CHRISTIANITY MAINTAINED. OR A Discovery of sundry Doctrines tending to the
Overthrow of Christian Religion: Contained in the Answer to a Book
entitled, Mercy and Truth, or, Charity maintained by Catholics.

Bringing into captivity all Understanding unto the Obedience of Christ.

2. Cor. 10.5. What is more contrary to Faith, then not to believe any thing,
to which Reason cannot reach?

S. Bernard. Epist. 190. Permissu Superiorum. 1638.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, CHARLES King of Great-Brittaine, France, and
Ireland, etc.
May it please your Most Excellent Majesty,
MY Presumption were not easily excusable (Most gracious Sovereign) in flying
to the Sanctuary of your Majesty, for the protection of this poor Treatise, if
the great importance of the Cause, vvherof I write, did not change my Fear
into Hope, and raise up my Hope as high as Confidence, that Christianity
Maintained, by what pen soever it be performed, needs not fear to find
benign acceptance from so Gracious and Great a King as you are; who glory
more in that most Sacred name of being a Christian, then in that most ancient
Stock of Royal Progenitors, which so gloriously adornes the Diadem of your
Sacred Majesty. For I do not in this occasion pretend to act either the
Offensive or Defensive part of any one particular Religion, honored with the
Name of Christianity; but I only come in the general Name of a Christian
Church, without treating whether it be Latin or Greek, East or West, of
England, or of Rome: and therefore I cannot despair of being graciously
admitted by your Majesty.

My Scope, and Work, as I am saying, is only to maintain the authority of
Holy Scripture, the Mystery of the Blessed Trinity, the Deity of our Blessed
Savior, the infallibility of his Apostles, the power of his Miracles, the
necessity of his Grace, and of the absolute Certainty of Christian Faith;
against an Adversary, who seeks to turn the divine belief of Christians
into humane Opinion: Page 36. and 37. and page 112. n. 154.
Who teaches that our assurance of holy Scripture, and of all the verityes
contained therein, is but Ibid.
probable, and credible; and consequently such as may well be false: Who
continually urges, Page 112. lin. 3.
that God, as sure, as he is good, neither does, nor can require of Christians
an infallible, and certainly vn-erring Belief of his word; That men, neither
are bound, nor can believe divine Revelations Page 330. lin. 13.25.33.
further then they are made apparent and evident to them; and that it suffices
unto Salvation to believe the Gospel Page 37. lin. 20. and s^qu.
as we do other Stories; as much as we do Page 327 n. 5. lin. 28.
Cesars Commentaries, or the Hi story of Salust: Who proclaims Page 144. n. 31.
the Apostles, with the whole Church of their time, to have erred in matters
of faith, even after they had received the Holy Ghost; That after their Deaths,
Page 292. infine and 293. Initio.
the whole Church was presently infected with universal Error; and that
the whole Church of the Page 338. lin. 5.
Gentiles may fall away into Infidelity: Who shuts Page 292. and 393.
the gates of Mercy against penitent sinners: Finally who opens an easy way
for the denial of all those maine points of Christianity above mentioned, as
it will appear in this ensuing Treatise.

Vouchsafe therefore, Most gracious Sovereign, to consider how Christianity
is impugned by some, even in this your Kingdom, and the incoueniences and
dangers thereof; and prevent both them, and such others of the self same kind,
as may grow greater if they be not prevented, by your Zeal and Care. I cannot
doubt, but that your Majesty will do it even for the Piety of the thing it
self, though my Adversary (who yet pretends that he is wholy of your
Majesty's Religion) gives you a more particular offense, by departing from the
very doctrines, which you believe. For besides diverse other single
differences, he neither allovves the Nine and thirty Articles, which your
Majesty, in your Royal Declaration, affirms to contain the true Doctrine of
the Church of England; nor holds he the Succession of Bishops to be necessary
in Gods Church; Page 356. and sequ.
which experience teaches to tend expressly to the confusion of the said
Church, and destruction of Monarchy.

And though God has made your Majesty most happy, both in a Royal Consort, of
singular and rare endovvments both of Body and Mind, and with a plentiful and
most hopeful Issue, (which with my heart I beg may even last to the very
end of the world) and with an Obedient and Loyal People, and with power
both at land and sea, and with times both of Plenty and Peace, whilst almost
all your Neighbors are in war and want; yet nothing will ever be more
able, to establish You in all these Felicityes, nor to auert all disasters from
your Majesty, then not to permit, that there be any conniuence at such enormous
Errors as these, which partly openly, and partly covertly, are vented against
Christ our Lord, and all Christian Faith.

The God of Heaven preserve your Majesty in all Health and Happiness, to his
greatest Glory, your Maiestyes own Felicity, and to the joy and comfort of
all your Kingdoms.

Your Majesty's most humble, and most obedient loyal subject, I. H.

To the Christian Reader.
WONDER not (Christian Reader) That I entitle this Little Treatise,
Christianity Maintained. I give it that Name, because that is the thing which I
endeavor here to make good, against one who ouerthrows Christianity, not by
remote Principles, or strained Inferences, but by direct assertions, and clear
deductio^s, naturally flowing from diverse of his doctrines: which if it be made
appear, I cannot but hope, that all who take comfort in the glorious, and most
happy name of Christian, will give me the right hands of fellowship in this
Common Cause. Ancient Pacianus says Epist. ad Semprou.
of every orthodoxe belieuer, that Christian is his name, Catholic his
Surname. Catholic cannot be conceived without Christian. But Christianity so
long as it is maintained, will afford some common Principles of belief, which
may direct men to find, that one Catholic Church of Christians, by means
whereof our Lord has decreed to give Grace and Glory. Let therefore neither
prejudice auert, nor private respects divert the good Readers understanding from
weighing in an equal balance that which is herce laid before it. God forbid
any Christian should exceed the desper are folly of the Jews, who would not
depose their private quarells, even while they were circled with a hostile army
of Romans: or be loss advised then the Romans, who took occasion to make
peace at home, by the pronocations of the Enemy abroad, indging it wifedome to
be swayed with fear of greater evil, especially when they could do it, under
the honorable title of a Common Liu. lib. 2.
good. In which respect, I lay asde, and as it were forget at this present, the
Surname of Catholic, while my scope is to maintain Christianity.

1. But I must notwithstanding by the way desire thee, by example of this Man
whose errors I undertake to discover, that thou will be pleased, to reflect
upon the misery into which they do bring themselves, who forsaking in truth
that glorious Surname, content themselves with the only name of Christians. For
consequently having lost the Gift, and Light of supernatural and infused
Faith, which in their Christendom they received, they lie so open to all
manner of deceites, that though they be warned of them, they run unawares
into them: because not regarding, or not esteeming and weighing the necessity
and importance of a Guide, they follow the Eye of their own Reason only, which
is too short-sighted to preserve them from falling into the manifold pitfalls,
which lie on all sides of Christian Faith, as we learn by all those, who in
all ages have swarued from it.

2. This Man, as the world knows, had warning abundant, in a little Treatise
called, The Direction, that he should not go a destructive way tending to the
overthrow of all Religion, Direct. ^a. 4. per totu^.
no less then of Catholic Doctrine. How little he has observed it, will
appear by the ensuing discourse, penned to the like intent, and to no other,
then, I dare say, the Direction was, to wit, to prevent, or rather now, to
discover Socinianisme covertly creeping into this Kingdom under the shrowde of
Natural Reason. The vanome of which Sect being still, as it seems, growing,
or as I may say, compounding, it is no wonder if the enemy of mankind does use
all his art to make that Treatise more and more odious, by which it began to be
detected.

The Direction falsified.
3. For to what other purpose does this man in his preface say, against all
Truth, and against the word of the letter, that the Author of the Direction,
fastens the Prefat. n. 7.
imputation of Atheism and Irreligion upon all wise and gallant men that are
not of our own Religion: and this in a different letter, as the very words of
the Directour, who yet has neither any such words or sense. And again, that
Prefat. n. 2^.
as the Samaritans saw in the Disciples cou^tenances, that they meant to go to
Jerusalem, so you pretend it is even legible in the forheads of those men,
that they (that is some Protestants of worth, and learning and auctority too)
are even going, nay making have to Rome: words set down in a different letter,
and in the same context with the other words of the Direction, which yet has
not any one such word, or syllable. And the Author was far from presuming to
meddle with the intentions of those persons, with whom this man would make him
odious.

4. He neither commended, nor discommended, nor so much as considered their
vicinity to us. His purpose was to show that for want of some public
infallible Authority, they could not possibly avoid frequent variations, by
which whether they fell to come nearer to us, or to go further from us, was not
material to his purpose. Let altars be demolished to morrow, let pictures be
defaced, let all that is done be undone; These last alterations will prove his
intent as strongly as the others can, wherein they happen to agree with us. For
his scope being to discover the impietyes of the Socinians, and to prevent the
hurt of souls by forewarning them of the danger; to this end he declared some
of the reasons for which this Sect disperseth it self, and is able to do it,
by working upon the minds of diverse Protestants. The chiefest he affirmed to be
the want of a public infallible Judge of Controuersyes, without which they
are left to their own private spirit, or wit, and discourse, which must of
necessity bring forth a multitude of differences, altercations, and
alterations, and end in Socinianisme, the quintessence whereof is to resolve
Faith into Opinion, or into every man's own Reason and Persuasion. Now to show
that for want of some living Guide, alterations in matters of Faith and
Religion must needs be frequent, he all adged such instances, as lay open to
the knowledge, and even to the eye of every man, and might afford a more
sensible demonstration of what he intended to euince: Yet so, that (as I said
before) his Argument received strength, not from their coming near to us, but
from their altering from themselves. From thence to infer, that they must
intend Popery, because they happen to agree with us in some things or rather
seem to agree, but indeed differ; is just as if one should say: The first
Protestants in England, intended to persist in Papistry, even when they
purposed the contrary, yea even when they did actually depart from us: Because
(forsooth) they were not so furious against every particular doctrine of
Catholics, as some others were. And I wonder how these men dare believe the B.
Trinity, and other principal mysteries of Christian Faith, since they must by
this means agree with Papists, and so may fear least themselves be in a way
to Popery.

5. Others are apt to believe on the contrary side, that the Directour was so
far from hoping that Protestants would become Catholics by these degrees, as
that he rather feared it might be a cause of some temptation to Catholics, and
a settling of Protestancy more effectually then could have been performed either
by the fervor of Zelots, or fear of Death, or any other means. And therefore
I make bold to say, that although we Catholics, his Majesty's most humble and
loyal subjects, should be most unworthy and ungrateful creatures, if we did
not with deepest thankefulnes acknowledge our infinite obligation to the tender
Clemency of our dread Sovereign: Yet I may truly say (if such a Truth may be
spoken without offense) that by many degrees They are more unreasonable, and
unthankful, who are unquiet, because the most moderate, that is, the most
powerful means which can be thought of, are put in execution, for
establishing that which they pretend to desire, I mean the Protestant
Religion; unless indeed they desire Protestancy should perish, if it do not in
all respects perfectly and punctually suit with their humors. For it is a true
saying; Moderate things may last, but no Violence can long endure.

6. This then was the Directours intention, free from all malignity, and
directed only to matters of Religion, and good of souls in the manner declared
above. Which to be true, I have heard him affirm most seriously by all that
can be feared, or hoped for in the next life, for all eternity; and therefore
he could not but be sorry, that any writing of his was interpreted to an other
meaning, of which if he had but once imagined his words to have been capable,
himself without so much as hearing any plea of defense, would have been the
first to have sentenced them to be destroyed, and all memory of them to be
forgotten. And he hopes that upon this sincere declaration it will be believed,
that if he erred, it was against his own intention, and not, a more erroris,
sed errore amoris (as Blessed S. Austine speaks) not by any love to error,
Lib. 22. Cinit. ca. ^.
but by an error of love, to the eternal good of souls, by preventing the
danger of their falling into precipices of Socinian doctrines.

7. But the foul Imputation wherewith, even in the Epistle Dedicatory to the
Kings most Excel. Majesty, this man is bold to calumniate the whole Order of
Jesuits, with intent doubtless to make the Directour, and his endeauours
hateful, (tearming it, that Order which enuenomes poison it self, and makes
the Roman Religion more malignant and turbulent then otherwise it would be:
whose very Rule and Doctrine obliges them to make all men, as much as lies in
them, subjects unto Kings, and servants unto Christ no further then it shall
please the Pope) is a most virulent slander, and most unjust untruth. For the
clearing whereof, though we might content our selves either with his ignorance
of our Order, Rule, and Doctrine; or with the guiltiness of his own
Conscience, in regard, that probably he cannot choose but know, that the intent
of them, and our proceedings, are nothing such as he proclaymes them: yet I
thought fit here to touch briefly some grounds, whereby his Majesty chiefly,
and all others may receive satisfaction, that there is no such thing in our
Order, Rule, and Doctrine, as this man is pleased to cast upon it.

8. And first (in regard, by what he says in his Preface, of the fourth Vow
which the Jesuits make of special obedience to the Pope, proper to their
Order, it seems, that which he does vent in his Epistle Dedicatory, has
relation to that VOW) it is to be understood, that, that Fourth VOW is wholly
circa Missiones, concerning Missions, in order to the help of souls, Constit.
part. 5. cap. 13. L. C.
as the words of that Vow expressly speak, and their Constitutions declare
thus: Tota intentio huius Voti Obediendi Summo Pontifici fuit, and est circa
Missiones, and sic intelligi oportet liter as Apostolicas, vbide hae Obedientia
loquu^tur, in omnibus quae iufferit Summus Pontifex, and quocunq miferit etc.
The whole intention of this Vow to obey the Pope, was, and is concerning
Missions, and so the Apostolical Letters are to be understood, where they
speak of this Obedience, in all things which the Pope shall command, and
whithersoeuer he shall send etc. As for their Rules in general, they are
confirmed by the same Authority, which confirmed the Rules of all Religions
Orders, and there is nothing in them which is not most holy, and which has not
been accounted such, even by our Enemies: or if there be any thing to be found
in them otherwise, let this man produce it if be can. They are not so hard to
come by, but that S. Paul's Churchyard may of times afford them. Doctrine their
Order approoues none but what is taught by other Catholic Divines, as has
been often demonstrated against such as this man is. And therefore we hold our
selves bound in all duty to be, and to profess our selves to be, as loyal
subjects to the sovereign Majesty of our King, as loving and tender toward
his Sacred Person, as respectfull and dutiful to his Commands, as any other
of his subjects of what profession soever; and to be bound also to teach all
other subjects, that the same subjection is due, not only for fear, but for
Conscience also, by the law of God, of nature, and of Nations. This we shall be
ready to make good at all times; as also to give his Majesty full satisfaction,
by what means his Majesty shall be pleased to appoint, in any particular point
of Doctrine, or Practice, which is, or may be imputed to our Rule, or Order.

9. It were over great boldness to appeal in this to the living testimony of
him, who in his experience abroad has been acquainted with more Communities
of our Order, then this man has been with Persons in his late changes when he
professed himself a Roman Catholic, and conuersed with diverse of us: And by
the equal hand which he carries toward all sorts of persons, obliges all
without prejudice to any. His Majesty may be pleased to use what means in his
Royal wisdom he shall think best. And if he should think it fit to pitch
upon such a Testimony, we should esteem our selves happy in the choice;
notwithstanding that M. Chillingworth may conceive otherwise, in regard that he
wilneeds have it, that Signor Con has prohibited the Directour from writing
books any more, Pref. n. 25.
or at least, has reason to do it.

10. But he must know, that we are of a different disposition from the
Socinians, and therefore though that Person were not of that eminent Integrity,
Piety, wisdom, Modesty, and all kind of worth as he is, who by so many ways
has obliged many great Persons to our nation, and howerly receives a most
gracious regard from those whose judgment and example all should dread, we
esteem it a great happiness to be subject to all lawful Auctorities. And
whatsoever our skill be in Logic, yet by Gods grace we will always in heart,
word, and deed maintain these to be good and lawful Arguments: A Person of so
eminent wisdom as he is whom this man names, aduises me not to write;
Therefore it is fittest for me not to write. And this other: A Person endued
with Authority, commandes me not to write: Therefore it is not only fit, but
necessary for me not to write. But this Logic is no Philosophy with
Socinians, who will have no Maisters' but themselves, even in matters
concerning the eternal salvation of their souls, and will one day find to
their cost, that Holy S Bernard uttered a most important Truth when he said:
Qui se sibi Magistrum constituit, stul to se Discipulum subdit. He who will be
his own Master, shall be scholar to a fool. But it is time for me to take
up and conclude this Preface with this caveat, that I would not have the Reader
conceive that in this little volume I have touched all this man's Doctrines which
tend to the overthrow of Christianity, but only such as were most obuious. Nor
is it my purpose at this time, exactly to confute his grounds or answer his
objections, which may be done hereafter. My maine business is to demonstrate,
that under the Name of Christians, he undermines Christianity, and setles
Socinianisme. Which is the cause that moved me to set forth this short
Treatise for a present Antidote, till a larger answer can be published. For
who will adventure upon food if be know it is mixed, and even incorporated with
deadly poison? This is the scope of this Treatise, whereto I hope all
Christians will concur. Socinians are but an aggregate of Jews, Manicheans,
Arians, and other condemned sects, which all good Christians ought to detest. I
heartily with their Conversion: yet if they will obstinately resist, in despite
of their inventions the words of the Apostle will be verified, Jesus Christ
yesterday, and to day, Hebr. 13.^.
the same also for ever. And they shall give a fearful account for their
contempt of al Churches, and errors against Christian Faith, when repentance
will nothing avail: Even at that day, when as S. Ambrose gravely says: Lib.
5. de fide c. 7.
The Jew shall perforce acknowledge whom he crucified; when the Manichean shall
adore whom he believed not to have come in flesh; when the Arian shall confess
him to be omnipotent whom he denied. And I may add; when all good Christians
shall joyfully behold him, whose Faith they labored to Maintain.

The Doctrines confuted in the ensuing Treatise.
THe first Doctrine. That Faith necessary to Salvation is not infallible. Chap.
1. The grounds of this Doctrine lead to Atheism. Chap. 2. The second Doctrine.
That the assurance which we have of Scriptures is but moral. Chap. 3. The
third Doctrine. That the Apostles were not infallible in their Writings, but
erred with the whole Church of their time. Chap. 4. The fourth Doctrine,
Injurious to the miracles of our Savior, and of his Apostles. Chap. 5. The
fifth Doctrine. By resolving Faith into Reason, he destroys the nature of
Faith, and Belief of all Christian Verities. Chap. 6. The sixth Doctrine,
Destructive of the Theological Virtues of Christian Hope, and Charity. Chap.
7. The seventh Doctrine, Takes away the grounds of Rational Discourse. Chap.
8. The eight Doctrine, Opens a way to deny the B. Trinity, and other high
mysteries of Christian Faith. Chap. 9. The ninth Doctrine, Lays grounds to be
Constant in no Religion. Chap. 10. The tenth Doctrine, Prouides for the
impunity, and preservation of whatsoever damnable Error against Christian
Faith. Chap. 11. The Conclusion.
CHRISTIANITY MAINTAINED. OR The discovery of sundry Doctrines tending to the
Overthrow of Christian Religion.
The first Doctrine. That Faith necessary to Salvation is not Infallible.
CHAP. I.
CHRISTIAN Faith being the foundation of Hope, the eye of Charity, the lesser
light appointed for the night of this world, the Way to Heaven; if this
Foundation be faulty, this Eye deceitful, this Light an Eclypse to it self,
this way erroneous; our Hope, Charity, Light, Happiness, and all Christianity
must end, Chap. 1.
in worse then nothing, in everlasting unhappiness. For as S. Thomas said to our
Savior, Io. 14.5.
We know not whither thou go, and how can we know the way? So what will it
avail us to know whither we go, if we follow a misleading way, the Direction
of a Faith weak, waueriug, and subject to Error? such is Christian Faith in
this man's judgment delivered in the Doctrine with which I thought fit to
begin, in regard it is the substance, and sum of that which he delivers, and
labors to prove through his whole book; and is persuaded, that it is of
great and singular use, and demonstrable by unanswerable arguments.

2. I must confess, it is of great use to ground Socinianisme, which, as the
Cap. 1. p. 7.
Direction fortold, rejects infallible supernatural infused Faith from being
necessary to salvation: and makes our Christian Faith of the Gospel, and of
Christ Jesus our Lord and Savior to be a mere human opinion, resolved into
the authority of men, of no greater certainty then other human Traditions and
Histories known by report. Hence the saying in Charity Maintained (that an
absolute certainty of Faith is necessary to Salvation) he taxes deeply as Page
328.
most pernicious and uncharitable; and else where Page 325. n. 3.
as a great error of dangerous and pernicious consequence; yea page 37. thus
he writes: Men being possessed with this false principle (that Infallible
Faith is necessary) and that it is in vain to believe the Gospel of Christ
with such a kind, or degree of assent as they yield to other matter of
Tradition; and finding that their Faith of it is to them indiscernable from the
belief they give to the truth of other stories, are in danger not to believe
at all etc. It is true, that (page 36. n. 8.) he says We cannot ordinarily
have any rational and acquired assent, more then moral founded upon
credibilities, whereby some may conceive, that besides human and rational
Faith, he supposes and requires Divine Faith, which is a pure, sincere, firm
adhesion to Gods word, not caused by reason and discourse, but infused by the
Holy Ghost's inspiration into a believing soul. But in truth he disclaimes
from any necessity of Divine Faith, or any divine light above the light of
mere reason, and will have men to be saved by the native forces of human,
rational, and fallible Faith. Men (says he) Vbi supra pa. 36. n. 8.
are unreasonable; God requires not any thing but reason; They pretend that
heavenly things cannot be seen to any purpose, but by the midday-light: but
God will be satisfied, if we receive any degree of Light which makes us leave
the works of darknesses. They exact a certainty of Faith above that of sense
and science: God desires only that we believe the conclusion, as the premises
deserve, whereof in rational Faith one is ever weak, credible, and not
infallible. And again page 112. n. 154. Neither God does, nor man may require
of us, as our duty, to give a greater assent to the mysteries of our Faith,
then the motives of credibility (which are fallible) deserve. This is his
doctrine, which he delivers often, and makes use thereof to reject the
infallible Authority of Gods Church: so profane, impious, and unchristian, as
I wonder that a man professing himself a Christian, durst venture to vent the
same in print, in a Christian country. For is the certainty of the Faith which
Christians yield to the truth of the Gospel, to the life of Christ Jesus our
Lord and Savior, to the histories of holy Scripture, of no greater discernable
certainty, then the belief we yield to humane traditions? I appeal to the
conscience of every true Christian, whether he do not most clearly discern
his assent to the Truths of holy Scripture, to be superior, and incomparably
more firm, then his belief of mere humane stories. That the Serpent spoke
unto Eve, and persuaded her to eat of the forbidden tree; that our first
Parents were naked, and did not perceive it till they had eaten of the
forbidden apple; these stories and other the like would any Christian believe
them, yea would they not laugh at them, as they do at Aesops Fables, were they
not of more credit with them, then Caesar's Commentaries, or Salusts histories,
as this man Page 327. n. 5.
says, they are not? That God requires not any thing of us but only reason;
That he exacts no more then that we believe the mysteries of Christian Faith,
with a human fallible assent; That divine illumination above the reach of the
light of reason is not necessary, that men may believe as they ought, to
please, and satisfy God; That God is satisfied with any degree of light, with
the mere light of natural Reason, and with the weak and wavering Faith,
which reason standing upon probabilities can ground; These be strange and
dismal positions, and such as overthrow Christianity, as is evident by many
reasons. I will point at a few.

3. First it is against holy Scripture. Faith, says S. Paul, is the substance
of things to be hoped for, the argument of things not appearing: Heb. M. v. 1.
or, as the translation received in England has it, the evidence, or ground,
or confidence of things not seen. All which signify a firm, certain, and as
I may say substantial Faith, much different from whatsoever assent, if it be
only probable. For as S. Bernard disputing against Abailardus (who likewise
taught that Faith was but Opinion) says touching this definition of S. Paul
(By the name of Substance we are determined to some certain and settled thing,
and Faith is not Opinion but Certainty:) Audis Epist. 190.
(says this Saint) Substantiam? Non licet tibi in fide putare, vel disputare
pro libitu, non hac illacque vagari per inania opinionum, per denia errorum.
Substantiae nomine, aliquid tibi certum, fixumque praefigitur. Certis clauderis
finibus, certis limitibus coarctaris. Non est enim fides aestimatio sed
certitudo. Do thou hear the name of Substance? It is not lawful for thee
in Faith to think or to dispute at thy pleasure, nor to wander hither and
thither, through the emptines of opinions, or straying error. By the name of
substance, some certain and settled thing is appointed thee. Thou art shut up
within certain bounds, and confined within limits which are certain. For
Faith is not an opinion but a certainty. This is also proved by the words of
the same Apostle: Gal. 1. v. 8.
Although we, or an Angel from Heaven euangelize to you, beside that which we
have euangelized to you: be he anathema: and where he says, Heb. 6. v. 8.
That by two things immovable, whereby it is impossible for God to lie, we
may have a most strong comfort. For how can it be most strong if it be grounded
only upon probabilities, as this man says our Faith and comfort is? The
falsehood whereof is yet further declared by the same Apostle Ep. 1. ad Thessal.
cap. 2. v. 12. When you had received of us the word of the hearing of God, you
received it not as the word of men, but (as it is indeed) the word of God. And
S. Bernard Ep. 190. alleges S. Paul to the same purpose, in this manner. Scio
cui credidi, and certus sum, clamat Apostolus (1. Tim. 1.) and tu mihi
subsibilas, Fides est aestimatio? tu mihi ambiguum garris, quo nihil est
certius? But this Truth being certainly believed by all Christians, it will be
needless to allege more texts of Scripture in confirmation of it. D. Potter
(in whose behalf you stepped forth) does evidently contradict your doctrine,
when he teaches Page 143.
that the chief ground of Christian Faith is divine Revelation, and that
nothing but this can erect an act of supernatural Faith; which must be
absolutely undoubted, and certain, and that without this, Faith is but opinion
or persuasion, or at the most an acquired human belief. And Doctor Hooker
(whom you allege page 325. for your opinion) in his Ecclesiastical Policy
page 117. writes most expressly in these words: The greatest assurance
generally with all men, is that we have by plain aspect and intuitiue
beholding etc. Scripture with Christian men being received as the word of God,
that, for which we have probable, yea that which we have necessary reason for,
yea that which we see with our eyes, is not thought so sure, as that which the
Scripture of God teaches, because we hold, that his speech reuealeth there
what himself sees, and therefore the strongest proof of all, and the most
necessary assented unto by us, which do thus receive the Scripture, is the
Scripture.

4. If we have recourse to reason, grounded on principles, which no Christian
denies, this doctrine likewise cannot be tolerated. For if a Christian be not
certain that his belief is true, he may according to your own confession
doubt, whether it be not false According to your own confession, I say, seeing
your self go about to prove Page 326. n. 4.
that Christian Faith cannot be absolutely certain; because if it were so, it
would follow, that any least doubting though resisted and inuoluntary, would
destroy it; which manifestly declares, that doubting can well consist with that
sort of uncertain Christian Faith which you go about to vent. If once way be
given for Christians to fall upon doubting of their Faith, why may not they put
themselves upon an examination in good earnest, and as doubting of the grounds
thereof? And if this kind of examination be lawful, who can discommend an
alteration, if they chance to find cause? as it is very possible they may, if
their first assent was not infallible? How then could S. Paul so absolutely
say: Although we, Gal. 1.8.
or an Angel from Heaven should euangelize to you, beside that which we have
euangelized, be he anathema?

5. But let us go a step further. This Assertion gives way to believe, that
the contrary to Christian Faith retains some probability, in regard that no
high degree of probability can of it self wholly deuest the opposite part of
all probability, this being excluded by certainty alone: Mistake me not, as if
I meant that the probability of one side were sufficient to bestow probability
on the other. This only I say, that whosoever belieues any point only with
probability, has in his understanding no present disposition which of it self
is repugnant to probability for the contrary side. And if Christians must be of
this disposition in their belief, they can have no settled or firm resolution,
never to embrace the contrary of that which for the present is their belief,
which ought notwithstanding to be the resolution of every true Christian
belieuer.

6. This is not all. If we follow this doctrine, this other unchristian
Consequence cannot be avoided: That one may be saved, though he believe some
sect contrary to Christian Religion, as Iudaisme, Turcisme, Paganism, or
Atheism, with as great, or greater probability, then he belieues the articles
of Christian Faith. For proof I need alleadg nothing beside what your self
suggest. In one place you tell us, that Page 37.
any faith if it be but a grain of mustardseed, if it work by love, shall
certainly avail with God, and be accepted of him. In another Page 327.
you endeavor to prove, that a probable persuasion, and hope of infinite and
eternal happiness, provided for all those that obey Christ Jesus, may be able
to sway our will to Obedience, and encounter with all those temptations, which
flesh and blood can suggest to auert us from it. Join these two doctrines
together, and the issue will be; that any probable belief of Christian
verities, or even of a God, must suffice to salvation, as enabling us to work
by love. Now it is clear that your grain of mustardseed, your any probable
persuasion or hope, are verified in any low degree of probability of faith in
Christ, or God; and yet they do not exclude equal or greater probability in
behalf of the contrary part (for example that Christ is not the Savior of the
world, or that there is not a God:) whence it follows that a man may attain
salvation, though he believe with equal or greater probability, that Christ is
not the Savior of the world, or that there is not a God, then is that
wherewith he belieues the same, and all other mysteries of Christian Faith.
Whether this tend not to Iudaisme, Turcisme, Paganism, or Atheism, and to the
overthrow of all Christianity, I need not say.

7. Moreover, who can oblige any understanding man, to dye for auerring the
Truth of that Faith, whereof he proclaymes himself to have no certainty? And
you, O glorious Martyrs of Christ our Lord, did rather spill, then shed your
blood, if you were so prodigal thereof, for a truth not certainly believed to
be such. This is the very same argument, which mellifluous S. Bernard brings
against Petrus Abailardus, a Progenitour of the Socinians, who in those days
taught, that Christian Faith was but opinion, and not infallibly certain:
Epist. 190.
Stulti ergo Martyrs nostri (says this Saint) sustinentes tam acerba propter
incerta, nec dubitantes sub dubio remunerationis proemio durum per exitum
diuturnum inire exilium. S. Paul says, Romans 5.7.
Scarce for a just man does any dye. And we may say, who will give his life for
a Truth? and most of all, who will not only give his life, but think himself
bound under pain of eternal damnation to lay it down in testimony of that,
which for ought he certainly knows, may prove to be an unjust, and untrue
thing? Was the precious blood of Christ our Lord, which by infinite degrees
excelled that of Martyrs, shed in such abundance for purchasing probabilities?
or for the impetration of Grace, to enable his servants to dye for the truth of
things, which in fine they esteemed but probable?

8. Far be it from the hearts of Christians to believe, and their tongues to
profess, that a God of infinite wisdom and goodness, would oblige himself
to reward men with everlasting happiness, for embracing the mysteries of
Christian Faith, which may once prove false, and to adiudge men to endless
torments, for adhering to the contrary, which in the end may be found true, if
Christian Faith can possibly be false, as false it may be, if it be but
probable.

9. Never could any doctrine be offered to the sons of Adam more plausible,
then that our belief of Heaven and Hell is but an opinion in it self, and no
way certain, concerning things of another world; whereas worldly pleasures,
are in present possession and certain. If the greatest certainty wherewith all
Christians hitherto have believed their faith to abound, has not been able to
stay the cariere of men's licenciousnesse; what shall we now expect, but, that
flattered by this doctrine, they, who before did run, will now fly, after the
Idols of whatsoever may appear to their souls or bodies, objects of delight?

10. No less liberty does this doctrine affoard for believing, then it does
for living, giving scope to Apostasyes, and endless changes of Religions, as
this man's fourefold alteration makes manifest, if all be true which is
reported of him. In which inconstancy notwithstanding he seems to glory,
stiling it Prefa. n. 5.
his Constancy in following that way to heaven, which for the present seems to
him the most probable. But of this more hereafter.

11. I will do him the favor to suppose that he holds no Religion more
certainly true then that of Christians, which yet to him being not certain,
what remains in his persuasion and doctrine, but that for matters of faith and
Religion, God has provided no certainty on earth? which is not only of very
ill consequence, as I have said, amongst Christians themselves, but exposes
Christian Religion to contempt among the enemies thereof, and disbelieuers of
it: which this man it seems does not value a hair; but measuring every body
by himself, taxes Christians generally to be of the like weakness,
vngroundednes, and vnsetlednes in their belief: For, says Page 327. n. 5.
he, men may talk their pleasure of an absolute and most infallible certainty,
but did men generally believe, that obedience to Christ were the only way to
present and eternal felicity, but as firmly and undoubtedly, as that there is
such a City as Constantinople, but as much as Caesar's Commentaries or the
history of Salust, I believe the lives of most men both Papists and Protestants
would be better then they are. I leave the Censure of this Doctrine to others:
I only note, first how poor a conceit this man himself has, and endeavors
to instill into others of the ground or adhesion, which Christians undoubtedly
have in their belief, making it no more solid or firm, then the belief of
Caesar's Commentaries etc. And secondly that it may perchance be his fortune to
be really forbidden to write any more books, if he can make no better
consequences, then to conclude the want of Faith, or firmness of Faith in
Christians, from the faults in their lives, seeing there may be in a manner
infinite other causes, why they do not live, as they most firmly believe they
should.

12. This therefore, you see is his doctrine concerning Christian Faith; that
it is weak, and weakly grounded; that it is resolved into the authority of
men, as the belief of Constantinople, Chap. 2.
and Caesar's Commentaries; that a Christian may really and deliberatly doubt of
the points of his faith, and yet be a Christian (that is) faithful. But that
which does most manifestly discover the impiety of this doctrine, and of this
his manner of arguing, is, that the reasons by which he pretends to maintain
it, induce plain Atheism, that is, they conclude as well, that men can have
no certain belief, knowledge, or assent that there is a God, or that we are
certain, that Christian Faith is even so much as probable; which now I am
going to show.

The Grounds of this Doctrine lead to Atheism.
CHAP. II.
1. I Said in the former Chapter that if a Christian be not certain that his
belief is true, he may according to this man's own confession doubt whether it
be not false. I pleaded his Confession, upon an Argument of his which perhaps
seemed to him a great subtilty, and hard to be answered, but is indeed a mere
toye, and if it prove any thing, it proves the Title of this Chapter to be
true. If, says he Page 326.
this Doctrine, of the absolute certainty of Christian Faith were true, then
seeing not any the least doubting can consist with a most infallible certainty,
it will follow, that every least doubting in any matter of Faith though
resisted and inuoluntary, is a damnable sin, absolutely destructive, so long
as it lasts, of all true, and saving Faith. Does not this Sophisme tend also to
prove, that if one be tempted with inuoluntary doubts against the Truths I
spoke of, he must forfeit his certainty that there is a God, or that Christian
Faith is certainly probable, and so either incur damnation without his own
fault, which is impossible, or attain heaven without any certain belief or
knowledge that there is a God, or that Christian Faith is certainly probable.

2. As for the argument it self, it is of no moment. It does not distinguish
betwixt the Habit of Faith, whereby Christians are permanently denominated
Faithful, and which remains even when we are a sleep, and the Act or
exercise thereof, which may be hindered by many good employments, as study or
serious attention to any business, without the least prejudice to the Habit of
which we are deprived only by Voluntary errors or doubts against it, not by
those which are inuoluntary and resisted. If this answer give not
satisfaction, let him either afford a better against his own objection, or
else profess, that he does not certainly believe there is a God, or that he is
not certain, that Christian Faith and Religion is so much as probable. And by
the way me thinks he should reflect, that if he think every Act destroys the
contrary habit, and in that respect no doubting may consist with the habit of
infallible faith, then the Doctrine of Catholic Divines, that every voluntary
Act of Heresy or Infidelity is destructive of the habit of Faith, should not in
reason and true consequence be termed by him Page 368.
a vain and groundless fancy.

3. An other argument to prove the fallibility of Christian Faith, in effect
is this: Page 326.
We pray for the increase and strengthening of our Faith: Therefore our Faith is
not infallible. You might as well argue: We may pray for a high degree of
happiness in heaven: Therefore every Saint in heaven is not perfectly happy. Do
you not know, that there may be intension of degrees, even in qualities which
have no mixture of the contrary? No light includes darkness, yet one light may
be greater then another. Thus the most imperfect act of faith, is most
certain in the most perfect kind of certainty, though not most certain in the
most perfect degree of certainty: and we may well believe that the least degree
of Christian Faith is incompatible with any deliberate and not resisted doubt,
or uncertainty, and yet pray for the increase thereof. If you deny this, then
tell me whether you may not pray for the increase of your belief of a God, and
his Attributes, and for the strengthening of it against all temptations (rising
either from the suggestions of the enemy, or from the weakness of man's
understanding in order to so high misteryes) as also of your certainty that
Christian Religion is probable in the higest degree of probability; and when
you have granted that you may, as I hope you will, then you will have answered
your own argument, unless you will acknowledge your self not to be certain
that there is a God, or that Christian Religion is probable.

4. A third reason whereby he endeauours to prove that Christian Faith is not
absolutely certain, is this in substance: That seeing, as S. John assures us,
Page 326.
our Faith is the victory which ouercomes the world; if our Faith be a certain
infallible knowledge, our victory over the world must of necessity be perfect,
and it should be impossible for any true belieuer to commit any deliberate
sin; How this does follow I cannot perceive, no more then one can infer
that Christians cannot commit as grievous sins as men that reject
Christianity, because the belief of Christians is true, and the belief of
others is false. The Angels in heaven and Adam in Paradise, were endued with
infallible Faith, yea and with Evidence, in the opinion of diverse good Divines;
and yet the Angels and Adam sinned deliberatly, and damnably. Faith does
direct, but not necessitate the will, which still remaining free, may choose
good or evil. If he will still maintain the argument for good, then he must
be convinced to say, that he does not with certainty believe a God, or that
virtue is to be embraced, because he can doubtless commit deliberate sins
against God, and virtue.

5. Not unlike to this is another reason, Ibid.
That Charity being the effect of Faith, if our Faith were perfect, Charity
would be perfect, and so no man could possibly make any progress in it. Give
me leave to speak to your self; do you not see, that by this reason, if you
believe in God with certainty, your love of God must be perfect without
possibility to make any progress in it; which because it is false, it must
follow, by force of your Argument, that you do not with certainty believe a
God. But as for the reason in it self, because it concerns more then your
self, I must tell you that it does falsely suppose that Charity is both an
immediate, and necessary effect of Faith, without interuention of Freewill,
which may refuse to follow the direction of Faith, and either wholly cease to
love God, or love him, now more, now less. And therefore no wonder, if upon a
false supposall, that follow which is also false.

6. This is not a time to enter into long discourses, how you confound
certainty with perfection, as if because Faith is absolutely certain, but yet
obscure, it must be also absolutely perfect, which is a great mistake, for it
wants the perfection of evidence, and has a possibility annexed to it, that it
may be both resisted, and rejected. But it will not be unpleasant
notwithstanding, nor untimely to stand a while, and see how excessiuely
confident you are of the strength and force of the foresaid Arguments, and the
contentment which you take in them. Thus you speak of them: Page 326. 327.
These you see are strange and portentous consequences, and yet the deduction
of them is clear and apparent, which shows this doctrine of yours (you mean
our doctrine of the infallibility of Christian Faith) which you would feign
have true, that there might be some necessity of your Churches infallibility,
to be indeed plainly repugnant, not only to Truth, but even to all Religion and
piety, and fit for nothing but to make men negligent of making any progress in
Faith, or Charity. And therefore I must entreat and adjure you, either to
discover unto me (which I take God to witness I cannot perceive) some fallacy
in my reasons against it, or never hereafter open your mouth in defense of it.
I answer, it seems to me, that your reasons are already sufficiently proved
to be fallacyes, since from them either nothing can be deduced for your
purpose, or else you must acknowledge your self to have no certainty that
there is a God, that virtue is to be embraced, or that Christian Faith is even
probable.

7. And yet I add, that you must in another respect also solue your own
objections. Remember these your words: Page 36.37.
Yet all This I say not, as if I doubted that the spirit of God being implored
by devout, and humble prayer, and sincere obedience, may and will by degrees
advance his servants higher, and give them a certainty of adherence, beyond
their certainty of evidence. And elsewhere: Page 112.
Gods spirit if he please may work more, a certainty of adherence beyond
certainty of evidence. Now you cannot deny but that these men may be tempted
against their Faith by inuoluntary doubting; that they may increase in it; that
they may commit some deliberat sin; and may make daily progress in Charity
and good works, even by the greater increase of their Faith: and yet you
grant them a certainty of adherence, beyond their certainty of evidence. And
so in this case your self must answer your own arguments, and confess them
to be but fallacies. Even your maine reason, that Christian Faith can be endued
with no stronger certainty then the probable motives on which it relyes, by
this self same instance is proved a Sopbisme. For now you grant a certainty of
Faith not without probable arguments of credibility, yet not for them, it being
more certain then they are; and therefore you are still put upon a necessity
of answering your own arguments. And whereas page 330. you make a show of
answering this particular objection, really you do not answer, but plainly
contradict your self, laboring to prove that it is impossible that there
should be a certainty of adherence beyond the certainty of evidence, as the
Reader may clearly see, and shall be demonstrated in due time.

8. One thing more I must not let pass, and it is, That whereas you say, We
would feign have Christian Faith believed to be infallible, that there might be
some necessity of our Churches infallibility; it seems you are apt enough to
yield infallibility to Gods Church, if once it be granted that Christian Faith
is infallible. And with good reason. For seeing you teach that universal
Tradition and other arguments of credibility, cannot produce an infallible
belief of holy Scripture, and of the mysteries believed by Christians; it must
follow, that some other infallible means must be found out for the propounding
to us the holy Scriptures: which other infallible means even according to your
persuasion, being not Scripture it self, nor every man's private spirit, there
remaynes only the authority of the Catholic Church, which as an instrument of
the holy Ghost, may be an infallible propounder both of Scripture and all
divine verities. Wherein there is a large difference between the Church and
other Judges. These in their sentences or determinations intend not to deliver
points of infallible Faith, as the Church must intend, and do it, if once it be
granted, that from her we must receive holy Scriptures, and believe them with a
certain and infallible assent of Christian Faith.

The second Doctrine. Chap. 3.
That the assurance which we have of Scriptures, is but moral.
CHAP. III.
1. THis man magnifies holy Scriptures in many places, as the only thing on
which he relyes his Salvation; but whosoever shall walk along with him from
place to place, and mark well his ways, will find that they lead to the quite
contrary, and show that he neither does value them to their right worth, nor
does lay any other grounds, but such as are more apt to breed disesteeme then
esteem of them. This may be seen, in that he teaches, Page 141. and 62.
That our assurance that the Scripture has been preserved from any material
alteration, and that any other book of any profance writer is incorrupted, is
of the same kind and condition, both moral assurances.

2. If this may be allowed, it must necessarily follow that the assurance which
we have of Scripture must in degree be much inferior to the assurance which we
have of such books of profane Authors as have a more full testimony and
tradition of all sorts of men, to wit, Atheists, Pagans, Jews, Turks and
Christians; whereas the books holy Scripture, are either unknown, or impugned
by all except Christians, and by some also who would bear of Christians, and
consequently the moral assurance of them, and of the incorruptednesse of them,
is the much the less, and of less moral credit. And by so same reason
whosoever builds upon this man's grounds, cannot have so great assurance that
there was a Jesus Christ, that he had disciples, and much less that he wrought
wondrous things, and less then this, that those wonders were true miracles;
as that there was a Coesar, Alexander, Pompey etc. or that they fought such
battles, and the like. For these things descend to us by a more universal
tradition, then the former. Page 116.
Do not your self speak thus? We have as great reason to believe there was
such a man as Henry the Eight King of England, as that Jesus Christ suffered
under Pontius Pilate. You should have said; we have greater reason to believe
it, if we consult humane inducements only, and consequently if Christian Faith
be not absolutely infallible, even above the motives of credibility, we are
more certain that there was a King Henry, then a Jesus Christ: A thing which
no true Christian can hear without detestation.

3. That which follows out of the same 116. page, is of the like nature,
laying a ground for un wary people to reject Scripture; For, having spoken of
some barbarous Nations, that believed the doctrine of Christ, and yet believed
not the Scripture to be the word of God, Page 116.
for they never heard of it, and Faith comes by hearing; you add these words:
Neither doubt I, but if the books of Scripture had been proposed to them by the
other parts of the Church where they had been before received, and had been
doubted of, or even rejected by th^se barbarous nations, but still by the bare
belief, and practice of Christianity they might be saved, God requiring of us
under pain of damnation, only to believe the verities therein contained, and
not the divine authority of the books wherein they are contained.

4. If this be granted, why might not any Church have rejected the Scriptures
being proposed by other parts of the Church? And why may not we do so at this
day? Nay seeing de facto we know the verities of Christian Faith by Scripture
only, according to your doctrine; we cannot be obliged to believe the
Scriptures, because the verities therein contained are necessary to be
believed, (for this very necessity you cannot believe, but by believing
aforehand the Scripture) but contrarily you may reject the verities themselves,
if you be not preobliged to believe the divine authority of the books wherein
they are contained.

5. Again, you say that Scripture is the only Rule of Christian Faith, Cap. 2
per totum.
yet it is not necessary to Salvation to believe it to be a rule of Faith, no
nor to be the Word of God. The first part of this doctrine is the scope of your
whole second Chapter. The second is taught purposely, and at large in the same
Chapter Page 116.
page 116. n. 159. Join these two assertions, and the Conclusion will be; That
we are not obliged to receive that which is the only ordinary means of
attayning Christian Faith, namely the Scriptures. And therefore in the ordinary
way, we cannot be bound to embrace Christian Faith, seeing it cannot be
compassed without the means to attain to it. For how can one be obliged to
attain an end, and yet be left free to reject the only means of atchieuing
that end? I am the freer to make this question, because you concur with me in
the answer, when you say: Page 16.
It was necessary that God by his providence should preserve the Scripture from
any indiscernable corruption, in those things which he would have known;
otherwise it is apparent it had not been his will that these things should be
known, the only means of continuing the Knowledge of them being perished. Now
is it not in effect all one, whether the Scripture have perished, or whether it
be preserved, if in the mean time we be not bound to believe, that it is the
Rule of Faith, and word of God? Nay, seeing as things now stand we may find the
verityes contained in Scripture, sufficiently expressed in innumerable other
books, we may at this present in conformity to your doctrine reject all the
holy Scripture, contenting our selves with the contents thereof taken from
other Authors, and not from the writers of the Bible.

6. The Doctrine which he carries through his whole Book, but particularly
insisteth upon in his third Chapter, that we cannot learn from Scripture it
self that it is Canonical, but only from Tradition of men, delivering it from
hand to hand, is no less injurious and derogatiue to holy Scripture then the
former, speaking of men in his sense, that is, not as endued with any
infallible assistance of the holy Ghost (which Catholics believe of the
Church) but only as wise, or many men, or for the like human qualifications;
for to this effect he says: Page 72. n. 51.
Tradition is a principle, not in Christianity, but in Reason, not praper to
Christians, but common to all men. This is certainly the right course to blast
the Authority of holy Scripture, not to maintain it. For besides that which I
have touched already, that by this means we are not so certain of Scripture,
as of profane books, he must come at length to resolve the belief of
Scripture into the Tradition or Authority of Pagans, Jews, Turks, or
condemned Heretics, as well as of true Christians. For seeing errors against
faith, or Heresies cannot in his principles be discerned but by Scriptures;
before they be received, the testimony of one man concerning the admittance of
them must weigh as much as of another, and be considered only as prooceeding
from a number of men, be they faithful or Infidels, true Christians or
condemned Heretics.

7. And further according to the same principles he must acknowledge, that he
belieueth some parts of Canonical Scripture with a more firm assent, then
others, to wit, as they have been delivered with more or less general
consent, or have been more or less once questioned: which is to deprive
Canonical Scripture of all Authority. For if once we give way to more or less
in the behalf of Gods word, we shall end in nothing. And this has the more
force in this man's doctrine, who professes that the greatest certainty which
he has of any part of Scripture, is within the compass of probability. What
certainty then shall those Scriptures have, which participate of that
probability in a less and less degree, according as they have been delivered
with different tradition and consent. How this doctrine will sound in the ears
of all true Christians, I leave to be considered, contenting my self to oppose
your Assertion with the discourse of D. King, afterward Bishop of London, in
the beginning of his first Lecture upon Jonas, where amongst other things he
says: Comparisons betwixt Scripture and Scripture are both odious and
dangerous. The Apostles names are euenly placed in the writings of the holy
foundation. With an impartial respect have the children of Christ's family from
time to time, received, reverenced, and embraced the whole volume of
Scriptures. You on the other side speak in a different strain and say thus:
Page 67. n. 36.
I may believe even those questioned Books to have been written by the
Apostles, and to be Canonical: but I cannot in reason believe this of them so
undoubtedly, as of those books which were never questioned. And elsewhere: The
Canon of Scripture, Page 69. n. 45.
as we receive it, is built upon universal Tradition. For we do not profess
our selves so absolutely and undoubtedly certain, neither do we urge others to
be so, of those Books which have been doubted, as of those which never have. By
this means what will become of the Epistle of S. James, the second Epistle of
S. Peter, the second and third of S. John, the Epistle to the Hebrews, and the
Apocalypse of S. John? And what part of Scripture has not been questioned by
some, and those some so many, as would have made us doubt of the works of Tully
or Liuy etc. if they had affirmed them not to have been written by such
Authors? And the only doubting of Erasmus, or some such other about the works
of some Fathers, has caused them to be questioned by diverse, upon much weaker
grounds, as difference of styles, or the like.

8. In another place you tell us Page 68. n. 43.
that to receive a Book for Canonical, it is enough to have had attestation
though not universal, yet at least sufficient to make considering men receive
them for Canonical, which were sometimes doubted of by some, yet whose number
and authority was not so great, as to prevail against the contrary suffrages.
Observe upon what inextricable passages, and less degrees of probability this
man does put us in our belief of holy Scripture. First we must settle our
Faith on men; then on considering men, though the consent be not universal;
thirdly upon the greater and more preualent number and authority of suffrages,
as if the greater number alone, without infallible assistance of the holy
Ghost, were a sufficient ground for Christian Faith. You deny (page 68. n. 42.)
that the Controversy about Scripture is to be tried by most voices, and yet
what is your greater number, but most voices? And as for greater Authority,
what can you mean thereby, except perhaps greater learning, or some such
quality, nothing proportionable to that Authority, on which Christian Faith
must rely?

The third Doctrine. That the Apostles were not infallible in their writings,
but erred with the whole Church of their time.
CHAP. IIII.
1. IT can be no wonder that he should speak meanly of the necessity, and
infallibility of holy Scripture, since he labors to fasten error upon the
Canonical writers, and deliuerers thereof the Apostles themselves, and the
whole Church of their time. Chap. 4.
And this concerning an Article of Faith of highest consequence and most
frequently revealed in holy Scripture, the denial whereof had been most
derogatory from the glory of our Savior, and from the abundant fruit of his
sacred Passion: to wit, that the Gospel was to be preached to all nations.
You shall receive it in his own words: Page 1^7. n. 21.
The Church may ignorantly disbelieue a Revelation, which by error she thinks
to be no Revelation. That the Gospel was to be preached to all Nations, was a
Truth revealed before our Saviors Ascension in these words; Go and teach all
nations. Math. 29.19. Yet through prejudice, or inaduertence, or some other
cause the Church disbelieued it, as it is apparent out of the 11. and 12.
Chapter of the Acts, until the conversion of Cornelius. And that the Apostles
themselves were inuolued in this supposed error of the most primitive Church,
he delivers without ceremony in another place: Page 144. n. 31.
That the Apostles themselves even after the sending of the holy Ghost were,
and through inaduertence, or prejudice continued for a time, in an error
repugnant to a revealed Truth, it is, as I have already noted, unanswerably
evident from the story of the Acts of the Apostles. Is not this to overthrow
all Christianity? If the Blessed Apostles on whom Christians are builded, as
upon their foundation ( Ephesians. 2.) were obnoxious to inaduertence, to
prejudice, to other causes of error; what certainty can we now have? The
Apostles might have written what they believed, and so we cannot be sure but
what they have written may contain some error proceeding from inaduertence,
prejudice, or some other cause. If they even after the receiving of the holy
Ghost, and with them the whole Church of that time, could either forget or
transgress so fresh a Command, imposed by our Savior Christ for his last
farewell at his Ascension; it will be obuious for adversaries of Christian
Religion to object, that perhaps they have been left to themselves, to oblivion,
inaduertence, and other humane defects in penning the Scripture. If they erred
in their first thoughts, why not in their second? With the assistance of the
holy Ghost they can err in neither, without it, in both.

2. The Objection which he brings is not hard to solue. S. Peter himself never
doubted. That vision was showed to him, and he declared it to the converted
Jews for their satisfaction, as it happened in the Council held by the
Apostles, about the observation of the law of Moses; which some Christians
converted from Iudaisme did much urge. But neither the Apostles, nor the other
Christians had any doubt in that matter: as likewise in our present case, not
all the Church, but only some Zealous for the Jews did oppose themselves to S.
Peter. For before the conversion of Cornelius other Gentiles were become
Christians, as Com. in Act. cap. 10. post verse. 48,
Cornelius a Lapide with others affirms and proves. For which respect the text
expressly declares, Act. c. 11. v. 2.
that they who were offended with S. Peter were of the circumcision, that is
Jews made Christians.

3. He goes on in this conceit, and adds a point no less dangerous then the
former. The Apostles Doctrine, says he, Page 144. n. 31.
was confirmed by miracles, therefore it was entirely true, and in no part
either false, or uncertain. I say in no part which they delivered constantly,
as a certain divine truth, and which had the attestation of divine miracles.
Thus you see he covertly calls in question all the Apostles writings, and lays
grounds to except against them. For if once we give way to such distinctions,
and say that the Apostles are to be credited only, in what they delivered
constantly as a certain divine Truth; we may reject in a manner all Scripture,
which scarce ever declares, whether or no the writers thereof did deliver any
thing, as a certain divine Truth; and much less that they remained constant
in what they delivered by writing. Or if it should express these particulars,
yet we could not be obliged to believe it, if once we come to deny to the
Apostles an universal infallibility. For what reason can this man give,
according to these grounds of his, why they might not have erred in that
particular declaration?

4. And besides, will he not oblige us to believe with certainty any thing
delivered by the Apostles which had not the attestation of divine miracles? It
seeemes he will not, and thereby in effect takes away the belief of very many
mysteries of Christian Faith and verities contained in holy Scripture. For that
miracles were wrought in confirmation of every particular passage of Scripture,
we cannot affirm neither out of holy Scripture it self, nor any other
credible argument: rather the contrary is certain, there being innumerable
verityes of the Bible which were never severally confirmed in that manner, and
yet it were damnable sin to deny them. And moreover where, or when did the
Apostles particularly prove by miracle, that their writings were the word of
God? Thus you see into what plunges he brings all Christians by his own
Inconstancy; from which certainly arises this itching desire of his to put
conceits into men's heads, as if the Apostles also might have been various in
their writings and not constant.

5. I cannot omit another distinction prejudicial to the infallibility of the
Apostles and of their writings, which he delivers in these words: Page 144.
n. 32.
For those things which the Apostles professed to deliver, as the Dictates of
human reason, and prudence, and not as divine Revelations, why should we take
them as divine Revelations? I see no reason, nor how we can do so, and not
contradict the Apostles and God himself. Therefore when S. Paul says in the
1. Epist. to the Corinth. 7.12. To the rest speak I, not the Lord. And again:
Concerning virgins I have no commaundment of the Lord, but I deliver my
judgment. If we will pretend that the Lord did certainly speak what S. Paul
spoke, and that his judgment was Gods commandment, shall we not plainly
contradict S. Paul, and that spirit by which he wrote which moved him to
write; as in other places divine Reuclations, which he certainly knew to be
such, so in this place his own Judgment touching some things, which God had
not particularly revealed unto him. This doctrine is subject to the same just
exceptions, which were alleged against the former. For if once we deny
universal infallibility to the Apostles, we cannot believe them with
infallibility in any one thing, but still we may be doubting whether they
speak out of their own spirit, and not by divine Revelation, though they
should even declare in what sort they intend to speak, because we may fear
they are deceived in those very declarations. And as you will perhaps say, they
write Divine Revelations, except in things which they profess to deliver as
the Dictates of human human reason and prudence; another will say that they
must or may be understood to deliver the dictats of human reason and prudence,
whenever they do not in express rearmes profess to deliver divine
Revelations, which is very seldom; the ordinary custom of holy Scripture
being to deliver verityes without any such qualifying of them. And if S. Paul
when in the Epistle and Chapter by you cited v. 40. says of himself, I think
that I also have the spirit of God, might be deceived in that thought of his;
we may also say he might be deceived, even when he affirms that he writes by
the spirit of God; and much more may we doubt, when he expresses no such thing,
as commonly neither he, nor any other Canonical writers do.

6. In the words which you cite: To the rest speak I, not the Lord, S. Paul
treates of a very important matter, that is, of the wives departing from her
husband, or the husbands from his wife. Wherein if S. Paul were subject to
error, he might chance to have taught a point of great Injustice, against the
command of our Savior declaring the very Law of nature, What God has joined
together let not man separate Mat. 19.6.
. And as for the words you allege in the second place: Concerning virgins I
have no commandment of our Lord, but I deliver my Judgment, the Apostle
afterward within the compass of the self same discourse, says that a man
sins not if he marry; wherein if S. Paul may be deceived, as speaking out of
his own spirit, as you say he does in some precedent words; you will not only
want this text to prove with certainty, that marriage is lawful, but
whenever marriage is allowed in any other place of Scripture (as Hebr. 13. v.
4. Marriage is honorable in all) you have put into the mouths of the old and
modern heretics, who impugned the lawfullnes of marriage, a ready answer
that those texts of Scripture, were but the Dictats of human reason and
prudence, wherein the writers of Canonical Scripture might be deceived.

7. The other words, Speak I, not the Lord, show only that our Savior left
power for the Apostles, and his Church to advise, counsel, ordain, or
command some things, as occasion might require, which himself had not
commanded, or determined in particular: which truth if you hold to be only a
Dictate of human reason, you open a way for refractary spirits to oppose the
ordinances of their Superiors and Prelates, in things not expressly commanded
by our Lord.

8. The last Words v. 25. Concerniug virgins I have no commandment of the Lord,
but I deliver my Judgment, which we translate, but I give counsel, prove
indeed our Catholic Doctrine concerning works of supererogation, or
Counsayles, in regard that the Apostle in this place persuades virginity as the
better, but commands it not as necessary: Yet they do in no wise imply any
doubtfulnesse or fallibility in the Apostles; never any hitherto besides your
self, offering to answer our argument by saying, the Apostle wrote only the
dictate of human reason, or prudence, and so might be deceived. Which answer
had been very obuious, if they had presumed to be so bold, as you are, with the
Apostles, and therefore it is a sign that no man besides your self durst
deliver this doctrine.

9. Certainly if the Apostles did sometimes write by the motion of the holy
Ghost, and at other times out of their own private Judgment or spirit; though
it were granted that themselves could discern the diversity of those motions
or spirits (which one may easily deny, if their universal infallibility be
once impeached) yet it is clear that others, to whom they spoke or wrote,
could not discern the diversity of those spirits in the Apostles. For which
cause learned Protestants acknowledge, that although each man's private spirit
were admitted for direction of himself, yet it were not useful for teaching
others. Thus you say (page 141.) A supernatural assurance of the incorruption
of Scripture may be an assurance to ones self, but no argument to another. And
as you affirm Page 62.
that books that are not Canonical may say they are, and those that are so,
may say nothing of it: so we cannot be assured that the Apostles deliver divine
Revelations, though they should say they do; nor that they deliver not such
Revelations though they say nothing thereof, if once we deny their universal
infallibility.

10. Now I beseech the good Reader to reflect upon this man's endeauours to
overthrow the holy Scriptures and Christianity, and to what at last he tends by
these degrees. First he says, our belief that Scripture is the word of God
exceedes not probability. 2. Amongst those Books which we believe to be the
word of God, we believe some with less probability then others. Thirdly we may
be saved though we neither believe that Scripture is the Rule of Faith, nor
that it is the word of God. Fourthly, our assurance that Scripture or any other
Book is corrupted, is of the same kind and condition, both, only moral
assurances. Fifthly the writers of holy Scripture might err in things which
they delivered not constantly, or not as divine Revelations, but dictates of
human reason, or if they delivered any doctrine not confirmed by miracles.
Sixthly, upon the same ground he might say that the Apostles were infallible
only when they delivered things belonging to Faith, Piety, or Religion, and not
when they wrote things merely indifferent, or of no great moment in
themselves, as some Socinians Volkel. l. 5. c. 5. Dom. Lopez. de Authorit. sac.
Script.
either grant, or care not much to deny. And then further it will be left to
every man's judgment, what is to be accounted a matter of moment: And soon
after it will be said, that to search whether the doctrine of the Blessed
Trinity, for example, be contained in Scripture, or no, is not much necessary;
since a man without knowledge of that speculatiue doctrine, may believe and
love God, as a chief Socinian teaches Iren. Phil^leth. dissertatione de Pace
Ecclesiae.
and your self affirm Page 37.
that any Faith if it work by love shall certainly avail with God, and be
accepted of him. And then will some say; Why may not a man love God though he
err in the doctrine concerning Christ delivered in Scripture? and so it will
not be necessary to believe that the Apostles were infallible in penning the
Scripture, but only in articlesd absolutely necessary to love God, and to have
a general sorrow for all our sins. And since to love God and have contrition
for our sins, a probable belief will serve according to your Page 327.
Principles, what need we any infallible Scripture at all, but only some
motives sufficient to produce a probable assent that there is a God, whether it
be by Scripture believed to be only a probable writing, or by natural
discourse, or any other means; as you teach, that one is not bound to believe
the Scripture to be the word of God, but may be saved, if by other means, for
example, preaching, he attain the knowledge of the verityes contained in
Scripture Page 116.
. And thus you see to what hauock these things lead, not only touching
Christianity, but of all Religion.

The fourth Doctrine. Injurious to the miracles of our Savior, and of his
Apostles.
CHAP. V.
1. THE Disciple is not above his Master: and we may not wonder that a man
should be free with the Apostles, if he spare not Christ himself. To the end
that the entrance might be proportionable to the building which he was raising,
he plants in his Preface a Tenet, which cannot but be as strange to all
considerate Christians, as it is dangerous to the weak. It seems he was not
able to deny, that true miracles have been wrought by members of our Catholic
Church: He comes therefore to this desperate evasion, and gives us these words
in print: Pref. (...). 43.
It seems to me no strange thing, that God in his Justice should permit some
true miracles to be wrought to delude them who have forged so many, as
apparently the Professors of the Roman doctrine have to abuse the world. I
shall wrong the Readers understanding, if for his sake I shall stand to dilate
upon that, which is very clear; that by this means the miracles of our Blessed
Savior, and his Apostles cannot be known to be inducements to truth, but may
have been snares to entrap the behoulders in pernicious errors. To what end
then does S. Paul prove his mission by miracles? 2. Cor. 12.12.
Signa Apostolatus meifacta sunt supervos, in omni prudentia, in signis, and
prodigijs and virtutibus. To what end did our Blessed Savior assign miracles,
to confirm the preaching of his Apostles? Signa autem eos, qui crediderint,
hae sequentur: In nomine meo daemonia eijcient etc. Mare. vlt. v. 17.
. To what purpose did he send this message to S. John Baptist, Caecivident,
claudi ambulant Mat. II.
? To what end did he say Joan. 15.24.
si opera non fecissem in eis, quae nemo alius fecit, peccatum non haberent?

2. Many other texts might be alleged. These will satisfy every good Christian
that belieues the Scriptures. But I confess, neither these or any other places
of Scripture can prove any thing with this man, who by affirming that true
miracles may be wrought to delude men, does deprive the Apostles of all
authority which they could gain by working miracles, and consequently leaves
men free from any obligation to believe that their writings were infallible.
And then to what purpose does he tell us in the same place, that the Bible has
been confirmed with those miracles, which were wrought by our Savior Christ and
his Apostles, since those very miracles might by the same ground, be delusions
rather then confirmations? If true miracles may now be wrought in punishment of
Christians for forging false miracles, as you pretend; what certainty can you
give a man that our Savior and his Apostles did not the like, Chap. 5.
in punishment of the Jews and Gentiles for Idolatry, Irreligiousnesse and
other grievous sins, which are never wanting in the world, and may be
punished in the manner you speak of, if once this assertion be admitted, that
True miracles may be wrought to delude men?

3. But though by this impiety you deprive Scripture of all authority, and
cannot consequently be persuaded to any thing by Scripture: yet there remains
one powerful authority to convince you even in this your tenet. It is your
self. For thus you speak to us upon another occasion: Page 144. n. 31.
If you be so infallible, as the Apostles were, show it as the Apostles did.
They went forth (says S. Mark) and preached every where, the Lord working
with them, and confirming their words with signs following. It is impossible
that God should lie, and that the eternal Truth should set his hand and seal
to the confirmation of a falsehood, or of such doctrine, as is partly true and
partly false. The Apostles doctrine was thus confirmed, therefore it was
entirely true, and in no part either false or uncertain. Is it not clear by
these words that since the Doctrine of the Roman Church has been confirmed by
true miracles (as you affirmed in your Motive, and for ought I can perceive,
deny it not in your answer) she must be the true Church? For even against your
self, when you speak not in opposition to the Roman Church, you confess that
the eternal Truth cannot confirm a falsehood with true miracles. Or if in
opposition to our Church you will recall what you deliver in your Book, and be
constant to that which you say in your Preface in answer to your Motive; I
must still be enforced to affirm that you prepare a way to the overthrow of
Christianity, by euacuating the efficacy of miracles wrought by Christ our
Lord, his Apostles, and all holy men, in confirmation of Christian Religion.

4. And to the end the Reader may not think I am too rigorous in pressing you
upon this one passage, upon which you were thrust by a hard necessity of
answering your own motives; I challenge you upon this other wherein you say:
Page 69. n. 47.
For my part I profess, that if the Doctrine of the Scripture were not as
good, and as fit to come from the fountain of goodness, as the miracles by
which it was confirmed were great, I should want one maine pillar of my Faith,
and for want of it, I fear should be much staggered in it. Catholics are
most certain that the doctrine of the Scripture is as good, as the miracles by
which it was confirmed were great. But this certainty we do not ground upon our
own Knowledge or Judgment, framed by considering the Doctrines in themselves,
as if we should be staggered if we could not find them to be such independently
of miracles; but, because they are confirmed by miracles, or otherwise
testified to be good, by them, to whom we must submit: whereas your way of
belief leaves a man in a disposition to be perpetually altering opinions,
accordingly as the same things may sometimes appear true, and other times
false; which diversity of judgments you must according to this your doctrine
follow, even against any point confirmed by miracles, if it chance to seem not
true to your understanding, which is the part and proper disposition of a
Socinian.

The fifth Doctrine. Chap. 6.
By resolving Faith into Reason, he destroys the nature of Faith and belief
of all Christian verityes.
CHAP. VI.
1. THe source whence all the aforesaid and innumerable other pernicious
sequels do follow, Gentle Reader, is, that according to this man's doctrine,
Christian Faith must be resolved into the evidence of natural reason, not as
preparing or inducing us to believe, but as the maine ground, and strongest
pillar of our Faith, and in a word, as the conclusion depends on the premises.
And to this purpose he builds much upon this axiom: Page 36. n. 8.
We cannot possibly be more certain of the conclusion, then of the weaker of
the premises; as a river will not rise higher then the fountain from which it
flows. Hence in the same place he deduceth that the certainty of Christian
Faith can be but moral, and not absolutely infallible. With this principle is
connexed another, unless you will call it the same more expressly declared
and applied. And it is this: If upon reasons seeming to my understanding very
good, I have made choice of a Guide or Rule for my direction in matters of
Faith; when afterward I discover that this Guide or Rule leads me to believe
one or more points, which in the best judgment that I can frame, I have
stronger reasons to reject, then I had to accept my former Rule; I may and
ought to forsake that Rule as false and erroneous: otherwise I should be
convinced not to follow reason, but some settled resolution to hold fast
whatsoever I had once apprehended. What follows from this vast principle, but
that if holy Scripture (for example) propound things seeming more evidently
contrary to reason, or my opinion, more plainly contradicting one another, then
the inducements which first moved me to believe Scripture were strong and
conuincing; I must reject the Scripture, as an erroneous Rule, and adhere to my
own Reason and discourse as my last and safest guide. This certainly does
follow. Especially if we remember another principle that the motives, for which
we believe holy Scripture, are only probable, for so they must in all equity
give place to reasons seeming demonstratiue and conuincing, as there will not
want many such against the high mysteries of Christian Faith, if once we
profess that our assent to them must be resolved into natural discourse. How
far dissonant this is from the received persuasion and tenet of all
Christians, that their Faith is not resolved into Reason but Authority, it is
easy to see by the effects. For why do Socinians and such like deny the
misteryes of the Blessed Trinity, the Deity of our Blessed Savior, and diverse
other verityes of Christian Faith, but because they seem manifestly repugnant
to reason?

2. It cannot be doubted but that any one to whom the salvation of his own
soul is dear, will be wary in admitting doctrines delivered in a Book, if
with Truth it may be affirmed, that the Author in point of belief is certainly
no good Christian, as one who denies the Divinity of Christ our Lord, and the
most Blessed Trinity, which are misteryes most proper to Christian Faith, and
most hateful to Jews and Turks. For what authority can he challenge with any
judicious Christian, in matters concerning Faith, who confessedly erres in the
prime articles of Christian Faith? as we fear even a sound man, if we think
he come from the pesthouse; and none will trust the Devil though transfigured
into an Angel of light. For which cause spiritual men bid us examine, not
only what motions we find in our soul, but also from what root they proceed.

3. I will not take upon me to say what you are, or what you are not, but in
matters concerning articles of faith we ought to speak plainly. You tell us
Praefat. n. 5.
that you believe the Doctrine of the Trinity, the Deity of our Savior, and
all other supernatural verityes revealed in Scripture. The question is not,
whether you believe some kind of Trinity, nor whether our Savior be God in
some sense by participation, as David says, I have said, you are Gods ( Psalm.
81.6.) and in that sense that they are contained in Scripture: But the question
is whether you believe those misteryes, as they are generally believed by
Christians, and expressed even in the 39. Articles of the English Church: or
whether you believe that in this sense they are revealed in Scripture. Be
pleased then to declare your self, whether you believe, that in the Godhead
there be three Persons of one substance, Power, and Eternity, the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, as is taught in the first article. And then whether
you believe the second Article, wherein is said: The Son which is the word of
the Father, the very and eternal God of one substance with the Father, took
man's nature in the womb of the Blessed Virgin, of her substance: So that two
whole and perfect natures, that is to say, the Godhead and Manhood were joined
together in one Person never to be divided, whereof is one Christ very God,
and very Man. Thirdly, whether you firmly believe the contents of the fifth
Article: The holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the son, is of one
substance, Majesty, and Glory with the Father and the son, very eternal God.
If these demands seem harsh, blame your self who were forewarned, even
before that which they call the Direction was published, when it was in your
power to have freed your self from this trouble, and secured others from the
scandal which your Book may give. Neither are these questions from the
matter, but consequent to principles delivered in your Book.

4. And let no man wonder, that I desire plain dealing. For I have seen a
Socinian Catechism in print, which at first grants that Christ is God, but
then to the question, whether he have the divine Nature, it answers, No:
because (forsooth) that is a thing repugnant both to Scripture and Reason. It
is apparent that the Socinians agree with the Manicheans, that Faith is
resolved into Reason, and that the Manicheans maintained a most strict
brotherhood with the Priscillianists, who taught that it is lawful to
dissemble a man's Faith even by oath: For their saying was, Iura, periura,
secretum prodere noli. And Arius, who denied the Divinity of our Savior
Christ, made no bones to forswear himself by a profession of Faith, contrary
to his internal belief. And whether any one who is esteemed a Socinian do not
hold it lawful to deny, or speak ambiguously against what he belieues, that
so in a very perverse sense he may with the Apostle, become all to all, it is
likely you know better then another can tell you.

5. Howsoever, every one does now expect, that both for these and other
manifest errors mentioned in that little Book of Direction, you openly declare
your self: it being not sufficient to say, as you do, in a general confused
manner, Pref. n. 28.
Whosoever teaches, or holds them, let him be Anathema. For this universality
or collection of errors, in a confused sort, leaves an evasion to make good
your speech, if you reject but any one of those errors, through withal you
embrace the rest. And therefore to acquit your credit, and to take away
scandal, it were your part to renounce each one in particular. For if in any
occasion, certainly in this, silence ought to be interpreted a confession of
the said errors. S. Hierome is of this mind, when he says, Ep. 75. adu.
Vigilantium.
Nolo in suspicione Haereseos quemquam esse patientem, ne apud eos, qui
ignorant innocentiam eius, dis^imulatio conscientia iudicetur, si taceat. It
you be not guilty, I do you a singular favor, in giving you this fair and sit
occasion, to wipe of that public stain which report has cast on you, and
whereof you have not only given too great occasion by your own words in
frequent Conferences, but now by your writings, which being published after the
Direction, demonstrates how deeply Socinian errors are rooted both in your
judgment and affection, which could not be abated, either by private advise, or
public admonition.

6. But to return from this necessary digression; This your resolving Faith
into natural Reason gives occasion for others at least, if your self be
guiltless, to deny the Divinity of our Savior Christ, and consequently to
deny that he redeemed mankind by his Death; which if he be not true God, had
been (O blasphemy!) not a price for our Redemption, but a punishment rather of
his either usurping the name of the true Son of God, or at least for giving
men cause to believe he did so. These I grant are harsh inferences, and yet you
cannot avoid them, so long as you limit Christian Faith to probabilities, and
resolve solue these into natural discourse, as the conclusion into the
premises. And give me leave to say, you do but dissemble to circumuent an
unwary Reader, when you say, Pref. n. 12.
that you submit all other reasons to this one. God has sai so: Therefore it
is true. For you conceal the maine point, which is, that you cannot know, that
God has said so, except by motives of credibility, which can produce only a
probable assent; and this must yield to the contrary, if it seem evident by
conuincing arguments, as Socinians conceive their reasons against the Blessed
Trinity, and the Deity of our Savior Christ, to be. The like I say of other
high misteryes of Christian Faith; and still must conclude, that under color
of vphoulding your cause you overthrow Christianity.

The sixth Doctrine. Chap. 7.
Destructive of the Theological Virtues of Christian Hope, and Charity.
CHAP. VII.
1. THe grounds which he has laid for the overthrow of Christian Faith, do by
consequence overthrow also Christian Hope, and Charity, and bring them down
to the rank of ordinary Moral virtues. But not content with this, he has
other passages, in which he strikes more near the root, and delivers
doctrines which tend immediately to the destruction of them. It is, says he,
Page 368.
against reason and experience, that by the commission of any deadly sin, the
Habit of Charity is quite extirpated. Reason and experience are his Guides, you
see, in all the most supernatural businesses of our souls. Reason and
experience, as it seems, do tell him, that even when he is committing a mortal
sin, that is, infringing the commaundment of God in a matter of weight and
moment, and in effect saying, I will not serve him; he is not withstanding in
Christian Charity with him, and his humble servant. Christian Charity, as all
Christians are taught, is a supernatural infused Habit, whereby we do love
and prefer God before all things, and are habitually inclined to it. When we
do not prefer him before all things, but turn our selves to Creatures by
some ouerweeing affection to them, that act of commission or omission, if it be
as I said Mortal, is not only to be considered as an Act, but as an Act
killing the soul, and bereauing it of the life thereof, that is of Charity,
whereby only we live in God: and consequently the Infused Habit of Charity
cease in us: howsoever we may find by experience some inclination still to
love God, either by some repetition of former acts of our own, or raised by
some consideration represented to us.

2. This is the doctrine received amongst Christians, which I do not now
undertake to dispute, and declare at large, but reserve it for a larger work;
my intent in this being only to point out the heads from whence very ill
consequences must needs follow, that people may take heed of them, and not be
too greedy of such novelties, least together with them they suck their
everlasting bane. For to go no further, to what pass would this one doctrine
bring a Commonwealth or Kingdom if it were received? Certainly to all
licentiousness and liberty. For if deadly sin may consist with the Habit of
Charity, much more with the Habit of Faith and Hope. And it being certain among
Christians, that God will damn no man in whose soul he beholds the precious
gemmes of these three Theological virtues Faith, Hope, and Charity; it will be
concluded, that deadly sin unrepented cannot exclude a man from Heaven. An
error most pernicious, and to be banished the thoughts of every Christian Man.

3. For the virtue of Hope, if I understand him right, he sometimes destroys
it by Presumption with overmuch largeness, and sometimes turns it to
Desperation by denying sinners a possibility to be saved, even with the best
repentance that they can have. In proof of too much largeness it will be
sufficient to allege words, wherein he speaks thus to Catholics: Page 32.
This pretense of yours, that Contrition will serve without actual Confession,
but Attrition will not, is a nicety, or phansy, or rather, to give it the true
name, a devise of your own to serve ends and purposes; God having no where
declared himself, but that wheresoever he will accept of that repentance which
you are pleased to call Contrition, he will accept of that which you call
Attrition. For though he like best the bright-flaming Holocaust of Love, yet he
reiects not the smoking flame of that repentance (if it be true and
effectual) which proceeds from Hope and Fear. Here he is very large, and
against all good Divinity will needs have an Act proceeding from Hope or
Fear, to be a sufficient and proportionable disposition to the noblest of the
three Theological virtues Charity. Among Protestant Deuines there want not
some who are so far from believing, that sorrow arising from Fear of Hell,
is sufficient for remission of sins, that they hold it rather to be a
sinful Act.

4. But neither in this do I intend for the present to enter into long
disputation, and therefore go forward to show that in other places of his
Book, he is as strict. For he calls Page 292.
it a doctrine of Licentiousness, that though a man live and dye without the
practice of Christian virtues, and with the Habits of many damnable sins
unmortified, yet, if he in the last moment of his life, have any sorrow for his
sins, and join confession with it, certainly he shall be saved. I see not
how this agrees with his former doctrine, that Attrition, and not only
Contrition, is sufficient for remission of sins. It is his part to reconcile
and vindicate from contradiction his own assertions. For me it is sufficient
that every body may be apt enough to infer from hence, that by this means a
poor sinner must despair, though he have even Contrition of his sins. For
in those circumstances, he has no time for the practice of Christian virtues,
nor for the mortifying the habits of many damnable sins, if he mean the
acquired physical habits of vice, produced by former vicious acts, as he must
understand if he mean to say any thing. For if by Habits of vice he understand
Habitual sins, or sins remaining not sufficiently retracted by sorrow, it
is to beg the question, as if he should say such repentance is insufficient for
pardon of our sins, because it takes not away our sins.

5. But he does more clearly declare himself, and cast men upon desperation,
by what he says of us in another place: Page: 392.
That although we pretend to be rigid defenders, and stout Champions for the
necessity of Good works, yet indeed we do it, to make our own functions
necessary, but obedience to God unnecessary: which will appear (says he) to
any man who considers what strict necessity the Scripture imposes upon all men
of effectual mortification of the Habits of all vices, and effectual
conversion to newnes of life, and universal obedience; and withal remembers,
that an Act of Attrition, which you say with Priestly absolution is sufficient
to salvation, is not mortification, which being a work of difficulty and time,
cannot be performed in an instant, and therefore neither Attrition, nor
Contrition, which signifies the most perfect kind of repentance will serve at
such an exigent. It is strange, Attrition alone should suffice for pardon of
our sins, and that it should be insufficient when it is joined with
absolution, which I hope you will not say, is ill, though you hold it not
necessary. Or if you mean, that Attrition is sufficient only when there
remains further time for mortification of vicious habits, this answer seems
repugnant to your own words, where speaking of some kind of men, you say, Page
32.
That notwithstanding their errors, they may dye with Contrition, or if not
with Co^trition, yet with Attrition, which, you say, God will accept. Which
supposition of yours seems either to speak of dying men, or at least to
comprehend them. And ( page 133.) you teach that for those men that have means
to find the Truth and will not use them, though their case be dangerous, yet
if they dye with a general repentance for all their sins known and
unknown, their Salvation is not desperate. Where you seem also to speak of
men at the hour of their Death, when yet they have not time to mortify the
habits of vice. And indeed it is repugnant to Reason, that by Attrition a man's
sins should be forgiven, and yet this forgiveness depend on the future
performance of mortification, which you say requires time Howsoever, for my
purpose it is sufficient, that by denying possibility of forgiveness to a
repentant sinner, at the last instant of his life, you uncharitably cast men on
desperation, and destroy the Hope, yea and Faith of Christians, which assures
us, that forgiveness is never denied to any that repents.

6. But there remains yet a more daungerours error, that one may be saved
with a general repentance for his sins, even while he actually continues in
them. This, unless I mistake, is employed in the words which I cited even now
Page 133.
that for those who have means to find the truth and will not use them, if
they dye with a general repentance for all their sins known and unknown,
their salvation is not desperate. Where you suppose, that a man remains in a
culpable error, and yet that a general repentance may obtain pardon without
actual dereliction of it. For if he forsake his error, he is out of your
case, which speaks of men that have means to find the Truth, and will not use
them. A very easy pillow if it could be sowed under any understanding ear. For
if such a general repentance would suffice at the hour of death, it would
also be sufficient at other times, and consequently one might have pardon of
his sins whilst he is actually committing them. Or if this be not the meaning
of that passage, it will notwithstanding be true, that either sorrow is
sufficient to obtain pardon for sins, when there remains no time to mortify
the habits of vice, which is against your Tenet; or else that a sinner cannot
obtain pardon at the hour of his Death, even with repentance.

The seventh Doctrine. Chap. 8.
Takes away the grounds of rational discourse.
CHAP. VIII.
1. IT may seem strange, that a man should resolve Christian Faith into
natural Reason, and yet fall upon a way which destroys all discourse of
Reason. But to these exigents human Understanding is brought, when it forsakes
the ground of Christianity. He teaches, and endeavors to prove Page 215.
and 217. n. 47.
by no fewer then seven reasons, that it is possible to assent to
contradictions at the self same time. If a man will speak in this to the
purpose, he must understand of formal and direct contradictions; for example,
Christ is the Savior of the world: Christ is not the Savior of the world.
Whereof to have put thee in mind, good Reader, shall suffice at this present,
according to the breuity which in this discourse I have proposed to my self,
not doubting but thou will upon this reflection and thine own examination find
that all his seven arguments, are very weak, and so far from proouing his
Assertion, that all of them, not one excepted, show directly the contrary of
that which he intended, notwithstanding that as it seems of purpose he took
this subject in task to show some strain of wit, and to purchase some opinion
of knowledge in Metaphysicke.

2. How it has thriued in his hand, time may show in some other treatise.
Where also perhaps some other subtiltyes or quircks will be sifted: to wit,
first, Whether Faith be properly Knowledge or Apprehension Page 325. n. 2.
, for he mightily mistakes in Philosophy. Secondly, Whether obscure and evident
be affections not of our assent, but of the object of it Page 328.
; which were a strange kind of Philosophy, as if we should say, God in himself
is obscure and evident, because some understand him with an obscure, and others
with a clear or evident assent. Thirdly, his discourse ( page 69. n. 48.)
about the eye, object, and act of Seeing, with the proportion which he would
make between them, and the object and act of Faith, which must fall upon an
heresy condemned in the Pelagians, besides some mistakes in Philosophy.
Fourthly, another subtilty about the essence of Habits, and formal motive, to
any Act etc. whereof he speaks page 138. n. 24. and does after his manner
mistake. Then also it shall be showed with how little reason he despises Page
195. n. 11.
the distinction of being obliged not to disbelieue, and of not being obliged
explicitly to believe; and with as little declaimes bitterly ( page 391. n. 8.)
against the doctrine that some things are necessary because they are
commanded, and others commanded because they are necessary. And finally, the
Reader must not be deprived at that time of the recreation he will receive by a
special subtilty indeed, about a saying in Charity maintained, That the Creed
was an abridgment Page 227. n. 65.
. Many more of the like nature will be then brought to the touchstone, and laid
as flat, as now perhaps to some partial men they may have seemed lofty and
learned. My purpose here is only to give the Reader warning, Chap. 9.
that there be in the current of his discourse such shelues, as by crossing the
general received principles among Christians, destroy Faith, and reciprocally
by the overthrow of Faith, come at length to ouerwhelme Reason it self.

The eight Doctrine. Opens a way to deny the B. Trinity, and other high
misteryes of Christian Faith.
CHAP. IX.
1. I Cannot omit notwithstanding here to show, that one of the Reasons which
he brings to prove, that one may at the self same time, yield assent to
contradictories, must be ranked amongst the rest of his Doctrins, which do
clearly tend to the over throw of Christianity. It is the third reason wherein
he argues thus: Page 215.
They which do captiuate their understandings to the belief of those things,
which to their understandings seem irreconciliable contradictions, may as well
believe real contradictions (for the difficulty of believing arises not from
their being repugnant, but from their seeming to be so.) But you (he speaks to
us Catholics) do captiuate your understandings to the belief of those things,
which seem to your understandings irreconciliable contradictions. Therefore it
is as possible, and easy for you to believe those that indeed are so. Change
but a word, and instead of Catholics, put Christians, and the Conclusion will
be: Therefore it is as possible, and easy for Christians to believe
contradictions that indeed are so, as to believe those which to their
understanding seem so. And seeing it is the common conceit of men, that one
cannot at the same time believe contradictions; and he himself acknowledges in
the same place, Page 217. n. 47.
that men should not do so, and that to do so, is both unreasonable and very
difficult; what will follow but that to believe the highest mysteryes of
Christian Faith, is, if not impossible, at least very difficult, and
unreasonable, and a thing that men should not do.

2. Now that Christians believe mysteries which to human reason seem to imply
contradiction, he himself will not deny. For though all the mysteryes of
Christian Faith be in themselves most sacred and true, yet to the weak eye of
human reason some of them seem to be against the Goodness of God: as that,
Many are called, and few elected, it being in his power to have elected, and
prevented with congruous and efficacious Grace, as well those many, as these
few. And our understanding is apt to be the more staggard with the depth of
this mystery, by considering that Christ our Lord dyed for the salvation of
all; and that every thought, word, or work of his was superabundantly
sufficient for the Redemption of infinite millions of worlds. Other points of
Christian Faith appear contrary to Gods infinite Mercy, and Justice. Such is
our belief, that for every deadly sin committed in a moment, and perhaps in
a matter seeming but a trifle, as the eating of an apple, he should inflict an
eternity of torments, if it be not repented. Or, that Infants can be justly
deprived of Beatitude in punishment of Original sin, to which they never
concurred by any Act properly theirs. And it might have been to good purpose,
if this man had declared himself directly in these two points, seeing he was
not without good ground directed to do so.

3. But I go on with the difficulty of Christian verities. For as the former
may seem harsh and rigorous, so others may seem, as it were, silly, and
unreasonable if Faith be resolved, as this man will have it, into human Reason.
Others bear a show of repugnance to the most received Principles of
Philosophy, and Metaphysicke, as the Mystery of the most Blessed Trinity.
Others in appearance derogate from the supreme respect we owe to God, as the
mystery of the Incarnation and Death of the son of God. Where I cannot but
observe, that this man speaks so irreligiously sometimes, that it may give
just occasion for men to enquire what he belieues concerning the Divinity of
our Savior Christ, as when he says; Pref. n. 8.
that the Doctrine of Transubstantiation may bring a great many others, as
well, as himself to Auerroes his resolution: Quandoquidem Christiani adorant
quod comedunt, sit anima mea cum Philosophis: seeing Christians adore what they
eat, my soul be with the Philosophers. Is this matter of eating our Savior
such a pill to your understanding, that rather then digest it you will turn
Turk or Infidel? If you believed indeed that our Savior Christ is truly God,
you would not be scandalized that Christians adore Him, who would and could be
eaten, no more then Him who stood in need of eating, and whom the Jews were
able to wound and murder, and might have eaten (even in a Capharnaiticall
savage manner, far different from the manner we receive him in the B.
Sacrament) if it had been his will to permit it. Perhaps for these reasons,
having subjected Faith to Reason, you wish with Auerroes, a professed enemy of
Christians, My soul be with the Philosophers.

4. He gives another suspicion of it in the passage following. For having
alleged diverse seeming contradictions in our Doctrine concerning the Blessed
Sacrament of the Altar, he concludes, Page 216. 217.
that if I (that is the Author of Charity Maintained) cannot compose the
repugnance, and that after an intelligible manner, then I must give him leave
to believe, that either we do not believe Transubstantiation, or else that it is
no contradiction, that men should subiugate their understandings to the belief
of contradictions; which yet, as I said before, he judges either impossible,
or at least unreasonable Ibid.
. And who I pray, can undertake against a cauilling wit, to answer all
arguments objected against the Blessed Trinity, Incarnation, and other sublime
verityes of Christian Faith, and compose all seeming repugnances after an
intelligible manner? Deuines are not ignorant, what inexplicable difficulties
offer themselves, even concerning the Deity it self, for example, his
Immutability, Freedom of will, voluntary decrees, knowledge of creatures, and
the like. Must we then deny them, because we are not able to compose all
repugnances after an intelligible manner? It may seem that you are of opinion
that we must; to which persuasion if you add another Doctrine of yours, That
there is no Christian Church assisted with Infallibility fit to teach any man,
even such articles as are fundamental, or necessary to salvation, but that
every one may, and must follow the Dictates of his own reason, be he otherwise
never so unlearned: what will follow, but a miserable freedom, or rather
necessity for men to reject the highest, and most divine mysteries of Christian
Faith, unless you can either compose all repugnances after a manner, even
intelligible to every ignorant and simple person (which I hope you will
confess to be impossible) or else say, it is reasonable for men to believe
contradictions at the same time, which by your confession were very
unreasonable.

5. And here I appeal to your own Conscience, whether in true Philosophy, the
objections which may be made against the mystery of the Blessed Trinity, and
the Incarnation of the son of God, be not incomparably more difficult, then
any which can be brought against Tra^substantiation. Some one whom you know
could say in some company, where there was occasion of arguing, Either deny the
Trinity, or admit of Transubstantiation; and it was answered, We will rather
admit this, then deny that. And with good reason. For if we respect human
discourse, there are more difficult objections against that mystery, then
against this. And if we regard Revelation, Scripture is more clear for the
real presence, and Transubstantiation, then for the mystery of the Blessed
Trinity. But no wonder if they who reduce all certainty of Christian Faith to
the weight of natural reason, are well content under the name of
Transubstantiation, to undermine the doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, and all
the prime verityes proper to Christian Faith. For which cause I have some
reason, as I touched before, Chap. 6. n. 6.
not to be satisfied, that this man for all his bragges of believing Scripture,
does make that account of it which Christians do, and ought to do, but
deludes the Reader with specious words: as for example, when speaking of the
holy Scripture he says: Page 376.
Propose me any thing out of this Book and require whether I believe it or
not, and seem it never so incomprehensible to human reason, I will subscribe
it with hand and heart, as knowing no demonstration can be stronger then this:
God has said so: Therefore it is true. These are glorious words, but contrary
to his own principles. For resolving Faith into Reason, he cannot believe that
which to his reason seems contradictory, but must think that the Motives for
which he receives Scripture being but probable, and subject to falsehood, must
of necessity yield to arguments more then probable, and demonstratiue to human
reason. And how then can he subscribe to Mysteryes incomprehensible to human
reason, and capable of objections which cannot always be answered, after a
manner intelligible, as he requires? And consequently he must, to use his own
words, give me leave to believe, that either he does not believe those
misteryes, or else, that he subiugates his understanding to the belief of
seeming contradictions; which he acknowledges to be unreasonable, and a thing
which men should not do, according to his own words Page 217.
. And the Reader had need to take heed that he be not taken also with that
protestation of his: Page 376.
I know no demonstration can be stronger then this; God has said so: Therefore
it is true: since he teaches, that he knows not that God has said so,
otherwise then by probable inducements, and only by a probable assent. So that
in fine this must be his strong demonstration: Whatsoever God speaks or
reueales, is most certainly true: But I am not certain, that God speaks in
the Scripture: Therefore I am certain that whatsoever is in Scripture is true.
Behold his demonstration, that is, a very false Syllogism, according to his
own discourse in another place where he not only graunts, but endeauours to
prove that the minor of this Demonstration exceedes not probability, and
consequently cannot infer a conclusion more them probable. Somewhat like to
this is an other cunning speech of his: Page 225. n. 5.
That he heartily belieues the Articles of our Faith be in themselves Truths, as
certain and infallible, as the very common principles of Geometry, or
Metaphysicke. Which being understood of the Objects, or Truths of Christian
Faith in themselves, is no privilege at all. For every Truth is in it self as
certain as the Principles of Geometry, it being absolutely impossible that a
Truth can be falsehood. But the point is, that he does not certainly know or
believe these Truths, as he does the Principles of Metaphysicke, but only with
a probable assent, and so to him the Truths cannot be certain. The like art
also he uses page 357. saying in these words: I do believe the Gospel of
Christ, as verily as that it is now day, that I see the light, that I am now
writing; for all this flourish signifies only, that he is certain he belieues
the Gospel of Christ with probable assent. As for the argument, it deserves no
answer. For who knows not that contradictories inuolue two propositions? but
he who captiuates his understanding, assents to one part only, Chap. 10.
and therefore is sure enough not to believe contradictories at the same time,
as he pretends. All which considered, the Reader will easily see, that his
Doctrines undermine the chiefest mysteries of Christian Faith, and overthrow
Christianity.

The ninth Doctrine. Lays grounds to be constant in no Religion.
CHAP. X.
I. I Said in the beginning, that as we could not know the way, unless we
first be told whither we go; so it could little avail us to be put in a way,
if by following it we might be misled. But suppose the end of our journey be
known, and the right way found, what better shall we be, if withal we be
continually harkning to some suggestions, which never let us rest, till we have
abandoned that path, by following other crosse-wayes, as we chance to fall upon
them. This is the case of the man with whom we have to deal. I will not build
upon his deeds, I mean his changes first from Protestant, to Catholic, then
from Catholic to Protestant, and then about again to Catholic, till at
last he be come to that pass, that it is hard to say, What he is, neither
Precisian, nor Subscriber to the 39. Articles, nor confessed Socinian, nor
right Christian according to the grounds which he has laid. If you will
believe himself, for matters of Religion, he is constant in nothing, but in
following that way to heaven which for the present seems to him the most
probable. He follows that which at the present seems most probable: A poor
comfort in matters of Faith, wherein error is of so great consequence. And yet
this cold comfort is upon the point of being lost; for the probability is
limited to the present.

2. Would any man think that in matters of this nature, and after so much
profession that he is now satisfied, he should Pref. n. 2.
profess himself, still to have a Travelers indifferency, most willing to be
led by reason to any way, or from it? And accordingly to tell us, Pref. n. 1.
That had there been represented to his understanding such Reasons for our
Doctrine, as would have made our Religion more credible then the contrary,
certainly he should have despised the shame of one more alteration, and with
both arms, and all his heart most readily have embraced it. Such was the
preparation which he brought to the reading of that Book, coming with such a
mind to the reading of it, as S. Austin before he was a settled Catholic,
brought to his conference with Faustus the Manichee. Did S. Austin after he was
a settled Catholic come with the like disposition to conference with any
Heretic or mis belieuer? To what purpose then does this man bring S. Austin
here, but to show the difference betwixt the Faith of one that is a Catholic,
and of one that is not; the difference I say in point of adhesion to his Faith,
the Catholic believing so assuredly that he may say with the Apostle, If we,
or an Angel from heaven euangelize Gal. 1.^.
to you besides that which we have euangelized to you, be he Anathema. Others
not being able ever to be certain of what they believe because they build upon
grounds which by their own confession are not certain and infallible.

3. In which respect also it may be justly wondered with what sense this man
taking upon him to be a guide to others, and to lead them a sofe way to
heaven, professes himself not to be settled in his way, and still to have not
only a Prof. n. 2.
Travelers, but an Ignorant Travelers Indifferency, willing to be led to any
way, or from it, because he knows not whether he be right or wrong; otherwise
if he know himself to be right, certainly it were not his part to be so
willing to be led to any way, or from it: which gives me hope, that no man of
judgment, and timorous conscience, will adventure the eternal salvation of his
soul, upon the writings or Doctrine of one, who is so unsettled, and whom he
either knows not where to find, or how long to keep in any one opinion or
profession; to whom the words of S. Bernard Ep. 193.
concerning Petrus Abailardus (who taught that Faith was but opinion) may be
applied: Homo sibi dissimilis est, totus ambiguus. He is a man who disagrees
even from himself, wholely composed of doubtings. I leave out his middle
words, intus Herodes, foris Ioannes.

4. One thing certainly people would be very glad to know, that whereas he
maintains, that his Alterations were the most satisfactory actions to himself
Page 303.
that ever he did, and the greatest victories that ever he obtained over
himself: Men, I say, would be glad to know upon what new and great Motives,
these most satisfactory actions, and greatest victoryes were over thrown
again, and frequent changes grounded. For his first being Catholic, we have
Motives in writing under his own hand, and now in print. But what new reasons
moved him to forsake us, this would people willingly know. If he had no better
reasons, then be the answers to his own Motives, I scarcely believe, that any
judicious Protestant will allow the alteration to have been good, diverse of
them being against Protestants themselves, and some repugnant to all
Christianity, as may be well seen by the effects, which they have wrought in
him, to wit, so much unsettledness in belief and Religion, that he knows not
to this day, what he would be at. But we may well suppose that as he willingly
leaves all men to their liberty, provided that they improve it not to a Tyranny
over others; so he reserues the like liberty to himself, and is in fine
resolved to believe whatsoever for the present does seem most probable to him:
and so living in perpetual Indifferency, be an example to others to be
constant in no profession, which is as good as to be of no Religion.

The tenth Doctrine. Prouides for the impunity and preservation of whatsoever
damnable error against Christian Faith.
CHAP. XI.
1. HE is no less prouide^t to conserve then industrious to beget Unchristian
errors and Atheismes. Suppose an Orthodoxe Belieuer fall first into damnable
Heresies, then to Turcisme or Iudaisme, afterward to Paganism, and finally to
Atheism. Let him freely speak his mind to the learned, and unlearned, to high
and low, to the Laity and Clergy, to all sorts of persons: Let him have swarms
of followers, let Circumcision be reduced, the Saturday observed for Sunday
with Jews, or Friday with the Turks, and in confirmation of these sacrileges,
let Books be written. What remedy? Must these things be tolerated in a
Christian Common wealth, or Kingdom? with resentment of a Christian Prince? in
despite of Christian Prelates? under the eyes of Christian Deuines? in the
midst of Christian people? They must be suffered, if we believe this man's
doctrine, Page 297.
that no man ought to be punished for his opinions in Religion. We are willing
(says he) to leave all men to their liberty, provided they will not improve it
to a Tyranny over others Page 179. n. 81.
, a good means to preserve every one in his liberty without fear of
punishment. And the contrary persuasion and practice, what is it? It well
becomes them who have their portions in this life, who serve no higher state
then that of England, or Spain, or France, who think of no other happiness
but the preservation of their own fortunes, and tranquillity in this world,
who think of no other means to preserve States, but human power and
Machiauillian Policy. How dangerous to Church, and even to State this
pernicious error is, and what encouragement it gives for unquiet persons to
oppose Authority, and how deeply it taxes England and other Protestant
Churches of Machiauillian Policy, and to be men who have their portions in this
life, who serve no higher State then that of England, or Spain, or France, who
think of no other Happiness, but the preservation of their own fortunes in
this world, for having punished Heretics even with death, I leave to be
considered by higher Powers.

2. Chap. 11.
I grant he would seem to mitigate his doctrine, and confine it within
certain limits, but such, that his exception is worse then his general Rule,
unless I mistake his meaning, and therefore present his words as they lie to
the Readers judgment. There is, says he, no danger to any State from any man's
opinion, unless it be such an opinion, by which disobedience to Authority, or
impiety is taught, or licenced; which sort I confess may justly be punished,
as well as other faults: or unless this sanguinary doctrine be joined with it,
That its lawful for him by human violence to enforce others to it. Thus he. As
for his first limitation, it either destroys all that he said before, or else
it is but a verbal gloss for his own security. For if he grant that every
Heresy is impiety, and brings with it disobedience to Authority (as certainly
it does, if it be professed against the laws of the Kingdom, or Decrees and
Commands of the Church, State, and Prelates where the contrary is maintained:)
If, I say, his meaning be this, then his former general Doctrine vanishes
into nothing; and it will still remain true, that men may be punished for
their opinions and heresies. But if his meaning be, that no opinion is to be
punished, except such as implies disobedience to Authority, or licenseth
Impiety in things which belong merely to Temporal affairs, and concern only
the civil comportment of one man to another, as theft, murder, and the like;
then he still leaves a freedom for men to believe, and profess what they
please for matters of Religion. And so, if they judge a thing to be unlawful,
which their Superiors affirm to be indifferent, yet they may hold their
opinion, and disobey their Prelates, and may be able to tell them from this man's
doctrine, that to enforce any man in points of this kind, is unlawful
Machiauillian Policy.

3. His second limitation seems to go further, telling us, that a ma^s
opinion may be punished, if this sanguinary doctrine be joined with it, That it
is lawful for him by human violence to enforce others to it. From whence, for
ought I can perceive, it clearly follows, that if any Church prescribe some
form of Belief, and punish others for believing and professing the contrary,
the Prelates or others of that Church, who co^curre to enforce by punishment
such contrary belieuers, may themselves be justly punished. As if for example,
an Arian be punished with Death in any Kingdom, the Prelates, or other Persons
of authority in that State, may according to his doctrine be lawfully punished,
as holding it lawful to enforce men against their conscience, which he calls
a sanguinary Doctrine. How dangerous a position this might prove, if Arians,
or Socinians, or any other sect, or unquiet spirit could prevail in any
Kingdom or Commonwealth where Heretics are punished, it is not fit for me to
exaggerate; being sufficient for my intention, to have made it clear, that the
enemy of mankind could never have invented a more effectual means then this
freedom of opinion, and encouragement by impunity, for the enlarging of his
infernal Kingdom by Heresy, Paganism, Atheism, and in a word, by destroying
whatsoever belongs to Christianity.

4. As for punishing Heretics with Excommunication, in words he grants it may
be done; but I have reason to suspect what his meaning is indeed, and whether
he speak thus only for some respects. For I know that a great Socinian has
printed the contrary. Iren. Philal. disp. de Pace Eccles.
And if no man can be punished with temporal punishment for embracing that
which his Conscience persuades him to be Truth, how can he be lawfully punished
by Excommunication, for doing that which to his understanding he is obliged to
do? For not acknowledging any authority of Church, or Prelates endued with
infallibility, he is still left to his own reason. Besides one effect of
excommunication is to exclude the Person so censured, from the civil
conversation with others; other temporal punishments in all Courts being also
consequent to it. Seeing then he denies that men are to be punished for their
opinions by Temporal punishments, he cannot with coherence affirm, that they
may lawfully be excommunicated: This certainly being a greater enforcement then
death it self, to such as understand the spiritual benefits, and advantages,
of which men are deprived by that Censure.

The Conclusion.
1. By that which has been said in these few precedent Chapters it evidently
appears; first, how fitting it was for the good of our Country in these
present circumstances, that people should have learned by some such Treatise as
the Direction, to beware of impious Doctrines, such as were foreseen that this
man would vent under color of defending the Protestant cause, and answering
Charity maintained. And that although nothing could be intended more
disgraceful to Protestant Religion, then to see a Champion, and a way chosen
to defend it, which openly destroys all Religion; yet Compassion could not but
work in a wel-wishing soul, and move it to desire, and to endeavor that
such a way should not be taken, which might make people more and more
insensible of any Religion, by blurring the common principles of Christianity,
and digging up the foundation thereof, to lay instead of them, the grounds of
Atheism.

2. Secondly though this has not taken the full effect which could have been
wished, and that notwithstanding the warning given, he has interlac^d his
whole book with such stuff as here you have seen; yet this we have gotten
further, that it is discovered clearly to the world, how deeply Socinianisme is
rooted in this man, (and, as it is to be feared, in many others with whom he
must needs have had much conference since his undertaking the work) in regard
that no timely advise or Direction, no force of reason, no fear of shame or
punishment, no former impressions of Christianity could withdraw him from
steeping his thoughts and pen in such Unchristian ink; nor the many
Corrections endeavored by the Approouers of his Book, blot out his errors,
though in respect of the alterations which have been by report made in it by
them, it is quite another thing from the first platform which he drew, and put
into their hands; and consequently how just reason the Directour had to
suspect, that his true intention, was not to defend Protestantisme, but
covertly to vent Socinianisme.

3. Now, thirdly, whether it be not high time that people should now at the
least open their eyes upon this second warning, and take that order which may
be convenient to prevent the spreading of so pernicious a Sect, I must leave to
the consideration of every one whom it may concern. I do only for the present
wish from my heart, that the maintayning of that Blessed Title, and State of
Christianity, of which our Country has been for so many ages possessed, may
be the effect both of this man's wavering and wandering trauells, and of these
my labors.

FINIS.
Errata.
PRaesat. page 10. lin. 25. to our nation corrige of our nation Ibid. page 11.
lin. 26. with corrige with Page 32. lin. 3. is the corrige is so Ibid. lin. 4.
by so corrige by the Page 53. lin. 21. Christ is God, lege, is the Son of God

In the margent page 11. over against S. Bernard eited line 3. put. Bernard.
Epist. 87.


