A Right excellent and famous Comedy, called The Three Ladies of London.

WHEREIN IS NOTABLY declared and set forth, how by the means of Lucar, Love
and Conscience is so corrupted, that the one is married to Dissimulation, the
other fraught withal abomination.

A perfect pattern for all Estates to look into, and a work right worthy to
be marked. Written by R. W. as it has been publicly played.

AT LONDON, Printed by John Danter, dwelling in Ducke Lane, near Smithfield.
1592.

The Prologue.
TO sit on Honors seat, it is a lofty reach,
To seek for praise by making bragges, often times does get a breach.
We list not ride the rolling rackes, that dims the crystal skies,
We mean to set no glimmering glance before your courteous eyes:
We search not Plutoes pensive pit, nor taste of Limbo lake:
We do not show of warlike fight, as shield and sword to shake:
We speak not of the powers divine, ne yet of furious sprights:
We do not seek high hills to clime, nor talk of loves delights*
We do not here present to you the threshar with his flayle,
Ne do we here present to you the milk-maid with her payle:
We show not you of country toil, as hedger with his bill:
We do not bring the husbandman to lop and top with skill:
We pay not here the Gardners part to plant, to set and sow:
You marvel then what wares we have to furnish out our show.
Your patience yet we crave a while till we have trimd our stall:
Then young and old come and behold our wares, and buy them all.
Then if our wares shall seem to you, well wouen, good and fine,
We hope we shall your custom have again another time.
FINIS.
A pythie and pleasant Comoedie of the three Ladies of London.
The first Act.
Enter Fame sounding before Love and Conscience. Love. Lady Conscience, what
shall we say to our estates,
to whom shall we complain?
O^ how shall we avridge such fates, as heapeth up our pain?
It Is Lucar now that rules the rout, it is she is all in all,
^is she that holds her head so stout, in fine it is she that works our fall.
Oh Conscience, I fear, I fear a day,
that we by her and Usurie shall quite be cast away.

Con. Indeed I fear the worst, for every man does sew
and comes from countries strange and far, of her to have view.
Although they ought to seek true Love and Conscience clear:
but Love and Conscience few do like, that ^eane on Lucars chair.
Men ought be ruled by us, we ought in them bear sway:
so should each neighbor live by other in good estate always.

Love. For Lucar men come from Italy, Barbary, Turkey,
From Jury: nay the Pagan himself,
Indangers his body to gape for her pelf.
They forsake mother, prince country, religion, kiffe and kin,
Nay men care not what they forsake, so lady Lucar they win.
That we poor ladies may sigh te see our states thus turned and tossed,
and worse and worse is like to be, where Lucar rules the roast.

Con. You say the truth, yet God I trust will not admit it so,
that Love and Conscience by Lucars lust shall catch an overthrow.

Fame. Good ladies rest content, and you no doubt shall see
them plagud with painful punishment for such their cruelty:
And if true Love and Conscience live from Lucars lust lascivious,
thou Fame a triple crown will give, which lasts ay victorious.

Con. God grant that Conscience keep within the bounds of right,
and that vile Lucar do not daunt her heart with deadly spite.

Love. And grant O God that Love be found in city, town and country,
which causes wealth and peace abound, and pleases God almighty.

Fame. But Ladies, is it your pleasure to walk abroad a while,
and recreate your selves with measure your sorrows to beguile.

Con. Pass on good Fame, your steps do frame, on you we will attend,
and pray to God that holds the rod, our states for to defend.

Exeunt. Enter Dissimulation, having on a Farmers long coat, and a cap, and
his poll and beard painted motley. Dissim. Nay no less than a farmer, a right
honest man,
but my to^ng cannot stay me to tell what I am:
Nay, who is it that knows me not by my party colored head?
They may well think that see me, my honesty is fled.
Tush, a fig for honesty, tut let that go.
Since men, women, and children my name and doings do know.
My name is Dissimulation, and no base mind I bear,
For my outward effects my inward zeal do declare:
For men do dissemble with their wives, and their wives with them again,
So that in the hearts of them I always remain:
The child dissembles with his father, the sister with her brother,
the maiden with her mistress, and the yongman with his lover,
There is Dissimulation between neighbor and neighbor, friend and friend, one
with another.
Between the servant and his master, between brother and brother,
then why make you it strange that ever you knew me,
Seeing so often I raunge throughout every degree?
But forget my baseness, i will toward London as fast as I can,
to get entertainment of one of the three Ladies, like an honest man.

Enter simplicity like a Miller all mealy with a wand in his hand. simp. They
say there is preferment in London to have,
Mas and there be i will be passing and brave:
Why i will be no more a miller, because the maidens call me dusty pole,
One thumps me on the neck, and another strikes me on the nole:
And you see I am a hansome fellow, mark the comporknance of my stature,
Faith i will go seek peraduentures, and be a serving creature.

Dissim. Whither away good fellow? I pray thee declare.

simp. Mary i will clare thee, to London, would thou did go there.

Dissim. What if I did, would it be better for thee?

simp. I marry should it, for I love honest company.

Dissim. Agreed, there is a bargen, but what shall I call thee?

simp. Cause thou art an honest man i will tell thee, my name is Simplicity

Dissim. A name agreeing to thy nature, but stay here comes more company.

Enter Fraud with a sword and buckler like a Ruffin. Fraud. Huffe once aloft,
and if I may hit in the right vain,
Where I may beguile easily without any great pain:
I will flaunt it and brave it after the lusty swash,
I Will deceive thousands, what care I who lie in the lash.

Dissim. What Fraud well met, whither trauellest thou this way?

Fraud. To London, to get entertainment there if I may,
Of the three ladies, Lucar, Love, and Conscience,
What care I to serve the Devil, so I may get pence?

simp O Fraud I know thee for a deceitful knave,
And art thou gotten so bon^acion and brave?
I knew thee when thou dwelt at a place called Grauesend,
And the guests knew thee too, because thou wast not their friend,
For when thou would bring reckoning to thy guess,
thou would say twice so much, and swear it cost thy dame no less.
So thou did deceive them, and thy dame too:
And because they spied thy knauerie, away thou did go.
Then thou did go into Hartfordshyre to a place called Ware,
And because horses stood at hay for a penny a night there,
Do that thou could get nothing that kind of way,
thou did greaze the horses teeth, that they should not eat hay*
And (...) tell the rider his horse no hay would eat,
Do the man would say, give him some other kind of meat.
Sir shall Igiue him ^ates, fitches pease barley, or bread,
But what ere thou gaust him, thou (...) three quarte^s when he was in bed,
And ^ow thou art so proud with thy filching and coosning art,
But I think one day thou will be proud of the Rope and the Cart:
take a w^se fellows counsel Fraud, leave thy coosning and filching.

Fraud. Thou hores^n rascal swad auant, i will bang thee for thy brauling,
how dare thou defame a Gentleman that has so large a living?

Sim. A goodly Gentleman Ostler, I think none of you al believe him.

Fraud What a clinchpoop drudge is this? I can forbear him no more.

Let Fraud ma^e as though he would strike him, but let Dissimulation step
between them. Dis^im. My good friend Fraud refrain, and care not therefore,
it is Simplicity that patch, he knows not good from bad,
And to stand in contention with him, I would think you were man
But tell me Fraud tell me, have thou been an Ostler in thy days?

Fraud. Faith I have proved an hundred such ways,
For when I could not thrive by all other trades,
I became a squire to wai^e upon ^ades.
But then was then, and now is now, so let that pass,
I am as thou see me, what care? the devil what I was.

Dissim. Y^^ say you go to London, in faith have with you than.

Simpl. Nay come and go with me, good honest man:
For if thou go with him, he will teach thee all his knauerie,
there is none will go with him that has any honesty.
A bots on thy ma^ley beard, I know thee thou art Dissimulation,
And have thou got an honest man's coat to semble this fashion?
I Will tell thee what, thou will even semble and cog with thine own father:
A couple of false knaves together, a thief and a broker:
thou makst towns folk believe thou art an honest man in the country*
yet do nothing but cog, lie, and foyst with hypocrisy.
You shall be hanged together and go alone together for me,
For if I should go the folks would say, we were knaves all three.

Enter Sym^^^e and Usury hand in hand. Sim. Friend Usurie, I think we are
welneare at our iournies end:
But know thou whom I have espied?

Usury. No.

Sym. Fraud our great friend.

Vsur. And I see another that is now come into my remembrance.

Sym. Who is that?

Vsur. Mary M. Da^ie Dissimulation, a good helper, and our old acquaintance.

Simpl. Now all the cards in the stock are dealt about,
the four knaves in a cluster comes ruffling out.

Sym. What Fraud and Dissimulation happily found out,
I marvel what piece of work you two go about?

Fraud. Faith sir we met by chance, and toward London are ben^

Usury. And to London we hye it is our chiefest intent,
to see if we can get entertainment of the Ladies or no.

Dissim. And for the self same matter even thither we go.

Sym. Then we are luckely well met, and seeing we wish al for one thing,
I would we our wills and wishing might win.

Sim^l. Yes they will be sure to win the devil and all,
Or else they will make a man to spue out his gall:
O that vile Usury, he lent my father a little money, and for breking one day,
He took the see^simple of his house and mill quite away:
And yet he borrowed not half a quarter so much as it cost,
But I thinck if it had been but a shilling it had been lost:
So he killed my father with sorrow, and undid me quite,
And you deal with him sirs, you shall find him a knave full of spite,
And Simon I perse I. Symonie too, he is a knave for the nonce,
He loves to have twenty livings at once:
And if he let an honest man as I am to have one,
H^le let it so dear that he shall be undone.
And he seeks to get Parsons livings into his hand,
And puts in some odd dunce that to his payment will stand:
So, if the parsonage be worth forty or fifty pound a year,
He will give one twenty nobles to mumble service once a month there.
Symonie and Usury both. What rascal is he, that speaks by us such villainy?

Dissim. Sirs, he was at us erewhile too, it is no matter, it is a simple soul
called Simplicity.

Enter Love and Conscience. But here come two of the Ladies, therefore make
ready.

Fraud. But which of us all shall first break the matter?

Dissim. Mary let Symonie do it, for he finely can flatter.

Vsur. Nay sirs, because none of us shall have pre-eminence above other,
we will sing in fellowship together like brother and brother.

Sym. Of troth agreed my masters let it be so.

Simpl. Nay and they sing, i will sing too.

The Song.
Good Ladies take pity, and grant our desire.
Conscience reply. Speak boldly and tell me what ^st you require.
Their reply. Your service good Ladies, is that we do crave.
Her reply. We like not nor list not such servants to have*
Their reply. If you entertain us, we trusty will be,
but if you refrain us, then most unhappy:
We will come we will run we will bend at our beck,
we will plie, we will hie, for fear of a check.
Her reply. You do feign, you do flatter, you do lie, you do prate,
you will steal, you will rob, you will kill in your hate:
I deny you, I defy you, then cease off your talking,
I refrain you, I disdain you, therefore get you walking.
Con. What Fraud, Dissimulation, Usurie, and Symonie,
How dare you for shame presume so boldly,
As once to show your selves before Love and Conscience,
Not yielding your lewd lives first to repentance?
Think you not that God will plague your wicked practices,
If you intend not to amend your lives so far amiss?
Think you not God knows your thoughts words and works,
And what secret mischiefs in your hearts there lurks?
then how dare you offend his heavenly majesty,
With your dissembling deceit, your flattery, and your Usurie?

Fraud. Tut sirs, seeing lady Conscience is so scrupulous,
I will not speak to her, for I see it is frivolous.
But what say you lady Love, will you grant us favor?

Love. I Will no such servants so ill of behavior:
Servants more fitter for Lucar than Love,
And happy are they which refrain for to prove:
Shameless, pitiless, graceless, and quite past honesty,
then who of good conscience but will hate your company.

Vsu. Here is scrupulous Conscience and nice Love indeed,
Tush, if they will not, others will, I know we shall speed.

simp. But lady I stand still behind, for I am none of their compan^.

Con. Why, what art thou? oh I know thou art simplicity.

simp. I faith, I am simplicity, and would feign serve ye.

Con. No, I may have no fools to dwell with me.

Simp. Why, then lady Love will you have me than?

Love. Yes simplicity thou shall be my man.

Simp. But shall I be your good man?

Love. Yea my good man indeed.

Simp. I but I would be your goodman, and swap up a wedding with speed

Love. No, Love may not marry in any case with Simplicity,
But if thou will serve me, i will receive it willingly,
And if thou will not, what remedy.

Simp. Yes i will serve ye, but will you go in to dinner, for I am hungry?

Love. Come lady Conscience, will you walk home from this company?

Con. With right good will, for their sights likes not me.

Exeunt Love and Conscience. Fraud. Fraud is the clubbish knave, and Usury the
hard hearted knave
And Symonie the diamond dainty knave,
And Dissimulation the spiteful knave of spade.
Come there any more knaves, come there any more:
I see four knaves stand on a row.

Let Fraud run at him, and let Simplicity run in, and come out again
straight. Fraud. Away Drudge, be gone quickly.

Simp. I wis, do thrust out mine eyes with a Lady.

Exit Simplicity. Usury. Did you ever see Gentleman so rated at before,
But it skils not, I hope one day to turn them both out at door.

Symo. We were arrantly flowted, rayled at, and skoft in our kind,
That same Conscience is a vild terror to man's mind:
Yet faith I care not, for I have borne many more than these,
When I was conversant with the Clergy beyond the Seas,
And he that will live in this world must not care what such say,
For they are blossoms blown down, not to be found after May.

Fraud. Faith care that care will, for I care not a point,
I have shifted hitherto, and whilst I live I will ieopard a joint:
And at my death I will leave my inheritour behind,
That shall be of the right stamp to follow my mind:
Therefore let them prate till their hearts ache, and spit out their evil,
She cannot quail me, if she came in likeness of the great devil.

Dissim. Mass Fraud, thou have a doughtie heart to make a hangman of,
For thou have good skill to help men from the coffe,
But we were arrantly flowted, yet I thought she had not known me,
But I perceive though Dissimulatio^ do disguise him, Conscience can see.
What though Conscience perceive it, all the world cannot beside?
Tush there be a thousand places where we our selves may provide:
But look sirs, here comes a lusty Lady toward us in haste,
But speak to her if you will, that we may be all plaste.

Enter Lady Lucar. Vsu. I pray thee do, for thou art the likeliest to speed.

Dissim. Why then i will to it with a stomach in hope of good speed,
Fair Lady, all the Gods of good fellowship kiss ye (I would say bless ye)

Luc. Thou art very pleasant and full of thy roperipe, I would say rhetoric

Dissim. Lady you took me at the worst, I beseech you therefore,
To pardon my boldness offending no more.

Luc. We do, the matter is not great, but what would thou have?
How shall I call thee, and what is it thou do crave?

Dissim. I am called Dissimulation, and my earnest request,
Is to crave entertainment for me and the rest,
Whose names are Fraud, Usurie, and Symonie,
Great caters for your health, wealth* and prosperity.

Luc. Fra^d, Dissimulation, Usurie, and Symonie,
Now truly I thank you for proffering your service to me:
You are all heartily welcome, and I will appoint straight way,
where each one in his office in great honor shall stay.
But Usurie did thou never know my grandmother the old Lady Lucar of Uenice.

Usury. Yes Madame, I was servant unto her, and lived there in bliss.

Lucar. But why came thou into England, seeing Uenice is a City where Usurie
by Lucar may live in great glory?

Usury. I have often heard your good grandmother tell,
that she had in England a daughter, which her far did excel:
And that England was such a place for Lucar to bide,
as was not in Europe and the whole world beside:
then lusting greatly to see you and the country, she being dead,
I made have to come over to serve you in her stead.

Lucar. Gramercie Usury, and doubt not but to live here as pleasantly,
and pleasanter too: but whence came you Symonie, tell me.

sym. My birth, nurserie and bringing up hithertoo has bin in Rome, that
ancient religious city:
On a time the monks a friars made a banquet, whereto they invited me
with certain other English merchants, which belike were of their familiarity.
So talking of many matters, amongst others one began to (...)
of the abundant substance still brought to that state.
Soon said the increase of their substance and wealth,
came from other Princes, and was brought thither by ^^ealth:
But the friars and monks with all the ancient company,
said that it first came, and is now vpholden by me Symonie:
which the Englishmen gave ear too, then they flattred a little too much,
as English merchants can do for advantage when increase it does tuch:
And being a shipboord merry, and overcome with drink on a day,
the wind served, they hoyst sail, and so brought me away:
and landing here, I heard in what great estimation you were,
made bold to your honor to make my repair.

Lucar. Well Symonie, I thank thee, but as for Fraud and Dissimulation
I know their long continuance, and after what fashion.
Therefore Dissimulation, you shall be my steward,
An office that every man's case by you must be preferred.
And you Fraud shall be my rent-gatherer, my letter of leases and my putchaser
of land,
so that many old bribes will come to thy hand.
And Usurie because I know you be trusty, you shall be my secretary,
to ^eale amongst merchants, to bargen and exchange money.
And Symonie, because you are a sly fellow, and have you^ tongue liberal,
we will place you over such matters as are Ecclesiastica^^
And though we appoint sundry offices where now ye are in,
yet jointly we mean to use you together ofttimes in one thing.

All. Lady we rest at your command in ought we can or may.

Lucar. Then master Dauie to my pallaice have thee away,
(...) will Crafty Conueyance my butler to make ready
The best fare in the house, to welcome thee and thy company:
but stay Dissimulation, my self will go with thee.
Gentlemen i will go before, but see in any case,
so soon as ye please resort to my place.

Exeunt, Dissim. and Lucar. sym. Doubt not fair Lady, we will not long absent
be.

Usury. Fellow Symonie this fell out pat, so well as heart could wish,
we are cunning anglers, we have caught the fattest fish,
Certainly it is true that her grandmother told.
Here is good to be done by use of silver and gold.
And seeing we are so well settled in this country,
Rich and poor shall be pincht whosoever come to me.

sym. Sir, being at Rome, and dwelling in the Friarie,
they would talk how England yearly sent over a great mass of money:
and that this little Yland was more worth to the Pope,
than three bigger Realms that had a great deal more scope:
For here were smoke pence, peter pence, and powle pence to be paid,
besides much other money that to the Popes use was made.
Why, it is but lately since the Pope received this fine,
Not much more than 33. years since, it was in Queen Mary's time.
But England had never known what this great had meant,
Had friar Austen from the Pope not hither been sent.
For the Pope hearing it to be a little Yland, sent him with a great Army over.
And winning the victory, he landed about Rye, Sandwych, or Dover.
Then he erected laws having the people in subjection,
and for the most part, England has paid tribute so long.
I hearing of the great store and wealth in the Country,
could not choose but persuade myself the people loved symonie.

Usury. But stay your talk till some other time, we forget my Lady,

Sym. Of troth you say true, for she bad us make have,
but my talk me thought sauoured well, and had a good taste.

Exeunt ambo. Enter Mercadore like an Italien Merchant. Merc. Me judge in my
minda dat me be not very far
from de place where dwells my Lady Lucar:
But here come vne shentie man's so he do.

Enter Dissimulation. Pray ye heartely ^^gnior leta me speaka you,
Pray ye do ye know un shentleman dat meshier Dauie do call^
Dissim. Yes sir, my self am he, and what would you withal?

Merca. Good a my friend meshier Dauie, helpa me pray ye heartely,
(...) have sum acquaintance a with Madona Lucar your Lady.
^ir upon condition I will, therefore I would you should know,
That on me and my fellowe^ you must largely bestow:
Whose names are Fraud, Usurie, and Symony, men of great credit and calling,
And to get my Ladies good will and theirs it is no small thing
But tell me can you be content to win Lucar by Dissimulation?

Merca. A good a my friend axa me no shush a question,
For he dat will live in de world must be of the world sure,
And de world will love his own, so long as the world endure.

Enter Lucar. Dissim. I commend you wit Sir, but here comes my Lady.

Merca. Come hider, heers too tree Crowns for de speak me.

Dissim. Well sir I think you, I will go speak for you.

Lucar. Master Dauy Dissimulation, what new acquaintance have ye gotten there?

Dissim. Such a one Madam that unto your state has great care:
And surely in my mind the Gentleman is worthy
To be well thought on for his liberality, bounty, and great care to seek ye.

Lucar. Gentleman, you are heartily welcome, how are you called, I pray you tell
us?

Merca. Madona, me be a Mershant and be called senior Merkadorus.

Lucar. But I pray you tell me what Countryman.

Merca. Me be Madona an Italian.

Lucar. Yet let me trouble ye, I beseech ye whence came ye?

Merca. For serua voutra boungrace, me come form Turkey.

Lucar. Gramercie, but senior Mercadore dare you not undertake, Secretly to
convey good commodities out of this country for my sake?

Merca. Madona, me do for love of you tinke no pain too mush,
And to do any ting for you me will not grush:
Me will a forsake a my Fader, Mother, King, Country, and more den dat,
Me will lie and forswear my self for a quarter so much as my hat.
What is dat for love of Lucar me dare or will not do:
Me care not for all the world, the great Devil, nay make my God angry
for you.

Luc. You say well Mercadorus, yet Lucar by this is not throwly won
But give ear and I will show what by thee must be done:
Thou must carry over Wheat, Pease, Barley, Oats, and Fitches, and all kind of
grain,
Which is well sold beyond sea and bring such merchants great gain.
Then thou must carry beside lether, tallow, beef, bacon, bell mettell, and
every thing,
And for these good commodities, trifles into England thou must bring:
As Bugles to make bables, colored bones, glass beads to make bracelettes
withal:
For every day Gentlewomen of England do ask for such trifles from stall to
stall,
And you must bring more, as Amber, Ieat, Coral, Crystal, and every such
babble,
That is slight pretty and pleasant, they care not to have it prefitable.
And if they demand wherefore your wares and merchandise agree,
You must lay Ieat will take up a straw, Amber will make one fat,
Corrall will look pale when you besicke, and Crystal will stanch blad,
So with lying, flattering, and glosing you must utter your ware,
And you shall win me to your will, if you can deceitfully swear.

Merca. Tinke ye not dat me have carried over corn, Ledar, Beef and Bacon too
all it is while:
And brought hedar many bables dese country men to beguile?
Yes, shall me tell you Madona, me and my countrimans have sent over,
Bell mettell for make ordinance, yea and ordinance it self beside,
Day my country and other countries be so well furnished as dis country,
and has never been spide.

Luc. New I perceive you love me, and if you continue in this still,
You shall not only be with me, but command me when and where you will.

Merca. Lady, for to do all dis and more for you me be content:
But I tinke some skall knave will put a bill in da Parliament,
For dat such a tings shall not be brought here.

Luc. Tush Mercadore, I warrant thee, thou need not to feare^
What and one do? there is some other will flatter and say,
They do no hurt to the country, and with a slight fetch that bill away.
And if they do not so, that by act of Parliament it be past,
I knew you merchants have many a slight and subtle cast,
So that you will by stealth bring over great store,
And say it was in the Realm a long time before.
For being so many of these trifles here as there is at this day,
You may increase them at pleasure, when you send over sea,
And do but give the searcher an odd, bribe in his hand,
I warrant you he will let you escape roundly with such things in and out the
land^
But senior Mercadore, I pray you ^ral^e in with me,
And as I find you kind to me, so will I savor ye,

Merca. Me tanke my good Lady. But M. Dissimulation, here is for
your fellows, Fraud, Usurie, and Symonie, and say me give it d^m.

Excunt Lucar and Mercadore, Dissim. I marry Sir, these bribes have welcome
been,
Good says I perceive, Dissimulation, Fraud, Symonie and Usurie shall live
In spite of Love and Conscience, though their hearts it does grieve.
Mas masters, he that cannot lie, cog, dissemble and flatter now a days,
Is not worthy to live in the world, nor in the Court to have praise.

Enter Art^fex an Artificer. Art. I beseech you good M. Dissimulation, befreend
a poor man,
To serve Lady Lucar and lu^e sir. i will consider hereafter if I can.

Dissim. What, consider me^ do thou think that I am a bribe taker?
Faith it lies not in me to further thy matter.

Art. Good M. Dissimulatten help me, I am almost quite undone,
But yet my living hitherto with Conscience I have won,
But my true working, my ca^ly ti^ing and my late going to bed,
Is scant able to find myself, wife and children dry break
For there be such a sort of strangers in this country.
That work fine to please the eye, though it be deceitfully,
And that which is slight, and seems to the eye well,
Shall sooner than a piece of good work be proffered to sell,
And our Englishmen be grow^e so foolish and nice,
That they will not give a penny abour the ordinary price.

Dissim. Faith I cannot help thee, it is my fellow Fraud must pleasure thee
Here comes my fellow Fraud, speak to him, and i will do what I can.

Enter Fraud. Art. I beseech you be good unto me right honest Gentleman.

Fraud. Why and whereto? what would thou have me do?

Art. That my estate you will so much prefar,
As to get me to be a workman to Lady Lucar:
And sir I doubt not but to please you so well for your pain,
That you shall think very well of (...) if I in her service remain.

Dissim. Good fellow Fraud do so much for I see he is very willing to live
And some piece of work to thee for thy pains he will give.

Fraud. Well upon that condition I will but I care not so much for his gifts,
As that he will by my name declare how he came by his great thrifts,
And that he will set out in every kind of thing,
That Fraud is a good husband, and great profit does bring.
Therefore the next piece of work that thou d^est make,
Let me see how deceitful thou will do it for my sake.

Art. Yes ^^r I will s^r, of that be you sure,
I Will honor your name while life does end^^e.

Dissim. Fellow Fraud, here comes a Citizen as I deem.

Fraud. Nay rather a Lawyer, or some petty fogger, he does seem.

Enter a Lawyer. Law. Gentleman, my earnest suite is to desire ye,
That unto your Ladies service you would help me:
For I am an attorney of the law and pleader at the bar,
And have a great desire to plead for Lady Lucar.
I have been earnest Sir, as is needful in such a case,
For fear an other come before me, and obtain my place.
I have pleaded for Love and Conscience till I was weary,
I had in my Clients, and many matters, that made my purse light, and my heart
heavy.
Therefore let them plead for Conscience that list for me,
I Will plead no more for such as bring nothing but beggary.

Dissim. Sir, upon this condition that you will keep men in law,
Ten or twelve years for matters not worth a straw:
And that you will make an ill matter seem good and firmable in deed,
Faith I am content for me part that you shall speed.

Fraud. Nay fellow thou know that Symonie and Usurie has an (...) matter in
law at this time,
Naw if thou can handle the matter so subtle and (...),
^s to plead that ill matter good and firmable at the bar,
Then thou shall show thy self worthy to win Lady Lucar.
Therefore tell me if you can and will do it or no.
If you do it, be sure to get my Ladies good will ere you go.

Dissim. By my honesty well remembered, I had quite forgot,
It Is about that, a fortnight ago sell cut the matter I wot.

Law. Tush sir, I can make black white, and white black again,
Tut he that will be a Lawyer, must I aue a thousand ways to feign,
And many times we L^wyers do one befreend another,
And let good matters slip, tut we agree like brother and brother,
Why sir, what shall let us to wrest and turn the law as we list,
Seeing we have them printed in the palms of out fist?
Therefore doubt you not, but make bold report,
That I can, and will plead their ill cause in good kind of sort.

Fraud. Of troth how likest thou this fellow Dissimulation?

Dissim. Mary I like him well, he is a cunning Clarke, and one of our
profession.
But come sir, go with us and we will prefer you.

Art. Good M. Fraud remember me.

Fraud Leave thy prating, I will I tell thee.

Art. Good M. Dissimulation think on me.

Dissim. Thou art too importunate and greedy.

Fraud. Come after dinner, or some other time when we are at leisure.

Dissim. Fraud and Lawyer exeunt. Art. Come after dinner, or some other time
indeed,
For full little do they think of a poor man's need:
These fellows will do nothing for pity and love,
And thrice happy are they that has no need them to prove.
God he knows the world is grown to such a stay,
That men must use Fraud and Dissimulation too, or beg by the way.
Therefore i will do as the most does, the fewest shall laugh me to scorn,
And be a fellow amongst good fellows to hold by S. Lukes horn.

(Ex^^. Enter Simplicity and Sincerity. Sinc. Good coossen Simplicity do
something for me.

Simp. Yes faith coossen Sincerity, i will do any thing for thee?
What would thou have me do for thee can tell that?
Mas I cannot tell what should do for me, except thou would give me a new
hat.

Sinc. Alas I am not able to give thee a new.

Simp. Why then I marvel how thou do do:
Do thou get thy living amongst beggars from door do door?
Indeed coossen Sinceretie, I thought thou wast not so poor.

Sinc Nay cossen Simplicity I got my living hardly but yet I hope just
And with good Conscience too although I am restrained from my lust.
But this it is coosen Simplicity, I would request you do for me:
Which is, to get Lady Love, and Lady Conscience hand to latter:
That by their menes I may get some benefice to make me live the better

Simp. Yes I Will do so much for thee coosen, but have thou any here?

Sincer. I behold they are ready drawn, if assined they were.

Let Simplicity make as though he read it, and look quite over, mean while
let Conscience enter. Simp. Let me see coossen, for I can read:
Mas it is bravely done, did thou it indeed?
Mistress Conscience, I have a matter to bequest you too.

Con. What is it? I doubt not but it is some wise thing if it be for you,

Simp. Mary my cossen Sincerity, wad bestre to scribe these papers here
That he may get some preferment, but I know not where.

Con. Be these your letters? what would you have me do, and how shall I call
ye?

Sinc. Lady, my name is Sincerity.

Con. And from whence came ye?

Sinc. I came from Oxford, but in Cambridge I studied late,
Having nothing, thought good if I could, to make better my state.
But if I had in stead of Divinity, the Law, Astronomy, Astrology,
Phislognomie, Palmestrie, Arithmetike, Logic, Mas^cke, Phis^cke, or any such
thing,
I had not doubted then, but to have had some better living.
But Divines that preach the word of God sincerely and truly,
Are in these days little or nothing set by.
God grant the good Preachers be not taken away for our unthankfulness
There was never more preaching and less following, the people live so amiss:
But what is he that may not on the Saba^th day attend to hear Gods word?
But we will rather run to bowls, sit at the alehouse, than one hour afford:
Telling a tale of Robin hood, sitting at Cards, playing at kettels, or some
other vain thing,
That I fear Gods vengeance on your head it will bring.
God grant amendment, but Lady Conscience I pray,
In my behalf unto Lucar do what ye may.

Simp. Mas my coossen can say his book well, I had not thought it,
Hes worthy to have a benefice, and it will hit.

Con. God be blessed Sincerity, for the good comfort I have of thee,
I would it lay in us to pleasure such believe me.
We will do what we can: But vltra posse non e^t esse, you know,
It is Lucar that has brought us poor souls so low.
For we have sold our house, we are brought so poor,
And fear by her shortly to be shut out of door.
Yet to subscribe our name we will with all our heart,
Perchance for our sake some thing she will impart:
Come hither Simplicity, let me write on thy back.

Simp. Here is the right picture of that fellow that sits in the corner.

Enter Hospitality while she is a writing. Hospi. Lady, me thinks you are
bus^e.

Con. I ^aue done sir, I was setting my hand to a letter to Lucar for our
friend Sincerity. But I would lady Love were here too.

Hosp. She is at home with me, but if it please you, so much in her behalf
i will do.

Con. I pray you heartily, and it shall suffice that turn well inow:
Good Simplicity, once more thy body do bow.

Simp. I think you will make me serve to be a washing block for you.
I would do it for you, but am afraid yonder boy will mock me.

Hos. No i will warrant thee.

Con. Here take thy letters Sincerity, and prosperous be they to thee.

Sinc. I yield you most hearty thanks my good lady.

Hosp. I Conscience, pleases it you to walk home and dine with me.

Con. Thanks my good f^iend Hospitality.
But tell me sir, have you invited to dinner any strangers?

Hos. No sure, none but lady Love, and three or four honest neighbors.

Simp. ^as my lady is gotten to dinner already,
I believe she rose at ten of clock she is so hungry.
What if I should come to dinner, is there any good cheer?

Hos. There Is bread and bear, one joint of meat, and welcome thy best fare.

Simp. Why, art thou called Hospitality, and have no better cheer than that
Faith and thou have no more meat for so many, they will nere be fat,
what if my coossen nay my self alone to dinner should come?
where should my lady and the te^^ dine? for I would eat up every crum.
Thou art an old ^ser do thou keep no better fare in thy house?
Have no great bag pudding, nor hogs face, that is called sowse

Hosp. My friend, Hospitality does not consist in great fare and banqueting.
But in doing good unto the poor, and to yield them some refreshing.
Therefore if thou and Sincerity will come and take part,
Such as there is i will give you with a free and willing heart.

Exeunt Hospitality and Conscience. Simp. ^e speaks well coossen, lets go to
d^nner with him.
the old man shall not think but we will pleasure him.
Faith he might have richer fellows to take his part,
But he shall never have better eating fellows if he would swelte his heart.
Here be they that will eat with the proudest of them.
For my mother said I could eat as much as five men.
Nay I am sure the gift of eating is given to me,
For our Maids would never believe I put all the meat in my belly,
But yonder comes a Knave, my lady Lucars cogging man,
Give me your letters coossen, i will prefer you if I can.

Enter Dissimulation. Sinc. Dissimulation, out upon him, he shall be no
spokeman for me.

Simp. Why then you are a fool coossen Sincerity,
Give me am then, for I know hele do it for me,

sinc. Seeing thou will have it, here receive it, but it greeues my har^ that
this dissembling wretch should speak on my part.

simp. Hear ye sir, I would request to liver this letter, to your good
wholesome mistars lady Lucar.

Dissim. Where had thou it tell me?

simp. Mary of my coossen Sincerity.

Dissim Why I have nothing to do in it, it is not to me thou should com^
I have not to do with Sincerities matters, it is my fellow Symonies room.

sinc. Thou art a kin to the lawyer, thou will do nothing without a fee,
But thou, Fraud, Usurie, nor yet Symonie shall have nothing of me.
And thou will do it, do it, and thou will not choose:
Both thee and their dealing I hate and refuse.

Dissim Why, and I am not bound to thee so far as knave go,
And therefore in despite of thee and thy coossen, there thy letters be,
What, think thou by captious words to make me do it?
Let them deliver your letters that has a stomach to it

simp. Faith coossen, hes such a tester in and semblation knave;
that hele do nothing les some bribery he have.
There Is a great many such promoting knaves that gets their living,
With nothing else but facing, lying, swearing and flattering.
Why he has a face like a black dog, and blusheth like the back side of a
chimney.
I was not for nothing thy Godfathers a cogging (...) gave thee.
Enter Lady Lucar. But here comes his mistrisse lady Lucar,
Now coossen i will liver your letter.
Mistrisse lady Lucar, heeres a letter for ye.

Lucar. Have thou a letter for me?

simp. Yes by saint Marie.
How say you coossen, she reads your letter?
And you can flatter, perhaps you shall speed better.

sinc. Thou speakst the truth Simplicity, for flatterers now a days, live
Gentlemen-like, and with prating get praise.

Lucar. Sir, I have read the tenure of your letter, wherein I find,
that at the request of Love and Conscience I should show my self kind,
And bestow some spiritual living on you, parsonage, or benefice,
For you stand greatly in need, as appears by this.
And trust me would do for you, but it lies not in me,
For all such matters are referred to my servant Symonie.
You must speak to him, and if you can get his good will,
then be sure of mine, their minds to fulfill.

sinc. Lady, I shall never get his goodwill for want of ability,
For he will do nothing except one bring money.
And if you grant it not, then it is past all doubt,
I shall be never the nearer, but go quite without.

Dissim. Madam, i will tell you what you may give,
Not hurting your self whereby he may live,
And without my fellow Symonies consent,
If to follow my mind you are any whit bent.

Lucar. Pray thee what is it? for thou know while for their house I am
bargaining,
And it be never so little, I must seem to do something.

Dissim. Why, have not you the parsonage of S. Nihal to bestow?
if you give him that, Symonie shall never know.

Lucar. Thou say true indeed: draw near Sincerity,
Lo for their sakes I will bestow frankly on thee,
The parsonage of saint Nihil i will give thee to pleasure them withal,
And such another to it, if thou watch till it fall.

simp. My lady axes you when you will take possession of your house, and lend
the rest of the money.

Lucar. What are they so hasty? belike they spent it merrsly.

simp. Faith no, for they would eat it if they could get it, when they are a
hungry.
But you may be happy, for you have sped well to day
(speaking to Sincerity You may thank God and good company that you came this
way,
The parsonage of S. Michels, bir Lady if you have nothing else,
you shall be sure of a living, beside a good ring of Bells.
Coossen, i will tell thee what thou shall do, sell the bells and make money,

sinc. Thou may well be Simplicity for thou show thy folly.
I have a parsonage, but of what? of saint Nihil, and Nihil is nothing.
Then where is the Church, or any Bells for to ring?
Thou understand her not, she was set for to ^^out,
I thought coming in their names I should go without,
It Is call to see that Lucar ^oues not Love and Conscience:
But God I trust will one day yield her just recompense.

simp. Coossen, you said that some thing to me you would give,
When you had gotten preferment of Lucar to live:
And I trust you will remember your poor coossen simplicity,
you know to lady Conscience and cry body I did speak for you.

sinc. Good Simplicity hold thy peace, my state is yet naught,
I will help thee sure, if ever I get ought.
But here comes sir Nicholas Nemo, to him I will go,
And see if for their sakes he will any thing bestow.

Enter sir Nicholas Nemo. Nemo. You come from Love and Conscience, as seems
(...) here,
My special good friends, whom I account of most dear,
And you are called Sincerity, your state shows the same,
you are welcome to me for their sakes, and for your own name,
And for their sakes you shall set what I will do for you,
Without Dissimulation, Fraud, Usurie, or Symonie:
For they will do nothing without some kind of gain,
such cankered corruption in their hearts does remain.
But come in to dinner with me, and when you have din^^, you shall have.

Presently go out. Sinc. You shall have, but what? a living that is blown
down with the wind.

Simp. Now cossen dismember your friends, seeing two livings you have
One that this man promised, and another that lady Lucar gave.
Mas you will be a jolly man and you had three or four more,
Lets beg apace coossen, and we shall get us great store.
Do thou get some more letters, and i will get them scribed of mistars Love and
Conscience,
And well go beg livings together, well beg no small pence.
How say thou coossen wut do so much?
If we can speak fair and semble, we shall be plaguie rich.

(...) Good Simplic^tie content thee, I am never the better for this,
But of force must leave off, seeing how vain it is:
Nor boots it ^inceritie to look for relief.
So few regard that to me is a grief.
This was Nicholas Nemo, and no man has no place.
then how can I speed well in this kind of case?
And no man bid me to dinner, when shall I dine?
Or how shall I find him, where, when, and at what time?
wherefore the relief had and to be had is small,
But to speak truth, the relief is nothing at all.
But come Simplicity, let us go see what may be had,
Sincerity in these days was sure borne to be sad.

Simp. Come lets go to dinner coossen, for the Gentleman I think has
almost dinde.
But if I get vittels enough i will warrant you i will not be behind.

sinc. What if thou can not get it, then how will thou eat?

simp. Mary on this fashion, with both hands at once, ye shall see when I get
meat.

sinc. why his name was Nemo, and Nemo has no being.

simp. I believe coossen you be not hungry, that you stand prating,
Faith i will go do him a pleasure* because the has need.
why and h^le needs have meat eat, a shall see how i will feed,
I believe he will not did me come again to him,
Mas and he do, a shall find a fellow that has his eating.

Exeunt ambo. Enter Usury and Conscience. Vsu. Lady Conscience, is there any
body within your house can you tell?

Con. There is no body at all be ye sure, I know certainly well.

Vsu. You know when one comes to take possession of any piece of land
There must not be one within, for against the order of law it does stand.
Therefore I thought good to ask you, but I pray you think not amiss:
For both you, and almost all other knows, that an old custom it is.

Con. You say truth, take possession when you please, good leave have (...)
Doubt you not, there is neither man, woman, nor child, that will or shall
hinder you.

Vsu. Why then I will boldly enter.
Exit.
Con. Who is more bold than Usurie to venture?
He makes the matter dangerous where is no need at all,
But he thinks it no pe^illous to seek every man's fall:
Both he and Lucar has so pincht us, we know not what to do,
Were it not for Hospitality, we knew not whither to go.
Great is the misery that we poor ladies abide,
And much more is the cruelty of Lucar and Usury beside.
O Conscience, thou art not accounted of, O Love, thou art little set by,
For almost every one, true love, and pure conscience does deny:
So has Lucar crept into the bosom of man, woman and child,
That every one does practice his dear friend to beguile.
But God grant Hospitality be not by them over pressed,
In whom all our stay and chiefest comfort does rest*
But Usurie hates Hospitality and cannot him abide,
Because he for the poor and comfortless does provide.
Here he comes, that has undone many an honest man,
And daily seeks to destroy, deface, and bring to ruin if he can.
Now sir, have you took possession as your dear lady wild you^

Enter Usury. Vsu. I have done, and I think you have received your money,
But this to you: my lady wild me to bid you provide some other hou^^ out of
hand,
For she would not by her will have Love and Conscience to dwell on her land:
Therefore it is best to provide ye^
So shall you save charges, for a less house may serueyt.

Con. I pray you heartily let us stay there, and we will be content
to give you ten pound a year, which is the old rent.

Vsu. Ten pound a year, that were a state jest,
If I should take the old rent to follow your request:
Nay after forty pound a year you shall have it for a quarter,
And you may think too, you are befriended in this matter:
But no longer than for a quarter to you i will set it,
For my lady perhaps will sell it, or to some other will let it.

Con. Well, since we are driven to this hard and bitter drift,
We accept it, and are contended to make bare and hard shift.

Vsu. Then get you gone, and see at a day your rent be ready.

Con. We must have patience perforce, seeing there is no remedy.

Exit Conscience. Vsu. What a fool was I to let it so reasonable?
I might so well have had after threescore, as such a trifle,
For seeing they were distressed they would have given largely*
I was a right sot, but i will be ouerseene no more believe me.

Enter Mercadore. Merca. Ah my good a friend M. Usurie, be my trot you be very
well met:
Me be much beholding to you for your good will, me be in your debt.
But a me take a your part so mich against a scal shurle called Hospitality:
Did speak against you, and says you bring good honest men to beggary.

Vsu. I thank you sir, did he speak such evil of me as now you say?
I doubt not but to reward him for his treachery one day.

Merca. But I pray tell a me how fare a my lady all dis while?

Vsu. Marie well sir, and here she comes if my self I do not beguile.

Enter Lucar. Luc. What seneor Mercadore, I have not seen you this many a day,
I marvel what is the cause you kept so long away

Merca. Shall me say to you Madama, (...) me have had such business for you in
hand,
For send away good commodities out of dis little country England:
Me have now sent over brass, copper pewter, and many odar ting,
And for dat me sall ha for Gentlewomans fine trifles, that great profit will
bring.

Lucar. I perceive you have been mindful of me, for which I thank ye:
But Usurie tell me, how have you sped in that you went about?

Vsu. Indifferently Lady, you need not to doubt,
I have taken possession, and because they were destitute,
I have let it for a quarter my tale to conclude.
Marry I have a little raised the rent, but it is but after forty pound by the
year:
But if it were to let now, would let it more dear.

Luc Indeed it is but a triffle, it makes no matter,
I force it not greatly, being but for a quarter.

(...). Madona me a you vat you sall do, let them to stranger dat are content,
To dwell in a little room, and pay mush rent:
For you know da Frenchmans and Flemings in dis country be many,
So dat they make shift to be ten houses in one very gladly.
And be content a for pay fifty or threescore pound a year,
For dat which da Englishmans say twenty mark is too dear.

Luc. Why seneor Mercadore, think you not that I
Have infinite numbers in London that my want does supply.
Beside in Bristow, Northampton, Norwich, Westchester, Canterbury,
Dover, Sandwich, Rye, Porchmouth, Plimmouth, and many mo,
That great rents upon little room do bestow.
Yes I warrant you, and truly I may thank the strangers for this,
That they have made houses so dear, whereby I live in bliss.
But seneor Mercadore, dare you to travel undertake:
And go amongst the Moors, Turks, and Pagans for my sake?

Merca. Madona, me dare go to de Turks, Moors, Pagans, and more too,
What do me care and me go to da great devil for you.
Command a me Madona* and you sall see plain,
Data for your sake me refusa no pain.

Luc. Then seneor Mercadore I am forthwith to send ye
From hence, to search ^or some new toys in Barbary or in Turkey,
Such trifles as you think will please wantons best:
For you know in this country it is their chiefest request.

Merca. Indeed de Gentlewomans here buy so much vain toys,
Dat me strangers laugh a to tinke wherein da have deir joys.
Fait Madona me will search all da strange countries me can tell,
But me will have sush tings dat please dese Gentlewomans vell.

Luc. Why then let us provide things ready to have you away.

Merca. A voutro commaundemento Madona me obey.

Exeunt. Enter Symonie, and Peter Pleaseman like a Priest. Sym. Now proceed
with thy tale and i will heart thee.

Peter. And so sir as I was about to tell you,
This same Presco, and this some Cracko, be both my parishioners no^
And sir they fell out maruellously about you:
The same Cracko took your part, and said that the Clergy
Was maintained by you, and vpholden very worshipfully.
So sir, Presco he would not grant that in any case,
But said that you did corrupt the clergy, and dishonor that holy place.
Now sir I was weary to hear them at such great strife,
For I love to please men so long as I have life:
Therefore I beseech your maistership to speak to Lady Lucar,
That I may be her Chaplain, or else to serve her.

Sym. What is your name?

Peter. Sir Peter.

Sym. What more?

Peter. Forsooth Pleaseman.

Sym. Then your name is sir Peter Pleaseman.

Peter. Yea forsooth.

Sym. And please woman too now and th^n,

Peter. You know that homo is indifferent.

sym. Now surely a good scholar in my judgment,
I pray you of what University were ye?

Peter. Di no University truly.
Mary I have gone to school in a College, where I have studied two or three
places o^ Divinity:
And all for lady Lucars sake, sir you may steadfastly believe me.

Sym. Nay I believe ye* but of what religion are you can ye tell?

Peter. Mary (...) of all religions, I know not my self very well.

Symo. You are a Prote stant now, and I think to that now will grant

Peter. Indeed I have been a Catholic* mary now for the most part a
Protestant.
But and if my service may please her, hark in your care sir,
I warrant you my religion shall not offend her.

Symo. You say well, but if I help you to such great preferment,
Would you be willing for my pain,
I shall have yearly half the gain.
For it is reason you know that if I help you to a living,
That you should unto me be somewhat beholding,

Peter. Yea (...), and reason good, i will be as your mastership please,
I care not what you do, so I may live at ease.

Sym. Then this man is answered, sir Peter pleasi^an come with m^
And i will prefer you straight way to my lady.

Peter. Oh sir I thank yt.

Exeunt. Enter Simplicity with a basket on his arm. Simp. You think I am
going to market to buy roast meat, do ye not?
But see how you are deceived, for well I wot,
I am neither going to the Butchers to buy mutton, veale nor beef,
But am going to a bloudsucket, and who is it? faith Usurie that thief.
Why sirs, it was no marckle he vndood my father that was called Plain dealing,
when he has undone my Lady and Conscience too with his usuring.
Trust him not sirs, for hele flatter bonacion and sore,
till he has gotten the Bakers vauntage, then hele turn you out of door.

Enter Dissimulation. Dissim. Simplicity, now of mine honesty very heartily
well met,

simp. What Semblation swear not, for thou swearest by that thou could never
get:
Thou have honesty now? thy honesty is quite gone:
Mary thou had honesty at xi. of clock, but it went from you ere noone:
why, how can thou have honesty, when it dare not come me thee?
I warrant Semblation, he that has less honesty than thou, may defy thee:
thou have honesty sir reverence, come out dog, where art thou?
Even as much honesty as has my mothers great hoggish sow:
No faith thou may put out mine eye with honesty, and thou had it here,
Have not left it at the alehouse in gage for a pot of strong beer?

Dissim. Pray thee leave prating Simplicity, and tell me what thou have there?

Simp. Why, it is nothing for thee, thou do not deal with such kind of ware.
Sir there is no beceit in a bag pudding, is there? nor in a plain pudding
pie:
Sir i will tell thee, I will not tell thee, and yet i will tell thee, now I member
me too:
Can tell, or would know whither with this parliament I go?
Faith even to s^ckswill thy fellow Usurie I am sent,
With my lady Loves gown, and lady Conscience too, for a quarters rent.

Dissim. Alas poor lady Love, art thou driven so low?
Some little pittance on thee i will bestow.
Hold Simplicity, carry her three or four Ducats from me,
And commend me to her even very heartily.

simp. Ducke eggs, yes i will carry them, and twere as many as this would hold.

Dissim. Tush thou know not what I mean, take this, it is gold.

simp. Mas it is gold indeed, why, wilt lend away thy gold, have thou no more
need?
I think thou art grown plaguey rich with thy dissembling trade,
But i will carry my lady the gold, for this will make her well apaid.

Dissim. And (...), carry lady Loves gown back again, for my fellow Usurie
Shall not have her gown, I am sure so much he will befriend me.

simp. But what shall Conscience gown do, shall I carry it back again too?

Dissim. Nay, let Conscience gown and skin to Usurie go.
If no body cared for Conscience more than I,
They would hang her up like bacon in a chimney to dry.

simp. Faith I told thee thou caredst not for Conscience nor honesty:
I think indeed it will never be the death of thee.
But i will go conspatch my arrant so soon as I can tell ye,
For now I ha gold, I would feign have some good meat in my belly.

Exit. Dissim. Nay i will hie me after, that I may send back lady Loves gown.
For I would not have Love bought quite out of town.
Mary for Conscience tut, I care not two strawes,
Why I should take care for her, I know no kind of cause.

Exit. Enter Hospitality. Hosp. Oh what shall I say? Usurie has undone me,
and now he hates me to the death.
And seeks by all means possible for to bereave me of breath.
I cannot rest in any place, but he hunts and follows me every where*
That I know no place to abide, I live so much in fear.
But out alas, here comes he that will shorten my days,

Enter Usury. Vsu. O have I caught your old gray beard you be the man whom
the people so praise:
You are a frank Gentleman, and full of liberality.
Why, who had all the praise in London or England, but M. Hospitality?
But i will master you now i will hold you a groat.

Hos. What will you kill me?

Vsu. No, i will do nothing but cut thy throat.

Hos. O help, help, help for Gods sake.

Enter Conscience running apace. Con. What lamentable cry was that I heard one
make?

Hos. O lady Conscience, now or never help me.

Con. why, what will thou do with him Usurie?

Vsu. what will I do with him? mary cut his throat and then no more

Con. O do thou not remember that thou shall dearly answer for
Hospitality that good member, reframe it therefore.

Vsu. Refrain me no refraining nor answer me no answering*
The matter is answered well enough in this thing,

Con. For Gods sake spare him, for cuntry sake spare him, for pity sake
spare him; for Love sake spare him, for Conscience sake forbear him.

Vsu. Let cuntry, pity, Love, Conscience, and all go in respect of my self,
He shall die, come ye feeble wretch, i will dress ye like an elfe.

Con. But yet Usurie, consider the lamentable cry of the poor,
For lack of Hospitality, fatherless children are turned out of door.
Consider again the complaint of the sick, blind and lame,
That will cry unto the Lord for vengeance on thy head in his name.
Is the fear of God so far from thee that thou have no feeling at all?
O repent Usurie, leave Hospitality, and for mercy at the Lords hand call.

Vsu. Leave prating Conscience, thou can not mollify my heart,
He shall in despite of theee and all other fe^le his deadly smart.
Yet i will not commit the murder openly,
But hale the villain into a corner, and so kill him secretly.
Come ye miserable drudge, and receive thy death*

Hale him in. Hos. Help good lady, help, he will stop my breath.

Con. Alas I would help thee, but I have not the power.

Hos. Farewell lady Conscience, you shall have Hospitality in London nor
England no more.

Con. O help, help help some good body.

Enter Dissimulation and Simplicity hastily. Dissim. Who is that calls for
help so hastily?

Con. Out alas thy fellow Usurie has killed Hospitality.

Simp. Now Gods blessing on his heart, why it was time he were dead*
He was an old churl, with never a good tooth in his head.
And he nere kept no good cheer that I could see:
For if one had not come at dinner time he should have gone away hungry.
I could never get my belly full of meat,
He had nothing but beef, bread and chief for me to eat.
Now I would have had some Pyes or bag puddings with great lumps of ^at:
But he did keep my mouth well enough from that.
Faith and he be dead, he is dead, let him go to the devil and he will.
Or if he will not go thither, let him even lie there still.
I Will nere make a lamentation for an old churlde,
For he has liude a great while, and now it is time that he were out of the
world.

Enter Luc^. Luc. What Conscience, thou lookst like a poor pidgeon pulled of
late.

Con. what Lucar, thou lookst like a whore full of deadly hate.

Luc. Alas Conscience, I am sorry for thee, but cannot weep.

Con. Alas Lucar, I am sorry for thee that thou can no honesty keep:
But such as thou art, such are thy attenders on thee,
As appears by thy servant Usurie, that has killed that good member
Hospitality.

Simp. Faith Hospitality is killed and has made his will,
And has given Dissimulation three trees upon a high hill.

Luc. Come hither Dissimulation, and hie you hence ^o fast as you may
And help thy fellow Usurie to convey himself out of the way,
Further, will the Justices, if they chance to see him, not to know him*
Or know him, not by any means to hinder him.
And they shall command thrice so much at my hand.
Go trudge, run out away, how do thou stand?

Dissim. Nay good lady* send my fellow Simonie,
For I have an earnest suite to ye.

Luc. Then Symonie go do what I have wild.

Sym. I run Madam your mind shall be fulfild.
exit.
Con. Well well Lucar, ^udeo and tace^, I see and say nothing:
But I fear the plague of God on thy head it will bring.

Dissim. Good lady grant that Love be your waiting maid,
For I think being brought so low, she will be well apaid.

Luc. Speak thou in good earnest, or do thou but dissemble?
I know not how to have thee, thou art so variable.

Dissim. Lady, though my name be Dissimulation, yet I speak bon^ side now,
If it please you my petitions to allow.

Enter Symonie. Luc. S^^nd by, i will answer thee anon: what news Symonie
Bring thou of thy fellow Usurie?

Sym. Mary madam good news: for Usurie ^es close
Hid in a rich man's house, that will not let him lose,
Until they see the matter brought to a good end,
For Usurie in this country has many a good friend:
And late I saw Hospitality carried to buryeng.

Luc. I pray thee tell me who were they that followed him?

sym. There were many of the clergy and many of the nobiliti^
And many right worshipful rich Citizens,
Substantial, gracious and very wealthy Farmars.
But to see how the poor followed him it was a wonder,
Never yet at any burial was seen such a number.

Luc. But what say the people to the murder?

sym. Many are sorry, and say it is great pity that he was slain*
But wh^ be they? the poor beggarly people that so complain:
As for the other they say it was a cruel bloody fact,
But I perceive none will hinder the murderer for this cruel act.

Luc. It Is well, I am glad of it, now Dissimulation if thou can get Lones good
will.
I am contented with all my heart to grant there until.

Dissim. Thanks to you lady, and I doubt not but she
With a little entreaty will thereto agree.

simp Now I have it in my breeches, and very well can tell,
That I and my lady with mistars Lucar shall dwell.
But if I be her serving fellow, and dwell there,
I must learn to cog lie, foyst and swear.
And surely I shall never learn, marie and twere to lie a bed all (...)
To that kind of lying I should give a good say.
Or if twere to eat ones meat, then I knew what for to do.
How say you strra, can I not, i will be drudge by you?

Luc. Now to you little mouse, did I not tell you before,
That I should ere twere long turn you both out of door?
How say you pretty soul, is it come to pass, yea or no?
Me thinks I have pulled your peacockes plumes somewhat low.
And yet you be so stout as though you felt no grief,
But ere it be long you will come puling to me for relief.

Con. Well Lucar well, you know pride will have a fall:
What avails it thee to win the world, and loo^e thy soul withall^
Yet better it is to live with little, and keep a conscience clear.
Which is to God a sacrifice, and accounted of most dear.

Luc. Nay Conscience, and you be b^okish i will leave ye,
And the cold ground to comfort your feet i will bequeath ye.
Me think you being so deeply learned, may do well to keep a school.
Why, I have seen so cunning a Clarke in time to prove a fool.

Exeunt Lucar and Symonie. Simp. Sir, if thou should marry my Lady thou
would keep her brave.
For me thinks thou art a plaguie rich knave.

Dissim. Rich I am, but as for knave keep to thy self.
Come give me my Ladies gown thou ass^headed elfe.

simp. Why i will go with thee, for I must dwell with my Lady.

Dissim. Pack hence away, ^acke Drum^ entertainment, she will none of thee.

(...). Simp. This is as my coossen and I went to M. Nemos hou^e,
There was no man to ^id a dog drink, or to change a man a ^ou^e,
But lady Conscience (nay who there) scratch that name away,
Can she be a lady that is turned out of all her array?
Do not be called no more lady, and if you be wise,
For every body will mock you, and say you be not worth two butter flie^.

Con. What remedy Simplicity? I cannot do withal:
But what shall we go do? or whereto shall we fall?

Simpl. Why to our vittails, what else have we to do?
And mark if I cannot eat twenty times so much as you.

Con. If I go lie in an Inn, it will grieve me to see,
The deceit of the Ostler, the powling of the Tapster, as in most houses (...)
lodging they be,
If in a brewers house, at the ^uer plenty of water, and scarcenes of mal^
I should grieve,
whereby to enrich themselves, all other with unsavory thin drink they
deceive.
If in a eannets house, with his great deceit in tanning,
If in a Weauers house, with his great coosening in weauing.
If in a Bakers house, with light bread, and very evil working.
If in a Chaundlers with deceitful weights, false measures, selling for a
halfepeny that is scant worth a farthing.
And if in an A^lehouse, with the great resort of poor unthrifts, that with
swearing at the Cards consume their lives,
Having greater delight to spend a shilling that way, than a groat at home to
sustain their needy children and wives.
For which I judge it best form to get some solitary place,
where I may with patience this my heavy cross embrace,
And learn to sell broom, whereby to get my living,
Using that as a quiet mean to keep my self from begging*
wherefore Simplicity if thou will do the like,
^ettle thy self (...) it, and with true labor thy living do seek.

Exit (...). Simp. No faith M. Conscience i will not for and I should sell broom,
the Maids would coossen me too competually with their old shoo^e.
And too I cannot work, and you would hang me out of the way.
For when I was a miller, Will did grind the meal while I did play.
Therefore i will have as easy an occupation as I had when my Father was alive,
Faith i will go even a begging, why it is a good trade a man shall be sure to
thrive.
For I am sure my prayers will get bread and cheese, and my singing will get me
drink.
Then shall not I do better than M. Conscience? tell me as you think.
Therefore God Pan in the Kitch^n, and God Pot in the buttery,
Come and resist me, that I may sing with the more meliositie.
But sir^, mark my cauled countenance when I begin,
But yonder is a fellow that gapes to b^^e me, or else to eat that which I sing.
Why thou art a fool, can not thou keep thy mouth strait together^
And when it comes sna^ at it as my fathers dog wo^ do at a liver.
But thou art so greedy,
That thou think to eat it before it come ^ie thee.
Simplicity singe^ Simplicity sings, and sperience does prove,
No biding in London for Conscience and Love,
The Country has no pear.
Where Conscience c^mes not once a year^^
And Love so welcome to every town,
^s wind that blows the houses down.
Sing down adowne, down, down, down.
Simplicity sings it, and spertence does prove,
No dwelling in London, no biding in London for Conscience and Love.

Simp. Now sir, have eaten up my song? and ye have ye shall eat no more to
day,
For every body may see your belly is grown bigger with eating up our play.
He has (...) his belly but I am never a whit the better,
Therefore i will go seek some vittels, and member for eating up my song you
shall be my debtor.

Enter Mercado^us the Merchant, and Gerontus a Jew. Geron, But seneor
Mercadorus tell me, did ye serve me well or no?
That having gotten my money would seem the country to forgo:
You know I lent you two thousand ducats for three m^nthes space,
And ere the time came you got another thousand by flattery, and thy smooth
face.
So when the time came that I should have received my money,
You were not to be found, but were fled out of the country,
Surely if we that be Jews should deal so one with an other,
We should not be trusted again of our own brother
But many of you Christians make no conscience to falsify your faith and
break your day.
I should have been paid at three months end, and now it is two year you
have been away.
Well I am glad you be come again to Turkey now I trust I shall receive
the interest of you so well as the principal

M^rca. A good a master Geronto pray hartly bare a me a little while,
And me shall pay ye all without any deceit or guile:
Me have much business for buy pretty knacks to send to England.
Good sir, bear a me four five days, mele dispatch your money out of hand.

G^ron. Seneor Mercadore, I know no reason why, because you have dealt with me
so ill,
Sure you did it not for need, but of set purpose and will:
And to bear with ye four or five days goes sore against my mind,
Least you should steal away, and forget to leave my money behind.

Merca. ^ra hartly do (...) no such ting my good friend a me,
Be me trot and fact mele pay you all every penny.

Geron. I Will take your faith and troth once more, and trust to your honesty
In hope that for my long tarrying you will ^eale well with me.
Tell me what good ware for England you do lack.

Merca. O no lack some pretty fine toy, or some fantastic new knack
For da Gentlewomans in England buy mush tings for fantasie^
You pleasure a me sir, vat me mean a dare buy.

Geron. I understand you sir, but keep tutch with me, and i will bring you to
great store,
Such as I know you came to this country for
As Musk, ^mber, sweet Powders, fine odors pleasant perfumes, and many such
toys,
Wherein I perceive consists that country Gentlewomans joys.
Besides I have Diamonds, Rubies, Emerodes, Saphires, Smaradines,
Opalles Onacles, Iacynthes, Aggattes, Turkasir, and almost
of all kind of precious stones:
And many fit things to suck money from such green headed wantons.

Merca. Fatta me good friend me tanke you most hartly always,
Me shall a content your debt within dis two or tree day.

Geron. Well, see you hold your promise, and another tune you shall command me.
Come, go we home, where our commodities you may at pleasure see,
Enter Conscience, with broomes at her back, singing as follows. New
broomes, green broomes, will you buy any,
Come maidens, come quickly, let me take a penny.
My broomes are not steeped,
but very well bound:
My broomes be not crooked,
out smooth cut and round.
I wish it should please you
to buy of my broom,
Then would it well case me,
if market were done.
Have you any ^lde boots,
or any old shoes:
Pouch rings or Bu^^ins,
to cope for new broom.
If so you have maidens,
I pray you bring hither:
Tha^ you and I friendly
may ^argen together.
New broomes, green broomes, will you buy any:
Come Maidens, come quickly, let me take a penny.
Conscience speaks. Thus am I driven to make a virtue of necessity,
And seeing God almighty will have it so. I embrace it thankfully^
Desiring God to mollify and lesten Usuries hard heart,
That the poor people feel not the like penury and smart:
But Usurie to made tolerable amongst Christians as a necessary thing
So that going beyond the limits of our law, they extort, and many to misery
bring.
But if we should follow Gods law, we should not receive above that we lend.
For if we lend for reward how can we say we are our neighbors fren^^
O how blessed shall that man be that lends without abuse:
But thrice accursed shall he be that greatly couets use:
For he that couets over much insaciate is his mind,
So that to per^urie and cruelty he wholly is inclinde:
Wherewith they sore oppress the poor, by diverse sundry ways,
Which makes them cry unto the Lord to shorten cutthrotes days:
Paul calls them thieves that does not give the needy of their store,
And thrice accursed are they that take one penny from the poor,
But while I stand reasoning thus I forget my market clean,
And since God has ordained this way, I am to use the mean,
Sing again. Have ye any old shoes, or have ye any boots, have ye any
bus^ins, or w^^ ye buy any broom.
Who bargens or chops with Conscience, what will no customer come?

Enter Usury. Vsu. Who is it that cries broomes, what Conscience selling
broomes
above the street?

Con. What Usurie, it is great pity thou art vnhanged yet.

Vsu. Believe me Conscience, it greeues me thou art brought so low.

Con. Believe me Usurie it greeues me thou wast not hanged long ago
For if thou had been hanged before thou slewest Hospitality,
Thou had not made me and thousands more to feel the like poverty.

Enter Lucar. Luc. Me thought I heard one cry broomes along the door.

Vsu. I mary Madam it was Conscience, who seems to be offended
at me very sore.

Luc. Alas Conscience art thou become a poor broom wife?

Con. Alas Lucar, will thou continue a harlot all days of thy life?

Luc. Alas me thinks it is a grief to thee that thou art so poor.

Con. Alas Lucar, me thinks it is no pain to thee that thou still platest the
whore.

Luc. Well well Conscience, that sharp tongue of thine has not been thy
furtherance.
If thou had kept thy tongue, thou had kept thy friend, and not have had
such hinderance.
But wottest thou who shall be married to morrow?
Love with my Dissimulation:
For I think to bid the guess, they are by this time well nie gone,
And having occasion to buy brooms, I care not if I buy them all.

Con. Then give me a shilling, and with a good will have them you shall.

Luc. Usurie, carry in these broomes, and give them to the maid.
For I know of such store she will be well apaid.
Exit Usury with the broomes. Hold Conscience, though thy broomes be not worth
a quarter so much,
Yet to give thee a piece of gold I do it not grutch:
And if thou would follow my mind, thou should not live in such sort,
But pass thy days with pleasure store of every kind of sport.

Con. I think you lead the world in a string, for every body follows you,
And since every one does it, why may not I do it too:
For that I see your free heart* and great liberality,
I marvel not that all people are so willing to follow ye.

Luc. Then sweet soul, mark what I would have thee do for me,
That is to deck up thy poor Cottage hansomely:
And for that purpose I have five thousand crowns in store,
And when it is spent thou shall have twice so much more.
But only see thy rooms be neat when I shall thither resort,
With familiar friends to pass the time in sport:
For the Deputy, Constable, and spiteful neighbors do spy, pry, and eye
about my house:
That I dare not be once merry within* but still mute like a mouse.

Con. My good lady Lucar, I will fulfill your mind in every kind of thing.
So that you shall be welcome at all hours, whosoever you bring.
And all the dogs in the town shall not bark at your doings I trow,
For your full pretense and intent I do thoroughly know,
Even so well as if you had opened the very secrets of your heart,
For which I doubt not but to rest in your favor by my desert.
But here comes your man Usurie.

Enter Usury. Luc. I Will send him home for the money.
Usurie, step in and bring me the box of all abomination that stands in
the window:
It is little and round, painted with diverse colors, and is pretty to the
show.

Vsu. Madam, is there any superscription thereon?

Luc. Have I not told you the name: for shame get you gone.
Well my wench, I doubt not but our pleasures shall excel,
Seeing thou have got a corner fit where few neighbors dwell,
And they be of the poorest sort which sits our turn so right:
Because they dare not speak against our sports and sweet delight,
And if they should (alas) their words would naught at all be wayd,
And for to speak before my face, they will be all afraid.

Enter Usury with a painted Box of ynke in his hand. Vsu. Madam, I deem
this same be it, so far as I can guess.

Luc. Thou say the truth, it is it in deed, the outside shows no less.
But Usurie I think Dissimulation has not seen you since your co^^ming home.
therefore go see him, he will rejoice when to him you are shown,
It is a bussie time with him, help to further him if you can.

Vsu. He may command me to attend at board to be his man.

Exit Usury. Here let Lucar open he Box, and dip her finger in it, and spot
Conscience face, saying as follows. Luc. Hold here my sweet, and then over to
see what does want,
the more I do behold this face, the more my mind does daunt:
This face is of favor, these cheeks are reddy and white,
these lips are cherrie red, and full of deep delight,
Quick rolling eyes, her temples high, and forhead white as snow,
Her eyebrows seemly set in frame, with dimpled chinne below:
O how beauty has adorned thee with every seemly hue,
In limbs, in looks, with all the rest proportion keeping due:
Sure I have not seen a finer soul in every kind of part,
I cannot choose but kiss thee with my lips, that love thee with my heart.

Con. I have told the crowns, and here are just so many as you to me did say.

Luc. Then when thou will thou may depart, and homewards take thy way,
And I pray thee make haste in decking of thy rome,
that I may find thy lodging fine, when with my friend I come.

Con. I Will make speed, and where I have with broomes ofttimes been roming.
I mean henceforth not to be seen, but sit to watch your coming.

Exit Conscience. Luc. O how joyful may I be that such success do find,
No marvel, for poverty and desire of Lucar do force them follow my (...)
Now may I rejoice in full contentation,
That shall marry Love with Dissimulation:
And have spotted Conscience with all abomination,
But I forget my self, for I must to the wedding,
Both vauntingly and flauntingly, although I had no bidding.

Exit Lucar. Enter Dissimulation and Coggin his man, and Symonie. Cog. Sir,
although you be my master, I would not have you to upbraid my name,
But I would have you use the right skill and title of the same:
For my name is neither scoggin nor scragging, but ancient Coggin:
Sir my ancestors were five of the four worthies,
And your self are of my near kin.

Dissim. Indeed thou say true, for Coggin is a kinsman to Dissimulation.
But tell me have you taken the names of the guestes?

Cog. Yea sir.

Dissim. Let me hear after what fashion.

The names of the guestes told by Coggin. Cog. There is first and foremost
master Forgery, and master Flattery
Master Perjury, and master Injury:
Master Cruelty, and master Pickerie, master Bribery, and master
Tretcherie:
Master Wincke at wrong, and master Headstrong, mistress privy theft,
and master deep Deceit, master Abomination, and mistress Fornication
his wife, Fardinando false-waight, and Frissit false-measure his wife.

Dissim. Stay, Fornication and Frissit false-measure are often familiar
with my Lady Lucar, and one of them she accounts her friend:
Therefore they shall sit with the bride in the midst, and the men a^ each
end:
Let me see, there are sixteen, even as many as well near is able:
to dine in the summer parlor at the playing table:
Beside my fellow Fraud, and you fellow Symonie,
But I shall have a great miss of my fellow Usurie.

Sym. Take no care for that, he came home yesterday even no longer,
His pardon was quickly begged, and that by a Courtyer.
And sir, since he came he had like to have slain good neighborhood and
liberality,
Had not true friendship stepped between them very suddenly:
But sir, he hit true friendship such a blow on the ear,
That he keeps out of all men's sight, for shame or for fear.

Dissim. Now of my troth it is a pretty jest, has he made true friendship
hide his head?
Sure if it be so, good neighborhood and liberality for fear are fled.

Sym. But fellow Dissimulation tell me, what Priest shall marry ye?

Dissim. Mary that shall an old friend of mine M. Doctor Hypocrisy.

Sym. Why will you not have sir Peter Pleasman to supply that want?

Dissim. Indeed sir peter is a good Priest, but Doctor Hypocrisy is most
ancient.
But (...) Eoggin, I pray you go to inuit the guess,
And tell them that they need not disturb their quietness:
Desire them to come at dinner time, and it shall suffice.
because I know they will be loath so early to rise.
But at any hand will Doctor Hypocrisy,
That he meet us at the Church very early:
For I would not have all the world to wonder at our match.
It is an old proverb, it is good having a hatch before the door, but i will
have a door before the hatch.

Cog. Sir, I will about it as fast as I can hie,
I Will first to that scalde bald knave Doctor Hypocrisy.

Exit Coggin. Sym. But fellow Dissimulation, how dare thou marry with Love,
bearing no love at all?
For thou do nothing but dissemble, then thy love must needs be small.
Thou can not love but from the teeth forward,
Sure the wife that marries thee shall highly be prefard.

Dissim. Tush tush, you are a merry man, I warrant I know what I (...)
And can yield a good reason for it I may say unto you.
What and if the world should change, and run all on her side?
Then might I by her means still in good credit abide.
Thou know Love is ancient, and lives peaceably without any strifs,
Then sure the people will think well of me because she is my wife.

Sym. Trust me thou art as crafty to have an eye to the maine chance,
As the tailor that out of seven yards stole one and a halte of durance.
He served at that inn she devil in the likeness of S. Ratherme,
Such Tailors will thrive, that out of a dublet and a pair of hose can steal
their wise an Aporn^.
The Dublet sleeue three fingers were too short,
The Uene^ians came nothing near the knee.

Dissim. Then for to make them long enough I pray thee what did he?

Sym. Two pieces set an handful broad to lengthen them withal,
Yet for all that be^^w the knee by no means they could fall.
He seeing that, desired the party to buy as much to make another pair,
The party did, yet for all that he stole a quarter there.

Dissim. Now (...) I can him thank, he could his occupation:
My fellow Fraud would laugh to hear one dressed of such a fashion,
But fellow Symonie, I thank you heartily for comparing the Tailor to me,
As who should say his knauerie and my policy did agree.

Sym. Not so, but i was the willinger to tell thee, because I know it to be a
true tale,
And to see how Artificers do extol Fraud, by whom they bear their sale.
But come let us walk, and talk no more of this,
Your policy was very good, and so no doubt was his.

Exeunt. Enter mercadorus reading a letter to himself, and let Gerontus the
Jew follow him, and speak as follows. Geron. Seneor Mercadore, why do you
not pay me? think you I will be mocked in this sort?
This is three times you have flowted me, it seems you make thereat a sport.
Truly pay me my money and that even now presently,
Or by mighty Mahomet I swear, I will forthwith arrest ye.

Merca. Ha pray a bear wit me tree or four days, me have much business in
hand.
Me be troubled wit letters you see here dat comes from England.

Geron. Tush this is not my matter, I have nothing therewith to do,
Pay me my money or i will make you, before to your lodging you go.
I have officers stand watching for you, so that you cannot pass by,
Therefore you were best to pay me, or else in prison you shall lie.

Merca. Arrest me dou s^al knave, mary do if dou dare,
Me will not pay de one penny, arrest me, do, me do not care,
Me will be a Turk, me came hedar for dat cause,
Darefore me care not for de so much as two strawes.

Geron. This is but your words, because you would defeat me,
I cannot think you will forsake your faith so lightly.
But seeing you drive me to doubt, i will try your honesty:
Therefore be sure of this, i will go about it presently.

(exit. Merca. Mary farewell and be hanged, sitten seal drunken Jew,
I warrant ye me shall be able very vell to pay you.
My Lady Lucar have sent me here dis letter,
Praying me to coossen de Jew for love a her.
Darefore mele go to get a some Turks apparel.
Dat me may coossen da Jew, and end dis quarrel.

(Exit. Enter three Begger^, that is to say, Tom Baggar, Wily Will, and
Simplicity singing. The Song.
To the wedding, to the wedding, to the wedding go we,
To the wedding a begging, a begging all three.
TOm Beggar shall brave it, and wily Will too,
Simplicity shall knave it where ever we go:
With lustily Brauado, take care that care will,
To catch it, and snatch it, we have the brave skill.
Oar fingers are lime-twigges, and Barbars we be,
To catch sheeres from hedges most pleasant to see:
Then to the Ilewife roundly we set them to sale,
And spend the money merrily upon her good ale.
To the wedding, to the wedding, to the wedding go we,
To the wedding a begging, a begging all three.
Tom. Now truly my masters, of all occupations under the sun, begging is the
best,
For when a man is weary, then may he lay him down to rest.
Tell me, is it not a Lords life in s^mmer to lowse one under a hedge,
And then leaving that game, may go clepe and coll his Madge?
Or else may walk to take the wholesome air abroad for his delight,
Where he may tumble on the grass, have sweet smells, and see mame a pretty
sight.
Why, an Emperor for all his wealth can have but his pleasure,
And surely I would not loose my charter of liberty, for all the Kings
treasure.

Will. Shall I tell thee Tom Beggar, by the faith of a Gentleman,
this ancient freedom I would not forgo,
If I might have whole mines of money at my will to bestow.
Then a man's mind should be troubled to keep that he had,
And you know it were not for me, it would make my valiant mind mad.
For now we neither pay Church money, subsidies, fifteens, scot nor lot,
All the payings we par, is to pay the good ale pot.

Simp. But fellow beggars you coossen me, and take away at the best meat.
And leave me nothing but brown bread, or sin of fish to eat.
When you be at the alehouse, you drink up the strong ale, and give me small
bear:
You tell me it is better than the strong, to make me sing clear.
Indeed you know with my singing I get twice as much as ye,
But and you serve me so you shall sing your selves, and beg alone for me.

Tom. We stand prating here, come let us go to the gate,
Mas I am greatly afraid we are come somewhat too late,
Good gentle M. Porter, your reward so bestw,
On a poor lame man, that has but a patre of legs to go.

Will. For Gods sake good mas Porter, give somewhat to the blind,
that the way to the Alehouse in his sleep cannot find.

Tom. For the good Lords sake take compassion on the poor.

Enter Fraud with a basket of meat on his arm. Fraud. How now sirs, you are
vengeance hasty, can ye not tarri^^
But stand ^auling so at my Ladies door.
Here take it amongst you, yet twere a good alms deed to give you nothing.
Because you were so hasty and kept such a calling.

Tom. I beseech yt not so sir, for we are very hungry,
that made us so earnest, but we are sorry we troubled ye.

Simp. look how greedy they be, like dogs that fall a snatching,
You shall see that I shall have the greatest alms, because I said nothing
Fraud knows me, therefore hele be my friend I am sure of that:
they have nothing but lean beef, ye shall see I shall have a piece that's
fat.
Master Fraud you have forgot me pray ye let me have my share,

Fraud. Faith all is gone, thou comst too late, thou see al is given there
By the faith of a Gentleman I have it not, I would I were able to
give thee more.

Simp. O sir, I saw your arms hang out at a stable door.

Fraud. Indeed my arms are at the Painters, belike he hung them out to dry
I pray thee tell me what they were, if thou can them descrie.

Sim. Mary there was never a scutchin, but there was 2 trees rampant
And then over them lay a sower tree parsant,
With a man like you in a green field pendant,
Having a hempten halter about his neck, with a knot under the left ear,
because you are a younger brother.
Then sir, there stands on each hand holding up the crease,
I worthy Ost^ers hand in a dish of grease:
Besides all this, on the helmet stands the hangmans hand,
Ready to turn the Ladder whereon your picture did stand:
Then under the helmet hung tables like chains, and for what they are I cannot
devise.
Except it be to make you hang fast, that the crows might pick out your eyes.

Fraud. What a swad is this? I had been better to have sent him to the back
door,
to have gotten some alms amongst the rest of the poor.
Thou praist thou can not tell what, or else art not well in thy wit,
I am sure my arms are not blazd so far abread as yet.

Simp. O yes sir, your arms were known a great while ago,
For your elder brother Deceit did give those arms too,
Mary the difference is all, which is the knot under the left ear.
the Painter says when he is hanged, you may put out the knot without fear.
I am sure they were your arms, for there was written in Roman
letters round about the hempten collar,
Given by the worthy valiant Captain master Fraud the O^^lar.
Now God be with ye sir, i will get me even close to the back door.
Farewell Com beggar, and wily Will, lle beg with you no more.

Exit. Tom. O farewell Simplicity, we art very loath to lose thy company.

Fraud. Now he to gone give care to me. You seem to be sound men in every
joint and him.
And can ye live in this sort to ^o up and down the country a begging?
O base minds I trow, I had rather hacke it out by the high way side,
Than such misery and pen^rie still to abide.
Sirs, if you will be ru^de by me, and do what I shall say,
I Will bring ye where we shall have a notable fine pray.
It is so sirs, that merchant, one Mercad^rus, is coming from Turkey
And it is my Ladies pleasure that he robbed should be,
She has sworn that we shall be all sharers alike,
And upon that willed me some such companions as you be to seek.

Tom O worthy Captain Fraud, you have wo^ne my noble heart:
You shall see how manfully I can play my part.
And here is wily Will, as good a fellow as your heart can wish,
To go a fishing with a cranke through a window, or to set lime twigges to
catch a pan, pot, or dish.

Will. He says true for I tell you I am one that will not give back,
Not for a double shot out of a black Jack.
O sir, you bring us a bed when ye talk of this gear,
Come, shall we go worthy Captain? I long till we be there.

Fraud. I, let us about it, to provide our weapons ready,
And when the time serves, I my self will conduct ye.

Tom. O valiantly spoken, come wily Will, two pots of ale well bestow
On our Captain courageously for a parting blow.

Exeunt. Enter the Judge of Turkey, with Gerontus and Mercadorus. Judge. Sir
Gerontus, because you are the palinti^e, you first your mind shall say,
Declare the cause you did arrest this merchant yesterday.

Geron. Then learned Judge attend; this Mercadorus, whom you see in place,
Did borrow two thousand ducats of me, but for a five weeks space.
Then sir, before the day came, by his flattery he obtained one thousand more,
And promised me at two months end I should receive my store:
But before the time expired, he ws closely fled away,
So that I never heard of him, at least this two years day,
till at the last I met with him, and did the money did demand,
Who swear to me at five days end he would pay me out of hand.
The five days came, and three days more, then one day he requested:
I perceiving that he flowted me, have got him thus arrested:
And now he comes in Turkish weeds to defeat me of my money,
But I trow he will not forsake his faith, I deem he has more honesty.

Judge. Sir Gerontus you know, if any man forsake his faith, King, country,
and become a Mahomet.
All debts are paid, it is the law of our Realm, and you may not gainesay it.

Geron. most true (reverend judge) we may not, nor i will not against our Laws
grudge.

Judge. Semo: Mercadorus is this true that Gerontus does tell?

Merca. My Lord judge, de matter, and circumstance be true me know well.
But me will be a Turk, and for dat cause me came here.

Judge. Then it is but a folly to make many words. Senior Mercadorus draw near.
Lay your hand on this book, and say after me.

Merca. With a good will my Lord judge, me be all ready.

Geron. Not for any devotion, but for Lucars sake of my money.

Judge. Say I Mercadorus do utterly renounce before all the world,
my duty to my Prince, my honor to my parents, and my good will to my country.

Merca. Furthermore I protest and swear to be true to this country
during life, and thereupon I forsake my Christian faith.

Geron. Stay there most puissant judge. Senior mercadorus, consider what you
d^^,
Pay me the principal, as for the interest, I forgive it you:
And yet the interest is allowed amongst you Christians, as well as in Turkey
Therefore respect your faith, and do not seem to deceive me.

Merca. No point da interest, no point da principal.

Geron. Then pay me the one half, if you will not pay me all.

Merca. No point da half, no point denere, me will be a Turk I say,
me be weary of my Christ's religion, and for dat me come away.

Geron. Well seeing it is so, I would be loath to hear the people say, it was
long of me
Thou forsakest thy says, wherefore I forgive thee frank and free:
Protesting before the judge, and all the world, never to demand penny nor
halfepeny.

Merca. O sir Gerontus, me take a your prosser, and tanke you most heartily.

Judge. But ^eneor mercadorus, I trow ye will be a Turk for all this.

Merca. Seneor no, not for all da god in da world, me forsake a my Christ.

Judge. Why then it is as sir Gerontus said, you did more for the greedines of
the money.
Then for any zeal or good will you bare to Turkey.

Merca. Oh sir, you make a great offense,
You must not judge a my conscience.

Judge. One may judge and speak truth, as appears by this,
Jews seek to excel in Christianity, and Christians in Iewishnes.

Exit. Mer. Uell vell, but me tanke you sir Gerontus wit all my very heart.

Geron. Much good may it do you sir, I repent it not for my part.
But yet I would not have this holden you to serve another so,
Seek to pay and keep day with men so a good name on you will go.

Exit. Merca. You say vel sir, it dus^^ good dat me have coosend de Jew,
Faith I would my lady Lucar de whole matter now knew.
Uat is dat me well not do for her sweet sake,
But now me will p^^uide my journey toward England to take.
Me be a Turk, no, it will make my lady Lucar to sin^e,
When she knows how me did da scal Jew beguile.

Exit. Enter Lucar, and Love with a vizard behind. Luc. Mistrisse Love, I
marvel not a little what ^oy conceit is crept into your head,
that you seem so sad and sorrowful since the time you first did wed,
tell me sweet wench what thou aylest, and if I can ease thy grief,
I will be pressed to pleasure thee in yielding of relief.
Sure thou make me for to think somewhat has chaunst amiss.
I pray thee tell me what thou aylest, and what the matter is.

Love. My grief alas I shame to show, because my bad intent
Has brought on me a just reward, and eke a strange event.
Shall I be counted Love, nay rather lascivious Lust,
Because unto Dissimulation I did repose such trust?
But now i moan too late, and blush my hap to tell,
My head in monstrous sort alas, does more and more still swell.

Luc. Is your head then swollen good mistress Love, I pray you let (...) see.
Of truth it is behold a face that seems to smile on me:
It is fair and well favored, with a countenance smooth and good,
Wonder is the worst, to see two faces in a hood.
Come lets go, well find some sports to spurn away such toys,

Love. Were it not for lucar, sure Love had lost her joys,

Exeunt. Enter Serviceable Diligence the Constable, and Simplicity with an
Officer to whip him, or two if you can. Simp. Why, but must I be whipped master
Constable indeed?
You may save your labor, for I have no need.

Dili. I must needs see thee punished, there is no remedy,
Except thou will confess, and tell me.
Where thy fellows are become that did the robbery.

Simp. Indeed master Constable, I do not know of their ^^ealing.
For I did not see them since we went together a begging:
Therefore pray ye sir be miserable to me, and let me go,
For I labor to get my living with begging you know.

Dili. Thou wast seen in their company a little before the deed was done.
therefore it is most likely thou know where they are become.

Simp. Why master Constable, if a sheep go among wolves all day.
Shall the sheep be blamd if they s^eale any thing away?

Dili. Yea mary shall he, for it is a great presumption,
that keeping them company, he is of like profession.
But dispatch sirs, strip him, and whip him:
Stand not to reason the question.

Simp. Indeed it was fraud so it was, it was not I,
And here he comes himself, ask him if I lie.

Enter Fraud. Dili. What say thou villain? I would advise thee hold thy
tongue.
I know him to be a wealthy man, and a Burgess of the town.
Sir, and it please your mastership, here is one ^aunders you with (...)
He says you were the chief doer of a robbery.

Fraud. What says the rascal? but you know,
It stands not with my credit to braule:
But good master Constalbe for his slanderous report,
Pay him double, and in as great a matter command me you shall.

Exit. Simp. M. Constable, must the countnance carry out the knave,
Why then if one will face folks out, some fine repar^ment he must have.

Bedle put off his clothes. Bedle. Come sir sack sauce: make quick dispatch
at once,
You shall see how finely we will fetch the skin from your bones.

Simp. Nay but tell me be you both right handed or no?

Bedle. What is that to thee, why would thou so same know?

Simp. Mary if you should both be right handed, the one would hinde^ the other,
then it would not be done finely according to order:
For if you whip me not with credit it is not worth a pin,
therefore I pray you M. Constable, let me be whipped on the skin.

Dili. Whereon do thou think they would whip thee I pray thee declare?
that thou put us in mind, and take so great care.

Simp. I was afraid you would have worn out my clothe^ with whipping, then
afterward I should go naked a begging.

Bedle. Have no doubt of that, we will savor thy clothes,
Thou shall judge that thy self, by feeling the blows.

Lead him once or twile about whipping him, and so exit. Enter Judge Nemo, the
Clarke of the Size, the Crier, and Serviceable Diligence, the Judge and Clarke
being set, the Crier shall sound thrice. Judge. Seruiseable Diligence, bring
hither such prisoners as are in
your custody.

Dili. My diligence shall be applied very willingly.
Pleases it you, there are but three prisoners so far as I know,
which are Lucar and Conscience, with a deformed creature much like Bi^^ons the
base daughter of Juno.

Judge. Nor where is that wretch Dissimulation?

Dili. He has transformed himself after a strange fashion.

Judge. Fraud: where is he become?

Dili. He was seen in the streets walking in a Citizens gown.

Judge. What is become of Usurie?

Dili. He was seen at the Exchange very lately.

Judge. Tell me, when you heard of Simony?

Dili. He was seen this day walking in Paul's, having conference and
very great familiarity with some of the Clergy.

Judge. Fetch Lucar and Conscience to the Bar.

Dili. Behold worthy judge, here ready they are.

Enter Lucar and Conscience. Judge. Stand forth: Diligence divide them a sunder.

Clarke. Lucar, thou art indicted by the name of Lucar,
To have committed adultery with mercadorus the merchant, and Creticus the
Lawier.
Thou art also indicted for the robbery of mercadore.
Lastly, and chiefly, for the consenting to the murder of Hospitality.
What say thou, art thou guilty or not in these causes?

Luc. Not guilty, where are mine accusers, they may shame to show their faces?
I warrant you none comes, nor dare to discredit my name:
In despite of the teeth of them that dare: I speak in disdain.

Judge. Impudent, can thou deny deeds so manifestly known.

Luc. In denial stands trial: I shame not, let them be shown,
It grinds my gall, they should slander me on this sort:
they are some old cankered currish corrupt Carles that gave me this report.
My soul craves revenge on such my sacred foes,
And reuengement I will have, if body and soul I lose.

Judge. Thy hateful heart declares thy wicked life,
In the abundance of thy abomination all evils are rife:
But what say thou Conscience to thy accusation
that art accused to have been hawde unto Lucar, and spotted with all
abomination.

Con. What should I say, nay what would I say in this our naughty living.

Lucar. Good Conscience if thou love me say nothing.

Clarke. Diligence, suffer her not to stand prating.

Let him put her aside. Judge. What letter is that in thy bosom Conscience?
Diligence reach it hither.
Make as though ye read it. Conscience speak on, let me heart what thou can
say,
For I know in singlenes thou will a truth bewray.

Con. My good Lord I have no way to excuse my self,
She has corrupted me by flattery, and her accursed self:
What need further trial, since I Conscience am a thousand witnesses,
I cannot choose but condemn us all in living amiss
Such terror does affright me, that living, I wish to die:
I am afraid there is no spark left for me of Gods mercy.

Judge. Conscience where had thou this letter?

Con. It was put into my bosom by Lucar:
Willing me to keep secret our lascivious living,
I cannot but condemn us all in this thing.

Judge. How now mallepart stand you still in defense or no?
This letter declares thy guilty Conscience, how say thou is it not for
Tell me, why stand hou in a maze? speak quickly:
Had thou thy tongue so liberal, and now stand to study?

Lucar. O Conscience thou have killed me, by thee I am overthrown.

Judge. It is happy that by Conscience thy abomination is known,
Wherefore I pronounce judgment against thee on this wise:
Thou shall pass to the place of darkness, where thou shall hear fearful
cries.
Weeping, wailing, gnashing of teeth, and torment without end,
Burning in the lake of fire and brunstone because thou can not amend:
Wherefore Diligence convey her hence, throw her down to the lowest hell,
Where the infernal sprites and damned ghosts do dwell.
And bring forth Love.
Exit Lucar and Diligence. Let Lucar make ready for Love quickly, and come with
Diligence. Declare that cause Conscience at large, how thou con^^est so spotted,
Whereby many by thee has been greatly infected:
For under the color of Conscience thou deceiuedst many,
Causing them to difile the temple of God, which is man's body:
A clean conscience is a sacrifice: Gods own resting place,
Why wast thou then corrupted so, and spotted on thy face?

Con. When Hospitality had his throat cut up Usurie,
He oppressed me with cruelty, and brought me to beggerie:
Turning me out of house and home, and in the end,
my gown to pait my rent, to him I did send;
So driven to that extremity, I have fallen to that you see,
Yet after judgment I hope of Gods mercy.

Judge. O Conscience, shall cankered quam corrupt thy heart?
Or shall want in this world cause thee to feel everlasting sma^t
O Conscience what a small time thou have on earth to live,
why do thou not then, to God all honor give?
Considering the time is everlasting that thou shall live in bliss,
If by thy life thou rise from death, to judgment mercy, and forgiveness.
Enter Love with Diligence. Stand aside Conscience, bring Love to the bar.
What say thou to thy deformity, who was the cause?

Love. Lady Lucar.

Judge. Did Lucar choke thee so, that thou gave thy self over to lust?
And did prodigal expenses cause thee in Dissimulation to trust?
Thou wast pure Love, and art thou become a monster,
Bolstring thy self upon the lasciuiousnes of Lucar?
Love answer for thy self, speak in thy defense.

Love. I cannot choose but yield, confounded by Conscience.

Judge. Then judgment I pronounce on thee, because thou followed Lucar,
Whereby thou have sold thy soul to feel like torment with her,
Which torments comprehended are in the worm of Conscience,
who raging still, shall nere have end, a plague for thine offense,
Care shall be thy comfort, and sorrow shall thy life sustain,
thou shall be dying, yet never dead, but pining still in endless pain.
Diligence convey her to Lucar, let that be her reward,
Because unto her cankered coin she gave her whole regard.
But as for Conscience, carry her to prison,
there to remain until the day of general session:
Thus we make an end,
Knowing that the best of us all may amend:
UUhich God grant to his good will and pleasure,
That we be not corrupted with the unsatiate desire of vanishing earthly
treasure:
For Covetousness is the cause of wresting man's Conscience,
Therefore restrain thy lust, and thou shall shun the offense.

FINIS.
Paul Bucke.


