The Art of Rhetorique, for the use of all such as are studious of Eloquence,
set forth in English, by THOMAS Wilson.

Anno Domini.

M.D.LIII.

Mense Ianuarij.

GVALTERVS HADDONVS D. IVRIS CIVILIS, ET OXOniens^s Collegij Magdalenensis
Praese^.
(...) soror, est affata sororem:
Quem d^dicit nuper, sermo Britannus erat.
(...) tacuit, magno perculsae dolor:
Nam nondum nostro nouerat ore loqu^.
Audijt haec, (...), Vu^lsonus forte, magister
Qui fuerat, nostros addideratque sonos:
(...) mutam, uerbis solatus am^cis
Se^ocat, and rogitat number esse Britanna uel^t.
Dcijciens oculos respondit uelle l^benter,
Sed se, qu^ possit, non reper^re, uia.
Ipse uias (inquit) tradam, legesque loquendi:
Quomodo perfect uerba Br^tanna loces.
Liberat ^lle ^idem, nostro sermon politur
(...), nostra est utraque facta soror.
Angl^a, nob^lium (...) charus sermo sororum
Est t^bi, sermonis charus and author erit.
NICOLAI VDALLI IN OPERIS COMmendationem Tetrastic^on.
VT Logice, lingua nos est affata Br^tanna
Sic modo Rhetorice uerba Britanna sonat.
Vtraque nempe soror, patrem cognoscit eundem
Anglia iam natis matter, utramque fouet.
ROBERTI HILERMII IN RHETORICEM THOmae Vuilsoni, Epigramma.
ANgl^a serua diu, and quondam uexata Tyrannis,
Libera nunc regnat, Rege potita pio:
Et cui iura ded^t Roma imperiosa tot annos,
Leg^bus ^psa suis uiuit, and ^mperijs.
Libertas ^gitur, regn^que antiqua potestas
Reddita nunc Anglis, quos rigat Oceanus.
Quod licet egregium, and decus immortale parenti
Conciliet magno: Rexque Edoarde tibi:
Gloria prisca tamen gentis, uel nomen auitum
Hoc est: nam fuerant libera sceptra tuis.
At quod barbaries uestris nunc exulat or^s,
Pulsaque rusticitas his dominata prius:
Hoc opus, hoc uestrum est, uobis per secula fama^
Quod dabit, and uestrum nomen ad astra feret.
Barbara gens siquidem, gemino sub Principe tal^
Artibus enitu^t nob^l^tata bonis:
Moribus and co^pta est l^udandis art magistra:
AEditaque ingenij sunt documenta uirum.
V^u^da testantur uigilem monimenta laborem,
Scriptaque tot, nulla quae moritura die.
Exemplum mihi sit de tot Scriptoribus, unus
(Namque ommes celebres nemo refer queat,)
Vuilsonus, patrio sub quo sermon magistro,
Pierides Musae perdid^cere loqui.
Cu^ tamen haud satis est, quod cum ratione loquantur,
Ni quoque concinn^, non putat esse satis.
Atque ob id addubitans, ne operi pars ulla deesset,
H^sce dedit Musis, hanc modo Rhetoricem.
O quanta his scriptis, linguae, regnique futura est
Ma^estas, and honos: si favor adfuerit.
THOMAS VVILSONVS IN Anglicam Rhetoricen.
ANglia si doceat, quod Graecia docta: qu^d obstat
Quo minus ex Anglis Anglia, uera sciat.
Non (qu^a Graeca potes, uel calls uerba Latina)
Doctus es, aut sapiens: sed qu^a uera u^des.
Aurea secreto tegitur sapientia sensu.
Abdita sensa tenes Anglus? es ergo sciens.
Sed mea Rhetoricen nequeat cum lingua polire:
Cui uacat, hoc unum quod ualet, oro uel^t.
To the right honorable Lord, John Dudley, Lord Lisle, Earl of Warwike, and
master of the horse to the kings majesty: your assured to command Thomas
Wilson.
WHen Pyrrhus King of the Epirotes made battle against the Romans, and
could neither by force of Arms, nor yet by any Policye win certain strong
holds: he used co^munely to send one Cineas (a noble Orator, and sometimes
scholar to Demosthenes) to persuade with the Capitaynes and people that were in
them, that they should yield up the said hold or towns without fight or
resistaunce. And so it came to pass, that through the pithye eloquence of this
noble Oratoure, diverse strong Castles and Fortresses were peaceablye given up
into the hands of Pirrhus, which he should have found very hard and
tedious to win by the sword. And this thing was not Pirrhus himself
ashamed in his commune talk to the praise of the said Oratoure, openly to
confess: allegynge that Cineas through the eloquence of his tongue, wanne more
Cities unto him, then ever him self should else have been able by force to
subdue. Good was that Orator which could do so much: and wise was that king
which would use such a mean. For if the worthiness of eloquence may move us,
what worthier thing can there be, the^ with a word to win cities and whole
countries? If profit may persuade, what greater gain can we have, then
without bloodshed to achiue a conquest? If pleasure may provoke us, what
greater delight do we know, the^ to se a whole multitude with the only talk of
a man ravished and drawn which way him likes best to have them? Boldly then
may I adventure and without fear step forth to offer that unto your
Lordeshyppe, which for the dignitye is so excellent, and for the use so
necessary: that no man ought to be without it, which either shall bear
rule over many, or must have to do with matters of a Realm. Consideringe
therefore your Lordshyps high estate, and worthy calling, I know nothing more
sittynge with your honor, then to the gift of good reason and
understanding, wherewith we see you notably endued, to join the perfection of
Eloquente vtteraunce. And because that as well by your Lordeshyppes most tender
imbracynge of all such as be learned, as also by your right studious
exercises, you do evidently declare, not only what estimation you have of all
learning and excellent qualities ingenerall, but also what a special desire
and affection you bear to eloquence: I therefore commend to your Lordeshyppes
tuition and patronage, this traictise of Rhethorique, to the end that both ye
may get some furtherau^ce by the same, and I also be discharged of my
faithefull promise this last year made unto you.

For where as it pleased you emonge other talk of learning, earnestlye to
wyshe that ye might one day see the Precepts of Rhetorique set forth by
me in English, as I had erste done the Rules of Logique: having in my
Country this last Somer a quiet time of vacation with the right worshypfull
sir Edward Dymmoke Knight: I traueyled so much as my leisure might serve
thereunto, not only to declare my good heart to the satisfiynge of your
request in that behalf, but also through that your mocion to help the
towardnes of some other, not so well furnished as your Lordeshyppe is. For as
touching your self, by the time that perfect experience of manifold and
weyghtye matters of the commune weal, shall have increased the eloquence,
which already does naturallye flow in you: I doubt nothing but that you will
so far be better then this my book, that I shall not only blowshe to
challenge you for a Scholar, in the Art of Rhetorique, by me rudelye set
forth: but also be driven to set this simple Traictise to your Lordshyppe to
Schole, that it may learn Rhetorique of your daily talk, finding you such
an Oratoure in your speech, as great Clarckes do declare what an Oratoure
should be.

In the mean season I shall right humblye beseech your good Lordshippe so to
be a Patron and defendoure of these my Labors to you dedicated: as I shall be
a continual peticioner unto almyghtye God for your preservation, and long
continuance.

Eloquence first given by God, after lost by man, and last repaired by God
again.
MAn (in whom is poured the breathe of life) was made at his first being an
euerliuynge Creature, unto the likeness of God, endued with reason, and
appointed Lord over all other things living. But after the fall of our first
father, Sin so crepte in, that our knowledge was much darkened, and by
corruption of this our flesh, man's reason and entendement were both
overwhelmed. At what time God being sore grieved with the folly of one man,
pitied of his mere good uesse, the whole state and posterity of mankind. And
therefore (where as through the wicked suggestion of our ghostelye enemy, the
joyful fruition of Gods glory was altogether lost:) it pleased our
heavenly father to repair mankind of his free mercy, and to grant an
euerliuynge enheritaunce unto all such as would by constante faith seek
earnestlye thereafter, Long it was ere that man knew himself, being
destitute of Gods grace, so that al things waxed savage, the earth untilled,
societye neglected, Gods will not known, man against manne, one against
another, and all against order. Some lived by spoil, some like brute Beasts
grased upon the ground, some went naked, some romed like woodoses, none did
any thing by reason, but most did what they could, by manhood. None almost
considered the euerliuynge God, but all lived most communely after their own
lust. By death they thought that all things ended, by life they looked for
none other living. None remembered the true observation of wedlock, none
tendered the education of their children, laws were not regarded, true
dealinge was not once used. For virtue, vice ^are place, for right and equity,
might used authority. And therefore where as man through reason might have
used order, manne through follye fell into error. And thus for lack of
skill, and for want of grace, evil so prevailed, that the Devil was most
esteemed, and GOD either almost unknown emonge them all, or else nothing
feared emonge so many. Therefore even now when man was thus paste all hope of
amendment, God still tendering his own workmanship, stirred up his
faithful and elect, to persuade with reason, all men to societye. And gave his
appointed ministers knowledge both to se the natures of men, and also granted
them the gift of vtteraunce, that they might with ease win folk at their
will, and frame them by reason to all good order.

And therefore, where as Men lived Brutyshlye in open feldes, having neither
house to shroude them in, nor attire to clothe their backs, nor yet any
regard to seek their best avail: these appointed of God called them
together by vtteraunce of speech, and persuaded with them what was good, what
was badde, and what was gainefull for mankind. And although at first, the
rude could hardly learn, and either for straungenes of the thing, would not
gladlye receive the offer, or else for lack of knoweledge could not perceive
the goodness: yet being somewhat drawn and delighted with the pleasau^tnes of
reason, and the swetenes of vtterau^ce: after a certain space, they became
through nurture and good aduisement, of wild, sober: of cruel, gentle: of
foles, wise: and of beasts, men. Such force has the tongue, and such is the
power of eloquence and reason, that most men are forced even to yield in that,
which most stands against their will. And therefore the Poets do feyne that
Hercules being a man of great wisdom, had all men lincked together by the
ears in a chain, to draw them and lead them even as he lusted. For his wit
was so great, his tongue so eloquente, and his experience such, that no one
man was able to withstand his reason, but every one was rather driven to do
that which he would, and to will that which he did, agreing to his advise
both in word and work, in all that ever they were able.

Neither can I see that men could have been brought by any other means to
live together in felowshyppe of life, to maintain Cities, to deal truly, and
willyngelye to obey one another, if men at the first had not by Art and
eloquence persuaded that, which they full often found out by reason. For what
manne I pray you being better abl^ to maintain him self by valeante
courage, then by living in base subjection: would not rather look to rule like
a lord, then to live like an vnderlynge: if by reason he were not persuaded
that it behooves every man to live in his own vocation, and not to seek any
higher rowme, then whereunto he was at the first appointed? Who would dig
and delue from morn till evening? Who would travail and toil with the
swea^e of his brows? Yea, who would for his kings pleasure adventure and
hasarde his life, if wit had not so won men, that they thought nothing
more needful in this world, nor any thing whereunto they were more bounden:
then here to live in their duty, and to train their whole life according to
their calling. Therefore where as men are in many things weak by Nature,
and subject to much infirmitye: I think in this one point they pass all
other Creatures living, that they have the gift of speech and reason.

And emonge all other, I think him most worthy fame, and amongst men to be
taken for half a God, that therein does chiefelye, and above all other, excel
men, wherein men do excel beasts. For he that is emonge the reasonable, of
all most reasonable, and emonge the wittye, of all most wittye, and emonge
the eloquente, of all most eloquente: him think I emonge all men, not
only to be taken for a singular manne, but rather to be counted for half a
God. For in seeking the excellencye hereof, the sooner he draws to perfection,
the nygher he comes to GOD who is the chief wisdom, and therefore called
God, because he is most wise, or rather wisdom it self.

Now then saying that God gives his heavenly grace unto all such as call
unto him with stretched hands, and humble heart, never wantynge to those, that
want not to them selves: I purpose by his grace and especial assistence, to
set forth precepts of eloquence, and to show what observation the wise have
used in handeling of their matters, that the unlearned by saying the practice
of other, may have some knowledge them selves, and learn by their neighbors
devise, what is necessary for them selves in their own case.

The art of Rhetorique.
what is Rhetorique.
RHetorique is an art to set furthe by vtteraunce of words, matter at large,
or (as Cicero does say) it is a learned, or rather an artificial declaracion
of the mind, in the handelyng of any cause, called in contencion, that may
through reason largely be discussed.

The matter whereupon an Orator must speak.
AN Orator must be able to speak fully of all those questions, which by law
and man's ordinance are enacted, and appoyncted for the use and profit of
man, such as are thought apt for the tongue to set forward. Rhetorique
occupied about all laws, concerning man.
Now Astronomy is rather learned by demonstracion, then taught by any great
vtteraunce. Arithmetique smally needs the use of eloquence, seeing it may be
had wholly by nombryng only. Geometry rather asks a good square, then a
clean flowyng tongue, to set out the art. Questions of two sorts.
Therefore an Orators profession, is to speak only, of all such matters as
may largely be expounded, for man's behoue, and may with much grace be set
out, for all men to hear them.

Of Questions.
Every question, or demand in things, is of two sorts. Either it is an
infinite question, and without end, or else it is definite, and comprehended
within some end.

Those questions are called infinite, Questions infinite.
which generally are propounded, without the comprehension of time, place,
and person, or any such like: that is to say, when no certain thing is named,
but only words are generally spoken. As thus, whether it be best to marie*
or to live single. Which is better, a courtiers life, or a scholars life.

Those questions are called definite, Questions definite.
which set furthe a matter, with the appoynctment, and namyng of place, time
and person. As thus. Whether now it be best here in England, for a Priest to
Marie, or to live single. Whether it were mete for the kings majesty, that
now is, to marie with a stranger, or to mary with one of his awn subjects.
Questions definite, belong properly to an Orator.
Now the definite question (as the which concerns some one person) is most
agreyng to the purpose of an Orator considering particular matters in the Law,
are ever debated betwixt certain persons, the one affirmyng for his part,
and the other deniyng, as fast again for his part.

Things generally spoken without al circumstaunces, are more proper unto the
Logicia^, Questions infinite, proper unto Logicia^s
who talks of things universally, without respect of person, time, or
place. And yet notwithstanding, Tullie does say, that whosoever will talk of
a particular matter, must remember that within the same also, is comprehended a
general. As for example. If I shall ask this question, whether it be lawful
for Willyam Conqueroure to invade England, and win it by force of armor, I
must also consider this, whether it be lawful for any man, to usurp power, or
it be not lawful. That if the greater cannot be borne withal, the less
cannot be neither. And in this respect, a general question agrees well to an
Orators profession, and ought well to be known, for the better furtheraunce of
his matter, notwithstanding the particular question, is ever called in
controversy, and the general only thereupon considered, to comprehend and
compass the same, as the which is more general.

The end of Rethorique.
Three things are required of an Orator. Orators bound to perform (...)
things.


To teach. To delight. And to persuade.
FIrst therefore an Orator must labor to tell his tale, that the hearers may
well know what he means, and understand him wholly, the which he shall with
ease do, if he utter his mind in plain words, Plain words proper unto an
Orator.
such as are usually received, and tell it orderly, without going about the
busshe. That if he do not this, he shall never do the other. For what manne
can be delited or yet be persuaded, with the only hearing of those things,
which he knows not what they mean. The tongue is ordained to express the
mind, that one might understand another meaning: Now what avails to
speak, when none can tell, what the speaker means? Therefore Phauorinus the
Philosophier (as Gellius tells ye tale) did hit a young man over the thumbes,
very handsomely for vsyng over old, and over strange words, Sirrah (quod he)
when our old great auncesters and graundsires were alive they spoke plainly in
their mothers tongue, A Philosophier^ witty saying to a young manne, that
sought to speak dark language.
and used old language, such as was spoken then at the buildyng of Rome. But
you talk me such Latin, as though you spoke with them even now, that were two
or three thousand years ago, and only because you would have no man, to
understand what you say. Now were it not better for the a thousand fold (thou
foolish fellow) in sekyng to have thy desire, to hold thy peace, and speak
nothing at all? for then by that means, few should know what were thy
meaning. But thou say, the old antiquitee does like thee best, because it
is good, sobre, and modest. Ah, live man as they did before thee, and speak
thy mind now, as men do at this day. And remember that, which Caesar says,
beware as long as thou live, of strange words, as thou would take heed
and eschew great rocks in the Sea.

The next part that he has to play, is to chere his gestes, and to make the^
take pleasure, with hearing of things wittely devised, and pleasauntly set
furthe. Orators must use delightful words, and sayings.
Therefore every Orator should earnestly labor to file his tongue, that his
words may slide with ease, and that in his deliverance, he may have such
grace, as the sound of a lute, or any such instrument does give. Then his
sentencies must be well framed, and his words aptly used, throughout the whole
discourse of his Oracion.

Thirdly, such quickness of wit must be showed, and such pleasant sawes
so well applied, that the ears may find much delight, whereof I will speak
largely, when I shall entreat of mouyng laughter. And assuredly nothing is
more needful, then to quicken these heavy laden wits of ours, and much to
cherishe these our lompishe and unwieldy natures, for except men find
delight, they will not long abide: delight them, and win them: werie them,
and you lose them for ever. And that is the reason, that men commonly tarry
the end of a merry play, and cannot abide the half hearing of a sower
checkyng Sermon. Preachers not so diligentely heard, as common plaiers.
Therefore, even these ancient preachers, must now and then play the fools
in the pulpite, to serve the tickle ears of their fleetyng audience, or else
they are like some times to preach to the bare walls, for though the spirit
be apt, and our will prone, yet our flesh is so heavy, and humors so
ouerwhelme us, that we cannot without refreshyng, long abide to hear any one
thing. Prechers must sometimes be merry, when they speak to the people.
Thus we se, that to delight, is needful, without the which, weightier
matters will not be heard at all, and therefore him cunne I thank, that both
can and will ever, myngle sweet, Deli^^ng needful.
among the sower, be he Preacher, Lawyer, yea, or Cook either hardely, when he
dresseth a good dishe of meat: now I need not tell that scurrilitie,
Scurrilitie odious.
or Alehouse iestyng, would be thought odious, or gross mirthe would be
deamed madness: considering that even the mean witted do know that already,
and as for other, that have no wit, they will never learn it, therefore God
speed them. Now when these two are dooen, he must persuade, and move the
affeccions Affeccio^s must be moved.
of his hearers in such wise, that they shall be forced to yield unto his
saying, whereof (because the matter is large, and may more aptly be declared,
when I shall speak of Amplificacion) I will surcease to speak any thing thereof
at this time.

By what means Eloquence is attained.
First needful it is that he, which desires to excel in this gift of
Oratorie, and longs to prove an eloquent man, must naturally have a wit, and
an aptness thereunto: then must he to his book, and learn to be well stored
with knowledge, that he may be able to minister matter, for all causes
necessary. The which when he has got plentifully, he must use much
exercise, both in writing, and also in speaking. For though he have a wit and
learning together, yet shall they both little avail without much practice.
Practice makes all things perfect.
What makes the lawyer to have such vtteraunce? Practice. What makes the
Preacher to speak so rou^dly? Practice. Yea, what makes women go so fast
away with their words? Marie practice I warraunt you. Therefore in all
faculties, diligent practice, and earnest exercise, are the only things, that
make men prove excellent. Many men know the art very well, and be in all
poynctes thoroughly grounded, and acquainted with the precepts, and yet it is
not their hap to prove eloquent And the reason is, that eloquence it self, came
not up first by the art, but the art rather was gathered upon eloquence.
Rhetorique first made by wise men, and not wise men first made by Rhetorique.
For wise men seeing by much obseruacion, and diligent practice, the compass
of diverse causes, compiled thereupo^ precepts and lessons, worthy to be
known and learned of all men. Therefore before art was invented, eloquence
was used, and through practice made parfecte, the which in all things is a
sovereign mean, most highly to excel.

Now before we use either to write, or speak eloquently we must dedicate our
minds wholly, to follow the most wise and learned men, and seek to fashion,
as well their speech and gesturyng, as their wit or endityng. Imitacion or
following the ways of wise men, is needful.
The which when we earnestly mind to do, we cannot but in time appear
somewhat like them. For if they that walk much in the son, and think not
of it, are yet for the most part son burnt, it cannot be but that they,
which wittyngly and willyngly travail to counterfecte other, must needs take
some color of them, and be like unto them, in some one thing or other,
according to the Proverb, by companiyng with the wise, a man shall learn
wisdom.

To what purpose this art is set furthe.
TO this purpose and for this use, Rhetorique, to what purpose it serves.
is the art compiled together, by the learned and wise men, that those which
are ignorant, might judge of the learned, and labor (when time should require)
to follow their works accordyngly. Again, the art helps well to dispose and
order matters of our own inuencion, the which we may follow, as well in
speaking, as in writing for though many by nature without art, have proved
worthy men, Art, surer guide, then nature.
yet is art a surer guide, then nature, considering we se as lively by the
art, what we do, as though we red a^thyng in writtyng, whereas natures doings
are not so open to all men. Again, those that have good wits, by nature,
shall better increase them by art, and the blunte also shall be whetted through
art, that want nature to help them forward.

Five things to be considered in an Orator.
ANy one that will largely handle any matter, must fasten his mind, first of
all upon these five especial poynctes that follow, and learn them every one.
Orators must have five things to make them perfect.


j. Inuencion of matter. ij. Disposicion of the same. iij. Elocucion. iiij.
Memory. v. Utteraunce.
THe findyng out of apt matter, called otherwise Inuencion, Inuencion, what it
is.
is a searchyng out of things true, or things likely, the which may
reasonably set forth a matter, and make it appear probable. The places of
Logique, give good occasion to find out plentitifull matter. And therefore
they that will prove any cause and seek only to teach thereby the truth,
must search out the places of Logique, and no doubt they shall find much
plenty. But what avails much treasure and apt matter, if man cannot apply
it to his purpose. Therefore in the second place is mentioned, the settelyng
or orderyng of things invented for this purpose, called in Latin, Dispositio,
Disposicion, what it is.
the which is nothing else, but an apt bestowyng, and orderly placyng of
things, declaryng where every argument shall be set, and in what manner every
reason shall be applied, for confirmacion of the purpose.

But yet what helps it though we can find good reasons, and know how to
place them, if we have not apt words, and picked sentences, to comme^de the
whole matter. Therefore this poynct must needs follow, to beautify the cause,
the which being called Elocucion, Elocucion, what it is.
is an appliyng of apt words and sentences to the matter, found out to
confirm the cause. When all these are had together, it avails little, if
manne have no Memory to contein them. The Memory therefore must be
cherished, Memory, what it is.
the which is a fast holdyng, both of matter and words couched together, to
confirm any cause.

Be it now that one have all these.iiij, yet if he want the fifth, all the other
do little profit. For though a man can find out good matter, and good
words, though he can handsomely set them together, and carry them very well
away in his mind, yet it is to no purpose, if he have no vtteraunce, when he
should speak his mind, and show men what he has to say. Utteraunce
therefore is a framyng of the voice, countenance, and gesture, after a comely
manner. Pronunciatio^ what it is.


Thus we se that every one of these must go together, to make a perfect
Oratoure, and that the lack of one, is an hynderaunce of the whole, and that
as well all may be wa^tyng, as one, if we look to have an absolute Orator.

There are.vii. parts in every Oracion. Oracions in general, consist upon
seven parts.

j. The enteraunce or beginning. ij. The Narracion. iij. The Proposicion. iiij.
The division or several partyng of things v. The Confirmacion. vi. The
Confutacion. vii. The Conclusion.
THe Enteraunce or beginning, Enteraunce, what it is.
is the former part of the Oracion, whereby the will of the standers by, or of
the Judge is sought for, and required to hear the matter.

The Narracio^, Narration.
is a plain and manifest poynctyng of the matter, and an evident setting furthe
of all things, that belong unto the same, with a brief rehersall, grounded upon
some reason.

The Proposicion Proposicion.
is a pithie sentence, comprehendyng in a small room, the some of the whole
matter.

The division Division.
is an openyng of things, wherein we agree and rest upon, and wherein we
stick, and stand in trauerse showing what we have to say, in our own
behalf.

The Confirmacion, Confirmacion.
is a declaracio^ of our own reasons with assured and constaunt profes.

The Confutacion, Confutacion.
is a dissoluyng or wipyng away, of all such reasons as make against us.

The Conclusion Conclusion.
is a clarkely gatheryng of the matter, spoken before, and a lappyng up of it
altogether.

Now because in every one of these, great head ought to be had, and much art
must be used, to content and like all parties: I purpose in the second book to
set furthe at large every one of these, that both we may know in all parts,
what to follow, and what to eschew. And first when time shall be to talk of any
matter, I would advise every man, to consider the nature of the cause self,
that the rather he might frame his whole Oracion thereafter.

Every matter is contained in one of these.iiii.
EIther it is an honest thing, whereof we speak, or else it is filthy and vile,
or else betwixt both, and doubtful what to be called, or else it is some
triflyng matter, Matters i^ general, stand in iiii. poynctes.
that is of small weight.

Matters honest.
when either we take in hand such a cause, that all men would maintein, or
else gainsaie such a cause, that no man can well like.

Matters, filthy.
when either we speak against our conscience in an evil matter, or else
withstand an upright truth.

Matters, doubtful.
is half honest, and half dishonest.

Matters, trifelyng.
causes, when there is no weight in the^ as if one should phantasy, to praise a
Gose, before any other beast living (as I know who did) or of fruict to
commend nuttes chefly, as Ovid did, or the fever quartaine, as Phauorinus did,
or the Gnatte, as Uirgill did, or the battaill of Frogs as Homere did, or
dispraise beardes, or commend shaven heddes.

Good head to be taken at the first, upon the handelyng of any matter in
Judgment.
NOT only it is necessary to know, what manner of cause we have taken in
hand, when we first enter upon any matter, but also it is wisdom to
consider the time, Circu^staunces necessary in all causes to be noted.
the place, the man for whom we speak, the man against whom we speak, the
matter whereof we speak, and the judges before whom we speak, the reasons
that best serve to further our cause, and those reasons also, that may seem
somewhat to hinder our cause, and in no wise to use any such at all, or else
warely to mitigate by protestacion, the evil that is in them, and always to
use whatsoever can be said, to win the chief hearers good wills, and
persuade them to our purpose. Favor wynnyng, and affeccions mouyng, when
they are most necessary.
If the cause go by favor, and that reason cannot so much avail, as good will
shall be able to do: or else if mouyng affeccio^s can do more good, then bryngyng
in of good reasons, it is meet always to use that way, whereby we may by
good help, get the over hand. That if mine adversaries Adversaries reasons,
when they should best be confuted.
reasons, by me being confuted, serve better to help forward my cause, then
mine awn reasons confirmed, can be able to do good: I should wholly bestow my
time, and trauaill to weaken and make slender, all that ever he brings with
him. But if I can with more ease, prove mine own sayings, ^ither with
witnesses, or with words, then be able to confute his with reason, I must
labor to withdraw men's minds, Arguments who^ they should chiefly be used
from mine adversaries foundation, and require the^ wholly to harken unto that
which I have to say, being of it self so just and so reasonable, that none
can rightly speak against it, and show them that great pity it were, for
lack of the only hearing, that a true matter, should want true dealyng. Over
and besides all these, there remain two lessons, the which wisemenne have
always observed, and therefore ought of all men, assuredly to be learned. The
one is, that if any matter Matters, hard to avoid, should always be past
over, as thoughwe saw them not at al
be laid against us, which by reason can hardely be avoided, or the which
is so open, that none almost can deny, it were wisdom in confutyng all the
other reasons, to pass over this one, as though we saw it not, and therefore
speak never a word of it. Or else if necessity shall force a man to say some
what, Good to be bold in most daungier, if otherwise we cannot escape.
he may make an outward brag, as though there were no matter in it, ever so
speaking of it, as though he would stand to the trial, making men to believe,
he would fight in the cause, when better it were (if necessity so required) to
run clean away. And herein though a man do fly and give place, evermore the
gladder, the less rauyng there is or stirryng in this matter: yet he flies
wisely, and for this end, that being fensed otherwise, and strongly
appoyncted, he may take his adversary at the best advantage, or at the least,
werie him with much lingeryng, and make him with often such fliyng, to forsake
his chief defense.

The other lesson is, that whereas we purpose always to have the victory, we
should so speak, that we may labor rather not to hinder, or hurt our cause,
then to seek means to further it. Better not to hurt a good matter by evil
speech, then to further it by good talk.
And yet I speak not this, but that both these are right necessary, and
every one that will do good, must take peines in them both, but yet
notwithstanding, it is a fouler fault a great deal, for an Orator to be
found hurting his own cause, then it should turn to his rebuke, if he had
not furthered his whole intent. Therefore not only is it wisdom, ^arenesse
in speaking, and forbearyng to speak.
to speak so much as is needful, but also it is good reason, to leave
unspoken so much as is nedelesse, the which although the wisest can do, and
need no teaching, yet these common wits offend much now and then, in this
behalf. The person before whom we speak, must be well marked.
Some man being stirred, shall hurt more our cause then twenty other. Tauntyng
words before some men, will not be borne at all. Sharp rebukyng of our
adversary or frumpes given before some persons: cannot be sufferd at all. Yea,
Time must be observed.
sometimes a man must not speak all that he knows, for if he do, he is like
to find small favor, although he have just cause to speak, and may with
reason declare his mind at large. And albeit that witless folk, can sooner
rebuke that, which is fondly spoken, then redely praise that which is wisely
kept close, yet the necessity of the matter, must rather be marked, then the
fond judgment of the people esteemed. What a sore saying were this? When a
lawyer should take in hand a matter, concerning life and death, and another
should ask how he has sped, to hear tell that the lawyer, has not only cast
away his clie^t, but undone himself also, in speaking things inconsideratly,
as no doubt it often happens, that wise men, and those also that be none
evil men neither, may unawares speak things, which afterward they sore
repent, and would call back again with loss of a great so^^e. Now what a folly
it is, not to remember the time and the men. Or who will speak that which he
knows will not be liked, if he purpose to find favor at their hands,
before whom he speaks, what man of reason will praise that before the Judges,
(before whom he knows the determinacion of his cause rests) which the
Judges self cannot abide to hear spoken at all? Or does not he much hinder
his own matter, that wtthout al courtesy or preface made, will largely speak
evil of those men, whom the hearers of his cause, tenderly do favor? Or be it
that there be some notable fault in thine adversary, with which the Judges
also are infected, were it not folly for thee, to charge thine adversary with
the same. Co^sideryng the Judges thereby may think, thou speak against
them also, and so thou may perhaps, lose their favor in sekyng such
defense, made without all discrecion. And in framing reasons, to confirm the
purpose, if any be spoken plainly false, or else contrary to that, which was
spoken before, does it not much hinder a good matter? Therefore in all
causes, this good head ought to be had, that always we labor to do some
good, in furtheryng of our cause, or if we cannot so do, at the least that we
do no harm at all.

There are three kinds of causes, or Oracions, which serve for every matter
Nothing can be handled by this art, but the same is contained, within one of
these.iij. causes. Orations, o^ causes of thr^e kinds,
Either the matter consists in praise, or dispraise of a thing, or else in
consultyng, whether the cause be profitable, or unprofitable, or lastly,
whether the matter be right, or wrong. And yet this one thing is to be learned
that in every one of these four causes, these three several ends, may every
of them be contained, in any one of them. And therefore he that shall have
cause, to praise any o^e body, shall have just cause to speak of justice, to
entreat of profit, and jointly to talk of one thing with another. But
because these three causes, are commonly and for the most part, severally
parted, I will speak of them, one after another, as they are set furthe by
wise men's judgments, and particularly declare their properties, all in order

The Oracion demonstratiue, Oracion Demonstratiue.
stands either in praise, or dispraise of some one man, or of some one thing,
or of some one deed done.

The kind Demonstratiue, wherein chiefly it is occupied.
THere are diverse things, which are praised, and dispraised, as men,
Countries, Citees, Places, Beasts, Hills, Rivers, Houses, Castles, deeds done
by worthy men, and policies invented by great warriers, but most commonly
me^ are praised, for diverse respects, before any of the other things are
taken in hand.

Now in praisyng a noble personage, Noble personages, how they should be
praised.
and in setting furthe at large his worthiness, Quintilian gives warnyng, to
use this threfolded order.

To observe things. Before his life. In his life. After his death.

Before a man's life, are considered these places.

The Realm. The Shire. The Town. The Pareutes. The Ancestors.
IN a man's life, praise must be parted threfolde. That is to say, into the
gifts of good things of the mind, the body, and of fortune. Now the gifts
of the body, and of fortune, are not praise worthy, of their own nature: but
even as they are used, either to, or fro, so they are either praised, or
dispraised. Gifts of the mind, deserve the whole trumpe and sound
commendacion above all other, wherein we may use the rehersall of virtues, as
they are in order, and beginning at his infa^cie, tell all his doings, till
his last age.

The places whereof, are these.
The birthe, and infancy. Whether the person be a man, or a woman The
childhode. The bryngyng up, ye nurturyng, and the behauour of his life. The
stripelyng age, or spryng tide To what study he takes himself unto, what
company he uses, how he lives. The man's state. Whereunto are referred these.
Prowesses done, either abroad, or at home. The old age. His policies and
witty devises in behoue of the public well The time of his departure, or
death Things that have happened about his death.

NOw to open al these places more largely, as well those that are before a
man's life, as such as are in his life, and after his death, that the reader
may further se the profit, I will do the best I ca^

The house whereof a noble personage came, The house o^ au^cestrie whereof a
noble personage comes.
declares the state and nature of his auncesters, his alliance, and his
kynsfolke. So that such worthy feactes, as they have heretofore done, and al
such honors as they have had, for such their good service, redowndes wholly to
the increase and amplifiyng of his honor, that is now living.

The Realm, ii. The realm.
declares the nature of the people. So that some Country brengeth more honor
with it, then another does. To be a French manne, descendyng there of a noble
house, is more honor then to be an Irishe manne: to be an English manne
borne, is much more honor, then to be a Scotte, because that by these men,
worthy prowesses have been dooen, and greater affairs by them attempted, then
have been done by any other.

The Shire or Town iii. The Shire or Town.
helps somewhat, toward the increase of honor: As it is much better, to
be borne in Paris, then in Picardie, in London, then in Lincoln. For that
both the air is better, the people more civil, and the wealth much greater,
and the men for the most part more wise.

To be borne a manchilde, declares a courage, gravity, and constancy. To be
borne a woman, declares weakness of spirit, neshenes of body, and fikilnesse
of mind. iiii. The se^e or kind.


Now for the bringing up of a noble personage, v. Educac^on.
his nurse must be considered, his play fellows observed, his teacher and
other his servants, called in remembrance. How every one of these lived
then, with whom they have lived afterward, and how they live now.

By knowing what he takes himself unto, and wherein he most deliteth, I may
commend him for his learning, for his skill in the French, or in the Italian,
for his knowledge in Cosmographie: for his skill in the laws, in the histories
of all countries, and for his gift of endityng. vi. Inclinacio^ of nature.
Again, I may commend him for plaiyng at weapons, for runnyng upon a great
horse, for chargyng his staff at the Tilte, for vautyng, for plaiyng upon
instruments, yea, and for paintyng, or drawyng of a platte, as in old time
noble princes, much delited therein.

Prowess done, declare his service to the King, and his country, either in
withstandyng the outward e^emie, or else in aswagyng the rage of his own
cou^treyme^ at home. vii Attemptes worthy.


His wise counsel, and good advise given, settes furthe the goodness of his
wit. viii.


At the time of his departing, Time of it. departing this world.
his sufferaunce of all sickness, may much commend his worthiness. As his
strong heart, and cherefull patience even to the end, cannot want great
praise. The love of all men toward him, and the lamentyng generally for his
lack, help well most highly to set furthe his honor.

After a man's death, After departure.
are considered his tomb, his cote armor set up, and all such honors, as
are used in funeralles. If any one list to put these precepts in practice, he
may do, as him likes best. And surely I do think, that nothing so much
furthereth knowledge, as daiely exercise, and enuryng our selfs to do that in
deed, which we know in word. And because examples give great light, after
these precepts are set furthe, I will commend two noble gentlemen, Henry Duke
of Suffolk, and his brother lord Charles Duke Duke of Suffolk, and lord
Charles.
with him.

An example of commendyng a noble personage.
BEtter or more wisely can none do, then they which never bestow praise, but
upon those that best deserve praise, rather myndyng discretly, what they ought
to do, then vainly deuisyng what they best can do, sekyng rather to praise
menue, such as are found worthy, then curiously findyng means to praise
matters, such as never were in any. For they which speak otherwise then truth
is, mind not the commendacion of the perso^e, but the setting furthe of their
own learning. As Gorgias Gorgias.
in Plato, praisyng unrighteousness, Heliogabalus Heliogabalus
Orators, commendyng whoredom, Phauorinus Phauorinus.
the Philosophier, extollyng the fever Quartaine, thought not to speak as the
cause required, but would so much say as their wit would give, not weighyng
the state of the cause, but myndyng the want of their brain, lookyng how much
could be said, not passing how little should be said. But I both knowing the
might of Gods hand, for such as love fables, and the shame that in earth
redoundeth to evil re^orters, will not commend that or those, which need no
good praise, but will commend them, that no man justly can dispraise, nor yet
any one is well able worthily to praise. Their towardnes was such, and their
gifts so great, that I know none which love learning, but has sorowed the
lack of their being, and I know that the only namyng of them, will stir
honest hearts, to speak well of them. I will speak of two brethren, that
lately departed, the one Henry Duke of Suffolk, and the other Lord Charles
his brother, Henry duke of Suffolk, and lord Charles his brother.
whom God thinkyng ^^eter for heaven, then to live here upon earth, took from
us in his anger, for the betteryng of our doings, and amendment of our evil
living. These two gentlemen were borne in noble England, both by father and
mother, of an high parentage. The father called Duke Charles, by marriage being
brother, to the worthy king of famous memory, Henry theight, was in such
favor, and did such service, that all Englaude at this hour, does find his
lack, and France yet does feel, that such a duke there was, whom in his life
time, the godly, loved: the evil, feared: the wise men, honored for his wit,
and the simple, used always for their counsel. Their mother, of birthe
noble, and wit great, of nature gentle, and merciful to the poor, and to
the godly, and especially to the learned, an earnest good patroness, and most
helpyng Lady above all other. In their youth their father died, the eldest of
the^ being not past.ix. years of age. After whose death, their mother knowing,
that wealth without wit, is like a sword in a naked man's hand, and assuredly
certain, that knowledge would confirm judgment, provided so for their bringyng
up, in all virtue and learning, that ij. like were not to be had, within this
realm again. When they began both, to wa^e somewhat in years, being in their
primetide, and spryng of their age, thelder waityng of the kings majesty that
now is, was generally well esteemed, and sucheh open was conceived of his
towardnes, both for learning, and al other things, that few were like unto him
in all the court. The other keeping his book, among the Cambrige men, profited
(as they all well know) both in virtue and learning, to their great
admiracion. For the Greek, the Latin, and the Italian, I know he could do
more, then would be thought true by my report. I leave to speak of his skill in
pleasant instruments, neither will I utter his aptnes in Music, and his
toward nature, to all exercises of the body. But his elder brother in this time
(besides his other gifts of the mind, which passed all other, and were
almost incredible) following his fathers nature was so delited with ridyng, and
runnyng in armor upon horseback, and was so comely for that feacte, and could
do so well in chargyng his staff, being but.xiiij. years of age, that men of
war, even at this hour, moan much the want of such a worthy gentleman.
Yea, the French men that first wondered at his learning, when he was there
among them, and made a notable Oracion in Latin: were much more astonished
when they saw his comely ridyng, and little thought to find these two
ornaments, joined both in one, his years especially being so tender, and his
practice of so small time. Afterward coming from the court, as one that was
desierous to be among the learned, he lay in Cambrige together with his
brother, where they both so profited, and so gently used themselfes, that all
Cambr^ge did reverence, both him and his brother, as two iewelles sent from
God. Thelders nature was such, that he thought himself best, when he was among
the wisest, and yet contempned none, but thankefully used all, gentle in
behauor without childishenes; stout of stomach without al pride, bold with
all warenesse, and friendly with good aduiseme^t. The younger being not so ripe
in years, was not so grave in look, rather chereful, then sad: rather quick,
then ancient: but yet if his brother were set a side, not one that went
beyond him. A child that by his own inclinacion, so much yielded to his
ruler, as few by chastement have done the like, pleasant of speech, prompte
of wit, stiryng by nature, hault without hate, kind without craft, liberal
of heart, gentle in behavior, forward in all things, gredy of learning, and
loathe to take a foil, in any open assembly. They both in all attemptes, sought
to have the victory, and in exercise of wit, not only the one with the
other, did often stand in contencion, but also they both would match with the
best, and thought themselfes most happy, when they might have any just
occasion, to put their wits in trial. And now when this grene fruicte began
to wax ripe, and all men lo^ged to have taste, of such their great
forwardness: God preuentyng man's expectacion, took them both about one
hour, and in so short time, that first they were known to be dedde, or any
abroad could tell they were sick. I need not to rehearse, what both they
spoke, before their departure (co^sideryng, I have severally written, both in
Latin and in English, of the same matter) neither will I heap here so much
together as I can, because I should rather renew great sorrow to many, then
do most men any great good, who loved them so well generally, that few for a
great space after, spoke of these two gentle men, but they showed tears,
with the only vtteraunce of their words, and some through over much
sorowyng, were fain to forbear speaking. God grant us also to live, that the
good men of this world, may be always loathe to forsake us, and God may still
be glad to have us, as no doubt the^e two children so died, as all men should
wish to live, and so they lived both, as al should wish to die. Seeing
therefore these two were such, both for birthe, nature, and all other gifts of
grace, that the like are hardely found behind them: let us so speak of
them, that our good report may warn us, to follow their godly natures, and
that lastly, we may enjoy that enheritaunce, whereunto God has prepared
the^ and us (that fear him) from the beginning. Amen.

The parts of an Oracion, made in praise of a man. The Enteraunce. The
Narracion. Sometimes the confutacion. The Conclusion.

IF any one shall have just cause, to dispraise an evil man, he shall sone do
it, if he can praise a good man. For (as Aristotle does say) of contraries,
there is one and the same doctrine, and therefore he that can do the one, shall
sone be able to do the other.

Of an Oracion demonstratiue, for some deed done.
THe kind demonstratiue of some thing done is this, Oracion Demo^stratiue of a
deed.
when a man is commended or dispraised, for any act committed in his life.

The places to confirm this cause, when any one is commended, are six in
number.
The places of Cofirmacion. j. It is honest. ij. It is possible. iij. Easy to
be done, iiij. hard to be done. v. Possible to be done, vi. Impossible to be
done.

Seven circumstaunces, which are to be considered in diverse matters.

The circumstaunces. j. Who did the deed. ij. What was done. iij. Where it was
done. iiij. What help had he to it. v. Wherefore he did it. vi. How he did it.
vij. At what time he did it.

The circumstaunces in meter.
Who, what, and where, by what help, and by whose:
Why, how, and when, do many things disclose.
THese places help wonderfully, to set out any matter, and to amplify it to
the vttermoste, not only in praisyng, or dispraisyng, but also in all other
causes where any aduisement is to be used. Yet this one thing is to be
learned, that it shall not be necessary, to use them altogether, even as
they stand in order: but rather as time and place shall best require, they
may be used in any part of the Oracion, even as it shall please him that
has the vsyng of them.

Again, if any manne be disposed, to rebuke any offense, he may use the
places contrary unto them that are above rehearsed, and apply these
circumstaunces even as they are, to the proof of his purpose.

An example of commendyng King David, for killyng great Goliath, gathered and
made by o^seruacion of circumstaunces.
GOD being the aucthor of mankind, powryng into him the breath of life, and
framyng him of claie in such a comely wise, David commended for killing Goliath.
as we al now se, has from the beginning, been so careful over his elect and
chosen, that in all dangers, he is ever ready to assist his people, keeping them
harmless, when they were often paste all man's hope. And among all other his
fatherly goodness, it pleased him to show his power, who? David against
Goliath.
in his chosen servant David, that all might learn to know his might, and
reken with themselfes, that though man give the stroke, yet God it is that
gives the ouerha^de. For whereas David was of small statu^e, weak of body,
poor of ^irthe, and base in the sight of the worldlynges, God called him
first to match with an houge monster, a little body, against a mighty Gyaunt,
an abiect^ Israelite, against a most valiant Philistine, with whom no
Israelite durst encounter. These Philistines minded the murder and overthrow,
of all the Israelites, trustyng in their own strength so much, that they
feared no peril, but made an account, that all was theirs before hand. Now
when both these armies were in sight, the Philistines upon an hill of the one
side, and the Israelites upon an hill, of the other side, a vale being betwixt
them both, ^here marched out of the Camp, a base borne Philistine, called
Goliath of Geth, a man of six cubits high. This soldier, when through the
bigness and stature of his body, and also with great bragges, and terrible
threatenynges, he had wonderfully abashed the whole army of the Israelites, so
that no man durst adventure upon him, God to the end he might del^uer
Israel, and show that man's help, with all his armor, little avail to get
victory, without his especial grace: and again, to the end he might set up
David, and make him honorable among the Israeli^es, did then call out David,
the son of Ephrate^^^, of Be^hleem Judah, whose name was Isai, who being but
a child in years, did kill out of hand, what? David killed Goliath.
by Gods might and power, Goliath the most terrible enemy of all other, that
bare hate against the children of Israel. When this mighty fellow was slain,
about the vale of Terebinthus, where? About the vale of Terebithus.
betwixt both tharmies, the Israelites reioysed, that before quaked, and
wondered at him then, whom they would scant know before, and* no doubt this
deed was not only wonderful, but also right godly. For in battaill to kill an
enemy, is thought right worthy, or to adventure upon a reb^ll, (though the
success follow not) is generally commended: yea, to put one to the worse, or
to make him fly the ground, is called manly, but what shall we say of David,
that not only had the better hand, not only bette his enemy, but killed
straight his enemy, yea, and not an enemy, of the common stature of men, but a
mighty Gyaunt, not a man, but a monster, yea, a devil in heart, and a beast in
body? David's enterprise, honest and godly.
Can any be compted more honest, then such as seek to save their country; by
hasardyng their carcasses, and shedyng of their blood? Can love show it self
greater, then by yeldyng of life, By what help and by whose? Alone, and without
the help of any manne living.
for the health of an army? It had been much, if half a dosen had dispatched,
such a terrible Gyaunte, but now, when David without help, being not yet a man, but a boy in years, ^lewe him hand to hand, what just praise does
he deserve? If we praise other, that have flain evil men, and compte them
haulte, that have killed their matches, David's enterprise, praise worthy.
what shall we say of David, that being wonderfully ouermatched, made his
party good, and got the gole of a monster? Let other praise Hercules, that
think best of him: let Caesar, Alexander, and Hanniball, be bru^ed for
warriers: David in my judgment, both did more manly, then all the other were
able, and served his country in greater danger, then ever any one of them
did. And shall we not call such a noble capitain, a good man of war?
Deserves not his manhood and stout attempt, wonderful praise? It virtue
could speak, would she not sone confess that David had her in full
possession? And therefore if well doings, by right may challenge worthy brute,
David will be known, and never can want due praise, for such an honest deed.
And what man will not say, but that David did mind nothing else herein, but the
saufegarde of his country, why? For the saufegarde of his country.
thinkyng it better for himself to die, and his country to live, then himself
to live, and his country to die. What gain got David, by the death of Goliath,
or what could he hope, by the death of such a mo^ster, but only that the love
which he bare to the Israelites, forced him to hasard his own life: Dauides
enterprise, prost^a^ie to himself and his country.
Thinkyng that if the Philistines should preuail the Israelites were like to
perish, every mothers son of them? Therefore he hassardyng this atttempte,
considered with himself, the saufegard of the Israelites, the mainteinaunce of
justice, his duty toward God, his obedience to his prince, and his love to
his country. Dauides enterprise, appeared easy to himself
And no doubt, God made this enterprise appear full easy, before David could
have the heart, to match himself with such a one. For though his heart might
quake, being void of Gods help, yet assuredly he wanted no stomach, when
God did set him on. Let tirauntes rage, let hell stand open, let Satan show
his might, if God be with us, who can be against us? Though this Goliath
appeared so strong, that.x. Dauides were not able, to stand in his hand:
yet.x. Goliaths were all over weak for David alone. Man cannot judge, neither
can reason comprehend, the mighty power of God. When Pharao with all his
army, thought fully to destroy the children of Israel, in the red sea,
did not God preserve Moses, and destroy Pharao? What is man and all his power
that he can make, in the hands of God, unto who^ all creatures, both in
heaven and in earth, are subject at his commandment? Therefore it was no
mastery for David, being assisted with God, as well to match with the whole
army, as to overthrow this one man. But what did the Israelites, when they
saw David take upon him, such a bold enterprise? Dauides enterprise,
accounted of his fre^des, hard and impossible.
Some said he was rash, other mocked him to scorn, and his brethren called
him fool. For thought they, what a mad fellow is he, being but a lad in
years, to match with such a monster in body? How can it be possible
otherwise, but that he shall be torn in pe^es, even at his first coming? For
if the Philistine may ones hit him, he is goen though he had ten men's
life's. Now what should he mean, so vnegally to match himself except he were,
weary of his life, or else were not well in his wits? Yea, and to give his
enemies, all the advantage that could be, he came unarmed, and whereas the
Philistine, had very strong armor, both to defend himself, and a strong
weapon to fight withal, David came with a slyng How? with a slyng.
only, as though he would kill crows, whereat, not only the Philistine
laughed, and disdained his folly, but also both the armies thought he was but
a dedde man, before he gave one stroke. And in deed, by all reason and devise
of man there was none other way, but death with him, out of hand, David
notwithstanding, being kyndeled in heart with Gods might, was strong enough
for him, in his own opinion, and forced nothing, though all other were much
against him. And therefore made no more a do, but being ready to revenge in
Gods name, such great blasphemy, as the Philistine then did utter, marched
toward his enemy, and with castyng a stone out of a slyng, he ouerthrewe the
Philistine at the first. The which when he had dooen, out with his sword, and
chopped of his hedde, cariyng it with, his armoure, to the Camp of the
Israelites: whereat the Philistines were greatly astonished, and the Israelites
much praised God, that had given such grace, to such a one, to compass such
a deed. And the rather this manly act, is highly to be praised, because he
subdued this houge enemy, when Saul first reigned king over Israel, and was
sore assaied with the great army of the Philistines. Let us therefore that
be now living, when this act or such like, come into our minds: remember
what God is, of how infinite power he is, and let us praise God in them, by
whom he has wrought such wonders, to the strengthenyng of our faith, and
constaunt keeping of our profession, made to him, by every one of us, in our
Baptism.

Examinyng of the circumstaunces
j. Who did the deed?

David being an Israelite, did this deed, being the son of Isai, of the
Tribe of Judah, a boy in years, This circumstaunce was used, not only in the
narracion, but also when I spoke of the honesty and godliness, which David
used, when he slew Goliath.

ij. What was done?

He slew Goliath, the strongest Giaunt among the Philistines. This
circumstaunce I used also, when I spoke of the honesty, in killyng Goliath.

iij. Where was it done?

About the vale of Terebinthus.

iiij. What help had he to it?

He had no help of any man, but went himself alone. And whereas Saul offered him
harnes, he cast it away, and trusting only in God, took him to his sling,
with.iiij. or.v. small stones in his hand, the which were thought nothing in
man's sight, able either to do little good, or else nothing at al. This
circumstaunce I used, when I spoke of the easenesse and possibilite, that was
in David, to kill Goliath, by Gods help.

v. Wherefore did he it?

He adventured his life, for the love of his country, for the maintenance of
justice, for thaduauncement of Gods true glory, and for the quietness of all
Israel, neither seeking fame, nor yet lokyng for any gain. I used this
circu^staunce, when I showed what profit he sought, in aduenturyng this deed.

vi. How did he it?

Marie he put a stone in his slyng, and when he had cast it at the Philistine,
Goliath fell down straight. I used this circumstaunce, when I spoke of the
impossibility of the thing.

vij. What time did he it?

This deed was done, when Saul reigned, first king over the Israelites, at
what time the Philistines, came against the Israelites. Thus by the
circumstaunces of things, a right worthy cause, may be plentifully enlarged.


Of the Oracion demonstratiue, where things are set furthe, and matters
commended.
THe kind demo^stratiue of things, is a mean whereby we do praise, or
dispraise things, as virtue, vice, tounes, citees, castles, woddes, waters,
hills, and mountains.

Places to confirm things are.iiii.
Places of confirmacion. i. Things honest. ij. Profitable. iij. Easy to be
done. iiij Hard to be done.

MAny learned, will have recourse to the places of Logique instead of
these.iiij. places, when they take in hand to commend any such matter. The
which places if they make them serve rather to commend the matter, then only
to teach men the truth of it, it were well done and Oratourlike* for seeing a
man wholly bestows his wit to play the Orator, he should chefely seek to
compass that which he ente^deth, and not do that only which he but half
minded. for by plain teaching, the Logician shows himself, by large
amplification and beautifiyng of his cause, the Rhetorician is always known.

The places of Logique are these.
Definition. Causes. Parts. Effects. Things adioy^y^g. Contraries.
I Do not se otherwise but that these places of Logique are confounded with
the other.iiiij. of confirmacion, Logique must be learned for confirmacion of
causes.
or rather I think these of Logique must first be minded ere the other can well
be had. For what is he that can call a thing honest and by reason prove it,
except he first know what the thing is, the which he can not better do, then
by definyng the nature of the thing. Again how shall I know whether mine
attempt be easy, or hard, if I know not the efficient cause, or be assured
how it may be done. In affirmyng it to be possible, I shall not better know
it, then by searchyng the end, and learning by Logique what is the final cause
of every thing.

An example in commendacion of Justice, or true dealyug.
SO many as look to live in peaceable quietness, being minded rather to follow
reason, than to be led by wilful affection: desire justice Justice commended.
in all things without the which no country is able long to continue. Then may
I be bold to commend that, which all men wish and few can have, which all
men love, and none can want: not doubtyng but as I am occupied in a good thing,
so al good men will hear me with a good will. But would God I were so well able
to persuade all men to Justice, as al men know the necessary use thereof: and
then undoubtedly I would be much boulder, and force some by violence, which
by fair words can not be entreated. And yet what needs any persuasion for
that thing, which by nature is so nedeful, and by experience so profitable,
that look what we want, without justice we get not, look what we have, without
justice we keep not. God grant his grace so to work in the hearts of al men,
that they may as well practice well doing in their own life, as they would that
other should follow justice in their life: I for my part will bestow some labor
to set forth the goodness of upright dealing that al other men the rather may do
thereafter. That if through my words, God shall work with any man, than may I
think my self in happy case, and rejoice much in the travail of my wit. And
how can it be otherwise, but that al men shall be forced inwardly to allow that,
which in outward act many do not follow: seeing God poured first this law of
nature into man's heart, and granted it as a mean whereby we might know his will,
and (as I might say) talk with him, groundyng still his doings upon this
poinct, that man should do as he would be done unto, the which is nothing
else, but to live uprightly, without any will to hurt his neighbor. Justice
naturally in every one of v^.
And therefore having this light of Gods will opened unto us through his mere
goodness, we ought evermore to refer al our actions unto this end, both in
geuyng judgment, and deuisyng laws necessary for man's life. And here upon it
is that when men desire the law for trial of a matter, they mean nothing
else but to have justice, Justice what it is, and how largely it extends.
the which justice is a virtue that yeldeth to every man, his own: to the
ever living God, love above al things: to the King, obedience: to the
inferior, good counsel: to the poor man, mercy: to the hateful and wicked,
sufferaunce: to it self, truth: and to al men, perfect peace, and charity.
Now what can be more said in praise of this virtue, or what thing can be like
praised? Are not al things in good case, when al men have their own? And what
other thing does justice, but seeks means to content al parties? Then how
greatly are they to be praised, that mean truly in all their doings, and not
only, do no harm to any, but seek means to help al. The sun is not so
wonderful to the world (says Aristotel Aristotel.
) as the just dealyng of a governor is merueilous to al me^. No the yerth
yeldeth not more gain to al creatures, than does the justice of a Magistrate
to his whole Realm. For, by a law, we live, and take the fruits of the
earth, but where no law is, nor justice used: there, nothing ca^ be had,
though al things be at hand: For, in having the thing, we shall lack the
use, and living in great plenty, we shall stand in great need. The mean
therefore that makes men to enjoy their own, is justice, the which being
ones taken away, all other things are lost with it, neither can any one save
that he has, nor yet get that he wants. Therefore if wrong doing should be
borne withal, and not rather punished by death, Wvrong dealyng deserves death.
what man could live in rest? Who could be suer either of his life, or of
his living one whole day together? Now because every man desiereth the
preservation of him self, every man should in like case desire the sauegarde
of his neighbor. For if I should wholly mind mine own ease, and follow gain
without respect to the hinderaunce of mine even Christian: why should not other
use the same liberty, and so every man for himself, and the devil for us al,
catch that catch may? The which custom if all men followed, the earth would
soon be void for want of men, one would be so gredie to eat up an other.
For in sekyng to live, we should lose our lives, and in gapyng after gooddes,
we should soon go naked. Therefore to repress this rage, and with wholesome
devises to train men in an order, God has lightened man with knowledge, that
in all things he may se what is right, and what is wrong, and upon good
aduisement deal justly with all men. God has created al things for man's use,
and ordained man for man's sake, that one man might help another. For though
some one have gifts more plentifully then the common sort, yet no man can
live alone without help of other. Justice necessary for almo^.
Therefore we should strive one to help another by just dealyng, some this
way, and some that way, as every one shall have need, and as we shall be always
best able, wherein the law of nature is fulfilled, and Gods commandment
followed. We love them here in earth that give us fair words, and we can be
content to speak well of them, that speak well of us: and shall we not love
them, and take them also for honest men, which are contented from time to time
to yield every man his own, and rather would dye then consent to evil doing?
From the less to the greater.
If one be ientle in outward behavior, we like him well, and shall we not
esteem him that is upright in his outward living? and like as we desire that
other should be to us, ought not we to be likewise affected toward them?
Even among brute beasts nature hash appoincted a law, and shall we men live
without a law? The Storke Young Storkes.
being not able to feed her self for age, is fed of her youngones, wherein
is declared a natural love, and shall we so live, that one shall not love
another? Man should be unto man as a God, and shall man be unto man as a Devil?
Has God created us, and made us to his own likeness, endewyng us with all the
riches of the earth, that we might be obedient to his will, and shall we neither
love him, nor like his? How can we say that we love God, Unnaturalness in man
toward God.
if there be no charity in us? Do I love him, whose mind I will hot follow,
although it be right honest? If you love me (says Christ) follow my
commandments. Ihon. ^iiii. Matthew. ^ix. (...). ^.
Christ's will is such that we should love God above al things, and our
neighbor as our self. Then if we do not justice (wherein love does consist) we
do neither love man, nor yet love God. The Wise man says: The beginning of a
good life, is to do justice. Proner. ^v^.
Yea, the blessyng of the Lord is upon the head of the just. Prouer. iiii.
Heaven is theirs (says David) that do justly from time to time. Psalm. xcvi.
What else then shall we do that have any hope of the general resurrection, but
do the will of God, and live justly all the days of our life? Let every man,
but consider with himself what ease he shall find thereby, and I doubt not but
every one depely waiyng the same, will in heart confess that justice makes
plenty, Profit of justice.
and that not one man could long hold his own, if laws were not made to
restrain man's will. We travail now, Winter and Summer, we watch, and take
thought for maintenance of wife and children, assuredly purposyng (that though
God shall take us immediately) to leave honestly for our family. Sauegarde had
by justice.
Now to what end were all our gatheryng together, if just dealyng were set a
side, if laws bare no rule, if what the wicked list, that they may, and what
they may, that they can, and what they can, that they dare, and what they dare,
the same they do, and whatsoever they do, no man of power is agreued therewith?
Gradation.
What makes wicked me^ (which else would not) acknowledge the King as their
sovereign lord, but the power of a law, and the practice of justice for evil
doers? The necessity of justice.
Could a Prince maintain his state royal, if law and right had not provided
that every man should have his own? Would servants obey their masters, the
son his father, the tenant his landlorde, the citezen his maiour, or
Shirife^if orders were not set and just dealyng appoincted for all states of
men? Therefore the true meaning folk in all ages give the^ selves some to this
occupacion, and some to that, sekyng therein nothing else, but to maintain a
poor life, and to keep them selves true men both to God and the world. What
makes men to perform their bargains, to stand to their promises, and yield
their debtes, but an order of a law grounded upon justice? Where justice is
executed, vice is exiled.
Where right bears rule, there craft is coumpted vice. The liar is much
hated, where truth is well esteemed. The wicked thieves are hanged, where good men
are regarded. None can hold up their heads, or dare show their faces in a
well ruled commune weal, that are not thought honest, or at the least have
some honest way to live. The Egiptians therefore having a worthy and a well
governed public weal, provided that none should live idlye, but that every
one monthly should give an account how he spente his time, and had his name
regestrede in a Book for the same purpose. Aegiptians what order they used to
banishe ydelnesse.
But Lord, if this law were used in England, how many would come behind
hand with their reckenynges at the audite day. I fear me there doings
would be such, that it would be long ere they got there quietus est.
Therefore the wourse is our state, the less that this evil is looked unto. And
suerly, if in other things we should be as negligent, this Realm could not
long stand. But thanks be to God, we hang them a pace that offend a law,
and therefore we put it to their choice, whether they will be idle and so fall to
stealyng, or no: they know their reward, go to it, when they will. But if
therewithal some good order were taken for education of youth, and setting
loiterers on work (as thanks be to God the City is most Godly bent that way)
all would sooue be well without all doubt. The wise and discrete persons in all
ages sought all means possible to have an order in all things, and loved by
justice to direct al their doings, whereby appears both an apt will in such
men, and a natural stirryng by Gods power to make al men good. Justice easy to
be observed, if will be not wa^^yng.
Therefore, if we do not well, we must blame our selves, that lack a will, and
do not call to God for grace. For though it appear hard to do well, because no
man can get perfection without continaunce: yet assuredly to an humble mind
that calls to God, and to a willing heart that faint would do his best,
nothing can be hard. God has set al things to sale for labor, and keeps
open shop, come who will. Therefore in all ages whereas we see the fewest good,
we must well think, the most did lack good will to ask, or seek for the same.
Lord, what love had that worthy Prince Seleueus to maintein justice, and to
have good laws kept, of whom such a wondrefull thing is written. For
whereas he established most wholesome laws for sauegarde of the Locrensia^s,
and his own son thereupon taken in adultrie, should lose both his iyes
according to the law then made, and yet notwithstanding, the whole City
thought to remitte the necessity of his punishment for the honor of his
father, Seleucus would none of that in any wise. Valor. lib. vi.
Yet at last through importunity being overcome, he caused first one of his
own iyes to be pluckte out, and next after, one of his sons iyes, leauyng
only the use of sight to himself and his son. Thus through equity of the
law, he used the dew mean of chastisement, showyng himself by a wonderful
temperature both a merciful father, and a just law maker. Now happy are they
yt thus observe a law, thinking loss of body, less hurt to the man, then
sparyng of punisheme^t, mete for the soul. For God will not fail the^, that
have such a desire to follow his will, but for his promise sake, he will reward
them for ever. And now, seeing that justice naturally is given to al men
without the which we could not live, being warned also by God always to do
uprightly, perceauyng again the commodities that redounde unto us by living
under a law, and the sauegard wherein we stand having justice to assiste us: I
trust that not only all men will commend justice in word, but also will live
justly in deed, the which that we may do, God grant us of his grace, Amen.

An Oration deliberatiue.
AN Oration deliberatiue, Oration deliberatiue.
is a mean, whereby we do persuade, or dissuade, entreat, or rebuke, exhort,
or dehorte, commend, or comfort any man. In this kind of Oration we do not
purpose wholly to praise any body, nor yet to determine any matter in
controversy, but the whole compass of this cause is, either to advise our
neighbor to that thing, which we think most nedeful for him or else to call
him back from that folly, which hinders much his estimacion. As for
example, if I would counseil my friend to travail beyond the Seas for knowledge
of the tongues, and experience in foreign countries: I might resort to this
kind of Oration, and find matter to confirm my cause plentifully. And the
reasons which are commonly used to enlarge such matters, are these that follow.

The thing is honest. Saufe. Profitable. Easy. Pleasant. Hard.
Lawful and meet. Praise worthy. Necessary.
NOW in speaking of honesty, I may by division of the virtues make a large
walk. ^onestie comprehends al virtues.
Again look what laws, what customs, what worthy deeds, or sayings have
been used heretofore, all these might serve well for the confirmacion of this
matter* lastly where honesty is called in, to establish a cause: there is
nature and God him self present from whom comes al goodness. In the
second place where I spoke of profit, Profit how largely it extends.
this is to be learned, that under the same is comprehended the gettyng of
gain, and the eschewyng of harm. Again, concerning profit Profit bears
the name of goodness, which is three folded.
(which also bears the name of goodness) it partly pertains to the body,
as beauty, strength, and health, partly to the mind, as the increase of
wit, the gettyng of experience, and heaping together of much learning: and
partly to fortune (as Philosophers take it) whereby both wealth, honor, and
friends are gotten. Thus he that divides profit, can not want matter.
Thirdely in declaryng it is p^easaunt, I might heap together the variety of
pleasures, Pleasures, largely set out.
which comme by travail, first the swetnesse of the tongue, the holsomnesse
of the air in other countries, the goodly wits of the ientlemen, the
strange and ancient buildings, the wonderful monumentes, the great learned
Clerckes in all faculties, with diverse other like, and almost infinite
pleasures.

The easines of travail Eas^nesse of travail.
may thus beperswaded, if we show that freepassage is by wholso^ laws
appointed, for all strangers, and way fairers. And seeing this life is none
other thing but a travail, and we as pilgrymes wander from place to place,
much fondenesse it were to think that hard, which nature has made easy, yea
and pleasant also. None are more healthful, none more lusty, none more merry,
none more strong of body, the^ such as have travailed Travail unto whom it
is ^arde.
countries. Mary unto them that had rather sleep al day, then wake one hour,
chosyng for honest labor sleuthful idleness: thinking this life to be none
other thing but a continual restyng place, unto such pardy, it shall seem
painful to abide any labor. To learn Logique, to learn the Law, to some it
seems so hard, that nothing can enter into their heddes, and the reason is,
that they wan^ a will, and an ea^nest mind to do their endeavor. For unto a
willing har^e, nothing can be hard, lay lode on such a manne^ back, and
his good harce may sooner make his back to a^e, then his good will, can grant
to yield and refuse the weighte. (...)
And now where the sweet has his sower joined with him, it shall be wisdom
to speak some what of it, to mitigate the sowernesse thereof, as much as may
be possible.

That is lawful Lawful.
and praise worthy, which laws do grant, good men do allow, experience
commends, and men in all ages have most used.

A thing is necessary two manner of ways. Necessary (...) ways taken.
First, when either we must do some one thing, or else do worse. As if one
should threaten a woman, to kill her, if she would not lie with him, wherein
appears a forcible necessity. As touching travail we might say, either a
man must be ignorant, of many good things, and want great experience, or else
he must trauaill. Now to be ignorant, is a great shame, therefore to trauaill
is most needful, if we will avoid shame. The other kind of necessity is,
when we persuade men to bear those crosses patiently, which God does send
us, considering will we, or nill we, needs must we abide them.

To advise one, to study the laws of England.
AGain, when we se our friend, inclined to any kind of learning, we must
counsel him to take that way still, and by reason persuade him, that it were
the metest way for him, to do his country most good. As if he give his
mind, to the Laws Laws of England.
of the realm, and find an aptnes thereunto, we may advise him, to continue
in his good intent, and by reason persuade him, that it were most mete for him
so to do. And first we might show him, that the study is honest and godly,
considering it only follows Justice, and is grounded wholly upon natural
reason. Wherein we might take a large scope, if we would fully speak of all
things, that are comprehended under honesty. For he that will know what
honesty is, must have an understanding, of all the virtues together. And
because the knowledge of them is most necessary, I will brifely set them
forth. Vertnes especial and chief four in no^^^e
There are four especial and chief virtues, under whom all other are
comprehended.

Prudence, or wisdom. Justice. Manhood. Temperaunce.
PRudence Prudence what it is?
or wisdom (for I will here take them both for one) is a virtue that is
occupied evermore, in searchyng out the truth. Now we all love knowledge, and
have a desire to pass other therein, and think it shame to be ignorant: and
by studiyng the law, the truth is gotten out, by knowing the truth, wisdom
is attained. Wherefore, in perswadyng one to study to Law, you may sh^we him
that he shall get wisdom thereby. Under this virtue are comprehended. Parts
of Prudence.


Memory. Understandyng. Foresight.
THE memory calls to account those things, that were done heretofore, and
by a former remembrance, gets an after wit, and learneth to avoid
deceit.

Understandyng sees things presently dooen, and perceives what is in them,
waiyng and debatyng them, until his mind be fully contented.

Foresight, is a gatheryng by conjectures, what shall happen, and an evident
perceiuyng of things to come, before they do come.

Justice.

Justice Justice, what it is.
is a virtue, gathered by long space, geuyng every one his own, mindyng in all
things, the common profit of our country, whereunto man is most bound, and
owes his full obedience.

Now, nature first taught manne, to take this way, and would every one so to
do unto another, as he would be doe^ unto himself. For whereas Rain waters
all in like, the Son shines indifferently over all, the fruict of the yerth
increases equally, God warns us to bestow our good will after the same sort,
doing as duty byndeth us, and as necessity shall best require. Yea, God
grants his gifts diversely among men, because he would man should know, and
feel, that man is borne for man, and that one has need of another. And
therefore, though nature has not stirred some, yet through the experience that
man has, concerning his commodity: many have turned the law of nature, into
an ordinary custom, and followed the same, as though they were bound to it by a
Law. Afterward, the wisdom of Princes, and the fear of Gods threate,
which was uttered by his word, forced men by a ^awe, both to allow things
confirmed by nature, and to bear with old custom or else they should not only
suffer in the body, temporal punishment, but also lose their souls for ever.
Nature Nature, what it is.
is a right, that fantasy has not framed, but God has graffed, and given
man power thereunto, whereof these are derived.

Religion and acknowlegyng of God. Natural love to our children, and other.
Thankfulness to all man. Stoutnesse both to withstand and revenge. Reverence
to the superior. Assured and constaunt truth in things.
REligion Religion.
is an humble worshippyng of God, acknowlegyng him to be the creator of
creatures, and the only geuer of al good things.

Natural love Natural love.
is an inward good will, that we bear to our parents, wife, children, or any
other that be nighe of kynne unto us, stirred thereunto not only by our
flesh, thinkyng that like as we would love our selfs, so we should love them
but also by a likeness of mind: and therefore generally we love all, because
all be like unto us, but yet we love them most, that both in body and mind,
be most like unto us. And hereby it comes that often we are liberal, and
bestow our goods upon the nedy, remembryng that they are all one flesh with
us, and should not want, when we have it, without our great rebuke, and token
of our most unkind dealyng.

Thankfulness Thankfulness.
is a requityng of love, for love, and will, for will, showing to our friends,
the like goodness that we find in them, yea, striuyng to pass them in
kyndenesse, losyng neither time nor tide, to do them good.

Stoutnes Stoutness.
to withstand and revenge evil, is then used when either we are like to have
harm, and do withstand it, or else when we have suffered evil for the
truthsake, and thereupon do revenge it, or rather punish the evil, which is
in the man

Reverence, Reverence.
is an humbleness in outward behauor, when we do our duty to them, that are
our betters, or unto such as are called to serve the king, in some great
vocacion.

Assured and constant truth is, Assured and constant truth
when we do believe that those things, which are or have been, or hereafter
are aaboute to be, cannot otherwise be, by any means possible.

That is right by custom, Right by custom.
which long time has confirmed, being partly grounded upon nature, and partly
upon reason, as where we are taught by nature, to know the ever living God,
and to worship him in spirit, we turnyng natures light, into blind custom,
without Gods will, have used at length to believe, Custom with (...)
ground, vn^^dly.
that he was really with us here in yearthe, and worshipped him not in spirit,
but in Copes, in Candlestickes, in Belles, in Tapers, and in Ce^sers, in
Crosses, in Banners, in shaven Crounes and long gounes, and many good morowes
else, devised only by the fantasy of man, without the express will of God.
The which childishe toys, time has so long confirmed, that the truth is
scant able to try them out, our hearts be so hard, and our wits be so
far to seek.

Again where we se by nature, that every one should deal truly, custom
increases natures will, and makes by ancient demean, things to be justly
observed, which nature has appoyncted.

As Ba^gainyng. Commons, or equalitee. Judgment given.

BArgainyng is, when two have agreed, for the sa^e of some one thing, the one
will make his fellow to stand to the bargain, though it be to his neighbors
undoing, restyng upon this poyncte, that a bargain is a bargain, and must stand
without all excepcio^, although nature requires to have things dooen by
conscience, and would that bargainyng should be builded upon Justice, whereby
an upright dealyng, and a charitable love is uttered amongst all men.

Communes Commons.
or equalitee, when the people by long time have a ground, or any such thing
among them, the which some of them will keep still, for custom sake, and not
suffer it to be fensed, and so turned to pasture, though they might gain ten
times the value: but such stubburnesse in keeping of Commons for custom sake,
is not standing with Justice, because it is holden against all right.

Judgment given, Judgment given.
is when a matter is confirmed by a Parlamente, or a Law, determined by a
Judge, unto the which many head strong men, will stand to dye for it, without
sufferaunce of any alteracion, not remembryng the circumstaunce of things, and
that time alters good acts.

That is right by a Law, Right by Law.
when the truth is uttered in writing, and commanded to be kept, even as it
is set furthe unto them.

Fortitude or manhood.
FOrtitude is a considerate hassardyng upon danger, Manhood.
and a willing heart to take pains in bahalfe of the right. Now when can
stoutnes be better used, then in just maintenance of the law, and co^staunt
triyng of the truth? Of this virtue there are four branches.

Honourablenesse. Stoutness. Sufferaunce. Continuance.
HOnorablenesse, Honorablenes
is a noble orderyng of weighty matters, with a lusty heart, and a liberal
vsyng of his wealth, to the increase of honor.

Stoutnesse Stoutness.
i^ an assured trust in himself, when he myndeth the compass of most weighty
matters, and a courageous defendyng of his cause.

Sufferaunce Sufferaunce.
is a willing and a long bearyng of trouble and taking of pains, for the
mainteinaunce of virtue, and the wealth of his country.

Continuance Continuance
is a steadfast and constant abidyng, in a purposed and well advised matter, not
yeldyng to any manne in querell of the right.

Temperaunce.
TEmperaunce Temperaunce.
is a measuryng of affeccions, according to the will of reason, and a subduyng
of lust unto the Square of honesty. Yea, and what one thing does sooner
mitigate the immoderate passions of our nature, then the perfect knowledge of
right and wrong and the just execucion appoyncted by a law, for asswagyng the
wilful? Of this virtue there are three parts.

Sobriety. Ientlenesse. Modesty.
Sobriety Sobriety.
is a bridelyng by discrecion the wilfulness of desire.

Ientlenesse Ieutlenesse.
is a caulmyng of heat, when we begin to rage, and a lowly behauior in all
our body Modesty Modesty.
is an honest shamefastness, whereby we keep a constant look, and appear sober
in all our outward doings. Now even as we should desire the use of all these
virtues, so should we eschew not only the contraries herunto, but also avoid
all such euilles, as by any means do withdraw us from well doing.

It is profitable.
AFter we have persuaded our friend, that the law is honest, drawyng our
arguments from the heap of virtues, we must go further with him, and bring
him in good believe, that it is very gainful. For many on seek not the knowledge
of learning for the goodness sake, but rather take pains for the gain* Hope
of reward makes men take pains.
which they se does arise by it. Take away the hope of lucre, and you shall se
few take any pains: No, not in the vineyard of the lord. For although none
should follow any trade of life, for the gain sake, but eue^ as he sees it is
most necessary, for thaduauncement of Gods glory, and not pass in what
estimacion things are had in this world: yet because we are all so weak of
wit, in our tender years, that we cannot weigh with our selfs what is best,
and our body so neshe, that it looks ever to be cherished, we take that,
which is most gainful for us, and forsake that altogether, which we ought
most to follow. So that for lack of honest means, and for want of good
order, the best way is not used, neither is Gods honor in our first years
remembered. I had rather (said one) make my child a cobbler then a preacher, a
tankerd bearer, then a scholar. For what shall my son seek for learning, when
he shall never get thereby any living? Set my son to that, whereby he may
get somewhat? Do ye not se how every one catches and pulls from the church
what they can? I fear me one day they will pluck down church and all. Call
you this the Gospel, when men seek only to provide for their belies, and care
not a grote though their souls go to hell? A patron of a benefice will have a
poor yngrame soul, to bear the name of a person for.xx. mark, or.x. li:
and the patron himself, will take up for his snapshare, as good as an.c. mark.
Thus God is robbed, learning decayed, England dishonored, and honesty not
regarded. Thold Romans not yet knowing Christ, The Romans laws for Church
digni^ees.
and yet being led by a reverent fear toward God, made this law. Sacrum
sacroue commendatu^ qui clepserit, rapseritue, parricida est He that shall
closely steal, or forcibly take away that thing, which is holy, or given to
the holy place: is a murderer of his country. But what have I said, I have a
greater matter in hand, then whereof I was a ware, my pen has run over far,
when my leisure serves not, nor yet my wit is able to talk this case in
such wise, as it should be, and as the largeness thereof requires. Therefore
to my lawyer again, whom I doubt not to persuade, but that he shall have the
devil and all, if he learn a pase, and do as some have dooen before him.
Therefore I will show how largely this profice extends, that I may have him
the sooner, to take this matter in hand. The law Law, profitable to the purse.
therefore not only brings much gain with it, but also auaunceth men both
to worship, renoume, and honor. All men shall seek his favor, for his
learning sake: the best shall like his company, for his calling: and his wealth
with his skill shall be such, that none shall be able to work him any wrong.
Some consider profit, by these circumstaunces, following.

To whom. When. Where. Wherefore.
NEither can I use a better order, then these circumstaunces minister unto me.
Circumstaunces, in obseruyng profit.
To whom therefore is the Law profitable? Marie to them that be best learned,
that have ready wits, and will take pains. When is the law profitable?
Assuredly both now and evermore, but especially in this age, where all men go
together by the ears for this matter, and that matter. Such alteracion has
been heretofore, that hereafter needs must ensue much altercacion. And where
is all this a do? Even in little England, or in Westminster hall, where never
yet wanted business, nor yet ever shall. Where^^^e is the law profitable?
Undoubtedly because no man could hold his own, if there were not an order to
stay us, and a Law to restrain us. And I pray you who gets the money? The
lawyers no doubt. And were not land sometimes cheaper bought, then got by the
trial of a law? Do not men commonly for trifles fall out? Folly in many, that
go to the Law.
Some for loppyng of a tree, spe^des all that ever they have, another for a
Gose, that graseth upon his ground, tries the law so hard, that he proves him
self a Gander. Now when men be so mad, is it not easy to get money among
them. Undoubtedly the lawyer never dies a beggar. Lawyers, ne^^r die beggars
And no maruaill. For an.C. begges for him, and makes away all that they have,
to get that of him, the which the oftener he bestows, the more still he
gets. So that he gains always, as well by increase of lernyng as by
storyng his purse with money, whereas the other get a warm son often times,
and a flappe with a fox (...) for all that ever they have spent. And why would
they? Tushe, if it were to do again, they would do it: therefore the lawyre can
never want a living, til the earth want men, and al be void.

The law easy to many, and hard to some.
I Doubt not, but my lawyer is persuaded that the law is profitable: now must I
bear him in hand that it is an easy matter to become a lawier* the which if
I shall be able to prove, I doubt not, but he will prove a good lawier, and that
right shortly* the law is grounded upon reason. And what hardenesse is it for a
man by reason to find out reason. That can not be straung unto him, the
ground whereof, is graffed in his breast. What, though the law be in a strange
tongue, the words may be got without any pain, when the matter self is
compast with ease. Tushe, a little law will make a great show, and therefore
though it be much to becomme excellent, yet it is easy, to get a taist. And
surely for getting of money, a little will do as much good oftentimes, as a
great deal. There is not a word in the law, but it is a grote in ye lawiers
purse. I have know ^e diu^rse that by familiar talkyng, and moutyng together
have comme to right good learning without any great book skill, or much
beating of their brain by any close study, or secret musyng in their
chamber. But where some say the law is very hard, and discourage young men
from the study thereof, it is to be understand of such as will take no pains
at al, nor yet mind the knowledge thereof. For what is not hard to man, when he
wants will to do his best. As good sleep, and say it is hard: as wake, and
take no pains.

The law. Godly. Just. Necessary. Pleasant.

WHat needs me to prove the law to be Godly, just, or necessary, seeing it
is grounded upon Gods will, and all laws are made for the maintenance of
justice. If we will not believe that it is necessary, let us have rebels
again to disturb the Realm. Our nature is so fond that we know not the
necessity of a thing, til we find some lack of the same. Bows are not
esteemed as they have been among us Englishmen, but if we were ones well beaten
by our enemies we should soon know the want, and with feelyng the smarte
lament much our folly. Take away the law, and take away our life's, for
nothing mainteineth our wealth, L^wes maintain life.
our health, and the sauegard of our bodies, but the law of a Realm, whereby
the wicked are condemned, and the godly are defended.

An Epistle to persuade a young ientleman to Marriage, devised by Erasmus in the
behalf of his friend.
ALbeit you are wise enough of your self through that singular wisdom of
yours (most loving Cosyn) and little needs the advice of other, yet either for
that old fryndshippe which has been betwixt us, and continued with our age
even from our cradles, or for such your great good turns showed at all times
toward me, or else for that fast kynred and alliance which is betwixt us:
I thought my self thus much to owe unto you if I would be such a one in
deed, as you ever have taken me, that is to say a man both friendly and
thankeful, to tell you freely (whatsoever I judged to apperteine either to the
sauegarde, or worship of you, or any of yours) and willyngly to warn you of
the same. We are better seen oftentimes in other men's matters, than we are in
our own. I have felt often your advise in mine own affairs, and I have
found it to be as fortunate unto me, as it was friendly. Now if you will
likewise in your own matters follow my counsel, I trust it shall so come to
pass that neither I shall repent me for that I have given you counsel, nor yet
you shall forthynk^ your self, that you have obeyed, and followed mine advise.
There was at supper with me the twelfe day of April when I lay in the
country, Antonius Baldus, a man (as you know) that most earnestly tendreth
your welfare, and one that has been always of great acquaintance and
familiarity with your son in law: A heavy feast we had, and full of much
mournyng. He told me greatly to both our heaviness, that your mother that
most godly woman, was departed this life, and your sister being overcome with
sorrow and heaviness, had made her self a Nun, so that in you only
remains the hope of issue and maintenanuce of your stock* whereupon your
friends with one consent have offerde you in Marriage a ientlewoman of a good
house, and much wealth, fair of body, very well brought up, and such a one
as loves you with all her heart. But you (either for your late sorrows which
you have in fresh remembrance or else for Religion sake) have so purposed to
live a syngle life, that neither can you for love of your stock, neither for
desire of issue, nor yet for any entreatie that your friends can make, either
by prayeng, or by weeping: be brought to change your mind.

And yet notwithstanding all this (if you will follow my counsel) you shall be
of an other mind, and leauyng to live syngle which both is barren, and
smally agreeyng with the state of man's nature, you shall give your self
wholly to most holy wedlock. And for this part I will neither wish that the
love of your fryndes, (which else ought to overcome your nature) nor yet mine
authority that I have over you, should do me any good at all to compass
this my request, if I shall not prove unto you by most plain reasons, that
it will be both much more honest, more profitable, and also more pleasant
for you, to marie, than to live otherwise. Yea, what will you say, if I prove
it also to be necessary for you at this time to Marie. And first of all, if
honesty may move you in this matter (the which among all good men ought to
be of much weighte,) what is more honest then Matrimony, the which CHRIST
him self did make honest, when not only he, vouchesaufed to be at a Marriage
with his Mother, but also did consecrate the Marriage feast with the first
miracle that ever he did upon yearche? What is more holy then Matrimony
which the creator of all things did institute, did fasten, and make holy,
and nature it self did establishe? What is more praise worthy Praise worthy
to marie.
than that thing, the which whosoever shall dispraise, is condemned straight
for an Heretic? Matrimony is even as honorable, as the name of an
Heretic, is thought shameful. What is more right, or m^ete, Right and (...)
to ma^te.
than to give that unto the posterity, the which we have received of our
auncesters? What is more inconsiderate than under the desire of holiness to
escew that as unholy, which God him self the fountain and father of al
holiness, would have to be counted as most holy? What is more unmanly than
that man should go against the laws of mankind? what is more unthankful
than to deny that unto youngelynges, the which (if thou had not received
of thine elders) thou could not have been the man living, able to have
denied it unto them. That if you would know who was the first founder of
Marriage, you shall understand that it came up not by Licurgus, nor yet by
Moses, nor yet by Solon, but it was first ordained, and instituted by the chief
founder of all things, commended by the ^ame, Marriage first made by God.
made honorable and made holy by the same. For at the first when he made man
of the yearthe, he did perceive that his life should be miserable and
unsavory, except he joined Eve as ma^e unto him. After man was made, the
woman was joined unto him.
Whereupon he did not make the wife upon the same claie whereof he made man, but
he made her of Adams ribs, to the eude we might plainly understand that
nothing ought to be more dear unto us the^ our wife, nothing more nigh unto
us, nothing surer joined, and (as a man would say) faster glewed together.
The self same GOD after the general floude, Matrimony renewed after the
floude.
being reconciled to mankind is said to proclaim this law first of all,
not that men should live single, but that they should increase, be
multiplied, and fill the earth. But how I pray you could this thing be,
saving by marriage and lawful coming together? And first least we should allege
here either the liberty of Moses law, or else the necessity of that time:
What other meaning else has that commune and comme^dable report of Christ in
the Gospel, Na^^re work allowe^ by Gods word.
for this cause (says he) shall man leave father and mother and cleave to his
wife. And what is more holy than the reverence and love due unto parents? and
yet the truth promised in Matrimon^e is preferred before it. and by whose
means? Mary by GOD him self. at what time? Forsouth not only among the Iues,
but also among the Christians. Men forsake father and mother and takes
themselfes wholly to their wyfes. The son being past one and twenty years,
is free and at his liberty. Yea the son being abdicated, becomes no son.
But it is death only that parts married folk, if yet death do part them.
Now if the other Sacraments (whereunto the Church of Christ chiefly
leans) be reverently used, who does not see that this Sacrament should
have the most reverence of al, the which was instituted of GOD, and that
first and before all other. As for the other they were instituted upon
yearthe, this was ordained in Paradise: the other were given for a remedy,
this was appoincted for the fellowship of felicity: the other were applied to
man's nature after the fall, this only was given when man was in most
perfect state. If we count those laws good that mortal men have enacted,
shall not the law of Matrimony be most holy, which we have received of
him, by whom we have received life, the which law was then together enacted
when man was first created? And lastly to strengthen this law with an example
and deed done Christ being an young man (as the Story reports) was called
to a Marriage, Marriage beautified by a miracle.
and came thither willyngly with his mother, and not only was he there
present, but also he did honest the feast with a wonderful marvel beginning
first in none other place to work his wounders, and to do his miracles. Why
then I pray you (will one say) how happens it that Christ forbear Marriage?
as though good Seir there are not many things in Christ at the which we
ought rather to marvel, than seek to follow. he was borne and had no father,
he came into this world without his mothers painful travail, he came out of
the grave when it was closed up, what is not in him above nature? Let these
things be propre unto him. Let us that live within the bounds of nature,
reverence those things that are above nature, and follow such things as are
within our reach such as we are able to compass. But yet (you say) he
would be borne of a Uirgine: Of a Uirgine (I grant) but yet of a married
Uirgine. A Uirgyne being a mother did most become GOD, and being married she
did show what was best for us to do. Uirginitie did become her, who being
undefiled, brought him forth by heavenly inspiration that was undefiled. And
yet Joseph being her housbande does commend unto us the law of chaiste
wedlock. Yea, how could he better set out the society in wedlock, than
that willing to declare the secret society of his divine nature with the
body and soul of man, which is wonderful even to the heavenly Aungelles,
and to show his unspeakable and ever abidyng love toward his Church: he
does call him self the Brydegrome, and her the Bryde. Great is the Sacrament
of Matrimony (says Paul) betwixt Christ and his Church. If there had been
under heaven any holier yoke, if there had been any more religiouse covenant
than is Matrimony, without doubt the example thereof had been used. But what
like thing do you read in all Scripture of the syngle life? Marriage honorable.
The Apostle S. Paul in the thirteen Chapi. of his Epistle to the Hebrews
calls Matrimony honorable among all men, and a bed undefiled, and yet the
syngle life is not so much as ones named in the same place. Nay they are not
borne withal that live syngle, except they make some recompense with doing
some greater thing. For else, if a man following the law of nature, do labor
to get children, he is ever to be preferred before him that lives still
unmarried, for none other end, but because he would be out of trouble, and
live more free. We do read that such as are in very deed chaiste of their
body, and live a Uirgines life, have been praised, but the syngle life was
never praised of it self. Now again the law of Moses accurseth the
barrenesse of married folk, and we do read that some were excemmunicated for
the same purpose, and banished from the altar. And wherefore I pray you?
Marie Sir because that they like unprofitable persons, and living only to
them selves, did not increase the world with any issue. In Deuteronomie it
was the chiefest token of Gods blessings unto the Israelites that none
should be barren among them, Deuteronomy. vi.
neither man, nor yet woman. And Lya is thought to be out of Gods favor,
Lia.
because she could not bring forth children. Yea, and in the Psalm of David
an hundredth twenty and eight, it is counted one of the chiefest parts of
bless to be a fruitful woman. Thy wife (says the Psalm) shall be plentiful
like a vine, and thy children like the branches of Olyues, round about thy
Table. Then if the law do condemn, and utterly dissalowe barren Matrimony,
it has always much more condemned the syngle life of Bacchelaures. If the
fault of nature has not escaped blame, the will of man can never want rebuke.
If they are accursed that would have children, and can get none, what
deserve they which never travail to escape barreinesse?

The Hebrews had such a reverence to married folk, Hebrews law for married
folk.
that he which had married a wife, the same year should not be forced to go
on warrefaire. A City is like to fall in ruin, except there be watchemen to
defend it with armor. But assured destruction must here needs follow
except men through the benefit of Marriage supply issue, the which through
mortality do from time to time decaie.

Over and besides this the Romans did lay a penalty upon their back that
lived a syngle life, yea they would not suffer the^ to bear any office in the
co^mure weal. But they that had increased the world with issue, Plutarchus in
the life of Cato.
had a reward by co^imune assent, as men that had deserved well of their
country. The old foren laws did appoincte pe^^lties for such as lived
syngle, the which although they (...) qualified by Constantius the Emperor in
the favor of Christ's religion, yet these laws do declare how little it is for
the commonweals advancement, that either a City should be lessened for
love of sole life, or else that the country should be filled full of bastardes.
And besides this, the Emperor Augustus Augustus Caesar.
being a sore punisher of evil behavior, examined a souldior because he did
not marie his wife according to the laws, the which soldier had hardely
escaped judgment, if he had not got.iij. children by her. And in this point
do the laws of al Emperors seem favorable to married folk, that they
abrogate such vows as were proclaimed to be kept and brought in by Miscella,
Miscella.
and would that after the penalty were remitted, such couenauntes, being
made against al right and conscience, should also be taken of none effect, and
as void in the law. Over and besides this, Ulpianus Vlpianus.
does declare that the matter of Dowries was evermore and in all places the
chiefest above al other, the which should never have been so, except there
came to the common weal some especial profit by marriage. Marriage has ever
been reverenced, but frutefulnesse of body has been much more. for so sone as
one got the name of a father, there descended not only unto him enheirtaunce
of land, but al bequestes, and gooddes of such his friends as dyed intestate.
The which thing appears plain by the Satyr Poet.

Through me thou art made, I^^enal.
an heir to have land,
Thou have al bequestes one with another,
All gooddes and cattle are come to thy hand
Yea gooddes intestate, thou shall have suer.
Now he that had.iij. children, was more favored, for he was exempted from al
outward ambassages. Again he that had five childen was discharged and free
from all personal office, as to have the governance, or patronage of young
ientleme^, the which in those days was a great charge and full of pains
without any profit at al. He that had.xiij. children was free by the Emperor
Iulianus law, not only from being a man at Arms, or Captain over horsemen:
but also from al other offices in the common weal. And the wise founders of
all laws give good reason why such favor was showed to married folk. For what
is more blesseful tha^ to live ever? Now where as nature has denied this,
Matrimony does give it by a certain sleyght, so much as may be. Who does
not desire to be bruted, and live through fame among men hereafter? Now there
is no buildinge of pillars, no exectinge of Arches, no blasinge of Arms, tha^
does more set forth a man's name, then does the increase of children.
Albinus obtained his purpose of the Emperor Adria^, for none other desert of
his, but yt he had begote an housefull of children. And therefore the Emperor
(to the hinderau^ce of his treasure) suffered the children to enter wholye upon
their fathers possession, forasmuch as he knew well that his realm was more
strengthened with increase of children, then with store of money. Again, all
other laws are neither agreynge for all Countries, nor yet used at all times.
Licurgus Licurgus law against vnma^^ed folk.
made a law, that they which married not, should be kept in Somer from the
sight of stage plays, and other wonderful shows, and in winter they should
go naked about the market place, and accursinge them selves, they should
confess openly that they had iustlye deserved such punishment, because they
did not live according to the laws. And without any more a do, will ye know
how much our old Auncesters heretofore esteemed Matrimony? Way well, and
consider the punishment for breaking of wedlock. Punishme^tes appointed for
breaking of wedlock.
The Greeks heretofore thought it mete to punish the breach of Matrimony
with battle that continued ten y^^es. The Grecians reuengement for adu^^trye.
Yea, moreover not only by the Roman law, but also by the Hebrews and
strangers, aduouterous persons were punished with death. If a thief
paid.iiij. times the value of that which he took away, he was delivered, but
an aduouterers offense, was punished with the sword. Emonge the Hebrews, The
Hebrews stoned Aduouterers.
the people stoned the aduouterers to death, with their own hands, because
they had broken that, without which the world could not continue. And yet they
thought not this sore law sufficient inoughe, but granted further to run him
through without law, that was taken in aduoutrye, Lawful for the married man
among the Hebrews to kill the aduoutere^
as who should say, they granted that to the grief of married folk, the
which they would hardlye grant to him that stood in his own defense for
saufegarde of his life, as though he offended more haynously that ^oke a man's
wife, then he did that took away a man's life. Assuredly wedlock must neades
seem to be a most holy thing, consideringe that bring once broken, it
must neades be purged with man's blood, the revenger whereof is not forced to
abide either law or judge, the which liberty is not granted any to use
upon him that has killed either his father or his mother. But what do we with
these Laws written? This is the law of Nature, not written in the Tables of
Brass, but firmelye prynted in our minds, the which Law, whosoever does
not obey, he is not worthy to be called a man, much less shall he be
counted a Citezen. For if to live well (as the Stoikes wittelye do dispute) is
to follow the course of Nature, what thing is so agreynge with Nature as
Matrimonye? Matrimony natural
For there is nothing so natural not only unto mankind, but also unto all
other living creatures, as it is for every one of them to keep their own
kind from decay, and through increase of issue, to make the whole kind
immortal.

The which thing (all men know) can never be dooen, without wedlock and
carnal copulation. It were a foul thing, that brute beasts should obey
the law of Nature, and men like Gyauntes should fight against Nature.
Whose work if we would narowly look upon, we shall perceive that in all
things here upon earth, she would there should be a certain spice of
marriage. I will not speak now of Trees, wherein (as Pliny most certainelye
writes) there is found Marriage Marriage emonge trees.
with some manifest difference of both kinds, that except the housbande
Tree do lean with his boughs even as though he should desire copulation
upon the womenne Trees growing round about him: they would else altogether
ware barraine. The same Pliny also does report that certain aucthoures do
think there is both male and female in all things that the Earth yeldeth.
Marriage among precious stones.
I will not speak of precious stones, wherein the same aucthoure affirms,
and yet not he only neither, that there is both male and female emonge
them. And I pray you has not GOD so knitte all things together with
certain lynckes, that one ever seems to have neade of another? What say you
of the sky or firmamente, that is ever stirrynge with contiuuall mouinge?
Marriage between the fir^^ament and the earth.
Does it not play the part of a husband, while it puffs up the Earth,
the mother of all things, and makes it fruitful with castinge seed (as a man would say) upon it. But I think ^ over tedious to run over all
things. And to what ^^de are these things spoken? Marye sir, because we might
understand that through Marriage, all thing^s are, and do still continue, and
without the same all things do decay, and come to naught. The old ancient
and most wise Po^tes do feyne (who had ever a desire under the color of
fables The fable of Giauntes that fought against Nature.
to set forth precepts of Philosophy) that the Giauntes which had snakes
fete, and were borne of thearth, builded great hills that mounted up to
heaven, minding thereby to be at utter defiaunce with God and all his
aungelles. And what means this fable? Marye it shows unto us, that certain
fierce and savage men, such as were unknown, could not abide wedlock for
any worlds good, and therefore they were stricken down headelonge with
lighteninge, that is to say: they were utterly destroyed, when they sought
to ^schue that, whereby the weal and saulfegarde of all mankind only does
^onsiste. Now again, the same Poets do declare that Orpheus Orpheu^.
the musician and minstrell, did stir and make soft with his pleasant
melodye the most hard rocks and stones. And what is their meaning herein?
Assuredlye nothing else, but that a wise and well spoken manne, did call
back hand hearted men, such as lived abroad like Beasts, from op^n
whoredom, and brought them to live after the most holy laws of Matrimonye.
Thus we se plainelye, that such a one as has no mind of Marriage, seems to
be no man, but rather a Stone, an enemy to Nature, a rebel to God him self,
seking through his own ^olye, his last end and destruction.

Well, let us go on still (seeing we are fallen into fables that are not fables
altogether) when the same Orpheus in the mids of Hell, forced Pluto him self
and all the deuilles there, to grant him leave to carye away his wife
Euridice, what other thing do we think that the Poets meant, but only to set
forth unto us the love in wedlock the which even among the Deuilles was
compted good and Godly. The most wicked can not chose but allow marriage.


And this also makes well for the purpose, that in old time they made Jupiter
Gamelius, the God of marriage, and Juno Lucina lady midwife, to help such
women as labored in child bed, being fondlye deceived, and supersticiouslie
erring in naming of the Gods, and yet not missinge the truth, in declaring
that Matrimony is an holy thing, and mete for the worthiness thereof, that the
Gods in heaven should have care over it. Emonge diverse countries, and diverse
men, there have been diverse laws and customs used. Yet was there never any
country so savage, none so far from all humanity, where the name of
wedlock was not counted holy, and had in great reverence. All nations ever
esteemed marriage.
This the Thracia^, this the Sarmate, this the Indian, this the Grecian, this
the Latin, yea, this the Britain that dwells in the furtheste part of all
the world, or if there be any that dwell beyond them have ever counted to be
most holy. And why so? Marye because that thing must neades be commune to
all, which the commune mother unto all, has graffed in us all, and has so
thorowlye graffed the same in us, that not only stockedoues and Pigions, but
also the most wild beasts have a natural felinge of this thing. For the
Lions are gentle against the Lioness. The Tigers fight for safeguard of their
young whelps. The Ass runs through the hot fire (which is made to keep her
away) for safegarde of her issue. And this they call the law of Nature, the
which as it is of most strength and force, so it spreads abroad most
largely. Therefore as he is counted no good gardener, that being content with
things present, does diligently proyne his old trees, and has no regard
either to ympe or graffe young settes: because the self same Orcharde (though
it be never so well trimmed) must needs decay in time, and all the trees dye
within few years: So he is not to be counted half a diligent citizen, that
being content with the present multitude, has no regard to increase the
number. Therefore there is no one man that ever has been counted a worthy
Citezen, who has not labored to get children, and sought to bring them up in
Godliness.

Emonge the Hebrews The Hebrews and Persians had a number of wives
and the Persians he was most commended, that had most wives, as though the
country were most beholding to him, that increased the same with the greatest
number of children. Do you seek to be compted more holy then Abraham Abraham.
him self? Well, he should never have been compted the father of many
Nations, and that through Gods furtheraunce, if he had forborne the company of
his wife. Do you look to be reckened more devout then Jacob? Jacob.
He doubts nothing to ransom Rach^l from her great bondage. Will you be
taken for wiser then Solomon? Solomon.
And yet I pray you what a number of wives kept he in one house? Will you be
compted more chast^ the^ Socrates, Socrates
who is reported to bear at home with zanti^^e that very shrewe, and yet not
so much therefore (as he is wont to ieste according to his old manner)
because he might learn patience at home, but also because he might not seem
to come behind with his duty in doing the will of nature. For he being a man, such a one (a^ Appollo judged him by his Oracle to be wise) did well
^erceyu^ that he was got for this cause, borne for this cause, and therefore
bound to yield so much unto nature. For if the old ancient Philosophers
have said well, if our diuin^s have proved the thing not without reason, if it
be used every where for a commune proverb, and almost in every man's mouth,
that neither God nor yet Nature, did ever make any thing in vain: Why did he
give us such members, how happens we have such lust, and such power to get
issue, if the single life and none other be altogether praise worthy? If one
should bestow upon you a very good thing, as a bow, a coat, or a sword,
al men would think you were not worthy to have the thing, if either you
could not, or you would not use it, and occupy it.

And where as all other things are ordained upon such great considerations,
it is not like that Nature slepte or forgate her self when she made this one
thing. And now here will some say, that this foul and filthye desire, and
styrringe unto lust, came never in by Nature, but through Sin: for whose
words I pass not a straw, saying their sayings are as false, as God is
true. For I pray you was not Matrimonye instituted (whose work can not be done
without these members) before there was any Sin. And again, whence have
all other brute beasts their prouocations? of Nature, or of Sin? A man
would think they had them of Nature. But shall I tell you at a word, we
make that fil^hye by our own Imagination, which of the own nature is good
and Godly. Or else if we will examine matters, (not according to the opinion
of men, but weye them as they are of their own Nature) how chau^ceth it
that we think it less filthye, to eat, to chewe, to digest, to emptye the
body, and to sleep, then it is to use carnal copulation, such as is lawful,
and permitted. Nay sir (you will say,) we must follow virtue, rather then
Nature. A gentle dishe. As though any thing can be called virtue that is
contrary unto Nature. Assuredly there is nothing that can be perfectlye got,
either through labor, or through learning, if man ground not his doings
altogether upon Nature.

But you will live an Apostles life, such as some of them did that lived
single, and exhorted other to the same kind of life. Tushe, let them follow
the Apostles that are A^ostles in deed, whose office seeing it is both to
teach and bring up the people in Gods doctrine, they are not able to
discharge their duties both to their flock, and to their wife and familye.
Although it is well known that some of the A^ostles had wives. But beit that
Bishops live single, or grant we them to have no wives. What do you follow
the profession of the Apostles, being one that is farthest in life from their
Uocation, being both a temporal manne, and one that lives of your own.
They had this Pardon granted them to be clean void from Marriage, to the
end they might be at leisure to get unto Christ a more plentiful number of
his children. Let this be the order of Priests and Monks, who belike have
entered into the Religion and rule of the Essens, (such as among the Jews
lothed Marriage) but your calling is an other way. Nay, but (you will say)
Christ him self has compted them blessed, which have gelded them sel^es
for the Kingdom of GOD. Sir, I am content to admit the authority, but
thus I expound the meaning. First, I think that this doctrine of Christ
did chieflye belong unto that time, when it behooved them chieflye to be void
of all cares and business of this World. They were feign to travail into all
places, for the persecutoures were ever ready to lay hands on them. But
now the world is so, that a man can find in no place the vprightnes of
behauioure less stained, then emonge married folk. Let the swarms of Monks
and Nun^es set forth their order never so much, let them boaste and brag
their bealies full, of their Ceremonies and church service, wherein they
chieflye pass all other: yet is wedlock (being well and truly kept) a
most holy kind of life.

Again, would to God they were gelded in very deed, what soever they be, that
color their noughtye living with such a iolye name of geldinge, living in
much more filthye lust under the cloak and pretense of chastity. Neither can
I report for very shame, into how filthye offenses they do often fall, that
will not use that remedy which Nature has granted unto manne. And last of
all, where do you read that ever Christ commanded any manne to live ^ingle,
and yet he does openly forbid diuorcement. Then he does not worste of all
(in my Judgment) for the commune weal of Mankind, that ^raunteth liberty
unto Priests: Priests marriage.
yea, and Monks also (if neade be) to mary, and to take them to their wives,
namely seeing there is such an unreasonable number every where, emonge whom I
pray you how many be there that live chaste. How much better were it to turn
their concubines into wives, that where as they have them now to their great
shame with an unquiet conscience, they might have the other openly with good
report, and get children, and also bring them up godly, of whom they them
selves not only might not be ashamed, but also might be counted honest men
for them.

And I think the bishops officers would have procured this matter long
ago, if they had not found greater gaiues by priests lemmans, the^ they were
like to have by priests wives. But virginity Virginity.
forsothe is an heavenly thing, it is an Angels life. I answer, wedlock is
a manly thing, such as is mete for man. And I talk now as man unto man. I
grant you, that virginity is a thing praise worthy, but so far I am
content to speak in praise of it, if it be not so praised, as though the just
should altogether follow it, for if men commonly should begin to like it, what
thing could be invented more perilous to a commune weal then virginity. Now
be it that other deserve great praise for their maydenheade, you
notwithstanding can not want great rebuke* seeing it lies in your hands to
keep that house from decay whereof you lineallye descended, and to continue
still the name of your auncesters, who deserve most worthily to be known for
ever. And last of all, he deserves as much praise, as they which keep their
maydenhode: that kepes him self true to his wife, and marieth rather for
increase of children, then to satisfy his lust For if a brother be commanded
to stir up sede to his brother that dies without issue, will you suffer the
hope of all your stock to decay, namely saying there is none other of your
name and stock, but your self alone, to continue the posterity. I know well
inoughe, that the ancient fathers have set forth in great volumes, the
praise of virginity, emonge whom, Hierome Hierom^ praise upon Virginity.
does so ^ake on, and prayseth it so much above the stars, that he fell in
manner to deprave Matrimony, and therefore was required of Godly Bishops to
call back his words that he had spoken. But let us bear with such heat for
that time sake, I would wish now, that they, which exhort young folk every
where, and without respect (such as yet know not themselves) to live a single
life, and to profess virginity: that they would bestow the same labor, in
setting forth the descripcion of chaste and pure wedlock. And yet those bodies
that are in such great love with virginity, are well contented that men
should fight against the Turks, which in number are infinitely greater then
we are. And now if these men think right in this behalf, it must needs be
thought right good and godly, to labor earnestly for children gettyng, and to
substitute youth from time to time, for the maintenance of war. Except
parauenture they think that Gunnes, Bills, Pikes, and nauies, should be
provided for battaill, and that men stand in no stead at all with them. They
also allow it well, that we should kill miscreaunt and Heathen parents, that
the rather their children not knowing of it, might be Baptized and made
Christians. Now if this be right and lawful, how much more ientlenesse
were it to have children Baptized, being borne in lawful marriage. There is no
nation so savage, nor yet so hard hearted, within the whole world, but the same
abhors murderyng of infauntes, and new borne babes. Kings also and hedde
rulers, do likewise punish most straightly, all such as seek means to be
delivered before their time, or use Physic to wax barren, and never to bear
children. What is the reason? Marie they count small difference betwixt him,
that kills the child, so sone as it begins to quicken: and the other, that
seeks all means possible, never to have any child at all. The self same thing
that either withers and dries away in thy body, or else putrifieth within
thee, and so hurts greatly thy health, yea, that self same, which falls
from thee in thy sleep, would have been a man, if thou thy self had been
a man. The Hebrews Hebrews.
abhor that man, and wish him Gods curse, that (being commanded to marie
with the wife of his dedde brother) did cast his seed upon the ground least
any issue should be had, and he was ever thought unworthy to live here upon
yerth, that would not suffer that that child to live, which was quick in the
mothers womb. But I pray you how little do they swerve from this offense
which by^d themselfes to live barrern, all the days of their life? Do they
no^ seem to kill as many men, as were like to have been borne, if they had
bestowed their e^deuors to have got children? Now I pray you, if a man had
land that were very fat and fertile, and suffered the same for lack of
maneryng, for ever to wax barren, should he not, or were he not worthy to be
punished by the laws, considering it is for the commonweals behoue, that
every man should well and truly husband his own. If that man be punished, who
little hedeth the maintenance of his Tillage, the which although it be never
so well manered, yet it yeldeth nothing else but wheat barley, bea^es, and
peason: what punishment is he worthy to suffer, that refuses to Plough that
land, which being tilled, yeldeth children. And for ploughyng land, it is
nothing else, but painful toylyng from time to time, but in gettyng children,
there is pleasure, which being ordained, as a ready reward for pai^es taking,
asks a short trauaill for all the tillage. Therefore if the workyng of nature,
if honesty, if virtue, if inward zeal, if Godliness, if duty may move
you, why can you not abide that, which God has ordained, nature has
established, reason does counsel, Gods word and man's word do commend,
all laws do command, the consent of all nations does allow, whereunto also
the example of all good men, does exhort you. That if every honest man should
desire many things, that axe^ most painful for none other cause, but only
for that they are honest, no doubt but matrimony ought above all other, most
of all to be desired, as the which we may doubt, whether it have more
honesty in it, or bring more delight and pleasure with it. for what can be
more pleasant, then to live with her, with whom not only you shall be joined,
in fellowship of faithfulness, and most* hearty good will, but also you shall be
coupled together most assuredly, with the company of both your bodies? If we
count that great pleasure, which we receive of the good will of our friends
and acquaintance, how pleasau^^ a thing is it above all other, to have one,
with whom you may break the botome of your heart, with who^ ye may talk as
freely, as with your self, into whose t^uste, you may saufly commit your self,
such ^o^e as thinks al your goods to be her charge. Now what an heavenly
b^isse (^row you) is the company of man and wife together, seeing that in all
the world, there can nothing be found, either of greater weight and
worthi^esse, or else of more st^engthe and assurance. For with friends, we
join only with them in good will, and faith fullness of mind, but with a
wife, we are matched together, both in heart and mind, in body and soul,
sealed together with the bond and league of an holy Sacrament, and partyng all
the goods we have, indifferently betwixt us. Again when other are matched
together in friendship, do we not see what dissemblyng they use, what falshode
they practice, and what deceiptfull parts they play? Yea, even those who^ we
think to be our most assured friends, as swallows fly away when summer is
past, so they hide their heddes, when fortune gynnes to fail. And often times
when we get a new friend, we straight forsake our old. We hear tell of very
few, that have cont^nued friends, even till their last end. Whereas the
faithfulness of a wife, is not stained with deceipte, nor dusked with any
disse^bly^g, nor yet parted with any change of the world but disseuered at
last by death only, no not by death neither. She forsakes and settes light by
father and mother, sister and brother for your sake, and for your love only.
She only passes upon you, she puttes her trust in you, and leans wholly upon
you, yea, she desires to die with you. Have you any worldly substance? You
have one that will maintain it, you have one that will increase it. Have you
none? You have a wife that will get it. If you live in prosperitee, your joy
is doubled: if the world go not with you, you have a wife to put you in good
comfort, to be at your commandment, and ready to serve your desire, and to
wish that such evil as has happened unto you, might chance unto her self.
And do you think that any pleasure in all the world, is able to be compared
with such a goodly fellowship and familier living together? If you keep home,
your wife is at hand to keep your company, the rather that you might feel no
werines of living al alone, if you ride forth, you have a wife to bid you fare
well with a kiss longyng much for you, being from home, and glad to bid you
well come at your next return. A sweet mate in your youth, a thankful
comfort in your age. Every society or companiyng together, is delitefull and
wisshed for by nature of all men, forasmuch as nature has ordained us to
be, sociable, friendly, and loving together. Now how can this fellowship of man and wife, be otherwise then most pleasant, where all things are common
together betwixt them both. Now I think he is most worthy, to be despised
above all other, that is borne, as a man would say for himself, that lives to
himself, that seeks for himself, that spares for himself, makes cost only
upon himself, that loves no man, and no man loves him. Would not a man
think that such a monster, were mete to be cast out of all men's company
(with Tymon that cares for no man) into the midst of the sea. Timon a
deadly hater of all company.
Neither do I here utter unto you those pleasures of the body, the which,
whereas nature has made to be most pleasant unto man, yet these great witted
men, rather hide them, and dissemble them (I cannot tell how) then utterly
contempne them. And yet what is he that is so sower of wit, and so drowpyng
of brain (I will not say) blockhedded, or insensate, that is not moved with
such pleasure, namely if he may have his desire, without offense either of
God or man, and without hynderaunce of his estimacion. Truly I would take
such a one, not to be a man, but rather to be a very stone. Although this
pleasure of the body, is the least part of all those good things, that are in
wedlock. But be it that you pass not upon this pleasure, and think it
unworthy for man to use it, although in deed we deserve not the name of man
without it, but compte i^ among the least and vttermoste profits, that
wedlock has: Now I pray you, what can be more heartily desired, then chaste
love, what can be more holy, what can be more honest? And among all these
pleasures, you get unto you a ioly sort of kinsfolk, in whom you may take
much delight. You have other parents, other brethren, sisterne, and nephews.
Nature in deed can give you but one father, and one mother: By marriage you get
unto you another father, and another mother, who cannot choose, but love you
with all their hearts, as the which have put into your hands, their aw^e
flesh and blood. Now again, what a joy shall this be unto you, when your most
fair wife, shall make you a father, in bringyng furthe a fair child unto
you, where you shall have a pretty little boy, runnyng up and down your
house, such a one as shall express your look, and your wives look, such a
one as shall call you dad, with his sweet lispyng words. Now last of all, when
you are thus lynked in love, the same shall be so fastened and bound together,
as though it were with the Adamant stone, that death it self ca^ never be able
to undo it. Thrice happy are they (quod Horace) yea, more then thrice happy
are they, whom these sure bands do hold, neither though they are by evil
reporters, full often set a so^der, shall love be unloosed betwixt them two,
till death them both depart. You have them that shall comfort you, in your
latter days, that shall close up your iyes, when God shall call you, that
shall bury you, and fulfill all things belongyng to your Funeral, by whom you
shall seem, to be new borne. For so long as they shall live, you shall need
never be thought ded your self. The goods and lands that you have got, go
not to other heirs, then to your own. So that unto such as have fulfilled
all things, that belong unto man's life, death it self cannot seem bitter.
Old age comes upon us all, will we, or nill we, and this way nature provided
for us, that we should wax young again in our children, and nephews. For, what
man can be grieved, that he is old, when he sees his own countenance which
he had being a child, to appear lively in his son? Death is ordained for all
mankind, and yet by this means only, nature by her providence, myndeth unto
us a certain immortality, while the increases one thing upon another ^uen as
a young graffe buddeth out, when the old tree is cut down. Neither can he seem
to dye, that, when God calls him, leaves a young child behind him. But I
know well enough, what you say to your self, at this while of my long talk.
Marriage is an happy thing, if all things hap well, what and if one have a
curste wife? What if she be light? What if his children be ungracious? Thus I
see you will remember all such men, as by marriage have been undone. Well, go
to it, tell as many as you can, and spare not: you shall find all these were
faults of the persons, and not the faults of Marriage. For believe me, none
have evil wifes, Evil wifes happen to evil men only.
but such as are evil me^. And as for you sir, you may choose a good wife, if
ye list. But what if she be crooked, and marde altogether, for lack of good
orderyng. A good honest wife, may be made an evil woman, by a naughty
husband, and an evil wife, has been made a good woman, by an honest man. We
cry out of wifes untruly, and accuse them without cause. There is no man (if
you will believe me) that ever had an evil wife, but through his own default.
Now again an honest father, brings furthe honest children, like unto himself.
Although even these children, how so ever they are borne, commonly become such
men, as their education and bringyng up is. Jealousy unknown to wise men.
And as for ielousy you shall not need to fear that fault at all. For none be
troubled with such a disease, but those only that are foolish lovers.
Chaste, godly, and lawful love, never knew what jealousy meant. What mean you
to call to your mind, and remember such sore tragedies and doulefull
dealings, as have been betwixt manne and wife. Such a woman being naught of
her body, has caused her husband to lose his hedde, another has poisoned her
goodma^, the third with her churlishe dealyng (which her husband could not
bear) has been his outer undoing, and brought him to his end. But I pray
you sir, why do you not rather think upon Cornelia, Cornelia.
wife unto Tiberius Graechus? Why do ye not mind that most worthy wife, of
that most unworthy man Alcestes? Alcestes wife.
Why remember ye not Iulia Iulia.
Pompeyes wife, or Porcia Por^ia.
Brutus wife? Lucretia.
And why not Artemisia, Artemisia.
a woman most worthy, ever to be remembered? Why not Hipsicratea, Hipsicratea.
wife unto Mithridates king of Pontus? Why do ye not call to remembrance the
ientle nature of Tertia Aemilia? ^ertia Aemilia.
Why do ye not consider the faithfulness of Turia? Turia.
Why comes not Lucretia and Lentula Lentula.
to your remembrance? and why not Arria? A^ria.
why not thousands other, whose chastity of life, and faithfulness toward
their husbands could not be changed, no not by death. A good woman (you will
say) is a rare bird, and hard to be found in all the world. Well then six,
imagine your self worthy to have a rare wife, such as few men have. A good
woman (says the wiseman) is a good portion. Prouer. x.
Be you bold to hope for such a one, as is worthy your manners. The chifest
poyncte stands in this, what manner of woman you choose, how you use her, and
how you order your self toward her. But libertee (you will say) is much
more pleasant: for, who soever is married, wereth fetters upon his legs, or
rather carries a clogge, the which he can never shake of, till death part
their yoke. To this I answer, I ca^ not see what pleasure a man shall have to
live alone. For if liberty be delitefull, I would think you should get a mate
unto you, with who^ you should part stakes, and make her priuey of all your
joys. Neither can I see any thing more free, then is the servitude of these
two, where the one is so much beholding and bound to the other, that neither
of the^ both would be louse, though they might. You are bound unto him, who^
you receive into your friendship: But in marriage neither party finds fault,
that their liberty is taken away from them. Yet ones again your are sore
afraied, least when your children are taken away by death, you fall to mourning
for want of issue* well sir, if you fear lack of issue, you must marie a wife
for the self same purpose, the which only shall be a mean, that you shall not
want issue. But what do you search so diligently, naie so carefully, all the
inco^modities of matrimony, as though single life had never any inco^moditie
joined with it at al. As though there were any kind of life in all the world, that
is not subject to al evils that may happen. He must needs go out of this world,
y^ lokes to live without felyng of any grief. And in comparison of y^ life which
ye saints of god shall have in heaven, this life of man is to be co^pted a
death, and not a life. But if you consider things within the compass of
mankind, there is nothing either more saufe, more quiet, more pleasant, more
to be desired, or more happy, then is the married man's life. How many do you
se, that having ones felt the swetnesse of wedlock, does not desire eftsoon
to enter into the same? My friend Mauricius, who^ you know to be a very wise
man, did not he, the next monethe after his wife died (whom he loved derely)
get him straight a new wife? Not that he was impacient of his lust, and could
not forbear any longer, but he said plainly, it was no life for him, to be
without a wife, which should be with him as his yoke fellow, and companion in
all things. And is not this the fourth wife, that our friend Iouius has
married? And yet he so loved the other, when they were on live that none was able
to comfort him in his heaviness: and now he hastened so much (when one was
ded) to fill up and supply the void room of his chamber, as though he had
loved the other very little. But what do we talk so much of the honesty and
pleasure herein, seeing that not only profit does advise us, but also need
does earnestly force us, to seek marriage. Necessitee enforces marriage.
Let it be forbidden, that man and woman shall not come together, and within
few years, all mankind must needs decay for ever. When zerxes zerxes.
king of the Persians, beheld from an high place, that great army of his,
such as almost was incredible, some said he could not forbear weeping,
considering of so many thousands, there was not one like to be a live, within
seventy years after. Now why should not we consider the same of all mankind,
which he meant only of his army. Take away marriage, and how many shall
remain after a hundredth years, of so many realms, countrees, kingdoms,
citees, and all other assemblies that be of men, throughout the whole world? on
now, praise we a gods name the single life above the nocke, the which is like
for ever to vndooe all mankind. What plague, what infeccion can either heaven
or hell, send more harmefull unto mankind? What greater evil is to be feared
by any flood? What could be looked for, more sorrowful, although the flame of
Phaeton should set the world on fire again? And yet by such sore tempests,
many things have been saved harmless, but by the single life of man, there
ca^ be nothing left at all. We se what a sort of diseases, what diuersitee of
missehappes do night and day lie in wait to lessen the small number of
mankind. How many does the plague destroy, how many do the Se^s swallowe,
how many does battle snatche up? For I will not speak of the daily dyeng
that is in all places. Death takes her flight every where round about, she
runs over them, she catches them up, she hasteneth as much as she can
possible to destroy al mankind* and now do we so highly commend syngle life
and eschew Marriage? Except happily we like the profession of the Essens (of
whom Josephus speaks that Essens ha^ed Marriage.
they will neither have wife, nor servants) or the Dulopolitans, called
otherwise the Rascalles and Slaves of Cities, Josephus xv^^^ cap. li^. ii.
the which company of them is alwaie increased and continued by a sort of
vagabounde peasauntes that continue, and be from time to time still together. Do
we look that some Iuppiter should give us that same gift, the which he is
reported to have given unto Bees that we should have issue without
procreacion, and gather with our mouths out of flowers, the seed of our
posterity? Or else do we desire, that like as the Poets feyne Minerua to be
borne out of Iuppiters head: in like sort there should children leap out of
our heads? Or last of al do we look according as the old fables have been,
that men should be borne out of the yerth, out of rocks, out of stocks,
stones, and old trees. Many things breed out of the earth without man's
labor at all. Young shrubbes grow and shoute up under the shadow of their
graundsyre trees. But nature would have man to use this one way of encreasyng
issue* that through labor of both the housband and wife, mankind might still
be kept from destruction. But I promise you if all men took after you, and
still forbear to marie: I can not see but that these things which you wonder
at, and esteem so much, could not have been at al. Do you yet esteem this
syngle life so greatly? Do you praise so much virginity above al other? Why
man, there will be neither syngle men, nor virgins a live, if men leave to
marie, and mind not procreation. why do you the^ prefer virginity so much
why set it you so hye, if it be the undoing of all the whole world? It has
been much commended, but it was for that time, and in a few. God would have
men to see as though it were a pattern, or rather a picture of that heavenly
habitacion, where neither any shall be married, nor yet any shall give theirs to
Marriage. But when things be given for an example, a few may suffice, a number
were to no purpose. For even as al grounds though they be very fruitful, are
not therefore turned into tillage for man's use and commodity, but part lies
fallowe, and is never mannered, part is kept and cherised to like the ^ye and
for man's pleasure: and yet in all this plenty of things, where so great store
of land is, nature suffers very little to wax barren: But now if none
should be tilled, and plowe m^n went to play, who sees not but that we
should al sterue, and be feign shortly to eat acornes: Even so, it is
praise worthy if a few live syngle, but if al should seek to live syngle, so
many as be in this world, it were to great an inconvenience. Now again be it
that other deserve worthy praise that seek to live a virgins life, yet it
must needs be a great fault in you. Other shall be thought to seek a pureness
of life, you shall be coumpted a parricide, or a murderer of your stock: that
whereas you may by honest marriage increase your posterity: you suffex it to
decaie for ever, through your wilful single life. A man may having a house full
of children, commend one to God to live a virgin al his life. The plowe man
offers to God the tenthes of his own, and not his whole croppe al together:
But you Sir, must remember that there is none left alive of al your stock,
but your self alone. And now it mattereth nothing whether you kill, or refuse
to save that creature, which you only might save and that with ease. But you
will follow the example of your sister, and live syngle as she does. And yet me
thinks you should chefely even for this self same cause, be afraied to live
single. For whereas there was hope of issue heretofore in you both, now ye
see there is no hope left but in you only. Be it that your sister may be borne
withal, because she is a woman, and because of her years, for sue being but a
girl and overcome with sorrow for loss of her mother took the wrong way, she
cast her self done headlong, and became a Nun at the earnest suit either of
folishe women, or else of doultishe Munkes: but you being much cl^er, must
evermore remember that you are a man. She would needs dye together with her
auncesters, you must labor that your auncesters shall not dye at all. Your
sister would not do her duty, but shranke away: think you now with your
self that you have. ij. offices to discharge. The daughters of Loathe Daughters
of Loath.
never stuck at the matter to have a do with their dronken father, thinkyng it
better with wicked whore dome and inceste to provide for their posterity, than
to suffer their stock to die for ever and will not you with honest, Godly, and
christ Marriage (which shall be without trouble and turn to your great
pleasure) have a regard to your posterity most like else for ever to decaie?
Therefore, let them on Gods name follow the purpose of chaist Hippolitus, let
them live a syngle life, that either can be married men, and yet can get no
children, or else such, whose stock may be continued by means of other their
kynsfolke or at the least whose kyndred is such that it were better for the
commune weal, they were all dead, than that any of that name should be a
live, or else such men, as the euerliuyng God of his most especial goodness
has chosen out of the whole world to execute some heavenly office, whereof
there is a marueilouse small number. But whereas you according to the report of
a Physician that neither is unlearned, The conclusion.
nor yet is any liar, are like to have many children hereafter, seeing also you
are a man of great lands, and revenues by your auncesters, the house whereof
you came, being both right honorable and right ancient, so that you could
not suffer it to perish without your great offense, and great harm to the
commune weal: again seeing you are of lusty years, and very comely for your
personage, and may have a maid to your wife such a one as none of your
country has known any to be more absolute for all things, coming of as
noble a house as any of them, a chaiste one, a sobre one, a Godly one, an
excellent fair one, having with her a wonderful Dowry: seeing also your
friends desire you, your kynsfolke we^e to win you, your Cosyns and aliaunce
are earnest in hand with you, your country calls and cries upon you: the
ashes of your auncesters from their graves make hearty suit unto you, do you
yet hold back, do you still mind to live a syngle life? If a thing were asked
you that were not half honest, or the which you could not well compass, yet
at the instaunce of your friends, or for the love of your kynsfolke, you would
be overcome, and yield to their requests: Then how much more reasonable were
it that the weeping tears of your friends, the hearty good will of your
country, the dear love of your elders might win that thing at your hands,
unto the which both the law of God and man does exhort you, nature pricketh
you forward, reason leads you, honesty allureth you, so many commodities
call you, and last of all, necessity it self does constrain you. But here an
end of al reasonyng. For I trust you have now and a good while ago changed
your mind through mine advise, and taken your self to better counsel.

Of Exhortation.
THe places of exhortyng Exhortyng.
and dehortyng, are the same which we use in perswadyng and dissuadyng,
saving that he which uses persuasion, seeks by arguments to compass his
devise: he that labors to exhort, does stir affections.

Erasmus shows these to be the most especial places that do perteine unto
exhortation.

Praise, or Commendacion. Expectation of al men. Hope of victory. Hope of
renown. Fear of shame. Greatness of reward. Rehersall of examples, in all
ages, and especially of things lately done.
PRaisyng Praisyng ^ d^ede,
is either of the man, or of some deed done. We shall exhort men to do the
thing, if we show them that is a worthy attempt, a Godly enterprise, and
such as few men hitherto have adventured.

In praisyng a man, Praisyng a man, the rather to encourage him.
we shall exhort him to go forward, considering it agrees with his wounted
ma^hode, and that hitherto he has not slacked to hasarde boldly upon the best
and worthiest deeds, requiryng him to make this end aunswereable to his
most worthy begynnynges, that he may end with honor, which has so long
continued in such renown. For it were a foul shame to lose honor through
folly, which has been got through virtue, and to appear more slack in
keeping it, than he seemed ^arefull at the first to atteine it.

Again whose name is renowned, his doings from time to time will be thought
more wonderful, and greater promises will men make unto them selves of such
men's adventures in any commune affairs, than of others, whose virtues are not
yet known. A notable Master of fence is marueilouse to behold, and men look
earnestly to see him do some wonder, how much more will they look when they
hear tell that a noble Captain, and an aduenturouse Prince shall take upon him
the defense, and sauegarde of his country against the ragyng attemptes of his
enemies? Therefore a noble man can not but go forward with most earnest will,
seeing al men Expectacion of al men.
have such hope in him, and count him to be their only comfort, their
fortress, and defe^se. And the rather to encourage such right worthy, we may
put them in good hope to compass their attempt, ^ope of victory.
if we show them that God is an assured guide unto all those, that in an
honest quarrel adventure them selves, and show their manly stomach. Satan him
self the greatest adversary that man has, yeldeth like a captive, when GOD
does take our part, much sooner shall al other be subject unto him, and cry
Peccaui. for if God be with him, what matereth who be against him?

Now when victory is got, what honor does ensewe? here opens a large
field to speak of renown, fame, and endless honor. (...)
In all ages the worthiest men have always adventured their carcases for the
sauegarde of their country, thynkyng it better to dye with honor, than to live
with shame. Again the ruin of our Realm should put us to more shame, Shame
follows fearfulness, when manhood is thought nedeful.
than the loss of our bodies should turn us to smarte. For our honesty being
stained, the pain is endless, but our bodies being gored, either the wound
may sone be healed, or else our pain being sone ended, the glory endures
for ever.

Lastely he that helps the nedelesse, defends his poor neighbors, Heaven,
the reward of hault Capitoines.
and in the favor of his country, bestows his life: will not God besides al
these, place him where he shall live for ever, especially seeing he has done
all these enterprises in faith and for Christ's sake?

Now in all ages to reckon such as have been right sovereign, and victoriouse,
what name got the worthy Scipio that withstood the rage of Annibal? what
Brute has Caesar for his most worthy co^questes? What triu^phe of glory does
sound in all men's ears upon the only namyng of mighty Alexander, and his
father King Philippe? And now to come home, what head ca^ express the renowned
Henry the fifte King of England of that name after the conquest? What wit
can set out the wonderful wysedom of Henry the seventh, and his great
foresight to epsy mischief like to ensewe, and his politic devises to
escape dangers to subdewe rebels, and mainteyne peace?

Of mouyng pity, and stirryng men to show mercy.
LIkewise we may exhort men to take pity of the fatherless, Mo^yng of pity.
the widow, and the oppressed innocent, if we set before their iyes the
lamentable afflictions the tyrannouse wrongs, and the miserable calamities,
which these poor wretches do sustain. For if flesh and blood move us to
love our children, our wyfes, and our kynsfolke: much more should the spirit
of God and Christ's goodness toward man stir us to love our neighbors most
e^tirely. These exh^rtacions the preachers of God may most aptely use, when
they open his Gospel to the people, and have just cause to speak of such
matters.

Of Commendyng.
IN commendyng The manner of commendyng*
a man, we use the report of his wit, honesty, faithful service,
painful labor, and careful nature to do his masters will, or any such
like, as in the Epistles of Tullie there are examples infinite.

Of Comfortyng.
NOw after al these, the weak would be comforted The manner of comfortyng.
and the soroufull would be cherised that there grief might be aswaged, and
the passions of man brought under the obedience of reason. The use hereof is
great, as well in private troubles, as in commune miseries. As in loss of
gooddes, in lack of friends, in sickness, in darthe, and in death. In all
which losses, the wise use so to comfort the weak, that they give them not
just cause even at the first to refuse all comfort. Comforty^g two ways ^sed.
And therefore they use two ways of chereshyng the troubled minds. The one is
when we show that in some cases and for some causes either they should not
lament at all, or else be sorry very little: the other is when we grant that
they have just cause to be sad, and therefore we are sad also in their
behalf, and would remedy the matter, if it could be, and thus enteryng into
fellowship of sorrow, we seek by little and little to mitigate their grief.
For all extreme heaviness, and vehement sorrows, cannot abide comfort, but
rather seek a mourner that would take part with them.

Therefore much warenesse ought to be used, when we happen upon such
excedyng sorrowful, least we rather purchase hatred, than aswage grief.

Those harms should be moderatly borne, which must needs happen to every
one, that have chanced to any one. As death, which spares none, neither
King, nor Cayser, neither poor, nor rich. Therefore to be impacient for the
loss of our friends, is to fall out with God, because he made us men, and not
Aungelles. But the Godly (I trust) will always remitte thorder of things to
the will of God, and force their passions to obey necessity. When God lately
visited this Realm with the sweatyng disease, Sweatyng disease.
and received the two worthy ientlemen Henry Duke of Suffolk, and his brother
Lord Charles: I seeing my Ladies grace their mother taking their death most
greauouslie could not otherwise for the duty which I then did, and ever
shall owe unto her, but comfort her in that her heaviness, the which
undoubtedly at that time much weakened her body. And because it may serve for
an example of comfort, I have been boulde to set it forth as it follows
hereafter.

An example of comfort.
THough mine enterprise may be thought folishe, and my doings very slender in
busiyng my brain to teach the expert, to give counsel to other when I lack
it my self, and whereas more need were for me to be taught of other, to take
upon me to teach my betters, yet duty byndyng me to do my best, and among a
number though I can do least, yet good will setting me forth with the
foremest: I cannot chouse but write what I am able, and speak what I can
possible for the better comfortyng of your grace in this your great heaviness,
and sore visitacion sent from GOD, as a warnyng to us all. The Phisician then
deserves most thank, when he practices his knowledge in time of necessity,
and then traueileth most painefullie, when he feels his paciente to be in
most danger. The soldier at that time, and at no time so much is thought
most trusty, when he shows at a need his faithful heart, and in time of
extreme danger does use, and bestow his most earnest labor. In the wealth
of this world what valiant man can want assistence? What mighty Prince can
miss any help to compass his desire? who lacks men that lacks no money?
But when God strikes the mighty with his strong hand, and displaceth those
that were hyghelye placed, what one manne does once look back for the better
^asemente of his dear Brother, and Godly comfortynge his even. Christian, in
the chief of all his sorrow. All men communelye more rejoice in the Sun
risynge, then they do in the Sun set^inge. The hope of Lucre and expectation
of private gain, makes many one to bear out a countenance of favor,
whose heart is inwardelye fretted with deadlye rancoure. But such Friends,
even as prosperi^ye do^he get them, so aduersitye does try them. God is
the searcher of every man's thought, unto whose judgment I refer the
assurance of my good will.

And though I can do little, and therefore deserve as little thancke, as I look
for praise (which is none at all) yet will I endeavor earnestlye at all
times, as well for mine own discharge, to declare my duty, as at this present
to say somewhat for the better easemente of your grace, in this your heaviness.
The passions Passions wo^ke diversely
of the mind have diverse effects, and the^fore work straungelye, according
to their properties* For like as joy comfort the heart, nourishes blood,
and quickens the whole body: so heaviness and care hinder digestion,
engender evil humors, waste the principal parts, and with tune consume the
whole body. For the better knowledge hereof, and for a liu^lye sight of the
same, we neade not to seek far for a^ye exampl^, but even to come strayghte
unto your grace, whose body as I understand crediblye, and partelye see my
self, is soore appayred within short time, your mind so troubled, and your
heart so heavy, that you hate in a manner all light, you like not the sight of
any thing that might be your comfort, but altogether stricken in a dumpe,
you seek to be solitarye, detestinge all joy, and delitynge in sorrow,
wishynge with heart (if it w^^e Gods will) to make your last end. In which
your heaviness, as I desire to be a comfortoure of your grace, so I can no^
blame your natural sorrow, if that now after declaration of the same, you
would moderate all your grief hereafter, and call back your pensifenes, to
the prescripte order of reason.

And first, for the better remedy of every disease, and troubled passion, it
is best to know the principal cause, and chief occasion of the same. Your
grace had two sons, how noble, how wittye, how learned, and how Godly,
many thousands better know it, then any one is able well to ^ell it. God at
his pleasure has taken them both to his mercy, and placed them with him,
which were surely over good to tarry here with us. They both died as your
grace knows very young, which by course of Nature, and by man's
estimation, might have lived much longer. They both were together in one
house, lodged in two several chambers, and almost at one time both sickened,
and both departed. They died both dukes, both well learned, both wise, and
both right Godly. They both before gave strange tokens of death to come.
The elder sittinge at Supper, and very merye, said soudainlye to that right
honest Matroue, and Godly aged gentilwoman, that most faithful and long
assured servant of yours, whose life God grant long to continue: Oh Lord,
where shall we suppe tomorowe at night, whereupon she being troubled, and yet
saiynge comfortablye, I trust my lord, either here, or else where at some of
your friends houses: Nay (quod he) we shall nauer suppe together again in
this world, be you well assured, and with that saying the gentilwoman
discomforted, turned it unto mirthe, and passed the rest of his Supper with
much joy, and the same night after.xij. of the clock, being the.xiiij. of
Iulye sickened, and so was taken the next morning about.vij. of the clock,
to the mercy of God, in the year of our Lord.M.D.Li. When the elder was
gone, the younger would not tarry, but told before (having no knowledge
thereof by any body living) of his brothers Death, to the great wonderinge
of all that were there, declaringe what it was to lose so dear a friend, but
comfortinge him self in that passion, said: well, my brother is gone, but it
makes no matter, for I will go straight after him, and so did within the space
of half and hour, as your grace can best tell, which was there present.
Now I renew these words to your graces knowledge, that you might the more
steadfastly consider their time to be then appointed of GOD to forsake this
evil world, and to live with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingedome of
heaven. But wherefore did God take two such away, and at that time? Surely to
tell the principal cause, The cause why God takes awa^ the most worth^est.
we may by all likeness affirm, that they were taken away from us for our
wretched sins, and most vile naughtines of life, that thereby we being
warned, might be as ready for God, as they now presently were, and amend our
lives in time, whom God will call, what time we know not. Then as I can see,
we have small cause to lament the lack of them, which are in such blessed
state, but rather to amend our own living, to forthinke us of our offenses,
and to wish of GOD to purge our hearts, from all filthiness and ungodly
dealinge, that we may be (as they now be) blessed with God for ever.
Notwithstanding the worckes of God are vns^archeable, without the compass of
man's brain preciselye to comprehend the very cause, sauinge that this
persuasion ought surely to be grounded in us, evermore to think that God is
offended with sin, and that he punishes offenses to the third and fourth
generation of all them that break his commandments, being just in all his
worckes, and doing all things for the best. And therefore when God plagueth
in such sort. I would with that our faith might a^waies be stayed upon the
admiration of Gods glory, througheoute all his doings, in whom is none
evil, neither yet was there ever any guile found. And I doubt not but your
grace is thus affected, and unfeignedly confessinge your own offenses, takes
this scourge to come from God as a just punishmen^e of Sin, for the
amendment not only of your own self, but also for the amendment of all
other in general. The lamentable voice of the pore (which is the mouth of
God) throughout the whole Realm declares full well the wickedness of this life,
and shows plainelye that this evil is more generallye felt, the^ any man is
able by word, or by wri^inge at full to set forth.

When God therefore that is Lord, not only of the rich but also of the poor,
sees his ground spoiled from the wholesome profit of many, to the vain
pleasure of a few, and the earth made private to suffice the lus^e of
insatiable covetousness, and that those which be his true members cannot live
for the intolerable oppression, the soore enhaunsynge, and the most wicked
grasing of those throughout the whole Realm, which otherwise might well live
with the only value and sum of their lands and yerelye revenues: he
strikes in his anger the innocents and tender yonglinges, to plague us with
the lack of them, whose innocencye and Godliness of life might have been a
just example for us to amend our most evil doings.

In which wonderful work of God, when he received these two most noble
ympes, and his children elected to the everlasting Kingedome, I can not but
magnifye his most glorious name, from time to time, that has so graciouslye
preserved these two worthy gentilmenne from the danger of further evil, and
most vile wretchedness, most like right shortelye to ensue, except we all
repent, and forthincke us of our former evil living. And yet I speak not
this, as though I knew any crime to be more in you, then in any other: but
I tell it to the shame of all those universally within this Realm, that are
gyltye of such offenses, whose inward consciences condem^ne their own
doings, and their open d^edes bear witness against their evil nature. For it
is not one house that shall feel the fall of these two princes, neither has
God taken them for one private persons offense: but for the wickedness of the
whole Realm, which is like to feel the smarte, except God be merciful unto
us. But now tha^ they be gone, though the flesh be frail, weak, and tender,
and must neades smart, being wounded or cut: yet I doubt not but your grace
lackinge two such porcions of your own flesh, and having them (as a man
would say) cut away from your own body, When necessity rules, sorrow
is nedeles^
will suffer the (...) with a good stomach, and remember that sorrow is but an
evil remedy to heal a sore. For if your hand were detrenched, or your body
maimed with some soubdaine stroke, what profit were it for you to weep upon
your wound, and when the harm is done, to lamente still the sore? saying that
with wepinge it will not be less, and may yet through weping full sone be
made more. For the sore is increased, when sorrow is added, and the pain is
made double, which before was but single. A constante christian should bear
all misery, and with patience abide the force of necessity, shewinge with
sufferaunce the strength of his faith, and especially when the change is
from evil to good, from woe to weal, what folly is it to so^owe that, for the
which they joy that are departed? They have taken now their rest, that lived
here in travail: they have forsaken their bodies, wherein they were bound, to
receive the spirit, whereby they are free. They have chosen for sickness,
health: for earth, heaven: for life transitory, life immortal: and for
manne, God: then the which, what can they have more? Or how is it possible
they can better? Undoubtedly if ever they were happy, they are now most
happy: if ^uer they were well, they are now in best case, being delivered
from this present evil world, and exempted from Satan, to live for ever
with Christ our Savior.

Then what mean we that not only lamente the want of other, but also desire
to tarry here our selves, hopinge for a short, vain, and therewith a
paynefull pleasure, and refusing to enjoy that continual, perfect, and
heavenly enheritaunce, the which so soon that happen unto us, as Nature
dissolueth this Earthlye body. Truth it is we are more fleshelye then
spiritual, sooner fealynge the ache of our body, then the grief of our
Soul: more studious with care to be healthful in carcass, then seeking with
prayer to be pure in Spirit. And therefore if our friends be stained with
Sin, we do not, or we will not espy their sore, we count them
faulteles, when they are most wicked: neither sekinge the redress of their
evil doing, nor yet once amendynge the faults of our own liuyuge.

But when our friend departs this world, and then forsakes us when Sin
forsakes him: we begin to show ouce fleshelye natures, w^ weep, and we
wayle, and with louge sorrow without discretion declare our want of Gods
grace, and all goodness. The folly of such as sorrow the want of the^e friends.
For whereas we see that as some be borne, some do dye also, m^nne, women, and
children, and not one hour certain to us of all our life, yet we never
mourn, we never w^epe, neither markyuge the death of such as we know, nor
regarding the evil life of those whom we love. But when such depart as were
either nigheste of our ky^red, or else most our friends, then we lamente
without all comfort, not the sins of their Souls, but the change of their
bodies, leauinge to do that which we should, and doing that only which
we should not do at all. Wherein not only we declare much want of Faith,
but also we show great lack of wit. For as the other are gone before,
either to heaven or else to hell: so shall our fre^des and kin^folke follow
after. We are all made of one metal, and ordained to dye, so many as live.
Death commune to all.
Therefore what folly is it in us, or rather what fleshelye madness
immoderatelye to wayle their death whom God has ordained to make their end,
except we lamente the lack of our own living? For even as well we might
at their first birth bewail their Natiuitye, considering they must needs
dye, because they are borne to live. And whatsoever has a beginnynge, the same
has also an ending, and the end is not at our will which desire
continuance of life, but at his will which gave the beginning of life. Now
then, s^ynge God has ordained all ^o dye, according to his appointed will,
what mean they that would have theirs to live? Shall God alter his first
purpose for the only satisfiynge of our folyshe pleasure? And where God
has minded that the whole world shall decay, shall any man desire that
any one house may stand? In my mind, there can be no greater comfort to any
one living for the lack of his friend, then to think that this happened to
him, which all other either have felt, or else shall feel hereafter: And
that God the rather made Death commune to all, that the universal plague and
egalnes to all, might abate the fierce^es of death, and comfore us in the
cruelty of the same, considering no one man has an end, but that all shall
have the like, and dye we must every mothers son of us, at one time or
other. But you will say: my children might have lived longer, they dyed
young. Sure it is by man's estimation they might have lived longer, but had
it been best for them think you to have continued still in this wretched
world, where Uyce bears rule, and Virtue is subdued, where GOD is neglected,
his laws not observed, his word abused, and his Prophets that preach the
judgment of God almost every where contemned. Evil, to live emonge the evil.
If your children were alive, and by thaduice of some wicked person were
brought to a brothell house, where entisinge harlottes lived, and so were in
danger to commit that foul sin of whoredom, and so, led from one
wickedness to another: I am assured your grace would call them back with
labor, and would with exhortations induce them to the fear of God, and
utter detestation of al sin, as you have full often heretofore done, rather
fearing evil to come, then knowing any open fault to be in either of them.
Now then, seeing God has done the same for you him self, that you would
have do^e for them if they had lived, that is, in deliuerynge them both from
this present evil world, which I count none other then a brothel house, and
a life of al noughtines: you ought to thank God highlye, that he has taken
away your two sons, even in their youth, being innocents both for their
living, and of such expectation for their towardnes, that almost it were not
possible for them hereafter o satisfye the hope in their age, which all men
presently had conceived of their youth. It is thought, and in deed it is no
less the^ a great poynct of happiness to dye happily. To dye happelye is great
happiness.
Now when could your two noble gentilmen have dyed better then when they were
at the best, most Godly in many things, offendinge in few, beloved of the
ho^este, and hated of none, (if ever they were hated) but of such as hate the
best. As in deed, noble virtue never wan^ed cankarde envy to follow her. And
considering that this life is so wretched, that the best are ever most hated,
and the vilest always most esteemed, and your.ii. sons of the other side
being in that state of honesty, and trained in that pathe of Godliness (as I
am able to b^ a lively witness, none has been like these many years, or at the
lest, none better brought up) what think you of god, did he envy them, or else
did he prouidently forsee unto them both, when he took them both from us.
Assuredly whom god loves best, those he takes sonest, according to the
saying of Solomon: Wisd. iiii.
The righteous man (meaning Enoch and other the chosen of God) is suddenly
taken away, to the entente that wickedness should not alter his understanding,
and that hypocrisy should not begile his soul. For the crafty bewitching of
lies, make good things dark, the unsteadfastness also and wickedness of
voluptuouse desire, turn aside the understanding of the simple. And though
the righteous was sone gone, yet fulfilled he much time, for his soul pleased
God, and therefore hasted he to take him away from among the wicked. Yea, the
good men of god in all ages, have ever had an earnest desire to be dissolved.
Psalm. lxxxiiii.
My soul (quod David) has an earnest desire to enter into the courts of the
lord. Yea, like as the heart desires the water brooks, Psalm. xlii.
so longs my soul after the O God. My soul is a thyrst for God: yea, even
for the living God, when shall I come to appear before the presence of God?
Paul and all the Apostles wished and longed for the day of the Lord, and
thought every day a thousand year, till their souls were parted from their
bodies. The^ what should we wail them which are in that place where we al
should wish to be, and seek so to live, that we might be ready when it shall
please god of his goodness to call us to his mercy Let us be sick for our own
sins, yt live here on earth, and rejoice in their most happy passa^e that are
gone to heaven. They have not left us, but gone before us to enherite with
Christ, their kingdom prepared. And what should this grieve your grace that they
are gone before, considering our whole life is nothing else but the right way
to death. Life, the right way to death.
Should it trouble any one yt his friend is come to his iournies end? Our life
is nothing else, but a continual trauaill, and death obtains rest after all
our labor. Death purchases re^t.
Among men that trauaill by the high way, he is best at ease (in my mind)
that sonest comes to his iourneis end. Therefore, if your grace loved your
children (as I am well assured you did) you must rejoice in their rest, and give
God hearty thanks, that they are come so sone to their iourneis end. Marie,
if it were so that man might escape the danger of death, and live ever, it
were another matter: but because we must all dye, either first or last, and of
nothing so sure in this life, as we are all sure to dye at length, and nothing
more uncertain unto man then the certain time of every man's latter time: what
forces when we dye, either this day, or to morrow, either this year, Death
more friendly, the sooner it comes.
or the next, saving that I think them most happy that die sonest, and death
frendely to none so much, as to them whom she takes sonest. At the time of
an execucio^ done for grievous offenses, what mattereth who dye first, when a
dosen are condemned together, by a law, considering they must all dye one
and other. I say still, happy are they, that are sonest rid out of this
world, and the sooner gone, the sooner blessed. The Thracians Thracians.
lament greatly at the birthe of their children, and rejoice much at the
burial of their bodies, being well assured that this world is nothing else but
misery, and the world to come, joy for ever. Children by weeping, declare out
(...).
Now again, the child new borne, partly declares the state of this life, who
begins his time with wailyng, and first shows tears, before he can judge
the cause of his woe. If we believe the promises of God, if we hope for the
general resurreccion, and constantly affirm, that God is just in all his
works: we cannot but joyfully say, with the just man Job: Job.
The lord gave them, the lord has taken them again, as it pleases God, so
may it be, and blessed be the name of the lord, for now and ever. God deals
wrongfully with no man, but extends his mercy most plentifully, over all
mankind. God gave you two children, as the like I have not known happy are
you most gracious lady, that ever you bare the^. God lent you them two for a
time, and took them two again at his time, you have no wrong done you, that he
has taken the^: but you have received a wonderful benefit, that ever you had
the^. Lent goods, must be restored at the awne^s will.
He is very unjust that boroweth, and will not pay again, but at his pleasure.
He forgets much his duty, that boroweth a jewel of the kings majesty,
and will not restore it with good will, when it shall please his grace, to call
for it. He is unworthy hereafter to borowe, that will rather grudge, because he
has it no longer, then ones give thanks, because he has had the use of it so
long He is over coueteous, that compteth not gainful, the time of his
borowyng: but judges it his loss, to restore things again. He is
unthankful, that thynkes he has wrong done, when his pleasure is shortened,
and takes the end of his delight, to be extreme evil. He loses the greatest
part of his joy in this world, that thinks there is no pleasure, but of
things present: that cannot comfort himself with pleasure past, and judge them
to be most assured, considering the memory of them ones had, can never
decay. His joys be over straighte, that be comprehended within the compass
of his sight, and thinks no thing comfortable, but that which is ever
before his iyes. All pleasure which man has in this world, is very short,
and sone goes it away, the remembrance lasts ever, and is much more
assured, then is the presence or lively sight of any thing. And thus your grace
may ever rejoice, that you had two such, which lived so verteously, and
died so Godly: and though their bodies be absent from your sight, yet the
remembrance of their virtues, shall never decay from your mind. God lends
life to all, and lends at his pleasure for a time. To this man he grants a
long life, to this a short space, to some one, a day, to some a year, to some
a month. Now when God takes, what man should be offended, considering he that
gave freely, may boldly take his own when he will, and do no man wrong.
The Kings Majesty gives one.x. pound another forty pound, another three
skore pound, shall he be grieved, that received but ten pound, and not rather
give thanks, that he received so much? Is that man happier, that dies in the
latter end of the monethe, then he is that died in the beginning of the same
Monethe? Does distance of time, and long tar^yng from God, make men more
happy, when they come to God? By space of passage we differ much, and one
lives longer then another, but by death at the last, we all are matched, and
none the happier, that lives the longer, but rather most happy is he, that
died the sonest, and departed best in the faith of Christ. Think therefore
your self most happy, that you had two such, and give God hearty thanks,
that it pleased him so sone, to take two such. Necessity is lawles, and that
which is by God appoyncted no man can alter. Rejoice we, or weep we, die we
shall, how sone, no man can tell. Yea, we are all our life time warned before,
that death is at hand, and that when we go to bed we are not assured to rise
the next day in the morning* no, not to live one hour longer. And yet to se
our folly, we would assign God his time, according to our sacietie, and not
content our selfs with his doings, according to his appoynctment. And ever we
say, when any dye young, he might have lived longer, it was pity he died to
sone. As though for sothe he were not better with God, then he can be with
manne. Therefore. whereas for a time your grace, much bewailed their lack,
not only absentyng your self from all company but also refusyng all kind of
comfort, almost dedde with heaviness, your body being so worn with sorrow,
that the long continuance of the same, is much like to shorten your days: I
shall desire your grace for Gods love, to refer your will to Gods will,
and whereas hitherto nature has taught you to weep the lack of your natural
children let reason teach you hereafter, to wipe away the tears, and let
not fantasy increase that, which nature has commanded moderately to use.
To be sorry for the lack of our dearest, we are taught by nature, to be
overcome with sorrow, it comes of our own fond opinion, and great folly
it is, with natural sorrow, to increase all sorrow, and with a little
sickness, to purchase ready death. The sorrows of brute beasts are sharp,
The nature of brute beasts.
and yet they are but short. The Cow lackyng her Caulfe, leaves Loweyng
within three or four days at the farthest. Birds of the air perceiuyng
their youngones taken from their neast, chitter for a while in trees there
about, and streighte after they fly abroad, and make no more a do. The Do
lackyng her Faune, the Hynde her Caulfe, braie no long time after their loss,
but seeing their lack to be without remedy, they cease their sorrow within
short space. Man only among al other, cease not to favor his sorrow, and
lamenteth not only so much as nature wills him, but also so much as his
own affeccion moves him. And yet all folk do not so but such as are subject
to passions, and furthest from fortitude of mind, as women commonly, rather
then men, rude people, rather then godly folk: the unlearned, sooner then the
learned: foolish folk, sooner then wise men: children, rather then young men.
Whereupon we may well gather, that immoderate sorrow is not natural,
Immoderate sorrow, not natural.
(for that which is natural, is ever like in all) but through folly
maintained, increased by weakness, and for lack of reason, made altogether
intolerable. Then I doubt not but your grace, will rather end your sorrow,
by reason: then that sorrow should end you, through folly: And whereas by
nature, you are a weak woman in body, you will show your self by reason, a
strong man in heart: rather endyng your grief by godly aduertisementes, and by
the just consideracion of Gods wonderful doings: then that time and space,
should we are away your sorrows, which in deed suffer none continually to
abide in any one, but rather rid the^ of life, or else ease them of grief.
Time, a remedy for fools, to take away their sorrow.
The fool, the ungodly, the weak hearted have this remedy, your medecin must
be more heavenly, if you do (as you profess) refer all to Gods pleasure,
and say in your prayer. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Those
whom God loves, those he chasteneth, and happy is that body, whom God
scourges, for his amendment. (...)
The man that dies in the faith of Christ is blessed, and the chast^ned
servant, if he do repent and amend his life, shall be blessed. We know not
what we doo^, when we bewail the death of our dearest, for in death is
altogether all happiness, and before death, The great misery of this world,
makes (...) of life
not one is happy. The miseries in this world declare, small felicitee to be
in the same. Therefore, many men being overwhelmed with much woe, and wretched
wickedness: have wished and prayed to God, for an end of this life, and thought
this world to be a let, to the heavenly perfeccion, the which bliss all they
shall attain hereafter that hope well here, and with a lively faith declare
their assurance. Your graces two sons, in their life were so godly, that
their death was their advantage: for, by death they lived, because in life
they were dedde. They died in faith, not weary of this world, nor wishyng for
death, as ouerloden with sin: but patiently taking the cross, departed with
joy. At whose diyng, your grace may learn an example of patience, and of
thanks geuyng, that God of his goodness, has so graciously taken these your
two children, to his favorable mercy. God punishes, partly to try your
consta^cie, wherein I wish that your grace, may now be as well willing to
forsake them, as ever you were willing to have them. But such is the
infirmity of our flesh, that we hate good comfort in words, when the cause
of our comfort in deed (as we take it) is gone. Impacience without comfort.
And me thinks I hear you cry notwithstanding all my words, alack my
children are gone. But what though they are gone? God has called, and nature
has obeyed. Yea, you cry still my children are dedde: Marie therefore they
lived, and blessed is their end, whose life was so godly. Woe worth, they are
dedde, they are dedde. It is no new thing, they are neither the first that
died, nor yet the last that shall die. Many went before, and all shall follow
after. They lived together, they loved together, and now they made their end
both together. Alas they died, that were the fruicte of mine own body, leauyng
me comfortless, unhappy woman that I am. You do well, to call the^ the fruict
of your body, and yet you nothing the more unhappy neither. For, is the tree
unhappy, from which the appelles fall? Trees, not accursed, because Apples
fall from cheins.
Or is the earth accurssed, that brings furthe grene Grass, which
hereafter notwithstanding does wither. Death takes no order of years, but when
the time is appoyncted, be it early or late, day or night, away we must.
But I pray you, what loss has your grace? They died, that should have died,
yea, they died, that could live no longer. But you wished them longer life.
Yea, but God made you no such promise, and mete it were not that he should be
led by you, but you rather should be led by him. Your children died, and that
right godly, what would you have more? All good mothers desire, that their
children may die Gods servants, the which your grace has most
assuredly obtained. Now again man's nature alters, and hardely tarieth
virtue long in one place, without much circumspeccion, and youth may sone be
corrupted. But you will say. These were good and godly brought up, and
therefore most like to prove godly hereafter, if they had lived still. Well,
though such things perhaps had not chanced, yet such things might have
chanced, and although they happen not to al, yet do they hap to many, and
though they had not chanced to your children, yet we knew not that before, and
more wisdom it had been, to fear the worst with good aduisement, then ever
to hope, and look still for the best, without all mistrustyng. For, such is the
nature of man, and his corrupt race, that evermore the one follows sooner, then
the other. Commodus Commodus
was a verteous child, and had good bringyng up, and yet he died a most
wicked man. Nero Nero.
wanted no good counsel, and such a master he had, as never any had the
better, and yet what one alive, was worse then he? But now death has assured
your grace, that you may warrant your self, of their godly end, whereas if
God had spared them life, things might have chanced otherwise. In wishyng
longer life, we wish often times longer woe, longer trouble, longer folly in
this world, and weye all things well, you shall perceive we have small joy
to wish longer life. This imaginacion of longer life, when the life stands
not by number of years, but by the appoyncted will of God, makes our folly so
much to appear, and our tears so continually to fall from our chekes. For if
we thought (as we should do in deed) that every day risyng, may be the
end of every man living, and that there is no difference with God, betwixt one
day, and an hundredth years: we might bear all sorrows, a great deal the
better. Therefore it were most wisdom for us all, and a great poynct of
perfeccion to make every day an even rekeuyng of our life, and talk so with
God every hour, that we may be of even board with him, through fulness of
faith, and ready to go the next hour following, at his commandment, and to
take always his sendyng in good part. The lord is at hand. We know not when
he will come (at mid night, at cock crow, or at noone days) to take either
us, or any of ours. Therefore, the rather that we may be armed, let us follow
the examples of other godly men, and lay their doings before our iyes. And
among all other, I know none so mete for your graces comfort, as the wise and
Godly behavior of good King David. David.ii. Regu^^^.xii.
Who when he was enfourmed, that his son was sick, prayed to God hartly, for
his amendment, wept, fasted, and with much lamentacion, declared great
heaviness. But when word came of his sons departure, he left his mournyng,
he called for water, and willed meat to be set before him, that he might eat.
Whereupon, when his men marueiled why he did so, considering he took it so
grievously before, when his child was but sick, and now being dedde, took no
thought at all, he made this answer unto them: so long as my child lived, I
fasted, and watered my plants for my young boy, and I said to my self, who
can ^ell, but that God perhaps will give me him, and that my child shall
live, but now seeing he is dedde, to what end should I fast? Can I call him
again any more? Nay, I shall rather go unto him, he shall never come again
unto me. And with that David comforted his wife Bethsabe, the which example,
as I trust your grace has read, for your comfort, so I hope you will also
follow it for your health, and be as strong in patience, as ever David was.
The history it self shall much delighte your grace, being red as it lies
in the Book, better then my bare touching of it can do, a great deal. The
which I doubt not but your grace will often read, and comfort other your
self, as David did his sorrowful wife. Job Job.
losyng his children, and all that he had, forgatte not to praise God in his
extreme poverty. Tobias Tobias.
lackyng his iye sight, in spirit prased GOD, and with open mouth, confessed
his holy name to be magnified throughout the whole yearthe. Paul the Apostle
of God, reproves the^ as worthy blame, which mourn and lament, the loss of
their derest. I would not brethren (quod he) that you should be ignorant, ^.
Thessa.iiii.
concerning them which be fallen on sleep, that you sorrow not as other do,
which have no hope. If we believe that Jesus died, and rose again, even so they
also, which sleep by Jesus, will God bring again with him. Then your grace,
either with leauyng sorrow, must show your self faithful, or else with yeldyng
to your woe, declare your self to be without hope. But I trust your grace, being
planted in Christ, will show with sufferaunce, the fruicte of your faith, and
comfort your self with the words of Christ, (...)
I am the resurrection and the life he that believes on me, yea, though he were
dedde, yet should he live, and whosoever lives, and believes in me, shall never
die. We read of those that had no knowledge of God, and yet they bare in good
worth, the discease of their children. Anaxogoras Anaxogoras.
hearing tell, that his son was dedde, no maruail quod he, I know well I
begot a mortal body. Pericles Pericles.
chief ruler of Athens, hearing tell that his two sons, being of wonderful
towardness, within four days were both ded, never greatly changed
countenance for the matter, that any one could perceive, nor yet forbear to go
abroad, but according to his wo^ted custom, did his duty in the counsel
house, in debatyng matters of weighte, concerning the state of the common
peoples weal. But because your grace is a woman, I will show you an example
of a noble woman, in whom appeared wonderful patience. Cornelia, Cornelia.
a worthy lady in Rome, being comforted for the loss of her two children,
Tiberius, and Caius Gracchus, both valiant ientle men, although both not the
most honest men, which died not in their beds, but violently were slain
in Civil battaill, their bodies liyng naked and unburied, when one emo^gest
other said: Oh unhappy woman, that ever thou should se this day. Naie
quod she, I will never think my self otherwise, then most happy, that ever I
brought furthe these two Gracchions. If this noble lady, could think her self
happy, being mother to these two valiant ientlemen, and yet both rebels,
and therefore justly slain: How much more may your grace, think your self
most happy, that ever you brought furthe two such Brandons, not only by
natural birth, but also by most godly education, in such sort that the like.ij.
have not been for their towardnes universally. Whose death the general voice
of all men declares how much it was lamented. So that whereas you might ever
have feared some daungerouse end, you are now assured that they both made a
most godly end, the which thing is the full perfection of a Christian life. I
read of one Bibulus Bibulus.
that hearing of his two children to dye both in one day, lamented the lack
of them both for that one day, and mourned no more. And what could a man do
less than for two children to lament but one day: and yet in my mind he
lamented enough and eue^ so much as was reason for him to do, whose doings if
all Christians would follow, in my judgment they should not only fulfill
natures rule, but also please God highly. Horatius Puluillus Horatius Puluillus.
being high Priest at Rome when he was occupied about the dedicatyng of a
Temple to their great God Iuppiter in the Capitoly, holdyng a post in his
hand, and hard as he was vtteryng the solemn words, that his son was
dead, even at the same present: he did neither pluck his hand from the post
lest he should trouble such a solempnitie, neither yet turned his
countenance from that public religion to his private sorrow, least he should
seem rather to do the office of a father, then the duty of an high
minister. Paulus Emilius Paulus Emilius.
after his most noble victory had of King Perse, desired of God, that if
after such a triumph there were any harm like to happen to the Romans, the
same might fall upon his own house. Whereupon when God had taken his two
children from him immediately after, he thancked God for grau^tyng him his
bound. For in so doing he was a mean that the people rather lamented Paulus
Emilius lack, the^ that Paulus or any bewailed any misfortune that the Romans
had. Examples be innumerable of those which used like moderation in subduyng
their affections, as Zenophon, Quintus Martius, Quintus ^^^tius.
Julius Caesar, Julius Caesar.
Tiberius Caesar, Tyberius Caesar.
Emperors both of Rome. But what seek I for misfortunate men, (if any such
be misfortunate) seeing it is an harder matter and a greater piece of work to
find out happy men, Let us look round about even at home, and we shall find
enowe subject to this misfortune. for who lives that has not lost? Therefore I
would wish your grace even now to come in again with God, and although he
be angry, yet show you your self most obedient to his will, co^sideryng he is
Lord over Kings, Emperors, and over all that be both in heaven and in
earth, and spares noone whom he lists to take, and no doubt he will take all
at the last. His dart goes daily, neither is any darte cast in vain which is
sent amongst a whole army standing thick together. Neither can you justly
lament that they lived no longer, for they lived long enough, that have lived
well enough. You must measure your children by their virtues, not by their
years. Sap.iiii.
For (as the wise man says) a man's wisdom is the gray heeres, and an
undefiled life, is the old age. Happy is that mother that has had Godly
children, and not she that has had long living children. For if felicity
should stand by length of time, some tree Trees live longer then men.
were more happy then is any man, for it lives longer, and so likewise brute
beasts, as the Stagge, The Stagge how long he lives.
who lives (as Plinius does say) two hundredth years, and more. If we would
but consider what man is, we should have small hope to live, and little cause
to put any great assurance in this life. Man, what he is, concerning his body.
Let us se him what he is: Is his body any thing else but a lump of earth made
together in such form as we do see? A frail vessel, a weak carrion, subject
to misery, cast down with every light disease, a man to day, to morrow none.
A flower that this day is fresh, to morrow withers. Good Lord do we not
see that even those things which nourishe us, do rotte and dye, as herbs,
birds, beasts, water, and al other without the which we cannot live. And how
can we live ever, that are sustained by dead things? Therefore when any one
does dye, why do we not think, that this may chaunse to every one, which now
has chaunsed to any one. We be now as those that stand in battle raie. Not
one man is suer of him self before an other, but al are in danger in like
manner to death* That your children died before other that were of ri^er years,
we may judge that their ripenes for virtue and all other gifts of nature were
brought even to perfection, whereby death the sooner approached for nothing long
lasts that is sone excellent. God gave your grace two most excellent
children, Ripe things last not long.
God never gives for any long time those that be right excellent. Their
natures were heavenly, and therefore more meet for God then man. Among fruit we
se some appels are sone ripe and fall from the tree in the midst of summer^
other be still green, and tarry til winter, and hereupo^ are commonly called
winter fruit: Even so it is with me^, some dye young, some dye old, and some
die in their middle age. Your suns were even.ij. such already, as some
hereafter may be with long continuance of time. They had that in their youth
for the gifts of nature, which al men would require of the^ both scacelie in
their age. Therefore being both now ripe, they were now most ready for God.
There was a child in Rome of a man's quantite, for face, legs and o^ her
parts of his body, whereupon wise men judged he would not be long living. How
could your grace think, that when you saw ancient wisdom in the one, and
most pregnant wit in the other meruailouse sobriety in the elder, and most
laudable gentlines in the younger, them both most studious in learning, most
forward in all feats as well of the body, as of the mind, being two such, and so
excellent, that they were like long to continue with you? God never suffers
such excellent and rare jewels long to enherite therth. Whatsoever is nie
perfection the same is most nigh falling. Virtue being o^s absolute cannot long
be seen with these our fleshly iyes, neither can that carry the latter end with
other, that was ripe it self first of al and before other. Fire goth out the
sooner, the clearer that it burns: and that light lasts longest, that is
made of most course matter. In green wood we may see that where as the fuel is
not most apt for burning, yet the fire lasts longer, than if it were
nourished with like quantity of dry wood. Eue^ so in the nature of man the
mind being ripe, the body decaiyeth straight, and life goes away being ones
brought to perfection. Neither can there be any greater token of short life,
than full ripenes of natural wit: The which is to the body, as the heat
of the Sun is to things yearthly. Therefore judge right honorable lady,
that even now they both died, when they both were most ready for God, neither
think that they died over soon, because they lived no longer. They died both
Gods servants, and therefore they died well and in good time. God has set
their time, and taken them at his time blessed children as they be, to reign
with him in the kingdom of his father prepared for them from the beginning.
Unto whose will, I wish and I trust your grace does wholly refer your will,
thankyng him as heartily for that he has taken them, as you ever thanked him,
for that he ever lent you them. I know the wicked words of some ungodly folk
have much disquie^ed your grace, notwithstanding God being judge of your
natural love toward your children, and al your faithful friends, and
servants bearyng earnest witness with your grace of the same: there ungodly
talk the more lightely is to be esteemed, the more ungodly that it is. Nay
your grace may rejoice rather, that whereas you have done well, you hear
evil, according to the words of Christ: Math. v.
Blessed are you, when men speak al evil things against you. And again
consider GOD is not led by the report of men to judge his creatures, but
persuaded by ye true knowledge of every man's conscience, to take them for his
servants, and furthermore the harm is theirs which speak so lewdlie, and
the bless theirs which bear it so pacie^tly. For look what measure they use
to other, with the same they shall be measured again. And as they judge so shall
they be judged. Be your grace therefore strong in adversity, and pray for them
that speak amiss of you, rendryng Good for evil, Paci^^ce praise worthy in
adversity.
and with charitable dealyng show your self long suffryng, so shall you heap
cooles on their heads. The boisterouse Sea tries the good mariner, and sharp
vexatio^ declares the true Christian. Where battaill has not been before,
there never was any victory obtained. You then being thus assailed, show your
self rather stowte to withstand, than weak, to give over: rather cleauyng to
good, than yeldyng to evil. For if God be with you, what forces who be
against you. For when al friends fail, GOD never fails them that put their
trust in him, and with an unfeigned heart call to him for grace. Thus doing I
assure your grace, God will be pleased, and the Godly will much praise your
wisdom, though the world full wickedly say their pleasure. I pray God your
grace may please the Godly, and with your virtuous behavior in this your
wydohode, win there commendation to the glory of God, the reioysyng of your
friends, and the comfort of your soul. Amen.

Thus, the rather to make pre^eptes plain, I have added examples at large both
for counsel geuyng, and for comfortyng. And most nedeful it were in such kind
of Oracio^s to be most occupied, considering the use hereof appears full often
in all parts of our life, and confusedly is used among al other matters. For in
praisyng a worthy man, we shall have just cause to speak of all his virtues,
of things profitable in this life, and of pleasures in general. Likewise in
trauersyng a cause before a judge, we cannot want the aid of persuasion, and
good counsel, concerning wealth, health, life and estimacion, the help whereof
is partly borrowed of this place. But whereas I have set forth at large the
places of confirmacion concerning counsel in diverse causes: it is not thought
that either they should al be used in number as they are, or in order as they
stand: but that any one may use them and order them as he shall think best,
according as the time, place, and person, shall most of al require.

Of an Oration judicial.
THE whole burdeine of weighty matters, and the earnest trial of al
controversies, rest only upon judgment. Therefore when matters concerning
land, gooddes, or life, or any such thing of like weight are called in
Question, we must ever have recourse to this kind of Oration, and after just
examinyng of our causes by the places thereof: look for judgment according to
the law.

Oration Judicial what it is.
ORation Judicial is, an earnest debatyng in open assembly of some weighty
matter before a judge, where the complainaunt commenseth his action, and the
defendaunt thereupon answers at his peril to al such things as are laid
to his charge.

Of the foundation, or rather principal paincte in every debated matter,
called of the Rhe^oricians the State, or constitucion of the Cause.
NOT only is it needful in causes of judgment to considre the scope
whereunto we must leauell our reasons, and direct our inuencion: but also we
ought in every cause to have a respect unto some one especial poincte, and
chief article: that the rather the whole drift of our doings may seem to
agree with our first devised purpose. For, by this means our judgment shall be
framed to speak with discretion, and the ignorant shall learn to perceive
with profit, whatsoever is said for his enstructio^. But they that take upon
them to talk in open audience, and make not their account before, what they
will speak after: shall neither be well liked for their inuencio^, nor allowed
for their wit, nor esteemed for their learning. For, what other thing do they,
that boult out their words in such sort, and without al aduisement utter out
matter: but show themselves to play as young boys, or scarre crows do,
which showte in the open and plain feldes at all auentures hittie missie.
Definition of a thing must first be known ere we speak o^^ mind at large.
The learned therefore and such as love to beco^mpted Clerks of understanding,
and men of good circumspection and judgment: do warely scanne what they
chefely mind to speak, and by definition seek what that is whereunto they
purpose to direct their whole doings. For, by such advised warenesse, and
good iye castyng: they shall always be able both to know what to say, and to
speak what they ought. As for example if I shall have occasion to speak in
open audience of the obedience due to our sovereign king I ought first to
learn what is obedience, and after knowelege attained, to direct my reasons to
the only prove of this purpose, and wholly to seek confirmacion of the same,
and not turn my tale to talk of Robbyn Hoode, and to show what a goodly
archer was he, or to speak wounders of the man in the Moon, Rouyng with (...)
reason.
such as are most nedelesse and farthest from the purpose. For then, the
hearer lookyng to be taught his obedience, and hearing in the mean season mad
tales of archerie, and great meruailes of the man in the Moon: being half
astonished at his so great straing will perha^pes say to himself: Now, whether the
devil will thou, come in man again for very shame, and tell me no bytailes,
such as are to no purpose but show me that which thou did promise both to
t^ache and persuade at thy first entry. Assuredly such fond fellows there
have been, yea eue^ among Preachers, that talking of faith, they have fetched
their full race from the.xij. signs in the Zodiake. An other talking of the
general resurrection has made a large matter of our blessed Lady, praisyng her
to be so ientle, so courtise, and so kind, that it were better a thousandfould
to make suit to her alone the^ to Christ her son. And what needed (I pray
you) any such rehearsal being both ungodly, and nothing at al to the purpose?
for, what makes the praise of our lady to the confirmacio^ of the general
dowme? Would not a man think him mad that having an earnest errand from London
to Dover, would take it the next way to ride first into Northfolke, next into
Essex, and last into Kent? And yet assuredly many an unlearned and wittelesse
man has straied in his talk much farther a great deal, yea truly as far,
as hence to Rome gates. Therefore wise are they that follow Plinies advise,
Plinies counsel for handeling of caus^^.
who would that al men both in writing and speaking at large upon any matter,
should ever have an iye to the chief title and principal ground of their whole
intent, never swaruing from their purpose, but rather bringyng al things
together to confirm their cause so much as they can possible. Yea, the wise
and expert men will ask of themselves, how hangs this to the purpose? to
what end do I speak it? what makes this for co^firmacion of my cause? and so
by often questionyng either chide their own fol^e, if they speak amiss* or else
be assured they speak to good purpose.

A State therefore generally is the chief ground of a matter, A State generally
what it is.
and the pryncipal poincte whereunto both he that speaks should refer his
whole wit, and they that hear should chefely mark. A Preacher takes in hand
to show what prayer is, and how nedeful for man, to call upon God: Now, he
should ever remember this his matter, applieng his reasons wholly and fully to
this end that the hearers may both know the nature of prayer, and the
nedefulnesse of prayer. The which when he has done, his promise is fulfilled,
his time well bestowed, and the hearers well iustructed.

A State, or constitution what it is in matters of Judgment.
IN all other causes the state is gathered without contention, and severally
handled upon good aduisement as he shall think best that professes to speak.
But in matters criminal, where judgment is required: there are two persons at
the least, which must through contrariety, stand and rest upon some issue.
As for example: A seruyng man is apprehended by a lawyer for felony upon
suspicion. The lawier says to the seruyng man: Thou have done this robbery.
Nay, (says he) I have not done it. Upon this conflicte and matchyng together,
arises this State, whether this serving man has done this robbery, or no?
Upon which poincte the lawyer must stand, and seek to prove it to the
uttermost of his power.

A State therefore in matters of judgment is that thing, State in Judgment
what it is.
which does arise upon the first demand and denial made betwixt men,
whereof the one part is the accuser, and the other part the person, or persons
accused. It is called a State because we do stand and rest upon some one
poincte, State, why it is so called.
the which must wholly and only be proved of the one side, and denied of the
other. I cannot better term it in English than by the name of an issue, the
which not only arises upon much debatyng and long trauerse used, whereupon
all matters ar said to com to an issue: but also elsewhere an issue is said to
be then and so often as both parties stand upon one poinct, the which does
as well happen at the first beginning before any probacions are used, as it does
at the latter endyng after the matter has at large been discussed.

The division of States, or issues.
NOW that we know what an Issue is, it is next most nedeful to show how many
they are in number. The wisest and best learned have agreed upon three only,
and no less, the which are these following.

The state. i. Coniecturall. ij. Legal. iij. Iuridiciall.

AND for the more plain understanding of these darcke words, these three
questions folowinge, expound their meaning altogether.

i. Whether the thing be, or no. ij. What it is. iij. What manner of thing it
is.
IN the first we consider upon rehearsal of a matter whether any such thing
be, or no. As if one should be accused of Murder, good it were to know,
whether any murder were committed at all, or on, if it be not perfectlye
known before: and after to go further, and examine whether such a man that is
accused, have done the deed or no.

In the second place, we doubt not upon the thing done, but we stand in
doubt what to call it. Sometimes a man is accused of felo^ye, and yet he
proves his offense to be but a trespace, whereupon he escapes the danger of
death. An other being accused for killynge a man, confesses his fault to be
manslaughter, and denies it utterly to be any murder, whereupon he makes
friends to purchase his Pardon. Now the lawyers by their learning must judge
the doubt of this debate, and tell what name he deserves to have that has
thus offended.

In the third place, not only the deed is confessed, but the manner of doing
is defended. As if one were accused for killynge a man, to confess the deed,
and also to stand in it that he might justly so do, because he did it in his
own defense: whereupon arises this Question, whether his doing be right or
wrong. And to make these matters more plain, I will add an example for every
state, severally.

Of the state Coniecturall.
The Assertion.
Thou have killed this manne.
The Answer.
I have not killed him.
The State or Issue.
Whether he has killed this man or no. Thus we see upon the auouchinge and
denial, the matter stands upon an issue.

Of the state Legal.
Assertion.
Thou have committed treason in this fact.
Answer.
I deny it to be treason.
State or issue.
Whether his offense done may be called treason or no. Here is denied that any
such thing is in the deed done, as is by word reported, and said to be.

Of the state Iuridiciall.
Assertion.
Thou have killed this manne.
Answer.
I grant it, but I have done it lawfullye, because I killed him in mine own
defense.

State or issue.
Whether a man may kill one in his own defense, or no, and whether this man
did so, or no.

The Oration coniectural, what it is.
THe Oration coniectural is, when matters be examined and tried out by
suspicions gathered, and some likelihode of thing appearinge. A Soldier is
accused for killinge a Farmar. The Souldioure denies it utterly, and says he
did not kill him. Hereupon rises the question, whether the Souldioure killed
the Farmar or no, who is well known to be slain. Now to prove this question,
we must have such places of confirmation, as hereafter do follow.

Places of confirmation, to prove things by conjecture.
i. Will, to do evil. ij. Power, to do evil.
IN the will must be considered the qualitye of the

Some are known to want no will to kill a man, because

The country where the man was borne declares sometime

Of what trade he is, by what occupation he lives.

Whether he be a gamester, an alchouse haunter, or a panion

Of what wealth he is, and how he came by that which

What apparel he wears, and whether he loves to go

Of what nature he is, whether he be hastye, headye, or

What shifts he has made from time to time.

What moved him to do such an heinous deed.

Places of Confirmation to prove whether he had power to do such a deed, or no.
















An example of an Oration Judicial, to prove by Contectures the knowledge of a
notable and most heinous offense, committed by a Soldier
AS Nature has ever abhorred murder, and God in all ages most terriblye has
plagued bloudsheading: so I trust your wisdoms (most worthy Judges) will
spedelye seek the execution of this most hateful sin. And where as God
reuealeth to the sight of men the knowledge of such offenses by diverse
likelihodes, and probable conjectures: I doubt not but you being called of God
to hear such causes, will do herein as reason shall require, and as this
detestable offense shall move you v^on rehearsal of the matter. The Manne that
is well known to be slain, was a worthy Farmar, a good housekeper, a welthye
husbandemanne, one that traueyled much in this world, me^nynge vprightlye in
all his doings, and therefore beloved emonge all men, and lamented of many
when his death was known. This Souldioure being desperate in his doings,
and living by spoil all his life time, came newly from the wars, whose
hand^s has been latelye bathed in blood, and now he keeps this country
(where this farmar was slain) and has been here for the space of one whole
month together, and by all likelihodes he has slain this honest farmer. For,
such menflesht vilaynes, make small account for kyllinge any one, and do it
they will without any mercy, when they m^ye see their time. Yea, this wretch
is bruted for his beastly demeanoure, and known of long time to be a strong
thief. Nether had he escaped the danger of the law, if the kings free pardon
had not prevented the execution. His name declares his noughtye nature, and his
wicked living has made him famous. For, who is he that hearing of N. (the
notable offenders name might here be rehearsed) does not think by and by, that
he were like to do such a deed? Neither is he only known universally to be
naught, but his soil also (where he was borne) gives him to be an evil man:
consideringe he was bredde and brought up among a den of thieves, emonge the
men of Tindale and Ryddesdale, where pillage is good purchase, and murdering
is counted manhood. Occupation has he none, nor yet any other honest means,
whereby to maintain him self: and yet he lives most sumptuouslye. No
greater gamester in a whole country, no such riotour, a notable whoremonger, a
lewderoister among Ruffia^s, an unreasonable waister, to day full of money, wtin
a seue^night after not worth a grote. There is no man that seethe him, but will
take him for his apparel to be a gentilman. He has his change of suits, yea,
he spares not to go in his silks and velvet. A great quareller, and fraie
maker, glad when he may be at d^fiau^ce with one or other, he has made such
shyftes for money ere now, that I marvel how he has lived till this day.
And now being at a low ebb, and loathe to seem base in his estate, thought to
adventure upon this farmar, and either to win the saddle, or else to lose the
horse. And thus being so far forward, wantinge no will to attempt this
wicked deed, he sought by all means possible, convenient oportunitye to
compass his desire. And waytinge under a wood side, nighe unto the high
way, about six of the clock at night, he set upon this farmer, at what
time he was coming homewarde. For, it appears not only by his own
confession, that he was there about the self same time, where this man was
slain: but also there be men that saw him ride in great haste about the
self same time. And because GOD would have this murder to be known, look I
pray you what blood he carries about him, to bear witness against him of
his most wicked deed. Again, his own confession does playnelye go
against him, for he is in so many tales, that he can not tell what to say.

And often his color changes, his body shakes, and his tongue foultereth
within his mouth. And such men as he brings in to bear witness with him,
that he was at such a place at the self same hour, when the Farmar was
slain: they will not be sworn for the very hour, but they say, he was at
such a place, within two hours after. Now Lord, does not this matter seem
most plain unto al me^, especially seeing this deed was done such a time, and
in such a place, that if the devil had not been his good Lord, this matter
had never come to light. And who will not say that this Caytife had
little cause to fear, but rather power inoughe to do his wicked feacte,
seeing he is so sturdye and so strong, and the other so weak and unwieldy:
yea, seeing this vilaine was armed, and the other man naked. Doubt yon not
(worthy Judges) seeing such notes of his former life to declare his inward
nature, and perceiving such conjectures lawfully gathered upon just
suspicion: but that this wretched Souldioure has slain this worthy Farmar.
And therefore I appeal for justice unto your wisdoms for the death of this
innocente man, whose blood before God asks just auengement. I doubt not but
you remember the words of Solomon, who says. It is as great a sin to
forgive the wicked, as it is evil to condemn the innocente: and as I call
unfeignedly for ryghtfull Judgment, so I hope assuredlye for just execucion.

The Person accused being innocente of the crime that is laid to his charge,
may use the self same places for his own defense, the which his accuse^ used
to prove him ^yltye.

The interpretation of a law, otherwise called the State legal.
IN boultynge out the true meaning of a law, we must use to search out the
nature of the same, by de fining sone one word, or comparing one law with an
other, judging upon good trial, what is right, and what is wrong.

The parts.

i. Definition. ii. Contrary laws. iii. Laws made, and the end of the law
maker iiii. Ambiguitye, or doubtfulnes. v. Probation by things like. vi.
Chalengynge or refusinge.
Definition what it is.
THen we use to define a matter, when we can not agree upon the nature of some
word, the which we learn to know by askyng the question what it is. As for
example. Where one is apprehended for killing a man, we lay murder to his
charge: whereupon the accused person when he grau^teth the killing, and yet
denies it to be murder: we must straight after have recourse to the
definition, and ask, what is murder, by defininge whereof, and comparing the
nature of the word, with his deed done: we shall sone know whether he committed
murder or manslaughter.

Contrary laws.
IT often happens that laws seem to have a certain repugnancie, whereof
among many rises much co^tencio^, where as if both ye laws were well weied and
considered according to their circumstances, they would appear nothing contrari
in matter, though in words they seem to dissent. Christ gives warning, and
charge his disciples in the.x. of Math. that they preach not the glad
tidinges of his coming into the world to the Gentiles, but to the Jews only,
unto whom he was sent by his father. And yet after his resurrection we do read
in the last of Mat. that he commanded his disciples to go into all the whole
world, and preach the glad tidinges of his passion, and ransom, paid for all
creatures living. Now though these.ii laws seem contrary, yet it is nothing
so. For if the Jews would have received Christ, and acknowleged him their
savior, undoubtedly they had been the only children of God, unto whom the
promise and covenant was made from the beginning. But because they refused
their Savior, and crucified the Lord of glory: Christ made the law general,
and called all men to life that would repent, promisinge salvation to all
such as believed and were baptized. So that the particular law, being now
abrogated, must ^^ades give place to the superioure.

Four lessons to be observed, where contrary laws are called in question.
i. The inferioure law must give place to the superior. ii. The law general
must yield to the special. iii. Man's law, to Gods law. iiii. An old law,
to a new law.
There be Laws vtterde by Christ's own mouth, the which if they be taken
according as they are spoken, seem to conteyne great absurdity in them. And
therefore the mind of the law maker must rather be observed, then the bare
words taken only, as they are spoken. Christ says in the v. of Matthew. Math.
v.
If thy right eye be an offense unto thee, pluck him out, and cast him away
from thee. If one give the a blow of thy right cheke, turn to him again thy
left cheke. There be some Eunuchs, that have gelded themselves for the
kingdom of heaven. (...)
Go, and sell all that thou have, (...)
and give it to the poor. He that does not take up his cross and follow me,
is not worthy of me. In all which sentences there is no such meaning, as the
bare words uttered seem to yield. Pluckyng out of the iye, declares an
auoydyng of all evil occasions: receiuyng a blow upon the left cheke,
co^mendes unto us, modesty and patience in adversity. Geldyng, signifies a
subduyng of affeccions, and tamyng the foul lust of pleasure, unto the will
of reason. Go and sell all: declares we should be liberal, and glad to part
with our gooddes to the poor and neady. Bearyng the Cross, be^o^^^eth
sufferance of all sorrows, and miseries in this world. Now to prove that the
will of the law maker, is none other then I have said: I may use the
testimonies of other places in the Scripture, and compare them with these
sentences, and so, judge by just examinacion, and diligent search, the true
meaning of the law maker.

Ambiguitee.
Sometimes a doubt is made, upon some word or sentence, when it signifies
diverse things, or may diversely be taken, whereupon full often arises much
contencion. The lawyers lack no cases, Lawyers.
to fill this part full of examples. For, rather then fail, they will make
doubts often times, where no doubt should be at all. Is his Lease long enough
(quod one): yea sir, it is very long, said a poor husband man. Then (quod
he) let me alone with it, I will find a hole in it, I warrant thee. In all this
talk, I except always the good lawyers, and I may well spare them, for
they are but a few.

Probacion by things like.
WHen there is no certain law by express words uttered for some heinous
offender, we may judge the offense worthy death, by rehersall of some other
Law, that sounds much that way. As thus. The civil law appoyncteth yt he
shall be put in a sack, and cast in the Sea, that kills his father: well, then
he that kills his mother, should by all reason, in like sort be ordered. It
is lawful to have a Magistrate, therefore it is lawful to plead matters
before an officer. And thus, though the last cannot be proved by express
words, yet the same is found lawful, by rehersall of the first.

Chalengyng, or refusyng.
WE use this order, when we remove our sewtes, from one Court to another, as
if a man should appele from the Common place, to the Chauncerie. Or if one
should be called by a wrong name, not to answer unto it. Or if one should
refuse to answer in the spiritual court, and appele to the lord Chauncellor.

The Oracion of right or wrong, called otherwise the state Iuridiciall.
AFter a deed is well known to be done, by some out person, we go to the
next, and search whether it be right, or wrong. And that is, when the manner of
doing is examined, and the matter tried through reasonyng, and much debatyng,
whether it be wrongfully done or otherwise.

The division.
THis state of right or wrong, is two ways divided, whereof the one is, when
the matter by the own nature, is defended to be right, without any further
sekyng, called of the Rhetoricia^s, the state absolute. The other (vsyng little
force, or strength to maintein the matter) is, when outward help is sought,
and bywaies used to pur^hase favor, called otherwise the state assumptiue.

Places of confirmacion for the first kind, are seven.
j. Nature if self. ij. Gods law, and man's law. iij. Custom. iiij.
Aequitie. v. True dealyng. vj. Ancient examples. vij. Couenauntes and deeds
autentique.
TUllie in his most worthy Oracion, made in behalf of Milo, declares that
Milo slew Clodius most lawfully, whom Clodius sought to have slain most
wickedly. For (quod Tullie) if nature have graffed this in man, if law have
confirmed it, if necessity have taught i^ if custom have kept it, if aequitie
have maintained it, if true dealyng has allowed it, if all commonweals have
used it, if deeds ancient have sealed this up, that every creature living
should fense it self, against outward violence: no man can think that Milo
has dooen wrong, in killyng of Clodius, except you think, that when men
mete with thieves, either they must be slain of them, or else condemned of you.

Places of confirmacion for the second kind, are four.
Grauntyng of the fault committed. Blamyng evil company for it. Comparyng
the fault, and declaryng that either they must have done that, or else (...)
done worse Shiftyng it from us, and showing that we did it upon commandment.
COnfessyng of the fault, Confessyng, what it is.
is when the accused person grants his crime, and craves pardon thereupon,
leauyng to ask justice, and leanyng wholly unto mercy

Confession of the fault, used two manner of ways.
The first is, The division.
when one excuses himself, that he did it not willyngly, but unawares, and by
chance.

The second is, when he asks pardone, for the fault done considering his
service to the common weal, and his worthy deeds heretofore dooen, promisyng
amendment of his former evil deed: the which words, would not be used
before a Indge, but before a king, or general of an army. For the Judges
must give sentence, according to the Law: the King may forgive, as being
aucthour of the law, and having power in his hand, may do as he shall think
best.

Blamyng other for the fault done, Blamyng other, how (...) is said.
is when we say that the accused person, would never have done such a
deed, if other against who^ also, this accusacion is intended, had not been
evil men, and given just cause, of such a wicked deed.

Comparyng the fault is when we say, Comparyng the fault.
that by flaiyng an evil man, we have done a good deed, cuttyng away the
corrupt and rotten member, for preseruacion of the whole body. Or thus: some
set a whole town on fire, because their enemies should have none aduau^tage
by it. The Saguntynes being tributarie to the Romans, S^guntines.
slew their own children, burnte their goods, and fired their bodies,
because they would not be subject to that cruel Haniball, and lose their
allegiaunce, due to the Romans.

Shiftyng it from us, Shiftyng the fault from us
is when we say, that if other had not set us on, we would never have
attempted such an enterprise. As often times the soldier says, his
Capitaines biddyng, was his enforcement: the servant thinks his Masters
commandment, to be a sufficient defense for his discharge.

The end of the first Book.
The second Book.
NOw that I have hitherto set furthe what Rhetorique is, whereunto every Orator
is most bound, what the causes be, both in their nature, and also by
number, that comprehend every matter, and what places serve to confirm every
cause: I think it is most mete after the knowledge of all these, to frame an
Oracio^ accordingly, and to show at large, the parts of every Oracion, (but
specially such as are used in judgment) that unto every cause, apt parts
may evermore be added. For every matter has a diverse beginning, neither al
controversies, or matters of weight should always after one sort be rehearsed
nor like reasons used, nor one kind of mouyng affeccio^s, occupied before all
men, and in every matter. And therefore, whereas I have briefly spoken of the^
before, I will now largely declare them, and show the use of them in every
matter, that ^ometh in debate, and is nedeful, through reason to be discussed

An enteraunce, two ways divided.
THe first is called a plain beginning, when the hearer is made apt, to give
good care out of hand, to that which shall follow. A beginning, what it is.


The second is a priuey twinyng, or close creping in, to win favor with much
circu^staunce, called insinuacion Insinuacion.


For in all matters that man takes in hand, this consideracion ought first to
be had, that we first diligently expend the cause, before we go through with
it, that we may be be assured, whether it be lawful, or otherwise. And not
only this, but also we must advisedly mark the men, before whom we speak,
the men against whom we speak, and all the circumstaunces, which belong unto
the matter. If the matter be honest, godly, and such as of right ought to
be well liked, we may use an open beginning, and will the hearers to rejoice,
and so go through with our part. If the cause be loathsome, or such as will
not be well borne withal, but needs much help, and favor of the hearers:
it shall be the speakers part, privily to get favor, and by humble talk, to win their good wills. First, requiryng them to give him the hearing, and
next, not straightly to give judgment, but with mercy to mitigate, all rigor
of the Law. Or in a complaint made, which the counsel shall grievously
stomach, to exaggerate it ye more, if we se just cause to set it forward. And
whereas many often times, are suspect to speak things of malice, or for hope
of gain, or else for a set purpose, as who should say, this I can do: the
wisest will evermore clear themselfes, from all such offenses, and never give
any toke^ so much as in them lies, of any light suspicion.

In accusyng any person, it is best to heap all his faults together, and
whereas any thing seems to make for him, to extenuate the same to the
outermoste. In defendyng any person, it is wisdom to rehearse all his virtues
first and foremest, and with as much art as may be, to wipe away such
faults, as were laid to his charge. And before all things, this would be well
marked, that, whenever we shall largely talk of any matter, we always so
invent, and find out our first enteraunce in the cause, that the same be for
ever taken, even from the nature and bowelles thereof, that al things, which
shall first be spoken, may seem to agree with the matter, and not made as a
Ship man's hose, to serve for every leg. Now whereas any long talk is
used, the beginning thereof is either taken of the matter self, or else of the
persons, that are there present, or else of them, against who^ the accion is
intended. And because the winnyng or victory, rests in three poynctes:
First, in apt teaching the hearers, what the matter is, next in gettyng them
to give good ear, and thirdly, ^^re things most mere for every Orator.
in winnyng their favor: We shall make them understand the matter easily,
To make the hearers to understand the matter.
if first of all we begin to expound it plainly, and in brief words,
setting out the meaning, make them harken to our sayings. And by no means
better, shall the standers by, know what we say, and carry away that, which
they hear, then if at the first, we couche together the whole course of our
tale, in as small room as we can, either by definyng the nature and substance
of our matter, or else by diuidyng it in an apt order, so that neither the
hearers be troubled with confoundyng of matter, and heapyng one thing in
another neck, nor yet their memory dulled with ouerthwarte rehersall, and
disorderly tellyng of our tale. We shall make the people attentive, To make
hearers attentiu^^*
and glad to hear us, if we will promise the^, to speak of weighty matters,
of wholesome doctrine, such as they have heretofore wa^ted: yea, if we promise
to tell them things, concerning either their own profit, or thaduauncement
of their country, no doubt we shall have them diligent hearers. Or else if
they like not to hear weighty affairs, we may promise them strange
news, and persuade them, we will make the^ laugh and think you not, that they
will rather hear a foolish tale then a wise and wholesome counsel?
Demosthenes therefore seeing at a time, Demosthenes tale of the Asses shadow.
the fondnes of the people to be such, that he could not obtein of them, to
hear him speak his mind, in an earnest cause, concerning the wealth of his
country: required them to ^ary, and he would tell them a tale of Robin Hode.
Whereat they all stayed, and longed to know what that should be. He began
straight to tell them, of one that had sold his Ass to another man, whereupon
they both went furthe to the next Market town, having with, them thesaied
Ass. And the wether being somewhat hot, the first awner, which had now sold
his Ass, went of that side the Ass, which kept him best from the heat. The
other being now the awner, and in full possession, would not suffer that, but
required him to give place, and suffer him to take the best commodity, of his
own Ass, that he could have, whereat the other answered and said, naie by
saint Marie sir, you serve me not so, I sold you the Ass, but I sold you
not the shadow of the Ass, and therefore pike you hence. When the people hard
this, they laughed apace, and likte it very well. Whereupon Demosthenes having
won them together, by this merry toye, rebuked their folly, that were so
slack to hear good things, and so ready to hear a tale of a Tubbe, and thus
having them attentive, preswaded with them to hear him, in matters of great
importau^ce, the which otherwise he could never have done, if he had not taken
this way with him.

We shall get the good wills of our hearers, To gett^ the hearers good will.
four manner of ways, either beginning to speak of our selfs, or else of our
adversaries, or else of the people, and company present, or last of all, if we
begin of the matter it self, and so go through with it. We shall get favor for
our own sakes, if we shall modestly set furthe our bounden duties, and
declare our service done, without all suspicion of vauntyng, either to the
common weal, as in seruyng either in the wars abroad, or else in bearyng some
office at home, concerning the tranquillity of our country: or in helpyng our
friends, kynsfolkes, and poor neighbors, to declare our goodness, done
heretofore toward them: and lastly, if we show without all o^tentacion,
as well our good wills toward the judges there, as also pleasures done for
them in times paste, to the outermoste of our power. And if any thing seem to
let our cause, by any misreport, or evil behauior of our parts heretofore:
best it were in most humble wise to seek favor, and slightly to aduoyde all
such offenses, laid to our charge.

We shall get favor, by speaking of our adversaries, if we shall make such
report of them, that the hearers shall either hate to hear of them, or
outerly envy them, or else altogether despise them. We shall sone make our
adversaries to be lothed, if we show and set forth, some naughty deed of
theirs, and declare how cruelly, how vilie, and how maliciously they have used
other men heretofore.

We shall make them to be envied, if we report unto the Judges, that they
bear theimselfes haulte, and stout upon their wealthy friends, and oppress
poor men by might, not regardyng their honesty, but sekyng always by hook
and croke, to rob poor men of their Fermes, Leases, and money. And by the
way declare some one thing, that they have done, which honest ears would
scant abide to hear.

We shall make them to be set naught by, if we declare what luskes they
are, how vnthriftely they live, how they do nothing from day to day, but
eat, drink, and sleep, rather sekyng to live like beasts, then myndyng to
live like men, either in profityng their country, or in tenderyng their own
commodity, as by right they ought to do.

We shall get good will, by speaking of the Judges and hearers: if we shall
commend their worthy doings, and praise their just dealyng, and faithful
execucion of the law, and tell them in what estimacion the whole country has
them for their upright iudgyng and determinyng of matters, and therefore in this
cause needs must it be that they must answer their former doings, and judge
so of this matter, as all good men have opinion they will do.

We shall find favor by speaking of the matter, if in handlyng our own cause,
we commend it accordyngly, and dispraise the attempt of our adversary
extenuatyng al his chief purposes, so much as shall be necessary.

Now rests for me to speak of the other part of Enteraunce into an Oration,
Insinuacion.
which is called a close, or privy gettyng of favor when the cause is
daungerouse, and cannot easily be heard without displeasure.

A privy beginning, or crepyng in, otherwise called Insinuation must then, and
not else be used, when the judge is greaued with us, and our cause hated of the
hearers.

The cause self oftentimes is not lyked for three diverse causes* if either the
matter self be dishonest, and not meet to be vtterd before an audience, or else
if the judge himself by aformer tale be persuaded to take part against us, or
last if at that time we are forced to speak, when the judge is weried with
hearing of other. For the judge himself being weried by hearing, will be much
more grieved if any thing be spoken either ouermuche, or else against his
likyng. Yea, who sees not that a weried man will soon mis^^ke a right good
matter? If the matter be so hainouse that it cannot be heard without offense,
(as if I should take a man's part, who were generally hated) wisdom were to
let him go and take some other whom al men liked: or if the cause were
thought not honest, to take some other instead thereof which were better lyked,
til they were better prepared to hear the other: so that evermore nothing
should be spoken at the first, but that which might please the judge, and
not to be acknowen ones to think of that, which yet we mind most of al to
persuade. Therefore when the hearers are somewhat calmed, we may enter by little
and little into the matter, and say that those things which our adversary
does mislyke in the person accused, we also do mislyke the same.

And when the hearers are thus won, we may say, that all, which was said,
nothing touches us, and that we mind to speak nothing at al against our
adversaries, neither this way, nor that way. Neither were it wisdom openly
to speak against them, which are generally well esteemed and taken for honest
men. And yet it were not amiss for the furtheraunce of our own causes
^losely to speak our fantasy, and so, streighte to altar their hearts. Yea
and to tell the judges the like in a like matter, that such and such judgment
has been given: And therefore at this time consyderyng the same case, and the
same necessity, like judgment is looked for. But if the adversary have so
told his tale that the judge is wholly bent to give sentence with him, and that
it is well known unto what reasons the judge most leaued and was persuaded: we
may first promise to weaken that, which the adversary has made most strong
for him self, and confute that part which the hearers did most esteem, and
best of all like. Or else we may take advantage of some part of our
adversaries tale, and talk of that first, which he spoke last: or else
begin so, as though we doubted what were best first to speak, or to what
part it were most reason first of all to answer, wonderyng, and taking GOD
to wittenesse at the strangeness of his report, and confirmacion of his
cause. For when the standorsby perceive that the aunswerer (whom the
adversaries thought in their mind was wholly abashed) fears so little the
objections of his adversary, and is ready to answer Ad omnia quare, with a
bold contenaunce: they will think that they themselves rather gave rash
credit, and were ouerlighte in beleuyng the first tale: than that he which
now answers in his own cause, speaks without ground, or presumes upon
a stomach to speak for him self without just consideracion.

But if the time be so spente, and the tale so long in tellyng, that a men
b^ almost weried to hear any more: than we must make promise at* the first to
be very short, and to lap up our matter in few words.

And if time may so serve it were good when men be weried to make them
somewhat merry, Mirth making good at the beginning
and to begin with some pleasant tale, or take an occasion to jest wittely
upon some thing then presently done.

Or if the time will not serve for pleasant tales, it were good to tell some
strange thing, Straung things some time nedeful to be told at the first.
some terrible wonder that they all may quake at the only hearing of the same.
For like as when a man's stomach is full and can brook no more meat, he may
stir h^s appetite either by some Tarte sauce, or else quicken it somewhat by
some sweat dishe: even so when the audience is weried with weighty affairs,
some strange wounders may call up their spirits, or else some merry tale
may cheer their heavy looks.

And assuredly it is no small con^yng to move the hearts of men either to
mirthe, or saddenesse: for he that has such skill, shall not lightely fail of
his purpose whatsoever matter he takes in hand.

Thus have I taught what an Enteraunce is, and how it should be used.
Notwithstanding I think it not amiss often to rehearse this one poincte, that
evermore the begyn^ng be not ouermuche labored, nor curiously mad^, but rather
apt to the purpose, Enteraunces apt to the purpose.
seemyng upon present occasion, evermore to take place, and so to be devised,
as though we speak all together without any great study, framyng rather our
tale to good reason, than our toungue to vain paintyng of the matter.

In all which discourse, whereas I have framed all the Lessons and every
Enteraunce properly to serve for pleadyng at the Bar: yet assuredly many of
them ma^e well help those that preach Gods truth, and exhort men in open
assemblies to upright dealyng.

And no doubt many of them have much need to know this Art, that the
rather their tale may hang toguether, where as oftentimes they begin as
much from the matter, as it is betwixt Dover and Barwyke, whereat some take
pity, and many for werines can skante abide their begynnyg, it is so long or
they speak any thing to the purpose. ^nteraunces apt for Preache^s.
Therefore the learned Clerks of this our time, have thought it good that al
Preachers should take their beginning upon the occasion of such matter as is
there written, declaryng why and wherefore and upon what consideracion such
words were in those days so spoken, that the reason given of such talk then
vtterde, might serve well to begin there Sermon. Or else to gather some several
sentence at the first, which brifely comprehends the whole matter following,
or else to begin with some apt similitude, example, or witty saying. Or
lastely to declare what went before, and so to show that which follows
after. Yea sometimes to begin lamentably with an unfeigned bewailyng of
sin, and a terrible declaryng of Gods threats: Sometimes to take occasion
of a matter newly done, or of the company there present, so that always the
beginning be aunswerable to the matter following.

Of Narration.
AFter the preface and first Enteraunce, the matter must be opened, and every
thing lively told, that the hearers may fully perceive what we go about* now
in reportyng an act done, or vtteryng the state of a controversy, Na^ration.
i. Brife. ii. Plain. iii. Probable
we must use these lessons, whereof the first is to be short, the next to be
plain, and the third is, to speak likely, and with reason, that the hearers
may remember, understand, and believe the rather, such things as shall be said.

And first whereas we sholud be short in tellyng the matter as it lies,
^r^uitie how (...) might be used.
the best is to speak no more than needs we must, not rauyng it from the
botome, or tellyng bytales such as rude people full often do, nor yet touching
every poinct, but tellyng the whole in a gross sum. And where as many
matters shall neither harm us, nor yet do us good being brought in, and
reported by us: it were well done not to meddle with them at al, nor yet twyse
to tell one thing, or report that, which is odiouse to be told again.
Notwithstanding this one thing would be well considered that in seeking to be
short, we be not obscure. And therefore to make matter plain, Pla^^en^s how it
might be used.
that all may understand it, the best were first and formest to tell every
thing in order so much as is nedeful, obseruyng both the time, the place, the
manner of doing, and the circumstaunces thereunto belongyng. Wherein good heed
would be had that nothing be doubtfullie spoken, which may have a double
meaning, nor yet any thing vtterde that may make as much against us, as with
us, but that al our words run to confirm wholly our matter. And suerly if
the matter be not so plainly told that al may understand it, we shall do
little good in the rest of our report. For in other parts of ye Oration if we
be somewhat dark, it is the less harm, we may be more plain in an other
place. But if the Narration, or substance of the tale be not well perceived,
the whole Oration besides is darckened altogether. For to what end should we
go about to prove that which the hearers know not what it is? Neither can we
have any liberty to tell our tale again, after we have ones told it, but must
straight go furthe and confirm that which we have said howsoever it is.
Therefore the reportyng of our tale may soon appear plain, if we first
express our mind in plain words, and not seek these rope ^ype terms,
which betraie rather a fool, than commend a wise man: and again if we
orderly observe circumstaunces, and tell one thing after another from time to
time, not tumblyng one tale in an others neck tellyng half a tale, and so
leauyng it raw, hackyng and hemmyng as though our wits and our senses were a
woll gatheryng. Neither should we suffer our tongue to run before our wit,
but with much warenesse set forth our matter, and speak our mind evermore
with judgment.

We shall make our sayings appear lykely, and probable: Probalitie how it might
be used.
If we speak directely as the cause requires, if we show the very purpose
of all the devise, and frame our inuencion according as we shall think them most
willing to allow it, that have the hearing of it.

The Narration reported in matters of judgment shall seem to stand with
reason, Narration (...) judgment.
if we make our talk to agree with the place, time, thing, and person, if we
shall show that whatsoever we say, the same by all likelyhodes is true, if our
conjectures, tookens, reasons, and arguments be such that neither in them
there appear any fablyng, nor yet that any thing was spoken which might of
right otherwise be taken, and that we not only speak this, but that diverse
other of good creditie will stand with us in defense of the same, all which
reportyng may sone be lyked, and the tale so told, may be thougt very
reasonable. Yea, we shall make our doings seem reasonable, if we frame our
work to natures will, and seek none other means, but such only, as the
honest and wise have ever used and allowed, bryngyng in, and blamyng the evil
always for such faults chiefly, whereunto they most of al are like to be
subject* as to accuse a spend al, of theft: a whoremunger, of adultery: a
rash quareller, of manslaughter: and so of other. Sometimes it is good and
profitable to be merry and pleasant in reportyng a matter, against some manner
of man and in some cause. For neither against all men that offend, nor yet
against all matters should the witty always use iestyng. And now for those
that shall tell their mind in the other kinds of Oratorie, as in the kind
Demonstratiue, Deliberatiue, in exhortyng or perswadyng: Narration in praisyng
and counsel geuyng.
the learned have thought meet, that they must also call the whole sum of
their matter to one especial poincte, that the rather the hearers may better
perceive whereat they leauel al their reasons. As if a Clarke do take in hand
to declare Gods hest, he will after his Enteraunce, Preachers what order they
use.
tell what thing is chiefly purposed in that place, and next after, show
other things annexed thereunto whereby not only the hearers may g^tte great
learning, and take much profit of his doctrine, but he him self may know the
better what to say, what order to use, and when to make an end.

Some do use after the literal sense to gather a mystical understanding, and
to expound the sayings spiritually, making their Narration altogether of
things heavenly. Some rehersing a text particularly spoken, apply the same
generally unto all states, enlargyng the Narration most Godly by comparyng
words long ago spoken, with things and matters that are presently done.
Notwithstanding the ancient fathers because they did only expound the
Scriptures for the most part, made no artificial Narration: but used to
follow such order as the plain text gave them. So that if every sentence
were plainly* opened to the hearers, they went not much farther, saving that
when any word gave them occasion to speak of some vice, they would largely
say their mind in that behaulfe: As Chrysostom and Basile have done, with
other.

The ware markyng and heedie obseruacion of time, place, and person may teach
al men (that be not past teaching,) how to frame their Narration in all
Controversies that are called in Question, and therefore when present occasion
shall give good instruction, what need more lessons? And especially seeing
nature teaches what is comely, and what is not comely, for all times.

Yea what tell I now of such lessons, seeing GOD has raised such worth
Preachers in this our time, that their Godly, and learned doings, may be a
most just example for all other to follow: as well for their living, as for
their learning. I fear me the precepts are more in number, than will be well
kept or followed this year.

Of Division.
AFter our tale is told, and the hearers have well learned what we mean, the
next is to report wherein the adversary and we, cannot agree, and what it
is wherein we do agree. And then to part out such principal poinctes whereof
we purpose fully to debate, and lay them out to be known: that the hearers
may plainly see, what we will say, and perceive at a word, the substance of
our meaning. Now Tullie would not have a division to be made, of, or above three
parts at the most, nor yet less than three neither, if need so require. for if
we have three chief grou^des whereupon to rest, Division of three parts at the
most.
appliyng al our arguments theru^to we shall both have matter enough to speak
of, the hearers shall with ease understand our meaning, and the whole Oration
shall sone be it at an end. Notwithstanding this lesson must not so curiously
be kept, as though it were sin to make the division of four, or five
parts, but it was spoken for this end that the division should be made of as
few as may be possible, that men may the better carry it away and the
reporter with more ease may remember what he has to say. Now in praisyng,
or dispraisyng, in perswadyng, or disswadyng, divisions must also be used. As
if one would enueighe against those women that will not give their own
chidren suck, he might use this division. Where as women commonly put their
children furthe to nursyng, I will first prove that it is both against the
law of nature and also against Gods holy will: ^vomen rebuked that nurse not
their own children.
Again I will show that it is harmefull both for the childs body, and also
for his wit, lastly, I will prove that the mother self falls into much
sickness thereby.

First, nature gives milk to the woman for none other end, but that she
should bestow it upon her child. And we see beasts feed there youngones,
and why should not women? GOD also commands all women to bring up their
children.

Again, the childrens bodies shall be so affected, as the milk is which they
receive. Now, if the Nurse be of an evil complexion, or have some hid
disease, the child suckyng of her breast must needs take part with her. And
if that be true which the learned do say, that the temperature of the mind
folowes the constitucion of the body, needs must it be that if the Nurse be
of a naughty nature, the child must take thereafter. But be it, the Nurse be
of a good complexion, of an honest behavior (whereas contrary wise Maidens
that have made a escape are commonly called to be Nurses) yet can it not be
but that the mothers milk should be much more natural for the child, than
the milk of a stranger.

As by experience, let a man be long used to one kind of drink, if the same
man change his air, and his drink, he is like to mislyke it. Lastely for the
mothers, how are they troubled with sore breasts besides other diseases that
happen through plenty of milk* the which Phisicians can tell, and women
full often have felt. Likewise in speaking of fasting, I might use this
division. First, (...) godly to fast, because the spirit is more free and
ap^er for any good work. Again it is wholesome, because thereby evil humors
are waisted, and many diseases either clearly put away, or much abated of
their tira^nie. Lastly it is profitable, because men spend less money, the
less bankequetyng that they use. Therefore, if men love either to be wise,
godly, healthful, or wealthy, let the^ use fasting, and forbear excess.

Now upon a division, there might also be made a subdiuision, as where I say,
it is godly to fast, I might divide go^linesse, into the hearing of Gods
word, into pra^yng ^^uoutly, and charitable dealyng with all the world.

Again, speaking of health, I might say that the whole body, is not only
more Iustie with moderate fasting, but al so more apt for all assaies. The
learned man studieth better when he fasteth, then when he is full. The
cou^sailor hears causes with less pain being empty, then he shall be able
after a full gorge.

Again, whereas the five senses, bring us to the knowleg^ of many things: the
more apt that every one is, the mo^e pleasure they bring ever with the^. The
iyes se more clearly, the ears hear more quickly, the tongue rouleth more
rou^dly, and tastes things better, and the nose smells evil savors the
sooner.

Philosophy is divided into the knowledge of things natural, (...)
things moral, and into that art, which by reason finds out the truth,
commonly called Logique. Now of these three parts of Philosophy, I might
make other three subdiuisions, and largely set them out. But these may suffice
for this time.

Of Proposicions.
QUintilian wills, that straight and immediately after the Narracion, there
should also be used such sentences, as might be full of pithe, and contein
(...) the^ the substance of much matter, the rather that the hearers may be
stirred upon the only report, of some sentencious saying, or weighty text in
the law. As in speaking largely against extorcio^, one might after his reasons
applied to the purpose, bring in a pithie and sentencious proposicion as thus.
Those hands are evil that scratche out the iyes: and what other do they,
that by force rob their Christian brethren? Woe be to that realm, where might
outgoeth right Or thus, when rage does rule, and reason does wait, what good
man can hope to live long in rest. Also an act of a realm may well serve to
make a proposicion. As thus. The law is plain: that man shall dye as an
offendour, whatsoever he be thatbreaketh up another man's house, and seeks
by spoil to undo his neighbor. Now here is no man^ that doubts, but that
thou have done this deed, therefore, what needs any more, but that thou must
suffer, according to the law? In diuidyng a matter, proposicio^s are used, and
orderly applied for the better setting forth of the cause. As if I should speak
of thankfulness, I might first show, what is thankfulness, Thankfulness, what
it is.
next how needful it is, and last, how commendable and profitable it is
universally? Thankfulness is a kind of reme^bryng good will showed, and an
earnest desire to requi^e the same. Without thankfulness, no man would do for
another. The brute beasts have these properties, and therefore man cannot want
the^, without his great rebuke. Some proposicions are plain spoken, without
any cause, or reason added thereunto. As thus. I have charged this man with
felony, as you have hard, but he denies it: therefore judge you it, I pray you
Sometimes a cause is added, after the allegyng of a proposicio^. As thus, I
have accused this man of felony, because he took my pursse by the high way
side, and therefore I call for justice. (...)
Thus proposicions might be gathered, next and immediately after the
rehersall of any cause, and beautify much the matter, being either alleged
with the cause annexed, or else being plainly spoken, without geuyng any reason
to it at all.

Of confirmacion in matters of judgment.
WHen we have declared the chief poynctes, whereunto we purpose to refer all
our reasons, we must heap matter and find out arguments, to confirm
the same to the outermoste of our power, making first the strongest reasons
that we can, and next after, gatheryng all probable causes together, that
being in one heap, they may seem strong, and of great weighte. And
whatsoever the adversary has said against us, to answer thereunto, as time
and place best may serve. That if his reasons be light, and more good may
be done in confutyng his, then in confirmyng our own: it were best of all to
set upon him, and put away by art, all that he has fondely said without
wit. For prouyng the matter, and searchyng out the substance, or nature of
the cause, (...)
the places of Logique must help to set it forward. But when the person
shall be touched, and not the matter, we must seek else where, and gather these
places together.

i. The name. ii. The manner of living. iij. Of what house he is, of what
country and of what years. iiij. The wealth of the man. v. His behavior or
daily enuryng with things. vi. What nature he has. vij. Whereunto he is most
given. viij. What he purposes from time to time. ix. What he has done
heretofore. x. What has befaulne unto him heretofore. xi. What he has
confessed, or what he has to say for himself.
IN well examinyng of all these matters, much may be said, and great
likelihodes may be gathered, either to or fro, the which places I used
heretofore, when I spoke of matters in judgment, against the accused
soldier. Now in triyng the truth, by reasons gathered of the matter: we must
first mark what was done at that time by the suspected person, when such and
such offenses were committed. Yea, what he did, before this act was dooen.
Again, the time must be marked, the place, the manner of doing, and what heart
he bare him. As thoportunitie of doing and the power he had to do this deed.
The which all set together, that either acquitte him, or find him giltee.
These arguments serve to confirm a matter in judgment, for any heinous
offense. But in the other causes which are occupied, either in praisyng, or
dispraisyng, in perswadyng, or diswadyng, the places of confirmacion, be such
as are before rehearsed, as when we commend a thing, to prove it thus. Honest
to be done. Profitable. Easy. Necessary.

And so of other in like manner, or else to use instead of these, the places of
Logique. Therefore, when we go about to confirm any cause, we may gather
these grounds above rehearsed, and even as the case requires, so frame our
Reasones. In confutyng Confutacion.
of causes, the like may be had, as we used to prove: if we take the contrary
of the same. For as things are alleged, so they may be wrested, and as houses
are builded, so they may be overthrown. What though many conjectures be
gathered, and diverse matters framed, to overthrow the defendaunt: yet wit
may find out bywaies to escape, and such shifts may be made either in
auoydyng the danger, by plain denial, or else by obieccions, and reboundyng
again of reasons made, that small harm shall turue to the accused person,
though the presu^ptions of his offense be great, and he thought by good reason
to be faulty. Placed of Log^^ue most needful.
The places of Logique, as I said, cannot be spared, for the confirmacion of
any cause. For, who is he, that in confirmyng a matter, will not know the nature
of it, the cause of it, theffect of it, what is agreyng thereunto, what
likeness there is betwixt that, and other things, what examples may be
used, what is contrary, and what can be said aginst it. Therefore, I wish
that every manne should desire and seek to have his Logique perfect, before he
look to profit in Rhetorique, considering the ground and confirmacio^ of
causes, is for the most part gathered out of Logique.

Of conclusion.
A Conclusion is the handsome lappyng up together, Conclusion, what it is.
and brief heapyng of all that, which was said before, stirryng the hearers
by large vtteraunce, and plentiful gatheryng of good matter, either the one
way, or the other.

There are two parts of a conclusion, Conclusion, of two sorts.
the one rests in gatheryng together briefly, all such arguments as were
before rehearsed, reportyng the so^me of them, in as few words as can be, and
yet after such a sort, that much variety be used* both when the rehersall
is made, as also after the matter is fully reported. For, if the repeticion
should be naked, and only set furthe in plain words, without any change of
speech, or shift or Rhetorique: neither should the hearers take pleasure, nor
yet the matter take effect. Therefore, when the Orator shall touch any place,
which may give just cause to make an exclamacion, and stir the hearers to
be sorry to be glad, or to be offended: it is necessary to use art to the
outermoste. Or when he shall come to the repeatyng of an heinous act, and the
manner thereof: he may set the Judges on fire, and heat them earnestly against
the wicked offender Thus in repeatyng, art may be used, and next with the
only rehersall, matters may be handesomely gathered up together.

The other part of a conclusion rests, either in augmentyng and vehemently
enlargyng that, which before was in few words spoken, to set the Judge or
hearers in a heat: or else to mitigate and assuage displeasure conceived, with
much lamentyng of the matter, and mouyng them thereby the rather to show
mercy. Amplificacion is of two sorts, whereof I will speak more at large,
in the next Chapter. The one rests in words, the other in matter. Such
words must be used, as be of great weight, wherein either is some
Metaphore, or else some large understanding is contained. Yea, words that fill
the mouth, and have a sound with them, set furthe a matter very well. And
sometimes words twice spoken, make the matter appear greater.

Again, when we first speak our mind in low words, and after use
weightier, the fault likewise seems to be greater As when one had killed a
ientleman, thus might another amplify his mind. For one slave to strike
another, were worthy of punishment, but what deserves that wretch, which not
only strikes a man, but strikes a ientlemanne, and not only strikes a
ientleman, but cowardly kills a ientlemanne, not geuyng him one wound, but
geuyng him twenty. To kill any manne in such sort, deserves death, but
what say you to him, that not only kills him so, but also hangs him most
spitefully upon a tree. And yet not content with that, but scourges him, and
mangeleth him when he is dedde, and last of all, makes a jest of his most
naughty deed, leauyng a writing there, about the dedde man's neck. Now
then seeing his crueltee is such, that thouly killyng, cannot content his
deuilishe deed, and most dedly malice: I ask it for Gods love, and in the
way of Justice, that this wicked Devil, may suffer worthy death, and be
punished to the example of all other. Amplifiyng of the matter, consists in
heapyng, and enlargyng of those places, which serve for confirmacion of a
matter. As the definicion, the cause, the consequent, the contrary, the
example, and such other.

Again, amplificacion may be used, when we make the law to speak, the dedde
person to make his complaint, the con^trey to cry out of such a deed. As if
some worthy manne were cast away, to make the country say thus: If England
could speak, would she not make such, and such complaints? if the walls of
such a city or town, had a tongue, would they not talk thus and thus? And
to be short, all such things should be used, to make the cause seem great,
which concern God, the common weal, or the law of nature. For if any of
these three be hindered, we have a large field to walk in. In praisyng, or
dispraisyng, we must exaggerate those places toward the end, which make
men wonder at the strangeness of any thing. In perswadyng, or disswadyng,
the rehersall of commoditees, and heapyng of examples together, increase much
the matter. It were a great labor to tell all the commoditees, and all the
properties, which belong unto the conclusion. For such art may be used in
this behalf, that though the cause be very evil, yet a witty manne may
get the ouerhande, if he be cunnyng in his facultee.

The Athenians Athenians for bad conclusio^s
therefore did straightly forbid by a law, to use any conclusion of the cause,
or any entrance of the matter to win favor. Cicero did herein so excel,
that lightly he got the victory in all matters, that ever he took in hand.
Therefore as iust^ praise arises by this part, so I doubt not, but the
wittiest will take most pains in this behalf, and the honest, for ever will
use the defense of most honest matters. Weapons may be abused for murder,
and yet weapons are only ordained for saufgard.

Of the figure amplificacio^.
Among all the figures of Rhetorique, there is no one that so much helps
forward an Oracion, and beautifieth the same with such delitefull ornaments,
as does amplificacion. (...)
For if either we purpose to make our tale appear vehemente, to seem
pleasant, or to be well stored with much copy: needs must it be that here we
seek help, where help chiefly is to be had, and not else where. And now
because none shall better be able, to amplify any matter then those, which
best can praise, or most dispraise any thing here upon earth, I think it
needful, first of all to gather such things together, which help best
this way. Therefore in praisyng, or dispraisyng, we must be well stored ever
with such good sentences, as are often used in this our life, the which
through art being increased, help much to persuasion. As for example, where
it is said (ientle behauioure wynneth good will, and clearly quensheth
hatered) I might in commendyng a noble ientlemanne for his lowliness, declare
at large how commendable, and how profitable a thing, ientle^behauioure is,
and of the other side, how hateful and how harmefull, a proud disdainful
manne is, and how beastly a nature he has, that being but a man, thinks
himself better then any other manne is, and also over good to have a match or
fellow in this life. As thus, if lowelinesse Lowliness.
and Charitee maintain life, what a beast is he, that through hatered will
purchase death? If God warns us to love one another, and learn of him to be
ientle, because he was ie^tle and humble in heart: how cruel are they, that
dare withstand his commandment? If the subject rebel against his king, we
cry with one voice, hang him, hang him, and shall we not think him worthy
the vilest death of all, that being a creature, contempneth his creator,
being a mortal manne neglects his heavenly maker, being a vile moulde of
claie, sets light by so mighty a God, and ever living King? Beasts and
birds without reason, love one another, they shroude, and they flock
together, and shall men endued with such gifts, hate his even christian, and
eschew company? When Sheep do straie, or cattle do strive one against
another, there are Dogs ready to call them in, yea, they will bite them (as it
has been full often seen) if two fight together: and shall man want reason,
to bark against his ^ewde affeccions, or at the least shall he have none to
check him for his faults, and force him to forgive? Likewise if you would
rebuke one that gives ear to backbiters Backbityng.
and slaunderers, ye must declare what a great mischief an evil tongue is,
what a poysone it is, yea, what a murder, to take a man's good name from him.
We compte him worthy death, that poysoneth a man's body, and shall not he
suffer the like pain that poysoneth a man's honesty, and seeks to obscure
and darken his estimacion? Men be well accepted among the wise, not for
their bodies, but for their virtues. Now take a way the thing, whereby men
are commended: and what are men, other then brute beasts? For beasts do
nothing against nature, but he that goes against honesty, the same manne
fights against nature, which would that all men should live well. When a man is killed secretly, we ask Judgment for the offendour, and shall they
escape without Judgment, that covertly murder a man's soul? That separate
him from GOD, that Judge him to hell, whose life has ever been most
heavenly? When our pursse is piked, we make strieght search for it again,
and emprisone the offendoure, and shall we not seek recouerye of our good name,
when evil tongues have stained it? If our fame be of more price, then is
either gold or gro^es, what mean we to be so careless in keeping the one,
and so careful in keeping the other? Fond is his purpose that being in the
rain, casts his garmente in a Bushe, and stands naked him self, for
saving the gloss of his gaye coat. And yet what other thing do they that
esteem the loss of money, for great lack: and count not the loss of their
honesty for any want at all? Thus we see, that from virtues and vices, such
amplifications may be made, and no doubt he that can praise or dispraise any
thing plentifullye, is able most copiouslye to exaggerate any matter.

Again, (...)
sentences gathered and heaped together commend much the matter. As if one
should say: Reuengemente (...)
belongs to God alone, and thereby exhort men to patience: He might bring
in these sentences with him, and give great cause of much matter. No man is
hurt but of him self, that is to say: adversity or wrong sufferinge is no
harm to him that has a constaunt h^rte, and lives upright in all his doings.

He is more harmed that does wrong, then he that has suffers wrong.

He is the stowter that contemns, then he is that commits wrong.

Yea, he gayneth not a little, that had rather suffer much loss, then try his
right by contention.

Gain got by fraud, is harm and no gain.

There is no greater victory, then for manne to rule his affections.

It is a greater matter to overcome anger, then to win a fortress or a tower.

There is no greater token of a noble heart, then to contemn wrong.

He that requiteth evil for evil: through hatred of an evil manne, is made
evil him self, and therefore worthy to be hated.

He that contemns his enemy in battle, is counted a goodman of war, and
a wise.

He that requiteth good for evil, is an angel of God.

He that minds reuengemente, is at the next door to manslaughter.

God is moved with nothing sooner to forgive us our^ offenses, then if we for
his sake fo^geue one another.

The requitinge of injuries has no end.

Strife is best ended through Patience

Anger is a madness, differing from it in this point only, that anger is
short, and tarieth not long, madness abides still.

It is folly to suffer the foam of a horse, or the striking of his foot, and
not abide any thing that a fool does, or a noughtye disposed fellow
speaks.

No man trusts a dronkard: And yet seeing the dronke^nes of rage, and madness
of anger, are much more dangerous then surfetinge with wine: he does folly
shely that trusts his own wit any thing, when he is in a rage. Good
deeds should all ways be remembered, wrong doing should sone be forgeuen,
and sone be forgotten.

Again for liberalitye, Liberality commended with heaps of sentences.
these sentences might serve. It is the property of a God to help man. He
has received a good turn by geuynge, that has bestowed his liberalitye upon
a worthy man.

He gives twice, that gives sone and chearefully.

God loves the glad geuer.

It is a poyncte of liberality, sometimes to lose a good turn.

He that gives to him that will evil use it, gives no good thing, but an
evil thing.

Nothing is more safelye laid up, then is that which is bestowed upon good
folk.

Be not afraid to sow good fruit.

Nothing is better given to Christ, then is that which is given to the pore.

No one man is borne for him self.

He is unworthy to have, that has only for him self.

The third kind of Amplifiynge is when we gather such sentences as are
communelye spoken, or else use to speak of such things as are notable in
this life. Of the first these may be examples. In lamenting the miserye of
wardeshyppes, Proverbs alleged, help Amplificatio^.
I might say it is not for naught so communely said: I will handle you like a
ward. She is a step mother to me: that is to say, she is not a natural
mother: who is worsse shodde then the shomakers wife? that is to say:
gentilmens children full often are kept but meanelye. Trotte sire, and trotte
damme, how should the fool amble, that is, when both father and mother were
naught, it is not like that the child will prove good, without an especial
grace of God.

Likeryshe of tongue, light of tail: that is, he or she that will fare
dainetelye, will often live full wantonlye. Sone ripe, sone rotten. Honor
changes manners. Enoughe is as good as a feast. It is an evil coke that can
not li^ke his own fingers. I will sooner trust mine eye, then mine ear. But
what need I heap all these together, seeing Heywodes Proverbs are in prynte,
where plentye are to be had: whose pains in that behalf, are worthy
immortal praise.

Things notable Things notable or strange, help forward Amplification.
in this life are those, the which chance to few. As this: To see a man of an
hundred years of age. A young child as sober as a man of fiftye years. A woman
that has had.xxiiij. children. A man once worth three or four thousand
pownde, now not worth a grote. A young man fayrer then any woman. A woman that
has had seven or eight husbands. A man able to draw a yard in his bow
besides the feathers. A man merye now, and dead within half an hour after.
There is none of all these, but serve much to make our talk appear
vehemente, and increase the weight of communication. As for example, If one
would persuade an old man to contemn the vanities of this world, he might
use the examples of sudden death, and show that children have dyed in their
mothers lap, some in their cradell, some stryplinges, some elder, and that
not one emonge a thousand comes to three score years.

Or be it that some live an hundred years, beyond the which not one in this
last age passes, what is there in this life, for the which any manne should
desire to live long, seeing that old age brings this only commoditye with
it, that by long living, we see many things, that we would not see, and
that many a man has shortened his life, for wearines of this wretched
world* Or what though some pleasures are to be had in this life, what are
they al to the pleasures of the life to come? Likewise in speakinge of evil
hap, I might bring him in that was once worth three thousand pound, and
is not now worth three grotes, and persuade men either to set light by
riches, or else to comfort them, and persuade them not to take thought,
seeing great harms have happened to other heretofore, and time may come when
God will send better. These sentences above rehearsed, being largely
amplified, increase much any such kind of matter.

^vhat is amplification.
AMplification is a figure in Rhetorique, which consists most in
Augmentynge and diminishynge of any matter, and that diverse ways.

The division of Amplification.
AL Amplification and diminishynge either is taken out of the substance in
things, or else of words. Out of the substance and matter, affections are
derived: out of words, such kinds of amplification, as I will now show,
and partly have showed before, when I spoke of the Conclusion, or lappynge up
of any matter.

The first kind of Amplification is, when by changing a word, in
augmentynge we use a greater, but in diminishynge, we use a less. Of the
first, this may be an example. When I see one sore beaten, to say he is
slain: to call a naughtye fellow, thief, or hangemanne, when he is not known
to be any such. To call a womanne that has made a escape, a commune harlot:
to call an Alehouse haunter, a dronkarde: to call one that is troubl^d with
choler, and often angrye, a mad manne: to call a pleasant gentilman, a
raylynge iester: to call a covetous man, a devil.

Of the latter, these examples shall be: when one has sore beaten his fellow,
for the same manne to say that he has scant touched him: When one has sore
wounded another, to say that he hurt him but a little: when one is sore sick,
to be said he is a little crased. Diminution
In like manner also, when we give vices, the names of virtue, as when I call him
that is a cruel or merciless man, somewhat soore in judgment. When I call a
natural fool, a plain simple man: when I call a notable flatterer, a fair
spoken man: a glutton, a good fellow at his table: a spend all, a liberal
gentilman: a snudge, or pynche penye, a good husband, a thriftye man.

Now in all these kinds, where words are amplified, they seem much
greater, if by corretion Correction.
the sentence be vtterde, and greater words compared with them, for whom they
are vtterde. In the which kind of speech, we shall seem as though we went
up by stayres, not only to the top of a thing, but also above the top.
There is an example hereof in the seventh action that Tullie made against
Uerres. It is an offense to bind a Citezen of Rome with chains, it is an
heinous deed to whyppe him: it is worse then manslaughter to kill him: what
shall I call it to hang him up upon a gibet? If one would commend the
aucthoritye which he alleges, he might say thus. These words are no fables
vtterde emonge men, but an assured truth left unto us by writing, and yet not
by any commune writynge, but by such as all the world has confirmed and
agreed upon, that it is autentique, and canonical: neither are they the words
of one, that is of the commen sort, but they are the words of a doctor in the
church of God, and yet not the words of a divine, or doctoure of the commune
sort, but of an Apostle: and yet not of one that is the worste, but of Paul,
that is the best of al other: and yet not Paul's, but rather the words of the
holy ghost, speaking by the mouth of Paul. He that loves to enlarge by this
kind, must marcke well the circumstaunces of things, and heapynge them
altogether, he shall with ease espy how one thing rises above an other. And
because the use hereof extends largelye, I w^ll largelye use examples. As
thus. If a gentleman and officer of the kings, being ouercharged at Supper
with ouermuche dry^ke, and surfetyng with gorge upon gorge, should vomit the
next day in the Parliamente house: I might enueyghe thus: O shameful deed, not
only in sight to be lothed, but also odious of all men to be heard. If thou
had done this deed at thine own house being at Supper with thy wife and
children, who would not have thought it a filthy deed? but now for the to do it
in the Parliamente house, among so many gentilme^, and such, yea, the best in all England: being both an officer of the kings, and a man of much
aucthoritye, and there to cast out gobbets (where belchinge were thought
great shame) yea, and such gobbets as none could abide the smell, and to
fill the whole house with evil sauoure, and thy whole bosom with much
filthiness, what an abominable shame is it above all other? It had been a foul
deed of it self to vomit where no such gentilmen were: yea, where no
gentilmen were: yea, where no Englysh men were: yea, where no men were: yea, where
no company were at al: or it had been evil, if he had borne no manner of office,
or had been no public officer, or had not been the kings officer: but being
not only an officer, but a public officer, and that the kings officer: yea,
and such a kings, and doing such a deed: I ca^ not tell in y^ world what to
say to him. Diverse examples mayebe invented like unto this. As thus, against
an head officer in a noble man's house, I might enueigh thus. Now Lord, what a
man is he, he was not ashamed being a gentilman, yea, a man of good years, and
much authority, and the head Officer in a Dukes house, to play at dyce in
an al^house with boys, bawdes, and verlets. It had been a a great fault to
play at so vile a game, emonge such vile persons, being no gentilman, being
no officer, being not of such years: But being both a man of fair lands,
of an ancient house, of great authority, an officer to a duke, yea, and to
such a Duke, and a man of such years, that his white heeres should warn him
to avoid all such foly^, to play at such a game, with such roysters, and
such verlets, y^a, and that in such a house as none come thither but thieves,
bawdes, and Ruffians: now before God I can not speak shame enoughe of him.
There is an other kind of Amplification when unto the highest, there is added
some thing higher then it is. As thus. There is not a better preacher emonge
them all, except Hughe Latimer, the father of all preachers. Th^re is no
better Latin man within England, except Gualter Haddon the lawe^.

Again, we amplifye a matter not ascendyng by degrees, but speakinge that
thing only, than the which no greater thing can be spoken. As thus. Thou
haste killed thine own mother, what shall I say more, thou have killed ^hine
own mother. Thou have deceived thy sovereign Lord and king, what shall I say
more, thou have deceived thy sovereign Lord and king.

Sometimes we amplify by comparynge, and take our ground upon the weakest
and least, the which if they seem great, then must that neades appear
gr^ate, which we would amplify and increase. As Tullie against Catiline.
My servants in good south, if they feared me in such sort, as all the
Citezens do fear thee: I would think it best for me to forsake my house. Thus
by using the less first, this sentence is increased, few servants are
compared with all the citezens, bondmen are compared with free men: Tullie the
master, is compared with Catiline the traitor, which was neither lord nor
ruler over the Citezens: and Tullies house is compared with the City.

By comparing of examples, we use also to increase our matter. As thus. Did
the Mayor of London thrust through Jack Straw being but a verlet rebel, and
only disquietinge the City: and shall the king suffe^ Capi^a^ne Kete to live
in Englandes ground, and ^^ioye the (...) of his realm, being a most
tyrannou^ tray^oure, and such a rebel as sought to overthrow the whole Re^^m^?

Here is Jack Straw compared with Captain Ket^ the City of London, with
the whole Realm, the Maio^ with the king. So that if he which is a private
person, and has no power of death, might punyshe with death the
disquietynge of a City: the king him self having all power in his hand,
may iustelye punish him that seeks to overthrow his whole realm.

The places of Logique help often for Amplification. As, where men have a
wrong opinion, and think theft a greater fault then slander, one might
prove the contrary as well by circumstaunces, as by arguments. And first he
might show that slander is theft, and that every slaunderer Slander, a
greater off^^ce then theft^
is a thief. For as well the slaunderer as the thief, do take away an other
man's possession against the owners will. After that he might show that a
slaunderer is worse then any thief, because a good name is better then all
the goods in the world: and that the loss of money may be recovered, but
the loss of a man's good name, can not be called back again, and a thief
may restore that again which he has taken away, but a slaunderer can not
give a man his good name again, which he has taken from him. Again, he that
steals goods or cattle, robbes only but one man, but an evil tongued man
infecteth all their minds: unto whose ears this report shall come.

Besides this, there are laws and remedies to subdue thieves: but there is no
law against an evil tongue. Again, all such heinous Offenses are ever the
more greuouslye punished, the more closlie, and more craftelye they are
committed. As it is thought a greater fault to kill one with poison, then to
kill him with the sword, and a more heinous offense to commit murder, then to
commit ma^slaughter: we may gather an argument also from the instrumente or
manner of doing. As a thief has done this offense with his hand, a slaunderer
has done it with his tongue. Again, by the judgment of al men,
enchauncement is a notable evil: But they that infecte a prince or a king
with wicked counsel, are not they more wicked enchaunters, considering they
do as much as if one should Poison a conduite head, or a River from whence
al men featche their water. And yet they do more, for it is a greater fault to
poison the mind, than the body. Thus by the places and circumstaunces, great
matter might be made.

By contrraries set together, things oftentimes appear greater. As if one
should set Lukes Ueluet against Geane velvet, the Lukes will appear better, and
the Geane will seem worser. Or set a fair woman against a foul, and she
shall seem much the fairer, and the other much the fouler. According
whereunto there is a saying in Logique* Contraria inter se opposita magis
elucescunt. That is to say, Contraries being set, the one against the other,
appear more evident. Therefore if any one be disposed to set fur^he chastity,
he may bring in, of the contrari^ part, whordome, and show what a foully
offense it is to live so uncleanly, and then the deformity of whoredom shall
much set forth chastity: or if one be disposed to persuade his fellow to
learning and knowledge, he may show of the contrary what a naked wretch, man
is, yea how much a man is no man, and the life no life, when learning o^es
wa^teth. The like help we may have by comparyng like examples together either
of creatures living, or of things not living: As in speaking of constauncie,
to show the Son who ever keeps one course: in speaking of inco^staunce to
show the Moo^e which keeps no certain course. Again, in young Storkes
Storkes.
we may take an example of love toward their damme, for when she is old,
and not able for her crooked bil to pick meat, the youngones feed her. In
young Uipers ^ipers.
there is a contrary example (for as Pliny says) they eat out their dammes
womb, and so come forth. In Hens there is a care to bring up their
chickens, is Egles the contrary, which cast out their eggs if they have any
mo then three: and al because they would not be troubled with bryngyng up of
many.

There is also a notable kind of amplification when we would extenuate and
make less, great faults, which before we did largely increase: to the end that
other faults might seem the greatest above all other. As if one had robbed
his master, thrust his fellow through the arm, acco^paned with harlottes,
kept the tavern till he had been as drunk as a ratte: to say after a large
inuectiue against al these offenses. You have heard a whole court roll of
ribauldrie and yet al these are but fle bitynges in respect and comparison of
that which I shall now show you. Who does not look for a maru^ilouse great
matter and a most hainouse offense, when those faults that are thought most
greuouse are counted but fle bitynges in respect and comparison of that which
he myndeth to rehearse? In like manner, one might exhort ye people to godliness,
and whereas he has set forth all the commodities that follow the same, as in
showyng a quiet conscience not gilty of any great fault, the liberty of
spirit, the peace which we have with GOD, the fellowship with all the elect,
for the servant of Satan, to be the son of GOD the comfort of the soul,
the greatenesse whereof no man is able to conceive: to say at length, and what
can be greater, what can be more excellent, or more blesseful? and yet al these
are small matters if they be compared with the blessed enheritaunce of the
everliving God prepared for all those that live Godly here upon earth,
fastenyng there whole trust upon Christ above, which both is able, and will
save all those that ca^ unto him with faith. We do increase our cause by
reasonyng the matter and casting our account, when either by things that
follow, or by things that go before, or else by such things as are annexed
with the matter, we give sentence how great the thing is. By things going
before I judge when I see an ^nuiouse, or hasty man fight wi^h an other as
hasty, that there is like to be bloodshed. As who should say, can enuiouse,
or hasty men match together, but that they must needs try the matter with
bloudshedyng? Assuredly it can not be otherwise but that blood must appease
their rage. Likewise seeing two wise men earnestly talkyng together, I cannot
otherwise judge but that their talk must needs be witty, and concern some
weighty matter. For to what end should wise men join, or wherefore should
they lay their heads together, if it were not for some earnest cause? wh^t a
shame i^ it for a strong man, of much health and great manhood, to be overcome
with a cup of drink. From things joined with the cause, thus. A woman
having her housbande emprisoned, and in danger of death, soubdenly step
before the King and craved his pardon. Bold was that woman which durst
adventure to knele before a King, whose housband had so grievously offended.
Though wo^en by nature are fearful, yet in her appeared a manly stomach, and a
good bold heart, yea even in great^st danger. By things that follow, thus,
al England lament the death of Duke Henry and Duke Charles two noble brethren
of the house of Suffolk. Then may we well judge that these two ientlemen were
wonderfully beloved, when they both were so lamented.

There is a kind of Amplifiyng, when in speaking of.ii. that fought together,
we praise him much that had the worse, because we would the other to have
more praise. Co^sideryng for a man to beat a boy, it were no praise, but for
a talle man to match with an other, that were as talle as him self: that were
somewhat worth. Therefore I would have the Scotts well praised, whom the
Englishmen have so often vanquished. He that praises much ^he stronghold of
Boleine, must needs thereby praise king Henry the.viij. of England, who by
martial power, won it, and kept it al his life time. Or thus. Such a one
kepes a marueilouse good house, for the worst boie in his house drynkes one and
the same drink with his master, and al one bread, yea every one has his meat
in silver, chamber vessels, and all are of silver. We judge by apparel, by
armor, or by harness what a man is of stature, or biggenes. We judge by
occasion, the goodness of men, as when they might have done harm, they would
not, when they might have slain, they sought rather to save. From the place
where one is, increase may be gatherd As thus. Being even in the Court, he was
never moved to ga^myng, being at Rome, he hated harlottes, where thereis by
report so great plenty as there are stars in the eleme^t.

From the time thus, he must needs be well learned in the laws of our Realm
that has been a student this thirty winter.

From the age: assuredly, he is like to be good, for being but a child he was
ever most godly.

From the state of life: no doubt but he is honest, for being but a servant he
lived so vprightely, as none could justly blame his life.

From the hardenesse of a thing. That which is almost only proper to Angels
must needs be hard for man: therefore chastity is a rare gift, and hard for
man to keep.

From the strangeness of a thing. Eloquence must needs be a wonderful thing,
when so few have attained it.

Likewise notable adventures done by a few, are more praise worthy than such
as have been done by a great nombe. Therefore the battle of Muskelborow against
the Scotts where so few Englishmen were slain, and so many Scotts
dispatched: must needs be more praise worthy, than if the number of Englishmen
had been greater.

Uehemencie of words full often help the matter forward, when more is
gatherde by cogitacion, than if the thing had been spoken in plain words.
When we hear one say such a man swelled seeing a thing against his mind, we
gather that he was then, more than half angry. Again, when we hear one
say, such a woman spittes fire, we gather straight that she is a Devil. The
Preacher thunderde in the Pulpite, belyke then he was metely hoote. But
concerning all such speeches, the knowledge of a Metaphore, shall bring men to
much knowledge, (whereof I will speak hereafter among the figures) and
therefore I surcease to speak of it in this place.

We increase our cause by heapyng of words and sentences together, couchyng
many reasons into one corner which before were scaterde abroad, to thentent
that our talk might appear more vehement. As when by many conjectures and
great presumptions we gather that one is an offender, heapyng them al into one
plumpe, which before were sparpled abroad, and therefore did but little good.
Amplification by conjectures
As thus: To prove by co^iectures a murder committed, I might thus say against
a suspected person. My Lords do not weye my words and sentences severally,
but consider them all altogether. If the accused person here shall receive
profit by this other man's death, if his life heretofore has ever been evil,
his nature couetouse, his wealth most slendre, and that this dead man's gooddes
could turn to no man's avail so much as unto this accused person, and that no
man could so easily dispatche him, and that this man could by no better means
compass his desire, and that nothing has been vnatt^mpted which might
further his naughty purpose, and nothing done that was thought needelesse, and
seeing a meet place was chefely sought for, and occasion served very well, and
the time was most apt for such an attempt and many means heretofore devised
to compass this offense, and great hope both to keep it close, and also to
dispatche it, and besides that, seeing this man was seen alone a little before
in the same place, where this other man was slain, and that this man's voice
which did slaye him was hard a little before in the same place where this other
man was slain, and seeing it is well known that this man came home late the
same night, and the next day after being examined, did answer confusedly,
fearefullie, and as though he were amassed, and seeing al these things are
partly showed by wittenesses, partly by good reason, partly by his own
confession, and partly by the report that commonly goes of him, which by
like is not spoken without some ground: It shall be your parts worthy judges
wayng al these things together to give certain judgment of him for this
offense, and not to think it a matter of suspicion. For it might have been
that three of four of these conjectures being proved, might give but only a
cause of suspicion, but whereas all these together are plainly proved by him,
it can not be otherwise but that he has offended.

It is an excellent kind of Amplifiyng when things increased, and things
diminished are both set together, that the one may the rather beautify the
other. As if, when Gods goodness toward us we largely amplified, we did
straight extenuate our vnthanfulnesse toward him again. As thus: Seeing God
has made man a creature unto his own likeness, seeing he has given him
life, and the spirit of understanding, endewyng him with h^s manifold graces,
and redemyng him not with vile money, but with his own preciouse body,
sufferyng death, and blodesheddyng upon the Cross, the rather that man might
live for ever: what an unthankful part is it, yea what an hainouse thing is
it for man so often to offend, so often to wallowe in such his wickedness, and
evermore for Gods loving kyndnesse, to show him self of all other creatures
most unkind?

Likewise contraries being rehearsed and the evil immediately vtterde after the
good, make much for increase. As many men now a days for sobriety, follow
gluttony, for chastity, take leachery, for truth, like falsehode, for
gentleness, seek cruelty, for justice, use wrong dealyng, for heaven, hell,
for God, the Devil: to whom they will without peradventure, it Gods grace
be not greater.

Of mouyng affections.
BEcause the beauty of Amplifiyng, stands most in apt mouyng of affections:
Affections mouyng.
It is needful to speak somewhat in this behaulfe, that the better it may be
known what they are, and how they may be used. Affections therefore (called
Passions) are none other thing, but a stirryng, or forcyng of the mind, either
to desire, or else to detest, and loathe any thing, more vehemently then by
nature we are commonly wont to do. We desire those things, we love them, and
like them earnestly, that appear in our judgment to be goodly, we hate and
abhor those things, that seem naught, ungodly, or harmefull unto us.
Neither only are we moved with those things which we think either hurtful,
or profitable for our selves, but also we rejoice, we sorry, or we pity an
other man's hap.

And evermore there are two things which move us, either this way, or that
way. The matter self which does happen, or is like to happen: and the person
also whom the matter does concern. As for example: If a wicked wretch have
his deserts, we are al glad to hear it, but if an innocent should be cast
away, we think much of it, and in stomach repine against wrong judgment. If
an evil man find much favor, we envy his good hap, yea it greeu^th us,
that any such should have such favor showed: And not only do we hate the
evil, that are come to any wealth, but also we envy commonly all such as come
to any preferrement, especially if either they have been as poor men as we
are, or else came of a meaner house than we have done. No one man would have
any to be better than him self, and every one enhableth his own goodness to
deserve like dignity with the best. And whereas some have go^te before,
startyng so^bdeinly from an inche to an elle, we spare not to say that
flattery made them speed, and though they have much gooddes, yet are they
clear void of all goodness, and therefore much good may it do them, we
would not come by gooddes in such sort to win all the world* for the
Devil and they (say we) shall part stakes with them one day. And thus we
can never be content to give our neighbor a good word. Yea though they have
served right well, and deserved a great reward, we must needs find some
fault with them to lessen their praises, and say that though their deserts
be great, yet their natures are naught: none so proud, though few be so
hardy: none so enuiouse, though few so faithful: none so couetouse, though
few so liberal: none so gluttonouse, though few keep such an house. And
thus, though we grant them one thing, yet we will take another thing as fast
again from them.

Such a man is an excellent fellow (says one) he can speak the tongues well,
^vith praisyng: dispraisyng used.
he plays of instruments few men better, he fey^eth to the Lute marueilouse
swetely, he endites excellently: but for all this (the more is the pity) he
has his faults, he will be dron^^e ones a day, he loves women well, he will
spend Gods coope if he had it, he will not tarry long in one place, and he
is somewhat large of his tongue. That if these faults were not, surely he were
an excellent fellow. Even as one should say: If it were not for liyng and
stealyng, there were not an honester man than such a one is that perchance
has some one good quality to set him forward. These ^uttes be to broad, and
these bars be over big, for look what is given to one by commendyng, the
same is straight taken away by buttyng. Therefore such are not to be lyked that
give a man a shoulder of mutton, and break his head with the spitte when they
have done. And yet this is many a ma^s nature, especially where envy has any
grounded dwelling place, whose property is always to speak nothing of other
without reproach and slander.

In mouyng affections, and stirryng the judges to be grieved, the weight of the
matter must be so set forth, as though they saw it plain before their ^yes,
the report must be such and the offense made so hainouse, that the like has
not been seen heretofore, and all the circu^staunces must thus be heaped
together: Description of an evil and wicke offense done.
The naughtines of his nature that did the dead, the cruel orderyng, the wicked
dealyng and maliciouse handelyng, the time, the place, the manner of his doing,
and the wickedness of his will to have done more. The man that sustained the
wrong, how little he deserved, how well he was esteemed among his neighbors, home
small cause he gave him, how great lack men have of him. Now, if this be not
reformed, no good man shall live saufe, the wicked will ouerflowe all the world,
and best it were for sauegard to be naught also, and to take part with them,
for no good man shall go quiet for them, if there be not spedie redress found,
and this fault punished to thexample of al other.

Quintiliane coucheth together in these few words the full heap of such an
heauouse matter, by gatheryng it up after this sort.

i. What is done. ij. By whom. iij. Against whom. iiij. Upon what mind. v.
At what time. vi. In what place. vij. After what sort. viij. How much he
would have done.
IF one b^e beaten blac^e and blewe, what is d^en.
we take it grievously: but if one be slain* we are much more troubled. Again,
if a slave or ruffine shall do such a deed we are displeased, By whom.
but if an officer, a preacher, or an head i^ntleman, should use any slavery,
we are much more agreued. Yea, or if a very notable evil man, commit such
an horrible offense, we think him worthy to have the less favor. If a sturdy
fellow be stricken, Against who^
we are not so much disquieted, as if a child, a woman, an aged man, a good
man, or a chief officer, should be evil used. If the offense be committed upon
upon what mind.
a prepensed mind, and wilfully, we make much more a do, then if it were
done by chance medly. At what (...).
If it be done upon an holy day, or else upon ^he day of Assise, or upon the
day of a kings coronacion, or about such a sol^mpne time or if it be dooen
in the night, rather then at Noone days, we make the matter greater, then if
it had been dooen at another time. In what place
In the course if one strike a man, it is ^hought greater, then if he should
strike him in the op^n streate. The manner of dooyng also, does much move the
patience of me^ as if one should cowardly kill one, After what sort.
and strike him suddenly* he were worthy greater blame, then if he should
manfully set upon him: or if one kill his fellow secre^ly with a gunne* he were
worthy more h^tred, then if he killed him with a sword or if he wounded him
sore, or cruelly mangeled him, we cry out much more, then if he had barely
killed him. And las^ of al, if his will had been to have done much more then
he did: How much he would.
we increase our anger against his rage much more, then ever we would else have
done.

Of mouyng pitee.
Now in mouyng pity, and stirryng men to mercy, the wrong done must first
be plainly told: or if the Judges have sustained the l^^e excremit^e, the best
were to will them to remember their awn state, how they have been abused in like
manner, what wrongs they have suffered by wicked doers: that by hearing their
own, they may y^ better hearken to others.

Again, whereas all other miseries, that befall unto man, are grievous to the
^are, there is nothing more he^nous, then to hear that the most honest men,
are son^st overthrown by the^ that are most wicked, and virtue put to flight,
through the only might of vice. That if the like has not happened, unto the
hearers of this cause, yet it were mere to show the^ that the like may happen,
and so require them to give judgment in this cause, as they would do in their
own, and rem^mber that harm may chance to every one, that perhaps
chances to any one. And no doubt every man remembryng himself, and his own
case, will look well about him, and give judgment, according to right.

Neither can any good be done at all, when we have said all that ever we can,
except we bring the same affeccions in our own heart, the which we would the
Judges should bear toward our own matter. He that will stir affeccio^s to
other* must first be moved himself.
For how can he be grieved, with the report of any heinous act, either in
stomackyng the naughtiness of the deed, or in bewailyng the miserable
misfortune of the thing, or in fearyng much, the like evil hereafter: except
the Orator himself utter such passions outwardly, and from his heart fetch
his complaints, in such sort, that the matter may appear, both more grievous
to the ear, and therewith so heinous, that it requires earnestly aspedy
reformacion? There is no substance of it self, that will take fire, except ye
put fire to it. Likewise no man's nature is so apt, straight to be heated,
Heat, causes heat.
except the Orator himself, be on fire, and bring his heat with him. It is a
common saying, nothing kyndeleth sooner then fire. And therefore a fiery
stomach, ^auseth evermore a fiery tongue. And he that is heated with zeal and
godliness, shall set other on fire with like affe^cion. No one man can better
enuiegh against vice, then he can do* which hates vice with all his heart.
Again, nothing moyste^h sooner then water. A weeping iye ^r^uoketh m^ysture.
Therefore a weeping iye causes much moisture, and provoke tears. Neither
is it any marvel: for such men both in their countenance, tongue, iyes,
gesture, and in all their body else, declare an outward grief, and with words
so vehemently and unfeignedly, settes it forward, that they will force a man to
be sorry with them, and take part with the^r tears, even against his will,
^o^withstandyng, when such affe^cio^^ are moved, it were good ^ot to stand
long in the^. For though a vehement talk may move tears, yet no art can
long hold them. For as Cicero does say, nothing dries sooner, then tears,
especially when we lament another man's cause, and be sorry with him for his sake

But now that I have taught men to be sorry, I will attempt again to make them
merry, and show what learned men say concerning laughter, in delityng the
hearers when time and place shall best require.

Of de^ityng the hearers, and stirryng them to laughter.
Considering the dullness of man's nature, Laughter m^uyng.
that neither it can be attentive to hear, nor yet st^^red to like or allow,
any tale long told, except it be ref^eshed, or find some sweet delight: the
learned have by wit^e and labor devised much varietee. Therefore sometimes in
tellyng a weighty matter, they bring in some heavy (...), and move the^ to be
right sorry, whereby the hearers are more attentive. But after when they are
weried, either with ^^diousnesse of the matter, or heuines of the report: some
pleasant matter is inverted both to quicken them again, and also to keep th^im
from sacietie. But surely few there be, that have this gift in due time to
chere men. Neither can any do it, whom nature h^th not framed, and given an
aptnes thereunto. Some man's cou^tenau^ce will make pastyme, though he speak
never a word Yea, a foolish word, uttered by an apt manne, or a gesture
straungely used by some pleasant body, set^es men full often upon a laughter. And
whereas some think it a trifle, to have this gift, and so easy, that every
varlet or common iesture is able to match with the best: yet it appears that
they, which wittely can be pleasant, and when time serves, can give a merry
answer, or use a nippyng taunte, shall be able to abashe a right worthy man,
and make him at his wits end, through the sodein quip and unlooked frsipe
given. I have known some so hit of the thu^bes, that they could not tell in y^
world whether it were best to fight, chide, or to go their way. And no
marvel: for where ye jest is aptly applied, the hearers laugh immediately, and
who would glad^y be laughed to scorn? some can pretely by a word spoken, take
occasion to be right merry. Other can jest at iarge, and tell a round tale
pleasantly, though they have none occasion at that time given. But assuredly
that mirth is more worth, which is moved by a word newly spoken, then if a
long tale should pleasauntly be told. For as much as both it comes unlooked
for, and also declares a quickenesse of witt^, worthy commendacion. There are
five things, which Tullie note^h, concerning pleasant talk.

i. What it is to delight the hearers. ij. Whereof it comes. iij Whether an
orator may move laughter iiij. How largely he may go, and what measure he must
use. v. What are the kinds of sportyng, or mouyng to laughter.
Now to tell you in plain words, what laughter is, how it stirs and
occupies the whole body, how it alters the countenance, and suddenly
brasteth out, that we cannot keep it in: Let some merry man on Gods name, take
this matter in hand. For it passes my cunnyng, and I think even they that
can best move laughter, would rather laugh merrily when such a question is put
furthe, then give answer earnestly, what, and how laughter is in deed.

The occasion of laughter, and the mean that makes us merry (which is the
second obseruacion) is the fondnes, the filth nes, the deformitee, and all
such evil behauior, as we se to be in other. For we laugh always at those
things, which either only or chiefly touch handsomely, and wittely some
especial fault, or fond behauior in some one body, or some one thing.
Sometimes we jest as a man's body that is not well proporcioned, and laugh at
his countenance, if either it be not comely by nature or else he through folly,
cannot well set it. For if his talk be fond, a merry man can want no matter to
hit him home, ye may be assured. Some jest is made, when it touches no man at
al, neither the demaunder neither the sta^ders by, nor yet any other, and yet
deliteth as much the hearers, as any the other can do. Now when we would
abashe a man, for some words that he has spoken, and can ta^e none
adu^untage of his person, or making of his body, we either doulte him at the
first, and make him ^eleue, that he is no wiser then a Goose: or ^ls we
confute wholly his sayings, with some pleasant jest, or else we extenua^e and
diminishe his doings, by some pretty means, or else we cast the like in his
dishe, and with some other devise, dashe him out of countenance: or last of
all, we laugh him to skorne out right, and sometimes speak almost never a word
but only in countenance show our selfs pleasant. Mirthe how many ways
(...) is moved.
But how soever we make sport, either the delight is uttered by countenance, or
by poynctyng to some thing, or else showed at large by some tale, or else
occasion taken by some word spoken

The.iij question is, whether it stands with an Orators profession, to delight
the hearers with pleasant reports, and witty sayings, or no. Assuredly it
behooves a man, that must talk much, evermore to have regard to his audience,
and not only to speak so much as is needful, but also to speak no longer
then they be willing to hear Even in this our time, some offend much in
tediousness, whose part it were to comfort all men with cherefulnes. Yea, the
preachers of God, Prea^he^s*
mind so much edefiyng of souls, that they often forget, we have any bodies.
And therefore, some do not so much good with tellyng the truth, as they do
harm with dullyng the hearers, being so far gone in their matters, that
oftentimes they cannot tell when to make an end. (...)
Pla^o therefore, the father of learning, and the well of all wisdom, when he
hard Antisthenes make such a long oracio^, that he stark weried all his
hearers, phy for shame man (quod he) do thou not know, that the measuryng
of an oracion, stands not in the speaker, but in the hearers. But some
perha^ps will say unto me pascite quantum in uobis est, to whom I answer,
estote prudentes. ^. Peter.v. Math.x.
And now bicaus^ our senses be such, that in hearing a right wholesome matter,
we either fall a sl^pe, when we should most harken, or else are weried with
still hearing one thing, without any change, and think that the best part of
his tale, rests in ma^yng an end: the witty and learned have used
delitefull sayings, and quick sentences ever among their weighty causes,
co^sideryng that not only good will is got thereby (for what is he that loves
not mirth?) but also men wounder at such a head, as has men's hearts at his
commandment, being able to make them merry when he list, and that by one
word speaking, either in answeryng some thing spoken before, or else
oftentimes, in geuyng the onset, being not provoked thereunto. Again, we se
that men are full often abashed, and put out of countenance, by such tauntyng
means, and those that have so dooen, are compted to be fine men, and pleasant
fellows, such, as few dare set foot with them.

Thus knowing, that to move s^orte, is lawful for an orator, or any one that
shall talk, in any open assembly: good it were to know, what compass he
should keep, that should thus be merry. For fear he take to much ground, and
go beyond his bounds. Iestyng when it should be spaced.
Therefore, no such should be taunted, or iested with all, that either are
notable evil livers, and heinous offenders: or else are pit^full caitifes, and
wretched beggars. For every one thinks it a better and a meter deed, to
punish naughty packes, then to shoffe at their evil demeanoure: and as for
wretched souls, or poor bodies, none can bear to have the^ mocked, but
think rather, that they should be pitied, except they foolishely vaunt
themselves. Again, none such should be made any laughy^g stocks, y^ either
are honest of behavior, or else are generally well-beloved. As for other, we may
be bold to talk with them, and make such game and pastime, as their good
wits shall give good cause. But yet this one thing, we had need ever to take
with us, that in all our iestyng we keep ameane, wherein not only it is mete to
avoid al gross bourdyng, and alehouse iestyng, but also to eschew al folishe
talk, and ruffin manners, such as no honest ears can ones abide, nor yet any
witty man can like well, or allow.

The division of pleasant behavior.
Pleasantness, either appears in tellyng a round tale, Mirthe making, two
ways used.
or else in taking occasion of some one word. The matter is told pleasauntly,
when some man's nature (whereof the ^ale is told,) is so set furthe, his
countenance so counterfeited, and all his iesture so resembled, that the
hearers might judge the thing, to be then lively done, even as though he were
there, whereof the ^ale was told. Some can so l^u^ly set furthe another man's
nature, and with such grace report a tale: that few shall be able to forbear
laughter, which know both parties, though they would the contrary never so
fain. Now in ^ount^rf^ityng after this sort* if such moderacion be not used,
that the hearer may judge more by himself, then the pleasant disposed man is
willing fully to set forth: it will not be well liked. For he that excedeth and
tells all: yea, more then is needful, without al repect, or consideracion
had: the same shall be taken for a common iesture, such as know not how to make
an end, when they once b^ginne, being better acquainted with bible babble, then
knowing the fruit of wisdoms lore.

Pleasantness in a saying, Pleasauntnes in a ^aiyng.
is stirred by the quick altryng of some one word, or of some one sentence.
But even as in reportyng a tale, or counterfeityng a man, so much is ever
naught: so scurrilitie or (to speak in old plain english) knavery in iestyng
would not be used, where honesty is esteemed Therefore though there be some wit,
in a pretty devised ieste: ^et we ought to take heed, that we touch not those,
who^ we would be most loath to offend. And yet some had as l^u^ lose their
life, as not bestow their conceived jest, and oftentimes they have, as they
desire. But shall I say of such wilful men, as a Spaniard spoke of an earnest
Gospeller, that for words spoken against an Ecclesiastical law, suffered
death in Smithe field? Ah miser, non potuit tacere and uiue^e? Ah wretch that
he was, could he not live, and held his peace?

Again, to jest when occasion is given, or when the jest may touch al me^: it
is thought to be against al good manner. Therefore the consideracion of time,
Di^ference betwi^te a common ieste^ and a pleasant wise manne.
and moderacion of pastyme, and s^ldome vsyng of dry mockes, even when need
most requires, make a difference, and show a several understanding,
betwirte a common iester, and a pleasant wise man.

Now the time requires, to show what kinds there are of mouyng laughter, and
making the hearer to be merry: notwithstanding this would first be learned, that
out of diverse pleasant speches, ancient sayings also may be gathred. As for
example we may by one word, both pra^se a faithful servant and if he be
naught, we may also jest of him, and dispraise him. According to that merry
saying of Nero, upon his man y^ was light fingered. I have one at home (quod
he) among all other, to whom there is no cofer locked, nor door shut in all my
house* meaning that he was a picklocke, and a false verl^t, and yet these
words might have been spoken of a faithful servant.

We shall delight the hearers, Pleasant answers made, contrary to our lokyng,
delight us much.
when they look for one answer, and we make them a clean contrary, as
though we would not seem to understand, what they would have. As when one
coming from a fair, and being asked in good sadness of another, how horses
went there. Marie quod he, some trotte, and some amble. And thus being deceived
of our lookyng (for who would have lookte for such an answer?) we are often
delited with our own error. Again, one Pontidius being sore grieved, that
another man had committed aduoutrie came to a friend of his, and said sadly: Ah
lord, what think you sir of him, that was taken in bed of late* with
another man's wife? Marie quod the other, I think him to be a very sluggard.
Po^tidius hearing him say so, was abashed at the strangeness of h^s answer,
and lokyng for no such thing was driven to laugh at his own error, although
before, he was much grieved with thaduouterers most wicked deed.

One being sore grieved with the evil behavior of a certain ^entlema^, spoke
his pleasure largely against him, whereupon another merry man, disse^blyng to
take his part, said he was an honester man then so. Yea (quod the other) what one
thing has he, whereby to prove himself honest at al? Marie (quod the man) he
has the kings pardon, and what say you to tha^?

When is it best to dine (quod one) to Diogenes? Diogenes.
Mary (quod he) for a rich man, when he list: for a poor man when he can.

A nob^e man that whilome kept a chapel, being disposed to serve God, went to
his closette deuoutely, and made him self ready to pray, whereupon one came
down in have, and said to the Chaunter, you must begin sir. The Chaunter
being a merry man, answered thus, as though he were angry. Begin quod he? I
will begin with none, e^cept they begin with me And so made the whole Quier,
that then was ready for syngyng, to fall straight a laughyng The which is all
one, for, sing we, or laugh we, what makes matter, so we be merry?

Words words doubt fully spoken.
doubtfully spoken, give often just occasion of much laughter. Ah (quod a
certa^n man) do you se yonder fellow, and do you know him? Yea, (quod the
other) I know him very well. I shall tell you sir (said the gentilman) there
is not a man of greater understanding within this City then he is. Tushe it
is not so (quod he.) No? (said the other) marcke well the bought of his leg,
and you shall see his vnderstand^nge worthy to be compared with the best, and
greatest of them all.

Sometimes it is well liked, when by the chaungynge of a letter, Chaungyng of a
letter, or al^ering part of a word, or adding a silla^le.
or taking away some part of a word, or addinge sometimes a syllable, we
make an other meaning. As one said that meante full vnhappelye, enue^ghynge
against those that held of Christ's spiritual being in the Sacrament: some
(quod he) will have a Trope to be in these words: This is my body: But surely
I would wish the T. were taken away, and they had that for their labor,
which is left behind.

What carye you master Person (quod a gentilman) to a Priest that had his
woman on horseback behind him, have you got your male behind you? No sir
(quod the Priest) it is my female.

The interpretation of a word does often declare a wit. Interpreta^^on of a
word.
As when one has done a robbery, some will say, it is pity, he was a handsome
man, to y^ which another made answer you say truth sir, for he has made
these shyftes by his hands, and got his living with light fingeringe, and
therefore being handsome as you say he is, I would God he were handsomelye
hanged.

Sometimes it is delightful when a man's word is taken, and not his meaning.
^vordes tak^ and not the meaning.
As when one had said to an other (whose help he must needs have) I am sorry
sir to put you to pains: The other answered, I will ease you sir of that
sorrow, for I will take no pains for you at all.

The turning of a word, and deniynge that wherewith we are charged, and
aunswering An answer from evil to worse.
a much worsse, does often move the hearer. There was one Bassus (as Quintilian
does tell) which saying a Lady called Domitia to be very nighe her self,
spoke his pleasure of her. Whereupon she being grieved charged him with these
words, that he should say she was such a pyuche penye, as would sell her
old shoue for money, ^^udgynge wit^ely re^uked.
whereupon he answered, No forsothe mad^me (quod he) I said not so, but these
were my words, I said you bought old sho^e, such as you could ge^ best
cheap for money.

The Hollanders words ars worthy rehearsal, who being a poor man (as
Erasmus tells the tale) had a cow or two going in ^he communes, whereupon it
happened that an Ox of a rich man's, who then was Mayor of the town had
gored the pore man's cow, and almost killed her. The poor man being in this
case half undone, thought notwithstanding by a wittye devise to get right
iudg^ment of master Mayor for the loss of his cow, if he got nothing
else, and therefore thus he framed his tale. A witty devised tale to g^t right
judgment
Sir so it is that my cow has gored and almost killed your Ox. What ha^h
she (quod he) by saint Marye thou shalt pay for him then. Nay (quod the
poor man) I cry you mercy, your Ox has gored my cow. Ah (quod the
Mayor) that is an other matter, we will talk of that hereafter at more leisure

These words were spoken of purpose, but now you shall hear what an old woman
spoke of simplicity. In the dotynge world, when stocks were saints, and
^umme walls spoke, this old grandamme was deuoutelye kneling upon her knees
before the image of our Lady. Whereupon a merye fellow asked her what she
meante to crouche and knele there. Marie (quod the old mother) I pray to our
Lady, that she may pray to her Son for me: with that he laughed at her
ignorance. A (...) bly^d answer
Whereupon she thinkinge that her words were spoken amiss, corrected her own
saying in this wise. Nay (quod she) I pray to Christ in heaven, that he
will pray for me to this good Lady here.

Words rehearsed contrary to that which was spoken, and (as a man would say)
ouerthwartly answered, ^^ordes o^ert^wartly answered.
do much abash the opponent, and delight the hearers. As when Sergius Galba
being sick, and therefore ^eping his house, had appointed certain of his
fre^des to hear a matter of one Libo Scribonius, Tribune of the people, a man
much noted for his noughtye and unclean life: this Libo said to him in this
wise. Good Lord, when shall we see you Sir abroad, out of your Parloure.
Marye (quod he) when thou kepeste thy self out of an other man's chamber,
meaning that he was over familiar with an other man's wife. Thus we se how and
in what manner pleasant sawes are gathered and used, upon the occasion of
diverse words spoken.

Pleasant sport made by rehearsynge of ^ whole matter
THe nature and whole course of a matter being largelye set out with a comelye
behauoure does much delight the hearers, and geu^th good cause of great
pastime. And this difference is between a ^este in a word, and a jest vtterde
in a long tale. That which is still deliteful, with what words soever you
tell it, is cont^in^d in the substance or nature of a long tale: (...)
betwirt a (...) in a word, (...) a ^est in a long^ ^ale.
that which loses his grace by alteration of a word, is contained in the
nature of a word. They that can lively tell pleasant tales and merye deeds
done, and set them out as well with gesture as with voice, leaving nothing
behind, that may serve for beautifiynge of their matter: are most mete for
this purpose, whereof assuredlye there are but few. And whatsoever he is that
can aptelye tell his tale, and with countenance, voice, and gesture, so
temper his report, that the hearers may still take delight: him count I a man
worthy to be hyghlye esteemed. For undoubtedly no man can do any such
thing, except they have a great mother wit, and by experience confirmed
such their comelines, whereunto by nature they were most apt. Many a man
reads histories, hears fables, sees worthy acts done even in this our
age, but few can set them out accordingly, and tell them lively, as the matter
self requires to be told The kinds of delitinge in this sort are diverse:
whereof I will set forth many, as hereafter they shall follow.

Sport moved by tellinge old tales.
IF there be any old tale or strange history well and wittely applied to some
man living, al me^ love to hear it of life. As if one were called Arthur, some
good fellow that were well acquainted with king Arthures bok^, and the knights
of his round table, would want no matter to make good sport, and for a need
would dubbe him knight of the round table, or else prove him to be one of his
kynne, or ^ls (which were much) prove him to be Arthure him self. And so
likewise of other names, merry panions would make mad pastime.

Oftentimes the deformity Deformity of body moves myrthe.
of a man's body gives ma^ter enoughe to be right merye, or else a picture in
shape like an other man, will make some to laughe right heartily. One being
grieved with an other man, said in his anger, I will set the out in thy
colors, I will show what thou art. The other being therewith much chafed,
show (quod he) what thou canste: with that he showed him, (pointinge with his
finger) a man with a bottell nose, blobbe cheaked, and as red as a Bouchers
bowl, even as like the other manne, as any one in all the world could be. I
need not to say that he was angrye. An other good fellow being merelye
disposed, called his acquaintance unto him and said: Come hither I say, and I
will show thee as very a lowte as ever thou saw in all thy life before,
with that he offered him at his coming a stele glass to look in. But surely
I think he looked awrye, for if I had been in his case, I would have told
him that I espied a much greater lowte, before I saw the glass.

In augmentynge Augmentyng or d^minishynge
or diminishinge without all reason, we give good cause of much pastyme. As
Diogenes seeing a pretye town, having a great pair of Gates at the coming
in: Take heed quod he, you men of this town, lest your town run out of
your gates. That was a marvelous bygge Gate I trow, or else a wonderful little
town, where such passage should be made.

A Friar disposed to tell mysteries, opened to the People that the soul of man
was so little, that a leven thousand might dance upon the nail of his
thumb. One marueylinge much at that, I pray you master Friar quod he, where
shall the piper stand then, when such a number shall keep so small a room.

Mirthe is moved when upon a trifle or a word spoken, an unknown matter and
weightye Opening a weyghtye (...) unknown ^hynge
affayre is opened. As if one should find fault with some man's sumptuous
buildinge, or other such thing: which had found much fa^oure at the same
man's hand: an other might say, well sir, he that builded this house, saved
your worship from hanginge when the time was. A nececessarie note for him
tha^kefullye to remember the builder of that house, and not slaunderouslye to
speak evil of him.

It is a pleasant dissembling, Dissemblyng^
when we speak one thing merelye, and thyncke an other earnestlye, or else
when we praise that which otherwise deserves disprayse, to the shaming of
those that are taken to be most honest.

As in speakinge of one that is well known to be naught, to say among all men
that are seen to, there is one that lacks his reward. He is the diligentiest
fellow in his calling of all other, he has traueyled in behalf of his
country, he has watched day and night to further his common weal* and to
advance the dignitye thereof, and shall he go emptye home? Who stood by it at
such a field, who played the man and cried, stop the thief, when such a
man was robbed? Who sees good rule kept in such a place? can any here charge
him with bawdrye? Which of you all dare say or can say that ever you saw him
dronke, if then these be true, ought not such to be seen to: and rewarded
accordingelye? For praysinge the unworthy, I remember once that our worthy
Latimer did set out the devil for his diligence wonderfully, and preferred
him for that purpose before all the Bishops in England. And no doubt, the
wicked be more busye and stirrynge, then the children of light be in their
generation.

What talk you of such a man (say the an other) there is an honest man ye
may be assured. For if a man had neade of one, he is ready at a pynche, his
body sweates for honesty, if you come to him in a hot summers day, you shall
se his honestye in such sort to reeke, that it would pitye any christian soul
living. He has more honestye with him then he neades, and therefore both is
able and will lend, where it pleases him best. Beware of him above all men
that e^uer you knew. He has no fellow, there is none such, I think he will
not live long* he is so honest a man, the more pitye that such good fellows
should know what death means. But it makes no matter, when he is gone,
all the world will speak of him, his name shall never dye, he is so well
known universally.

Thus we may mockingelye speak well of him, when there is not a noughtyer
fellow within all. England again, and even as well set out his noughtines
this way, as though we had in very deed uttered all his noughty conditions
plainelye, and without iestinge. Emonge all that ever were pleasant in this
kind of delight, Socrates bears the name, and may worthelye challenge praise.
Sir Thomas More with us here in England* had an excellent gift not only in
this kind, but also in all other pleasant delites, whose wit eue^ at this
hour is a wonder to all the world, and shall be undoubtedly, even unto the
worlds end. Unto this kind of dissembling, is next adioyn^nge a manner of
speech, when we give an honest name to an evil deed. As when I would call
one accordingly that is of a noughtye beha^oure, to say: Ah sirrah, you are a
merchant in deed: Where as I think a merchants name is honest. Some old
fellows when they think one to be an heritique they will say, he is a
gospeller. Some new fellows when they think one a Papist, they will call him
straight a catholic, and be even with him at the lands end. Contrariwise
some will give an ^uil name to a good thing: As a father loving his Son
tenderlye, and having no cause to be grieved with him, will sometimes say to
him: Come hither sir knave, and the mother merelye being disposed, will say
to her sweet Son: Ah you little horeson, will you serve me so. Where as I
thyncke some womenne that often so say, will swear upon a book they are none
such, and almost I had said, I dare swear for some of them my self, if
God had not forbidden me to swear at all.

This Kind also is pretye, when we gather an other thing by a man's t^le,
then he would ^ladly we should gather. When Liuius Sali^ator a Romayne
captain had kept the Castle of Taren^um losinge the town to Anni^al his
enemy, (...)
and that Maximus thereupon had laid siege to the same town, and got it
again by the sword: then Sali^ator which thus kept the Castle, desiered
him to remember, that through his means he got the town, Why should I not
(quod he) thyncke so? for if you had never lost it, I had never got it.

To dissemble sometimes as though we understood not what one meant, declares
an apt wit, and much deliteth such as hear it. Diogenes (...).
was asked on a time what wine he loved best to drink. Marye (quod he) an
other man's wine, meaning that he loved that drink best, that cost him
least. The same Diogenes likewise was asked what one should give him to let
him have a blow at his head. Marye a Helmet quod he.

One Octa^ius a Libian borne (as witnesses) Macrobius said unto Tullie when
he spoke his mind upon a matter. Sir I hear you not, I pray you speak
owder. No (quod Tullie)? that is marvel to me, for as I do remember, your
ears are well bored through, meaning that he was nailed upon a Pillarie, or
^lles had holes made in his ears, which might well serve (as Tullie iested)
to receive open air.

When Mettellus took muster and required Caesar to be there, not abiding yt he
should be absent, though his eyes grieved him, and said: What man do you se
nothing at all? Yes marye quod Caesar, as evil as I se, I can se a lordship of
yours the which was.iiii. or.v. miles from Rome) declaringe that (his building
was over sumptuous, and so howge with^ll, (much above his degree) that a blind
man might almost se it. Now in those days ouercostlye building was generally
hated, because men sought by such means to get fame and bear rule in the
commune weal.

The like also is of one Nasica who when he came to the Poet Ennius, and
askinge at the gates if Ennius were at home, the maid of the house, being so
commanded by her m^ster, made answer that he was not within. And when he
perceived that she so said^ by her masters commandment, he went straight
his way, and said on more.

Now shortelye after when Ennius ^nnius pleasant answer to Nasica
came to Nasica and called for him at the door, Nasica cried out alowde and
said, Sirrah, I am not at home? What manne (quod Ennius) I hear the speak.
Do not I know thy voice? Then (quod Nasica) Ah shameless man that thou art,
when I sought thee at thy home, I did believe thy maid when she said thou wast
not at home, and will not thou believe me when I tell thee mine own self that
I am not at home?

It is a pleasant hearing, when one is mocked ^ man m^^^ed with the some he
brings
with the same that he brings. As when one. Q. Opimius having an evil name
for his light behauoure had said to a pleasant man Egilius that seemed to be
wanton of living, and yet was not so: Ah my sweet darling Egilia, when will thou come to my house sweet wenche, with thy rock and thy spindle? I dare not
in good faith (quod he,) mi mother has forbid me to come to any suspected
house where evil rule is kept.

Those iestes are bitter which have a hid understanding in them, whereof also a
man may gather much more then is spoken. A homelye fellow made his woeful
lamentation to Diogenes in most pitiful sort, because his wife had hanged her
self upon a Fig tree, hopinge to find some comfort at his hand. But
Diogenes Diogenes doggysh aunswe^ in despyte of ^omen.
hearing this strange deed, For the love of God (quod he) give me some
slippes of that tree, that I might set them in some orcharde. The fruit liked
him well, and belyke he thought that such slippes would have been as good to
dispatche noughtye womenne, as lime twigges are thought mete to catch wild
birds withal

An Archideacon, being nothing so wise as he was welthy, nor yet so learned,
as he was worshipful, asked a yo^ge man once, whether he had a good wit,
or no. Yes mary sir (quod he) your wit is good inoughe if you keep it still,
and use it not, for every thing as you know is the worsse for the wearinge.
Thou say even truth (q^od he) for that is the matter that I never used
preachyng^ for it is no^hyng but a waistyng of wit^e, and a spen^yng of wind.
And ^et if I would preach, I think I could do as well as the best of them.
Yea sir (quod he) but yet I would ye should ^o^ prove is for fear of strainyng
your self to much: Why? Do^^t thou fear that (quod he?) nay thou may be
assured, I w^l never preach so long as I live, God being my good Lord. There
are over many Heretics, for good meaning men to speak any thing now a days.
You say even truth (quod the young man) and so went forth, but to tell al, I
had need to have time of an other world, or at the lest to have breathe of an
other body.

An unlearned Orator made an Oration on a time, thynkyng that he had with his
well doing deli^ed much al m^n, and moved them to mercy and pity, and
therefore sittyng down, he asked one Catulus if he had not moved the hearers to
mercy. Yes marie (quod he) and that to great mercy and pity both, for I
thynk there is none here so hard hearted, but thought your oration very
miserable, and therefore nedeful to be greatly pi^ied.

Churlishe aunsweres, like the hearers some times very well. When the father
was cast in judgment, the son seeing him weep: Why weep you father? (quod he)
To whom his father answered: What? Shall I sing I pray the, seeing by a law
I am condemned to dye. Socrates likewise being mo^ed of his wife because he
should dye an innocent and giltelesse in the law: Why for shame woman (quod
he) will thou have me to dye guilty and deseruyng. When one had fal^e into a
ditche, an other pitiyng his fall, asked him, and said: Alas how got you into
that pit? Why, Gods mother (quod the other) do thou ask me how I got in,
nay tell me rather in the mischief how I shall get out.

There is an other contrary unto this kind, when a man suffers wrong, and
gives no sharp answer at al. As when Cato was stricken of one that carried a
chest (some say a long ^owle) when the other said, after he had hit him: Take heed sir I pray you: why (quod Cato) do thou carry any thing else.

Folly and lack of natural wit, or else want of honesty give good matter of
myrthe often times. When Scipio being Praetor had appoincted unto a certain
Sicilian, one to be his lawyer that was of a good house, and had an evil
wit, little better than half a fool: I pray you (quod the Sicilian to
Scipio) appoint this lawier for mine adversary, and let me have none at al
hardely.

In speaking against an evil man, ^vishyng.
and wishyng somewhat thereupon, a jest may seen delitefull. When an evil man
had accused many persons, and none took any harm by him but rather were
acquitted from time to time, and taken the sooner for honest men: Now would to
Christ's passion (quod a naughty fellow) that he were mine accuser, for the^
should I be taken for an honest man also, through his accusacion, Demonides
having crooked feet, lost on a time both his shoone, whereupon he made his
prayer to God that his shoone might serve his feet that had stolen them away.
A shrewde wish for him that had the shoone, and better never wear shoone,
than steal them so dearly.

Things gathered by conjecture Conjectures.
to seem otherwise than they are, delight much the ears being well applied
together. One was charged for robbyng a Church, and almost evidently prou^d to
be an offendour i^ that behaulfe* the said man to save himself harmless,
reasoned thus: Why (quod he) how should this be, I never robbed house, nor yet
was ever faulty in any offense besides, how then should I presume to rob a
Church? I have loved the Church more than any other, and will lovers of the
Church rob the Church? I have given to the Church, how happens that I
am charged to take from the Church having ever so good mind to church
dignity? assure your selves they passed little of the Church, that would
adventure to rob the Church. They are no Church men, they are masterlesse
men, or rather S. Niclas Clerks, that lack living, and going in procession
takes the Church to be an Hospital for way fairers, or a pray for poor and
nedie beggars: but I am not such man.

Things wantyng, Things wantyng.
make good pastyme being aptely used. Alack, alack, if such a one had
somewhat to take to, and were not past grace: he would do well enough without
all doubt. I warrant him, he wantes nothing says an other of a couetouse man
but one thing, he has never enough.

Such a man has no fault, but one, and if that were amend^d, all were well:
what is that quod an other? In good (faith) he is naught.

To give a familiar advise in the way of pastyme, deliteth much the hearers.
Familiare advise geuyng.
When an unlearned lawyer had been hourese and almost lost his voice with
ouerlong speaking, one Granius gave him counsel to drink sweet wine could, so
sone as he came home. Why (quod he) I shall lose my voice, if I do so. Marie
(quod he) and better do so, then undo thy clie^^ and lose his matter altogether.

But among all other kinds of delight there is none that so much comfort
and gladdeth the hearer, Things ^^^ken contrary to expcction.
as a thing spoken contrary to therpectation of other. Augustus Emperor of
Rome seeing a handsome young man there, which was much like unto himself in
contenaunce, asked him if ever his mother was in Rome, as though he had been
his bastard. No forsouth (quod he) but my father has been here very often:
with that the emperor was abashed, as though the emperors own mother had been
an evil woman of her body

When an unlearned Physician (as England lacks none such) had come to
Pausanias a noble Ientleman, and asked him if he were not troubled much with
sickness. No sir (quod he) I am not troubled at al, I thancke God, because I use
not thy counsel. Why do ye accuse me (quod the Physician) that never tried
me? Mary (quod Pausanias) if I had ones tried the, I should never have accused
the* for then I had been dead, and in my grave many days agone.

An English Phisicio^ ridyng by the way, and seeing a great company of men
gatherd together, sent his man to know what the matter was, whereupon his man
understanding that one there was appointed to suffer for killyng a man: came
ridyng back in all post haste, and cried to his master, long before he came at
him: Get you hence sir, get you hence for Gods love. What means thou (quod his
master). Mary (quod the servant) yonder man shall dye for killyng of one man,
and you I dare say, have kilde a hundredth men in your days: Get you hence
thereore for Gods love, if you love your self. Examples be innumerable that
serve for this purpose.

A man may by hearing a loud lie, A lie mocked with a lie.
pre^^ly mock the lie by reportyng a greater lie. When one being of a low
degree and his father of mean welthe, had vaunt^d much of the good house that
his father kept, of two Be^fes spent wekelie, and half a score Tun of wine
drunk in a year, an other good fellow hearing him lie so shamefully: I deed
(quod he) Beef is so ple^tiful at my master your fathers house that an Ox in
one day is nothing, and as for wine, Beggars that come to the door are served
by whole gallondes. And as I remember your father has a spryng of wine in the
midst of his Court, God continue his good house keeping.

Oftentimes we may grant to an other, the same that they will not grant to us.
Grauntyng to other the same, that they will not grant to us.
When a base born fellow whose parents were not honest, had charged Lelius
that he did not live ac^ordyng to his auncesters: yea, but thou do live
(quod Lelius) according to thy elders.

One being a ientlemen in birth, and an unthrift in conditions, called an
other man in reproach beggar and slave. Better be born a beggar, than dye a
beggar.
In deed Sir (quod the poor man) you are no beggar borne, but I fear me ye
will dye one.

An other likewise called Diogenes varlet and caitif, to wh^me Diogenes
answered in this wise. In deed such a one have I been as thou now art, but
such a one as I now am, shall thou never be.

Salust Salust.
being a ientleman borne, and a man of much wealth, and yet rather by birthe,
noble: than by true dealyng honest: envied much the estimacion which Tullie
had among al men, and said to him before his face: Thou art no ientleman borne,
and therefore not meet to bear Office in this commune weal: In deed (quod
Tullie) my nobility begynnes in me, and thine does end in the. Meaning
thereby that though Salust were borne noble, yet he were like to dye wretched,
whereas Tullie being borne both poor, and base, was like to dye with honor,
because of his virtue, wherein chefely consists nobili^ie.

There is a pleasant Pleasant di^sem^lyng in outward behavior.
kind of di^semblyng when two meets together, and the one cannot well abide
the other: and yet they both outwardely strive to use pleasant behavior, and
to show much courtesy: yea to co^tende on both parts, which should pass
other in vsyng of fair words, and making lively countenaunces: sekyng by
dissemblyng, the one to deceive the other. Checkyng a liar with an open mock.


When we see a notable lie vtterde, we check the offendour openly with a
pleasant mock. As when one Uibius Curious did speak much of his years and
made him self to be much you^ger then he was: (quod Tullie) why than master
Uibius as far as I can gather by my reckenyng, when you and I declamed
together last, you were not then borne by all likelyhoode, if that be true
which you say.

When Fabia Dolobella said to the same Tullie that she was but thirty years of
age (as women by their good wills would never be old) I think so (quod
Tullie) for I have heard you say no less, xx. years ago.

A Soldier that thoug^t his estimacion stoude most in the virtue of his
hand gunne, made a marueilouse braggue of it, and said he was able to showte
leauel a great deal farther than any one there would believe him to say truth:
wherpo^ he called for his man to bear witness of the same, and asked him
whether it were so, or no. In deed (quod his man) you say truth, but then you
must remember Sir, you had the wind with you when you shot so far. Belyke
he thought, there would never come such a wind again.

Of disposicion and apt orderyng of things.
I Have travailed hitherto in teaching the right way to find meet matter for
every cause, vsyng such Art as my slender wit could best yield. And now,
next and immediately after invention, I think meet to speak of framyng and
placyng an Oration in order, that the matter being aptely sartelde, and
couched together: might better please the hearers, and with more ease be
learned of all men. And the rather I am earnest in this behaulfe, because I
know that al things stand by order, and without order nothing can be. For by
an order we are borne, by an order we live, and by an order we make our end.
By an order one rules as head, and other obey as members. By an order Order of
what sort it is.
Realms stand, and laws take force. Yea by an order the whole work of
nature and the perfect state of all the elements have their appointed course.
By an order we devise, we learn, and frame our doings to good purpose. By an
order the Carpenter has his Squyre, his Rule, and his Plumme^. The Tailour his
met Yard, and his measure: The Mason his Former, and his Plain, and every
one according to his calling frames things thereafter. For though matter be
had, and that in great plenty: yet al is to no purpose, if an order be not
used. As for example: What avails Stoone, if Masons do not work it? What
good does clothe, if Tailours take no measure, or do not cut it out? Though
Timber be had for making a Ship, and al other things necessary, yet the
ship shall never be perfect, till work men begin to set to their hands,
and join it together. In what a comenly order has God made man, whose shape
is not thought perfect, if any part be altered? yea al folk would take him
for a monster, whose feet should occupy the place of his hands. An army
never gets victory, that is not in araie, and set in good order of
battle. So an Oration has little force with it, and does smally profit,
which is vtterde without all order. And needs must he wander, that knows not
how to go, neither can he otherwise chouse, but stumble: that gropyn^ in the
dark, can not tell where he is: Yea he must needs both leave much unspoken,
repeat often, things spoken before, not knowing what, nor where to speak
best: that geues him self rather to take the chance of fortune, than to
follow the right way of advised counsel. What should a man do with a weapon
that knows not how to use it? What though one have mountains of gold, what
avails him to have such heaps, if he cannot tell how to bestow them? It is
not enough to have learning, but it is al to use learning. Therefore because
this part of bestowyng matter, and placyng it in good order, is so necessary:
I will show what the learned have said in this behaulfe so much as I shall
think nedeful.

Disposic^on what it is.
DIsposicion (as Tullie does define it) is a certain bestowyng of things, and
an apt declaryng, what is meet for every part, as time and place do best
require.

Diuidyng of Disposicion.
THere are two kinds of disposyng, and placyng of matter. The one is when we
follow the appointed rule of Rethorique, the which nature does almost teach
us: The other is wholly fasshioned by the discretion of him that makes the
Oration.

Rethorique Rhetorique what it ^ea^^heth, for orderyng of things.
does teach us, and nature also leads us thereunto, first to speak somewhat
before we open our matter, after that to tell the cause of our intent, setting
forth the matter plainly that al may understand it, then to prove our own
cause by good reason, and to confute all such things as are contrary to our
purpose: last of al, to gather the whole in a sum, concludyng the matter
briefly, and so to make an end. Now to place those reasons, which should
both serve to confirm and to confute, and to tell in what part of the Oration
it were best to use this reason, and that reason, that the rather we might
prove, teach, and persuade: a right wise man had need to take this matter in
hand. For even as the time, the place, the judge, and the matter it self shall
give cause: so must a wise body take his advantage. Sometimes it shall be
expedient to use no preface at al, or else when the matter is well known, it
will be good to leave the matter untold, and straight to seek the
confirmacion, vsyng some strong reason for the same purpose. Yea sometimes it
may do good to neglecte the natural order, and begin first to prove the
cause, and afterward to tell it better, than it was told before.

If the judge, or the hearers shall be weried with other ^eportes before, it is
best to go to the matter, and prove it out of hand with as brief reasons,
and as strong as can be gatherde possible. And in prouyng of our matters, we
had need evermore rather to way our reasons, than to number them, and think
not that then we shall do best, when have the most, but then look to do
best, when we have the strongest. And first of all the strongest should be used,
and the other placed in the midst of the Oration, the which being heaped
together will make a good mustar. Arguments how they should be digested.
And yet this also would be learned, whereas we used the best reasons at the
first, we should also reserve some that were like good, for the later end:
that the hearers might have them fresh in their remembrance, when they
should give judgment. The slender reasons that can do less good, and yet not
all, (for some may better be omitted) would be placed in the midst (as I
said) that both they might be less marked, or being heaped there together,
they might do more good, especially when both weighty reasons went before,
and weighty reasons also, followed after. Now a wise man that has good
experience in these affairs, and is able to make him self a Rhetorique for
every matter, will not be bound to any precise rules, nor keep any one order,
but such only as by reason he shall think best to use, being master over
Art, rather then Art should be master over him, rather making Art by wit,
than confoundyng wit by Art. And undoubtedly even in so doing, he shall do
right well, and content the hearers accordyngly. For what mattereth whether we
follow our Book, or no, if we follow wit, and appoint our self an order,
such as may declare the truth more plainly? Yea some that be unlearned and
yet have right good wits: will devise with them selves without any Book
learning, what they will say, and how much they will say, appointyng their
order, and partyng it into three, or four parts, or more, if need be, such
as they shall think especial points, and most meet to be touched. Whose
doings as I can well like, and much commend them for the same: so I would
think them much more able to do much better: if they either by learning
followed a Pattern, or else knew the precepts, which lead us to right order.
Rules were therefore given, and by much obseruacion gathered together, that
those which could not see Art hid in another man's doings, should yet se
the rules open, all in an order set together: and thereby judge the rather of
their doings, and by earnest imitacion, seek to resemble such their
inuencion. Thuse of art.
I cannot deny but that a right wise man unlearned, shall do more good by his
natural wit, then twenty of these common wits, that want nature to help
art. And I know that rules were made first by wise men, and not wise men made
by rules. For these precepts serve only to help our need, such as by nature
have not such plentiful gifts And as for other, unto whom nature is more
favorable, they are rather put the sooner in remembrance, that such lessons
are, then so taught as though they never knew them, or else never would use
them. And therefore a certain learned man, and of much excellency, being
asked what was such a figure, and such a trope in Rhetorique: I cannot tell
(quod he) but I am assured, if you look in the book of mine oracio^s, you shall
not fail but find them. So that though he knew not the name of such and
such figures, yet the nature of the^ was so familiar to his knowledge, that he
had thuse of them, when soever he had need. Now though this man could well
thus do, being of such notable understanding, yet it were folly that all
should follow his way, which want so good a wit. And I think even he
himself, should not have lost by it neither, if he had seen that in aglasse,
which he often used to do without knowledge. Man is forgetful, and there is
none so wise, but counsel may do him good. Yea, he shall do much
better, that knows what art other me^ have used, what inuencion they have
followed, what order they have kept, and how they have best done in every part.
If he like not theirs, he may use his own, and yet none does so evil (I
think) but some good may be got by him. The wise therefore will not refuse to
hear: and the ignorant for want, had need to seek a will.

The End of the.ii. b^ke.
The third book.
Of apt chusyng and framyng of words and sentences together, called Elocucion.
ANd now we are come to that part of Rhetorique, the which above al other is
most beautiful, whereby not only words are ap^ly used, but also sentences are
in right order framed. For whereas Inuencion, helps to find matter, and
Disposicion serves to place arguments: Elocucion gets words to set furthe
inuencion, and with such beauty commends the matter, that reason seems to
be clad in purple, walkyng before, both bare and naked. Therefore Tullie says
well, to find out reason, and aptly to frame it, is the part of a wise man,
but to commend it by words, and with gorgious talk to tell our conceipte,
that is only propre to an Orator. Many are wise, but few have the gift to set
furthe their wisdom. Many can tell their mind in English, but few can use
mete terms, and apt order: such as all men should have, and wise men will
use: such as needs must be had, when matters should be uttered. Now then what
is he, at whom all men wonder, and stand in a mase, at the view of his wit?
Whose doings are best esteemed? who^ do we most reverence, and count half a
God among men? Eloquent men most esteemed.
Even such a one assuredly, that can plainly, distinctly, ple^tifully, and
aptly utter both words and matter, and in his talk can use such
conposicion, that he may appear to keep an vniformitiee, and (as I might say)
a number in the uttering of his sentence. Now an eloque^t man being smally
learned, can do much more good in persuading, by shift of words, and mete
placyng of matter: then a great learned clerk shall be able with great store of
learning, wantyng words to set forth his meaning. Wherefore I much marvel
that so many seek the only knowledge of things, without any mind to commend or
set furthe their entend^ment: seeing none ca^ know either what they are, or
what they have, without the gift of utterance. Yea, bring the^ to speak their
mind, and ^nter in talk with such as are said to be learned, and you shall
find in the^ such la^^e of utterance, that if you judge them by their
tongue, and expressyng of their mind: you must needs say they have no
learning. Wherein me thinks they do, like some rich snudges, that having great
wealth, go with their hose out at heels, their shoes out at toes, and their
cotes out at both elbowes. For who can tell, if such men are worth a grote,
when their apparel is so homely, and al their behauior so base? I can call the^
by none other name, but slouens, that may have good gear, and nether ca^, nor
yet will ones wear it clenly. Barbarous clerks, no better then sloue^s.
What is a good thing to a man, if he neither know thuse of it, nor yet
(though he know it) is able at all to use it? If we think it comeliness, and
honesty to set furthe the body with handsome apparel, and think them
worthy to have money, that both can and will use it accordyngly: I cannot
otherwise se, but that this part deserves praise, which stands wholly in
set^yng furthe the matter by apt words and sentences together, and
beautifieth the tongue with great change of colors, and variety of figures.

Four parts belongyng to Elocucion.
j. Plainness. ij. Aptenesse. iij. Composicion. iiij. Exornacion.
Among al other lessons, this should first be learned, yt we never affect any
strange y^kehorne terms, but so speak as is commonly received: neither
sekyng to be over fi^e, nor yet living over careless, vsyng our speech as
most men do, and ordryng our wits, as the fewest have done. Plains what it
is.
Some seek so far for outla^dishe English, that they forget altogether their
mothers language. And I dare swear this, if some of their mothers were alive,
they were not able to tell, what they say, and yet these fine English clerks,
will say they speak in their mother tongue, if a man should charge the^ for
cou^terfeityng the kings English. Some far iorneid ientleme^ at their
return home, like as they love to go in foreign apparel, so they will powder
their talk with ouersea language. He that comes lately out of France, will talk
French English, and never blushe at the matter. Another choppes in with
Angleso Italiano: the lawyer will store his stomach with the pratyng of Pedlers.
The Auditour in making his account and rekenyng, comes in with sise sold, and
cater de^ere, for vi. s iiij.d. The five Courtier will talk nothing but
Chaucer. The mystical wise men, and Poetical Clerks, will speak nothing
but quaint proverbs, and blind allegories, delityng much in their own
darkness, especially, when none can tell what they do say. The unlearned
or foolish fantastical, that smelles but of learning (such fellows as have
seen learned men in their days) will so latin their tongues, that the simple
cannot but wonder at their talk, and think surely they speak by seem
Reuelacion. I know them that think Rhetorique, to stand wholly upon dark
words, and he that can ^atche an ynke horn term by the tail, him they
count to be a five English man, and a good Rhetotician And the rather to set
out this folly, I will add here such a letter, as Willyam Summer himself,
could not make a better for that purpose. Some will think and swear it to,
that there was never any such thing written, well I will not f^rce any man to
believe it, but I will say thus much, and abide by it to, the like have been
made heretofore, and praised above the Moo^e.

Ponderyng expe^dyng, and reuolutyng with my self your ingent affabilitee, and
ingenious capacitee, for mundane affairs: I cannot but celebrate and extolle
your magnificall dexteritee, above all other. For how could you have adepted
such illustrate prerogative, and dominicall superioritee, if the fecunditee of
your ingenie had not been so fertile, and wou^derfull pregnaunt. An ynkehorne
letter.
Now therefore being accersited, to such splendent renoume, and dignitee
splendidious: I doubt not but you will adiuuate such poor adnichilate
orphans, as whilome ware co^disciples with you, and of antique familiarity in
Lincoln shire. Among whom I being a Scholasticall panion, ^btesiate your
sublimitee to extol mine infirmitee. There is a sacerdotall dignitee in my
native country, contiguate to me, where I now contemplate: which your
worshipful benignitee, could sone impetrate for me, if it would like you to
extend your scedules, and collaude me in them to the right honorable lord
Chauncellor, or rather Archigra^macian of England. You know my literature,
you know the pastoral promocion, I obtestate your clemency, to inuigilate
thus mu^he for me, according to my confidence, and as you know my condign
merits, for such a compendious living. But now I relinquishe to fatigate your
intelligence with any more frivolous verbositie, and therefore he that rules the
climates be evermore your beautreux, your fortress, and your bulwark. Amen.

What wise man readyng this letter, will not take him for a very Caulfe, that
made it in good earnest, and thought by his ynkepot terms, to get a good
personage. Does wit rest in strange words, or else stands it in wholesome
matter, and apt declaryng of a man's mind? Do we not speak, because we would
have other to understand us, or is not the tongue given for this end, that
one might know what another means? And what unlearned man can tell, what half
this letter signifies? Therefore, either we must make a difference of English,
and say some is learned English, and other some is rude English, or the one
is court talk, the other is country speech, or else we must of necessitee,
banishe al such affected Rhetorique, and use altogether one manner of language.
When I was in Cambrige, and student in the kings College, there came a man out
of the town, with a pint of wine in a pottle pot, to welcome the provost of
that house, that lately came from the court. And because he would bestow his
present like a clerk, dwelling among the schoolers: he made humbly his three
courtesies, and said in this manner. Ch^ good ^uen my good lord, and well might
your lordship vare: Understandyng that your lordeship was come, and knowing
that you are a worshipful Pilate, and kepes a bominable house: I thought it my
duty to come incantiuantee, and bring you a pottell a wine, the which I
beseech your lordeship take in good worth. Here the simple man being desirous
to amend^ his mothers tongue, showed himself not to be the wisest manne, that
ever spoke with tongue.

Another good fellow in the country, being an officer, and Maiour of a town,
and desirous to speak like a fine learned man, having just occasion to rebuke
a runnegate fellow, said after this wise in a great heat. Thou yngram and
vacacion knave, if I take thee any more within the circumcision of my
dampnacion: I will so corrupt thee, that all vacacion knaves shall take
ilsample by thee. Roper^pe ch^^yng.


Another standing in much need of money, and desirous to have some help at a
ientlemanns hand, made his complaint in this wise. I pray you sir be so good
unto me, as forbear this half years rent. For so help me God and halidome,
we are so taken on with contrary Bishops, with reuiues, and with subsides to
the king, that al our money is clean gone. These words he spoke for
contribucion, relief, and subsidy. And thus we see that poor simple men are
much troubled, and talk oftentimes, they know not what, for lack of wit and
want to Latin and French, whereof many of our strange words full often are
derived. Those therefore that will eschew this folly, and acquaint themselfes
with the best kind of speech, must seek from time to time, such words as
are commonly received, and such as properly may express in plain manner, the
whole conceipte of their mind. And look what words we best understand,
and know what they mean: the same should sonest be spoken, and first applied
to the vtteraunce of our purpose.

Now whereas words be received, as well Greek as Latin, to set furthe our
meaning in thenglishe tongue, either for lack of store, or else because we
would enriche the language: it is well done to use them, and no man therein can
be charged for any affectacion, when all other are agreed to follow the same
way. There is no man agreued, when he hears (letters patentes) and yet
patentes is latin, and signifie^h open to all men. The Communion is a
fellowship, or a coming together, rather Latin then English: the Kings
prerogative, declares his power royal above all other, and yet I know no man
grieved for these terms, being used in their place, nor yet any one suspected
for affectacion, when such general words are spoken. The folly is espied,
when either we will use such words, as few men do use, or use them out of
place, when another might serve much better. Therefore to avoid such folly,
we may learn of that most excellent Orator Tullie, who in his third book,
where he speaks of a perfect Oratoure, de lareth under the name of Crassus,
that for the choice of words, four things should Four things observed, for
choice of words.
chiefly be observed. First, that such words as we use, should be proper unto
the tongue, wherein we speak, again, that they be plain for all men to
perceive: thirdly, that they be apt and mete, most properly to set out the
matter. Fourthly, that words translated from one significacion to another,
(called of the Grecians, Tropes) be used to beautify the sentence, as
precious stones are set in a ryng, to commend the gold.

Aptenesse what it is.
Such are thought apt words, that properly agree unto that thing, which they
signify, and plainly express the nature of the same. Therefore they that have
regard of their estimacion, do warely speak, and with choice, utter words
most apt for their purpose. In weighty causes, grave words are thought
most needful, that the greatness of the matter, may the rather appear in
the vehem^ncie of their talk. Aptnes.
So likewise of other, like order must be taken. Albeit some, not only do not
observe this kind of aptnes, but also they fall into much fondness, by vsyng
words out of place, and appl^yng them to diverse matters without all
discrecion. As thus. An ignorant fellow coming to a ientlemannes place, V^^apte
vsyng of apt words
and seeing a great flock of sheep in his pastor said to the owner of them,
now by my truth sir, here is as goodly an audience of sheep, as ever I saw in all my life. Who will not take this fellow meter to talk with sheep, then to
speak among men? Another likewise seeing a house fair builded, said to his
fellow thus: good lord, what a handesome phrase of buildyng in this? Thus are
good words evil used, when they are not well applied, and spoken to good
purpose. Therefore I wish that such untoward speaking, may give us a good
lesson, to use our tongue warely, that our words and matter may still agree
together.

Of Composicion.
When we have learned usual and accustomable words to set furthe our meaning,
we ought to join them together in apt order, that the ear may delight, in
hearing the harmomonie. I know some English men, that in this poynct have
such a gift in the English, as few in Latin have the like and therefore,
delight the wise and learned so much, with their pleasant composicion: that
many rejoice, when they may hear such, and think much learning is got,
when they may talk with such. Composicion Composicion what it is.
therefore, is an apt ioynyng together of words in such order, that neither
the ear shall epsy any ierre, nor yet any man shall be dulled with ouerlong
drawing out of a sentence, nor yet much confounded with myngelyng of clauses,
such as are nedelesse, being heaped together without reason, and used without
number. For, by such means the hearers will be forced, to forgettefull often,
what was said first, before the sentence be half ended: or else be blinded
with confoundyng of many things together. Some again will be so short, and
in such wise curtall their Sentences, Faules in co^posicion.
that they had need to make a commentary immediately of their meaning, or else
the most that hear them, shall be forced to keep counsel.

Some will speak oracles, that a man cannot tell, which way to take them,
some will be so fine, and so Poetical with all, that to their semyng, there
shall not stand one heir amiss, and yet every body else shall think the^
meter for a ladies chamber, then for an earnest matter, in any open assembly.

Some will roue so much, and babble so far without order, that a man would
think, they had a great love, to hear themselfes speak.

Some repeat one word so often, that if such words could be eaten, and
chopte in so often, as they are uttered out, they would choke the widest throat
in all England. As thus. If a man knew, what a man's life were, no man for any
man's sake, would kill any man, but one man would rather help another man,
considryng man is borne for man, to help man, and no to hate man. What man
would not be choked, if he chop^ al these men at ones into his mouth, and never
drouke after it? Some use ouermuche repeticio^ of some one ^etter, as pitiful
poverty prays for a penny, but puffed presu^pcio^, passes not a poynct,
pa^peryng his panche, with pestilent pleasure, procuring his pass port to post
it to Hell pytte, there to be punished with pains perpetual. Some will so
set their words that they must be feign to gape after every word spoken,
endinge one word with a vowell, and beginning the next with an other, which
undoubtedly makes the talk to seem most unpleasant. As thus Equirie
assuredlye every iniurye auoydeth. Some will set the carte before the horse,
as thus. My mother and my father are both at home, even as though the good man
of the house ware no breaches, or that the graye Mare were the better Horse.
And what though it often so happens (God wotte the more pitye) yet in
speakinge at the least, let us keep a natural order, and set the man before
the woman for manners sake.

An other cominge home in haste after a long journey, says to his manne: Come
hither sir knave, help me of with my boots and my spurs. I pray you sir
give him leave first to pluck of your spurs, ere he meddle with your
boots, or else your man is like to have a mad pluckinge. Who is so folyshe as
to say the counsel and the king, but rather the King and his counsel,
the father and the son, and not contrary. And so likewise in all other as they
are in degree first, evermore to set them foremost.

The wise therefore talkinge of diverse worthy men together, will first name
the worthiest, and keep a decent order in reportynge of their tale. Some end
their sentences all alike, making their talk rather to appear rimed meter
then to seem plain speech, the which as it much deliteth being measurablye
used, so it much offends when no mean is regarded. I heard a preacher
delityng much in this kind of composition, who used so often to end his
sentence with words like unto that which went before, that in my judgment,
there was not a dosen sentences in his whole sermon, but they ended all in ryme
for the most part. Some not best disposed, wished the Preacher a Lute, that
with his rimed sermon he might use some pleasant melodye, and so the people
might take pleasure diverse ways, and dance if they list. Certes there is a
mean, and no reason to use any one thing at all times, seeing nothing
deliteth (be it never so good) that is always used.

Quintilian likeneth the colors of Rhetorique to a man^es eye sight. And
now (quod he) I would not have all the body to be ^ull of eyes, or nothing
but eyes: for the^ the other parts should want their due place and
proporcion. Some ouerthwartelye set their words, placynge some one a mile
from his fellows, not contented with a plain and ca^ye composition, but seek
to set words they can not tell how, and therefore one not likynge to be
called and by printe published Doctoure of Phisike, would neades be named of
Phisike Doctor, wherein appeared a wonderful composition (as he thought)
strange undoubtedly, but whether wise or no, let the learned sit in
judgment upon that matter.

An other. As I rose in the morning (quod one) I met a carte full of stones
emptye. Belike the manne was fasting, when the carte was full, and yet we see
that through strange composition this sentence appears dark.

Some will tell one thing.xx. times, now in, now out, and when a man would
think they had almost ended, they are ready to begin again as fresh as
ever they were. Such vain repetitions declare both want of wit, and lack
of learning. Some are so homely in all their doings, and so gross for their
invention, that they use altogether one manner of trade, and seek no variety to
eschew tediousnes.

Some burden their talk with nedelesse copye, and will seem plentiful, when
they should be short. An other is so curious and so fine of his tongue, that
he can not tell in all the world what to speak. Every sentence seems
commune, and every word generallye used, is thought to be folyshe, in his
wise judgment. Some use so many interpositions both in their talk and in
their writing, that they make their sayings as dark as hell. Thus wha^
faults be known, they may be avoided: and virtue the sooner may take place,
when vice is forsene, and eschewed as evil.

Of Exornation.
WHen we have learned apt words and usual Phrases to set forth our
meaning, and can orderlye place them without offense to the ear, we may
boldelye commend and beautify our talk wy^h diverse goodlye colors, and
delitefull translations, that our speech may seem as bryghte and precious,
as a rich stone is fair and orient.

EXornation Exornation.
is a gorgiousse beautifiynge of the tongue with borrowed words, and chaung of
sentence or speech, with much variety. First therefore (as Tullie says) an
Oration is made to seem right excellent by the kind self, by the color and
juice of speech. There are.iij. manner of styles or endi^inges, Three mane^ of
styles or endi^inges.
the great or mighty kind, when we use great words, or vehement figures:

The small kind, when we moderate our heat by meaner words, and use not the
most stirring sentences:

The low kind, when we use no Metaphores, nor translated words, nor yet use
any amplificatio^s, but go plainelye to work, and speak altogether in commune
words.

Now in all these three kinds, the Oration is much commended, and appears
notable, when we keep us still to thatistyle, which we first professed, and
use such words as seem for that kind of writing most convenient.

Yea, if we mind to increase, or diminish: to be in a heat, or to use
moderation: to speak pleasauntly, or speak grauelye: to be sharp, or to be
soft: to talk lordlye, or to speak finely: to wax ancient, or familiar
(which al are comprehended under one of the other three:) we must ever make
our words apt and agreeable to that kind of style, which we first ganne to
use. For as french hodes do not become Lords: so Parliament Robes are
unsitting for Ladies. Comelines therefore must ever be used, and all things
observed that are most mete for every cause, if we look by attemptes to have
our desire.

There is another kind of Exornacio^ Exorna^ion ^ by colors of Rhetorique.
yt is not egua^ly sparpled throughout ye whole oration, but is so disseuered
and parted, as stars stand in the firmament, or flowers in a garden, or pretty
devised antiques in a clothe of Araise.

What a figure is?
A Figure is a certain kind, either of sentence, oration, or word, used
after some new or strange wise, much unlike to that, which men communely use
to speak.

The division of Fygures.
THere are three kinds of figures, the one is when the nature of words is
changed from one signification to an other called a Trope of the Grecians: The
other serves for words when they are not changed by nature, but only
altered by speaking, called of y^ Grecians a Scheme: The third is when by
deuersity of invention, a sentence is many ways spoken, and also matters are
amplified by heapynge examples, by dilatynge arguments, by comparinge of
things together, by similitudes, by contraries, and by diverse other like,
called by Tullie Exornacion of sentences, or colors of Rhetorique.

By all which Figures, every Oration may be much beautified, and without
the same, not one can attain to be counted an Oratoure, though his learning
otherwise be never so great.

Of the first use of Tropes.
WHen learned and wise men began first to enlarge their tongue, Tropes how
they were first ^ounded*
and sought with great vtteraunce of speech to commend causes: they found
full often much want of words to set out their meaning. And therefore
remembrynge things of like nature unto those whereof they spoke: they used
such words to express their mind, as were most like unto other. As for
example. If I should speak against some notable Pharisee, I might use
translation of words in this wise: Yonder man is of a crooked judgment, his
wits are clowdie, he lives in deep darkness, dusked altogether with blind
ignorance, and drowned in the raginge sea, of bottomeles superstition. Thus is
the ignoraunte set out, by calling him crooked, clowdye, dark, blind, and
drownde in superstition. All which words are not proper unto ignorance, but
borrowed of other things, that are of like nature unto ignorance. For the
unskillful man has his wit set out of order, as a man's body is set out
of ioynte, and thereupon it may be said to be crooked. Likewise he may be
called clowdye, for as the clouds keep the Sun shinynge from us, so does
his Ignorance keep him blindefolde from the true understanding of things.
And as when the eyes are out, no man can see any thing: so when perfect
judgment is wantinge, the truth can not be known. And so likewise of all
other. Thus as necessitye has forced us to borowe words translated: so has
time and practice made them to seem most pleasant, and therefore they are
mucht the rather used. Yea, when a thing full often can not be expreste by an
apt and mete word, we do perceive (when it is spoken by a word translated)
that the likeness of that thing which appears in an other word, much
lighteneth that, which we would most gladly have perceived.

And not only do men use translation of words (called Tropes) for need
sake, when they can not find other: but also when they may have most apt
words at hand, yet will they of a purpose use translated words. And the
reason is this. Men count it a point of wit to pass over such words
as are at hand, and to use such as are far f^tcht and translated: or else
it is, because the hearer is led by cogitacion upon rehearsal of a Metaphore,
and thinks more by remembrance of a word translated, then is there expreslye
spoken: or else because the whole matter seems by a similitude to be opened:
or last of al, because every translation is commenly, and for the most part
referred to the senses of the body, and especially to ye sense of seeing, which
is the sharpest and quickest above all other. For when I shall say that an
angrye manne fometh at the mouth, I am brought in remembrance by this
translation to remember a bore, that is fightyng uses much foming, the which
is a foul and lothelye sight. And I cause other to think that he brake
patience wonderfully, when I set out his rage co^parable to a bores fominge.

An other being offended with checkes given, will say, I marvel sir what
you mean to be ever snarringe at me, wherein is declared a brutishenes,
consideringe he speaks biting words, as much without reason and as
uncomely, as a dog does, when he snarreth, the which we see is nothing
semely. There is nothing in all the world, but the same may have the name of
some other word, the which by some similitude is like unto it.
Notwithstanding there ought much warenesse to be used in chosyng of words
tanslated, that the same be not unlike that thing, whereunto it is applied, nor
yet that the translation be uncomely or such as may give occasion of any
unclean meaning.

A Trope.
A Trope Trope what it is.
is an alteration of a word or sentence from the proper signification to that
which is not proper.

The division of Tropes.

Tropes are either of a word, Division of Tropes.
or or a long continued speech or sentence.

Tropes of a word are these.

A Metaphore or translation of words. A word making. Intellection. Abusion.
Transmutation of a word. Transumption. Change of a name. Circumlocution.
Tropes of a long continued speech or sentence are these.

An Allegory, or inuersion of words. Mountinge. Resemblinge of things.
Similitude. Example.
What is a Metaphore.
A Metaphore Metaphora
is an alteration of a word from the proper and natural meaning, to that
which is not proper, and yet agrees thereunto, by some lykenes that appears
to be in it.

An Oration is wonderfullye enriched, when apt Metaphores are got and
applied to the matter. Neither can any one persuade effectuouslye, and win
men by weight of his Oration, without the help of words altered and
translated.

The diuer^itye of translations.
First we alter a word from that which is in the mind, to that which is in
the body. As when we perceive one that has begiled us, we use to say: Ah
sirrah, I am glad I have smelled you out. Being grieved with a matter, we
say communelye we can not digest it. The Lawyer receiving money more then
neadeth oftentimes, will say to his Client without any translation. I feel you
well, when the poor man thinks yt he does well understand his cause, and will
help him to some good ^nde. For so, communelye we say, when we know a man's
mind in any thing. This kind of mutation is much used, when we talk
earnestlye of any matter.

From the creature without reason, to that which has reason.
THE second kind of translation is, when we goo from the creature without
reason to that which has reason, or contrary from that which has reason,
to that which has no reason. As if I should say, such an unreasonable
brawler, did nothing else but bark like a Dog, or like a Fore. Women are
said to chatter, churles to grunte, boys to whyne, and young men to yell.
Contrariwise, we call a Fox false, a Lion proud, and a Dog flatteringe.

From the living to that which has no life.
FRom the living to the not living, we use many translations. As thus. You
shall pray for all men dispersed throughoute the face of the earth. The arm
of a tree. The side of a Bancke. The land cries for vengeance. From the
living, to the not living: Hatred buddeth emonge malicious men, his words
flow out of his mouth. I have a whole world of business.

In observing the work of Nature in all several substau^ces we may find
translations at will, then the which nothing is more profitable for any one
that myndeth by his vtteraunce to stir the hearts of men either one way or
other.

A word making word making.
called of the Grecians Onomatopeia is when we make words of our own mind,
such as be derived from the nature of things. As to call one Patche or
Cowlson, whom we see to do a thing folyshelye, because these two in their time
were notable foles. Or when one is lustye to say Taratauntara, declaringe
thereby that he is as lustye, as a Trumpette is delitefull, and styrringe: or
when one would seem galaunte, to cry hoyghe, whereby also is declared
courage. Boys being grieved will say some one to an other, Sir I will cappe
you, if you use me thus, and withholde that from me which is mine own:
meaning that he will take his cappe from him. Again, when we see one gaye and
galaunte, we use to say, he courts it. Quod one that reasoned in divinity
with his fellow, I like well to reason, but I can not chappe these textes in
scripture, if I should dye for it: meaning that he could not tell in what
chapter things were contained, although he knew full well that there were
such sayings.

Intellection.
INtellection Intellection.
called of the Gretians, Synecdoche, is a Trope, when we gather or Judge the
whole by the part, or part, by the whole. As thus. The king is come to London,
meaning thereby that other also be come with him. The French man is good to
keep a Forte, or to skyrmishe on horseback, whereby we declare the Frenchmen
generally. By the whole ye part, thus. All Cambridge sorowed for the death of
Bucer, meaning the most part. All England reioyseth that pilgrimage is
banished, and Idolatrye for ever abolished: and yet all England is not glad,
but the most part.

The like phrases are in the Scripture, as when the Magians came to Jerusalem,
and asked where he was that was borne King of the Jews. Herod starte up
being greatly troubled, and all the city of Jerusalem with him, and yet all the
City was not troubled, but the most part. By the sign we understand the
thing signified, as by an Iuie garlande, we judge there is wine to sell. By the
sign of a Bear, Bull Lion, or any such, we take any house to be an Inn. By
eating bread at the Communion, we remember Christ's death, and by Faith,
receive him spiritually.

Abusion.
ABusion, Abusion.
called of the Grecians Catachresis, is when for a certain proper word we
use that which is most nighe unto it: As in calling some water, a fish ponde,
though there be no fisshe in it at all: or else when we say, here is long
talk, and small matter. Which are spoken improperly, for we cannot measure,
either talk, or matter by length, or breadth.

Transmutacion of a word.
TRansmutacion Transmuta^ion.
helps much for variety, the which is when a word has a proper
signification of the own, and being referred to an other thing, has an other
meaning, the Grecians call it Metonymia the which is diverse ways used. When
we use the au^^hor

Transumption.
TRansumption is, when by digrees we go to that, which is to be showed. As
thus: Such a one lies in a dark doungeon, now in speaking of darkness, we
understand closeness, by closeness, we gather blackenesse, and by
blackenesse, we judge depenesse.

Change of name.
Change of a name, is when for the propre name, Antonomasia.
some name of an office, or other calling is used. As thus: the Prophet of God
says: Blessed, are they who^e sins be not imputed unto them, meaning David.
The Poet says: It is a virtue, to eschew vice, wherein I understand Horace.

Circumlocution.
CIrcumlocution is, periphrasis
a large description either to set forth a thing more gorge^uslie, or else to
hyde it, if the ears cannot bear the open speaking: or when with few words
we cannot open our meaning, to speak it more largely. Of the first thus. The
valiant c^urage of mighty Scipio subdued the force of Carthage and Numa^tia.
Henry the fifte, the most puissaunt King of England, with seven thousand men
took the Frenshe King prisoner with all the flower of nobility in France. Of
the second, When Saul was casyng himself upon the ground, David took a
piece of his garment, took his weapon that lay by him* and might have stain
him. Such a one defiled his body with such an evil woman. For the third
part, the large commentaries written, and the Paraphrasis of Erasmus
englished: are sufficient to show the use thereof.

What is an Allegory.
AN Allegory is none other thing, but a Metaphore used throughout a whole
sentence, or Oration. As in speaking against a wicked offendour, I might say
thus. Oh Lord, his nature was so evil, and his wit so wickedly bente, that
he meant to bouge the ship, where he himself sailed, meaning that he purposed
the destruction of his own country. It is evil puttyng strong wine into
weak vessels, that is to say it is evil trustyng some women with weighty
matters. The English Proverbs gatherde by Ihon Heywood help well in this
behaulf, the which commenly are nothing else but Allegories, and darcke
devised sentences. Now for the other four figures because I mind hereafter to
speak more largely of them, and Quintilian thinks them more meet to be
placed among the figures of Exornacion, I will not trouble the reader with
double inculcation, and ewyse tellyng of one tale.

Of Schemes, called otherwise sentences of a word and sentence.
I Might tarry a long time in declaryng the nature of diverse Schemes, Scheme
what it is.
which are words or sentencies altered, either by speaking, or writing,
contrary to the vulgar custom of our speech without chaungyng their nature
at all: but because I know the use of the figures in word is not so great in
this our tongue, I will run them over with as much haste as I can.

The division of Schemes.
Strange vsyng of any word or sentence contrary to our daiely wont, is
either when we add, or take away a syllable, or a word, or eucrease a sentence
by change of speech contrary to the commune manner of speaking.

Figures of a word.
THose be called figures of a word, when we change a word, and speak it
contrary to our vulgar and daily speech. Of the which sort, there are six
in nom^er.

i. Addition at the first. ij. Abstraction from the first. iij. Iuterla^yng in
the midst. iiij. Cuttyng from the midst. v. Addyng at the end. vi. Cuttyng
from the end.
OF Addition. As thus. He did all to berattle him. Prosthe^^s.
Wherein appears that a syllable is added to this word (rattle.) Here is good
nale to sell, for good ale.

Of Abstraction from the first, thus. Apheresis.
As I romed al alone, I ganne to think of matters great. In which sentence,
(ganne) is used, for began.

Interlacyng in the midst. As. Relligion, for religion. ^penthesis.
Cuttyng from the midst. Syncope.
Idolatry, for Idololatrie. Addyng at the end. Proparalepsis
Hasten your business, for, Haste your business.

Cuttyng from the end. A fair may, Aporope.
for, maid.

Thus these figures are shortly set out, and as for the other Schemes,
which are vtterde in whole sentences, and expressed by varitie of sreache: I
will set them forth at large among the colors and ornaments of Elocution, yt
follow.

Of colors and ornaments to commend and set forth an Oration.
NOW, when we are able to frame a sentence handsomely together, Colors of
Rhetorique.
obseruyng number and keeping composition, such as shall like best the ear, and
do know the use of Tropes, and can apply them to our purpose: than
thornamentes are necessary in an Oration, and sentences would be furnished
with most beautiful figures. Therefore to the end that they may be known,
such as most commend and beautify an Oration: I will set them forth here in
such wise as I shall best be able, following the order which Tullie has used
in his Book made of a perfect Orator.

Restyng upon a poyncte.
WHEN we are earnest in a matter, Commor^^io.
and feel the weight of our cause, we rest upon some reason, which serves
best for our purpose. Wherein this figure appears most, and helps much to
set forth our matter. For if we still keep us to our strongest hold, and make
ofterecourse thither, though we be dryue^ through bytalke to go from it now
and than: we shall force them at length, either so avoid our strong defense,
or else to yield into our hands.

An evident, or plain setting forth of a thing as though it were presently
done.
THis Figure is called a description, or an evident declaration of a thing,
(...)
as though we saw it even now done. An example. If our enemies shall invade,
and by treason win the victory, we al shall dye every mothers son of us,
and our City shall be destroyed stick and stoone. I see our children made
slaves, our daughters rauisshed, our wifes carried away, the father forced to
kill his own son, Description of outrage after ^ battle.
the mother her daughter, the son his father, the sucking child slain in the
mothers bosom, one standing to the kuees in another blood, Churches spoiled,
houses pluckte down, and al set in fire round about us, every one cursy^g the
day of their birth, children criyng, women wailyng, and old men passing for
v^ry thought, and every one thynkyng himself most happy that is first rid
out of this world, such will the cruelty be of our enemies, and with such
horrible hatred will they seek to dispatche us. Thus where I might have said,
we shall al be destroyed and say no more, I have by description set the evil
forth at large. It much avails to use this figure in diverse matters, the
which whosoever can do, with any excellent gift, undoubtedly he shall much
delight the hearers. The circumstaunces well considered in every cause, give
much matter for the plain opening of the thing. Also similitudes, examples,
co^parisons from one thing to another, apt translacions, and heaping of
allegories and all such figures as serve for amplifiyng, do much commend the
lively setting forth of any matter. The miseries of the Courtiers life might
well be described by this kind of figure. The commodity of learning, the
pleasure of plowe men, and the care that a King has. And not only are matters
set out by description, but men are painted out in their colors, yea
buildings are set forth, Kingdoms, and Realms are portured, places, and
times are described. Diversity of natures*
The English man for feedyng, and chaung of apparel: The Duytche man for
drynkyng: The French man for pride and inconstaunce: The Spa^yard for
nymblenes of body, and much disdain: The Italian for great wit and
policy: The Scotts for boldenes, and the Boeme for stubbornness.

Many people are described by their degree as a man of good years is compted
sober, wise and circumspect: a young man wild, and careless: a woman bablyng,
inconstant, and ready to believe all that is told her.

By vocation of life, a soldier is counted a great bragger, and a vaunter of
himself: a Scholar simple: a russed coat, sad and sometimes crafty: a
courtier, flatteryng: a citezen, ie^tle.

I^ describing of persons there ought always a commelinesse to be used,
Description of person.
so that nothing be spoken which may be thought is not in them. As if one
shall describe Henry the sixth, he might call him ientle, mild of nature, led
by persuasion, and ready to forgive, careless for wealth, suspectyng none,
merciful to al, fearful in adversity, and without forecast to epsy his
misfortune. Again for Richard the third I might bring him in, cruel of heart,
ambiciouse by nature, enuiouse of mind, a deep dissembler, a close man for
weighty matters, hardy to revenge, and fearful to lose his high estate,
trusty to none, liberal for a purpose, castyng still the worst, and hoping
ever the best. By this figure also we imagine a talk for some one to speak,
and according to his person we frame the Oration. As if one should bring in
noble Henry the.viij. of most famous memory to enueigh against rebels, thus
he might order his Oration. What if Henry theight were alive, and saw such
rebellion in this Realm, would not he say thus, and thus? yea me thynkes I
hear him speak even now. And so set forth such words as we would have him
to say.

Some times it is good to make God, the Country, or some one town to speak,
and look what we would say in our own person, to frame the whole tale to
them. Such variety does much good to avoid tediousenes, for he that
speaks al in one sort though he spoke things never so wittely shall sone weary
his hearers. Figures The use of figures.
therefore were inverted to avoid sacietie, and cause delight: to refresh with
pleasure and quicken with grace, the dullness of ma^s brain. Who will look of a
whit waul an hour together, where no work manship is at al? Or who will cate
still one kind of meat, and never desire change? Certes as the mouth is
dainty: so the wit is tickle, and will sone loathe an unsavory thing.

A stop, or half tellyng of a tale.
A Stop is, when we break of our tale before we have told it. Precisio.
As thus. Thou that art a young man of such towardnes having such friends to
play me such a part, well, I will say no more, God amend all that is
amiss. Or thus. Does it become the to be, shall I tell al, Naie, I will not for
very shame.

A close understanding.
A Close understanding is, when more may be gatherd than is openly expressed.
Significatio plus ad intellige^du^que dixeris.
A naughty fellow that used much robbery, found him self grieved that the
great Orator Demosthenes spent so much oil whereby he watched from time to
time in compassyng matters for thy commune weal: In deed (quoth) Demosthenes
Demosthenes.
dark nights are best for thy purpose, meaning that he was a great robber in
the night. O^e also being set in a heat, because another had contraried him
for the choice of meats, was much more grieved when he gave him this tauut.
You may boldly (quod he) speak for fish eating, for my master your father
has many a time and often wipt his nose upon his sleeue, meaning that his
father was a fishemonger.

Short sencences.
THen short clauses, or sentences are used when we speak at a word,
Distinct concisa breuitas.
part of our mind, and nest after speak as briefly again, vsyng to make
almost every word a perfect sentence. As thus. The man is sore wounded, I
fear me he will dye. The Phisicions mistrust him: the party is fled, none
persueth: God send us good luck.

Abatyng, or lessenyng of a thing.
WE make our doings appear less, when with words we extenuate Extenuatio^
and lessen the same. As when one had given his fellow a sound blow, being
rebuked for the same said he scante touched him. Likewise, when two have
fought together, to say that the one had his leg prickte with a sword, when
perchance he had a great wound.

Witty iestyng.
MAny pleasant ientlemen are well practiced in merry conceited iestes, (...).
and have both such grace and delight therein, that they are wonderful to
behold, and better were it to be sharply chidde of diverse other, then
pleasauntly taunted by any of the^. When a ientleman of great lands and small
wit had talked largely at a supper, and spoke words scant worth the hearing,
an other being much grieved with his foolie, said to him: Sir I have taken
you for a plain meaning ientlema^, but I know now, there is not a more
deceiptfull body in all England: with that, other being grieved with the young
ientlemans foolie, boldly began to excuse him for deceit, and therefore said,
he was to blame to charge him with that fault, considering his nature was
simple, and few can say that ever he was crafty. Well quod the other, I must
needs say he is deceiptful, for I took him heretofore for a sober witty young
man, but now I perceive, he is a foolish bablyng fellow, and therefore I am sure
he has deceived me like a false crafty child, as he is: with that they al
laughed, and the ientleman was much abashed. But as touching sharp tauntes, I
have largely declared them in place, where I treated of laughter.

Digression, or swaruyng from the matter.
WE swerve sometimes from the matter upon just consideracions, Digressio ab ^e
non longa.
making the same to serve for our purpose as well as if we had kept the matter
still. As in making an inuectiue against rebels, and largely setting out the
filth of their offense, I might declare by the way of a digression, what a
noble country England is, how great commodities it has, what trafike here is
used, and how much more need other Realms have of us, than we have need of
them. Or when I shall give evidence, or rather declame against an hainouse
Murderer, I may digress from the offense done, and enter in praise of the
dead man, declaryng his virtues in most ample wise, that the offense done,
may be thought so much the greater, the more honest he was that has thus been
slain.

Notwithstanding this would be learned, that (when we make any such
digression) the same may well agree to the purpose and be so set out, that it
confound not the cause, or darken the sense of the matter devised.

Proposicion.
PRoposicion is a short rehersall of that, Proposicio quid sis dicturus.
whereof we mind to speak. I will tell you (quod one) there is none has a
worse name then this fellow, none has been so often in trouble, he may he
fautelesse, but I can hardely believe it, there are enough that will testify of
his naughtiness, and auouche his evil demeanor to be such, that the like
has not been hard heretofore.

An over passage to another matter.
WHen we go from one matter to another, we use this kind of phraise. Seiunctio
as eo quod dictum est*
I have told you the cause of all this evil, now I will tell you a remedy
for the same. You have heard of justification by faith only, now you shall here
of the dignitee of works, and how necessary they are for every christian body.

Of coming again to the matter.
WHen we have made a digression, Reditus ad propositu^.
we ma^e declare our return, and show that whereas we have roued a little,
we will now keep us within our bounds. In this kind of digression, it is
wisdom not to wander over far, for fear we shall werie the hearers,
before we come to the matter again. I knew a preacher, that was a whole hour
out of his matter, and at length remembryng himself, said, well, now to the
purpose, as though all that, which he had spoken before, had been little to the
purpose, whereat many laughed, and some for stark weariness were fain to go
away.

Iteratyug and repeatyng things said before.
WHen a man has largely spoken his mind, Iteratio.
he may repeat in few words, the sum of his saying. As if one should be
charged with felony, that is a man of wealth and honesty, he might thus gather
his mind together after a long tale told. First I will prove there is no cause
that I should steal, again that I could not possible at such a time steal,
and last, that I stole not at all.

The conclusion, or ^appyng up of matter.
THe conclusion, is an apt knittyng together of that, which we have said
before. Rationis apta conclusio.
As thus. If reason can persuade, if examples may move, if necessitee may
help, if pitee may provoke, if dangers foreseen, may stir us to be wise:
I doubt not but you will rather use sharp laws, to repress offenders, then
with dissolute negligence, suffer all to perish.

Mountyng above the truth.
MOuntyng above the truth, is when we do setfurthe things excedyngly and
above all men's expectacion, meaning only that they are very great. Veritatis
superlatio, atque ^^aiectio.
As thus, god promised to Abraham, that he would make his posteritee, egual with
the sa^des of the earth. Now it was not so said, that there should be so many
in deed, but that the number should be infinite. For, whether we shall
understand those, to be the children of Abraham, that came of his stock in
flesh, or else take the^ for the children of Abraham, that have the faith of
Abraham: we shall never prove the number of men, to be e^uall with the sands
of the sea, though we could reken all that have been, from the beginning of
the world. Therefore in this speech, we must understand there is a
mountyng, called of the Grecians hyperbole: we use this figure much in
English. As thus. He is as swift as a swallowe, he has a belly as big as a
barrel, he is a giaunt in making. The whole Temmese is little enough to serve
him, for wasshyng his hands. In all which speeches we mount evermore a
great deal, and not mean so as the words are spoken.

Askyng other, and answeryng our self.
BY askyng other, and answeryng to the question our self, Rogatio.
we much commend the matter, and make it appear very pleasant. If I would
rebuke one that has committed a robbery, I might say thus. I wonder what you
meant to commit such felony. Have you not lands? I know you have. Are not
your friends worshipful? Yes assuredly. Were you not beloved of them? No doubt
you were. Could you have wa^ted any thing y^ they had? If you would have eaten
gold, you might have had it. Did not they always bid you seek to them, and
to none other? I know they did. What evil hap had you then, to offend in
such sort not going to your friends, which would not se you want, but sekyng
for that, which you should not have, endaungeryng your self by untrue dealyng,
to feel the power and strength of a law, when otherwise you might have lived in
sauegard?

The like kind of writing is also used, when we make another body to speak,
and yet not ask them any question at al. As when D. Haddon had comforted the
duchess of Suffolkes grace for her children, and had said they were happly gone
because they might have fallen hereafter, and lost that worthy name, which at
their death they had: at last he brings in the mother, speaking motherlike,
in her childrens behalf of this sort, and answers still to her sayings. But
al these euilles whereof you speak (quod she) had not chanced: Yet such
things do chance. Yet not always: Yet full often. Yet not to al: Yet to a
great many. Yet they had not chanced to mine: Yet we know not. Yet I might
have hoped: Yet better it had been to have feared.

Snappishe askyng.
WE do ask oftentimes, because we would know: we do ask also, Perco^tatio
because we would chide, and set furthe our grief with more vehemency, the
one is called Interrogatio, the other is called Percontatio. Tullie enueighyng
against Catiline, that Roman rebel, begins his oracion chidingly,
questio^yng with Catiline of this sort. How long (Catili^e) will thou abuse our
sufferaunce? How long will this rage and madness of thine go about to deceive
us?

Dissemblyng or close iestyng.
WHen we jest closely, and with dissemblyng means, grigge our fellow,
Dissimutatio, alia dicentis ac significanti^
when in words we speak one thing, and mean in heart another thing,
declaryng either by our countenance, or by vtteraunce, or by some other way,
what our whole meaning is. As when we se one bostyng himself, and vain
glorious, to hold him up with ye and naie, and ever to ad more to that, which
he says. As I know one that said himself, to be in his own judgment one
of the best in all England, for triyng of metalles, and that the counsel
has often called for his help, and cannot want him for nothing. In deed
(quod another) England had a sore loss, if God should call you. They are all
Bungelers in comparison of you, and I think the best of them, may thank you
for all that he has: but yet sir your cunnyng was such, that you brought a
shillyng to nine pence, naie to six pence and a grote to two pence, and so
gave him a frumpe, even to his face, because he saw him so folishe. A glorious
ientlema^ that had two servants, and belike would be known not only to
have them, but also to have mo, said in the presence of a worshipful man, I
marvel much where all my servants are? Marie sir (quod one) that thought
to hitte him home: they were here al two, even now. Thus he closly mocked him,
and worthily. For, the number is not great, that stands upon.ij, and (all)
is to much, when we speak of so few.

Doubtfulnesse.
DOubtfulnesse is then used, when we make the hearers believe, Dubitacio.
that the weight of our matter causes us to doubt, what were best to speak.
As when a king finds his people unfaithful, he may speak in this wise.
Before I begin, I doubt what to name ye. Shall I call you subjects? You deserve
it not. My friends ye are not. To call you enemies were ouerlitle, because your
offense is so great. Rebels you are, and yet that name does not fully utter
your folly. Traitors I may call you, and yet you are worse then traitors, for
you seek his death, who has given you life. Thoffence is so great, that no man
can comprehend it. Therefore I doubt what to call you, except I should call you
by the name of them all. Another. Whether shall I speak, or hold my peace?
If I speak, you will not hear, if I hold my peace, my conscience condempneth
my silence.

Distribucion.
DIstribucion, Distributio
is when we apply to every body, such things as are due unto them, declaryng
what every one is in his vocacion. It is the duty of a King, to have an
especial care over his whole realm. It is thoffice of his nobles, to cause
the kings will to be fulfilled, and with all diligence to further his Laws,
and to se justice done every where.

It is the part of a subject, faithfully to do his princes commandment, and
with a willing heart to serve him at al needs.

It is thoffice of a bishop to setfurthe Gods word, and with all diligence to
exhort men to all godliness. It is an husbands duty to love his wife, and
with ientle means to rule her. It is the wifes office, humbly to submit her
self to her husbands will. Servants should be faithful to their maistres,
not only for fear of a law, but also for conscience sake. Masters should use
their servants accordyngly, paiyng them that, which is due unto them. A
father should bring up his children in the fear of God. Children should
reverence their fathers with all submission. It is also called a distribucion,
when we divide the whole, into several parts, and say we have four
poynctes, whereof we purpose to speak, comprehendyng our whole talk within
compass of the same.

Correccion.
COrreccion, Correctio.
is when we alter a word or sentence, otherwise then we have spoken before,
purposyng thereby to augme^t the matter, and to make it appear more vehement.
Tullie against Verres, Tullie against Uerres.
gives a good example. We have brought before you my Lords, into this place
of judgment, not a thief, but an extorcioner and violent robber, not an
aduouterer, but a rauisher of maids, not a stealer of church goods, but an
errant traitor, both to God and all godliness: not a common ruffin, but a
most cruel cut throat such as if a man should rake hell for one, he could
not find the like. Again, if one would enueigh against bacbiters, after this
sort. Thou have not robbed him of his money, but thou have taken away his good
name, which passes all worldly goods, neither have thou slau^dered thine
enemy, but thine own brother, and friend, that meant thee well, and has done
thee pleasures: nay thou have not slandred him, but thou have slain him. For a
man is half hanged, that has lost his good name. Neither have thou killed him
with the sword, but poisoned him with thy tongue, so that I may call it rather
an enchanting, then a murder. Neither have thou killed one man alone, but so
many as thou have brought out of charity, with thy most venomous bacbityng
Yea, and last of al, thou have not slain a man, but thou have slain Christ in
his members, so much as lay in thee to do. But of this figure I have spoken
heretofore, where I wrote of amplificacion.

Reieccion.
REieccion Reiectio.
is then used, when we lay such faults from us, as our enemies would charge
us with all, saying it is folly to think any such thing, much more to speak
it: or else to say, such a man's word is no slander, or it needs not to
talk of such toys. Or thus. Who would think that I would do such a deed?
Or is it like that I would do such a deed? Antony charged Tully, that he was
the occasion of civil battaill. Nay (quod Tullie) it is thou, it is thou manne
and none other, that settes Ceasar on work, to seek the slaughter of his
country.

A Buttresse.
A Buttresse is a fe^se made for that, premunitio
which we purpose to hold up, or go about to compass. As thus. I hope my
lords, both to persuade this man by reason, and to have your judgment in
this matter. For whereas it is a sore thing to be justly accused, for breaking
friendship, then assuredly if one be wrongfully slandred, a man had need to look
about him

A familiar talk, or communicacion used.
COmmunicacion Communicatio.
is then used, when we debate with other, and ask questions, as though we
looked for an answer, and so go through with our matter, leauyng the judgment
thereof to their discrecion. As thus. What think you in this matter? Is there
any other better means to dispatche the thing? What would you have done, if
you were in the same case? Here I appeal to your own conscience, whether you
would suffer this unpunished, if a man should do you the like displeasure.

Descripcion of a man's nature, or manners.
WE describe Descriptio
the manners of men, when we set the^ furthe in their kind what they are. As in
speaking against a coueteous man, thus. There is no such pi^che pe^y on live,
as this good fellow is. He will not lose the paryng of his nails. His heir is
never rounded, for sparyng of money one pair of shoen serves him a.xij.
month, he is shod with nails like a horse. He has been known by his cote
this.xxx winter. He spentones a grote at good ale, being forced through
company, and taken short at his word, whereupon he has taken such conceit
sins that time, that it has almost cost him his life. Tullie describes Piso
for his naughtines of life, wonderfully to hear, yea, worse then I have
setfurth this coueteous man. Read the Oracion against Piso, such as be learned.

Error.
Error Erroris inductio.
is, when we think mu^he otherwise then the truth is. As when we have
conceived a good opinion of some one man, and are often deceived, to say, who
would have thought, that he ever would have done so. Now of all men upon
earth, I would have least suspected him. But such is the world. Or thus. You
think such a man a worthy personage, and of much honesty, but I will prove,
that he is much otherwise: a man would not think it, but if I do not prove
it, I will give you my hedde.

Mirthe making.
I Have heretofore largely declared, the ways of mirth making, and therefore I
little need to renew the^ here in this place In hilaritate^ impulsio


Anticipacion, or Preuencion.
ANticipacion, Ante occu^patio.
is when we prevent those words, that another would say, and disprove them
as untrue, or at least wise, answer unto them. A Godly Preacher enueighed
earnestly against those, that would not have the Bible to be in English, and
after earnest probacion of his cause, said thus: but me thynkes I hear one
say. Sir, you make much a do, about a little matter, what were we the
worse, if we had no scripture at al? To whom he answered: the scripture is left
unto us by Gods own will, that the rather we might know his
commandments, and live thereafter all the days of our life. Sometimes this
figure is used when we say, we will not speak this or that, and yet do
notwithstanding. As thus. Such a one is an Officer, I will not say a briber.
Right is hyndered through might^, I will not say, overwhelmed. Thus in
saying we will not speak, we speak our mind after a sort, notwithstanding.

A Similitude.
A Similitude Similitudo
is a likeness when.ij. things, or mo then two, are so compared and resembled
together, that they both in some one property seem like. Oftentimes brute
beasts, and things that have no life, minister great matter in this behalf.
Therefore those that delight to prove things by similitudes, must learn to
know the nature of diverse beasts, of metalles, of stones and al such, as
have any virtue in them, and be applied to man's life. Sometimes in a word
appears a similitude, which being dilated helps well for amplificacio^. As
thus. You strive against the streme, better bow then break. It is evil
runnyng against a stone wall. A man may love his house well, and yet not ride
upon the ridge. By all which, any one may gather a similitude, and enlarge it
at pleasure. The proverbs of Heiwode help wonderful well for this purpose.
In comparyng a thing from the less to the greater, Similitudes help well to
set out the matter. That if we purpose to dilate our cause hereby with poses
and sentences, we may with ease talk at large. Similitude enlarged.
This shall serve for an e^ample. The more precious a thing is, the more
diligently should it be kept, and better head taken to it. Therefore time,
(co^sideryng, nothing is more precious,) should warely be used, and good care
taken, that no time be lost, without some profit gotten. For if they are to
be punished, that spend their money, and waist their lands, what folly is it,
not to think them worthy much more blame, that spend their time (which is
the chifest treasure that God gives) either idly, or else ungodly? For what
other thing does manne lose, when he loses his time, but his life? And what
can be more dear to man, then his life? If we lose a little money, or a ryng
of gold with a stone in it, we count that great loss. And I pray you, when
we lose a whole day, which is a good portion of a man's life, shall we not
compte that a loss, considering though our money be gone, we may recover
the same again, but time lost can never be called back again. Again when we
lose our money, some body gets good by it, but the loss of time turns to
no man's avail. There is no man that loses in any other thing, but some
body gayneth by it, saving only in the loss of time. Yea, it has saved
the life of some, to lose all that they had. For riches be the occasion
sometimes of much mischief in this life, so that it were better sometimes
wastefullye to spend, then warely to keep: by the loss of time, no man has
profited him self any thing at all. Besides this, the better and more precious
a thing is, the more shame to spend it fondly. Though me^ keep their goods
never so close, and lock them up never so fast, yet often times, either by
some mischaunce of fire, or other thing, they are lost, or else desperate
Dickes borowes now and then against the owners will, all that ever he has.
And now though ye owner be undone, yet is he not therefore dishonest,
considering honestye stands not in wealth or heaps of money: But the loss
of time, seeing it happens through our own folly, not only does it make
us wretches, but also causes men to think that we are paste all grace. A
wonderful kind of infamy, when the whole blame shall rest upon none other
man's neck, but upon his only that suffers all the harm. With money a man may bye land, but none can get honesty of that price: and yet with
well vsinge of time, a man not only might get him much worship, but also
might purchase himself a name for ever. Yea, in a small time a man might get
great fame, and live in much estimation. By losinge of money we lose little
else: by losing of time, we lose all the goodness and gifts of GOD, which
by labor might be had.

Thus a Similitude might be enlarged by heapynge good sentences, when one
thing is compared with an other, and a conclusion made thereupon.

Emonge the learned men of the Church, no one uses this figure more then
Chrysostom, whose writings the rather seem more pleasant and sweet. For
similitudes are not only used to amplify a matter, but also to beautify the
same, to delight the hearers, to make the matter plain, and to show a certain
majesty with the report of such resembled things, but because I have spoken
of similitudes heretofore in the book of Logique, I will surcesse to talk any
further of this matter.

Example.
HE that myndeth to persuade, must neades be well stored with examples.
Exemplum
And therefore much are they to be commended which search Chronicles of all
ages, and compare the sta^e of our elders, with this prese^te time. The
historye of Gods book to the christian is infallible, and therefore the
rehearsal of such good things as are therein contained, move the faithful to
all upright doing and amendmente of their life. The Ethnicke aucthoures stir
the hearers, being well applied to the the purpose. For when it shall be
reported that they which had no knowledge of God, lived in a brotherlye
love, one toward an other, detested aduoutrye, banished periures, hanged the
unthankful, kept the idle without meat, till they labored for their
living, suffered none extorcion, exempted Brybers from bearing rule in the
commune Weal: the Christians must neades be ashamed of their evil behavior,
and study much to pass those, which are in calling much under them, and
not suffer that the ignoraunte and Paganes life, shall counteruayle the taught
children of God, and pass the Christians so much in good living, as the
Christians pass them in good learning. Uneguall examples commend much the
matter. I call them vneguall, when the weaker is brought in against the
stronger, as if children be faithful, much more ought men to be faithful.
If wome^ne be chaste, and undefiled: men should much more be clean, and
without fault. If an unlearned manne will do no wrong, a learned man and a
preacher must much more be vprighte, and live without blame. If an householder
will deal iustlye with his servants, a King must much the rather ^eale
iustelye with his subjects.

Examples gathered out of histories and used in this sort, help much toward
persuasion. Yea, brute beasts minister great occasion of right good matter,
considering many of them have shown unto us, the paternes and images of
diverse virtues.

Doves Doves
seeing an hawk, gather all together, teaching us none other thing, but in
adversity to stick one to another.

Craynes Craynes
in the night have their watch, warninge us never to be careless, for if
their watch fail them, they al never leave till they have killed that one
Crayne, teaching us that no traitors are worthy to live upon earth. The
watch for his safegarde, and because he would not sleep: holds a stone in
his foot, the which falls from him, when he begins to wax heavy, and so
he keeps him self s^yll wakyng. Whereby we may learn that all men in
their vocation should be right ware and watchful. The Hen clocketh her
chickens, feadeth them, and keeps them from the Kyte. Womenne must clock
their children, bring them up well, and keep them from evil hap. Now I
might in speakinge of some odious vice, largelye set out some example
belonginge to the same, and compare it with other by heapinge of Chronicles,
and matchinge of things together.

The unthankful Vn^hankeful^nes how evil it is
in this age (whereof there is no small number) can not have enoughe said
against them. And therefore I am minded to say somewhat against them, to
the utter abhorrynge of all such unkind dealing. For he that is unthankful,
and for herty love, shows cankard hatred: wants all other Uertues, that are
required to be in manne. The chief perfection and the absolute fulfillyng of
the Law, stands in the love which manne owes first to God, and next to his
neighbor. Let a (...) have faith that he may be able to translate
mountains (as saint Paul says:) yea, let his have never so good qualities,
or be he never so politic a man for the saulfegarde of his Country, be he
never so wise, so ware, and so watchful: yet if he want Love, he is nothing
else but as a soundinge brass, or a tinckelinge Cymbal.

Now he that is churlishe and unthankful, must neades want love, and
therefore wants he all other goodness. The Persians therefore seeing the
greatenes of this offense and that where it rested, all vices for ever were
banished: provided by a law that such should suffer death as felons, which
were found faultye with unthankfulness. Unthankfulness punyshed by the Pers^^s
with death


And yet I can not see but they deserve rather an exquisite kind of Death
(such as few have seen, or few have felt) then to suffer like Death with
other, that have not like offended with them.

But now because this offense is an evil most odious, and the principal
occasion of all other mischief, I will set forth three notable examples, the
one of a Dragon, the second of a Dog, and the third of a Lion (which all
three in thankefulnes, if that be true which is reported of them wonderfullye
exceaded,) and the rather I seek to set them out, that the wicked herebye
may well know what they them selves are, when brute Beasts shall set
them al to schole.

There was a man (as Pliny writes) which fostered up a young Dragon,
Thankfulness of a Dragon
who seeing the same beast to wax wonderful great, feared to keep his
Dragon any longer within his house, and therefore he put him out into a wild
Foreste. It happened afterward that the same manne traueylinge on his journey
through the Foreste, was besette with thieues. And now being in this
distress, and lokinge for none other end but death, made (as loathe to
depart) a grea^e showte and an outcrye: strayghte upon whose noise, and at the
knowledge of his voice, the Dragon came to him in all the haste possible.
Whereupon the thieves being greatelye afraid, ran clean away to save them
selves harmeles. Thus through the thanckefulnes of a Dragon, this man's life
was saved.

The dog of the Roman Fuluius is more wonderful This Fuluius traueylinge by
the way, was slain with slaves that lay in wait for him. Tha^kefulnes (...).
His Dog seeing his master dead, lay by him for the space of two days.
Whereupon when the manne was missinge, and search made for him: they found him
dead, with his Dog liynge by him.

Some marueylinge to see the Dog lie there by his dead master, stroke him,
and would have driven him from the dead corse, and could not: some seeing
such kindenes in the Dog, and pitiynge him that he should lie there without
meat, two or three days before: cast him a piece of flesh, whereupon the Dog
strayghte carried the meat to his masters mouth, and would not eat any
whitte him self, though he had forborne meat so long before. And last of
all, when this dead body should be cast into the river, (according to the
manner of the Romans) the Dog leapt in after, and holding up his master so
long as he could, did chose rather to dye with him, the^ to live without him.

The Lion (whereof Appian the Grammarian does speak) is also strange for his
kindenes, and almost incredible. Tha^kefulnes of a Lion.
A servant that had run away from his master, and hid him self for
fear in a cave, within a great woodde, took a thorn out of a Lions foot,
which then came to him for succor as he lay there. Now when he had done, the
lion to requite his good turn, brought such meat to the cave, as he could
kill in the wood. The which meat the Servant rostynge against the Sun,
(being in the most hot country of all Africa) did eat from time to
time. At length yet being werye of such a lothesome life, he left the cave,
and came abroad, by means whereof, he was taken again, and being a slave to
his master (who had power of life and death over him) he was condemned to
be cast to the wild beasts at Rome, there to be devoured of a Lion. The pore
caytife stood pitifullye in the sight of thousands, ever iokinge when he
should be devoured. It happened at the same time, when this fellow was thus
adjudged to dye: that the same Lion was taken, whose foot he healed in the
wood. When the Lion was put to him, he came first very terribly toward this
fellow, and immediately knowing what he was, stood still, and at length fauned
gently upon him. The fellow at first being amassed, began to take heart unto him
afterward, as half knowing him likewise, and thus they began both to take
acquaintance the one of the other, and played together a good space without all
danger, whereupon the people being amassed, much wondered at the straungenes
of this thing. And standinge thus astonished, they sent to know of the slave,
what this matter should mean. Unto whom this poor wretch opened the whole
thing altogether, even as it happened. When the people heard this, they not
only reioysed much at the sight thereof, but also they made earnest request to
his Master for his life. His master marueylinge as much as any of them, at
such an vnwonte kyndenes: gave him not only his life, but also his fredome.
And now to the end he might have somewhat whereupon to live, the people gave
him a ^ee for term of his life. The fellow by and by got him a ^^^e and a
coler, and carried the Lion up and down the city in such sort, as
huntesmenne carye a Greyhounde, or a Spaniell, the people still wonderynge, and
saying ever as he came bye: Behold a man that has cured a Lion, behold a
Lion that has saved a man.

The which example, the more strange it is, the more ashamed may they be
that are unnatural, and may learn kindenes of a brute Beast. For such
men being overcome with kindness by Beasts, are worsse then Beasts, and
more mete rather to be tormented with Devils, then to live with men.

Of enlargynge examples by copye.
ANd now because examples enriched by Copy, help much for Amplification: I
will give a taste, how these and such like Histories may be increased.

And for the better handelynge of them, needful it is to mark well the
circumstau^ces: that being well observed and compared together on both
parts, they may the rather be enlarged.

As thus. Example enlarged.
That which brute Beasts have done, shall thou being a man seem not to have
done? They showed them selves natural, and will thou appear unnatural? Nay
they overcame nature, and will thou be overcome of them? They became of
beasts in body, men in nature, and will thou become of a man in body, a
Beast in nature?

They being without reason, declared the propertye of reasonable creatures,
and will thou being a man endued with reason, ap^eare in thy doings
altogether unreasonable? Shall Dogs be th^nkefull: and men, yea, christian
men want such a virtue? Shall worms show such kindenes: and men
appearre graceless? It had been no matter if they had been unthankful: but
man can never escape blame, saying God has commanded, and Nature has
graffed this in all men: that they shoul^e do to other, as they would be
done unto. Again, they for m^ate only showed them selves so kind: and shall
man for so many benefits received, and for such goodness showed, requite for
good will, evil deeds: for hearty love, deadlye hatred: for virtue, vice: and
for life given to him, yield death to other? Nature has parted man and beast:
and shall man in nature be no man? Shamed be that wretch that goes against
nature, that one ye has the shape of a man, and in nature is worse then a
beast. Yea, worthy are all such rather to be torn with devils, then to live
with men. Thus an example might most copiouslye be augmented, but thus much
for this time is sufficient.

The saiynge of Poets and all their fables are not to be forgotten, Poetical
narrations profitable.
for by them we may talk at large, and win me^ by persuasion, if we declare
before hand, that these tales were not feigned of such wise men without
cause, neither yet continued until this time, and kept in memory without
good consideration, and thereupon declare the true meaning of all such
writing. For undoubtedly there is no one tale emonge all the Poets, but under
the same is comprehended some thing that perteyneth either to the amendment
of manners, to the knowledge of truth, to the setting forth of Natures
woorcke, or else to the understanding of some notable thing done. For what
other is the paynefull travail of Ulisses discribed so largelye by Homere, but
a lively picture of man's misery in this life.

And as Plutarche says* and likewise Basilius Magnus: In the Iliades are
described strength and valeantenes of the body: In Odissea is set forth a
lyuelye Pattern of the mind.

The Poets Poets under cul^ures show much wisdom.
were wise men, and wished in heart the redress of things, the which when
for fear they durst not openly rebuke, they did in colors paynte them
out, and told men by shadows what they should do in good south: or else
because the wicked were unworthy to hear the truth, they spoke so, that none
might understand, but those unto whom they pleased to utter their meaning,
and knew the^ to be men of honest conversation.

We read of Danae Danae
the fair damosel, whom Iuppiter ^empted full often; and could never have his
pleasure, till a^ length he made it rain gold, and so as she sat in her
chimney, a great deal fell upon her lap, the which she took gladly, and
kept it there: within the which gold Iuppiter him self was comprehended,
whereby is none other thing else signified, but that women have been, and will
be overcome with money*

Likewise Iuppiter fanseinge the fair maid Isis Isis
could not have his will, till he turned him self into a fair white Bull,
which signified that beauty may overcome the best.

If a man would speak against covetous Caytifes, can he better show what
they are, then by setting forth the strange plague of Tantalus, Tantalus
who is reported to be in Hell, having water coming still to his chynne, and
yet never able to drink: and an apple hangyng before his mouth, and yet never
able to eat?

Icarus Icarus.
would needs have wings and fly contrary to nature, whereupon when he had
them set together with ware, and joined to his side, he mounted up into the
air. But so sone as the sun had somewhat heated him, and his wax began to
melte, he fell down into a great River, and was drowned out of hand, the
which water was ever after called by his name. Now what other thing does this
tale show us, but that every man should not meddle with things above his
compass.

Midas Midas.
desiered that whatsoever he touched, the same might be gold: whereupon when
Iuppiter had granted him his bound: his meat, drink, and al other things
turned into gold, and he choked with his own desire, as al cocouetouse men
lightely shall be, than can never be content when they have enough.

What other thing are the wonderful labors of Hercules, Hercules labors
what they signi^^ed.
but that reason should withstand affection, and the spirit for ever should
fight, against the flesh? We Christians had like fables heretofore of ioyly
fellows, the Images whereof were set up (in Gods name) even in our Churches. But
is any man so mad to thynk that ever there was such a one as S. Christofer S.
Christofer what he signified.
was paincted unto us? Mary God forbid. Assuredly when he lived upon earth
there were other houses builded for him, then we have at this time, and I
think tailers were much troubled to take measure of him for making his
garments. He might be of kynne to Garganteo, if he were as big as he is set
forth in Antwerpe* But this was the meaning of our elders (and the name self
does signify none other) that every man should bear Christ upon his back,
that is to say, he should love his brother as Christ loved us, and gave his
body for us: he should tra^^ile through hunger, cold, sorrow, sickness,
death, and al dangers with all sufferaunce that might be. And whether should
he travail? to the euerliuyng GOD* but how? In darkness? No forsouth, by the
light of his word. And therefore Saint Christofer being in the Sea, and not
well able to get out (that is to say being almost drouned in sin, and not
knowing which way best to escape) an Heremite appeared unto him with a
la^terne and a light therein, the which does signify none other thing to the
Christian but the true word of God, which lighteneth the hearts of men, and
gives understanding to the youngelinges (as the Prophet does say). Again,
Saint George S. George on horse back.
he is set on horseback and kills a Dragon with his spear, which Dragon
would have devoured a virgin, whereby is none other thing me^t but that a
King and every man unto whom thexecution of justice is committed, should
defend the innocent against the ungodly attemptes of the wicked, and rather
kill such deuilles by marcial law, than suffer the innocents to take any
wrong. But who gave our clargie any such authority that those monsters
should be in Churches as lay men's Books? God forbadde by express word to
make any graven Image, and shall we be so bold to break Gods will for a good
intent, and call these Idolles lay men's Books? I could talk more largely of
examples, and heap a number here together, as well of Ethnike Aucthours, as of
other here at home: but for fear I should be tediouse, these for this time
that suffice.

Of Fables.
THe feigned fables, such as are attributed unto brute beasts, would not be
forgotten at any hand. For not only they delight the rude and ignorant, but
also they help much for persuasion. Apologi.
And because such as speak in open audience have ever more fools to hear
them than wise men to give judgment: I would think it not amiss, to speak
much according to the nature and fancy of the ignorant, that the rather they
might be won through fables, to learn more weighty and grave matters* for all men cannot brook sage causes, and ancient collacions: but will like earnest
matters the rather, if some thing be spoken there among agreyng to their
natures. The multitude (as Horace does say) is a beast, or rather amo^ster that
has many heads Fables* how nedeful they are to ^eache the ignorau^^e.
and therefore like unto the diversity of natures, variety of inuencion must
always be used. Talk altogether of most grave matters, or depely search out
the ground of things or use the Quiddities of Dunce to set forth Gods
mysteries: and you shall see the ignorant (I warrant you) either fall a sleep,
or else bid you farewell. The multitude must needs be made merry: and the more
foolish your talk is, the more wise will they count it to be. And yet it is no
foolishness, but rather wisdom to win men by tellyng of fables to hear of
Gods goodness. Undoubtedly fables well set forth, have done much good at
diverse times, and in diverse common weals. The Roman Menenius Agrippa
allegyng upon a time a fable of the conflicte made betwixt the parts of a man's
body, and his belie: quieted a marueilouse stir that was like to ensewe and
pacified the uproar of ^ediciouse rebels, which else thought for ever to
destroy their country. Themistos^es persuaded the Athenia^s not to change
their Officers, by rehersyng the fable of a scabbed fore. For (quod he) when
many flees stood feedyng upon his raw flesh, and had well fed themselves, he
was contented at another persuasion, to have them slapte away: whereupon their
ensewed such hungry flees afterward, that the sorry fo^e being al alone was
eaten up almost to the hard boon, and therefore cursed the time that every he
agreed to any such evil counsel. In like manner (quod Themistocles) if you will
change Officers, the hungry flees will ea^e you up one after another, whereas
now you live being but only bitten, and like to have no farther harm, but
rather much wealth and quietness hereafter, because they are filled, and have
enough, that heretofore suckte so much of your blood.

Now likewise as I gave a lesson how to enlarge an example, so may fables also
in like sort be set out, and augmented at large by Amplification. Thus much
for the use of fables. Again, sometimes fei^ed Narrations and witty invented
matters (as though they were true in deed) help well to set forward a cause,
and have great grace in the^, being aptely used and well invented. Luciane
passes in this point: and sir Thomas More for his Eutopia can sooner be
remembered of me, then worthily praised of any according as the excellency of
his inuencio^ in that behaulf does most justly require.

Digestion.
DIgestion Digesti^.
is an ordely placyng of things, partyng every matter severally. Tullie has
an example hereof in his Oration which he made for Sextus Roscius Amarinus.
There are three things (quod Tullie) which hinder Sextus Roscius at this
time, the accusacion of his adversaries, the boldenes of them, and the power
that they bear. Eruscus his accuser has taken upon him to forge false matte^,
the Roscians kinsfolk have boldly adventured, and will face out their doings,
and Chrisogonus here, that most can do, will press us with his power.

A whisht, or a warnyng to speak no more.
A Whisht, is when we bid them hold their peace that have least cause to
speak, and can do little good with their talkyng. Reticen^i^.
Diogenes being upon the Sea among a number of naughty packes in a great
storm of wether, when diverse of these wicked fellows cried out for fear of
drownyng, some with fained prayour to Iuppiter, some to Neptune, and every one
as they best fantaised the gods above: ^iogenes.
whishte (quod Diogenes) for up Gods mother, if God him self know you be
here, you are like to be drowned every mothers son of you. Meaning that they
were so naught, and so fainedly made their prayour to false Gods without mind
to amend their naughty life, that the living God would not leave them
unpunished though they cried never so fast. We use this figure likewise, when
in speaking of any man: we say, whisht, the woulfe it at hand: when the same
man comes in the mean season, of whom we spoke before.

Contrariety.
Contrariety Contentio.
is, when our talk stands by contrary words, or sentences together. As
thus we might despraise some one man. he is of a strange nature as ever I
saw, for to his friend he is churlishe, to his foe he is ientle: give him
fair words, and you offend him: check him sharply, and you win him. Let
him have his will, and he will fly in your face: keep him short, and you shall
have him at commandment.

Fre^nesse of speech.
Freeness of speech, Liberavox
is when we speak boldly, and without fear, even to the proudest of them,
whatsoever we please, or have list to speak. Diogenes herein did excel, and
feared no man when he saw just cause to say his mind. This world wants
such as he was, and has over many such, as never honest man was, that is to
say, flatterers, fawners, and southers of men's sayings.

Stomach grief.
Stomach grief, Iracundia.
is when we will take the matter as hot as a tossed. We need no examples for
this matter, hot men have to many, of whom they may be bold and spare not,
that find them selves a cold. Some times we en^reate earnestly and make
means by pra^er to win favor. Deprecatio
Somtymes we seek favor by speaking well of the company present. Co^cilia^io.
As. Through your help my lords this good deed has been done. Laesio.
Some times we speak to hurt our adversaries, by setting forth their evil
behauior. Purgatio.
Sometimes we excuse a fault, and accuse the reporters. Optatio.
Sometimes we wish unto God for redress to evil. Sometimes we curse the
extreme wickedness of some pastgood roisters. Execratio.
In all which I think neither examples need, nor yet any rehearsal had been
greatly necessary, considering al these come without any great learning,
saving that for apt bestowing, judgment is right nedeful.

Of figures in sentencies, called Schemes.
WHen any sentence upon the placyng, or setting of words, is said to be a
figure: thesaied is always called a Scheme, the which words being altered,
or displaced, the figure straight does lose his name, and is called no more a
scheme. Of this sort there be diverse, such as hereafter follow.

Doublettes.
DOublettes, Geminatio verborum.
is when we rehearse one and the same word twice together. Ah wretch, wretch,
that I am. Tullie against Catiline inueighyng sore against his traiterouse
attemptes, says after a long rehearsed matter, and yet notwithstanding all this
notouriouse wickedness: the man lives still, lives? Nay mary he comes into
the counsel house which is more. An other: Darrest thou show thy face, thou
wretched thief, thou thief I say to thine own father, darrest thou look
abroad? Thus the often repeatyng of one word does munhe stir the hearer, and
makes the word seem greater, as though a sword were often dug and thrust
twice, or thrice in one place of the body.

Alteryng part of a word.
ALteryng part of a word, Pau^um immutat (...) verbum.
is when we take a letter, or syllable from some word, or else add a letter, or
syllable to a word. As thus. William Somer seeing much a do for accomptes
making, and that the Kings Majesty of most worthy memory Henry theight
wanted money such as was due unto him: And please your grace (quod he) you have
so many frauditours, so many conueiers, and so many deceivers to get up your
money, that they get al to themselves. Whether he said true, or no, let God
judge that. it was unhappily spoken of a fool, and I think he had some
Scholemaister: he should have said Auditors, Surueyours, and Receauours.

Repetition.
REpetition Repetitio a primo.
is when we begin diverse sentencies one after another with one and the same
word. As thus: When thou shall appear at the terrible da^e of judgment before
the high majesty of God, where is then thy richesse? where is then thy deintie
fair? where is the^ thy great band of men? where are then thy fair houses?
where are then al thy lands, pastures, parkes, and forestes? I might say thus
of our sovereign lord the Kings majesty that now is. King Edward has
overthrown idololatrie: King Edward has bannished superstition: King Edward
by Gods help has brought us to the true knowledge of our creation: King
Edward has quieted our co^sciencies, and labored that al his people should
seek health by the death and Passion of Christ alone.

Conversion.
Conversion Conversion eiusdem in extremum.
is an often repeatyng of the last word, and is contrary to that which went
before. When just dealing is not used: wealth goes away, fryndship goes away,
truth goes away, all goodness (to speak at a word) goes away. Where
affections bear rule, there reason is subdued, honesty is subdued, good will
is subdued, and al things else that withstand evil, for ever are subdued.

Comprehension.
COmprehersion, Conuersio in eadem.
is when both the above rehearsed figures are in one kind of speaking used, so
that both one first word must often be rehearsed, and likewise al one last
word. What wins the hearts of men? Liberality. What causes men to
adventure their life's, and dye willyngly in defense of their masters?
Liberality. What continues the sta^e of a King? Liberality. What becomes a
woman best, Silence b^cometh a wom^n best.
and first of al? Silence. What second? Silence. What third? Silence. What
fourth? Silence. Yea if a man should ask me til dowmes day, I would still cry,
silence, silence, without the which no woman has any good gift, but having
the same, no doubt she must have many other notable gifts, as the which of
necessity do ever follow such a virtue.

Progression.
PRogression Progressio
stands upon contrary sentences which answer one another. If we would
rebuke a naughty boie, we might with co^mendyng a good boie, say thus. What a
boie are thou in co^par^son of this fellow here. Thou sleapes: he wakes: thou
plays: he studies: thou art ever abroad: he is ever at home: thou never
waits: he still does his attendaunce: thou carest for no body: he does his
duty to al men: thou do what thou can to hurt al, and please none: he
does what he can, to hurt none, and please all.

Like endyng, and like falling.
THen the sentences are said to end like, when those words do end in like
sillables, which do lack cases. Similite^ desinens, similiter cadens.
Thou lives wickedly, thou speaks naughtely. The rebels of Northfolke (quod
a most worthy man that made an inuectiue against the^) through slavery, slew
Nobility: in deed miserably, in fashion cruelly, in cause deuilishly.

Sentencies also are said to fall like, when diverse words in one sentenc^e
end in like cases, and that in ryme. By great travail is got much avail, by
earnest affection, men learn discrecion.

These.ij. kinds of Exornacion are then most delitefull when contrary things
are repeated together: when that ones again is vtterde, which before was
spoken: when sentencies are turned, and letters are altered. Of the first this
may be an example: Where learning is loved, there labor is esteemed: but where
sleuth is thought solace, there rudenes takes place. A King is honored, that
is a King in deed. will you drink or you go, or will you go or you drink. There
is a diffrence betwixt an horsemilne, and a milnehorse. He is a meter man to
drive the Carte, than to serve in the Court. Through labou^ comes honor,
through ydell living follows hangyng. Diverse in this our time delight much in
this kind of writing, which being measurably used, deliteth much the
hearers, otherwise i^ offends, and werieth men's ears with sacitie. S.
Augustine Augustine.
had a goodly gift in this behaulf, and yet some thinks he forgot measure,
and used ouermuche this kind of figure. Notwithstanding the people were such
where he lived, that they took much delight in rimed sentences, and in Orations
made ballade wise. Yea they were so nyce and so waiwarde to please, that
except the Preacher from time to time could ryme out his Sermon, they would
not long abide the hearing. Tacitus Tacitus.
also shows that in his time, the judges and sergeauntes at the law were
driven to use this kind of phrase both in their writing, and also in their
speaking. Yea great lords would thynk themselves conte^pned, if learned men
(when they spoke before the^) sought not to speak in this sort. Rymed
sentences used without measure.
So that for the flowyng style, and full sentence, crepte in mynstrelles
elocution, talkyng matters altogether in rhyme, and for weightinesse and
gravity of words, succeeded nothing else but wantonness of inuencon. Tullie
was forsaken, with Liuie, Caesar, and other: And Apuleius, Ausonius, with such
mynstrell makers were altogether followed. And I think the Popes heretofore
(seeing the people folly to be such) made al our Hymns and Anthemes in rhyme,
Rymes made, to mock the simple.
that with the singyng of me^, plaiyng of organnes, ringyng of belles, and
r^nyng of Hymns, and Sequencies the poor ignorant might think the Harmony
to be heavenly, and verily believe that the Angels of God made not a better
noise in heaven. I speak thusmuche of these two figures, not that I think
folly to use them (for they are pleasant and praise worthy) but my talk is
to this end, that they should neither only, nor chefely to used, as I know
some in this our time do ouermuche use them in their writings. And ouermuche
(as al men know) was never good yet. Yea a man may have ouermuche of his
mothers blessyng if she will never leave blessyng. Therefore a measure is best,
yea even in the best things. And thus far for these.ij. figures.

Egual members.
EGuall members are such, when the one half of the sentence answers to the
other, Pa^ia pa^ibus rela^a.
with just proporcio^ of number, not that the sillables of necessitee, should
be of just no^bre, but that the ear might judge them, to be so eguall, that
there may appear small difference. As thus. Law without mercy, is extreme
power, yet men through folly, deserve such justice. Learning is dangerous, if
an evil man have it. The more noble a man is, the more ientle he should be.
Isocrates passes in this behalf, who is thought to write altogether in
number, keeping just proporcion in framyng of his sentence.

Like among themselfes.
SEntences are called like, when contraries are set together, Similia inter se.
and the first takes as much as the other following: and the other following
takes as much a way, as that did, which went before. As thus* Lust has
overcome shamefastenesse, impudency has overcome fear, and madness has
overcome reason. Or else sentences are said to be like among themselfes, when
every part of one sentence is eguall, and of like weight one with another As
thus. Is it known, tried, proved, evident, open, and assured that I did such
a deed? Another. Such riote, Dicyng, Cardyng, pikyng, stealyng, fighting,
ruffines, queanes and harlottes, must needs bring him to naught.

Gradacion.
GRadacion Gradatio.
is when we rehearse the word that goes next before, and bring another word
thereupon that increases the matter, as though one should go up a pair a
staiers, and not leave til he come at the top. Or thus. Gradacion is when a
sentence is disseuered by degrees, so that the word, which ends the
sentence going before, does begin the next. Labor gets learning, learning
gets fame, fame gets honor, honor gets bless for ever. Another. Of
slouthe comes pleasure, of pleasure comes spendyng, of spe^dyng comes
whoryng, of whoryng comes lack, of lack comes theft, of theft comes
hangyng, and there an end for this world.

Regression.
THat is called regression, Regressio.
when we repeat a word eftso^es, that has been spoken, and rehearsed before,
whether the same be in the beginning, in the midst, or in the latter end of
a sentence.

In the beginning, thus. Thou art ordained to rule other, and not other to rule
thee.

In the midst, thus. He that has money, has not given it and he that has
given money, has not his money still: but he that has given thanks, has
thanks still, and he that has them still, has given them notwithstanding.

In the latter end, thus. Manne must not live to eat, but eat to live. Man
is not made so the Sabbath, but the Sabbath is made for man. If man do any
filthy thing, and take pleasure therein: the pleasure goes away, but the
shame tarieth still. If manne do any good thing with pain, the pains go away,
but the honesty abides still.

words loose.
Words louse are such, Dissolutnm
which as are vttred without any addicion of coniunccions, such as knitte
words and sentences together. As thus. Obey the King, fear his laws, keep
thy vocacion, do right, seek rest, like well a little, use all men, as thou
would they should use thee.

Out criyng.
OUt criyng is when with voice we make an exclamacion. Exclamatio
Oh Lord, O God, O world, O life, O manners of men? O death, where is thy
styng? O hell where is thy victory?

Often vsyng of one word in diverse places.
CAn he have any man's heart in him, or deserves he the name of a man, that
cruelly kills a poor innocent man, who never thought him harm.

A cause given to a sentence uttered.
I Fear not mine adversary, because I am not guilty. I mistrust not the
Judges, because they are just, the quest will not cast me, the matter is so
plain.

A cause given to things contrary.
BEtter it were to rule, then to serve: For, he that rules, lives: because he
is free. But he that serves, cannot be said to live. For where bondage is,
there is no life properly.

Sufferaunce.
TAke your pleasure for a time, and do what you list, Permissio*
a time will come when account shall be made. When things cannot be, that we
would have, we should will that, which we can have. Patience is a remedy for
every disease.

A doubtyng.
SHall I call him fool, Dubitatio.
or shall I call him varlet, or both? Another. What made him to commit such a
robbery? Lack of money, or lack of wit, or lack of honesty? I doubt
whether to call him a foolish knave, or a knauishe fool. When much matter
was here in England, for calling the Pope, supreme hedde of the Church (quod
a Spanyarde, A Spaniardes dou^te.
that whilome was of the Popes court in Rome) you doubt much here in England,
whether the Pope be hedde of the church or no, and great variaunce there is
emonges you, at the which folly of yours I do much maruaill, for we doubt
much at Rome, whether he be a member of the Church at all, or no.

Reckenyng.
REckenyng, is when many things are nombred together. Dinumeratio.
There is no streat, no house, no man, no child, no shop, no lodgyng in all
this town, but he has been in it. There is no stone, no Diamo^d, no Sapphire,
no Rubie, no Crystal, no Turcasse, no Emerode, but he knows them
perfectly. By this figure we may enlarge that, by rehersyng of the parts,
which was spoken generally, and in few words. This may be an example. Such
a ientle man being an unthrift, has spent all that ever he had. Thus the
sentence Sentence amplified by several rehersyng of things.
may be ampli^ied, if we show particularly what he had, and tell severally how
he spent it. Look what enheritaunce came to him (which was no small thing) by
the death of his awn kin, and his wifes kinsfolk: What dower soever he had by
marriage of his wife, which by report was very great thing Whatsoever he got by
executorship: Whatsoever the kings Majesty gave him. What booties soever he
got in war fare, look what money he had, what plate, what apparel, what
householde stuff, what land and Lordeshippes, what Sheep, goods, Parkes, and
Meadows, yea, whatsoever he had, moveable, or immovable, his house, and all
that ever he had: he has so spent in few days, so wasted it, and made such
havoc of all together, among the beastly compagnie of filthy queanes, among
abominable harlottes, with banquetyng from day to day, with sumpteous rear
suppers, with drinkyng in the night, with dain^ees and delicates, and a^l
such sweet delites, with Dicyng, Cardyng, and all manner of gamenyng: that he
has now left neither cross nor crucifixe, no not a dodkin in all the world,
to bless himself with all. Thus these words (he has spent all his goods in
riot) are dilated, and set furthe at large, by rehersyng severally every
thing, one after another.

Reasonyng a matter with our selfs.
THen we reason the matter with our selfs, Disputatio
when we ask questions of our selfs, and answer thereunto. As thus. How
came this good fellow by all that he has? Did his father leave him any land?
Not a foot. Did his friends give him any thing? Not a grote. Has he served in
any vo^acion, to heap up so much wealth? No^e has lived more idly. Does
he not lean to some noble man? Yea, but he never received more then.iiij.
mark wages. How then comes he by all that ever he has, living without
labor, having no friends to help him, having so little to take unto by all
outward apparaunce, and spendyng so l^berally, and owyng no man a grote in all
the world? Assuredly, it cannot be otherwise, but that he comes naughtily by
most of that, which he has Another. Seeing thou art so basely borne, so poor
in state, so smally learned, so hard favored, and have no wit at al, what
meanest thou to vaunte thy self so much, and to make such bragges as thou
do. What does make thee to wax so proud? Thy stock whereof thou did
come? Why manne, they are very base folk. Thine own wealth? ^ushe, thou art
as poor as Job. Thy learning? Marie thou never camst yet where any learning
did grow. Thy beauty? Now in good sothe, a worse favored manne can there
not be upon earth again. Thy wit? Now God he knows, it is as blounte as
may be. What other thing then, is all this thy braggyng, but plain madness.

Resemblyng of things.
REsemblyng of things, is a comparyng or likenyng of look, with look, shape,
with shape, and one thing with another. As when I see one in a great h^ate,
and fiercely set upon his enemy, I might say, he let flee at him like a
Dragon. Or thus. He looks like a Tiger, a man would think he would eat one,
his countenance is so ougle. He speaks not, but he barks like a Dog: he
whettes his tethe like a Bore, he beats the ground with his foot, like a
great Horse: he is as raumpyng as a Lion. By this figure called in Latin
Imago, Imago.
that is to say an Image, we might compare one manne with another, as Salust
compares Ceasar and Cato together, or we might heap many men together, and
prove by large rehersall, any thing that we would, the which of the Logicians
is called induccion.

Answeryng to our self.
WE are said to answer our self, when we seem to tell our self, Sibi ipsi
responsio.
what we will do. Phedria in Terence being much troubled and out of quiet,
because he was not received of his woman, but shut out of doors, when he was
most willing to se her, made as though he would not come to her afterward,
nor yet se her at all, when she did most iently send for him. And therefore
being in his anger, thus he said: Well, what shall I do? Shall I not go, not
even now when she sendes for me, of her own accord? Or shall I be of such a
nature, that I cannot abide the despitefulnesse of harlottes? She has shut
me out, she calls me again. Shall I go to her? Naie I will not, though she
entreat me never so fair.

Order.
ORder Ordo.
is of two sorts, the one is, when the worthier is preferred, and set before.
As a man is set before a woman. The second is, when in amplificacion, the
weightiest words are set last, and in diminishyng, the same are set
formoste. With what look, with what face, with what heart dare thou do such a
deed?

Brief describyng, or circumscripcion.
CIrcumscripcion, Circumscriptio.
is a brief declaryng of a thing. As thus. He is free, that is subject to no
evil. It is a virtue to eschew vice.

There are diverse other colors of Rhetorique, to commend and set furthe a
sentence, by change of words, and much varietee of speech, but I had rather
offend in speaking to little, then deserve rebuke in saying to much.
Forasmuch as close silence may so^er be pardoned, then immoderate bablyng can
want just blame, and therefore thus an end.

Of memory.
AS I have labored to set out the other parts of Rhetorique, in such ample wise
as I thought most needful so it stands me in hand, not to slacken mine
endeavor, now that I am come to speak to memory. For, though man have
understanding and judgment, which is one part of wisdom: yet wantyng a
remembrance to apply things aptly, when time and place shall best require: he
shall do but small good with all his understanding. And therefore it is said not
without reason, that the same is memory to the mind, that life is to the body.
Now then what else must they do that esteem reason, and love knowledge, but
cherishe the memory from time to time, as an especial and sovereign
preservative, against thinfeccion of cankard oblivion. The faulkners say, it
is the first poyncte of haukyng to hold fast. And yet I cannot think
otherwise, but that in all good learning also, it is best and most expedient,
evermore to hold fast. For, what avail good things, if we cannot keep them,
if we receive them in at one ear, and let them out as fast again at the
other ear? A good thriftie man will gather his goods together in time of
plenty, and lay them out again in time of need: and shall not an Orator
have in store good matter, in the cheste of his memory, to use and bestow in
time of necessitee? I doubt not, but all men desire to have, a good
remembrance of things, the which what it is, how it is divided, and how it
may be preserved, I will show in as few words as I can.

what is memory.
Memory Memory what it is*
is the power retentiue of the mind, to keep those things, which by man^es
wit are conceived, or thus. Memory is the power of the mind that contains
things received, that calls to mind things past, and renueth of fresh,
things forgotten.

The place of memory.
THe Phisicians declare, that in the former part of the head, lies the common
sense, the which is therefore so called, because it gives judgment, of all the
five outward senses, only when they are presently occupied about any thing.
As when I hear a thing, or see a thing, my common sense judges, that then I
do hear, or se the same. But the memory called the Threasure of the mind,
lies in the hinder part, the which is made most perfect by temperatnesse,
and moderacion of qualitees in the brain. For where humors excede or want,
there must needs ensue much weakness of remembrance. Children Children and
old men have but evil memories.
therefore being over moist, and old men over dry, have never good
memories. Again, where over much cold is, and extreme moisture, there is ever
much forgetfulness. Therefore it avails greatly, what bodies we have, and of
what constitucion they be compacte together. Hot and moys^ bodies sone
conc^iue.
For such as be hot and moist, do sone conceive matters, but they keep not
long. Again, they that be cold and dry, Cold and dry keep things sure.
do hardely conceive, but they keep it surely, when they ones have it. And
the reason is this, heat being chief qualitee, does draw things unto it
(as we may se by the Son) the which notwithstanding are sone after
dissipated and resolved. Again, who has seen a print made in water of any
yerthly thing? Then though heat and moisture together, draw things unto them,
yet (we se plainly) they cannot long hold them. But when the brain is cold and
dry, things are therefore the faster holden, because it is the property of
cold and drought, to thicken all things, and to harden them fast together,
as we see the water through coldenesse, is congeled, and soft things are
frosen oftentimes, almost as hard as a stone. So that moisture, through heat
being chief qualitee, does draw: and drought through coldness, which is
chief contrary to heat, does harden and make things fast together. But now
how do we know, that the memory Memory in the latter part of the hedde.
rests in the latter part of the hedde? No doubt, experience has proved,
and confirmed this to be most true. For, there has been some, that being hurt
in that place, have utterly forgot their own name I do remember one man, that
(being hurt in that place, at the insurreccion of the Lincoln Shire men, xv.
years past) could not devise the making of some Letters, in his Cross row,
when he took pen and ynke, to write to his friend, whereas before that time,
he wrote both fast and fair, and was learned in the Latin. And therefore
when he wrote, he would stand musyng a great while, before he could call to
his remembrance, how he used to make a.P. a G. or such another letter,
whereupon diverse much marueiled what he would have, or what he meant at the
first time. For being grieved, and willing to ask help, he could not utter his
meaning, for lack of remembrance, and yet his tongue served him well
otherwise, to utter whatsoever came in his hedde.

The division of memory.
Memory Memory divided.
is partly natural, and partly artificial. Natural memory is, when without
any precepts or lessons, by the only aptenesse of nature, we bear away
such things as we hear. Wherein some heretofore, did much excel, and
greatly pass all other. As Themistocles, Themistocles.
who had so good a memory, that when one proffered to teach him the art of
memory, nay by saint Mar^e (quod he) teach me rather the art of
forgettyng. Declaryng thereby that his memory was passing good, and that it
was more pain for him, to forgette such things, as he would not keep, then
hard to remember such things as he would know.

Mithridates Mithridates
also had such an excellent memory, that whereas he was Lord and ruler
over.xxij. strange countries that spoke diverse speeches one from an other: he
was able to talk with every one of them in their own country language.

Likewise Cyrus Cyrus.
King of the Persians, having a great army of men, knew the names of all
his Soldiers.

Cyneas Cyneas
Ambassadoure for king Pyrrhus, called every one by his name that was in the
Parliamente house at Rome, the second day after he came thither, the number
of them being four times as many as they ^e, that belong unto the Parliament
here in England.

Julius Caesar Julius Caesar.
is reported that he could read, hear, and tell one what he should write, so
fast as his pen could run, and endite letters him self altogether at one
time.

Thus we see that naturallye men have had wonderful memories, as
contrariwise there have been heard of as strange forgetful wits. Some
has not known his right hand from his left. An other has forgotte
Forgetful wits.
his own name. An other has carried his knyfe in his mouth, and has run
round about the house sekinge for it. An other has told a tale half an
hour together, and immediately after has forgotte what he spoke all that while.

Cicero tells of one Curio, that where as he would make a division of three
parts, he would either foget the third, or make up a fourth, contrary to
his first purpose and entente.

This I remember being a boy, Belike this man had the art of forget^tinge.
that where as a preacher had taken upon him to set forth the.xij. Articles
of our belief, he could not in all the world find out paste nine. So that
he was feign to say, he was assured there was twelve, where soever the other
three were become, and he doubted not but the hearers knew them better then he
did, and therefore he would for his part say no more, but commit them all to
God, and those nine (thought he) were enoughe for him at that time, to set
forth and expound for their understanding. Pre^erua^ion o^ Memory.


Now the best mean both to mende an evil memory and to preserve a good, is
first to keep a diet, and eschew surfites, to sleep moderatelye, to
accompanye with women rarelye, and last of all to exercise the wit with
cunning of many things without Book, and ever to be occupied with one
thing or other. For even as by labor the wit is whetted, so by lithernes
the wit is blunted.

But now concerning the other kind of memory called artificial, I had need
to make a long discourse, considering the strangeness of the thing to the
English ear, and the hardness of the matter, to the ignoraunte and unlearned.
But first I will show from whence it has beginning, and upon what occasion it
was first invented, before I adventure to declare the precepts that belong
unto the same.

The first founder of the art of Remembraun^e.
THE invention of this Art is fatherde upon Simonides, Simonides, ^i^st
aucthoure of the Art of remembrance.
for when the same manne (as the fable records) had made in behalf of a
triumpha^t Champion called Scopas, for a certain sum of money a Ballade,
such as was then wont to be made for Conquerours: he was denied a piece of
his reward, because he made a digression in his song (which in those days
was customablye used) to the praise and commendatio^ of Castor and Pollur (who
were then thought being Twins, and got by Iuppiter to be Gods) of whom
the Champion willed him to ask a portion, because he had so largelye set
forth their worthy doings. Now it chanced, that where as there was made a
great feast to the honor of the same Uictorye, and Simonides had been placed
there as a geiste, he was suddenly called from the table* and told that there
was two young men at the door, and both on horseback which desiered most
earnestlye to speak with him out of hand. But when he came out of the doors,
he saw none at all, notwithstanding, he was not so sone out, and his foot on
the thresholde, but the Parlour fell down immediatlye upon them all that were
there, and so crusshed their bodies together, and in such sort, that the
kinsfolk of those which were dead, coming in, and desierous to bury them
every one according to their calling, not only could they not perceive them up
their faces, but also they could not discern them by any other mark of any
part in all their bodies.

Then Simonides well remembringe in what place every one of them did sit,
told them what every one was, and gave them their kinsfolks carkases, so
many as were there Thus the art was first invented. And yet (though this be
but a fable) reason might beat thus much into our heads, that if the like
thing had been done, the like remembrance might have been used. For who is he
that sees a dosen sit at a table whom he knows very well, can not tell,
after they are all risen, where every one of them did sit before? And
therefore be it that some man invented this tale: the matter serves well our
purpose, and what need we any more?

What things are requisite to get the Art of Memory.
THey that will remember many things and rehearse them together out of hand:
must learn to have places, and digest Images in them accordingly

A Place what it is.

A place is called any rowme apt to receive things.

An Image what it is.

An Image is any picture or shape, to declare some certain thing thereby. And
eue^ as in wax we make print with a seal so we have places where lively pictures
must be set. The places must be great, Places vow they must be.
of small distaunce, not one like an other, and evermore the fifte place must
be made notable above the rest, having always some several note from the
other, as some antique, or a hand pointing, or such like, that the rather
having a great number of places, we might the better know where we are, by
the remembrance of such notable and strange places. And thus having them
well appoynnted, we must keep them fresh in our memory, and never change
them, but use them still, whatsoever we have to say. But the images we may
change as the matter shall give just cause, vsinge such as shall serve best
for the knowledge of things.

The which Images must be set forth as though they were stirring, Images
how they must be.
yea they must be sometimes made raumping, and last of all, they must be made
of things notable, such as may cause earnest impression of things in our
mind. As a notable evil favored man, or a monstrous horse, such as saint
Georges horse was wont to be, or any such like, help well for remembrance.

i. The places of Memory are resembled unto Wax and Paper. ij. Images are
counted like unto letters or a Seal. iij. The placing of these Images, is like
unto words written. iiij. The vtteraunce and using of them, is like unto
reading.
ANd therefore as we do reserve paper, and yet chau^g our writynge, putting out
words as occasion shall serve, and settinge other in their rowme: so may we do
for the Images invented, change our pictures often, and reserve the papers
still. Some gather their places and images out of the cross row, beginning
every letter with the name of some Beast, and so go through the whole, making
in every beast five several places, where the impression of things shall be
made, that is to say, in the Head, the Bealye, in the Tail, in the former
part of the legs, and also in the hinder part. So that by this means, there
shall be gathered, an hundredth and fiftene places.

Some again will set their places in his head or body wi^h whom they speak.
As to make the nose, the eyes, the forheade, the here, the ears, and other
parts, to serve for places. And for making places in any house, church, or
other rowme, this lesson is also given, that we enter our first places
always upon the right hand, never returning back, but going on still as I
might say in a circuit, til we come to that place where we first began. But
first before the Images be invented, the places must be learned perfitelye,
and therefore one gives counsel that we should go into some solitary place
where no company is, and there make our places, walking up and down four or
five times and calling still to our remembrance what and where the places are.
And not only to do this once or twice, but to labor in it two or three days
at several times, until we shall be able to tell our places upon our fingers
ends.

And now to make this hard matter somewhat plain, I will use an example. My
friend (whom I took ever to be an honest manne) is accused of theft, of
aduoutrie, of riot, of manslaughter, and of treason, if I would keep these
words in my remembrance, and rehearse them in order as they were spoken, I
must appoynte five places, the which I had neade to have so perfectlye in
my memory, as could be possible. As for example, I will make these in my
chamber. A door, a window, a press, a bedsteade, and a chimney. Now in ye
door, I will set Cacus the thief, or some such notable verlet. In the window I
will place Venus. In the press I will put Apitius yt famous glutton. In the
bedsteade I will set Richard the third king of England, or some like notable
murderer. In the chimney I will place the black Smythe, or some other notable
traytoure.

That if one repete these places, and these Images twice or thrice together, no
doubt, though he have but a mean memory, he shall carye away the words
rehearsed with ease. And like as he may do with these five words, so may he
do with five score, if he have places fresh in his remembrance, and do but
use him self to this trade one fortenight together.

Therefore though it seem strange and folyshe to them that know it not, yet
the learned have taken this way, and doubt not but maruayles may be done, if
one have places ready made for the purpose, and have them fresh in his
remembrance. For what other thing else do they that appoint images in certain
places made for that purpose, but write (as a man would say) upon Paper,
that which is spoken unto them? What makes the old manne (that for lack of
natural heat and moisture, scante knows his right hand from his left)
remember in the morning where he laid his purse all night, but the beds
head, which lyghtlye is the appointed place for all men's purses,
especially such as be wayfairers, and have but little store.

Shall some gentilman play blyndefolde at the chesse, and can not a learned
man be able to rehearse up a score or two of strange names together? A
Neteherde having the charge and keeping of.xviij. score head of beasts in a
wyld Fenne, that belong to diverse men, will not only tell, who be the
owners of al such cattle, but also he will show a man twice a week where
any one is feading, and if he want one among the whole, he will tell
immediately what it is, and whose it is that is wantynge. Then fond are they
that count the Art of Memory so hard, seeing they will neither prove the
hardenes of it, nor yet blowshe at the matter, when they see pore neteherdes go
so far beyond them. How many things does Memory contain marvelous to
behold, and much more would, if we were not altogether slouthful, and as
careless to keep, as we are to get, good things I mean, not goods of this
world. Every Artificer has through exercise and labor, an artificial
memory, saving the learned man only, who has most need of it above all
other.

When we come to a place where we have not been many a day before, we remember
not only the place it self, but by the place, we call to remembrance many
things done there. Yea sometimes a window makes some remember that they have
stolen in their days some thing out of it. Sometimes a chimney tells them
of many late drinkinges and sittinges up by the fire. Sometimes a bedstead
puts the^ in remembrance of many good morowes, sometimes a door, and
sometimes a parler. Thus we se places eue^ without images, help often the memory,
much more then shall we remember, if we have both places and Images.

But now because I have half weried the reader with a tedious matter, I will
harten him again with a merye tale. At the time of rebellion in Northfolke,
there was a priest among al other adjudged to dye upon a gibet in a grene
place, a little from the high way side. This Priest s^inge the place of his
last end, stood a while musinge with him self, and said to the company
there. Now Lord God what a thing is this. God grant al rebels like
remembraunces.
It comes to my remembrance now that about fourtene years paste, I was merye
here upon this Bancke with an other Priest, and wallowynge me down upon the
grass, I said these words: Haec requ^es mea in seculu^ seculi, hic habitabo
quoniam elegi eam. The which Sentence being a Psalm of David, is nothing
else in English, But this is my resting place for ever and ever, here shall be
my dwelling, because I have chosen it. And now (quod he) I find it to be
over true, so that I think it be Gods will I should dye, and therefore I take
it in good worth, and thus I desire you al to pray for me. Thus we see that
the place brought him in remembrance of a sentence spoken.xiiij. years before.

Therefore this knoweledge is not to be neglected, no though we do contemn it,
yet we have the use of it. For if we be fully disposed to remember a thing, we
do call up the memory, and stir it to mind things like thereunto. As if
one be called Wingefeld, and I fear to forget this name I might remember the
winge of a bird, Remembrance by things like
and a grene feld to walk in. Sometimes we remember the whole, by keeping in
mind some part of a word. As when one is called Crowcroft, I might by
remembering of a Crow, the rather mind his name.

Notwtsta^ding there be some (among who^ is Erasmus) which like not this art of
Memory, but say it rather hinders, then helps a man's wit. And yet Tullie
the greatest Orator among the Romans, did well allow it, and proved it good
by a natural reason. For where as we know some things (says he) only by
understanding, and some by the sense of seeing, those we keep best in our
minds which we know by sight, and have marked with our eyes. As for example.
When I se a Lion, ye image thereof abides faster in my mind, the^ if I should
hear some report made of a Lion Among all the senses, the eye sight is most
quick, and co^teineth the impressio^ of things more assuredly, the^ any of
the other senses do.

And the rather when a man both hears and sees a thing (as by
artificial memory he does almost se things liuelye) he does remember it
much the better. The sight printeth things in a man's memory, as a seal
does prince a man's name in wax. And therefore heretofore Images were set up
for remembrance of Saints, to be lay men's books, that the rather by
saying the Pictures of such men, they might be stirred to follow their good
living. The which surely had been well done, if God had not forbidden it.
But saying things must be done not of a good entente, but even as God has
commanded, it is well done that such Idolles are clean taken out of the
church. Marye for this purpose whereof we now write, they would have served
gayly well. Thus the art is sone told, but the practice of it is all. And
therefore if one desire to excel herein, let him take pains to gather his
places together, and keep them well in remembrance, prouinge by half a score,
how he shall be able to use a hundredth. And no doubt, but time and exercise
shall make him perfect.

For the best art of memory that can be, is to hear much, to speak much,
to read much, and to write much. And exercise it is that does all, when we
have said all that ever we can.

Of Pronunciation.
PRonunciation is an apt orderinge both of the voice, Vtteraunce it is.
countenance, and all the whole body, according to the worthiness of such
words and matter as by speech are declared. The use hereof is such for any
one that likes to have praise for telling his tale in open assembly, that
having a good tongue, and a comelye countenance, he shall be thought to pass
all other that have the like vtteraunce: though they have much better
learning. The tongue gives a certain grace to every matter, and beautifieth
the cause in like manner, as a sweet soundynge Lute much sets forth a mean
devised Ballade. Or as the sound of a good instrumente styrreth the hearers,
and moves much delight, so a clear soundyng voice comfort much our
d^intie ears, with much sweet melody, and causes us to allow the matter
rather for the reporters sake, the^ the reporter, for the matters sake.
Demosthenes therefore, Demostenes saying of pronunciation.
that famous Orator being asked what was the chiefest point in all Oratorie,
gave the chief and only praise to Pronunciation, being demanded, what was
the second, and the third, he still made answer, Pronunciation, and would
make none other answer, till they left askyng, declaryng hereby that Art
without vtterau^ce can do nothing, vtteraunce without Art can do right
much. And no doubt that man is in outward apparaunce half a good Clarke,
that has a clean tongue, and a comely gesture of his body. Aeschines.
Aeschines likewise being ba^nished his country through Demosthenes, when he
had read to the Rhodians his own Oration, and Demosthenes answer thereunto,
by force whereof he was bannished, and all they marueiled much at the
excellency of the same: then (quod Aeschines) you would have marueiled much
more if you had heard himself speak it. Thus being cast in misery and
bannished for ever, he could not but give such great report of his most
deadly and mortal ennemy.

The parts of Pronunciation.
PRonunciation stands partly in fashionyng the tongue, and partly in
framyng the gesture.

The tongue, or voice is praise worthy, if the vtteraunce be audible, strong,
and easy, and apt to order as we list. Therefore they that mind to get
praise in tellyng their mind in open audience must at the first beginning
speak somewhat softely, use meet pausyng, and being somewhat heated, rise with
their voice, as the time and cause shall best require. They that have no good
voices by nature, or cannot well utter their words, must seek for help
elsewhere. Exercise of the body, fasting, moderacion in meat, and drink,
gaping wide, or singyng plain song, and counterfeityng those that do speak
distinctly, help much to have a good deliverance. Demosthenes being not
able to propronounce the first letter of that Art which he professed, but
would say, for, Rhethorique, Letolike, used to put little stones under his
tongue, and so pronounced, whereby he spoke at length so plainly as any man
in the world could do. Musicians in England have used to put gagges in
childre^s mouths that they might pronounce distinctely, but now with the
loss and lack of Music, the love also is gone of bringyng up children to
speak plainly. Some therebe that either naturally, Faults in pronunciation
or through folly have such evil voices and such lack of vtteraunce, and
such evil gesture, that it much defaceth all their doings. One pipes out his
words so small through defaulte of his wind pype, that ye would think he
whisteled. An other is so hource in his throat, that a man would think he
came lately from scouryng of harness. An other speaks, as though he had
Plummes in his mouth. An other speaks in his throat, as though a good Ale
cru^me stacke fast. An other ratles his words. An other choppes his words. An
other speaks, as though his words had need to be heaued out with leauers. An
other speaks as though his words should be weyed in a ballaunce. An other
gapes to fetch wind at every third word. This man barks out his English
Northrenlike with Isay, and thou ladde. An other speaks so finely, as though
he were brought up in a Ladies Chamber. As I knew a Priest that was as nice as
a Nonnes Hen, when he would say Mass, he would never say Dominus
vobiscum, but Dominus vobicum. In like manner as some now will say, the
Commendementes of God, black vellet, for Commandments and black velvet.
Some blows at their noistrelles. Some sighs out their words. Some synges
their sentencies. Some laughes altogether, when they speak to any body. Some
gruntes like a Hog. Some cackels like a Hen, or a Jack Dawe. Some speaks
as though they should tell a tale in their sleeue. Some cries out so loud,
that they would make a man's ears ache to hear the^. Some ^oughes at every
word. Some he^mes it out. Some spittes fire, they talk so hotely. Some makes
a wrie mouth, and so they wreste out their words. Some whynes like a Pig.
Some suppes their words up as a poor man does his porage. Some noddes their
head at every sentence. An other winckes with one iye, and some with both. This
man frowueth always when he speaks. An other looks ^uer as though he were
mad. Some cannot speak, but they must go up and down, or at the lest be
stirryng their feet as though they stood in a cockeryng Bote. An other will
play with his cappe in his hand, and so tell his tale. Some when they speak
in a great company, will look al one way, as I knew a reader in my days,
who looked in like sort when he read to Scholars, whom one thought to
disappoint of such his constant looks: and therefore against the next day
he painted the Devil with horns upon his head in the self same place where
the Reader was wont always to look, the which strange monster when the
reader saw, he was half abashed, and turned his face an other way. Some pores
upon the ground, as though they sought for pynnes. Tullie tells of one
Theophrastus Tauriscus, who is said to declaime arsee versee. Some swelles in
the face and sill^s their chekes full of wind, as though they would blow out
their words. Some settes forth their lips two inches good beyond their
teeth. Some talks as though their tongue went of patyns. Some shows al their
teeth. Some speaks in their teeth altogether. Some leates their words fall in
their lips, scant openyng them when they speak. There are a thousand such
faults among men both for their speech, and also for their gesture, the
which if in their young years they be not remedied, they will heartily be
forgotte when they come to man's state. But the rather that these faults may be
redressed: I have partly declared heretofore the right use of vtteraunce, and
now I mind by Gods help to show the right use of gesture.

Vvat is gesture.
GEsture is a certain comely moderacion of the countenance, Gesture what it
is.
and al other parts of man's body, aptely agreeyng to those things which are
spoken* That if we shall speak in a pleasant matter, it is meet that the
look also should be chereful, and all the gesture stirryng thereafter. The head
to be holden upright, the forehead without frownyng, the brows without
bendyng, the nose without blowyng, the iyes quick and pleasant, the lips
not laid out, the tethe without grennyng, the arms not much cast abroad, but
comely set out, as time, and cause shall best require: the hands somtymes
opened, and sometimes hold together, the fingers pointyng, the breast laid out,
and the whole body stirryng altogether with a seemly moderacion. By the which
behavior of our body after such a sort, we shall not only delight men with
the sight, but persuade them the rather the truth of our cause.

Q. Hortensius had such delight to use comely gesture, Hortensius.
and had such grace in that behaulfe: that I doubt whether men had a greater
desire to see him, than they had to hear him. His countenance so well agreed
with his words, and his words were so meet for his contenaunce, that not
only he did please the judgment of his hearers, and contented their mind:
but also he pleased their iyes, and delited their ears, so much as could be
wished.

Tullie says well: The gesture of man, is the speech of his body, and
therefore reason it is, that like as the speech must agree to the matter, so
must also the gesture agree to the mind. for, the iyes are not given to man
only to se, but also to show, and set forth the meaning of his mind, even as
unto a Bore are given briselles: to a Lion, the tail: to a horse, his cares:
whereby their inclinacions and soubdeine affections are sone espied. When we
see a man look read in the iyes, his brows bent, his teeth bytyng his upper
lip, we judge that he is out of patience. Therefore as we ought to have good
regard for the vtteraunce of our words, so we ought to take heed that our
gesture be comely, the which both being well observed, shall euerease fame and
get estimacion universally.

But hear an end. And now as my will has been earnest to do my best: so I
wish that my pains may be taken thereafter. And yet what needs wishyng,
seeing the good will not speak evil, and the wicked can not speak well.
Therefore being stayed upon the good, and assured of their ientle bearyng with
me: I fear none, because I stand upon a saufe ground.

Faults escaped in thenprintyng.
FOlio.viii. line.xxxii.i. read, vaunte. Fol.xxxiii. line.i. Read, or do we.
Fol.lxxvi. line.vii.i. respect. Fol.lxxvi. line.viii. iester. Fol.lxxxi.
line.vii. seem. Fol.lxxxvi. line.xv.ii. Rhetorician.
A Table to find out such matter as is contained in this Book, first by the
Leaf, and next by the Page, or side of the Leaf.
A.
A Batyng, or lessenyng of a thing. xcvi.i. Abraham. xxvij.i. Abraham how he
is said to be the father of many Nations. xcvij.ij. Abusion what it is.
xciij.i. Adversaries reasons when they should best be confuted. v.i. Egyptians
what order they used to bannishe idelnesse. xv.ij. Aeschines. c.xix.i.
Affections must be moved. ij.ij. Affections how they would be moved.
lxxi.ij. Affections must first be stirred in him, that seeks to stir
other. lxxiij.ij. Affectation in speaking English fond and strange.
lxxxvi.i.ij. Allegory what it is. xciij.ij. Alcestes wife. xxxi.ii. Al^eryng
part of a word, how, and what it is. cvii.i. Ambiguitie. liii.i.
Amplification. lxiiii.i. Amplification what it is, and how it is divided.
lxvi.ii. Amplification by comparyng of things, and encreasyng of the least.
lxviii.i. Amplification by examples. lxviii.i Amplification by co^traries.
xcix.i. Amplificatio^ by lessenyng of great faults to make other seem greater.
xcix.i. Amplification by praisyng the unworthy the rather that an other may
have more praise. lxx.i. Amplification by co^iectures. lxx.ij. Amplification by
things increased, and diminished. lxxi.i. Anaragoras patience. xl^iii.ii.
Anticipacion wha^ it is. C.i. Aptenesse what it is. lxxxviii.i.lxxxix.i.ij.
Arguments when they should chiefly be used. v.i. Augmentes how they should
be digested. lxxxiiii. Art surer guidy than nature. iii.ij Art to what stead it
serves. lxxxv.i Arthemisia. xxxi.ii. Assured truth what it is. xviii.ii.
Askyng other, and aunsweryng our self. xcvii.ii.xcviii.i. Attemptes worthy.
vii.ii. Athenians forbad Prefaces, and Conclusions. lxiiii.i. Argumentyng, or
diminishyng, to move laughter. lxxviii.ii. Augustus favorable to married folk
that had children. xxiiii.ii. Augustus abashed at a boys answer. lxxxii.i.
Augustine. cviii.ii.
B.
BAckebytyng set forth by Amplification. lxiiii.ii. Barbarouse Clerks no
better than slouens. lxxxvi.i. ABeldames bli^d answer. lxxvij.ij Beginning of
an Oration what it is. lv.i. Better borne a beggar, than dye a beggar.
lxxxij.ij. Better not to hurt a good matter by evil speech, than to further it
by good talk. v.ij. Bibulus patience for loss of his children. xlv.i. Blami^g
other, how it is said. lvij.i Brute beasts nature for mournyng. xlij.i.
Buttresse what it is. xcix.ij
C.
CAtoes saying to him that stroke him, and bad him beware. lxxxi.i. Chalengyng,
or refusing, when they are used. liij.ij. Change of name what it is. xciij.ij
Changing part of a letter, word or syllable. lxxvij.i. Churlishe aunsweres
delight sometimes. lxxxi. Circumstauncies in praising. x.i. Circumstauncies
necessary to be noted in all causes. v.i. Circu^stauncies in obseruyng
profit. xx.ij. Circumlocution. xciij.ii. Close understanding what it is.
xcvi.i Commons what it is. xix.i. Co^posicio^ out of course. lxxxix.i.ii
Commendyng. xxxvi.i. Comfortyng the affllicted. xxxvi.i. Co^modus the Emperor.
xliii.ii. Comparyng a fault done, how it is used. lvii.ii. Composicion.
lxxxviii.i. Comprehension what it is. cvii.ii. Conclusion what it is.
iiii.ii.xcvii.ii.lxiii.i. Confessyng what it is. lvii. Co^firmacio^ what it is.
iiii.ii.lxi.ii Confirmacion to prove matters* out of Logique. lxii.i.
Confirmacion gatherd of the person. lxii.i. Confutatio^ what it is.
iiii.i.lxii.ii. Conjectures. viii. Colors of Rhetorique what they are.
xciiii. Colors of Rhetorique lykened to the iye sight. lxxxix.ii. Coniectural
State, or issue. xlix.i. Conversion what it is. c.vii. Co^stante truth what it
is. xviii.ii. Contrary laws. lii.i. Continuance what it is. xix.ii.
Contrariety. cvi.ii. Cornelia. xxxi.ii.xliiii.ii. Correction. lxvii.xcix.i.
Counsel and good advise given. vii.ii. Craynes, what straung order they use.
cii. Curio, passing in forgetfulness. cxvii.i. Cyneas memory, notable.
cxiii.i. Cyrus memory how great it was cxiii.i.
D.
DAnae that fair Damosel, how she was deceived. ciiii.ii. David commended for
killyng Goliath. x.ij. David bewailyng the sickness of his son. xliiij.i.
Death common to all. xxxix.ij. Death purchaceth rest. xlj.j. Definicion always
needful to be known. xlvij.ij. Definicion how it should be used in causes
criminal. lij.j. Deformitee of body moves mirth lxxviij.ij. Delityng
needful. ij.ij. Demosthenes tale of the Asses shadow. lv.j. Demosthenes
saying of pronunciacion. C.xix.i. Demonides saying, when he had lost his
shooen. lxxxj.ij Descripcio^ of a ma^s nature. xcix.ij. Descripcion of person.
xcv.ij. Descripcion of an evil and wicked offense. lxxij. Difference betwixt
a common iester, and a pleasant wisema^. lxxvj. Difference betwixt a jest in a
word and a long tale. lxxviij. Digestion what it is. Cvj.j. Digression or
sweruyng. xcvj.ij. Diminucion. lxvij. Diogenes being called verlette, what he
said. lxxxij.ij. Diogenes whishte or warnyng given. Cvj.ij. Diogenes.
lxxvj.ij.lxxx.j. Disposicion and apt orderyng of things. lxxxiij.j.
Disposicion what it is. lxxxiiij.i. Disse^blyng or covert iesti^g. xcviii.j
Dissemblyng pleasauntly. lxxxj.i^. Distribucion. xcviii.ij. Division of
example. Cij.j. Division of figures. xc. Division of Tropes. xcj.ij. Division
of figures in a word. xciii^. Division of states or issues in causes of
judgment. xlviij.ii. Division of causes iuridic. liij.ij. Division of how
many parts it must be made. lx. Division of proposicions. lxi.i^. Dog of a
Romans, how thankful he was. Cii.ij. Doves. C.ii. Doubtfulnesse. xcviii.i^.
Doublettes what they are. cvii.j. Dragon how thankful he was. cii.ij. Duke of
Suffolk and lord Charles his brother. viij.i.xxxvii.ij.
E.
Easiness of travail. xvi.ij. EDucacion of a noble. vii.ij. EGuall members
what they are. Cix.j. Eloquence by what means it may be atteigned. ii.ij.
Elocucion what it is. iiii.j. Elocucion an apt chosyng of words and
sentences. lxxxv.ii. Eloque^t men most esteemed. lviii.i^. Enteraunce what it
is. iiii.i. Enteraunce into any matter, two ways divided. lv.j. Enteraunce
apt. lviii.j. Entrance apt for preachers. lviii.ij Ending like, and falling
like what they are. cviii.i. Error what it is. c.i. Essens haters of marriage.
xxxiii.i. Evil to live among the evil. xl.i. Evident setting furthe of a
matter. xcv.i. Example what it is. c.ii. Example, how it may be enlarged by
Copy. ciii.ii. Example of commendyng a noble personage. viii.i. Example of
co^mendyng king David, for killyng Goliath. x.ii. Example in commendyng of
Justice. xiii.ii. Exhortacion. xxxiii.ii. Exornacion what it is. xc.i.
F.
FAbia Dolobella wittely mocked of Tulli. lxxxiii.i. FAbles most needful some
times to be told. cv.ii. Fame follows worthy feats. xxxv Familiar and
pleasant advise given. lxxxv.i. Familiar talk used. xcix.ii. Fasting set
forth by division. lxi.i. Favor winnyng, and affeccions mouyng, when they are
most necessary. v.i. Fau^es in composicion. lxxxviii.ii. Frenesse of speech.
cvi.ii. Friar how (...) was asked, when he preached of man's soul.
lxxviii.ii Figure of Rhetorique what it is and division of the same. xci.ii.
Figure of a word what it is. xciiii. Figures to what use they are. xcv.ii.
Figures in sentences called Scheme^. cvii.i. Five things to be considered in
an Orator. iii.ii. Folly in many yt go to the law. xx.ii Folly of them that
lament the departure of their friends. xxxix.ii Folly, and lack of wit, give
occasion of pastyme. lx^xi.i. Fortitude what it is. xix.i. Four things
observed for choice of words. lxxxviii.i.
G.
GEsture what it is. cxviii.i. GIauntes fightyng against nature what they sig.
xxvi.i GOod head to be taken at the first, in handelyng a matter in judgment.
v.i. Good to be bold in most danger if otherwise we cannot escape. v.ii Good
will, makes great burdeynes light. xvii.i. Goods leut, must be restored at
the owners will. xli.ii. Gorgias. lxxx.i. Gradacion what it is. cix.i.
Grauntyng to other, that they will not grant to us. lxxxii.ii. Grecians
reuengement for aduenterie. xxv.i.
H.
HEarers how they should be made attentive. lv.i. HEarers good will how it
should be got. lv.i. Hebrews law for married. xxiiii.i. Hebrews stoned
aduou^rers. xxv.i. Hebrews curse. xxix. Hercules labors what they signify.
cv.i. Hieromes praise upon virg. xxviii.ij Hipsicratea. xxxi.ii. Heliogabalus.
lxxx.i. Hollanders witty devise. lxxvii.ii. Honesty comprehends all
Uertues. xvi.ii. Honest names given to an evil thing. lxxix.ii. Honorablenes
what it is. xix.i. Hope of reward makes men take pains. xix.ii. Horace
Puluillus patience for the loss of his child. xlv.ii.
I.
Jacob. xxvii.i. ICarus. ciiii.ii. Jealousy unknown to wise men. xxxi.ii.
Ientlenesse what it is. xix.ii. Iestyng when it should be spared. lxxv.ii.
Images how they must be used for remembrance. cxi^ii.ii. Imitacion or
following the wise, needful. xxx.ii. Impacie^ce without comfort. xliii.i.
Inclinacion of nature. vii.ii. Insinuacion what it is. lv.i. Intelleccion what
it is. xcii.i. Interpretacion of a Law, called the state legalle, what it is.
lv.i. Interpretacion of a word. lxxvii.i. Inuencion what it is. iii.ii. Jobs
patience in aduersitee. xliiii.i. Judgment given what it is. xix.i. Isis.
ciiii.ii. Iulia. xxxi.ii. Justice commended. xiii.ii. Justice what it is, and
how largely it extends xiiii.i. Justice natural in every one of us xiii.ii.
Justice necessary for all men. xiiii. and ii. Justice easy to be observed, if
will be not wantyng. xv.ii. Justice what it is. xvii.ii. Julius Caesar. xlv.i.
Julius Ceasar of what grease remembrance he was. cxiii.ii. Iuridiciall state
or issue. xlix.i.
L.
LAughter mouyng and how many ^hynges are to be considered in that beha^fe.
lxxiiii.i. Laws of England. xvii.i. Laws profitable for the purse. xx.ii.
Laws maintein life. xxi.ii. Lawful among the Hebrews, for the married to kill
the aduouterer. xxv.i. Laws contrary, have four lesso^s to be observed.
xxv.ii. Lawyers never dye beggars. xx.ii. Lawyers ready to epsy doubts.
liii. Letter of coumfort to the Duches grace of Suffolk. xxxvi.ii. Legal
state, or issue. xlix.i. Lia being barrein, thought to be out of Gods
favor. xxiiii.i. Liberalitee, commended with heaps of sentences. lxv.ii.
Lycurgus Law against unmarried folk. xxv.i. Liyng, pretely mocked. lxxxii.ii.
Life, the right way to death. xl.ii. Likeness of things among them selfs.
Cix.i. Lion, how thankful he was. Ciii. Logique must be learned for
confirmacion of causes. xiii.i. Lowlines, set out by ampl. lxiiii.ii.
M.
MAn, what he is concerning the body. xlv.ii. Manhood, what it is. xix.i.
Marriage first ordained by God. xxii.ii. Marriage beautified by mir. xxiii.i.
Marriage natural. xxv.ii. Marriage among trees, and precious stones. xxv.ii.
Marriage between the firmament, and the earth. xxvi.i. Marriage generally
esteemed. xxvi.ii. Matter whereupon an Oratoure must speak. i.i. Matters in
general, stand in. poynctes. iiii.iiii.ii Matters honest. iiij.ii Matters
filthy. iiij.ii Matters doubtful. iiij.ii Matters trif^lyng. iiij.ii Matters
hard to avoid, should be past over as though we saw them not. v.i.
Memory, how it is preser. cxiii.ii. Memory, what it is cxii.i Memory, what
it is iiii.i. Menenius Agrippa pacified a rebellion by a fable. cv.ii. Metal
trier, kyndely mocked* for his glorious vauntyng. xcviii.ii. Misery of this
world, makes werinesse of life. xlii.ii. Midas. Ciiii.ii. Mirthe making, good
at the beginning. lviii.i. Mirth, how many ways it is moved. lxxv.i. Mirth,
moved by openyng a weighty matter, and not fully known. lxxix.i. Mithridates
worthy memo. cxiii.i. Modesty, what it is. xix.ii. Mouyng of pitee. lxxiii.ii.
Mou^tyng above the truth. xcvii.ii.
N.
NArracion, what it is. iiii.i. NArracion, what it is, and how it is divided.
lviii.ii NArracion, in judge. lix.i. Narracion, in praisyng, and counsel
geuyng. lix.ii. Nature, what it is xviii.i. Natural love, what it is. xviii.i.
Natures work allowed by Gods word. xxiii.i. Nasica his pretty answer to
Ennius, when he asked for him at his house. lxxx.ii. Necessary, two ways
taken. xvii.i. Necessitee enforces mari. xxxii.ii. Nero the Emperor.
xliii.ii. Noble personages, how they should be praised. vi.ii.
O.
ODious scurrilitee. ii.ii. OLd tales rehearsed, to make sport. lxxviii.i.
OPimius, pleasau^tly mocked by one Egilius. lxxx.ii. Order, of what sort.
lxxxiii.ii.cxi.i. Order breakyng. lxxxviii.ii. Orpheus the Musician, how
cunnyng he was in his calling, and what is meant by his wondrous doings.
xxvi.i. Oracions in general consist upon seven parts. iiii.i. Oracio^s, or
causes of.iii. kind. vi.i. Oracion demonstratiue. vi.ii. Oracio^ demonstratiue
of a deed. x.i. Oracion deliberatiue. xvi.i. Oracio^ judicial what it is.
xlvii.i. Oracio^ co^iectural what it is. xlix.ij Oracion coniecturall upon a
murder committed. l.ii. Oracion of right, or wrong, what it is. liii.ii.
Oracion of right or wrong upon ma^slaughter. lvii.i. Orators bound to
perform three things. i.ii. Orators must use delitfull words and sayings.
ii.i. Orators must have five things to make them perfect. iii.ii. Orators
of necessitee, must have three especial things. lv.ii. Orator that thought
he had moved pitee, mocked. lxxxi.ii.
P.
Patience praise worthy in aduersitee. xlvi.ii. Parts of prudence. xvii.ii.
PAssions. xxxvii.i. Paulus Emilius most godly desire. xlv.i. Passage to
another matter, what it is. xcvii.i. Pausanias pleasant saying to a
Phisician. lxxxii.i. Persians had many wifes. xxvii.i. Pericles patience.
xliiii.i. Persons pleasant answer, cariyng his woman behynd. lxxvii.i.
Phauorinus witty saying to a young manne. ii.i. Phisician mocked. lxxxii.i.
Philosophy divided. lxi.i. Pitee mouyng. xxxv.ii. Places of Logique, most
needful to be known. lxii.ii. Places to encreace and set furthe the evil of
a wicked deed. lxxii.ii. Places of memory, how they must be used. cxiiii.ii.
Places of praisyng. vii.i. Places of exhortacion. xxxiiii.ii. Places to
confirm things, gathered by conjecture. l.i. Places of confirmacio^ in
matters of right and wrong. liii.ii. Place of confirmacio^, when a fault is
granted. lvii.i. Plain tellyng of the matter, most needful for an Orator.
lv.ii. Plainness how it might be v. lix.i. Plainness what it is. lxxxvi.i.
Plain words proper unto an or. i.ii Platoes saying to Antisthe. lxxv.ii
Pleasantness in saying. lxxvi.i. Pleasures largely set out. xvi.ii.
Pleasant sportyng two w^yes used. lxxv.ii. Pleasant answers contrary to our
lokyng, delight much. lxxvi. Plinius counsel for handelyng of causes.
xlviii.i. Plutarch for increase of iss. xxiiii.i Poetical narracions profita.
ciiii.j Po^tidius how he was dece. lxvi.ij. Poets under color show much
wisdom. ciiii.ii. Porcia. xxxi.ii. Praisyng, and therwithal dispraisyng one
and the same man. lxxii.i. preachers what order they use. lix.ij. Preachers.
lxxv.i. Preachers not so diligently heard as common Plaiers. ii.ii. Preachers
must sometimes be merry when they speak to ye peo. ii.ii. Praisyng a deed.
xxxiiii.ij. Practice makes all things perfect. iij.j. Praises parted
threfolde, in commendyng a man. vi.ij. Priests marriage. xxviii.i. Preuencion
what it is. c.j. Probable how it might be us. lix.i. Profit of Justice. xvij.
Profit, how largely in exten. xvi.ij. Profit bears the name of goodness
which is threfolde. xvi.ii. Progression what it is. cviii.j. Pronunciacion,
what it is. cxvi.ii. and iiii.i. Proposicion what it is. iiii.ij. and xcvii.i.
Proposicions, what they are. lxi.i. Proverbs alleged, help amplificacion.
lxvi.i. Prudence, what it is. xvij.ii.
Q
Questions to be spoken i.j. Questions of.ii. sorts i.j. QUestions infinite.
i.j. QUestions definite. i.j. Questions definite belong properly to an Orator.
i.ii. Qestions infinite proper to Logicians. i.ii. Quintus Martiussuffrau^ce
xlv.j
R.
REasonyng a matter, what it is. cx.ii. REieccio^, what it is. xcix.ii.
REligion, what it is. xviii.i. Repeatyng of things said before. xcvii.i.
Repeticion, what it is. cvii.ii. Restyng upon a poyncte, what it is. xciiii.ii.
Returnyng to the purpose, what it is. xcvii.i. Reuengement forbidden, and set
out by amplificacion. lxv.i. Right by custom, what it is.xviii. and ii. Right
by law, what it is. xix^i. Ripe things last not long. xlvi.i. Rimed sentences
used without reason. cviii.ii. Rimes made to mock the simple. there.
Rhetorique, what it is. i.j. Rhetorique, occupied about all laws. there.
Rhetorique, what end it has. i.ii. Rhetorique, first made by wisemen and not
wisemenne made first by it. iii.i. Rhetorique, for what purpose it is set
furthe. iii.i. Rhetorique, to what purpose it serves. there. Rhetorique, what
it teaches for orderyng of things. lxxxiiii.i. Roman Laws for Church
dignitees. xx.i. Roperipe chidyng lxxxvii.ij. Rouyng without reason. xlvii.ii.
S.
SAguntines how faithful they were. lvii.ii. Saint Christopher what he
signified. cv.ii. Saint George what he signified. Cv.i. Salust saying to
Tullie, and his witty anfwere to him again. lxxxii.ii. Sauegard had by
Justice. xv.i. Scurrilitee odious. ij.ii. Sheme what it is. xciiii.i. Sentences
gathered, help amplificacion. lxvi.i. Sergius Galba ouerthwarte answer.
lxxvii.ii. Shape evil fourmed moves pastime. lxxviii.ii. Shame follows
fearfulness, when manhood is needful. xxxv.ii. Shiftyng faults from us, how
it is said. lvii.ii. Similitude what it is. c.ii. Simonides first founder of
the art of remembrance. Slander proved by amplificacion a greater offense
then Theft. lxviii.i. Snappishe askyng. xcviii.i. Snudgyng, wittely rebuked.
lxxvii and ii. Sobrietee what it is. xix.ii. Socrates. xxvii. Sorrow nedelesse,
when necessitee rules. xxxviii.ii. Sorrow immoderate, not natural. xlii.ii.
Soldier mocked pleasauntly of his own man. lxxxiii.i. Spanyardes doubt. ci.
Staggues how long they live. xlv. and ii. State generalli, what it is.
xlviii.ii State in judgment what it is. xl. and viii.ii. State why it is so
called. xlviii.ii. Stomach grief. cvi.ii. Strange things needful to be
told. lviii.i. Strange reports help for amplificacion. lxvi.i. Storkes what
nature they. xcix. Stoutness what it is. xviii.xix.ii. Surfeityng rebuked by
am. xlvii.ii
T.
TAcitus. Cviii.ii. TAntalus. Ciiii.ii. TEmperaunce what it is. xix
Thankfulness what it is. xviii.ii.lxi..ii. Themistocles memory. Cx.ii.
Themistocles persuasion to the Atheniens, by a fable. Cv.ii. Things gathered
by a man's saying, otherwise then he meant. lxxx.i. Things notable or strange
help well for amplificacion. lxvi.i. Thracians lament at birthe, and rejoice at
burial. xli.i. Tobias patience. xliiii.i. Transmutacion of a word. xciii.i.
Transumpcion what it is. xciii.ii. Trauaill hard to whom. xvi.ii. Trees not
accurssed, because Apples fall from them. xliii.i. Trees live longer then men.
xlv.ii. Tropes how they were found. xc.ii. Trope what it signifies. xci.ii.
Turnyng of a word. lxxvii.i. Tiber^us Ceasar. xlv.i. Time must be observed.
v.ii. Time of departing life. viii.i. Time a remedy for fools to put away
sorrow. xlii.ii. Timon an hater of compa. xxx.ii.
U.
UErtues.iiii. in no^b. xvii.ii. UNapte vsyng of apt words. lxxxviii.ii.
ULpianus. xxiiii.ii. Unnaturalnes in man. xiiii.ii. Uibius Curious pleasauntly
mocked of Tullie. lxxxiii. vipers what nature they have. xcix. Uirginitee.
xxviii.ii Unthankefulnesse rebuked. cii.i. Unthankfulnes punished. cii.ii.
Utteraunce what it is. cxvi.ii.
W.
WAntyng of things, make pastyme. lxxxii.i. WArenesse in speaking, and
forbearing to speak. v.ii. Weeping yies. lxxii.ii. Whisht or warnyng given.
cvi.i. Willyam Somer. cvii.i. Wishyng, right pleasant. lxxxi.ii. Witty saying
of a Philosoph. xxi. Wits forgetful. cxiii.i. Witty devised tale.
lxxvii.ii. Witty lie making. xcvi.ii. Woe of this world, declared. xli.i.
Women rebuked. lx.ii. Words doubtfully spoken. lxxvi.i. Words taken and not
the. lxxvii.i. Word making what it is. xcii.ii. Wrong dealyng deserves death
xl.i. Wifes evil, happen to evil. xxxi.i. Words overthwart. lxxvii.ii
X.
Xerxes. xxxi.i.
Y.
Issue what it is. xlviii.ii. YNke horn letter. lxxxvi.ii. YOung Storkes.
xiiii.ii.
Finis.
Richardus Graftonus, typographus Regius excudebat.

Cum priuilegio, 2d imprimendum solum.


