The rule of Reason, conteinyng the Art of Logique, set forth in English, by
Thomas Vuilson.

An. M.D.LI.

To the most excellent Prince, and our most redoubted sovereign Lord Edward
the sixth, by the grace of God King of England, France, and Ireland, Defendour
of the faith, and of the Churches of England, and Irelande, in earth the
supreme head, your most faithful and obedient subject Thomas Wilson wishes
long life with most prosperouse Reign.
IF my power and habilite were answerable to my good will, most excellent Prince
and sovereign Lord, this token of mine humble duty which I now offer unto
your Majesty, should be as great and preciouse, as by reason of the
contrary, it is base and slender. wherefore I most humbly beseech your
Majesty in no worse part to accept this little offer, the^ as the present of
a true faithful subi^cte, which would have brought better, if his power had
been thereafter. But ^olowing the example of poor men in the ancient Histories
of Plutarche, and other writers much commended: I offer unto you^ highness
part of such fruictes as have grown in a poor stude^tes gardin. This f^uict
b^ing of a strange kind (such as no English ground has before this time,
and in this sort by any tyllage brought forth,) may perhaps at the first
tasting, seem somewhat rough, and harshe in the mouth, because of the
strau^genesse: but after a little use, and familiar accustomyng thereunto, I
doubt not but the same will wax every one day more pleasant then other. But in
simple and plain words to declare unto your Majesty, wherein my wit and
earnest endeavor has at this season travailed: I have assaie^ through my
diligence to make Logique as familiar to Thenglishe man, as by diverse me^nes
industries the most part of the other the liberal Sciences are. For
considering the forwardenesse of this age, wherein the very multitude are
prompte and ripe in all Sciences that have by any man's diligence been set forth
unto them: weighyng also that the capacity of my country men the Englishnacio^
is so pregnaunt and quick to achiue any kind, or Arte^ of knowledge, whereunto
wit may attain, that they are not inferior to any other: And farther
po^dering that diverse learned me^ of other countries have heretofore for the
furtheraunce of knowledge, not suffered any of the Sciences liberal to be hidden
in the Greek, or Latin tongue, but have with most earnest travail made every
of them familiar to their vulgar people: I thought that Logique among all
other being an Art as apt for the English wits, and as profitable for there
knowledge as any the other Sciences are, might with as good grace be set forth
in Thenglishe, as the other Arts, heretofore have been. And therefore I have
so far as my sle^der practice has enabled me, enterprised to join an
acquaintance betwiene Logique, and my countryme^, from the which they have
been hitherto barred, by tongues unacquainted. Notwithstanding I must needs
confess, that ye Printer hereof your Majesty's servant provoked me first
hereunto, unto whom I have ever found my self greatly beholding, not only
at my being in Cambrige, but also at all times else, when I most neded help.
But as touching the thing self though I have not done it with so good
perfection as the worthiness of the Art requires, or as some other better
learned could do: yet I hope that whereas now it is dedicated unto your
highness, and so made commune to all: my good will shall want no favorers in
that I have first labored to bring so noble a mistre^se, both of reason, and
judgment, acquainted with so noble a country, and here to be made of a
stranger a free denisen: wherein I take not upon me so connyngly, and
perfectely to have written of the said Art, as though none could do it better:
but because no Englishman until now has gone through with this enterprise, I
have thought mete to declare yt it may be done. And yet herein I profess to
be but as a spur or a whet stone, to sharp the pe^nes of someother, that
they may polishe, and perfect, that I have rudely and grossly entered. And
albeit I do herein take upon me no more but to be as a poor mean man, or
simple person, whose charge were to be a lodesman to convey some noble
princess into a strange land where she was never before, leauyng the
enterteinyng, the enrichyng and the deckyng of her to such as were of
substance and furniture according: yet if this work may now at the first
enteraunce have the saufe co^duict and protection of your most Royal
Majesty, I trust it shall in process appear, and prove, that I have not
altogether in vain taken upon me this strange labor, but rather to very good
purpose and effect attempted the same. I know your grace for your own study
little needs any help of such an English treatise, being so well travailed
both in the Greek and in the Latin for the same purpose, through the help of
those right worthy men Sir Ihon Cheke, and Sir Antony Cook, your Majesty's
teachers and Scholemaisters in all good litterature. But to feed and to
satisfy the thirste and desire of such Englishemen as for defaulte of the
said tongues could otherwise not come to the knowledge of Logique: I have judged
it labor worth to give ye precepts and Rules thereof in English, that all men
according to the gift that to every one is measured, may be the more provoked
to follow the examples of your Majesty as well in studiousnesse and desire of
knowledge, as also in the exercise of all virtue, and pryncely worthiness,
wherinto your grace has made a goodly entry. In which most godly trade if
your grace shall continue together with the fear of God, and the most
reverent obseruacion of his most holy commandments, and Gospel, (wherein at
this day al England to their incomparable joy and comfort does see and find
your Majesty's chief delight to be) it cannot be doubted, but that the same
shall be to the wicked a terror, to the godly a comfort, to this Realm of
England, a perpetual defense and sauegarde^ and to al Christian Kings, either
now living or hereafter to come, an example of Kyngly worthynesse, and a
myrroure of Pryncely governance. And where as to the most noble Kings of
Israel and Judah, the lord for their sundry virtues gave sundry gifts of his
grace (as to David his dearling, puissaunce and might against his enemies^ to
Solomon, wisdom and richesse: to Aza, innocence of life, and pureness of
Religio^^ to Iosaphat, prudence of Kyngly regiment to set good ministers, and
officers under him: to good King Josias, the aduaunceme^t of Gods true
service, and the rotyng up of Idolatry: to Ioathan, a long and prosperous
Reign in all godly rest and quietness:) all these noble gifts of Regal
excellency, shall the lord your guide and governor vouchesafe to power upon
your highness, to endewe you with all, in whom are now planted such graffes
of his heavenly grace, as the fruit hereafter is most like to be incomparable.
Which thing that it may so be, your Majesty has, and perpetually shall
have, the daily, and incessaunte prayers of all us your most faithful loving
subjects, for the long and prosperouse Reign of your highnesse^ to the glory
of God, the honor and Princely dignity of your self, and the wealth of your
Realms and dominions, long to endure, Amen.

GVALTERVS HADDONVS Cantabrigiensis, Legum Doctor.
Grammatice, lingua nos est affata Britanna,
Curreret ut Latiis lingua Latina rotis.
Nunc (...) ^enit, and nostris se uocibus effert,
Vt ratio nostros possit habere sonos^
Ant^, peregrinis linguis instructa fuisti
Anglia, nunc propria discere uoce potes.
Gra^maticen laudant omnes, quia uerba poliuit:
Qualis erit (...) nos ratione regens?
Attulit hac, nostras Thomas wilsonus ad aures
Vtilis and patriae sic suit ille suae.
The Art of Logique.
Logique is an art to reason probably on both parts, of all matters that be
put forth, so far as the nature of every thing can bear.

The division of Logique.
THis Art is divided into.ii. parts. The first part stands in framing of
things aptlye together, in knitting words, for the purpose accordingly, and
in Latin is called Iudicium. Iudicium


The second part consists in finding out matter, and searching stuff
agreeable to the cause, and in Latin is called Inuentio. Inuentio.
For you must understand, that when one goes about to prove any thing, he
must first inuente somewhat to prove his cause, the which when he has done:
he must use judgment, both in framing the same reason so inverted, and also
to see, whether it serves for the purpose or not.

And now some will say, that I should first speak of the finding out of an
argument, before I should teach the way how to frame an argument. Truth it
is that naturally we find a reason or we begin to fashion the same. And yet
notwithstanding, it is more mete that the ordring of an argument should be
first handeled: forasmuch as it shall no more profit a man to find out hi^
argument, except he first know how to order the same and to shape it acording^y
(which he does not yet perfectli know) then stones or Timber shall profit the
^^a^o^ or Carpenter, which knows not how to work upon the same. A reason is
easlier found then fashioned, for every manne can give a reason naturally and
without art, but how to fashion and frame thesam^, according to the art, none
can do at all, except they be learned. Therefore, because every man's wit can
give lightly a reason of diverse things without any learning at all, even by
the instinct of nature, and yet not be able to set the same in order
Scholerlike, either to prove or to confute: I purpose first to show the manner
of making an Argument, as which is more needful: Next after that ye shall
learn the manner of finding of an Argument. And the places where all Arguments
do rest, and last of all ye shall know the captious or deceiptful
Arguments, as they be in Aristotle.

A brief declaration in meter, of the vij, liberal arts, vvherin Logique is
comprehended as one of them.
Grammar does teach to utter words.
To speak both ape and plain,
Logiquely art settes forth the truth,
And does tell (...) what is vain.
Rethorique at large paintes well the cause,
And makes that seem right gay,
Which Logique spoke but at a word,
And taught as by the way.
Music with tunes, d^lites the ear,
And makes us think it heaven,
Arithmetique by number can make
Reconinges to be ^auen.
Geometry things thick and broad,
Measures by L^ne and Square,
Astronomy by sterres does tell,
Of foul and eke of fair.
The difference between Logique and Sophistry.
LOgique otherwise called Dialecte (for they are both one) is an Art to try
the corn from the chafe, the truth from every falshed, by defining the
nature of any thing, by dividing the same, and also by knitting together true
Arguments and vntwining all knotty Subtiltees that are both false, and
wrongfully framed together.

Sophistry is ever occupied either in proving the truth always to be false,
or else that which is false to be true, so that euermore^ one part of the
argument is either false, by using some ambiguous word, or by not well appliyng
it to the purpose, or else not framing it according to the Rules: so that a
skilful artificer^ may y^ sooner put the vain Sophister to silence by opening
the fraud, and declaring the craft of his inuencion. Whereas otherwise an
argument made by the rulers of Logique cannot be avoided, but must needs be
true, whosoever say nay. And so much more is Logique to be preferred before
Sophistry, as he is the more to be esteemed that tells a true tale, the^ he
which tells a lie. And even as a Grammarian is better liked, that speaks
true and good Latin, then he is that speaks false: Even so Logique of it
self is good, when Sophistry on the otherside is naught. And well may we say,
that Sophisters are like those which play with false dice, and would make
other believe that they are true, or else properly to term them, they be like
those that go for honest men and are none.

The difference between Logique and Rethorique.
Both these Arts are much like saving that Logique is occupied about all
matters, and does plainly and nakedly setfurthe with apt words the sum of
things by the way of Argumentacion. Again of the other side Rethorique uses
gay paincted Sentences, and sets forth those matters with fresh colors and
goodly ornaments, and that at large

Insomuche, that Zeno being asked the difference between Logique and
Rethorique, made answer by Demonstration of his Hand, declaring that when his
hand was closed, it resembled Logique, when it was open and stretched out, it
was like Rethorique.

The Office of Logique.
LOgique professes to teach truly, orderly and plainly. And here we may se
how universal this commodity is, and how largely it extends, not only to
know worldly affairs: but also to know God, and all his heavenly works, so
far as nature may comprehend.

There be.iiij. parts of this office or duty whereunto Logique is bound. That
is. To define the nature of every thing, to divide, to knitte true arguments,
and unknit false,

Of Questions.
THIS same manner of knitting words in a due order, being one of y^ parts of
Logique, or rather Logique it self, shows the manner of all Questions, called
otherwise either Propositions, or several words.

A question is either a word or sentence put forth, as when I ask what such a
thing is, and would know an other man's advise therein, as thus, What is man?
What is truth? What is ambicion?

Every Question is either Single or double. A single question rests in a
single word, as thus. What is friendship? What is Philosophy? A doble question
stands not in one word, but in.ii. several sentences, as thus. Is the study
of Philosophy praise worthy, or is it not?

Likewise a proposition, which is a sentence uttered in plain words e^presly
signifiyng either truth or falshed, is either single or doble. A single
Proposition as thus: Wicked men cannot abide to read the word of God. Of the
which you may make a double proposition by addyng somewhat thereunto as thus.
Wicked men not only can they not abide to read the word of God, but also they
seek by all means possible to over throw the same.

Of the ^iue Predicables, otherwise called the five common words, which are
spoken of other
WHen we go about to expound any matter, first we must begin with the
definition, to know the very nature of the thing, the which we cannot do,
except we first learn the predicables, for they show the largenes and the
narrownes of words, how far they do extend, and how much they comprehend
in them. As when I se one afar of come unto me, first I know that he is a
man, then when he comes nigher, I know whether he be of mine acquaintance or
no. Likewise, when I go about to declare what one is, and to open the nature
of any thing, I use the largest words, and so it must needs be, that I begin
with the Predicables, because they show how much every word does comprehend
in it self, and how large or narrow it is. They be called Predicables because
some one thing is spoken of an other. And they are (as a man would say) marks
or notes of words yt are spoken of many, showing how and by what manner the
same words are atributed to other.

They be.v. in number.
Genus The general word. Species The Kind Differentia The difference.
Proprium The properte. Accidens The thing chau^cing or cleuing to the substance
GENVS is a general word, Genus
the which is spoken of many that differ in their kind: as when this Question
is asked, What it is. As Animal. A living creature. Ars an Art. Virtus,
Virtue. Gemma. A precious stone. Or else thus. Genus, is a general word, under
the which diverse kinds or sorts of things are comprehended, as under a
liui^g creature are co^prehe^ded men and beasts. Under art, are co^prehe^ded,
Logique, Gra^mer, Retorique. etc. Every general word, has diverse kinds, and
is spoken evermore, of them al. As Gemma. A precious stone. comprehends in
it self, A Sapphire, A Rubie, A Crystal, A Turkas. As thus. Saphirus est gemma.
A Sapphire is a precicious stone. And so of other.

Every general word is.ij. ways considered, and commonly called the ch^ef
general, in latin, Genus ^^mum. and the middle general, in latin, Genus
intermedium.

The chief general is so^ that where as it is the head of al and above al, it
can never become inferior, to be of any kind or sort in things. As the
Substance the Quantitee, the Qualitee, are ever chief general words, and
cannot be comprehended under any other.

The middle general, is the same that being comprehended betwixt the chief
general, and the lowest kind or sort in things, may be also some kind or
form it self, as a body, a living creature: the which.ij. being compared
with their in^eriors, are general words: being referred to their superiors,
they are Species. That is to say, shapes, kinds or sorts in things.

Species, seu fo^ma, the kind, or sort of any thing comprehended, under a
word more universal, is the same of whom the general word, is spoken, when
the question is asked, what it is. As when I ask, What is Justice? I answer a
Virtue. Therefore in this proposition (Justice is a virtue) Justice is the
Species, and virtue is the general word, which comprehends the said
Justice, and is spoken of the same

Or thus, Species^ is a common word that is spoken of many which differ only
in number, as manne is spoken of Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, and of every
proper name belonging to any man. As Socrates is a man. Plato is a man.
Aristotle is a man.

Every Species or kind in things is of.ij. sorts. The one is called the
lowest kind, which is always spoken of every proper name, and ever is Species
neither can it at any time be Genus, although sometime it bear the name of
genus. The other is called Species i^termedia, that is the kind placed betwixt
the higheste and the loweste, which at diverse times and by diverse
considerations may both be Genus, and Species For that which is under the
general Word that same may be called Species or Kind, that which
comprehendethe other, may be called the general word.

A Nowne proper is that whereof the kind is rehearsed. As Cato est Homo. Cato is
a man: in this proposition, Cato is the Nowne proper, which belongs to one
man only, and Man, is the kind, which is more large, and comprehends all
men.

THis Table shows the Order of every substance and kind as they are
apoi^ted by nature, what are the chief general words, what are the middle
general, what are the lowest kinds in every thing, and what are the kinds
bewixt both.

with body A Substance. Without body. as God Angels Spirits. The soul of
man.
Compounded of diverse elemente^ A body. Without mixtur as the iiij. elements.
Fire. Air. Water. Earth heaven and all the planetes. Being a living thing A
body co^pou^ded With out life as Stones. Metalles Liquores.
^auing the sense of feli^g A body living. Without Sense or feling at al as a
Tree. a Shrubbe. an Herb?
Endued with reason. A living creature. Without the gift of reason as Beasts,
birds or fish, some living. upon the land. in the Water. in the Air or in
both.
A man. as. Scipio. Socrate^ Alexander and every several man living.


Di^^erentia.
Differentia, that is to say the difference, is the same that is spoken of many
which differ in form and kind, when the question is asked, What manner of
thing it is, as when we say. Quale quid est homo? What manner of thing is man?
we must answer, He is endued with reason. If the question be asked what is a
man, we must answer by his Genus, or general word, he is a living creature. If
the question be asked what manner of thing a beast is? We may sai, He is without
the gift of reason. Every difference that is most proper to every thing, is
naturally and substa^cially joined to the kinde^ ^hiche is comprehended under
the general word,

Proprium.
PROPRIVM, That is to say a properte, is a natural pro^e^es, and manner of
doing, which agrees to one kind and to the same only and that evermore. And
also may be spoken of the same kind, and by conversion, the same kind may be
spoken of him also. As to speak and to have power to laugh, does only agree to
man, and to none other creature earthely. And as I may say, Whosoever is a man
has power given him of nature to speak: So may I also say by conversion
backewarde, whosoever ever has power given him of nature, to speak, that same
body is a man. To bark is proper to a Dog, and only proper and evermore
proper. Ergo whosoever has power or rather an inclination given of nature to
Bark, that same is a dog. And again, Whatsoever creature is a dog, that
same has power or rather an inclination to bark. To go upright is proper to a
man, and only to a man, and to none other living creature. Notwithstanding, you
must mark one thing, that although many men go crooked and some also cannot
speak^: yet both to go upright and to speak are proper to all men generally,
and therefore this rule serves to avoid such objections. Verba in
definitionibus posita, no^ actu^, sed pote^tia^ significa^t. which is as much to
say, yt wor^^s vied in definitions, do not signify the very act in deed, but
the power, the apines, or the inclination of nature thereunto: as when I sai, it
is proper for every man to speak I mean to be able or to be apt by Nature to
speak, is proper to every man.

Note further that Proprium is not always taken after one sort, but it is
four ways considered.

First the property is that which agrees to some kind only, although not to
every person comprehended under the same kind. As it is proper to a man only
to be a Poet, or to be a Physician, and yet not proper to every man. Secondly,
the property is that which agreth to every singular person, and yet not
only to Man. As to have two fete agrees to every singular person, and yet
not to man only. Thirdly, the property is that which agrees to every man,
and to man only and yet not always nor for evermore. As to have hoare hears
in the old age agrees to man only, and yet not always, but for the most
part men have hoare hears in their old age. Fourthly, the property is
that which in deed is most aptly and chiefly called Proprium, when any thing
does agree to every man, to man only and always to man. As to be able to
Speak, to laughe, to go upright, agrees to every man, to man only, and
always to man
This diversity many have made betwixt the difference and the properte, that
the difference is one part of Man's substance, and is the part that makes
up man. As to have the gift of reason does signify the mind, which is one
part of man, for man himself is co^pact of body and mind.

A Property does signify a certain thing, Which is attributed to Man when
he is made, and as a man would say, does come after, when man is holy made, as
to be able to speak, to laugh, to go upright.

Accidens (that is to say, a thing cleaving, or chaunsing, or coming to a
substance) is that which does not stand by himself, neither is the part of
a substance, but rather is after such sort in the substance, that it may
both be away, and be there, sometimes more and sometime less, without
destruction or loss of the Subject, or substance, as mirth, sorrow, to run,
to sit, to be well colored, all these may be away, and yet the man may be on
live in whom they ware before. So that the lack of them in their quantite, or
greatness, is not ye loss of the Substance. And al though no Substance at any
time does altogether forsake his Accide^tes, Yet this we see, that one and the
same Substan^ce, does some time alter his Accide^tes, forsaking some, and
taking other. As water being set on the fire, alters the coldness, and
takes heat, so that we may judge by this, that coldenes in the water is not a
Substance, but an Accide^t.

An Accident is two ways considered, for either it may be separated, or it
may not^ some may be separated from their Subject as cold may be taken
from water, and knoweledge from the mind. Other are inseparable, because they
cannot be taken away al together, as ^^ature or brodenes, cannot be taken from
man. Heat cannot be taken from fire, nor moisture from water, the which
notwithstanding they are not separat from their substance, yet the quantite or
greatness is changeable in every one of them, for some time it is more, and some
time it is less. And we se heat in other things to be separated from the
Subject. Where upon we judge that the heat is an other thing then the very
Substan^ce of fire. Therefore this is worthy to be known, that the Substance
is one thing, and the Accident an other thing, and mete it is to make a
difference betwixt them, as thus. The soul is one thing, the fear of God is
an other thing. Man may be without the fear of God (as many one is at this day
the more pite) Therefore the fear of God is an Accident, the soul is a
Substance.

The use and commodite, which we hau^ by these five commune words called
otherwise Predicables.
THere be.iiij. especial commodites. First they show the largeness, and the
narrownes of the most general words, called otherwise Predicamentes, which
hereafter follow: so that here by, you may perceive how much every word
comprehends in it self, and how far it may be applied. The second profit
is, that every thing is defined by these five common woord^s, forasmuch as al
things the more narowe they be, are always defined by words that are more
large. As by the general word, by the difference, and the propretie. Thirdly,
they are good to judge the knitting of words, and to se what thing may truly
be joined to other. for there is no Proposition, nor yet ioi^ing together of
any sentence (according to the common order of nature) but they always agree to
these above rehearsed Predicables: so yt either the kind is spoken of the
singular or proper name (which is ever some one person, as thus^ Cicero est
homo. Cicero is a man) Or else the general word, the difference, the propretie,
or the accident, are all spoken either of the kind, or of some one person^ as
thus^ Homo, vel Cicero^ est animal ratione praeditum, loquendi facultatem
habens, album, lo^gum, latu^. A man, or Cicero, is a living creature, endewed
with reason, having aptnes by nature, to speak, being, white, long, and broad.
So that no proposition can be, but the parts of the same are comprehended with
in these.v. common words. Fourthlie, the general word, the kind, the
difference, and proprete are joined together necessarily, so that when you name
one, al the other follow. Therefore when a proposition is made from the kind, to
the general, to his difference, or property: it is evermore an undoubted true
proposition, as this. Homo est animal ratione praeditu^, loquendi facultatem
habens. A man is a living creature endewed with reason, having aptenesse by
nature to speak. A man can not he except he be a living creature, endewed with
reason and having aptnes of nature to speak. The accident not withstandyng is
not necessarely spoken of the subject, but is there casually, and may be
changed, as thus. Homo est albus. Sum man is white. This proposition may be
aftreward false, for he may be black, or alter his complexio^ some other way,
so that the accide^t is often altered, and an other succedeth in his ronme.
Therefore it is good to be known, when you have a Proposition, whether it be
undoubted true, for evermore, or else may be false at any time.

Of the Predicamentes, called in English General words.
A Predicament is an order of single words, wherein things of one kind, are
couched and comprehended under one word, which is most general.

A Predicamente is nothing else in English, but a showing or a rehersyng what
words may be truly joined together, or else a setting furthe of the nature of
every thing, and also showing what may be truly spoken and what not. and for
this cause arts were invented, because that the truth might be known, and
every thing uttered with his propre words. For when I say, A man is a
creature, I know this proposition has his propre words, and that like as Man
is a Substance, so is the creature, which is the general word unto him,
which both are in one Predicamente, and the order in this Proposition is
observed according to the Art, for we must always begin at the lowest and
go vpwardes, which order agreth also to nature, when things less known, are
declared by things that are more known, as shall more plainly hereafter
appear.

The Predicamentes are divided in to the Substance, and the Accidente. The
first, is both called the Substance and is a Substance in deed. The other
are Accidents, as not being of the Substance, but cleauyng thereunto.

The commoditee of these Predicamentes is great. First, where as they be
divided into the Substance and Accident, it is a good lesson to know evermore
the substance, from the thing which is Accidental. Again, of these most
general words arises this profite^ that if you will define any thing, or
show the nature thereof, you may know in which of al these store houses the
word rests, which should express the nature of another.

Thirdly, if one will bestow a little diligence herin, searchyng where every
word is setteled, and knowing to which of al these most general words he may
best refer it: he shall faithfully know the nature of all things, no man
better, then the which, nothing is more necessary. and this difference is
betwixt the.v. commune words otherwise called the Predicables, and these most
general words called Predicamentes, that the Predicables, set forth the
largeness of words, the Predicamentes do name the verey nature of things,
declaryng (and that substa^tially) what they are in very deed.

A note of certain things diligently to b^ observed before the rehearsal of
the most general words.
Considering ambiguite bredeth error, most warenesse ought to be used, that
the doubleness of no one word deceive the hearer. The cause of all
controversy, is either the not well understanding, or else the wily vsyng of
words that in se^ce have double meaning. Aristotel the Scolemaister to all
scholars, gives good warning that all men be right ware in any wise to have
the right understanding of every several word.

There be words that under one and the same title, comprehend the nature of
many things, as these words following.

as a Croune. as a Bear. as Time. as Sage. a noble
A croune signifies the croune of a ma^s head, and also signifies a croun of
gold, such as is curraunt, or else such as Kings wear at the day of their
coronacion. A bear, signifies a brute beast that is baited with dogs, and
also signifies the cophine where in a dead man is carried to his burial. Time
notes both the space of hour, day and year, and yet we call an herb by
that name, which grows in gardyns. Sage also betokens an herb, and yet we
call wise men, sage men: so yt every one of these words have a double meaning,
and joined only together by fellowship of name, by nature, and in very deed,
do very much dissente. Therefore this ought evermore to be marked that al
words be well noted according to their natures, that the rather we may escape
error. Those are only to be received and used, for the mayntenaunce of all
truth whose name, and nature is all one, or the which are ever more to be
taken and understood after one sort. As homo a man, signifies none other
thing but man. Arbor, a tree signifies none other thing in all the world but
a tree only, and so of other. If any word be used that has a double meaning,
restrain the largeness thereof, and declare how you will have it taken, by
means whereof, the fraud shall sooner be avoided, and the truth bette^ known.

The Predicamentes are in number.10.
1 Substantia. The Substance. 2 Quantitas. The Quantite. 3 Qualitas. The
Qualitee. 4 Relatiua. The Relacion. 5 Actio. The manner of doing. 6 Passio. The
Suffering. 7 Quando. When. 8 Vbi. Where. 9 Situs. The Settelling. 10 Habitus.
The appareiling.
SVbsta^tia, the Substance, or being which Cicero calls Nature, is a thing
which stands by it self, and needs no help of an other, but has his
propre being and substance naturally, or thus.

The substance is a thing which has his propre being of hymsel^e, and
contains accidents which happen thereunto, neither can any substance be
seen, saving only the accidents, as the color, the greatenes, and such like
qualities of man are seen, but the very substance cannot be seen.

The division of the Substance.
THe substance is divided into the first, and second. The first substance is
called every singular person or propre name as Socrates, Plato, Virgil, Homere.

The second substance co^prehendeth both the general word, and the kind also
of every singular person, as thus Tullie, Coesar, Hanibal with other. Likewise
this word (a liui^g creature) being a substance and general word to every
propre name contains al things particulerlie that have life.

It is profitable to mark the order of substance, set furthe in a table a
little before, for we may by the same, divide severally every substance, of
all things in this worlde^ the which when we know, and remember in our
minds, we perceive evidently, the difference, between God, and his creatures,
and seeing the thing created of God and the properties there with all, we rest
upon the same, and learn the use, and propre commodity of many things here
in earth. We may define many things, by the same table: as we may define
God, man, heaven, earth, beast stone, and any thing else yt is a substance.

Of quantitee.
THe quantity, is the greatness of a thing, or the nombre. And proper it is to
this most general word, to be divided, as greatness, is divided into
several parts, and nombres into every several nombre.

Quantitee is.ii. ways considered.
The one is called Continua quantitas, that is, when the question is asked, how
great, or broad any thing is^ and therefore the length, the latitude, and the
depenesse of bodies artificial, are herein observed: the use whereof, is most
seen in Geometry.

The other is called discreta quantitas, when the question is asked, how many
things there be, and is occupied altogether in no^bryng. The use of this is
perceived in Arithmetique.

Of qualit^e.
THe qualite, is a form, or shape of the body, or mind, whereof some name is
derived, as of wisdom, men are called wise, of Justice, men are called Just.

There be three manner of qualitees, whereof the first does contein the habit,
otherwise called, the perfect having of any thing. The other is, a forwardnes
in any thing, gotten by labor and travail, not given by natures goodness, or
else we may call it, the half attainyng of that, which we go about to have,
wantyng perfeccion, for lack of full time, and is called in Latin dispositio,
as to have mean knowledge, and not to be fully instructed in ye practice of
justice, is dispositio. Again to be fully learned, to have accomplished all
things, due to righteousness and Justice, is called in Latin, habitus, as
who should say, the absolute atteinyng, and strong hold of the same. The pith
of this word habitus, can hardely be uttered with one word in this our
tongue. Notwithstanding it may in mo words be opened, for the better
understanding of it. For even as wax chaufed with the hand, is made softer,
even so some parts of man are made by us more apt to compass any thing. He
that uses often to speak French, shall by continuance, obtein perfeccio^: he
that uses much to write, at length shall have a ready hand, and this is called
habitus. So that no man has knowledge, or perfect skill in any thing, except
he get it by labor, and acquaint nature with trauail. Notwithstanding, I must
needs confess, that all natures be not like apt, to receive knowledge. Some
are given to one thing and some to another. Therefore (...) which by nature
have a promptnes^e^ shall so^er attein perfeccion, then any other can do, if by
labor and earnest travail, they will stretche to attein that whereunto they
are apt, and with good endeavor, ^ilip nature forward. God gives some one
manne a passing gift, to search the influence of the stars, to another he
grants, a natural enclinacion to Music, and al heavenly harmonies. So that
if either of these two, would seek to follow their natural aptness, it were
most like they should e^cell. Other that do not find nature so favorable, can
never come to any such perfeccion.

The full atteinyng of any thing, by long time, is two ways considered, for
either it is of the body, or else of the mind. Perfection, gotten b^ help of
the body, is when men can by much use, leap, wrestle, or cast the bar,
better then any other, or else do excel in any handie craft, above the common
sort.

The habit of the mind, that is to say, that constaunt hold of any thing,
which is in the mind, either consists in knowledge, or else in practice. In
knowledge, are comprehended all arts as Gra^mer, Logique, Astronomy etc. and
all other learning, whereunto wit can atteine. That habit of the mind,
which is in practice, and by good aduisement is chosen, stands in the will
of man. As all virtue, and all vice do. Just dealyng evermore, manhood in
sufferyng all harms stoutly for honesties sake, and temperaunce of life, in
forbearyng lust, and ^ilthie glotonie. These virtues though their ofspryng be
from God, yet time makes them perfect, in the iyes of man. Other virtues are
given of God wholly, and altogether without man's labor to attain the^. As
faith, hope, charitee, and all other like gifts of the holy ghost.

The second form, is called ye power strength, or pronesse of nature, in
latin Naturalis uis. And the contrary hereunto, is called the weakness of
nature, when she has denied her power, to any one thing, in Latin it is
called Imbecillitas naturae.

The natural strength, is an aptnes of nature, given either to the body, or to
the mind. To the mind, as the aptnes to learn, the pro^ptnes of memory^ of the
body (in man) to be apt by nature to wrestle, for a horse, to be quick and
stirryng, for a bird, to be apt to fly, for fish, to live in the water,
(the which man cannot do) for an Ass to be slow, for a stone to be hard.
etc. Natural weakness, is when nature diminishes her gift, as when she
denies aptnes to learning, as we see many dull wits for lernyng, and much
unfit that way. Nature has denied some men, health of body, that they are
never well at ease, some men are so sick in their brain, that they are never
wise, some are capons by kind, and some so blunt by nature, that no art can
whet them An Ass will never be swifte, a stone will never be soft of nature.
All qualities be instruments of nature, where by the works, as heat, is the
instrument of fire. The heat and cold, in the juice of herbs are
instruments, whereby men either are healed, or else past healyng, for this
world.

The third kind comprehends, the affeccions of man, called in Latin,
pe^turbationes, and also those passions which tarry but for a little while.

A perturbacion, or else affeccion, is a sudden change of the mind, and also of
the body.

There be.iii^. perturbacions principal, which are in the mind, whereof all
other have their ofspryng.

Libido, seu cupidi^as. Lust or desire. Leticia. Mirthe. ^g^^tudo. Grief.
Metus. Fear.
The which are stirred up, by some mocio^ of the mind, either desiryng any
thing earnestly, or abhorry^g the same

There be five perturbacions of the body, which move the senses, and are
c^lled things offered to the senses^ as colors, either whiteness,
blackness, or any like, move the iyes. All soundes and ^oyses that be made^
move the hearing, as co^ghyng, speaking, bra^yng of a D^ere^ ^lowyng of a Cow,
or neighyng of an horse. Sauors move the smellyng, as perfumes, sweet odours,
the strong smell of ordure, and such filth. Sauces move the taste, as
bitterness, tart^es, sow^rnes. Such qualities as are touched, move the se^ce of
touching as hardness, softnes, roughnes, plains.

The affeccio^s, called Patibiles qualitates, (the passions that abide but
awhile) differ from perturbacio^s, for as much as they tarry not long, but
suddenly come, and suddenly goo, as blushyng in a man's face, sudden fear,
suddenly to change color, and ware pale. The other tarry longer, as en^ie,
ambicion, love, continual fear, gredinesse, with such other.

The fourth comprehendeth^ the figure, and form of any thing. The figure
comprehend^th the shape of things that have no life, as the fashion of the
Element^ of trees, of floudes, of an house, a ship, a cote, and such like.

The form co^teineth the portrature of al living things, as the very lively
image of man, of an horse, or a lio^, as we call a man well favored, or hard
favored.

The table of quality.
The Qualitee.
Of the mind. Of the body. Of the mind Given by nature, as the natural
inclinacion to any thing. Gotten by study. Gotten by ^^udy Tariyng still with a
man, and hardely going away. Going ^one away, as the affeccions. Tariyng
still with a man. As knowledge, which either consists by practiced skill. Or
else by speculacion, and by the only obseruacio^ of things natural. Practiced
skill. Either of virtue. Or else of v^ce. Of virtue. As Justice. Fortitude.
Temperaunce. Te^perance or just dealyng of every synguler person. As Ca^o,
Socrates, Plato.

Of Relatiues.
RElatiues are those, which are comprehended with other, or the which are
named, one with another, and (as a man would say) have a mutual respect, one
to another.

The other predicamentes before rehearsed, were absolutely spoken, so that we
may understand by one, and the same word, what it means. As we may
perceive what a man is, although we join nothing to him, we know what
Justice is, although we compare him with none other thing. But these Relatiues,
cannot be so well understood, except we join some thing to them. As when I
say a father, I ca^ not so call him, except I understand a son that he
has. So that every body is called a father, in respect that he has a son,
or else not. Again, no body can be called a Schole Master, except he have
scholars. There is no husband except he have a wife.

Therefore we may se, that Relatiues are referred evermore to another, neither
can they be taken absolutely, without having respect, to some other word.
There is no word, but we may considre the same to be a Relative, if we
refer it to some other thing, and therefore we may go throughout all the
predicame^tes, with this one place, and find relacion in every one of the^.

Those that are referred to some thing, are of two sorts. First they are
properly so called, as the father, and the son, the master, and his servant,
neither can they be considered, except they be compared with some other, for
when one is called father, he is properly so called, because he has a son,
and thereof has he his proper being.

Again relatiues, improperly so called, are those several words, which are
known, and have their being, even when they stand alone: and yet considered
with other, they have diverse respects. as love, is the love of the thing
loved. Or thus, love beholds the thing loved. Faith beholds that thing,
whereunto it leaves. And therefore where as Paul says, we being justified by
faith, have peace before God, it is as much to say, that we are not received
for the worthiness of the qualitee, but for his sake, that is the son of
God. For I pray you, whereunto leaves faith, or what thing does it else
behold? Saving only our Lord Jesus, that died freely once for all. Or else
thus, Relatiues are so called, (and yet vnproprely) which are not according to
their propre being, but according as they are so named, whereof the.vj.
predicamentes that follow, bear the name. As he that does any thing, is
referred to a thing done, whe^ein the two places that follow are declared,
which signify, to do, and to suffer. By the place ( vbi) where, one neighbor
is compared with his ne^t neighbor. By the place quando, when, A child of.vj.
year old, is compared with a child of the same years. He that lies upright, is
compared with him that^ lies down grouelyng. In all these the proper being,
is not declared, for a child may be six years of age, although he be not
compared with another, and therefore it is called relatio secundum dici
improprie. But a man can never be a father, saving only in consideracio^ of
his son And yet note this one thing, it is proper to all Relatiues, always
to be true, even by co^uercion. And thus whosoever is a father, the same has a
son, whosoever is a son, the same has a father. Who soever has faith,
that same man leans to Christ only. Whosoever leans to Christ only, that
same manne has faith. Here are two things to be marked in relacion. The
ground of every thing, and the end whereunto it has respect, or
consideracion. As a father is the ground, in that he does begette, and has
respect to his son, in that he is begotten. The son is the ground, in that
he is begotten, and has respect to his father, which did beget him. And thus
likewise in all other.

The table of the Relatiues.
By nature. As by the cause and the effect, the father, and the son, are
considered. By some manner or way used. The magistrate, and the Mace, the King,
and his sword carried before him are compared together. By degrees in calling.
The lord, and his servant, the aduocat, and his client. By kynted. The brother
and Sister. Relatiues are compared one with an other. By marriage. The son in
law, the mother in law. By covenant. The graunter of a lease, and the
tenant. By accide^tal, happenyng. A poet, to be a lier, a phisician, to be a
man queller, or a lawyer, to be a thief. By natural kind. A man, a woman. By
years. A young man, an old man. By condition of life. A poor man, a rich man,
a freeman, a bond man.

The manner of doing, in latin called. Actio.
A Gere, seu facere, is wha^ we are said to be occupied in a matter that is
before us, or when our labor is exte^ded upon a weaker or less thing, and in
this place, ar contained al verbes actiues, as to write, to dispute, to banquet,
to beget, to increase, to diminishe, or to change, and to speak at a word, al
those are contained in this place, which answer to this question, what does
he, or what does it, excepted always verbes perteinynge to the senses or
affections, as to hear, to taste, to see, to envy, al which have the passive
significacion.

Every action is either natural, or volu^tary. That is called natural, which
is done by the might of nature, as to begette, or to bring forth, to increase,
or decrease, to alter by qualite, as to be moist, dry, cold, or hot, to
move from place, to place. That is called volu^tarie, which does betoken any
thing done freely, as to teach, to write, to read, to play the merchant
man, or to do any other action. And hereunto may be referred every man's
deutie living.

Perpessio called in English a sufferynge.
PAti, fieri, seu accipere, to suffer, to be done, or to take, is the effect
of the action, and to make it ^lai^e, it is a verb passive, even the ^ame,
which the gra^marians use, as to ^e taught, to be increased, to be diminished,
all these are passiues, and are referred to this predicament.

Vbi. Where.
VBi is an order, or predicament, which comprehends the description of
places, wherein some ^hyng is reported either to be done, to ^aue ben done, or
else hereafter, to be ^one. As to be at London, to be at Ca^^rydge, to be at
home, to be in a cham^er, to be above, beneth, on the right hand, left hand,
before, or behind, and what soever is answered to this question, when I ask
where any thing is, or where any thing is done. This place well serves for
co^iectures, either ^n praysyng or dispraisyng.

Quando. When.
THis Predicame^t Quando, co^teineth the difference, and diversity of times,
as. Nunc, Now Heri, yesterdaye, noctu, in the night time, Interdiu, in the day
time. This place also gives light to confirm causes. As to prove that one is
paineful, I may say such a one studieth day, and night, so much as nature can
bear. Therefore he is a payneful man.

Situm esse, to be settled.
Situm esse, is than considered, when a man's body is in any wise place, a^ to
lie a side, to stand upright, to sit, to lean, to lie grouelyng, to lie
wide open.

Habitus, the araiyng or clothyng.
SOme call this Predicament Habitus, integume^tum, that is a coueryng or
apparelynge of any body, as to have a coat to wear a goune, to be harneysed,
to have a jack, a sheart of mayle, a cote armoure. Also to go gorgiously, as
to wear cheines of golden to have braselets, rings, ouches, and stones, to
hau^ asceptre or mace in his hand. Thirdly to possess gold, silver, land,
wife, and children, or to contain any thing, as the hogs head does hold
wine, the barn holds corn. etc.

The use and commodity of these Predicamentes.
IF you will define any word, and know the propre nature of the same, ye must
needs know these ten Predicamentes. As for an example, if ye will know what a
man is, ye must have recourse to the place ^f Substantia, and there ye shall
learn ^y the same place that man is a living creature endued with reason If ye
will know what virtue is, ye must go to the Predicamente Qualitas, and there ye
shall se, that virtue is a constant habit of the mind, making them praise
worthy in whom it is. If ye will define the nature of a father, seek for
Relatiua, and there ye shall learn that he is a father, that has a son, he
is a master, that has a servant, and so forth in the realte. Therefore ye
must needs have these Predicamentes ready, that when so ever ye will define
any word, or give a natural name unto it, ye may come to this store house,
and take stuff at will.

Of a diffinition.
THere is nothing in all this whole art of logique more necessary for man to
know, than to learn diligently the defifinition, and division of every
matter that by reason may be comprehended. For he that first well
understands what he does go about, (knowing fullye the nature of every cause
propounded,) shall less err in the whole discourse following, and easy shall it
be for him to avoid false arguments, if he can lear^e first to se the very
nature, and substantial propretye of every thing.

A definition is.ii. ways considered, for either it is a defi^ition of a
word, or of a substance. A definition of a word, is any manner of declaration
of a word, as, a Realm, is so called by cause it is by a king ruled, and
meryly to say it, A woman has her name so given her, by cause she brings woe
unto man.

A definition of the substance, is a speech, which shows the very nature of
the thing, and every perfect definition is made perfect by the general word,
and his difference joined together.

So that what soever is defined, it is ^l ways the kind or sort of some
^hyng, as thus. Man is a living crea^ure endued with reason: man, is the ^hyng
defined, and the other (that is, a ^^uing creature endewed with reason) ^^s the
definition.

There be.iiij. rules to be observed ^n every perfect definition. First that
the definition conteyne no more than the thing defined, nor yet that the thing
defyned, contain any more than ^he definition does. Again we must ^ake
head, that the definition express ^he very nature, and substance, of the
^hynge defined, or else it is no good ^efinition.

Thirdly, we must see that the definition be plain, and open, without
ambiguitie, not having any obscure or ^ar fetched words.

O^ a division.
IT is an old saying. Qui been distinguit, been docet. He yt does well divide,
does teach well. And Socrates in Phedro Platonis praisyng much the manner of
diuidyng says at length, that if he kne^ a man which could well divide, and
seuerallye set every thing in his place, he would follow him as though^ he
should follow god himself. In what miserable blindness ware we, if we knew not
the difference betwixt the law, and the gospel, the which only we do know
by the benefit of division. There be many fond people which have much
dispraised all temporal laws, and civil laws, thinkyng^ it mete that al
commonweals should only have the gospel, and none other ^awe at all. This
may seem to some a gaie saie^ge, where as in deed it is both folishe, and
wicked. For there is a difference betwi^te Political laws, and the gospel: For
the political law does cause an outward discipline to be observed eue^ of
the wicked, so that they dare not offend outwardlye for fear of corporal
punishment. The magistrate which has this charge is ordained of god, and
first his charge is to set forth the ten commandments given to Moses, in
the stony ta^es, and to cause the same to be obser^^d universally, punishyng
the offen^urs for their evil deeds corporallye. after this he must enacte other
parti^^lar laws, as occasion shall serve which do not dissent from these.x.
con^^^eryng these laws are general, and therefore particular things may be
^^awen out of them. As where it is s^^d. Thou shall do no theft, the ma^^trate
seeing falsehode in bargay^yng, and much disceipte used to de^aude one, an
other, straight causes ^ to be proclaimed that all such as v^^ disceipt in
bargaynyng, commit ^efte, and shall be attainted thereupon ^^ felc^s, the which
man in so doing h^th fulfilled gods commaund^me^t. Now again, as for the
preaching of the Godspell, it is an other manner of thing, for thereby sins
ar forgiven. ^e inheritance of life everlasting ^^aunted, and an ever living
Church ^f mankind gathered to be Gods ^^osen people, and also the true
knowl^ge of God, perfect righteousness, and the hope of life everlasting, is
kindled in the hearts of al godly through the power of gods holy ghost.
But there be few that will obey wyllynglie, and with all there hearts, the
words of the gospel in such wise.

Neither can any Law be able violentlye to force the inward thought of man.
Therefore the outward magistrate though he cannot bind men's consciences from ye
thing that is eui^, yet does he much to with draw them from doing evil, and in
deed if laws ware, not men could not live. Therefore the political regiment,
and the gospel are.ij. diverse things. This ^horte distinction gives a
light to many weighty matters, the which thing when men know not, they wander
in great darkness, and for lack of light, faull in to error.

What a division is.
A Division is a diuidynge of that which is more commune, into those which
are less common. As a definition therefore does declare what a thing is, so
the division shows how many things are contained in the same.

A division, is either the deuidyng of a word, or of a thing. A division
first of a word, is when any word that signifiyng diverse things, is divided
into every several signification that he has, as if I would divide this word,
Canis, into a dog, a fish of the sea, and a star in the Elemente, thus might
I say, Canis is either a dog that lives upon the earth, or else a star in
the elemente.

A division of the thing is.iij. ways considered, for either it is when the
general is divided into his kind, the whole into his parts, or else when the
substance is divided into his accidents. The general is divided into his
kind thus, as an Element is divided into the fire, the aier, the water, and
the earth. A common weal is divided into the state of people which bear
rule, and also into that power where the best, and wisest have the
governance, and thirdly into ones hand which alone bears the stroke and is
chief magistrate. Of living creatures some are endued with reason, some are
with out reason.

The whole is divided into his parts as thus. The body is divided into the
head, bealie, hands, and feet. A man is divided into body, and soul, and
this kind of deuidyng is proprelie called Partitio. And the very difference
betwixt diuisio, and partitio is, that in a division where the general, and the
kind are, the general word is spoken of the kind it self, as. Iustitia est
virtus. Justice is a virtue, where as it cannot be so, when the whole is
divided into his parts, that the whole should be spoken of his part, as I can
not say, Caput est homo. the head is man. For the head is not man, nor yet the
bealy, al though they both be parts of man. We have evermore need of this
Partition in all matters. The law of Moses is divided into.iij. parts, for
either it is Moral, Judicial, or Ceremonial, neither is this Partition
necessary for Moses common weal only, but for all other regimentes that be.
The moral law stands for ever, and is not altered at any time but is
received from time, to time, even as Moses received the same of God in stony
tables. The Judicial law is next, the which although we be not bound to
observe as the Israelites ware, yet must there be acts of Parliamente made for
the reformacion of things that be amiss, and Magistrates appointed to punysh
such as break the ten commandments, called the moral law, and even so
may we judge of the Ceremonial Law. that although it appertain nothing to
us to keep such Ceremonies as Moses, and Aaron have enacted, yet it is
needful that there be an order in all our doings and that we resort together to
the temple reverently, and that the Parents appoint their children a time to
learn at schole, and for their servants a time to do their true service.

The substance is divided into his accide^tes, as thus, of men, some are fre,
some are bo^de.

An other manner of dividing there is contrary to this, as when the accidents
are divided into there substaunces, as thus. Of good things some are of the
mind, some of ye body, and some of fortune. Also there is a division when
accidents are divided into accidents, as of good things, some are honest,
some profitable, and some plesaunt.

Rules necessary to be observed in every division.
FIrst it must be provided that the division as much as may be (for it cannot
always be so) ought to be made with two contrary differences, fully
containyng in them self the whole cumpasse or widenes of the general word, or
that which is divided, for it is a fault to forget any thing, or let slip any
part.

Again the differences which divide the general word, being joined both
together, must be egall to the said general word, and the parts coupeled
together, must be as much as the hoole, or else the division is not good. A
living creature is divided into his two differences, as into a thing having
reason, and a thing that has no reason. Now what so ever is a living
creature, the same is a thing that either has reason or else that lacks
reason. And again every thing that is endewed with reason, and without
reason, that same is a living creature. So that in every division, the
members, or parts that do divide, by conversion are turned with ye thing
divided, even likewise it is with partitio^, as I have spoken before of
deuisio^. Where as logike has two parts, Judgment and findyng o^t of
things, even as I say logique is nothing else but judgment, and findyng out
of things, so of the other side, judgment, and findyng out of things, is
nothing else, but logique it self. Whereby appears a plain^ conversion, that
what so ever the one is, the same is the other, which thing must diligently
be observed in every division. For if the members that do divide, be either
more or less than the thing divided: straight way the division is not good,
for according to a Precept that we have in latin. Memb^a diuidentia semper cum
diuiso conuerti debent. The parts that do divide must always be equal with the
thing divided, and turned by conversion with the same, or else the division is
not lawful.

The manner of handeling a single Question, and the ready way how to teach
and set forth any thing plainly, and in order, as it should be, in latin
Methodus.
IN handeling of any single question, the precepts and rules given before in
the commune words, in the most general words, in the definition, and
division, do very good service, and help toward the orderyng of every such
matter. The whole nature of such questions are thoroughlie seen by vsyng of
this order. Every single question is eight ways examined, first to ask
whether the thing be, or no. As thus. Is there any one man that may be called
wise? Is there any law? Is there any friendship upon earth? This question is
often proved, either by experience, or else by authoritee of the wise. Therefore
in questionyng what the thing is, we must declare the very nature^ as if I
shall speak of frendshippe, I will first be at a point of what frendshyp I
must speak. For friendship is of two sorts. The one is true and perfect
frendshippe, which comes from the heart for virtues sake, and is only among
good men: the other is fay^ed favor, when one for lucre bears a fair face
outwardely, and fedeth inwardly a maliciouse stomach. And this is the commune
frendshippe, whereof the wicked only are partakers. The second question is, to
ask what a thing is. And this comes from the definition, which is of two
sorts. either of the substance of any thing, or else of the name. Of the name
as thus, a realm is that country which is ruled by a king. Of the substance
thus. A realm is a gatheryng of people together, being able to live, and
withstand other for preservation of themselves, abiding several. The law is
an ordina^^ce which commands things in order, to be done, and forbids
the contrary. The third question is, when the parts, and every several kind
is considered, and for this question the division and partition do much good.
As the law of the Gospel and the political law. The fourth question is to
ask what are the causes, and especially what is the efficient cause, and what
is the final cause, or the end of any thing. The efficient cause of all good
laws, is God, and his minister. The final cause, or the end, is to live
vprightlie in the fear of God, and to walk all the days of our life in the
obseruacion of his holy will. The fifte question is, when the effect, the
office, or propre workyng is examined. As the effect of the law is, to
conserve the state of man to continue peace universally, to encreace wealth,
and make love betwixt all. The syxt question is when things be asked that
happen after, or the which have great affinite, or likelyhode together. As if
laws be kept and followed, we se our childrens children wax to wealth. We se
much neyghbourhode and good will to help the needy, and so forth. The
seventh is to ask what are disagreyng. As from the law, dissenteth rebellion,
stubbournesse, pride, with other. The eight question is to bring in witness,
and to show by whose authoritee the law takes place. The scripture teaches
that God gave the law to Moses, and Poule with Peter also, and Christ himself
commanded every man to obey the higher power in all things, that are not
directely repugnaunt from the will of God. Thus ^he question is eight ways
examined, and the manner taught thereby to frame it in dew order, so that he
which keeps well this trade, can not fail in any cause that he takes in
hand. And because they may the rather be remembered, I will set them
altogether.

As touching the law.8. ways. 1^ whether it is or no 2. what it is^ 3. what
are the parte^. 4^ what are the causes. ^. what are the effects or propre
workyng. 6 What are next adjoining, what are like, what happen therbi 7 What do
disagree, or what are contrary. ^. What example there is, or authorite to
prove it.


And this lesson ought diligently to be learned of al, that evermore they
begin from the general, and come to every several part. As in declaryng
what virtue is, first to tell the nature of it generally, and after to handle
every virtue by it self. And this order both Tullie has followed in his book
de officijs, and also Aristotle in his Ethikes has done the like, to ye great
admiration of al those that be learned.

Of a proposition.
Even the very order of nature requires that first of all we should speak of
several words, and as a man would say, teach one his lettres, and teach
him the manner of spelling, before we teach him to read, and afterward join
sentences together, and frame propositions by knittyng several words in
order, for it is the very office of the mind first to know, and then to
knitte^ neither can any child utter a sentence, before he learn to speak a
word. Again, when nature has taught several words, then the mind joins
to guether, deuideth, and afterward gives a Judgment whether they be well or
no. For a man ware little better then a brute beast, if he could but only
apprehende several words, having no gift, or aptnes to join them in order,
and to judge how things are joined together. But seeing God has kindeled th^s
light in man, that he can both join, and judge, we will now speak of the
knittyng together, and the ioynyng of words in a proposition.

What a Proposition is.
A Proposition is a perfect sentence spoken by the Indicative mode, signifiyng
either a true thing, or a false, without al ambiguitie, or doubtfulnes. As
thus, every man is a liar.

There be two parts in a proposition, the one is called Subiectum (that is to
say that where of sumwhat is spoken,) the other is attributum, commonly called
predicatum, that is to sai, that which is spoken of any thing, as in the above
rehearsed proposition. Every man is a liar, Man, is that whereof this saying (to
be a liar) is spoken, and this same saying (to be a liar) is that which is
spoken of man.

Every proposition is two ways divided, either it is a single sentence,
standing of one perfect sentence, as Justice is a virtue, or else it is a double
sentence having two propositio^s in it, as thus. If justice be a virtue, it is
a good thing praise worthy.

That proposition is called false, the which either natural reason proves to
be plain false, or the experience of man declares to be untrue, as thus. The
stone does feale. the soul of man is mortal. Experience shows the soul to
be immortal, and nature teaches us that no stone has the sense of fealyng.

The second division of a Proposition.
Again Propositions do either affirm, or deny, as this proposition. Pleasure
is a good thing, does affirm that pleasure is good. Again, pleasure is not a
good thing, does deny yt pleasure is good. That Proposition does affirm, when
any thing is reported to be in any thing That Proposition does deny, when any
thing is denied to be in any thing.

The third division of a Proposition.
THirdly al Propositions ar either, general, particular, indiffinite, or
singular^ Those Propositions ar called general, or universal, the which have a
general sign joined to the first part of the Proposition, as thus. Every
covetous man is poor. No man both loves, and is wise. No man is evermore
happy. General signs are these^ Omnis, Nullus, Quilibet, Nemo. Every body,
nobodie, all the world, not one in all the world.

Particular propositions are these, where a particular sign is added to the
former part of the Proposition, which does not contain al but a part or a
few, as thus. Some men fear God. Some men are to much desierous of glory.
The particular signs be these. Quidam, Aliquis, Plerique, Plerunque. A certain
man, some body, all men for the most part, oftentimes.

The Propositions are called Indefinite (that is to say, uncertain) where the
former part of the Proposition is a general word without a sign, as thus.
The soul is immortal. Manhood is a virtue. One man is better then an other.
Old men are covetous. And note this diligently, that those Indefinite
Propositions (whose last rehearsed part is necessary, and is so spoken of the
former part, that it does alwaie agree to the same, and to the whole nature of
the same) do implie as much as a general propositino, as in the above
rehearsed Proposition. The soul is immortal. this word (to be immortal) which
is spoken of the soul, agre^h not to one man, or to certain, but to every man
living. when the Accidents are spoken of the former part, it implies as much
as a particular Proposition does. as^ Homo homini prestat ingenio, virtute,
doctrina. (Some man is better then an other in wit, learning, and virtue,) is
no more to say, than Quidam homo homini prestat. Some one man is better then an
other.

A singular Proposition, is when a propre name of a man is contained in a
Proposition, and is the former part of the same, as. Cicero est Orator. Cicero
is an Orator. Alexander est bellicosus. Alexander is a warrior.

The repu^naunce of Propositions
REpugna^cie, is the diuersitee of.ij. propositio^s, which have both one
subiectum, (called the former part,) and one attributum, which is the rehearsed
part, and in sense spoken of the former.

There be.iiij. in nombre, called in Latin. Contrariae, Subcontrariae,
Co^tradictoriae, and Subalternae.

General contrary Proposicio^s, are those, whereof the one does affirm, and
the other does deny, as thus. Omnes homines gloria ducuntur, All men are moved
with glory. Nulli homines gloria ducuntur, No men are moved with glory.

Particular contrary, are two Particulars, whereof the one does affirm, the
other does deny. Aliqui homines gloria ducuntur, Some men are moved with glory.
Aliqui homines gloria non ducuntur, Some men are not moved with glory.

Contradictory Proposicio^s are, when the one is Uniuersal affirmative, and the
other Particular negative. or else when the one is Uniuersal negative, and the
other Particular affirmative, as thus. Omnes homines gloria ducuntur^ All men
are moved with glory. Aliqui homines gloria non ducu^tur. Some men are not
moved with glory, and likewise backward.

Subalternae are those, which be either Uniuersall affirmative, and Particular
affirmative, or else universal negative, and particular negative.

A single P^oposicion, is three ways denided.
PRopositio Categorica (other wise called a single Proposition) is divided
into, true and false Propositions.

They are true Propositio^s, which agree to the matter, and are either
necessary, or else such as may be either true, or false, called in Latin
fortuitae or contingentes.

Necessary Propositions, are assuredly true, and known so to be either by
nature, or else by experience.

Of those that necessarily be knitte together are these. The propre name, the
kind, the general word, the difference, the propretie, the definition, the
causes, the propre work of causes, and some Accidents that ever tarry, as
thus, Cicero est homo, Cicero is a man. Homo est animal ratione praeditum,
aptum ad risum, A man is a living creature, endued with reason, apt to laugh.
Dies est necessario, quoniam Sol exoriens est, It must needs be day, because
the Son is up. Ignis calidus est, Fire is hot.

Those Propositions are chaungeable, which may be true, or chance to be so;
as. Pecunia est bonum, Money, is a good thing. and whersoeuer the Accident is
spoken of that which contains him: every such Proposition is called
chaunceable or that which may be true, as: Water is made whot; here we see that
it chances to water (contrary to her nature) to be warm, and therefore it is
called chaunceable as the which may chaunce^ or be changed.

The Table of repugnaunt Propositions.


HEre we must be diligent that in all such repugnauncie of Propositio^s, there
be no doubtfulnes in any word, and that always there be one manner of words
that go before, and also one manner of words that end the sentence, plainly
and without double understanding. This diversity of Propositions is very
necessary to discern, the truth, from that which is false, for when we join
two Propositions that are dissonant, we shall easily try the chafe from the
corn, the which when we have done, we may the better, stick to the truth
with full assente, the contrary being ones disclosed and rejected.

De Conuersione, of the turnyng of Propositions.
Conversion, is the chaungyng or alteryng of words in a Proposicion, when ye
former part (whereof any thing is rehearsed) and the hinder part (which is
rehearsed of the former) are changed, the one, into the others place.

There be.iij. manner of Conuersio^s, Simplex, per Accidens, per
Contrapositionem.

A plain Conversion is, when both the Proposition^ are like in all things,
both in signs, and also in affirmacion, or negation, saving only that of the
last rehearsed, is made the former part of the sentence, and the former part, is
made the last rehearsed part.

Such Conversion is made, when both Propositions be either Uniuersall
negatiues, or else particular affirmatiues, for the first thus. Nemo timens
Deum, co^taminat se adulterio. Ergo, Nemo contaminans se adulterio timet Deum.
No man that fears God, de^ileth him self with adultrie^ therefore, no man that
defiles him self with adultrie, fears God. Here we may see the Conversion
plain, as the rule above rehearsed teaches. For ij. particular affirmatiues,
this shall be an example. Quida^ aulici, boni sunt. Ergo quida^ boni, aulici
sunt. Some courtiers are honest, Ergo some honest men are courtiers.

A Conversion by Accide^t, is when the former part of ye sentence, is made the
last rehearsed part, and the last rehearsed part, made ye former part, both the
Propositions affirmyng, or deniyng, saving only that the signs be changed,
that is the one being Uniuersall, the second being Particular. First a
Conversion is made of.ij. affirmatiues, thus. Omnis virtus est lauda^da, Ergo
laudandu^ aliquid, est virtus. All virtue is to be praised, therefore some
thing to be praised is a virtue. A conversion of.ij. negatiues, thus. Nemo
malus foelix, foelix igitur (sapiens cum sit) non est malus. No evil man is
absolutely happy. Therefore an absolute happy man (consyderyng he is wise)
cannot be evil. This kind of Conversion is very profitable for him that will
dispute. for where as we reason often from the general word, to the kind, we
must needs use this manner of Conversion, as thus. If al exercise be good, then
this exercise is good, and so of other.

A Conversion by contraposition, is when the former part of the sentence is
turned into the last rehearsed part, and the last rehearsed part, turned into
the former part of the sentence, both the propositions being universal, and
affirmative, saving that in the second Proposition there be certain negatiues
enterlaced, as thus.

Omnis homo auet aliquid videre, audire, scire.

Ergo quod non auet aliquid videre, audire, scire, non est homo.

Every man desires to se, to hear, or to know somewhat, therefore what soever
he is that desiereth not to see, to hear, or to know somewhat, that same body
is not a man. This Conversion is profitable, and serves well to reason by.
thus reasons Christ by this Conversion against the Jews in the viij. Chapter
of John^ Qui ex Deo est, verba Dei audit, vos igitur cum non audiatis, ex Deo
non estis. He that is of God, hears the words of God, You therefore because
you hear not, be not of God. This Conversion co^futeth the Jews plainly, and
proves that they are not of God. If, we will reason from the general word to
the kind, or from the greater, to the less, we may use this Conversion very
well. Omnis homo est animal, Ergo quodcnnque no^ est animal, id nec homo est.
Every man is a living creature, therefore what soever thing is not a living
creature, that same is not a man. Take away the general word, and there ca^ no
kind remain at all. From the superior universal, to the inferior, thus we
may reason. All pure gold looks yealowe, therefore what soever looks not
yealowe, yt same is not pure gold. This Conversion serves well to make an
Argument in the second figure, as I will declare hereafter, the which ought
diligently to be observed.

Propositio Hypothetica, that is to say a double Proposition.
PRopositio Hypothetica, is a sentence with two single Propositio^s knit
together always, with some Conjunction, as thus. Si iustitia est virtus, est
laudabilis. If justice be a virtue, it is praise worthy.

There be.iii. manner of double Propositions.
A Double Proposition standet^ of.iij. parts, whereof the one is a conditional
Proposition, affirming a thing to be either true or false, with an (if.) As
thus. If faith be upon the earth, some men fear God. If the world continue
still as it does, walowyng in most abominable sin, God will at length punish
the offenders very sore. All which Propopositions are ever true, when the
parts are so knit together: that the latter part, must needs follow upon
that, which goes before. The second part is, when a Proposition has a
disjunctive, which knitteth the sentence up, as thus. Either it is day, or else
it is night. Such Propositions are true, when both the parts are true, and
the same also are false, when either of the parts are false. The third part
is, when conjunctions that do deny are joined toguether, as thus. Battle
being not laufull, is not to be desiered.

By all which double Propositions we may reason formally in diverse causes,
is thus by the first. If faith be upon the earth, some men fear God, but no
man fears God, therefore faith is not upon the yerth. Again, if we fear God,
we are in charity, but we are not in charity. Therefore we fear no^ God. By
the second thus. Either it is day, or else it is night, but it is day,
Therefore it is not night. Couetouse men either be the servants of God, or else
of the Devil, but they are not the servants of God: Ergo, they are the
servants of the Devil. By the third thus. Battle being not lauful, is not
to be used, but battle is lauful Therefore it is to be used.

Of making an Argument.
I Have rehearsed hitherto al single words, what the nature is of every one,
and in what general word they may be found. I have set forth the nature of a
definition, and a division. I have taught also to join these several words
into a proposition, and to make the same a perfect sentence. Now therefore by
gods grace, I will show the manner how to join sentences together, and to
prove a matter by knittyng proposicions handesomely in an argument, or else to
confute any thing that a man list, by placing the proposicio^s accordingly.
Therefore there ought good diligence to be used in this behalf, for as much as
it is the clerkliest part of al, and the hardest piece of work, to frame an
argument aptly, and to know the very reason, why things are so knit together.

What an argument is.
An argument, is a way to prove how one thing is gathered by another, and to
show that thing, which is doubtful, by that which is not doubtful.

To find out the reason, that shall prove, (in Latin) called medium, (in
English) the double repete.
After this sort we may find the reason, whereby to prove our matter. When we
have a question or sentence, that we would either confirm, or confute, Ask
the cause of our self, why, and wherefore that thing, which is spoken of the
former part in any sentence, should be so applied to the same. And to make the
matter more plain, I will make this question. Est ne auarus pauper? Is a
covetous man poor or not? I may thus reason with my self. why should a
covetous man be called poor, what affinity is betwixt them two? marie in
this poynct, they both agree, that like as the poor man, ever lacks and
desires to have: so the covetous manne ever lacks, wantyng the use of that
which he has, and desirereth still to have, being never co^te^t though god
give enough. Then seeing it is even so, that both do lack, and both do
desire to have: this same reason is the only cause, whereby mine argument is
made perfect. For thus I may frame mine argument aptly.

Whosoever lacks, and desires evermore to have, that same man is poor.

A covetous man lacks, and desires evermore to have.

Therefore a covetous man is poor.

Thus this argument is made perfect by askyng this question, wherefore a
covetous man is poor? As hereafter I will show it more at large, by other
examples, ^o make the thing more plain.

There be four kinds of arguments.
Syllogismus a perfect argum^ Enthymema, an imperfect argum^ Inductio, an
induction. Exemplum. an example.
SYllogismus, is an argument whereby the last sentence, which we would prove,
is confirmed by other proposicio^s, and sentences, more universal, and better
known, then the thing which is proved: conteinyng in themselfes the reason,
why the last sentence is true, and why they are applied to the same. This kind
of argument, is from the general word, to the kind, as thus. If I will prove
theft worthy of punishment, I must first ask the question, why? and that
thing that comes to my mind, more universal then theft, co^prehe^dyng the
offense of theft in it, may serve to make the argument. As I may thus reason,
that theft should be punished, because it is a vice, or a mischeuous deed, and
then thus I knit up mine argument.

Every vice or mischeuous diede is to be punished.

Theft is a vice, or a mischeuous diede.

Therefore theft is to be punished.

Here we se three proposicions, or sentences, whereof the first is called Mayor,
that is to say, the proposicion at large. the second is called Minor, that is
to say, the several proposicion. the third is called conclusio. that is, the
lappyng up of all. And here we must note, that like as there be three
Propositions, even so there be three diverse endynges, called in Latin,
Termini, of the which, the one is called the term at large, in the first
proposicion only, and afterward is referred, to the former part of the
conclusion, called subiectu^ conclusionis. The second term is called the
several, which is in the second proposicion, and this is the word whereof
the question is made, and is spoken of in the conclusion. The third is called
the double repeat, which is twice rehearsed, before the conclusion, and
therefore it is twice rehearsed, because it is the knitting together, of the ij.
proposicions, and the cause, why the former part of the proposicio^, (whereof a
thing is said,) and the last rehearsed part, (being attributed to the part
going before,) are joined together in the conclusion. As to make the thing
plain by the former argument, I will prove this conclusion. Theft is to be
punished. Theft is called the former part whereof this word (punished) is
spoken, and this word (punished) therefore is called the last rehearsed part,
because it is spoken of theft, which went before. Now to make my argument, and
to prove this sentence true, I must seek a word, which is more general then
that, which is proved. And that word that comes to my mind, and is
perteinyng to the cause, being more universal: (for every thing that is
proved, is proved by a thing more known) that same word or reason, is called
the double repete. whose property is twice to be rehearsed in an argument, and
that in the first and second proposicion, never enteryng into the conclusion,
as thus. Every vice is to be punished, (vice) is the double repete, which must
be rehearsed in the second proposicion, (for I said before) it must be twice
rehearsed because it may be evident, that the former ^art of the conclusion, is
in very deed comprehended, under the former part of the first proposicio^. And
then the argument is made as follows.

Every vice is to be punished

Theft is a vice.

Ergo it is to be punished.

Here we se the double repete (which proves the matter) is twice rehearsed in
the first, and second proposicion, and enters not into the conclusion. The
term at large, is in the first proposicion, and the term several, is in the
second proposicion, and enter both into the conclusion. So that we may se
that, which proves the thing, does not enter into the conclusion, but is
twice rehearsed in the two propo^icio^s, and so the conclusion follows, by
reason that these two words, vice, and theft, agree in a third altogether,
and whatsoever is said of the one, is said of the other, and nothing can be
comprehended under the general, but all the kinds have the same contained in
in them, which in this proposicion, are r^ferred to the general. (Al vice is
to be punished, unto vice, is referred this word punished) therefore,
whatsoever is comprehended under this word, vice, as theft, adultery, wrong
dealyng, murder, this word punished, is rehearsed of them all: because it
agrees to the general, and is rehearsed of the same. Therefore I reason thus.
All vice is to be punished.

Therefore Adultery^ are to be punished Wrong dealyng. are to be punished
Murder. are to be punished


For if that, which is general, is to be punished, then the kinds, or sorts
in things, are al^o to be punished. According to this saying. whatsoever is
truly, and altogether rehearsed, of the general, that same also is rehearsed of
the kind, which is included in the general.

There be.v^i. Rules, especially to be observed, for the making of ^n argument
called Syllogismus.
FIrst, that in every Syllogismus, the first proposicion be universal I call
that proposicion universal, when there is omnis, that is to say, all: or else
nullus, that is to say, none, in the proposicio^. As for example. Every vice
is to be punished, this proposicio^ is universal, because it has omnis, in
it, which signifies all, or every one. Likewise I call it particular, when the
proposicio^ has quidam, or aliquis, that is to say certain, or some body,
quidam aulici sunt honesti, some courtiers be honest.

The se^ond rule.
If one of the proposicions be particular, or negative, the conclusion is
particular, or negative, I call that proposicion negative, when nullus, or
nemo, (that is to say) none, or no body, is in ye proposicion. As nullus
Christianus est foenerator, no Christian is an usurer.

The third rule.
In a Syllogismus, both the proposicions, can neither be negatiues, nor yet
particulars togethers, for even as of two negatiues, there follows nothing, so
of two particulars, there follows nothing. Therefore, when any such argument
is made, we may boldly say it is not lawful, because it is in no mode, as it
is very plai^e to se in making of this argument following.

Some Courtiers are rich.

I will be a Courtier.

Therefore I shall be rich.

Or this.

Some bishops are good.

Such a one is a bishop.

Therefore he is a good bishop.

This argument is not lawful, first, because by my rule I am taught, that of
pure particulars, nothing does follow, as Quidam (sum) is a particular Ego, I,
is a singular word, or signignifieng as much as a propre name, and again it is
in no figure as hereafter I shall show. Thirdly it is mete that the first
part of the second proposition should be included in the first proposition,
whereof some what is rehearsed or else it is no good argument, in the first
figure.

Some Kings be righteous.

Nero is a King.

Therefore Nero is righteous.

This is no good argument, because that Nero (which is the first word in the
second proposition of whom some thing is rehearsed) is not comprehended under
the former part of the first proposition, which is Kings, for this former
part (some kings) does not speak of Nero, nor comprehend such as he is, but
honest, and godly disposed governors. And yet in weighty causes such
arguments have been used, even of those that would have drawn us from the
obedience of gods holy word, and persuaded some that we ware free from the
observation of any one thing comprehended in Moses laws. As thus.

The law of Moses is abolished from the Gentiles.

The law of the.x. commandments is the law of Moses.

Ergo the law of the ten comman^dementes is abolished from the Gentiles.

Where as this first proposition comprehends not all the laws of Moses, but
the laws ceremonialle which ware as figures ordained in declacla^ation of
Christ's coming, and therefore the scripture says until Ihon, the law was,
and the Prophets, signifiyng that in Ihons time he was come, in whom the old
ceremonial laws ware fully verified and fulfilled, which at his coming
began to cease, seeing he himself was the fulfillyng of the law, not that we
should not observe the moral laws of the heavenly precepts commanded by
God, for Christ himself repeteth the obseruacion of them, yea and byndeth us
to a more straightness, that not only we should do none evil, but that also
we should consent to none evil, therefore this first proposition, is not
general, but particular, and so though the ceremonial law be gone, yet the
moral law taryeth still according to Christ's holy will.

Medius terminus, called the double repete (which is a word rehearsed in both
propositions) must not enter into the conclusion, because the other two parts,
called termini, be proved by this, and brought to the conclusion, by reason
they agree with this third, the which two otherwise could not enter into the
conclusion, if this double repete were not mentioned in both propositions, and
kept out it self from the conclusion, as is evidently to se by an
argumentacion.

The fifth Rule.
In an argument, called Syllogismus there ought not to be doubtful words, or
mo words in ye conclusion then was before rehearsed. For mo things to be in
the conclusion, this example shall serve which An^honius makes in the first
book of Tullie de oratore.

Unprofitable things are not to be taught.

In Philosophy are unprofitable things.

Ergo philosophy is not to be taught

This argument is to be denied, because there is more in the conclusion, then
was rehearsed in the two first propositions. For this should have been the
conclusion. Some unprofitable things which be in philosophy, are not to be
learned, not yt philosophy it self is to be rejected, for else we might make
this argument likewise.

Dronkenes is not to be allowed.

In drinking is often times dronkenes.

Therefore drinkyng at any time is not to be allowed.

Therefore we must frame our argument so, that nothing be more in the
conclusion, then was in the other propositions. As thus.

Dronkenes is not to be al-alowed.

In some drinkyng is oftentimes dronkenes.

Therefore some drinkyng is not to be allowed.

The sixth Rule.
There ought not to be mo terms in an argumentacion then three, for otherwise
there is no good argument.

Every political Magistrate ought to keep under disobedient persons, with
corporal punishment.

Peter is an Apostle.

Therefore Peter should punish the disobedient.

In this argument, is no ioynyng together of the first proposition, and the
second: for the political magistrate, and an Apostle, are two manner of
things. Therefore it ha^geth together like germans lyppes as we use to say.

The seventh Rule.
The double repeat, which is twice mentioned in both propositions, ought to be
no doubtful word, for doubtful words make four several terms which
should not be, as thus.

No bondsman is free.

All that believe the Gospel truly, are free.

Ergo none that believe the gospel truly, are bond men.

This argument is false, and must be de^ied at the first, because, there be
four terms, for in the first proposition, fredome, is taken for such a
liberty as men do use in commonweals, to make servants, and apprentises
fre, in the second proposition, fredome is taken for deliueryng the soul from
the wrath of God, from sin, and from death everlasting, as we read in the
scripture. Whom the son has made free, they are fre in very diede, not that
this fredome takes away all orders in the common weal, that no man shall have
an apprentise, or a bond man. For although the father in heaven has made them
free from sin, from death, and from the wrath of God, yet are they still
apprentises, and bond by a political law^ therefore we may see that there
be.iiij. endynges or terms, considering he speaks of one liberty in the
first proposition, and of an other in the second, so that the argument is not
good. A like argument there is, which one made to Diogenes.

That which I am, thou art not

I am a man.

Ergo thou art none.

Here is ambiguite in this verb (I am) far if it be understood in the first
proposition that this word (I am) is not considered according to the general
substance, but according to the quality, or rather propre being, speaking of
ye diversity of men, as when I live, I have mine own body, my flesh, and mine
own bones, thou have thine also propre unto the, and not that I am thou, nor
thou art I. Then it is well said, that which I am, thou art not. But if I
understand this word (I am) in the first proposition as a substance
universal, or rather general copulative, to be rehearsed of the inferiors,
the^ it is not good. For as I may say, Diogenes is a man, Aristotle is a man,
so I may say of al men. Whereby we may see here also four parts, or
endinges, and therefore the argument must be denied at the first, geuyng this
reason yt I have showed before.

Now that I have set forth the precepts which are to be observed in an
argument, I will declare how to seat be and place an argument, that any body
may give a reason, why every word is set in an argument, in this, or that
place. First therefore we must considre, there be four figures, which serve
for the making of an argument, and modes also, which teach the ordering of
propositions whether they shall be universal, particular, affirmative, or
negative. I will define them both after this sort.

A figure is a lawful placing of the double repeat, in the two propositions,
and even as the double repeat is placed, so we may judge with ease in what
figure the argument is. The first figure is such an order of propositions in an
argument, that ye double repeat must be the former part in ye first
proposition, and the last rehearsed part in the second proposition, where upon
the conclusion does follow. And the reason that it must be so, is because that
where as in this figure the argument is evermore made from the general, to the
kind universally, (for ye first proposition evermore in these two figures must
be universal, either affirmative, or negative) and because of the general
word, there is sumwhat rehearsed of the kind: one of the propositions must be
so placed, that it may evidently appear that the kind is encluded in the
general. And therefore ye general is spoken in the second proposition of the
kind.

A mode, is a lawful placing of propositions in there due quality, or
quantity. I call that in the proposition a quality, when it does affirm or
deny. I call it a quantity, when it is either universal, or particular. Unto
the first figure belong four modes, which may be perceived by these.iiij.
words.

Barbara. C^larent. Darij. Ferio.
THese four words must not be forgotten if we will make an argument truly in
the first figure, for every argument that is made in this figure, is in one of
these four modes, or else it is no argument of the first figure. If the double
repete be the former part in the first proposition, and the last rehearsed
part in the second proposition, it is in the first ^igure, notwithstanding,
except it be in mode also, it is no argument. Therefore we must learn to place
an argument in mode al^o. And for the better knowledge of this thing, note that
in these words there be four vowels to be considered, and marked. That is to
say, A, E, I, and, O. And where we see A in Barbara thrice, we must consider
that these three AAA in this one word, declare unto us three universal
propositio^s affirmative, E, declares a proposition negative universal. As in
Celarent we se twice. E, whereby we are taught that the argument (if we make it
in this mode) must have two universal negatiues, and one universal
affirmative, by reason of A, which is in the midst of Celarent. I does
signify a particular affirmative. O. does signi^^e a particular negative, as
in Ferio, the first must be a negative universal, the second an affirmative
particular, the third a negative particular. That these things may be more
evident to make an argument, both in figure, and mode, I will give examples for
every mode of this figure, that one may plainly see the whole matter as though
it were in a glass, remembryng always, that these modes serve for this
figure, which figure is known (as I said before) when the double repete is
the former part of the first proposition, and the last rehearsed part of the
second proposition. And where as I said before that certain arguments were
in no mode, althoug they were in the first figure, and therefore not good
because they were not both in one mode, and figure, these shall be to
understand, they were not in one mode, because the first proposition must be
universal ever, or else it is not good. Now therefore here follow examples of
the first figure and of the modes thereof.

Bar All honest things are to be embrased. ba All law made by a christian
magistrate are honest. ra Therefore all laws made by a Christian magistrate are
to be embrased. Ce No contemner of the magistrate is a christian. la All
Anabaptists are contemners of the magistrate. rent Therefore no Anabaptiste is
a Christian. Da Whatsoever deserves the favor and grace of god, the same only
does iustefy. ri Faith only deserves the favor and grace of God. f Ergo faith
only does justify. Fe No extorcioner is godly. ri Some rich man is an
extorcioner. o Ergo some rich men are not godly.
The second figure is, where the the double repete is the last, rehearsed part
in both propositions, after this sort followynge, and there be.iiij. modes
belongyng to the same figure, as it shall appear, which all they have these
iiij. vowels in the^. A.E.I.O. so that they make the proposition to be
universal, or particular, affirmative, or negative, as it was before.

Note that the conclusion is always negative, for as much as the first, and
the second, are always repugnaunt, neither do they agree in the double
repeat, called Medius terminus. And therefore the conclusion is negative by
contraposition, whereof I spoke before when I entreated of the conversion or
turnyng of propositions.

Ce No just man, before god has an unquiet, and doubtful conscience. sa All
they that trust to be justified by their works, have unquiet consciences. re
Therefore none trusting to his works, is just before God. Ca The christian
righteousness, is the pureness of the mind. mest To wear a tipete, a coule,
a shaven croune, is not the pureness of the mind. tres Therefore the outward
attire is not the christian righteousness. Fes No true divine co^temneth
philosophy. ti Some English preachers contemn philosophy. no Ergo some
English preachers are no true diuines^ Ba All christians refuse to get
goods ungodly to Some vsures refuse not to get goods ungodly. co Therefore
some usurers are no christians.
The.iij. figure is, where the double repete is the former part in both
propositions. And there be.vj. modes of the same figure. Note also that the
conclusion must needs be par^icular, in this figure where ye ^ormer part in
both propositions is the double repete, for like as we reason in the first
figure from the general word, to the kind, that is from the universal, to the
particular, so in this figure we reason from the kind (which is less) to the
general word which is more universal, but so not withstanding, that the
conclusion be particular. and therefore this kind of argument is very good. For
the Species, or kind, being ones put, the general, must needs follow.

Da Every common weal has need of armor, and laws. rap Every common weal
is gods ordenaunce. ti Therefore laws, and armor, are gods ordenaunce. Fe
No virtue should be eschued. lap All virtue has her woe with her. ton Therefore
some woe should not be eschued. Di Mercy only forgyueth sins. sa Al mercy
is purchased by faith. mis Therefore by faith only forgyuenesse is obtained. Da
All those that think them selves holy by their beads, by our ladies fast,
and by we aryng a heary shirte, are neither wise nor godly. ti Some priests
in England think no less. si Ergo some priests are neither wise, nor godly.
Bo Some battaill is not to be eschued. car Every battle is full of much
misery. do Ergo some misery is not to be escheued. Fe None that bear any
deadly malice, fear God. ti Some bear their neighbors deadly malice. son
Therefore some fear not God.
It is very necessary that there should be.iij. figures, as I have showed
already. for in every argument that has the shape of a Sillogismus (for the
induction and the example have it not, nether be they in mode and figure)
evermore we reason from the general, to the kind universal, making the
conclusion universal, or else we reason from the kind, to the general, making
the conclusion particular, or else there is a repugnancie of the term at large,
and the several, when they do not agree with the double repete, or last of
all we join many causes, and many effects together, whereof is made an
argument, called Sorites, or coaceruatio, that is to say, a heapyng together of
things

When we make an argument, and proceed from the general word, to the kind, it
is in the first figure. and even by our reason we learn this, that if the
greater be not, the lesser cannot be. As thus, if one be no living creature,
how can he be a man, if he be a living creature, he must either be a man or a
brute body.

When we proceed from the kind, to the general, making the conclusion
particular, the argument is in the third figure. And this is for ever true,
that when the kind is rehearsed, the general must needs follow.

But when there is a repugnauncie in an argument of the term at large, and the
several, so that they agree not ^ith a third word, it is ever in the second
figure. And this is plain to see that such an argument must needs be well
concluded, when we go about to co^^ute any thing, seeing: that.i^. kinds which
are repugnaunt, must needs be disseuered, and so the conclusion to be made upon
the same. As it is easy to se in the arguments of the second figure. Therefore
it is good reason that both there should be two figures, and also that the
argument does well proceed being made in any of them.

Some times an argument is made when we couple many causes together and the
very effects of the same, as thus^

Ouermuche gourmandise hyndreth digestion in the stomach.

By evil digestion in the stomach, corrupt blod is e^gendred in the liver.

When evil blood is bread in the liver evil humors are spread through out all
the bodye^

Evil humors spread through out the body, cause a distemperature in the
body, and after that bring the dropsey.

Therefore ouermoche gourmandise causes dropsey.

Of an half argument called Enthimema.
AN half argument, is an argument imperfect, the which is, when one
proposition is rehearsed, and the conclusion straight brought in there upon, as
thus. That is not good which brings a man to mischefe. Therefore money is not
good^ The bible teaches a man his duetye toward god, and his neighbor, Ergo
it is necessary to be known, and read of every body. Pleasure brings
endeles pain after it, Ergo pleasure is to be eschued. These arguments
behalf arguments, wantyng one proposition evermore, the which if we add a
perfect argumentation follows thereupon, as thus.

Whatsoever brings endless pain after it, that same is to b^ e^chued.

Pleasure brings endelesse pain after it.

Ergo pleasure is to be eschued.

These half imperfect Arguments called Enthymemata, consiste partly of
likelyhodes, and partly of infallible reasons.

Likelyhodes, are those, that often hitte the truth, and yet are not always
so, as thus.

Such a youngma^ talks often, and that alone also, with such a young maid.

Ergo he is in love with her.

This may be true, and this may be false. for although the conjecture have
some probabilite with it, yet is it not for ever true. The other called
infallible reasons, or rather necessary Arguments, must by all reason be
evermore true, as thus.

Such a woman is brought in bed.

Ergo she has had the company of a man.

An other.
The Sun is risen,

Ergo it is day.

Therefore in all co^municacion, good head ought to be taken, that likelyhodes
of things, be not used for necessary reasons

Of an Argument, called Syllogismus Expositorius.
THis kind of Argument has evermore a nown propre, to be as the double repete
in both Propositions: contrary to the manner of all other Argumentes^ and it
may be referred to the third figure.

Paul does allege godly sentences of the Ethnicques,

Paul was a preacher.

Ergo, a preacher may allege godly saynges of the Ethnicques.

For what so ever is truly gathered of particular things, the same also is
propre to things general, and what soever agreth to the propre name, the same
also agrees to the kind, to the difference, or propretie, of the said nowne
propre.

Inductio.
AN Induction, is a kind of Argument when we gather sufficiently a no^bre of
propre names, and there upon make the conclusion universal, as thus.

Rhenyshe wine heateth,

Maluesey heateth,

Frenchewine heateth, neither is there any wine that does the contrary:

Ergo all wine heateth.

An other Example.
Dathan for dis^obience against the superior pour, ended his life wretchedly.

Likewise Abiron,

Likewise Chore,

Likewise S^mei.

Neither is there any example to the contrary.

Therefore all rebels, and traitors to their Prince, and King, shall dye
wretchedly.

An other Example.
Nembroth although he was a iolie hu^ter, yet he lived like a wretch in great
misery.

Laban also lived wretchedly,

Pharao was sore plaged,

Amalech, Madian, Abimelech,

Herod, with other ware scourged grievously for their wickedness, neither is
their any example to the contrary,

Therefore the end of wicked men is wretched.

This kind of Argument is called Inductio, because that showing diverse propre
names, it enduceth at length, and moves the mind to make a general
conclusion. Therefore necessary it is, that in such Arguments all the examples
which are induced be like, for if any be found contrary, the Argument is of no
force, as thus, Athanasius lived unmarried,

Ambrosius lived unmarried,

Basilius had no wife and a great many mo.

Ergo all Bishops heretofore were unmarried.



The Argument is not Lawful, forasmuch as diverse have been married in the
Primative Church, as Spiridion, Hermes, Hilarious, Policrates, Tertullianus,
and diverse other. for it was the manner in ye primative church that honest
married men were chosen to be Bishops, and had the charge of christ's flock.
The Apostles also (as Egnatius wittenesseth) had wives as well as other men, and
as I think used them, as other me^ do their wives, or else asked their leave,
and consent to forbear them.

De Exemplo.
AN example, is a manner of Argumentation, where one thing is proved by an
other, for the likeness, that is found to be in them both, as thus. If Marcus
Attilius Regulus had rather lose his life, then not keep promise with his
enemy, the^ should every man being taken prisoner keep promise with his
enemy. If cities have been destroyed for breaking of wedlock, then adulterers
must needs be punished. If Alexander dawned a weak soldier when he was
almost frosen for cold, and did set him in his own chair against the fire:
the^ should al captains, and me^ of war, be tender over there poor
warriors and base soldiers.

Ever more take heed that in this kind of Argument the causes be like of both
sides, or else the Argument proves not, as thus.

Peter killed Ananias taken with an open lie.

Therefore spiritual ministres, may punish open offenders, with temporal
sword.

The examples are not like. Peter did kill Ananias with the word, and power of
the holy Ghost-therfore preachers must not kill the body, but only
excommunicate men, accomptyng the^ unworthy to be in the congregation. The
sword is lauful for the te^porall Magistrate only, and for none other.

Sorites.
SOrites, vel coaceruatio, is a heapyng together of causes, one, upon an other.
A kind of Argument when the last rehearsed word of the first Proposition, is
repeted in the first part of the second Proposition, necessarily agreyng
there unto, and so going still forth in like manner, til at the length the last
rehearsed word be added unto the first word, called Subiectum of the first
Proposition. And it is a kind of Argument much used, when we ascend upward
from the lowest, to the highest. or else when we go from the causes, to the next
thing done. which things done, are the occasion of other things besides, as
thus.

A man is a living creature,

A living creature is a lively body

A lively body is a substance,

Ergo a man is a substance.

Where the Law is, there is transgression,

Where there is transgression, there is fear,

Where there is fear, there is remorse of conscience.

Therefore, where the Law is, there is remorse of conscience.

An other.
Justification is not without faith

Faith is not without a repenta^t heart,

Therefore, justification is not without a repentant heart.

No Arguments be made negatiuely by this kind of Argumentation, as thus.

The Gospel is not the Law,

The Law teaches us the fear of God.

Therefore the Gospel does not.

Or thus.
Christ the son, is not in person, God the Father,

God the father is ever living.

Therefore Christ is not euer-liuyng.

But these, and such like be as wise as this that follows.

John is not Jack,

Jack is a good boy.

Therefore John is none.

And the reason is: No Arguments are made negatiuely by this kind of
reasonyng, neither is the consequent good, when words that agree not
necessarily, are joined together.

Of evil manners are made good laws,

Good laws are things worthy to be praised,

Things worthy praise, are to be desired.

Therefore evil manners are to be desired.

This knittyng is not laufull, for evil manners of them selves, are not the
occasion of good laws, but the godly mind of good Magistrates is the very
chief cause^ as the disease, is not the cause of healyng, but rather the
Physician, and his Medicines, and man's nature, which resists the poison of
sickness is the very cause. Again in every heapyng up of Arguments after such
sort, learn, and mark, how they proceed, and you shall easily se false
packyng.

Thus merry fellows reason when they are at nale.
He that drynkes well, slepes wel^

He that slepes well, sins not,

He that sins not, shall be saved.

Therefore let us drynk well, and we shall be saved.

Mark the procedyng and you shall easily avoid the error, for although in
sleep, we sin not, yet by drinkyng we cause sin, and no one man, at one
time both drynketh and slepeth: therefore though in slepyng he offended not, yet
in drynkyng he passes measure.

A horned Argument, called Dilemma.
DIlemma, otherwise complexio, vel cornu^us syllogismus, called a horned
Argument, is when the reason consists of repugnau^t members, so that what so
ever you grant, you fall into the snare, and take the foil. As if I should
ask whether it were better to marie a fair woman, or a foul. If you say a
fair. Then answer I, that is not good, for they como^ly say, she will be common.
If you say it were good to mary an hard favored woman, then I answer, she will
be loathsome, and so ye fall into an inconvenience. Notwithstanding if either of
the parts may be turned into the adversaries neck again, or both of them,
it is a faulty Argument. and you may confute the same by inuersio^, that is to
say, turning his tail clean contrary, as thus. If I shall marie a fair
woman, I shall have great pleasure, and comfort in her: if I marie a brown
woman, she shall not be common to other, for few men will seek after her.
Therefore, I shall have comfort both ways.

De Consequentiis.
IF profits not a little, after the rehersall of such Arguments briefly to
show the knittyng of Propositions, and to declare the manner of a short
Argument uttered by two Propositions, which are said to stand upon the
Antecedent and the Consequent: as the Logicians use to term them.

The f^rst rule.
From the universal to the particular, the argument goes well, but not
contrary, as thus.

This officer does his duty.

Ergo all officers does their dutie^

But this is true.

All officers do their duty,

Ergo this officer does his duty.

The second rule.
From that, which by nature is in any thing, to that which happeth casually,
or comes by some miseuill, the reason is not good. As thus.

Sobre diet is good:

A fever causes sobre diet.

Ergo a fever is good.

Another argument used by the Romish bishop.

Sin does not beget man.

The work of lust begets man.

Therefore lust otherwise called concupiscentia, is not sin.

The second proposicion is not true, for wicked concupiscence, came in by
man's folly, and has much defaced that, which nature first ordained. Therefore
nature it self through god, gives increase, which is much contrary to the
wicked lust of concupiscence.

^^e third rule.
Things disagreeyng, are not con^idered both one way, and with one respect.

The Gospel wills us to make no difference of meats.

The Phisicens appoynct us a diet, and forbid us this and that.

Ergo the Gospel, and the phisicens teach things contrary

These do not disagree, considering their ends are diverse. The scripture
forbids supersticion, in the obseruacion of days: the Phisicen has respect
to the state of a man's body.

The fourth rule.
The argument is good, when substau^ces are set, according to their propre
differences. But when they are set, the one against the other, according to the
accidents, which are convenient to both, the argument is not good. As thus.

It is lawful for you, not to drink wine.

Ergo to drink wine, is unlawful.

Where as this word lawful, is common to both, as well to drink, as not to
drink.

The.v. rule.
Every thing, the more that other things are through it, the same is always
the more it self. As thus.

The water is hot through fire.

Ergo the fire is more hot.

Another.

Some love to mary for goodes^

Therefore they love goods best of all.

Some arguments made, according to this rule, are nothing true. and therefore
it is good to give warnyng of the^.

It is well said, and wisely, this rule holds in causes, that are next
adioynyng, and the which wholly compass a matter^ not in those causes, that
are fetched far of, and being but half causes, partly and by the way, give
only the occasion. As thus.

Ouide came to be a Poet by his Master.

Therefore his master was the greater Poet.

The argumen^ is not good in those causes, that are but half causes, for Ovid
is not a Poet, only because he learned Precepts of his Master, but al^o
because he had a great aptnes by nature, and a wonderful wit, to do better
then another.

Some hold fast upon a saying of. S. Augustine, and build wonders upon that
text. I would not believe the Gospel says Augustine, except the catholic
church did persuade me. And hereupon say they.

The Gospel is believed, for the church sake.

Ergo the Church is of more aucthoritee.

And here they heap a no^bre of mischiefs. Therefore (say they) the church
may make laws, appoynct tradicions whatsoever they be. But I answer thus,
the Antecedent is false. For I chiefly believe the Gospel, co^sideryng God is
the aucthor: and seeing the wonders that he has done, I give credit to it for
his sake. I grant we do believe the Gospel, for the church sake, but yet
principally, for that GOD is the chief aucthor, that persuades us to receive
his word, and after the church (as the second cause) tells us that the
Gospel is the truth of God. Therefore if they will make this such an argument,
as they seem to say it is, then this that follows, is of as good force, for
in all things it is like.

This child is a good boy, gramercie rod.

Ergo the rod is better then the boy.

Of the second part of Logique, called Inuentio, that is to say, the fyndyng
out of an argument.
Hitherto we have treated of the former part of logique called in latin
Iuditium, that is to say, Judgment, or skill, to declare the nature of every
word severally, to set the same words in a perfect sentence, and to knitte
them up in argument, so that hereby we might with ease epsy, the right frame
in matters, how they agree being lapped up in order. Now therefore the other
part shall be set forth which is called Inuentio, whereby we may find
arguments, and reasons, mete to prove every matter where upon question may
rise. This part is the store house of places wherein arguments rest, unto the
which if we confer the matter which we entende to prove, there will
appear diverse arguments to confirm the cause. Like as they therefore that
dig for gold in ye ground, do search narowly the veins of the earth, and
by diligent markyng the nature thereof, at length find out the mine, which
ones being found, they straight bring to light, for the only behoue of man:
So he that will reason wisely, as well for the commune profit of other, as for
his own private gain, must be a very diligent labourer. and considering
matters are put to the proof, wherein often rests doubt, his part must be
evermore to mark ye nature of his cause and to seek confirmation thereof in
every part. First by the definition, the cause, the effect, and propre
office. Again to se what is contrary, what is like, and what things be
incide^t thereunto, the which all when he has done^ he shall se at length that
some one argument above al other, serves best to confirm his cause, the
which when with travail, he has found out, he may bring to light and use,
according to his will.

What a place is.
A Place is the restyng corner of an argument, or else a mark which gives
warnyng to our memory what we may speak probably, either in the one part,
or the other, upon all causes that fall in question. Those that be good hare
finders will sone find the hare by her form. For when they se the ground
beaten flat round about, and fair to the sight: they have a narow guess by all likelihod that the hare was there a little before. Likewise the hontesman in
huntyng ye fox, will sone epsy when he sees a hose, whether it be a fox
borough, or not. So he yt will take profit in this part of logique, must be
like a hunter, and learn by labor to know the boroughes. For these places be
nothing el^ but couertes or boroughes, wherein if any one search diligently,
he may find game at pleasure. And although perhaps one place fail him, yet
shall he find a dousen other places, to accomplish his purpose. Therefore if
any one will do good in this kind, he must go from place to place, and by
serching every borough, he shall have his purpose undoubtedly in most part of
the^, if not in all. We se that every proposicion does either affirm a thing
to be true, or else denies, yt it is true. Therefore when any thing is
constantly saide^ it needs somewhat evermore to confirm it. As for example.
The Sacraments are necessary in the church of God. I may prove this sayng
true, by reasonyng from that place which is called the end of every thing.
As thus.

To give testimony of our faith, and to nousell our self in the practice
thereof, is very necessary.

The Sacraments give testimony of our faith. etc.

Ergo the Sacraments are very necessary.

When any proposition does deny, it is needful to have a third word which
may agree with one part of the proposition. As if one should thus say. Man
is not justified by his works. The place of repugnaunt words that do
altogether disagree gives just matter. And therefore I may say, man is not
justified by his works, because he is justified by his faith only. For if
mercy come by grace, and that frelie, then works cannot save us. Paul
proves the first, therefore the second is for ever true.

The division of the places, which are.xxii^^. in number.
Some are inward places called loci interni and they ar Partly in the very
subst etc. a^ Definitio Genus Species Proprium totum parts Coniugatae
and partly incident to the substance as Adiacentiae Actus Subiectum.

Either kult^e with a nigh affinity, called Cognata of the which some are
causes as Efficiens Finis,
Some are those, which spring of the causes called Eue^ta. as Effectae^
destinata

Some are outward places. called Externi, that is not in the substance or nature
of the thing, but without it and these are. Or else applied to the thing, not
King the cause thereof, but only geuyng a name thereunto, called Applicita. As
Locus. Tempus. Connexa
Or else they be accidents, whereof there be.v. Co^tingentiae. Pronunciatae
Nomen r^i, Comparat^. Similia.
Or else they are repu^nancies, as Opposita. Differentia.


Of the difinicion.
There be seven places, which are in the substance, or nature of the thing The
definicion. The general word. The kind. The propretie. The whole. The
parts. The yoked words.


A Definicion is a perfect sentence whereby the very nature of the thing it
self, is set furthe and expounded. You may reason from this place, both
affirmatively, and negatiuely, as thus. Fortitude is a virtue, that fights in
the querel of right I may reason thus from the definicio^ to the thing
defined, if I will prove fortitude praise worthy.

Da Whatsoever is a virtue, fightyng in the querell of right, the same is praise
worthy. ri Fortitude is a virtue, fightyng in the querell of right. i Therefore
fortitude is praise worthy.
If I will define a good thing, and prove that money is ^ot good, I may reason
thus.

Ce No such thing is good, that is desired for respect of another end sa Al
money is desired, for respect of another end. re Therefore no money is good.
The general rule.
To whom the definicion does agree to the same also does the thing defined
belong. And contrary wise, both affirmatively and negatiuely.

The manner of reasonyng
If Socrates be a living creature endued with reason, then is he a man, if he
be a man, he is a living creature endued with reason. If he be not a living
creature. etc. then is he no man. If he be no man, then is he no living
creature, endued with reason.

The use.
The nature of every thing, is known by the definicio^, and therefore this
place above al other is most necessary

Of the general word.
The general word, is spoken of many, that differ either in kind, or else
diffre in nombre, when the question is asked, what it is, we may reason
negatiuely, from this place thus.

Ce No wastfulnes is a virtue. sa Liberality is a virtue. re Therefore no
wastfulnes ca^ be called liberality.
Or thus.

No virtue may be called wastfulnes.

Liberality is a virtue.

Therefore liberality may not be called wastfulnes.

The general rule.
If the general word be taken away, the kind tarieth not. If the general
word do remain, it shall not straight follow, that the kind shall ensue. For
it is no good argument, if I se a tree a good way from me, to say, it is a
tree, therefore it is an Apple tree. I may say thus well negatiuely, it is no
tree. Therefore it is neither apple tree nor other.

The manner of reasonyg.
If every creature by nature love it self, then man does love himself. If every
virtue be praise worthy, then in thadministracion of justice, to give every
man his own, it is praise worthy.

The use.
The general word, declares the largeness of any thing, so that where the
general takes no place, the other that be inferior cannot be. As if there be
no living creature, in some one house, then there must needs be no manner of
man in the same house.

Of the kind.
The kind being reckened among the places, is taken to be any one thing
that is less general than an other, and by this shyfte even propre noumes or
names of things shall serve for the kind, and go in stead thereof. Therefore
as we reason from the kind to the general, so may we reason from nownes
proper, to their kinds.

Of the kind
From the kind to the general, an argument is made affirmatiuelye, as thus.
if justice is to be desired, than virtue is to be desired. Such a man is a
slaunderer, ergo he is a naughty man.

The general rule.
To whom the kind does agree, to the same also the general does agree.

The manner o^ reasonyng.
If sobriety be praise worthy, then virtue is praise worthy. If dro^ckenes be
deuelishe, then surfeytyng is deuelishe.

The use.
The kind is general to every propre name, and therefore in describynge the
nature of every noune proper, we have much need of this place, to know under
what kind every several thing i^ comprehended. Again what soever is defined,
that same is ye kind of some one thing, so that hereby we learn how far
this word stretches being ordained to set forth the nature of every propre
name.

Of the diff^rence and propr^tye.
From the propretye, and difference arguments are derived both affirmative,
and negative. he can reason a matter artificiallye, therefore he is a good
logicien. Aesope could not utter his mind at large, but did stammer, and
stay much in his speech, therefore he was no Orator.

The general rule.
When the propretye, or difference is granted, then the kind straight
follows, take away the same, and there remains no kind at all.

The manner of reasonyng.
Whosoever is endued with reason, the same is a man

The use.
The difference, and the proprety declare natures workyng in all things
living, and therefore they h^lpe well to show what every thing is by his propre
gift.

we spoke before of a method, or direct order to be used in all our doings:
and herein we may well se the use thereof. for hitherto we handeled those places
which do nothing else but comprehend the nature of a perfect definition. now
whereas the place follows of the whole and his parts, it is nothing else but
the right manner of a perfect division. the places that follow after, declare
the causes, the effects, what be incident, what be disagreyng from the
matter, showing example and testimonies of the ancient.

Of the whole and the parts.
The whole is that same which consists of his parts, and is divided.ij.
manner of ways. First there is the whole in substance, which stands of
such parts, that if one betaken away, the whole decays straight, neither
can it afterward keep his name, as it did before. For an example. A man is
divided into body, and soul. Take away the body, who co^pteth the soul to
be that man, which before had his body joined thereunto? we say the soul
lives wha^ the body is deed, but no man says the soul is the very man,
even as we called him before, when he was compacte of both.

Again there is the whole absolute with his parts, which serves to make the
whole perfect, addyng such things that although they be away, yet the whole
notwithstanding remains, and has his name still, as when a man is made of
body, and soul, (which are the parts of his substance, and cannot be away)
yet has he other parts, which although they be away, the whole
notwithstanding kepethe his name still. As if a man lose his hand^ his arm, or
one of his fete, yet is he called a man, and these be called parts integrales,
that is to say, the parts which finishe the whole, and make it perfect,
after that it has those parts which make the substance.

The general rule.
If the whole be, the parts of the substance must needs be. As if a man be
alive, the body, and soul, both live.

The manner of reasonyng.
If philosophy be good, then it is good to know the nature of things, the
way of ordering man's life, and the skyl how to reason probably, for
philosophy it self is divided into these three parts.

The use.
Here by we learn to examine the whole by the parts, that if we cannot
obtain our purpose to have the whole granted, to examine it by the parts,
and force our adversary to assente to some member.

The integrale parts, which make perfect the whole, and cause the bigness
thereof, are called parts like, or not like.

Parts like, are those which are always like, and divided evermore into like.
As the flesh, bones, sinews, fire, water, gold, iron, wine, wood, stone. Every
part of al these, is called as much as the whole. as a piece of flesh, is
called flesh, apiece of wood, is called wood a drop of water, is called
water, as well as a gallo^ of water is called water. They be called in latin
Similares parts, because they are named like unto the whole, for a piece of
flesh is as well called flesh, and asmoche has it the name of flesh, as a
great braune has. The parts which have not like names to the whole, are
partly pri^cipal, and partly not principal. the principal parts are those
which in no wise may be away without loss of the whole it self: as the parts
of man's body which conteyne life, cannot be away without loss of the man.
As the head, the bealy, the heart, and the entrails. Ye^ notwithstanding the
parts of these cannot be called like to the whole, for no man says that a
piece of the heart, is a heart, or a piece of the head, is a head, and so in the
other.

Those which are not principal parts, may be away: and the whole not
withstandyng remain still, as the hands, the fiete, the legs, and the arms.

The general rule.
When the chief parts are taken away, the whole needs decaieth: the chief
parts being brought altogether, the whole needs must follow.

Such a man has learned moral philosophy, natural, and logique, therefore he
is a Philosopher.

Badius can neither write well, speak well, nor yet recite authors acordyngly.
Therefore he is no gra^marien. This man is no rethoricien, because he cannot
place his things in good order. For where as five things be required ^n an
Orator, first, to inuente, aftre to place things invented, thirdly, to set
forth y^ matter in good words, fourthly, to remember all these, and last of al
to utter the same distinctlie, and with a clear voice. If one lack any of
these five, he cannot be called an orator. Therefore I may say, such a one
has an evil memory. Ergo he is no orator. or such a one has no vtteraunce.
Ergo he may not be called an orator. In the negative part, it is enoughe to
take one part away, for the disalowing of any thing. But if I will affirm any
thing by ye parts, I must take all the parts, and not one, or two parts. For
he is not an orator that can invent only, or place things in good order
only, except he can do the whole as it is required. Again he is no good
orator that can teach only, or delight, but he is absolute that can both
teach, delight, and also persuade.

The manner of reasonyng.
We reason from the part to the whole affirmatively, and negatiuely. Thus.
Such a one can neither judge the knitting of words together, nor frame the^
in order according to the art, nor avoid any subtilties. Ergo he is no
logician.

The use.
The parts set forth the whole, and are a great beautifieng to the same,
being severally handeled, and in their natures set forth at large.

Of words yoked together.
Yoked words which being derived of one, are changed in the speaking. As of
Sapiens, sapientia, sapienter. A wise man, wisdom, wisely. Here we se that of
a wise man, is derived wisdom. I may reason from this place both
affirmatively, and negatiuely, If one be not wise, he has no wisdom, if one be
wise, he has wisdom. If one do circumspectely, he is called a circumspecte
man. If it be no misery to die, then death is not miserable. Such a one is a
philosopher, therefore he has studied philosophy. Arguments derived from
hence have great force, if the only yoked words be joined together without
addition of an other, or else they are not strong. As thus. Preachers be evil
livers. Ergo preaching is evil.

The general Rule.
When one of the yoked words is added, or put away, the other also is added,
or put away.

The manner of reasonyng.
Such a one is a priestely minister, Ergo he is a priest. Such a man has
served the king nobly. Ergo he is a noble man. The preacher handled his matter
learnedlie. Ergo the preacher has learning.

The use.
We may learn by this place to know what things are, being considered in
other. For if I would know whether it be good, or no, to be a man of honor,
and to have rule in the common weal: I may learn by them that do rule, what
it is to be a man of honor, and how daungerouse a calling they have, that
are placed in high estate.

Of words adjoined to the substance and yet not of the substance.
Words adjoined are called those accidents whereby the singular word, or
propre name, has an other name the^ of the very substance, as unto Cato,
(which of his substance is a man) wisdom does happen, whereby he is called
wise. Unto Cicero also (which by his substance is a man) there happens
eloquence, whereby he is called eloquent. So that he has an other name then
his substance gives, which is to be eloquent, and this is the word adjoined.
Al quantities, qualities, and those that are comprehended in the predicament of
relation, are referred to this place, when they are considered to be
comprehended in a substance. Virtue referred to the mind which conteyneth
it, is a word adjoined: compared with vice, it is a contrary: referred to
justice, it is a general word. Words adjoined are perceived. either by the
senses (as those which are subject to the senses) or else by vndrestandyng. As
swyftenesse may be considered to be in a man, although we se him lie a long.
And so we say such a lacquie ronneth well, although we do not then presently
se him run, but we remember that he has run, saying now as we have seen
before in deed. Again some words adjoined are by nature in the thing which
contain the^, as heat is naturally in fire. And because we se that ye same
heat, although it never go away, yet at all times it is not of like strength:
but at some time less whote, then at an other, we judge ye same heat to be an
accide^t. Some words adjoined are not naturally cleauyng, but by some other
way are joined to ye thing conteinyng them, as heat in water set upon the
fire.

The general Rule.
I fone of the words adjoined be in the subject or thing conteinyng, the other
also is like to be there, which follows upon the first. As thus. Cato is a man
worthy praise, because he is ware sober, and full of experience. Praise
follows virtue, as the shadow does the body. Therefore whosoever has
modesty and great knowledge of things, the same man of necessity wins
praise, and fame, that cannot die. Again if the words adjoined be, ye subject
that conteyneth them must needs be also, as thus. If God be all goodness then
there is a God.

The manner of reasonynng.
Christ came to this world being gentle and mild. Ergo Christ came not to
destroy the lost sheep, but to save them. Scholars be godly, virtuous, and
occupied in learning. Ergo it is a graciouse deed to help such of them as
have need.

The use.
We may by this place either praise, or dispraise, setting forth the nature of
men, and iudgyng the^ by their works.

Of deeds done, or suffered to be done, called Actus.
THe manner of doing, or sufferyng is, when we are supposed to be occupied, or
affected any manner of way, either in doing, or in suffryng. There be so many
manner of doings, as there be adiace^tes, or words adjoined. And of these
adiacentes, fear, sorrow, travail, rest, heat, cold, are derived these: to
fear, to be sorry, to travail, to rest, to be hot, to be cold. And
generally all those words that are referred unto ye two Predicamentes called
the manner of doing, and the sufferyng, are compassed with in this place, if the
same words be considered as Accidents which cleave to the substance, and
may both be present, and also be a way without loss of the substance. For
if things done, be waied according to their proper manner of doing, they are
referred to the two places above, called the difference and the propretie. For
where as we say. Such a one speaks, Ergo he is man (for nothing else can
speak naturally but man only) although in this case (to speak) be a manner of
doing, yet it is not referred to this, but rather to the propretie, because it
belongs to man alone, and always to man.

The general rule.
If the manner of doing, or sufferyng be, the thing conteynyng is also, and the
words adjoined also (whereof doing, and sufferyng have their of spryng)
follow upon the same.

The manner of reasonyng from this place.
If one breathe, the same man has life in him. If Julius Caesar came into
England, then there was such a man called Julius Caesar. If Richard the third
played the tyrante here in England, then there was such a man in England.

The Use.
This place much helps either for praise, or dispraise. Some officers bribe
the poor, rob their Master, and wayst their own. Ergo such are worthy
death.

Of the thing tonteynyng.
The Subject, or the thing conteinyng, is a substance being the stoorehouse
of Accidents, and the very proppe to hold up diedes done: for neither wisdom,
strength, health, nor Policy can be at al, except they be contained with in
some one body.

The general rule.
Take away the thing conteinyng, and there remains nether adjacent, nor yet
deed done.

The manner of reasonyng.
There is fie^, Ergo it is hot. Christ was a very man, Ergo Christ died, and
sufferde the panges at his departing.

An other.
Why do thou say that I owe the a croune, whom I know was never yet worth
a grote. Mela^chthon lives and reads. Therefore there is great learning to be
had where he is.

The Use.
By naming a worthy person, his praise is sufficiently set forth, even when his
name is ons vtterd. For what learned man hearing the name of Cicero, does not
remember thereby, the full practice and the absolute skill of all eloquence?
These places therefore help as well for the amplifiyng of matters, either in
praise or disprayse, as they do for the steadfast prouyng of any cause.

Of outward places being not in the substance, but only touching the
substance, and without the nature of it.
THe first are called, the causes of things, and the things coming of
causes, which only are joined t^ the thing necessarily, where as the other
places following are not coupled necessarily, but are only joined together by a
certain alliance to ye present matier.

The division of caus^s.
Some causes, are called the very causes of things, even by their own nature:
other causes are happenyng causes, the which may perhapps bring forth the
effect, lastely there be causes without the which, things can not be done, and
yet are they not any cause to force the effecte^

The very cause of things, is such a one that if it be practiced in very
diede, and set forth with other natural causes, the effect must needs follow:
and again if it be not put in practice, although the other be put, yet the
effect shall not follow. As for example, although one have a cloth, yet can he
not have the use of it, except the tailer cut it out. And although the
milner grind, yet we are like to dine without bread, except the baker, do
his part also in the batche.

The happenyng cause, is such a one that although it be put in practice in
very diede, yet it shall not straight way so be, that the effect must n^des
follow. As an ague may be the happenyng cause, that some one man keeps good
diet, and yet not any forcyng cause: for then all sick folk might be compted
for sober men. The cause without the which, things cannot be dooen, as thus.
The Surgean cannot heal a wound, except the dedde flesh be cut out. The
waiefarer shall hardly come to his iorneis end, except he have some money in
his purse. In time of war, it is evil trauailyng without a pass port, and
this is called in Latin, Causa sine qua non, that is to say, the cause without
the which we ca^ not, and yet it is not the cause of our iourneyng.

The de^inition of a very cause.
A cause in very deed, is a mean, by whose force some thing does follow.

There be.iiii. such causes.

The efficient cause. The end. The matier. The shape.
The efficient cause, is the working cause, by whose means, things are
brought to pass.

Of those that are workyng causes, some by nature bring things to pass, some
by aduisement, and by a fore purposed choice. Things work by nature (and
that necessarily) which lack knowledge to choose this, or that, and have no
judgment, to discern things. As the Son, the fire, herbs, precious
stones. The son, even by nature, gives light to the day, and cannot other
wise do. the fire burns naturally^ Herbs keep their virtue of necessity.
The Adamant draws Iron, even by nature. And so the blood stone, stops
blood. Some of these causes work by the force and violence of nature, some by
an outward power, being strained thereunto. They work by the force and violence
of nature, whose beginning, is within theimselfes: being aided by none other
outward thing. As fire burns, eue^ by the natural force of heat, which is in
the substance thereof. They work by an outward power, which are strayned to
work by another mean. As water set upon the fire, wareth hot, and yet is not
hot by her own nature, but is made hot by the nature, and might of fire, of
who^ the water takes heat. In like manner boulettes of lead, shot out of a
gunne, an arr^we out of a bow, a stone out of a slyng: all these fly not into
the air, by their ^wne power or might, but by force, and violence of him that
casts the^

The general rule.
From the natural workyng cause, the effect must needs follow, as thus. If
the Son shine, the day must needs be, which is the effect, or
workmanship of the Sun. Such a man has eaten Hemlock: Ergo he is poisoned,
and in danger of death. Fire is in the Chimney, or in the top of the house,
therefore it must needs burn. Take away the cause, and theffect can not be at
al: for if there be no fire, there can be no flame, nor burning neither.

The second workyng cause, is when things are dooen by aduisement, and by
choice, not by any necessity at all, for things may as well not be done, as
be done, as if there be a Shomaker, there may be shone made, and contrary, if
there be no Shomaker, there can be no shone at all.

The ^enerall rule.
When the voluntary cause in put, the woorkemanship, or the thing done may
follow. As if there be a Carpenter, a house may be made. If one read good
a^cthors, and harken to the readyng of learned men, he may come to good
learning.

The manner of reasonyng.
Such a one has dronke poison, ergo he will dye shortly. Christ has
reconciled mankind to his father, by sufferyng death upon the Cross, Ergo
such as believe in this saving health, shall live for ever.

Another division of ^auses efficient.
Some efficient causes, are co^maundyng causes. As the King is the commaundyng
cause to his subject, to do this or that. The Master of works, is the
commaundyng cause, to all the laborers. The other efficient causes, are
obedient causes, when the servant works at his masters commandment.

Another d^uis^on of causes efficient.
Of such efficie^t causes as do obey, some do their work, as the Mason
works upon the stone, the Carpenter upon wood. Other efficient causes that
are obedient, are but instruments of dooyng, as hatchet^es, hammers, pike
a^es, with other. In battaill, the capitain is the efficient commander: the
souldiour^ the efficient obeyer: gunnes darts, bows, and bills, the
instruments of doing. Good head ought to be had, that in all causes we make
a difference, not confoundyng one with another, that the nigh causes, and the
farther causes, be not taken all for one. A cause far fetched, is this. Such
a one fell out with his neighbor: Ergo he killed him. Falling out brings
chidyng, chidyng brings hatred, hatred causes fightyng, fightyng gives
blows, blows sone dispatche, sone dispatchyng, is ready death. Therefore, I
might more probably reason thus. Such a one gave his neighbor a dedly wound:
Ergo he has killed him. And thus the argumeist is made from the nighest cause.

Another division.
Some causes are principal causes, as the holy ghost workyng all Godly
mocio^s, and stirryng our nature, evermore to the best. Other causes, are the
inclinacio^s in man, that are either good or eiuill Thirdly, there are helpyng
causes, which are means the rather, to further us in all virtue. As learning,
practisyng of honest behauor, acquaintyng our nature, evermore with the best.
The principal cause, that Joseph forbear, to company with another man's wife:
was the holy ghost, that stirred his mind with the fear of God. The second
cause, was his own mind, that remembered the word of God, and the punishment
dew for sin. The third cause was, that he accustomed himself, ever to live
uprightly, and not only to avoid sin, but also to avoid the occasion of
sin. There be other divisions, but I leave to rehearse them, for fear I
should be over long.

The end, called. Finis.
THe end is, for whose cause any thing is done, and is two ways considered.
For there is an absolute end, whereunto al other are referred, being called
the perfeccion, and chief property in any thing: as the chiefest end in any
man, is to be perfectly endued with reason, and to attain euerliuyng felicity.
The chiefest property in a horse, is to be of a very good courage, and to want
no stomach: the chifest perfeccion in fire, is to be very hot, and very
dry. There is another end, called a helpyng end, which serves to an higher
end, and is only ordained for this purpose, that we might attain thereby,
the perfect end of all. As meat, drink, apparel, and other necessary
things, are helping ends for man, to attain the chifest end. For without
these ends, man could not live. To live honestly in this life, to be upright
in dealyng, with all persons, is an helpyng end, (as the Philosophiers take
it,) and a testimony to the world of our faith (as the Christians take it)
for man to live, world without end. To mary a wife, is a helpyng end, for a
man to avoid fornicacion. The poor man labors, and wherefore? To get his
living. Wherefore gets he his living? That he may the better be able to
serve God. The soldier fights at his princes commandment, chiefly because
God commands him, next after for love of the king and his country: thirdly
and last of all that he might live the rather, in quiet at home with his wife,
and children. So that of one, and the same thing, there may be many ends,
being orderly considred.

The general rule.
Whose end is good, or evil, the same thing is good, or evil, as a sweard is
good, because it is good for a man, to defend hymsef. Faith in Christ Jesus is
good, for by faith we are saved. To undo my neighbor, with lendyng for gain,
is most ungodly: therefore to be an usurer, is most ungodly. To desire
another man's wife, is ungodly, because adultery, is ungodly. Battaill is
good, because it brings peace. For all men should fight, for this end, that
we might live in quiet, with our neighbors. If thou will be honest^ and
esteemed for a godly person, do the accions of virtue, and thou shall be well
reported of, especially of the honest. It is good to learn, because learning
it self is good, which is the end of our study.

Of the mat^r or substance, called, Materia.
THe substance called materia, is ready to be framed of the woorkeman, as him
likes, by the which substance, either things natural, or else things
artificial are made. As first a man, which is a natural thing, is made of
body, and soul. An Image, which is an artificial thing, is made by the ha^dy
work of man, and is graven out of stone, or molten in gold, or in brass. From
this place are made arguments, that both do affirm, and also deny. As thus,
if a man have cloth, he may have a garment made if it like him. But if a man
have no clothe at al, how can he have a goune, or a coat? If the Baker lack
meal, how can he make bread. The matier is co^sidred.^^. ways. Fir^^ it is a
substance, that tarieth still, as when a house is made of stone, wodd, and
plaster, or an Image of gold, brass, or silver: Here the substance tarieth
still, although the form be altered. Likewise when a house is taken down, the
stone, and tymbre remain still, and k^pe their substance, and serve as they did
before, either for ereccio^ of the same house again, or else other wise, as it
shall please him that is the awner. Again, the substance is that, which
changes into another nature, and cannot be the same, that it was before: as
of meal and water, bakers make their bread: now they cannot resolve the same
bread, again into Meal, and water, which was the former substance.

The general rule.
When the substance is at hand, the workmanship may follow, and the effect
may appear: But when the substance is taken away, there can be nothing made
at al. As if a man lack silver, how can he make an Image of silver? There is
no stone, wood, nor plaster: Ergo there is no house. But if I reason thus by
the substance, that cha^geth into another nature, and cannot be the same, that
it was before: I reason then amiss, as thus. There is no meal or flower, ergo
there is no bread: but I should say rather, there was no meal nor flower,
ergo there is no bread.

The manner of reasonyng
The Shoemaker has no Lether, how can he then make a Shoe? The Printer has
no paper, ergo he cannot set his men on work.

The shape called Forma.
The shape, or fashion of any thing, is a cause whereby the thing that is made
has his name, as leather, when it is m^de, or fashioned for the foot, is
called a shoe. Such a man weare^th a livery coote guarded with Ueluet, and all
the Yeoman servants have but plain cootes, ergo he is one of the gentlemen.
He has a silver pot gilte, and wrought with Goldsmithes work, Ergo it is
better then a pot, wrought with plain silver, being of the same quantity or
bigg^enes.

The general rule.
When the shappe or form is made: theffect, or thing ^oen may follow: take
away the shape, and the use also is taken away. A cup is made, ergo a man
may drink in it: break the cup, and how shall you drink of the same cup.
The element goth compass wise, because it is round. Reason is called the shape
of man. Therefore I may say, such a one lacks the gift of reason, Ergo he
is a fool.

Things coming after the causes, called Euen^a.
Those which come of causes, are.ij. ways considred, for either they are
called things that in due time follow the cause that went before, or else
things ordained to some certain end.

Those things which come after the cause, and are made of the same, are
called effecta. And every argument is either derived from theffect of the
matter, of the form, or of thefficient cause.

From the effect of the matter or substance, called Materia, thus ye may
reason.
He has a Sword made of Iron, Ergo he has iron. Here is a house, Ergo here
is stone, and wodde.

From the effect of the form.
A bowl being turned, rouleth, Ergo it is round.

From the effect of the eff^c^ent cause.
It is bright day, Ergo the son is up.

The gen^ral rule.
When the effect is come forth, it must needs be, that either his propre
cause is then, or else that it has been before.

The manner of reasonyng.
If slaughter be not to be borne in a commune weal, then these pyke
quarellers, these roisters, and fighters, are not to be suffered to go
unpunished.

The thing appointed for some ^nde.
That which is appointed for some certain end, and use: is called
destinatum, as a house is builded to dwell in. Armor is provided for man to
defend himself. Medicines are helpyng means, for man to recover health. I
showed before that there was an^ende, which was a helpyng end, and a mean to
come to the perfect, and most absolute end, for without this appointed mean
and provision of God, man could never live, much less could he come to any
perfeccion in this life, as touching the accio^s, and worthy feats required of
man. Thus we may reason from this place. Seeing it is lawful for man, to
defend himself, it is lawful for man, to wear a weapon. If war be lawful,
then money is necessary, without which, no man can go forward, or set furthe an
army.

The general rule.
Those things that agree to that which is appointed to the end, agree also to
the end it self.

The manner of reasonyng lawfullye.
If a man may lawfully buy the great bible in English, he may then also
even without askyng leave, read it at his pleasure.

The v^^ of all these causes.
The commodity of these causes is so great, that in setting furthe the use of
them, a man might sooner lack words, than want matter. First we know that
nothing is done without a cause, and therefore seeing this world framed as it
is, every thing proporcioned in his due order, we may truly gather that
there is one above all, that rules all, whom the Christian calls God. In
praisyng or dispraysyng, how can a man better proceed, than by rehersyng the
end of every thing. Again in examinyng and searchyng out the profit or
disprofite, by the end we know what is gainful: by the efficient cause we
know what may be dooen. For whatsoever is profitable, the same is profitable
for some end, and whatsoever we would have done, we may soon perceive by the
efficient, if it may be done. yea in causes of judgment, we may judge, what
will some one man had to do this or that, when we consider, to what end he did
this or that. Last of all, we know hereby, that God has ordained nothing in
vain, and that every thing is ordained for some one end. The end of Christ's
death was, to merit man's redemption. The end of man's life is, to trust wholly
in Christ's passion, and to live thereby for ever.

Of things outwardly applied, called Applici^a.
They are called things outwardly applied to a matter, which are not the
cause of the same matter, and yet, give a certain denomination to it. There be
iij of this sort.

The time. The place. Things annexed, or knitte together.
And these.iij. are nothing else, than the.iij. Predicamentes or general places,
which I rehearsed before.

Vbi. Where. Quando. When. Habitus. The arayeng.
The manner of reasonyng.
If one list to reason from the place, called in latin Locus, he may thus say.
Such a one is in the country, Ergo he is not in the City. If I will prove
that a man being accused of murder unjustly, did not offend: I may reason both
from the time, and the place. The man was killed in the fields, about iij. of
the clock in the after none, all which time this other man came not abroad.
No, he looked not out of his house all that day. Ergo this man did not kill
him. Clodius was accused at Rome that he had made a spoil of the relics in
the temple of Bona Dea, where as he at the same time when this deed was thought
to be done, was at Interamna, a village in the country beside Rome. Quintilian
says thus. Thou have killed an adulterer, which the law does permit, but
because thou haste killed the same man in a brothels house, thou art worthy to
dye thie self. Notwithstanding these.i^. places are rather used of the
Rethoriciens, than among the logiciens, for when a man is taken of suspection
we go about to prove him faulty by diverse conjectures. As if he ware about
ye same place, at the self same time, when a man was slain, and also had his
sword about him: we conjecture that he might have killed him. Again if we
perceive one to be a riotous fellow, ready to fight with every body,
accompanyeng with naughty packes, and evermore at one end of al frayes, waxyng
pale when he is apprehended, shaking for fear, or runnyng away, when he
should be taken, we suspect such a one that he is not altogether cliere.
Therefore Orators do use to mark things that go before the fact, as whether
he hated the man or no, or what gain he might have by his death, and also
observe things joined with the fault, as changynge of hew, when he is
apprehended, or his sword to be blodie, or any part of his apparel, and
thyrdlye they note what follows. that is, if he ran away, if he cannot tell
his tale plainlye, and so they conclude as they are led by suspection. Some
Arguments are necessary, some probable, as thus, from the consequent. Such a
woman is brought in bed with a child, Ergo she has had the compaignie of
man. Such a man had a bluddye sword in his hand straight after the death of
his neighbor, even in the same fildes where his neighbor was slain, Ergo it
is like this man has slain him. All which arguments are derived from the
place called Contingentia as I will show it hereafter.

Of words annexed, or knitte to the substance, called Connexa.
AS touching words knitte, ye may vnders^and, that they are joined outwardly
to the Subject, and give a name unto him, according as they are. As Richesse
are joined to a rich man. For where as Crassus is called a man by his own
substance, yet not withstandyng by his richesse, he is called a rich man.

So he yt has a wife, is called a housband. He that has a master, is called
a servant. He that has a father, is called a son. Words knitte, are
divided diversely, for some are called such as are nighe, and touching the
substance. As to be full of fish, is agreyng to the water, to be full of
grass, is annexed or agreing to the earth, to be cloudy is annexed or agreyng
to the aier. Again words knitte, are called those things, that a man
wears, as to wear a cote, a jack, a harneis, to have shoen, to be merry, to
be dustie, and al such as are casual to man. Some are called, annexed or
agreyng, which are knitte to man, and things not worn upon his back, but
farther of, and rather perceived by vnderstandyng^ then known by eiye sight.
As nobilite, power, fame, aucthorite. To be an Officer, a Mayour, a Sherieue,
lord Chauncelour, co^ptrollour, or any other officer in the common weal, all
these are annexed to their inferior, over whom they have aucthorite. In this
point differ words knitte, called annexed, from words adjoined, called
adiacentia, that all adiacentes, or words adjoined cannot be with out the
subject, as heat, cold, whitenes, or any other like cannot be, except they be
comprehended with in some Subject. For it is propre to every Accident, to be
in some one thing co^teining him. If there be nothing conteynyng, then the
Accident cannot be. Not withstandyng, words knitte, are so placed, that one is
without the other, and may be, either of them severally, if the one happen to
perish: as a housebande is without the substance of his wife, and although
his wife dye, yet the housband may be onliue, saving that he loses his name
to be called housband, but if a wise man die, wisdom must de^a^e also, because
it must ne^es be in some one subject, or else it cannot be.

Of Accidents.
THose are here called Accide^ts which both them selves, and the thing also,
may be together, one^ with another, and also may be away, the one, from the
other.

There be v. of this sort.

Things chauncyng. The name of a thing. Sentences of the sage. The likeness.
Things compared together.
Things chauncyng called Contingentia.
THose accide^tes are called things chauncing, which chance about a thing so,
that whether these things chance, or no, y^ thing it self may be, or though
ye thing be not, these may so ^^aunce to be. As palenesse, which thing may
chance before sickness, and the same also may chance though a man be not sick.
And a man also may be sick, and yet nothing pale at all. Likewise love and
fear. A man may love, although he fear not, a man may again fear, although
he love not.

The diversity of three diverse places.
Words adjoined, words knit to another, and words chauncyng to a thing
differ thus, that in words adjoined called adiacentia, the cause why things
are so named, is ever in the subject neither can the words adjoined continue,
except they be comprehended within some one substance. Words knit, are of
such sort that by namyng one, the other is straight known. As when I name a
Scholemaister, I signify scholars also, although I do not expresselie name
them. But in words chauncyng called Contingentia, we must at the lest
compare.ii. together, that we may better know them to be of this place.
Therefore if I name this word (craft) by it self, without any further
consideracio^, then it is an adjacent, or a word adjoined. If I name this
word (servant) craft is referred to the place called a word knit,
considering craft is mentioned in respect of the seruan^t. If I say thus (a
crafty servant) then these two are considered to be in this place called
Contingentia, which is a place of words chancing to a thing so, yt whether
they chance or no, y^ thing it self may be notwithstanding. As a servant
may be, and yet not crafty. Again one may be crafty, and yet not a servant.

The diui^ion of things chauncyng.
Some go before the thing, sum are joined with the thing, some follow after
the thing.

Things chauncyng before. As thus. The sky was very red this morning. Ergo we
are like to have rain or night.

Things joined with the matter at the very instaunte. As thus. Anger is in
old men. often fetchyng of wind declares a sickness of the lunges. If ye
bequether or maker of any will, be onliue, the will takes no place, and may be
void. Such a one goes ga^^ in his apparel, spends with the bes^, and yet
has nothing to maintain his charges. Ergo it is like that he comes by his
goods noughtely.

Things happenyng after. Such a one is well learned. Ergo he has gone well
to his book heretofore.

The name of a thing, or the interpretation of a word.
THe interpretacion or name of a thing is a word made by the agreement of men,
to signify this, or that. As P^ilosophus is y^ man whatsoever he be, that has
a desire, and a love, to the knowledge of wisdom. Therefore if ye will expound
what a philosopher is, you may reason thus, from the interpretation of the
word. Whosoever he be that has an earnest love to philosophy, and seeks
knowledge thereof, that man is a philosopher.

Cato has an earnest love to philosophy, and seeks knowledge thereof.

Ergo Cato is a philosopher.

Again the interpretacion of a thing is the^ thought to be, when a metaphore
or translation is used, and the meaning thereof taken. As when this word Ignis
(fire) betokens love. Where as of y^ own nature it signifies fire, as we
read in Ouide, thus.

Quis enim celauerit ignem

Lumine qui se^per proditur ipse suo

Who can keep close the fire, or hide the burning heat.

That does betraie it self always with light of flame so great.

Wherein is nothing else signified but love, which is so hot of it self that
it must needs break out into flames, and show it self at one time, or other.

The general Rule.
To whom the interpretation of a nowne does agree, to the same also the nowne
it self agrees.

The manner of reasonyng.
Such a child is called dawson, And he may well be so called, for his father
is but a dawe.

Of the place called authority, otherwise named sentences of the sage.
AL such testimonies may be called sentences of the sage, which are brought
to confirm any thing, either taken out of old authors, or else such as have
been used in this commune life. As the sentences of noble men, ye laws in any
realm, quick sayings, proverbs, that either have been used heretofore, or
be now used. Histories of wise philosophers, the judgments of learned me^,
the commune opinion of the multitude, old custom, ancient fashions, or any
such like. Testimonies, are two ways considered. For either they are such as
pertayne to God, or else to man. Those authorities which come from God, and are
spoken by the holy ghost, are undoubtedly true, neither can they be false:
therefore we ought most reverently to receive the word of God, and agree to
such textes as are written and spoken, even as though we heard God him self
speak, with lively voice unto us. Ma^s authority has no such great force,
although noble men, learned Philosophers, and stout capitaines have pronounced
many things most wisely. For although Aristotle says that the world
neither had beginning, nor yet at any time shall have endyng: I may reiecte
this saying, (if any man bring me it for his confirmation,) although this
great philosopher did pronounce the same. For except I be persuaded by reason,
it is in my choice, either to admit, or to refuse such authorities. Not
withstandyng we should not forsake wise men's words rashely, but with a modest
answer desire y^ adversary not so much to stick to his authority, as to
prove the same by some good reason. In profane things ye may reason
affirmatively very well, as thus. The best things are first to be learned, for
so does Quintilian teach. Nusquam tuta fides. It is hard trustyng any body.
For so says Virgile. But I can not reason negatiuelie, when I bring mine
authority out of profane aucthours. For I reason amysse if I say. There is
no such disease called the French pocques, because Galene the chief of
phisicians never makes mention in all his books of any such disease. For this
evil has crept in, sense his time, through the noughtines of men. And
although it were then, yet may it be that he never heard of it. Hereunto might
be added all such sentences as by the law of nature are graffed in man. As
these following. Do as thou would be done unto. Be thankful to him, that
does the a pleasure. Honor thy father, and thy mother. Know there is a God.
He that has not these opinions naturally fastened in his heart, he may justly
be thought rather a beast, then man endued with reason.

In matiers of scripture I may reason both affirmatively, and negatiuely,
Christ says to his disciples. Rege^ Gentium domina^tur, vos autem non sic.
Kings bear rule over countries, but you must not do so. Therefore no
ministres should have any temporal power, because Christ says so. Ye may
reason negatiuely thus, we read not in all the scripture from Genesis to the
revelation of saint Iho^, that ever there was friar, moncke, nonne, or chanon,
ergo let them go from whens they came. We read not in ye scripture that
worshipping of images, was ever allowed to be Lay men's books. Therefore, take
down such idolles, and let them serve for other uses.

The general rule for profane authorities. That which is allowed by all wise
men, or at the least by the better part: no man ought rashely to gain say
it, or thus. Every connyng man must be believed in his own art.

The manner of reasonyng.
Aristotle thought best that dronkerds should have double punisheme^t. therefore
they deserve it. By textes of the scripture we may better reason y^ matter, as
thus. Cursed be he that does ye work of the lord guilefully, says the
Prophet. Ergo evil Bishops, or loytering pastors are accursed of God.

Of the similitude, or likeness.
A Similitude, is when.ii. things or more, are so compared together, that even
as in the first there is one property, so in the other there is a like
propretie, according to both their natures severally observed. For like as
water by continuance wears a stone, so there is nothing so hard, but by time
it may be compassed, or brought to pass. As spiders make their own copwebbes
without any other help: so some good fellows can bring up news and tell
stran^g tales without any hearing, when there is not one word true. As the
palm tree being ouerlaide with weightes, rises higher, and buddeth upward
more freshelye: so a noble stomach vexed with much aduersite is evermore the
s^outer. And this ought diligently to be observed yt the thing which is brought
to make the Similitude, be like unto that which is proved.

The manner of findyng out a similitude.
In every cause that we do purpose to handle at large, we must observe
diligently, what things are spoken by translacion, that is, from the propre
signification, to a meaning that is not propre. As speaking in the praise of a
King, and callyug him the bright son of the earth, I may gather a similitude
by this word (son) and make it thus. Even as the son only geuet^ light to
all the whole earth: so there ought to be in a co^mu^e weal one king that
should be ruler over all.

The gen^rall rule.
Of similitudes there is like judgment, that is, even as we think of the one,
so we may thynk of the other.

The manner of reasonyng.
As a dog standing at the table^ side, eats that up by and by which his
master has cast to him, and ever looks for more, and more: So some when they
have received a living for which they hoped before, by and by they are ready,
to take another, and although they be full, yet still they are hungry.

Of things compared.
Things are compared toguether in one third word, whereu^to they both do
agree, as thus. If theft be worthy death, then murder is worthy no less.
Here ye se that theft, and murder are compared together in one third word,
which is death.

Comparacions are divided two manner of ways, for either they be equal, or
not equal. They are equal in this wise. if the father have aucthorite over his
son, he has also aucthorite over his daughter.

The general rule.
Where things are equal, there must needs be equal Judgment. Comparacions are
unequal, when I reason either from the greater to the less, or else from the
less, to the greater. From the greater to the less, ye may reason thus. If a
Capitain with his whole company be not able to sack a town, much less one
base soldier can be able to do it. The scholemaster cannot understand the
Greek, or the Hebrew toungue, much less can the scholar, which never learned
either of them.

From the less, to the greater, ye may reason affirmatively, as thus. Children
can suffer much cold, and cannot young me^ bear a frost? Custom bears
swing, and shall reason take no place? Women have died for there country,
therefore may not me^ be ashamed to fear death? Noble men are desirous to
have a good horskeper that ca^ keep their horses well, and they spare not to
give great stipendes to such, and shall they not much more be desirous, to
have a good scholmaster, that might Godly bring up their children, in virtue
and wisdom? If a horse be not well broken, the awner will se that he may be
made gentle: and shall not a man seeing his natural child, evil brought up,
take pains, and se him brought to some good order? We can se a spauain, a
splent, a ring bone, or such other disease in a horse, and shall we not be as
ready to look, that there be no fautes in our children, or in the teacher, to
who^ we give the charge, to bring them up in learning, and good manners?

The general rule.
If that which seems to be the greater, be not added, neither shall be added,
that which is the less. Again, if that, which is less be added, that which
is greater, shall be added also.

The manner of reasonyng.
The scholar understands Latin, ergo his scholemaster also has knowledge in
the same toungue. Negatiuely thus. If God will not allow a vow, made by the
daughter, without the knowledge of her father, although the vow be but for one
day: how much less shall that marriage take place, when young folk make
privy contractes, without the good will obtained of their parents.

The use.
This place helps much to exhort especially, when we reason from the less,
to the greater, or contrary. Neither can any one that teaches, want thuse
hereof, if they purpose, that their sayings shall take place.

Of repugnauncie.
A repugnaunce, is such a disagreyng state of things that no one thing can be
the same, that the other is, by one nature, or substance, as thus. Manne, and
virtue, the one cannot be the^ame, that the other is.

The ^euision.
Things repugnant, are divided in to discordantes, and into words differyng
one from another, by any manner of means.

Of discordantes, called Opposita.
Discordantes, are when only one word or sentence, is contrary to another, so
that the one cannot be the same that the other is, nor yet both at one time,
can be in one, and the same subject, as hot, and cold, the father and the
son, sight, and blyndnes, night and dar^enes.

There be.iiii. of th^^ sort.
Contraries. Relatiues. Privation. Contradiction.
COntraries, are such discordantes, as cannot be, at one, and the same time in
one substance: notwithstanding, they may both severally be, in two subjects,
or substances^ at one, and the same time. As whitnes, blacknes, virtue, and
vice, wisdom, and foolishnes. Contraries are two ways considered, for some
be such that if one be not, the other must needs follow, and they are called
in Latin, Contraria immediata, that is to say, contraries, where nothing
comes betwixt: as thus. A wise man, a fool. Virtue, vice. Faith, unbelief.
Al these are such, that if the one be not in a man, the other must needs be.
As thus. Such a one is wise, ergo he is no fool. If a man be not wise, it must
needs be, that he is foolish. We are saved by faith: ergo we are condemned by
unbelief

Again, other contraries be so, that though the one be away, yet the other
follows not therefore of necessity. For black, and white, be contrary, and
yet they be not so contrary, that if the white color be not, the other must
needs be. For a man may be high colored, or sallowe colored, and yet not
black. Therefore in such contraries, where some thing may be put betwixt the
extremes, it is no good reason to say, that if the one be not, the other must
needs be. Note further, that all discordantes are not contrary, according to
their general word, or common accidents, but according to their proper
differe^ce^ For if we reason thus.

Fire is an Element.

Ergo water is none.

The argument is not good, for fir^ and water are not contrary, according to
their general word, which agrees to them both, but according to their
proper differences, as in that, fire is hot and dry, it is contrary to water,
which is cold and moist. Thus some, that maintained counterfeicte chastity,
were wont to reason against Marriage.

Uirginitie is good.

Therefore marriage is not good.

Whereas Uirginitie, and marriage, are not contrary, according to their general
word, which is (good) but according to their proper difference. As thus.

Uirginitie is a single life, without knowledge of carnal act.

Therefore marriage is not so.

Therefore this word (good) in the above rehearsed argument, does signify a
thing granted of God, and allowed by his will, which does as well, comprehend
marriage, as it does virginity therefore this argument, is of no more force,
then if I should say.

Justice is good.

Ergo temperance is not good.

And yet there is no man, but will say, that both these two virtues are good
Or thus merrily.

Gentlemen have souls.

Ergo poor men have none.

Whereas God has given, both high and low, rich and poor, the spirit that
s^all live ever. But this I speak, to set furthe more at large, the fondenesse
of the other argument, concerning Marriage.

The general rule.
But away one of these contraries, where nothing comes betwixt, called
immediata contraria, and the other must needs follow, which is not true in those
contraries^ where some thing comes betwixt them, called contraria mediata.

RElatiues are those, which are compared among themselfes, or else referred to
some other. As a father, a son. A master, a servant. A king, a subject.

The general rule.
If one of the relatiues be, the other must needs be: if the other be not, the
other cannot be neither.

The manner of reasonyng
Thou art my servant, why doo^^^ thou not know me, to be thy master? Thou
art a subject, and will thou take in han^e to rule?

PRiuacio^, is the absence of tha^ thing from a substance, which by nature,
might have been there^

The habit, is the having of that thing, in the substance, which nature has
granted to be there.

The general rule.
Every priuacion, is the destruction of that, which by nature was.

The manner of reasonyg.
Such a man is blind:

Ergo he cannot se.

Blyndnesse, is called priuacion, because it is the absence of that thing,
which either by nature was, or might have been, in the substance. Neither
does any mann^, call a stone blind, because nature has utterly denied, the
gift of seeing to all stones.

Sin is called priuacion, because it is the destruccio^, of that great
goodness, which God powered in man. And therefore God justly punishes those,
that have forsaken his grace.

Sentences gainsaiyng, otherwise called, contradiccion.
Sentences gainsaiyng, are two proposicions, the one deniyng that, which the
other affirms: as thus. Christ is in the Sacrament really: Christ is not in
the Sacrament really. It cannot be, but one of these two proposicions, must
needs be false.

The general rule.
If one of the two proposicions, be granted to be true, the other must needs
be granted to be false. Neither ca^ it be, by any means possible, that both
of the^ should either be true or false, at one, and the same time. Always
provided, that there be no doubtfulnes in the words: for if one word signify
diuersely, then may both proposicions, be either true, or false, at one, and
the same time. As thus.

The flesh of Christ, profits greatly.

The flesh of Christ, profits nothing at all.

In these two proposicions, there is no contradiccion, or gainsaiyng, but that
they both may be true, at one an^ the same time, co^sideryng they are both
diuersely taken. Christ's flesh eaten and chewed, with our tethe, profits
nothing, Christ's flesh torn upon the cross, profits much, as the which
purchases to al beleuers, life for ever

The manner of reasonyng.
If we be justified freely, through the only merits of Jesus Christ: Then
this is false, that we are not justified, only through the merits of Jesus
Christ: but the other is true: ergo this is false.

The use.
Of Priuacion, Contradiccion, and of contraries that immediately follow:
co^dicional arguments are made, with the addicion of some one coniunccion, of
the which, when the one is true, the other must needs be false, as thus. Either
the soul is immortal, or else it is not immortal, but the first is true: ergo
the second is false.

Of words differyng.
THen have we the use of this place, when we reason and prove that one thing
is not the same. that another is, as thus. King Lud is not the same, that Julius
Caesar, or Brutus was: King Lud builded London, of whom the city had his name,
being called Luddes town, and afterward, by alteracion of letters, called
London. Ergo neither Caesar, nor Brutus, builded the same. Discorda^tes called
opposita are not the same that words differyng are, called differentia. For
as much as where discorda^tes be^ one thing only is set against another one.
As for example. Nothing can be set against brightness, as discordant, but only
darkness, nothing ca^ be set against heat, but only cold, and so in other.
But in this place, there may many things differ from some one thing, and
whatsoever is not the same that another is, may be called a word differyng,
in Latin, differens, or disparatum. Socrates is a man, ergo he is not an ore,
a stone, a horse or any other thing else.

Things differ four ways, either by nombryng. As every singular man,
diff^r^th one from another. James is one, and Iho^ is another. Other differ in
their kind, when they are comprehended under diverse kinds, as Be^uuis of
Hampton, and Arundell his horse: or else Alexander, and Bucephalus. Other differ
by the general word, when they are comprehended, under diverse general
words, as Baptism, and matrimony, the one comprehended under a Sacrament of
God, the other under a certain ordinance of God. Lastly, words differ by
their most generals, when they are placed in diverse predicame^tes A king,
manhod, the one is placed among the relative, is the second in quality.

The general rule.
We cannot make things, that do much differ, to be of one nature.

The manner of reasonyng.
We reason from words differyng, negatiuely altogether.

From such as differ in number, we reason thus.

Such a one is called Thomas, therefore he is not the same, that Ihon is. Peter
is not Paul, nor yet Paul is Peter. Faith is not works, nor yet works are
faith.

From such as differ in kind, thus,

I am a man, therefore I should not be used like a brute beast.

From such as differ by ye general word.

I did borowe plain clothe of the, and why do thou require raised velvet of
me?

From such as differ in predicame^t.

Virtue is a quality of the mind, therefore it is no substance.

AFter knowledge atteined, exercise is most necessary. And happy shall he be,
that unto skill, adds practice, for then learning is best confirmed, when
knowledge is put in ure.

Therefore considering, I have set forth the places, I think it necessary
after knowledge of the same, to describe matters by every one of them, as they
lie in order: that other may likewise, when any question comes in
controversy, go through the places themselfes with it, and examine every
word, by every several place.

And to make this thing more plain, I will go through the places with one
certain word, and look what help I shall find there for knowledge of the
same. The word shall be (a king) or (a Magistrate.)

The definition.
The definition of a magistrate. Every King, or magistrate, is the minister of
god, for a good end, to the punishynge of naughtye persons, and to the
confortyng of godly men.

The general rule.
The Minister of God.

The kind.
Either a tiraunt, or a godly king, the one rules according to his lust, the
other according to right, and Justice.

Words yoked.
The officer, the office, to bear an office, if the office can not be spared,
the officer can not be spared.

Adiacentes necessarily joined.
Wisdom, earnest labor, cunnyng in sciences, skylfull both of war, and
peace, these all must needs be in every Magistrate.

Adiacentes adjoined casually.
To be liberal, to be frugall, to be of a temperate life, all these happen to
be in good magistrates.

Deeds necessary.
To defend Religion, to enact godly laws, to punish offenders, to defend
the oppressed, all these are necessary in a king, and are never found in any
tiraunt.

The thing conteynyng.
Moses, David, Solomon, Ezechia^, Josias. Charles the Emperor. Edward the.vi.
of that name. King of England.

The efficient cause.
God himself, or else the ordinance of God.

The second efficient cause.
Unquiet people, rebels, disobedient people, are the cause why magistrates
are ordained.

The end of a magistrate.
This end he must needs observe that always the people live in quietness, and
in honest conversation pass their whole life.

The effect, or else things done by a Magistrate.
Peace is made, the realm enriched, all things plentuous, but where a tiraunt
rules, al things are contrary.

The authority.
The.xiij. to the Romans, let every soul be subject to the powers.i.
Peter.ij. Be subject to the king.

Things inc^dent.
The scepter is a token of Justice, even as the sword is a sign of
reuengement, or wrath paiyng of Subsidies, taxes, tributes, rent, or any such
like, yeomen of the guard, and all other walters, soldiers in war, the
obedience of the subjects, the honor given unto him, triumphs made, runnyng
at the tylte, fighting at the Barriers fighting at the tourney. Al these are
co^tingentia to a king, that is, although these things be not in a commonwealth, yet may there be a king, yea and although there be no king in some
commune weal, yet these things may be every echone of them, as it was in
Athenes where the people had the rule of the common weal, and all was referred
to their Judgment.

Similitudes.
That which the shepeherd is to the sheep, the same is the magistrate to his
subjects. That which the master of the ship, is to the ship, or the master
of an household, to his house, or the head to the whole body: the same is the
magistrate to his subjects.

Things compared.
Servants must be obedient and subject to there masters with all reverence,
as we read in the scripture: how much more then should the subjects be
obedient to their king and sovereign lord, which by the ordinance of God,
is appointed to rule, and to have governance over them.

Ye may se by this one example, that the searchyng of places, ministers
arguments plentifully. For if ye will prove a magistrate necessary, ye may
reason from the definition, from the causes, from the authority, from the
thing conteynyng, from the adiacentes, from the similitude, and make good
reasons for the purpose. Not withstandyng, I think it not necessary that ye
search all the places at every time, and for every matter: but that ye
search most part of them. And although we cannot find a good argument in
every one of them, yet it is well if we may gather but three or.iiij. good
arguments. As when we go into a gardyne, we shall not find all herbs growing
there, although we search every corner: so when we look in all yt places of
invention for the proof of ou^ matter, we shall not find in every place a
good argument for our purpose. Not withstandyng it is most necessary, either
when we will prove a matter our self, or else try an others labor, which is
set forth at large most eloquently: to bring the whole some of his long tale
to these places, and make an argument in three lines of that, which he
dilateth, into three shietes.

And for our self, if we will reason a matter earnestly, it shall be profitable
to see our own arguments before hand derived out of the places, the which
shall make us more bold to speak, when we shall evidently perceive our own
reasons suerly grounded. And the better able we shall be to confirm our own
cause, and to avoid all objections, when we know suerly by this art,
whereunto we may leave. For although other shall empece our doings, and wrest
our words, yet we shall be able evermore to keep our own, when we playnelie
perceive whereof our argument has his ground Many speak wisely which never
read logique, but to speak wisely with a judgment, and to know the very
fountain of things: that can none do, except they have some skill in this art.

Therefore what diversity there is betwixt a blind man, and him that sees,
the same difference is betwixt a wise man unlearned, and a wise man learned.
Ye have seen the commodity of this art by this one word (magistrate) which I
did apply to every place, that might give any light for the making of an
argument. Now ye shall have a question set forth, and both the parts of a
proposition referred to the places of invention, that thereby ye may know
wherein the places do agree, and wherein they do not. For where as the places
agree (that is to say, al things are referred to ye one, that are referred to
the other) there the proposition is good, and the latter part of the
proposition, is truly spoken of the first. But where the places do not agree
(that is to say, some things are referred to ye one word, that are not
referred to the other) there the things themselves can not agree. I will use
this question for an example. whether it be lawful for a priest to marie a
wife or no. And first of all I will examine a Priest, and apply him to all the
places. Next after that we will refe^ a wife to all the places, and se when we
have done, where in these.ij. do agree, and wherein they do not agree.

From the definition.
A Preacher is a clerck or shepeherd which will give his life for his sheep,
enstructed to set forth the kingdom of God, and desierouse to live
vertuousely: a faithful, and a wise steward who^ the lord does set over his
house, that he may give the householde servants meat, in due time.

From the general word.
A minister a servant, a holy man, a gospeler, the minister of God should be
upright in his living, faithfully bestowyng the words of truth.

From the kind.
Peter, Paul, Ihon Baptist, Esaie, Esdras, and Steuin, Ambrose being a
temporal man was after that a minister of the Church. Chrysostom became of a
lawer, an ernest preacher of gods word. yea Peter and Andrewe both ware
fishers, therefore temporal men may be called, if they be worthy, and desire
this spiritual function.

From the Property.
To be miete to teach, to be godly wise, to do, and to teach all things that
they are commanded. Saint Hierome is his Epistle to Nepotianus, as touching
the life of Preachers, says thus. I will not have the plead causes, and to be
abrabblyng ianglar without all reason, but I will have the to be a faithful
minister of the Sacraments, and very skillful in the laws of the Lord.

The whole.
To be brought up in the scripture^ even from his youth, to be godly in
co^uers^cion, and wholly to be enstructed with all things, necessary for a
preacher. whosoever ever is thus armed, is worthy to be a minister, in the Church
of God. This Argument is derived from the whole.

The parts.
To invent matier out of the scripture, according to the aptnes of his hears,
to deck his doings ha^dsomly, to place his sentences in order, to remember
what he speaks, and to utter his words distinctly, plainly, and with loud
voice.

Things yoked together.
A preaching, a Preacher, to do the work of a Preacher. Timoth. iiij. He that
by his preaching edefieth, ye same man is a preacher.

Things cleauyng, or adjoined to the substance.
Labor, diligence, wit, knowledge, sobriety, ge^tlenes, virtue, marriage, an
earuest desire to bring up his childern well, with other such. A bishop must be
without fault, ye housba^d of one wife, watchefull, sober, modest, herberous,
apt to teach, no great dryuckar of wine, no fightar, not given to filthy
lucre, but upright, void from brawlyng, from covetousness, etc. i. Timoth. ii.

Deeds done.
To feade Christ's flock, to put his life in danger for the flock committed
to his charge, to bring up his flock and famuly in the fear of God, in ye
knowledge of his word, and in due obseruyng of the same.

The thing conteynyng.
Hierome in his first book of the Commentaries which he made upon the
Galathians.j. cap. Let us not think that the Gospel rests in the words of
Scripture, but in the sense, not in the outward rynde, but in the very heart,
not in the leaves, but in ye very root of reason. Let the words of Christ
dwell plenteously in you, with all wisdom. Collos. iii.

The matier.
The word of God. The old Testament, and the new. Hieremie the first. Behold,
I have given my words in to thy mouth.

The shappe, or form.
The shappe may be taken of the conversation, speech, spirit, or the manner of
the preachers living.

The efficient cause.
God himself, the Scripture, good prechers, Evangelists, the Lord will give
his word, to those that preach, plentefully. Psal^ lxvii. I have graffed,
Appollo has watered, but God gives increase.

The end.
The end of preaching is, that the wicked might be converted to repentance,
and the just man kept in his upright living. Ezechiel, iii.

Things done by virtue of the cause.
To win men to Christ, to make men's consciences quiet, to move the^ to
prayer. When Peter made a sermon, out of hand there was about.iij. thousand
converted to the faith of the gospel, that self same day.

What is appointed to him, and propre to this reasonyng.
To stude earnestly, and search the scriptures that he may prove a true
minister of God, to live a good life, and seek to keep a household, that he
may be herberous.

The place.
The church, the pulpite, the vestiarie, the chauncell. I spoke openly to in
the sinagoge says Christ, and in the Church, to all the Jews that came
thither, and I spoke nothing in corners.

The time.
A young man, and elderly man, and old man, to preach early and late.i.
Timothy.iiij. Let no man contemn thy youth.

Things annexed.
To have some stipende for his preaching. worthy is the labourer to have his
wagies. Matthew. x.

The other places following, because they are not absolutely considered, but
referred to some other, and ever having respect to the next word, which is
rehearsed in y^ question of that which went before, they cannot severally
handle any one word: and therefore ye must mark the whole question, and in
one Argument comprehend as well the wife, as the minister. Now therefore ye
shall have this word, vxor (a wife) described through out the places.

The definition.
A wife, is a woman that is lawfully received into ye felouship of life, for
the increase or gettyng of childern, and to avoid fornicacion.

The general word.
A wife, is a woman.

The kind.
A chaiste wife, a learned wife, a manerly wife, or else ye may use the propre
names of women, for the kyn^^ it self, as Lucretia, Cornelia, Portia,
Hipsicratea, etc^.

The property.
To bring forth childern.

The whole.
The whole woman herself altogether.

The parts.
The head, the breast, the arms, the back, the thighe, the heart, the veins,
blood, and flesh.

Words joined.
Housewifely to do ye work of a wife. She does ye duty of a good wife: Ergo
she is a wife. She haudleth all things housewifely: Ergo she is a good
houswife.

Words adjoined.
The love in marriage, care over the famulie, keeping of herself to one
housbande, be obedient unto him, love of her children, loss of her childern.

Deeds done.
To be obedient, to be shrew shaken, to bring up her childern well, to live in
marriage with her housbande both at bed, and at board, according to the will of
God.

The thing conteynyng.
The woman her self.

The matier, and form.
The body, and soul, or the woman and the man, are the matter of marriage, the
consunctio^ it self is the form of it.

The efficient cause.
God himself, the Scripture, let a man be the housba^d of one wife. They
shall be.ii. in one flesh. The cause that one woman is married to a several
person, and likes him before al other, and the man her in like wise: is god
himself first, that kindles such affections, next after, their consent, and
full agreement does enseue.

The end.
To bring forth children, and to keep him sanf, and to avoid sin.

The effect.
Children godly enstructed, the house well ordered.

Things appointed for some end.
To please her husband, to live a good life, to provide things necessary for
the furniture of her household.

The place.
The house, the chamber of wedlock, the halle, or parlour.

The time.
A young woman, or an old. Aristotle says, it is mete for men to marye
at.xxxvj. for maidens to marie at.xviij. but then was then, and now is now, al
things in this world are ripe before there time. I mean not that honesty it
self is so, for I never knew it ripe as yeat, but ever raw. But thus ye see
the time of marriage was not so hastily looked for, as it is now. In this world
a child shall scant be out of his shel, but he shall be suer to one or other, y^
which I doubt, whether it may be called a marriage or no: for those that be of
ripe years, no man doubts, but if they can agree both, and have there friends
good will (for that ought to be sought for, and also obtained) the marriage is
allowed before God.

Words anne^^d or knitte together.
Marriage is referred to this place, for a wife is so called, because the has a
housband, neither can any woman be called a wife, except she have an husband,
therefore she is placed emonge the words annexed, that is, where one thing is
knitte to an other, so that the one cannot be, except the other be also.

Now that we have drawn these words, the preacher, and the wife, after this
sort, through out the places, so far as we could: we should compare them
together, and se wherein theido agree, and wherein they vary. Let us compare
the definitions together, and we shall find sumwhat even there, where these
words be (desiryng to live virtuously) which shall give light for an
argument, as thus.

Whosoever desires to live virtuously, must mary a wife.

Every true preacher of gods word, desires to live virtuously

Ergo every true preacher must mary a wife

Now if mine adversary will deny the proposition at large, called the mayor,
then can I do no good with it, except I find somewhat in the definition of a
wife, which is agreing to this above rehearsed proposition. I find in this
word (wife) that she is married for the increase of children, and to avoid
fornication. Then I reason thus for the confirmation of my purpose by the
argument called Sorites.

Whosoever desires to live virtuously, desires to avoid fornication.

Whosoever desiereth to avoid fornication, desiereth marriage.

Ergo whosoever desiereth to live virtuously, desiereth marriage.

Again the general word of both these definitions gives light for an
argument. Every wife is a woman, every preacher is a man, and nature has
ordained that man and woman may live in marriage, (if they be so disposed) of
what degree, condition, or state, so ever they be, nothing in all the scriptures
to the coutrarye. Therefore I may reason thus.

What soever is a man, that same may marie a woman by gods ordinance.

Every preacher is a man.

Ergo every preacher may marie a woman by gods ordinance.

Even as I have done in these places, comparynge one to an other, so ye may do
in the residew, and where ye se any thing serves for your purpose, that they
agree together on both parties, ye may use the same: if they do not agree in
some places, ye may refuse them, or else so mollyfye the thing that such
repugnauncies may not harm your cause at all. As where it is in the words
adjoined that a woman is often ^imes overthwart, froward, disobedient careless
over her children forasmuch as these be no causes of marriage, they shall not
hinder marriage, for a godly man will bear al adversity, and suffer such
evil hap, and not therefore eschew marriage, because these incommodities
chance in marriage. Now I will enter into the other places which do not
severally handle one word, but have respect evermore to an other, and so by
the knittyng together of.ij. things, or setting the one against the other, the
truth of our purpose is espied, and the cause confirmed.

From the similitude.
As he is not to be compted a good gardener, or a good orchard keeper that is
content with such fruict as he has already, only cherishyng his old trees, and
has no ^are neither to cut down the old, nor yet to fet new graffes: so
that man is to be compted no diligent member in the common weal, which being
content with the present compaignie of me^, has no mind to increase the
number of people.

From authority.
If the great workman of things god almighty himself after the flood being
reconciled to man made this law (as we read in scriptures) that men should not
live single, but increase and be multiplied, that the earth might be filled:
and seeing also that Christ himself sense that time has allowed marriage by a
miracle of chaungyng water into wine, which miracle was the first that he did
upon earth: and seeing Paul also bids every man that cannot live chaste,
to marie, and that it is better to marye, then to burn in filthy desires, and
besides this wills a bishop should be the husband of one wife: it must
needs be that preachers may lawful marye, as well as any other temporal men.

From comparison of the less, to the greater.
It is a shame to se brute beasts obey the law of nature, and man,
especially a learned man, and a preacher, like a stout giaunt to strive with
nature, and do contrary to her biddyng.

From the greater to the less.
If the daughters of Lot doubted nothing at the matter to lie with the^ own
father when he was drunk, thinkyng it better to provide for increase ^y
filthy lust, than that ma^ky^d should decay: shall not than a preacher which
should have regard for the increase of mankind, and also a desire to avoid
fornication, marye, if he be disposed, or other wise cannot live chaste?

Of discordantes.
Ye may reason from the contrary thus, if virginity be a thing given to
angels and almost above man's reach, than marriage is a thing propre to man.

From the Privation.
If the lack of children be a thing hateful to man, than the having of
children is a thing joyful to man.

From the rela^ion.
If a Bishop be allowed by the scri^tures to be a husband, then is he allowed
to have a wife, and by the scriptures we read that he is allowed to be a
husband, for Paul says. Let a Bishop be the husband of one wife, Ergo he is
allowed to have a wife.

From words differyng
That word is called a differyng word, whatsoever it is, which is not the
same, that an other is. As thus. A preacher is a man. Ergo he is no God.
Priests be men as other men be, and that some married men ^re now have well
known. Therefore he may marie a woman, if he cannot live chaste, considering
there is nothing in all the scriptures to the contrary.

As I have done for the office of a Prince, and the marriage of a priest, so
may I also go through out the places with any other matter, that is now in
controversy.

As faith, works, penance, the sacrifice of the mass, baptism, the law,
the gospel, sin, slander, rule, preaching, and every other thing that man is
bound to know.

What is faith? faith is a trust and full persuasion, whereby only we d^
assure us that our sins be forgeuen us, and we accepted as just before god,
through the merits of Christ.

Or thus.
Paul in the Epistle to the Hebrews. Faith is a sure confidence of things
which are hoped for, and a certainty of things, which are not seen.

The general word.
A sure confidence, and a certainty of things.

The kind.
A faith, which is occupied about things both corporal, and also spir^tuall,
beleuyng that Christ was both God and man, by whom salvation is atteined.

The difference.
Things which are hoped for, and the which are not seen.

The propretie.
To believe assuredly, and trust the promises of God.

The parts of faith.
The true faith has no parts. All beit faith is diuersely taken in the
scripture, for there is an historic^ll faith. As I do believe that William
Conqueror was king of England. There is also a iustifiyng faith, wherbi I look
assuredly to be saved. There is a faith, when one man faithfully promises an
other, to do this or that, and will stand to his word. There is also a faith
of miracles, whereby the Apostles did cast out deuels, and helped often the
diseased persons.

Thyn^es adjoined to faith, and also things annexed to ^ayth.
Hope, charity, to be good to the poor, to forbear from wicked attemtes, to
speak well of all, to eschew excess.

The thing conte^nyng.
The mind of man, or the soul of man.

The efficient cause.
The word of God, or the holy ghost, stirryng the heart of man, and
co^^ortyng him in the merits of Christee passion.

The end of faith.
Life everlasting, which is given frelie to every beleuer that confesses in
his heart, Jesus to be Christ, and assuredly trusts to be saved by the only
merits of his passion.

Contraries.
Unbelief, desperation, whereby man falls from God, to his utter damnation
for ever.

The places of false conclusions, or deceiptfull reasons.
Now that I have declared, what an argument is, what the places of inuencion
be, how they serve for the confirmacion of any matter, how every thing is
made, in his due mode, and figure, and also showed the obseruacio^ of many
things, where by any one, shall both be assured, that his argument is true,
(if it be made according to the rules)and also may know that it is false, if it
be not made according to the same rules: I will from hence furthe, set out the
manner, of deceiptfull arguments, called in Latin, reprehensiones, or fallaces
conclusiunculae, even as Aristotle has set the^ forth Albeit, there is no
argument so deceiptful, but they al may easly be avoided, if the rules be
marked, that are rehearsed before, concerning the true making of an argument.
For according to the old saiyng^ Contrariorum eadem est doctrina. That is to
say, of contraries, there is one manner of doctrine, for he, which can
handsomely set forth a lion. in his shape and portraicture, may judge with
reason a Lion evil fauouredly painted, and can with little difficulty, show
the faults in every part. so in like manner, if one can make an argument,
according to the rules above rehearsed, in his due form and mode, he can tell
also, when an argument is other wise made then the rules ca^ bear

To some men, these places of craft that follow, may seem strange, and yet
even in weighty matters, the wicked have derived their subtle defenses, from
these deceiptfull corners. Therefore, because such places, may the rather be
avoided, and better known, I will both set them furthe at large, and also
teach as well as I am able, how to confute them. And first to confute, is
nothing else but to Judge false packyng, and to unloose by reason, things knit
together by craft. Therefore the Logician, if he will do his part, must not
only fence himself, for confirmacion of his own cause, but must also
overthrow, the assercion of other, and also by reason, prove their sayings to
be false, which by deceipte, would inueigle the weak.

The manner of confutacion two ways considered.
For the first, either we purpose by disputacion, to answer fully to the
matter, or else secondly (if power want to compass that) we seek some other
means, to satisfy the manne, and that three manner of ways, either by making
the obieccio^ seem less then it is, or by bryngyng some other example against
it, or else by sekyng some means, to go from the matter.

We make the argument appear sle^der, when we receive it laughyngly, and
declare by words, eue^ at the first, that it is nothing to the purpose, and so
abashe the opponent.

Again, we turn another argument in our adversaries neck, when we bring
another example against him. Or else when we charge him, with a like fault, and
lay some greater matter in his dishe. Lastly, we shift away, from the
violence of our adversary, by making some digression, or geuyng occasion of
some other talk, whereby the adversary, either is driven to forget his
argument, or else being blinded with to much matter, is forced either to go no
further, or else to think himself content. In all which manner of confutation,
when we purpose to put a man to silence, I would wish great moderation to be
used, and as little advantage taken by such means, as may be possible. For
although it be a poor help (as in deed it is none other) yet many a man
loses his estimacion, by much vsyng of such fashio^s. It is a world to se
the subtle brain, of many braggyng bodies which with bold countenance, bear
an outward shadow of wisdom, having only the maskyng visage, and lackyng
the natural face. They will stand stoutly in maintenance of an untruth, and
with countenance seem to show it: yea, and by their bold bearyng it out
almost persuade the hearers, that they only have the true part, and that
other, are altogether deceived. They will say, that no wise manne, would ones
think that for shame, which their adversary, utters without all shame,
yea, they will say, he speaks too too baby shelye, and so dashe him out of
countenance, that he shall not well know what to say, and last of all, they
will trifle and toye merely, and so with imp^de^t laughyng^ make the other past
speaking. I will not put any in this memento, as though they ware gyltie: but
their own doings, shall put in theimselfes, on Gods name, for me.
Notwithstanding, I would gladly wish (as I said before) that there ware a
measure used, and then such doings, might better be borne.

We answer to the matter, ij. ways, either generally, or particularly. A
general answer is made three ways. First, when the fault is in the matter,
that is to say, in the words of either proposicion, when they signify
diverse things, or be diversely applied, to show it plainly: and either deny
it a^ folishe, or else dissolve it, as doubtful. As thus, the libertiues reason.

What soever is natural, that same is not evil.

To sin is a thing natural.

Ergo to sin is not evil.

The several or second proposicion is not true. And therefore the argument i^
false, in the matter it self. For God did create the nature of man, pure and
clean, and said, that all was good, which he made, at the first creacion.
Neither was it Gods will, that man should altre his commandment, and swerve
from the pathe, of his appointed laws, but rather the suggestion of the
devil, and the weakness of our flesh, brought man to hell, death and
dampnacion.

Again, when the fault appears in the form, and manner of making an argument,
we must declare that it is not framed^ according to the rules, which require
that every argument, should both be in mode and figure, as I have before
sufficiently declared. As thus.

All Magistrates do reuenge^

Every bold hardy man does revenge

Ergo every bold hardy man, is a Magistrate.

This argument, being made in the second figure, is of no force, co^sideryng it
is in no mode, of the same figure. For in this figure, all the proposicions, do
not affirm altogether, but one of the^ ever does deny, as it appears plainly,
to him that list to se.

Thirdly, when the fault is both in the matter, and in the manner of making, we
must refuse the argument, and show the faults plainly. As thus.

Every slaughter, is sin.

Every adultery is sin.

Ergo every adultry is slaughter

First the fault is, that slaughter is not well defined. For in war time, it
is lawful to kill, and every man may stand in his own defense, against
violent robbers, and rather kill then be killed. Thirdly, the argument is in
no mode^ although it be in the second figure

The particular auoydyng of an argument, is.v. ways used, either by declaryng
in what deceipfull subtlety, it is contained, or from which of the places, it
is wrongfully derived, or to show the wrong framyng, in every mode and figure,
or to make an argument, with a like reason, and so to avoid the cause, or last
of all, to use the strange deceiptfull places, which shall be last rehearsed.

And now will I tell particularly, every deceiptfull argument, that when such
a subtle argument shall be used, either in disputacion, or private talk: any one
may epsy the fault out of hand and show in which of these capcious reasons,
the subteltie rests.

And first, a false conclusion, is a deceipte used in an argument, whereby one
under the color of truth, goes about, to inuegle the hearer, or thus, a
false conclusion is an argument, apperyng to the ignorant, as though it were
true, and yet is nothing true at all. Aristotle does divide them into two
parts. Some be called deceiptfull arguments, when a doubtful word is used,
or the kind of speech is strange, and may be taken two ways, and that the
fault is rather in the kind and manner of speaking, then in the matter or very
thing it self. Therefore those yt be good gra^marians, and know the properties
of words, and are skylfull in the tongues, can gaily well solute such errors
as be made by the mystakyng of words, or by false understanding of phrases,
whereof in very dead many heresies, and much false doctrine have had there
first beginning. There be again some crafty subtilties which are not in the
word, but rather spring either of the euel knittyng together of the
propositions, or else of the confusion of things, that is to say, when one
thing is falsely appointed for an other, as in this proposition, a man may
easily epsy false packyng which is in the second figure.

Fes No sin does beget a man. ti Co^cupisce^ce does beget a man no. Ergo
concupiscence is no syn
The second proposition although it may deceive a man, that is not ware, yet
is it altogether false, because nature which is a thing ordained of god, does
begette man, not the wicked impotencie or rather the destruction of nature,
which afterward followed. Here it is plain that a mingle mangle is made of
things, when generation which should be attributed to nature, is referred to
the concupiscence, because it is in nature, and next adioynyng unto it.

Now for the nombre and deuidyng of these deceiptfull arguments, it is to
understand, that there be.xiij. whereof syx are called subtilties in the
word, or manner of speaking, and the other.vij. ar called subtilties, without
the word, when things be confounded, and one taken for an other.

Deceitpfull arguments.
In the word are these following.

1. The doubtfulnesse of a word. 2. The double meaning of a sentence^ 3. The
ioynyng of words that should be parted. 4. The partyng of words that should be
joined. 5. The manner of speech. 6. The Accen^e.
ALl these names be comprehended under this one word (doubtefull)
notwithstanding Aristotle sets forth diverse ways, that he may show the
difference of these doubtful things. For some arguments have the doubt in a
word signifiyng diversely, some in the propretie o^ the phrase, some in the
joining together of words, and some other in the deuidyng, and displacyng of
the same, as it shall appear more playnlie in the handelyng of these places
seuerallye. Homonumia, which may be called in english, the doubtfulnes of one
word, when it signifies diversely, is a manner of subtlety, when the deceit
is in a word that has mo significations then one. And the reason is, that
such arguments are not good, because there are four terms in the two
propositions, for the double repete, sygnifieth one thing in the first
proposition, and an other thing in the second proposition. Therefore nothing
is proved in the conclusion, when such doubtful words are placed in a
proposition. And therefore when such a subtlety is espied, a man may deny
the co^^equente, giving this reason that it is a subtlety drawn from ^his
place of doubtfulnesse.

An example.
Da Every arm is a substance made of flesh, blood, bones, sinues, and veins.
^i God ye father has an arm. i. Ergo God the Father is one that has a
substance of flesh blood, bones, sinues, and veins.
I answer: This knittyng is not good, and therefore I deny the whole. The
reason is, because it is a subtlety of a doubtful word^, for in the first
proposition, the arm is considered to be such a one, as a man has, but in the
second Proposition it is not so meant, for ^t signifies by a Metaphore the
power, strength, or might of God.

An other example.
Fe^ There is none evil in the City, says the Prophet, which the Lord has
not done, si- There be many sins and horrible euilles in the City: o. Ergo
God is ye aucthor of sin.
I deny the consequent. Because their is doubtfulnes in this word evil: for
in the first Proposition evil does signify, the evil of punishment, as we
call commonly all calamity, evil, and al punisheme^t evil, which are not
sin: and in the second Proposition, evil does signify offense, and all
naughtines that is committed. Therefore the second Proposition is not agreeyng
with the first, and therefore the argument is not good.

The second subtlety, called Ambiguitas.
The Ambiguitee, is, when the construction brings error, having diverse
understandings in it, as when the words be placed doubtfully, as thus.
Craesus halim penetrans magnam peruertet opum vim. Cresus going over the floude
halim, shall overthrow a great empire. Here is not me^cioned, whether he shall
overthrow his own, or an other man's. By the which Oracle in deed, he being
deceived, lost his own kingdom, when he thought to subdewe his enemies, and
bring them under subjection. Therefore when sentences be spoken doubtfully,
that they may be co^strued.ij. manner of ways, they are referred to this place.
Notwithstanding the use of this place is very rare, and seldom happens,
therefore I will be the shorter, and only show two versies in Latin which by
cause they be very pretie^ and may be.ij ways taken, I think it not amiss to
set them forth here.

Laus tua, non tua fraus, virtus, non copia rerum,

Scandere te fecit, hoc decus eximium.

In English thus:

Worthiness, not wilines, godliness, not goods, brought the hereunto,

Richesse great, and mu^^ authorite, with wordely honor to come to.

These verses being red backwarde either in English or in Latin, beginning at
the last word, have a clea^e contrary understanding, as thus.

To come to honor worldelye, with authorite much, and great richesse,

Hereunto, brought the, goods, not godliness, wiliness, not worthiness.

These two verses were written to the Pope, as worthy such a one, and s^tte
upon Pasquillus in Rome, even for very love, as I take it: not of thee Pope,
but of Gods holy word.

The third dece^pteful argument.
COniunctio distrahendorum^ a ioynyng together of those things which should be
disseuered, and either to be applied to the things that go before, or to the
things that follow after.

Da- Whosoever knows letters, now has learned them, ri- A Grammaria^ knows
letters i^ Er^o a Grammarian now has learned them.
Here this Aduerbe (now) if it had been referred to the first point which is as
ye se in this word (letters) and the point afterward made, when this word
(now) had been put to it, al had been well: but because the word (now) is
other wise placed, and referred to the next sentence, (which is now has
learned them) it is a false Argument, because this word (now) should be
referred to the first poinct, as thus.

Whosoever knows letters now, has learned them,

A Gra^marian knows letters now

Ergo a Grammarian has learned them.

And so this Argument is good being thus placed^ but though this subtlety seem
childishe^ yet old babes have used it, even in the weightiest cause of our
redemption, and thought therein to foil the godly, reasonyng in jest after this
sort, and yet meaning good earne^^.

Faith, without works, does justify

Faith, without works, is a dead faith:

Ergo a dead faith does justify.

Here, one may se a false packing, for in the first Proposition, faith is
several, and referred to the last word of the same Proposition, which is
(does justify) in the second Proposition faith is referred to the.ij. words
(without works.) so that the same faith is not meant in the second
Proposition, that is me^t in the first, and the reason is, that words are
joined together, which should not be so joined, for now there are.iiij.
terms, whereas by the rules of Logique, there should be but three, (faith) is
one, (does justify) is the second, (faith without works) is the third, (a
dead faith) is ye fourth term. And the reason that there be.iiij. is, that
faith is first severally considered, which never wa^teth works following her,
as fruit declaryng what the tree is, not that the fruit does purchase
justification, but rather gives a token yt by faith it self, where of such
works do spryng, iustificacio^ is atteyned. In the second Proposition, there
is mentioned a dead faith, a faith without works, which faith the devil
himself has, where as if the Argument ware true, there should be none other
faith considered in the second Proposition, then was rehearsed, and mentioned in
the first Proposition. I have labored the rather at large, to make this matter
more plain to the ignorant, not that it so much neded, for the evasion is
easy of it self, and this Argument is of no greater weight, then the other
above rehearsed were.

Of partyng words that should be joined together.
DIsiunctio coniunctorum, is a diuidyng of things which should be joined
together, and a making of words several, or else a disseuering of.ij. parts,
which should be but one. for like as by the other place, words are joined
together which should be divided, so now by this place, that thing is
divided, which should be all one.

The Law and the Gospel are two diverse things.

The word of God is the Law and the Gospel.

Ergo, the word of God is two diverse things.

In this Argument (the word of God) being a whole thing of it self, is
divided, and where respect should be had to the two parts ioy^tely
considered together, which are nothing else but the whole: the parts are
severally understood, and referred to the whole, not both together as they
should be, but severally with their pro^erties, as they should not be. For
the word of God is not the Law only, or the Gospel only, although it stand
of these two, but is the Law and the Gospel both joined together: for where as
a man is made of body and soul, the body is not man, nor yet the soul
neither, and yet they both joined together, make up a perfect man.

An other example.
The articles of our faith, are.xij. in nombre,

To believe in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ his only son, are the
articles of our faith.

Ergo to believe in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ his only son,
are.xij. in nombre.

This Argument is to be denied, because the doubtfulnes rises of the division,
for, to believe in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ his only son, are the
Articles of our faith, and yet they.ij. are not the whole.xij. in number.
Therefore they two being of the.xij. are wronglie placed if they be divided
into.xij. Aagain there be.iiij. ends, or terms. for in the first Proposition,
this part (the articles of our faith) comprehend the.xij. in number, but in the
second Proposition this part (to believe in God and in Jesus Christ) do not
comprehend all the articles, but two only, therefore it is an evil Argument.

This kind of Argument is used often times of those, which by reporting an
other man's labor, and his well doing, deprave the same, either by addyng, or
diminishyng the same, as by taking a piece of a sentence out of some Doctor,
and applieng it for there purpose, or by adding more then they find, as both
divines and lawers often times full ungodly have done, not regarding the whole
course, and order of the thing, but taking out patches and pieces to serve
their ungodly purposes, which in deed, made nothing for the^, neither they
them selves do understand, what they bring, when they do not mark the whole
course of the matter. The Romish, reason thus.

If thou will enter to heaven, keep the commandments:

Therefore keeping the commandments, purchases heaven.

This Argument is false by leauyng the best out, for the doctrine of the
gospel must first be had, our faith must be fastened, and Christ must
sanctify our doings, before they can be good. Neither is any thing good
because we do it, but because it pleases god so to accept it. It is true, he
yt does well, shall have well, but who is he? even ye same body, which first
believes in Christ, and apprehends mercy by faith, whose works God
accepts for good, other wise he shall never come where God is. Therefore epsy
the subtilties of the vugodlie, and fly there fraud.

The fifte place.
FIgura dictionis^ called otherwise in good Latin Forma orationis, the manner
of the speech, is when the phrase bredeth error, and the property of the
tongue not well known, engenders ambiguite, as in the.viij. Chapter of Math.
When Christ bad those which were healed of the leprosy: Go and show themselves
to the Priest, our forfathers applied this saying to confession, thinkyng that
every one was bond in conscience under pain of damnation, to confess his
sins to the priest every year ones, whereas Christ's meaning was nothing
so, and therefore they ware much deceived in the manner of speaking. This order
was in the old law as we may read in Leuiticus, that lepers came not into
the town, but if any happened to be whole, and amended, he was first
commanded to show him self to the priest, that the curate seeing his body
clean, might be a witness to the parish of his amendment, and so the man
after that, might the rather be suffered to go abroad, and be in company with
other men.

But even as they have fondely wrested this place to confession, even so might
light women, and evil disposed wives, abuse their husbands fondely, expoundyng
saint Paul's words in the.vij. of the first, to the Corinthians, where he
says. The wife is bond to the law, as long as her husband lives, but if
her husband sleep, she is at liberty to marie with whom she will. God
forbid, women should take this advantage of their husbands slepyng, as the
Romish folk have abused all men wakyng. Sleep in this text, signifies
nothing but death, and yet, might women as well abuse this text, as other me^
have abused christ's saying, for the maintenance of confession. Therefore the
propretie of every speech, and the manner of speaking ought always to be
observed: we say in English some time, to some one with whom we are offended,
Ah sirrah ye are an honest man indede, and yet we do not mean that he is
honest indede, but think rather that he is a naughty fellow. So likewise,
Christ when he should be taken of the Jews said to his Apostles, Dormite and
requiescite, sleep one syrs, and take your rest, not that he would they should
so do, but to there rebuke and shame he spoke it, because they were careless, and
took there rest. So Paul rebukyng the Corinthians, because they made heathen
men their judges, and pleaded there causes under them, said, if there be no
body emonge you to hear your own causes, make vile persons and abiectes, to
be Judges emo^gst you. Not that he would it should so be, but to their shame,
he spoke it, as he says himself. Also unto this place may be referred the
kind of phrase propre to every tongue. As where it is in the gospel. Non
exibit, donec vltimum quadrantem soluerit, he shall not go out, until he has
paid the las^e farthyng, this sentence does not signify a condition, but it
signifies that he he shall never come out at al. Therefore those that be
ignorant in the tongues are easily deceived: Likewise in Mathewe we read. Qui
dixerit verbum aduersus spiritum sanctum no^ remittetur ei, neque in hoc seculo
neque in ^uturo. He that shall speak a word against the holy ghost shall not
be forgeuen nether in this world, nor yet in the world to come, that is to
say, he shall never be forgeuen. Although the papists refer this place to
purgatory, most vainly and unlearnedly. The accent causes ambiguite, by
reason of the affinity in words, as when one has lost all the money in his
purse, and for lack of coin is feign to hold the candel: for an other man
when he sees the same body do his duty with his cappe of, to his better,
to say merely by the way of a suit to the worthiest person: I pray you sir
let this good fellow be covered, he is bare, where as bare signifies a bare
purse: as well as a bare head, and is properlye so said. Again and most
aptely this subtlety takes place, when sentences be evil pointed, and the
sense thereby depraved, as some that maintain justification by works, have
strau^gely abused a text of saint Augustine, making the point plain, whereas
it should be an interrogatiue, and has been of late years so found in an old
written hand. The sentence is this. Qui fecit te sine te, no^ potest seruare te,
sine te? he that made the without the, can not he save the, without the?
whereas, making it a plain point in latin, it has a clean contrary
understanding, and makes much for the maintenance of false religion. for it
is as much, as who should say: he that made the, without the, cannot save the,
without the. Moreover, words spoken by imitation, that is to say, when one
reherseth that which an other man says, must diligently be observed. Paul
writing to the Collossiens shows the noughtines of some men that will keep
simple folk in subjection with there traditions, and trouble the consciences
of the weak, saying, do not touch, do not taste, do not handle meat, which
Paul recites, in rebuke to the hypocrites and obstinate Pharisees, and yet
some notwithstanding fondly have misconstrued the same, persuadyng them selfs
that Paul gave such commandment. Therefore those things which ar^ spoken
by imitation following an other man's speech, must otherwise be understood,
than these words which a man speaks of him self, and gives instruction
certainly thereby. Thus far have I handled these subtle arguments, which
are in the words, now will I rehearse all such false co^clusio^s as are in the
matter. And first this is to be noted, that the faults of every argument are
either in the wrong definyng, and not well se^tyng forth the nature of any
thing, or else in not aptely diuidyng, or lastely not advisedly weighyng the
causes of things, but heapynge them up with out order or reason. The other
subtilities above rehearsed may either be aduoyded by well markynge the true
definition, or else having respect to the division, by declaryng severally how
large every word may be taken, and what error may rise by the false
understanding of some one word: The subtilities following co^tein such
absurdities, which rise not upon the nature of some one word, but take their
ground of the matter and thing it self.

There be.vii. in nombre.
^. From the accident. ^. From that, which is partly and after a sort so, to
be full and wholly so. 3. The mistakyng of sentences gainsaiyng. 4. The
consequent. 5. The cause that is not, put for the cause. 6. The cuckoes song^
or by things doubtfull^ to prove thygnes that are as doubtful. 7. Many
questions asked for one thing.
The first deceit.
FAllacia accidentis, the deceit fullness of the accident, is when diverse
things are joined to gether, in one subject, that is to say, when one, and
the same thing, is referred both to the substance, and also to the accident, or
else, when the accide^tes (which are not of the very substance of man, but may
be away, the man living still,) are not well joined together, or else, when we
make our argument ab euentis, that is to say, by that thing, which happens
to a man casually, and pronounce the same, to be the very proper cause, why, and
wherefore, this or that is so. Of the first, this may be an example.

That same which flesh is, bread is not.

Flesh is food,

Therefore bread is none.

In the first proposicion, I understand the substance of flesh, and in the
second proposicion, I mean the accident or property, which is in them
both, and therefore mine argument is not lawful. because I referred, both the
substance and the accident, to one, and to the same subject. For although
flesh and bread, be not all one in substance, because flesh is one thing,
and bread is another, and either of the^ has their proper being, and distinct
substance: yet they agree both in their accident, that is to say, in food,
to serve for the sustenaunce of man.

No sin must be committed,

Wicked men, even when they execute Justice, do sin.

Therefore, wicked men must do no Justice, being set in authority.

The first proposicio^ is true, and the second also, for what soever is not of
faith, the same is sin. Neither can any thing be well, how soever it seems in
our iyes, except our faith be first fastened upon the free mercy of Christ.
Therefore the Jews, how soever ^he^ live, keeping order, obseruyng laws,
forbearyng riot, yet all their doings, are nothing but sin, whatsoever they
do, seem it never so honest, or Godly, to the sight of man. And yet this
argument is not truly lapte up. For in the first proposicio^, (sin) is not
considered by himself, and therefore it is truly said, that no sin must be
committed. In the second ^roposicion, where execucio^ of Justice, is reported
to be sin, it is not so of it self, but because the person is evil himself,
which executes the Law, and therefore the offense comes casually, and as
the Logicians say, per accidens, where as sin before was considered,
according to the substance. And therefore, though the officer being naught,
offends when he ministers Justice, (because faith makes al works good)
yet must he do justice, because it is so commanded, even as he must assuredly
believe, that Jesus is the Messiah, and the promised savior sent of God. And
though the doing be evil to him, yet it is good to other.

Again, thus reason some.

By faith we are justified.

Faith is a work.

Ergo by works we are justified.

This proposicion is false, considering that faith, in the first proposicio^,
is the same, through which we are justified, not by the worthiness of our
beleuyng, but through the free mercy of Christ, the which we apprehende
through faith. And therefore we must in this saying consider, that faith is
referred by relacion to Christ, through whom only, al mercy is atteined, and
that grace comes, not because faith is a work, but because mercy goth
before, and receives freely all beleuers, without worthiness either of beleuyng
or else of doing any other work. Therefore in the first proposicion, faith being
not so taken, as it is in the second, we may say well, it spryngeth from
this deceiptful place, and is therefore not lawful

Another argument.
This man is a witty fellow,

This same man is lame,

Ergo this same man has a lame wit.

This is evident false, because the accidents of the body, are referred to the
substance of the mind, as by this last argument, ye may see that lamenesse,
which is of the body, is attributed to the mind, and the reason is vain.

The third deceipte is, when many things are referred to one subject, we make
that to be the very next and chief cause, which is a casual thing, and
comes by hap unto any body as thus.

David is a blessed man.

David is an adulterer.

Ergo adulterers are blessed men

I deny the consequence, because it is a deceiptfull argument, by that, which
is the accident. For when many things chance to one manne, we must se what
are the very causes of that thing which we attribute to the subject. David
is a blessed man. And wherefore? Not because he was an adulterer, for that
happened to him casually, but because he was chosen of God, and had the fear
of God before his iyes, and although this happened by the instinct of the
devil, yet he called for grace, repented sore, and trusted in Gods mercy, as
the Psalms plentifully be are witness, and this was the cause, why ^e was
blessed.

Ye must observe, that in this deceiptfull argument, although many things, are
referred to one subject, yet are they not after one sort, comprehended in
the same subject, but diversely considered, as when I join accidents, both of
body, and mind together, as thus.

This fellow is a singyng man,

This fellow is blind.

Ergo he is a blind singyng man.

Here ye may se the accide^tes of the mind and body, joined together, which
should not be so.

The Anabaptists reason thus.
That which is nothing, deserves no punishment.

Sin is nothing.

Ergo sin deserves no punishment.

In the first proposicio^, that thing is meant, which is not at al, but is
clean gone from nature, or else never was with in the nature of things. In the
second proposicio^, (sin) is to be reported to be nothing, because it self
being nothing worth, spoyleth a man of his other virtues, and so overthrows
nature, as much as it can. When we se a man blind, we judge that he has lost
his sight, herein we esteem the sight, to be a gift given of God, and
blyndnesse to be the taker away of that, which was given of God. In like
case, sin is the destruction of that, which was, being of it self nothing.
And so in this case, to do well, is a thing, the want whereof, is nothing, the
which, is sin.

Another.
Whatsoever increases sin is not to be taught.

The Law of Moses encrea^seth sin.

Ergo the Law is not to be taught.

I answer, the law e^creaseth not sin, by the own nature, but casually.
For when man himself, is corrupted with vice, then the Law makes his sin
appear heinous, and en^reaseth ye knowledge of sin in him. So that i^ the
first proposicion, the nature of increasyng sin, is considered: in the
second proposicio^, the casual happenyng is rehearsed when things are evil not
of theimselfes, but made evil through the wickedness of the offe^dor. Al
such arg^mentes, must be aduoyded by distinccion, that is, ye must declare
the double meaning in the two proposicions, and the^ ye have soluted the
subtilitie

The second.
FRom that, which is partly and after a sort so, to be full, and wholly so,
and by color of the part, to give judgment of the whole.

Wine is evil for those, that be sick of an Agewe.

Ergo wine is al together evil.

Red wine byndeth.

Ergo all wine binds.

This argument is from the particular, to the universal, the which is easy to
be aduoyded. Therefore errors do often chance, when we comprehend the whole,
speaking only of the part, or when we make the sign, to be the very self
thing, and although ye have had childishe examples before, only to make the
matter plain, ye shall se that in weighty matters, this deceiptfull argument
has been used.

We hear many now a days cry out and say, the lawyers are naught, they
mean no truth, but only seek for lucre, where as no man I think condemns
all lawyers, although he have just cause to accuse sum wretched lawyers. Some
say again that priests have left fornication gaily wel^ and are never
suspected now a days for adultery being yoked in lawful marriage: But some
spare not to say again, that they have made an exchauge, leauyng up
whoredom, and following covetousness, the deuell and al: marie God forbid
that all priests should so do. And in deed if any one should so reason, I
would reckon his argument to be comprehended within the compass of this false
conclusion. Thus reason the Anabaptists.

Unrighteousnes is altogether reproved.

In every kingdom is much unrighteousness used.

Ergo every kingdom is altogether reproved.

By this means we shall have no kingdom, no law, no political order, no
trade, no discipline, no judgment for offenders. But this argument is to be
rejected, because it is deryued from the part, to the whole. For although many
things be amiss in a political body, yet the whole therefore must not be
dissolved, the laws must not be abrogated, nor yet good order aba^doned: for
the chief thing that is in every empire is a thing, ordained of God, and a
righteous thing, as for an example. Political order, laws, statutes,
Judgment, execution, and punyshyng offenders, and therefore they reason
amiss, that say there is an abuse in a political order, therefore we shall
have no order at all in any common weal, and again ye shall perceive, that
there is more in the conclusion, then was rehearsed in the two former
propositions. Therefore we ought diligently to note the circumstaunce of the
thing, if we will avoid this subtlety, and when a thing is spoken in part,
we must not thereby judge the whole: or measure ye universal, by that which
is comprehended under the general.

A man may forsake an adulterouse wife.

Ergo he may forsake his wife.

This is from the inferior to the universal, which is not well gathered, as
it stands here: for although a man may forsake his wife, being naught of her
body, yet may he not forsake an honest woman, when it likes him to change.
for this word (wife) in the first proposition, is hedged with her
circumstance, that is to say, aduoutry, which causes diuorcement. Neither is
this argument good, the King may put to death every evil man, Ergo the king
may put to death every man. Again if we will reason negatiuely, as we did
before affirmatiuelie, we shall frame our argument amiss. As thus.

No wife should be put away.

Ergo neither a naughty wife should be put away.

Again.
No wine is evil

Ergo no myngled wine is evil.

This is from the universal, to that which is inferior, and as ye would say
hedged with his circumstance, and compassed with that, which before, was
neither in wife, nor yet in wine. For a wife so long as she keeps her self to
her husband only, she is no aduoutresse. Wine that drinks of itself, is not
myngled, and therefore the argument is not good because that thing is in the
less, or inferior, which was not in the general.

There is a figure in Rethorick, called Hiperbole, that is to say, when a
thing is spoken beyond measure vncrediblie, and yet is not so largely meant. As
when I will praise a man for his strength, I will say, he passes Hercules in
manhood, meaning that he excels in manhood and valeauntnes. If we know one
that ronneth well, either dog, man, or horse, we use to say, he is as swifte
as a swallowe, he flies like an arrowe out of a bow, meaning only that he is
excedyng swifte. Therefore we must diligently take heed, when such speches are
used, that we take not them as they be spoken, but as they are meant, neither
take the whole for the part, when the whole is expressed in words, and the
part meant in understanding. Jeremy says. Scio domine quod non est hominis
via eius.

I know Lord that man has not his way.

Therefore man has no fre will at al, no advise, no choice, to deliberate
either this way, or that way.

This consequent is not good, for Ieremias saying, must be understand
exclusiuely. The way of man, that is to say, the calling of man, is not only
ruled or led by the power, strength, or force of man, neither can he do any
thing of himself alone, without the help or grace of god. Sennacherib that
wicked king, thought by his own power and wisdom, to win his spurs against
Jerusalem, but he trusted so much to himself, and his own wisdom, that he
lost his boots and al, at length. The chief and principal cause of all godly
actions, proceed from God, but so not withstandyng do they proceed, that man
has choice, will, and liberty, to do what him likes, being assisted with the
grace of God. As Christ prayseth the labourer and says. To him that has,
shall be given. And Chrysostom says very well. God draws unto him, but he
draws the willing. For god will have our good will, to be joined with his
calling. Therefore Plato in his.iiij. book where he framed his commonweal,
does well mitigate this Hiperbola, in this sentence which seems credible (God
does al things, and orders every action) saying, I do well allow this
sentence, that God rules al things, but so not withstandyng I allow it, if
it be well understand. For it ware best to ground it so, that man's will,
labor, and diligence, must be joined thereunto, as we se in sailyng upon the
sea, Shipmen call to God for help, and God will help them, but so not
withstandyng, if they help them selfs. According whereunto there is in the
fables of Esope a tale of one, whose cart stood fast in the mire, which man
seeing his cart laid fast, cried to Hercules for help, and prayed that he
might come from heaven: answer was made, that he should first help himself,
and then call upon Hercules, or else his cart were like to stick fast still.

An other argument.
The church does not err.

The Phariseis are the church.

Ergo the Phariseis do not err.

The disceipt is, from the particular to the universal. As who should say,
some do not err in the church, Ergo no body does err at all, that be of the
church: which is false, for the church is as well of the euel as of the good.
The good men that are trained in the truth of God, and taught the true love of
God, by often readyng and following his word, have the true light and err not:
Other that be slouhtfull, careless, brouned in ambition, and all wordlie lust,
both can err, and do err, from time to time. Therefore where as I say, the
church does not err, it is called Synecdoche, that is to say, when the part
is used for the whole.

An other argument made by the Anabaptists.
To the just, there is no law set.

The riotouse soune after his conversion, is just.

Ergo unto him there is no law set.

This argument is from the part to the whole: he is delivered from the law,
for so much as pertains to his condemnation, but he is not fre for so much as
belongs to the due obedience, which he owes unto God: for this order
stands for ever most steadfastly, that every creature be obedient to God the
creator. Again for as much as in every just man that is converted from his
evil ways there remains a wicked inclination, the same must always be
bride led and kept in, even with the terror of the law, as though it ware
with a mouserolle.

The sign is often times turned into the thing it self, as I rehearsed before.
This is ye picture of saint George

Ergo it is saint George himself.

This argument men have used, when they have seen a man painted in a wall, or
graven in a stone, as thus. This is saint Christopher, this is saint Loy.
This is the picture of Christ, Ergo it is Christ. This is an Image of our
Lady, Ergo it is our Lady, and here she will work wounders. more than in an
other place, as she did at walsingham, at Boston, at Lincoln, at Ipswiche, and
I cannot tell where, when priests gatherd monye, and poor folks ware mocked.
here, ye must deny the conseque^t, because the sign is not the thing
signified, neither is god bound to any place, to the which he has not bound
him self by his word, nor yet and saint neither. This rule overthrows all
manner of Idols which have been in all ages from time to time. In this kind of
subti^tie, ye must diligently observe.iiij. circumstancies, the parson, the
time, the place, and the manner of comparynge things together, all which are
false and deceipteful reasons.

The person.
A noble man of the parliament house may hunte in the kings parkes by
authority.

Ergo every man ma^e.

The time.
It is not lawful to walk in the streets of London after the watch is set.

Ergo it is not lawful to walk in London at all.

The place.
It is not lawful to give a blow within the court gates,

Ergo it is not lawful at all in mine own defense.

The manner of comparyng.
It is an Image of a man,

Ergo it is a man.

Compare these.ij. together, and mark the accident adjoined to a man, and ye
shall perceive that it takes away all substance, and leaves only the
shadow: for this word painted, restrayneth the other and compasses him with
in his bounds, so that a painted man can no more be called a man, then an
adulterous wife can be called a wife: for so long is a woman called a wife, as
she keeps her self within the bounds of matrimony, other wise she is no
wife, although men use to call them wives.

The.iii. deceit.
SEcundum no^ causam, vt causam, that is, when a cause that ^s not able to
prove the mat^er, is brought in as though^ it ware of force and strength, but
the ground being considered, the fault is easily espied.

Dronkenes is evil,

Ergo wine is naught.

Wine is not to be reproved altogether, although some abuse the same, for it is
a good thing ordained of God for the sustenaunce of man.

An other argument.
Some young men, when they come the other lands, fall to unthriftiness.

Ergo riches are not good.

In all such arguments, wherei^ good things are reproved, because evil
bodies abuse the same, the evil wyl^ and the naughty inclination of the man
which abuses such things is to be rebuked: and therefore when it is
otherwise, it may be said, that a cause which is not, is put for a cause. As
some abuse Paul's meaning, when they go about to deprave philosophy.

Paul warns that we should not be deceived by philosophy.

Ergo Philosophy is naught, say some.

The argument does not follow, for a good thing may be much abused, and yet the
thing it self may not be altogether rejected as naught: therefore Paul does
not condemn demonstrations and principles which are assured truths, taught
by the sciences, as in arithmeticke.iiij. and.iiij. make.viij. In philosophy.
The whole is greater then the part, do as thou would be done unto, but he
reproves the abuse of sciences, when there is made a mingle mangle of them,
and one confounded with an other, as some have said that philosophy will
teach a christian, as much for his profession, as all the Prophets and the
whole Bible besides will do: this made Paul bid men take heed, that they be
not deceived by philosophy.

Now a days they will say. I cannot tell, here is is much preaching, much
teaching of gods word, but I see few folowers of it, it was a better world
when we had not half so many preachers, heresies were never more ripe,
naughtiness never more abounded, therefore give us the old learning again, and
take you the new.

This reason is not worthy a straw, The wickedness of the Preachers comes not
of their learning, but of their vicious natures, and naughty desiers: for out
of one and the same flower the Be sucketh honey, and the spider draws poison.
By these and such other like examples, ye may easily epsy, wherefore the
Argument is not good, if ye mark whether the true cause be in the former
Proposition, or some counterfect reason, which seems to prove, and yet in
diede does not prove the matter at al. for if I reason thus.

Iohson and Robson looked through an hedge, and the one saw the other:

Ergo they two are both nigh of kindred:

What man sees not, that does see any jot at al, that this gear hangs
together like a broken pot sheerd, and that the Antecedent does nothing at
all, prove the Consequent: and yet the other Arguments above rehearsed (if they
be narowlie marked,) are as folishe, and as worthy to be laughed at, as is
this folishe fond reason, and madly invented argument.

An other Argument.
Fear not the signs of the Element:

Ergo they signify none evil to come.

The Consequent is false, for Christ does forbid his Disciples, to fear the
signs, not by cause they signify none evil to come, but by cause that where
as they signify harm, and punishemen^ to the world, and wicked persons: yet
he will be a present succor to his church, and never leave it comfortles. As
when the godly hear this (fear not death) it does not follow, but that death
is an horrible thing, and much repugnaunt to man's nature. This deceiptful
Argument is much used in this our life, and made a bucklar for diverse
matters. As when I am loathe to be of a quest, or that any such business should
trouble me, being sent for, I feign my self sick, because I would not gladly
come. Or when one that is rich should healpe a poor man, to say: God healpe
you sir. I have a great charge my self, I can not do for you. Or when a
Bisshoppe should be desired to teach or preach, to say: he is sick. Or when
a lawyer being desired to healpe a poor man, and proffered there upon, a little
money, even so much as the poor man can not well spare, and yet not half so
much as the lawyer would have: straight to say, I am sorry, I can not do for
you, if I were not called upon otherwise by diverse men, I would not fa^l to
do you good. This is as they say in English, better a badde excuse, then none
at all, in Latin it is called, non causa pro causa posita. And the using of
such excuses among the Rethoritians, is called, translatio, that is to say, a
shiftyng, or puttyng of the fault from one, to an other. As we read that
Demades used a wonderful good shifte, when it was laidesore to his charge yt
he had writtte^ a very naughty decre and dishonest, for the obteynyng of the
peace at Alexanders hand: He answered that the same Decree was not writtten
with his own writing pen, but with Alexanders warryng spear, which is as much
to say, fear did drive him to take such, and such conditions of peace. We
read a notable History of a young child in Rome, called Papirius, which
because both it is pleasant, and much to be woundred at, and also serves for
this purpose right aptly, I think it meet to be rehearsed in this place. This
Papirius being a young ladde of.x. or.xij. years old, and son to one of the
Senators in Rome, which were then, as noble men be now in England, lords of
the Counsel, went every day with his father to the Parliamente house, and hard
from time to time all matters that were debated there. His father evermore
charged him that he should not utter any thing, which he hard, to any body
living. It happened afterward that upon urgent causes and weighty affairs,
the Counsel did sit much longer then they were wount, and continued so, for
the space of a seue^-night. Every body meruailed what this matter should be.
This boy Papirius knew all. His mother being most of all desirous to know what
it should be, when she could not attain the knowledge thereof by her housba^d,
she called the boie to confession, and having the instrument of absolution by
her, that is, a very good birche^ rod, charged her son truly to tell her
every whitte that was debated in the Parliament house, or else he should smart
for it surely: for, what with the secretenesse of the thing, and what with the
silence of her son, she was wonderful with child, till she had got some
what of the boie. The boie himself, first reme^bryng his fathers
commandment, and considering how he should be paid at his hand, if he
told al things in diede as they were: and again of the other side, seeing
present pain before him, the rod at hand, his mother with child till she
were somewhat satisfied, thought it better, pretely and by the way to mock
his mother, and so to stop her mouth with some forged tale: then falsely to
bewraie his father, his friends, and al his country. and therefore thus he began
craftily to shape his tale: Mother if you will promise me to keep that close,
which I shall disclose unto you, and tell it no body living, you shall hear
the whole matter, even as it is. She answered, she would not tell it again
whatsoever it were. Then said he, Mother the matter wholly concerns marriage,
and the Counsel have long debated, whether it were better for one man to have
two wives, or one wife to have two housbandes, and as yet the matter hangs in
suspense. When she hard this, her heart burned and her stomach was ouercharged
wonderfully, that except she had laid it in one of her neighbors lappes, it
was like she would have brast. Out she goes, and makes as much speed with her
tongue, as she does with her fete, and tells it immediately to her next
neighbor, and from one, to an other, till at length a number knew it, where
upon they agreed wholly to go all together to the Counsel house, to entreat
the Senators to sit no longer upon this matter, but clearly to determine with
one assente and consent, that it were best, and most expedient for every woman
to have.ij. housbandes, and not otherwise for no worlds good, any thing
heretofore to the contrary notwithstanding. By this example ye may see the
subtlety of this deceipte. For when the mother asked her son, what the cause
was of their long sitting, he told^ her a clean contrary thing, which the
Counsel never thought nor yet once minded, this is, no^ causa pro causa
posita. A cause that is not, put for a cause

The.iiii. deceit.
FAllacia consequentis, when the consequent, that is to say the latter
proposicion, is evil gathered by the antecedent, which goes before. And the
way to know the fault of this deceiptfull argument, is to examyne the
argument, with the precepts of Logique, above rehearsed.

Evil deeds purchas^ death.

Ergo good deeds purchase life.

The argument is not good, first co^sideryng, we cannot fulfill the law, by our
selfs. Again, works are wicked, that are done without faith, so that first
we must be in the state of grace by faith, and assured through faith, to live
ever, before our works shall be accepted for good, neither can our doings be
perfect, in any part, to fulfill Gods will, and his commandments, and
therefore, though evil deeds deserve death, yet good deeds can never
purchase life, so long as we be not able, to fulfill the Law, as God knows,
we shall never be: scripture, our consciences, the world, and all, bearyng
witness against us. Of signs that be not proper, neither tarry long, no
strong argument is made, as thus.

He is pale in countenance.

Ergo he is in love.

Palenes may come of study, of care and thought, of abstine^ce, of watchyng of
some diste^perature in the body, and many other ways besides.

Again, there is an other rule. A posse ad esse, non est bona consequentia.
Because a thing may be, it shall not therefore follow that it is. As the
Catholics have served us, for the Sacrament, saying, that because God is
omnipotent, and may be in the Sacrament, by his power really: Ergo he is
there really. For so may I say. God may feed every christian, both in body
and soul, with the might of his word. Ergo he does so. The prophet says, I
never saw a just man forsaken of god, nor his sede begging his bread. And yet
god does not feed al christians with his word only, but uses his appoyncted
will generally. Likewise in the Sacrament, God fedeth us spiritually, because
the flesh eaten, profits nothing, and they that eat the Sacrament in faith,
tarry in God^ and God in them spiritually^ and have life everlasting, whereas
other that eat it without faith, have it not at all, for lack of faith,
considering God is in no wicked man. But in thold world, many wonders were
wrought, and because things might be^ al things should be, as they would have
it, and yet I cannot be persuaded to think that because al priests may be
honest, therefore they all be honest.

From the general, to the inferior, affirmatively, is no good argument made.

He is a man.

Ergo he is a good man.

He may notwithstanding, be an evil man, yea, and sooner evil, then good, for
none can tell almost now a days, where the good men d^ell. Or if they have
dwelling places still, yet few ca^ find them at home. Again, to make an
argument, from those things, which happen to a man, and may be away: the
reason cannot of necessity follow.

This old manne goes gaily, and like a young man.

Ergo he is in love with some woman.

In this reason, a likelihode is made necessary, as though it could not other
wise be, but that he was in love, because he went in fresh apparel, young man
like. But for this whole capcious cause, I think it best, that ye mark the
rules, above rehearsed, and ye shall not fail to epsy the fault, for the
dec^ipte is sone seen, if ye call the argument to account.

The.v. deceit.
PLures interrogationes, many questions, that is, when I goo about to deceive
one, askyng him this and that, and he thinkyng not to what end I ask him, at
length is brought to an inconvenience, by his former grauntyng, of things
particularly. And it is two ways considered: First when we ask of many
things, one: and again, when we ask of one thing, many things, and put
forth diverse questions, before we come to ye pur^ose. For the first, this may
be an example.

Is water and wine whot or no?

The question is asked, so that he must answer to them both, which he can
not do at one time, and give one resolute answer directly, according to the
demaunders will. But this is a trifle, and one that has but a spo^full of wit,
may answer to this question, v^yng a distinccion, and several showing the
qualities, of both wine and water, otherwise he cannot be able, to make any
reasonable answer, as the question is propounded.

Is worshippyng of saints, and praiyng to god himself, allowed among
Christians, or no?

Here ye se, that for.ij. diverse things, one certain question is directly
required, whereas no man can justly answer at a word: and therefore the
question being vain made jointly, must severally be soluted.

I will merrily add another, which agrees to the second manner of askyng, and
I will add the same, rather to give matter of laughyng, then that there is any
great weight in it. A lawyer took pains in a matter of law, for a certain
ge^tleman, that was some time a scholar. The gentleman promised him a horse for
his labor, the lawyer after pains taken, requires his horse, the gentleman
denies his debt, although the lawyer had witness. And thus the gentleman
reasoned merrily for him self: sir quoth he, all horses be not of one color, but
of diverse colors, some black, some white, some baye, some daple: if I owe
you any by promise, I owe you no more of one color, then I do of another,
co^sideryng, I did promise you no more of one color, then I did of another,
and I may be discharged of my promise, as well in deliueryng one certain
colored horse, as another. Therefore, either I owe you horses of all colors,
or else I owe you none at all: but I do not owe you horses of all colors,
(considering I promised you but one) therefore I owe you none. Yea, serve you
me so, quoth the Lawyer, mary this school poynct, much passes al our law
poi^ctes. Well sir as it pleases you, quoth he, if you be at that poynct. When the
gentleman saw him so reasonable, and heard him say so, he gave him according
unto his promise, co^sideryng, he referred the whole matter so gently, to his
pleasure.

For this second manner of askyng, when of one thing, many are asked, one may
easily be inuegled and brought to an inconvenience, before he be ware, and of
this kind of askyng, there is also a notable example in Tullie, where he
speaks in his book De inuentione, of this figure inductio, which is by
things not doubtful, to prove that thing true which is doubtful. Socrates
shows that Aspasia had this talk with zenophon, and his wife, in manner and
form following, after other communication had before. And tell me in faith,
(quod Aspasia) if thy neighbor had more precious Jewels then thou now haste,
whether would thou wisshe to have hers, or thine own? She answered. I
would have hers, what if she had more costelie garments, more fine apparel,
would thou not have it also, ye mary would I, (quod she.) Ah well I say,
what if thy neighbor had a better husband then thou now have, whether had
thou rather keep thine own still, or hers? With that she bloushed. Then
Aspasia when apportunitie served, spoke to zenophon likewise, and said merely
unto him, he not knowing of this that was spoken before. I pray the tell me
zenophon, What if thy neighbor had a better horse then thine is, had thou
rather have thine own or thy neighbors? I would have his says he. what if he
had better land then thou have, would thou have ^is, or thine own? I would
have his says he. What if he had a better wife then thou have, would thou
change or no? Here zenopho^ said never a word. Then spoke Aspasia. For
as much as both of you only has not answered me, in that poinct, which I
most desired to know: I my self will show what both you think. For you
being a woman, first you desire a very honest man to your husband: and zenophon
being a man, desires to have a right honest woman. Therefore except you both
shall so behave your selfs, that there may be found, neither man, nor
woman, more honest vnd earth, then you two be: vndoubtelie you both will
evermore most earnestlye desire that, which you think pri^cipale and best of
al, both that thou being a husband, might have a right honest wife, and you
also being a woma^^ might be married to a right honest husband.

The syxt deceit^.
PEtitio princip^, the cuckowes song, that is, a repeting of that wholly in the
conclusion, which before was only spoken in the first proposition: or else by
things doubtful, to prove things that are as doubtful.

Every slaunderer must be banyshed the court.

Such a man is a slaunderer.

Ergo every slaunderer must be banished the court.

The conclusion is not well gathered, for it should not be universal, but
particular, and therefore seeing the same is repeted that was spoken before,
with out any good probation: in my mind it may be called the cuckowes song.
Again, when an unknown thing is proved by a thing, that is as much unknown,
as the other is.

In purgatory, sins be forgeuen to the dead.

Ergo we must say mass still for the dead.

This wise reason, fond preachers heretofore have made, that therefore we must
have mass for the dead, because in purgatory sins be forgeuen the dead. And
yet doubt I as much of this place purgatory, as I mistruste this folish
massyng, and to say truth it is sin to like either of the^ both, and as for
purgatory, I think there was never none such, but only invented to fear
the simple, as children have been made afraied with a visar, or else found out
to pike men's purses. An other.

Thus many hundred years have men used to ^raie to saints departed.

Ergo they do not amiss, that pray to the dead still.

I answer, whoredom has been used these many hundredth years, Ergo it is
lawful both to have the stews and to go to the stews still.

Every man may see how foolyshe this argument is, and yet it is as good as the
other, every ynche of it. For although men have prayed, me^ have gone on
pilgremage thus long, and thus long: yet it is not therefore true, that the
people did well therein. For we English men know (not only by hear say, but
also by good experience) that custom is the mother, and the suck geuer unto
all error. And therefore, when such arguments are made, we say. Dubiu^ per
id quod aeque dubium est, confirmatur. That which is doubtful, is proved by
that which is as doubtful, and so we do not allow the argume^nt.

Thirdly, when that thing is taken to prove, as though it ware undoubted, and
every body agreed thereunto: where as yet it is in controversy.

The anabaptists have the holy ghost the teacher of al things.

Ergo they need not to here ye gospel, nor yet be bound to follow it.

Who knows not, that has any knowledge of the truth, that the first may
lawfully be doubted, and rather denied, then granted.

Fourthly, this deceipte is then used when that which follows, proves that
which goes before, as though the cart went before the horse, for often times
that thing which is proved, is more assured then that which does prove, as
thus.

Infantes have faith.

Ergo they must be baptized.

The consequent is undoubtedly true, for as much as we fi^de it so in the
scripture that in ye primative church whole families were baptized, children
and all: for we read not that they were excepted: and yet some doubt, and
that of the greatest clerks, whether children have faith or no.

The.vii. deceit.
IGnoratio elenchi, (that is the mistakyng of co^tradictorie propositions) is a
disceiptful argument which comprehe^deth in it self al other above rehearsed
subtilties Aristotel notwithstanding has compassed this deceit with in his
bounds. First when respect is not made to one and the same thing, but
diuersely applied.

To eat flesh is good for health sake.

To eat flesh is not good when offense may follow.

Ergo to eat flesh is good and not good.

Truth it is and yet shall it not follow, that whosoever eats, the same man
does offend: considering to eat is lawful, and is none offense to God at
all, being ones allowed by the magistrate, in whose hand lies the whole
orderyng of this matter.

Again, this deceit is used when contradiction is made according to diverse
respects, as thus.

The law is to be followed in moral precepts, and not in ceremonials, nor yet
always in judicials neither.

Ergo the law is to be followed and not to be followed.

It is even so, and yet not true neither, that the law is always to be
rejected, and to be followed, as it pleases our fantasies.

Thirdly, this subtlety is fashioned, when a contradiction is used, and yet
not used of like sort, so that the latter part does not deny the former in
one manner of understanding, as thus.

I know the word of God, and I do not know it.

Those that live licentiously, and fear not the general resurrection, may
justly be here included, and the.ij. sentences which seem to gain say, may
both be true in them: for some know that the scriptures are of God, or at
least, they know that the scriptures are commonly taken for the word of god,
and yet they themselves, know not one word of gods will, nor yet pass a
whitte for it. Or we may say that those poor souls in the Popes reign knew
the word of god only by here say, when they hard the ghosphell read in latin,
and could not tell one word what it me^t.

Fourthly, the time, may alter things, and make.ij. diverse things to be
both true, thus.

To work upon the Saboth is forbid, and yet, not to work upon other days, is
also forbid.

Ergo to work, and not to work, are both forbed.

It is an easy matter to avoid all such deceiptes. Therefore there is a rule
in logique that.ij. contradictions can never be both, either false or true, at
one and the same time, and that in one respect, as thus.

Al true beleuers shall attain salvation.

Some true beleuers shall not attain salvation.

These.ij. propositions can never be both together either true or false. Now
the other which were made before, may be both true, at one and the same time,
and therefore they are not contradictories, because they are not considered in
respec^e of one, and the same thing, at one and the same time, but diversely
applied and considered, as thus.

To preach in the congregation is meet for a man, and not for a woman.

Ergo to preach is meet and not meet.

All this is true being diversely consi^ered, first, a woman may not preach, and
yet a man may, and so the sentence is true, and it may well be said to
preach is meet and not meet, with out any contradiction at all, because of
the diverse respects, which be had both to the man, and to the woman. if the
rule of contradictorie propositions before rehearsed, be well marked, all these
deceiptes may easily be avoided.

Of particular auoydyng false argume^^es which are deryued from the places.
WHen I see an argumrnt derived from these subtle places, or else from the
places of invention, which I have before at large declared: I ought to observe
diligently the general rules and precepts there given, for if one reason thus
from the general word, such a man follows noughtines, Ergo he is a thief,
the argument is not good, and the error appears the rather, by this general
rule, From the gene^al to the kind, the argument is not good. for though one
be naught otherwise, yet may he live noughtly long, and be no thief at all,
as he may be an aduouterer, a swearer, or such like.

False ^casons made through the evil framyng of an argument.
THe wrong framyng, may with ease be espied, if the rules be ones learned, that
are before set forth for the same purpose. And again all other kind of
arguments, have rules especial, and propre to themselfes whereby the true
orderyng of an argument is better known.

Of objections made to an argument.
Objections are then used, when we do not dissolve the argument by the rules
of logique, or directly avoid the danger, but bring an other thing, as an
example, to overthrow that which was spoken before, and this manner is four
ways used.

By taking occasion of the self same. thing, that is put forth, and wrestyng it
otherwise. By v^yng the like example in an other matter, By making clean
contrary example. By standing to authority, or vsyng sentences of the sage.
For the first, this example may serve, richesse are good, because they bring
pleasure. nay marie, richesse are evil, because they bring woe.

Of the second, thus. Such a one is an honest man for I saw him ones give
almose to the poor, I answer, such a one is no dronckarde, for I saw him
ones sober.

Of the third, thus. Such an honest man has ones received a great
displeasure of his frinde and neighbor, Ergo he may hate him deadly for
ever. Nay not so, for the wicked man will sometimes forgive, receauyng
displeasure, and therefore the goodman must much more forgive.

Of the fourth, thus. Forgive him, because he is a child, nay not so, for
Solomon byddeth, that the rod should not go from the child, therefore it is
good to beat him, when he offends.

I have trauayled thus far, to disclose untruths, and to open cloked errors,
wherein though sometimes the examples be but slender, yet in great matters the
same dec^ipte has taken place. Therefore though to the English ear, they may
seem strange, yet I hope they will be better taken, when this is known and
fully seen, that they give light to greater matters, and that logique by good
order, and perfect reason^ does rule all and espieth faults which otherwise
would bread offense: for look what false argument is used, the some may with
ease be found in some one of these deceipteful corners, or elsewhere in the
places of invention, and therefore may by art easelye be avoided. especially,
if the other rules above rehearsed, be ones well dige^^ed. for the rules are
touch stones to try untruths, and to frame matters right. And generally good
head ought to be had, that the matter, and form of every argument be true
according to the rules^ for by these.ij. points, al errors are espied. The
fault is in the mat^er (called in latin Materia,) when words are doubtefull,
and may diversely be taken, and also when the pithe, or substance of the matter
is confounded, and straungelye used by words joined together, and things not
orderly placed: in all which kind of arguments, ye must use either a flat
denial of the proposition, or else use a distinction to show how the argument
may be true, and how it may be false, according as it is understood. We use
a denial when of.ij. propositio^s in the Argument, we deny either the
proposition at large, or the several by showyng the fault to be in the
definition, in the division, in the causes, or some other place, as thus.

Such a one is a very honest man,

For I had good cheer at his house.

Here the fault is in the definicion, for if I would go about to d^fine an
honest man, every body would la^gh me to scorn, if I would thus define him.
That man what soever he be that makes me good cheer at his house, is a very
honest man: but I must rather say thus. What so ever he is that does as he
would be done unto, and wrongeth no body, but lives still vprightly^ godly,
and continently, that same is an honest man, or else not. For virtue is gotten by
long practice, and by well doing of many good things, not by making a good
dinner, and therefore the other above rehearsed definition, by cause it is not
lauful nor agreing with the rules of a definition, it is utterly to be denied,
this reason applied there unto that the definition is not lawful. Albeit I
knew one in my life, and that no small bird, which was better learned then
wise, and yet not so well learned in d^ede, as he thought himself in his own
opinion, wise, and used the like reason. For where as it chanced by occasion
of talk, that one in his co^paigny inueighed against ye same ma^s friend,
speaking things nothing tothsome, and otherwise then he would gladly hear,
although not greatly missing the quishyne in reportyng truth, he took the
matter very hot, and like a friend spoke earnestly in his friends cause,
testifyeng for his honesty with most constant words, and to persuad^ him ye
better he used this sore reason. Thou art to blame, quoth he to deprave such a
man's estimacio^, for by gods mother he is a very honest man, for he is my
special friend, I would thou should know it, and therrfore cease thy railing:
with that, other came to part the^. for they fell to reasonyng with Arguments,
that were neither in figure, nor in mode, but stood in plain buffeftes, which
is a subtlety, that is not mentioned with in the compass of this book, and
therefore dangerous, neither can it be avoided, except one have a headpece, or
some weapon in his hand to bear of, such deceipte, and so to save himself
harmless. Some call such rough dealyng, Carters Sophistry, when the fiste
reasons a matter by buffites, which the tongue should prove by Arguments.
Again for the division when it is not well made, it is to be denied in like
manner, the cause showed why and wherefore, as thus.

^uery man is either wastefull or covetous,

Cicero is man:

Ergo Cicero is either wastfull or covetous.

This division is not good, for many men offend in neither, but live
moderately^ content with there own, be it never so little. Moreover when no
true cause is applied, but a false reason forged, ye may avoid danger by
denieng it, as thus.

Money makes unthrifts,

Ergo money is naught.

Or thus.
Five burns houses,

Ergo what shall we do with it.

Or thus.
Water drowneth whole Cities,

Ergo water is nothing profitable

In all such Arguments the true cause is omitted, and a counterfecte cause
used. for neither money, nor ^ire, not yet water, do harm of the^ selues^ but
the naughtines of nature which abuses them, and the necligence of man which
forseeth not to the^, is the very true cause of their evil doing: and yet in
weighty matters such fond reasons have been used, as for the reading of Gods
word, for women to be learned, for Rethorick to be taught, or the temporal
law at this day in this our realm to be frequented, or occupied.

A distinction must be used, when any word is doubtful, and may be taken
diuersly^ As thus.

Time heals sick folk,

Ergo it is very good.

Here a distinction must be used, for time as well signifies an herb, as it
signifies the space, which is of an hour, day, or year. A friend of mine
was called Harris. one not well knowing his name, called him Harriso^ne. I deny
the son ( quoth he) not meaning the second person in Trinity, but the addicion
of this word (son.)

A learned man and a Phisician (some know who^ I mean) having at a certain
time a coat of Ueluet, that was much worn, and bare at the breast, being then
also poor withal, and having a thyn^e purse, sittyng at a table, and laiyng
his hand upon his breast, said thus merrily to his friend: well ( quoth he) for
all this hard world, at the worste I am thus much worth, even in bare
Ueluet. The Same man afterward, sittyng at a Table, not having elbowe rowine,
but being troubled, and his cote somewhat araied, which was dressed at the
Shermans, not past two or three days before, said merrily: I pray you my
Masters be good to my coat, for I promise you, within these two or three
days, it has scaipt a skowryng.

A young man of Cambridge, standing in a Galarie over the water, and lokyng on
his book: having the water on the one side, and a gardine on the other side,
wherein as it chanced then, were diverse maidens of the town (for it was
about Easter, at what time maidens gadded abroad, after they had taken their
maker, as they call it) he being thus beset, one of his fellows being abroad,
and seeing him there, bad him come to him. He answered, I can not come. The
other demanded why? Mary (quod he) because I am compassed with fire, and
water. Meaning the maidens to be fire, and a prouocacion to lust, burning
worse then fire: and ^o all good aucthors have used this word fire. As
Terence. Accede ad ignem hunc, iam calesces plus satis. Come to this fire,
says Parmeno to Phedria, meaning Thais the harlotte, and you shall be as whote,
as coals by and by. Therefore where such speech is used, it is always called
in latin metaphora. That is to say, a turnyng from the proper significacion
to that, which is not proper, wherein the old Philosophers, have wonderfully
excelled, as Diogenes, Socrates, and in our time sir Thomas More, a man for his
wit, very singular.

The fault that is in the form, or manner of making, as we call it, may be
dissolved, when we show that the conclusion, is not well proved, by the former
proposicions, and that the argument, is either not well made, in figure or in
mode, or in both: for of true things, none other thing can be concluded but
truth, if the due form of concludyng be observed, and the just placyng or
setting of the terms, called in Latin, termini, as ye hard before, be truly
ke^t, as the rules before have taught Notwithstanding of false proposicio^s an
undoubted truth, may well enough be concluded, as thus.

Every sin, may be suffere^ in a common weal,

Every execucion done by a law is sin,

Ergo every execucion, do^n by law, may be suffered in a common weal.

The two first proposicions are manifestly false, and yet the conclusion is
very true. So that ye may se, after.ij. false proposicio^s, a true conclusion
may follow, and not contrary wise, of two true proposicions, a false conclusion
ca^ be made. For as we say in Latin. Ex ueris, nil nisi ue^u^ sequitur, that
is to say, of true sayings, nothing does follow but truth. Therefore when the
conclusion seems not good, ye may justly suspect the other two proposicions,
although they seem never so true, for vndou^tedly, the fault is either in the
evil knittyng, (when the argument is not in his mode, and figure accordyngly,)
or else in the co^foundyng of words either not well placed, or evil applied or
else in the doubtfulnes of some word All riot is an offense.

No coueteousnes is riot,

Ergo no coueteousnes is any offense.



Thus we se a false conclusion, made of two undoubted true proposicions, and
yet I said before, of true sayings, nothing does follow but only truth. But
abide, ye must examine this argument with the rules, and then ye shall se, that
the fault is in the form, or manner ^f making an argument. For it is in no mode
of the first figure, although it be an argument of the first figure.

Some time the fault is only in the matter, and not in the manner of making an
Argument, whereof there are diverse examples above rehearsed Sometimes the fault
is both in the matter, and in the manner of making an Argument, as thus.

The earth is profitable, and causes much plenty,

Men are in the earth.

Ergo men are profitable, and cause much plenty.

First, it is in no figure, because the double repete in the first Proposicion
is the substance of the earth, and in the second Proposicion, is the being
in the earth, and so there ^e.iiij. terms, in the two Proposicions. Again it
is in no mode, because the first Proposicion in the first figure is not
universal. And this may suffice which hitherto I have rehearsed for the solutyng
of an Argument, for as much as he that ca^ divide, define, and make his
Argument in mode and figure, according to the rules before mentioned, and
diligently mark doubtful words: shall sone epsy the faults in an evil
Argument, for as much as it cannot otherwise be, but yt he which knows the
best, shall easily judge, and with out difficulty epsy the worst.

And now the rather to delight the reader, I will add here certain witty
questions and arguments, which can hardely be avoided, and yet pleasant, and
therefore not unworthy to be known.

They are called trappyng Arguments, because few that answer unto them, can
avoid danger, and thu^ they are named in strange words.

Crocodilites. Antistrephon. Ceratine. A^is^aton. Cacosistaton. Vtis.
Pseudomenos.
Crocodilites.
CRocodilites, is such a kind of subtlety that when we have granted a thing
to our adversary being as^ed before what we will say: the same turns to our
harm afterward: and causes an inconuenie^ce thervpo^ to ensew. Authors do
feign that the Crocodile being a monster in Egypt did take a woman's child
from her, and spoke with the mother in this wise: Woman I will give the thy
child again, if thou will say truth to me, and tell me assuredly, whether I
will give the thy child again or no? She answered, I know assuredly thou will not give me my child again, and therefore it is reason I have my child
again because I have said truth. Nay, said the Crocodile, I will not give the
thy child again because thou may be seen to have said truth, less that if I
give the thy child again, thou should have made a lie: neither yet would I
have given the thy child again, if thou had said otherwise, because the^ thou
had not said truth. And hereof this Argument has his name, called
Crocodilites. Notwithstanding Luciane tells this tale after an other sort,
and makes Chris^ppus to ask an other man what he would say, in case he
should be asked such a question of the Crocodile, as I have before rehearsed.

Antistrephon.
ANtistrephon, is nothing else, then to turn a man's saying into his own neck
again, and to make that which he brings for his own purpose, to serve for
our purpose, in Latin it may be called, Inuersio. Aulu^ Gellius has a notable
e^ample of Pithagoras, a noble Sophiste, and Euathus scholar to the same
Pithagoras. This Euathus was a very rich young man, and glad to learn
eloquence, and to plead causes in the common place. This young man therefore
considering Pithagoras to be a singular man in this behalf, and a mete
Scholemaister for his purpose, desired to be his scholar, and promised to give
him a great some of money, for his pains, even as much as he would ask, and
gave him upon agreement half in hand before he learned, and couenaunted their
upon that he should have the other half even the first day that he stood at
Bar^e, and by pleadyng, got the ouerhand in Judgment of his adversary.
After this, when he had been a good while Pithagoras scholar, and profited very
much in the Law, and yet notwithstanding came not to ye Bar, but still
shifted him of^ and tracting the time (of like because he would not pay ye
residue of his money) Pithagoras takes aduiseme^t as he himself thought, very
subtlely, and charge him with his promise, having an action of debte against
him, and therefore he called him to the Law. Where when he had hi^ before the
Judges, he begins his tale in this wise.

Here I have the now (says Pithagoras) and learn, therefore folishe fellow
as thou art, and mark this poinct for thy learning: whether the judgment be
given with the, or against the, I shall have my money every grote of it. If
thou art cast in the law, I have won by virtue of the law, if thou art not
cast, but gettest the ouerha^de by judgment of the^e men, yet must I have it
nevertheless, because our bargain was so made, when I first began to teach
the. Euathus hearing this, answered as ye shall hear. I could easily sir
avoid this your crooked subtlety, and be without all danger, if I would not
stand at ye bar my self, but get some advocate to stand for me, for by such
means, you could not charge me with any debte, considering I my self pleaded
no cause. Notwithstanding I like it better a thousand fold, that I my self am
here personally, and speak in mine own cause: seeing that not only, I will
get the ouerhande of you in this our matter, whereby I shall be discharged of
debt, but also even in this argument I will turn your own words into your
own neck again, and so triumph both ways. And therefore learn you again
as wise as you are, and mark this poinct for your learning, whether the
judgment be ^euen with you, or against you, I shall save my money, every
grote of it. For if you be cast in the law, I have wo^ne by virtue of the law,
and so I owe you nothing. If you be not cast, but get the ouerhande of me, by
the judgment of these men: then according to my bargain, I shall pay you
nothing, because I have not gotten the ouerhande in judgment. The judges seeing
the matter so doubtefull, and so hard to determine for either party: fearing
to do amiss, left the matter raw without judgment for that time, and
differred the same to an other season. Thu^ ye se that the yongin^ being ye
scholar, gave his master a bone to gnawe^ and bette him with ^is own rod,
which the master had made for his scholars tail.

There is in Aristophanes a wonderful pretty talk, betwixt the father and the
son, which serves well for this purpose. For where as the son had beaten
the father contrary to al order and honesty, yet not withstandyng the son,
thought he had as good authority to beat his father if he did am^sse ^s the
father to beat him. And therefore he sayde^ wherefore should my father beat
me? His father made answer. Mary (quod he) because I love the, and would thou
should do well. Mary therefore (quod the son) will I beat the to, because
I love the also good father, and would thou should do well: and with that
laid on strokes surely, till he made his father grant that it was as lawful
for the son, to beat his father, as for the father to beat his son.

Ceratinae.
CEratin^^ argumentationes, are called horned arguments, the which are so
dau^gerouse to answer unto, for both parts propouned, that it will be hard to
escape a foil. Even as when ye se a bull, and would catch him by the horns, ye
se as much danger in the one horn, as in the other^ and so you fear to take
him on either side: In like case, when these horned arguments are propouned, a
man uneath can tell what to answer. As we read in the gospel of Matthew the
xxij. Chapter, when the Phariseis did send their disciples (which did
prete^de holiness, and bare a face of true religion) to take Christ in a snare.
And therefore first they came, geuyng him a name of authority, and called him
master flatteryngly, as though he might speak his mind freely to them, because
there was none but his Scholars, and such as sought unfeignedly to be edefied
in the truth: secondly, they praise him for his goodness, that he is true in
all his dealings, and uses no dissimulacion, and again they say, that not
only he is true, but also teaches the way ^f truth, and then thus they
begin to question with him, and to feel his mind what he will say (for truly
they thought to take him in a trip, whether he held his peace, or spoke) and
therefore they said. Sir may we lawfully pay tribute to Caesar, or no? Or how
thy^ke you, does it stand with Gods word^, that we may pay, or no? Here
Christ was beset two ways, first it was dangerous for him, to hold his
peace: for then he might seem by so doing, to have respect to the person of
men^ and for fear not open the truth, in such a weighty matter, and so stain
the glory of God. Of the other part, if he should answer it ware a dangerous
piece of work, in like manner, for they thought, he would either speak on
Cesars side, and allow payeng of Tribute, and so incur the hatred of all the
people, whereby they might more boldly afterward^ put him to death: or else they
thought, he would speak against Caesar, and so he should commit treason, and be
apprehended thereupon, as a Traitor. But Jesus knowing their naughty purpose,
and plainly seeing where about they went, disapoyncted them of their will, that
they could take none advantage of him at al. And therefore he said, because he
would publishe their falsehode, what tempt you me ye ypocrites? Show me the
coin of the tribute, and they took him a penny, and he said unto them: whose
is this Image and superscripcion They said unto him, Cesars. Then said he, give
therefore unto Caesar the things which are Cesars, and unto God those things
which are gods. Christ did not at the first when they propounded their
question unto him, plainly say, give unto Caesar the things, which are
Cesars, but when he had asked them whose coin it was, and that they by their
own confession, had granted it to be Cesars, whereby they bare witness of
themselfes that they ware subject to Caesar, he said, for as much as you grant
your selfs by the virtue of this coin to be tributaries, pay on gods name
to Caesar the things that pertayne to Caesar, and unto God those things that
are gods.

Cacosistata.
CAcosistata are such arguments that being propounded, between two persons,
they serve as well for the one part, as the other, as thus. You must forgive
him, because he is but a child, no mary, therefore will I beat him, because he
is a childe^ or thus. This man should not be judged to dye, by any temporal
law, because he is a priest. yes mary therefore should he be Judged to dye,
because he is a priest, and has offended, which should have given good
example to other of well living.

Asistata.
ASistata are such arguments, as are impo^sible to be true, as when a child
of two years old, should be accused of aduoutrie, as though it were like, that
he could offend in such filthiness.

Vtis.
VTis is nothing else, but when one goth about to prove a thing, and makes
that which should prove, to be as uncertain, as that thing, which is proved,
as thus. In Purgatory synn^s are forgiven, by virtue of the Mass, ergo we
must say Mass still. Whereas I think there is no godly wise man, but doubts
as much that Purgatory is, as he may justly say, that the mass saves no
man.

Pseudomenos.
THis is called a liynge argument, for what so ever ye shall say, ye must
needs sa^e ami^^e. Epimenides a man borne in Crete said that the people borne
in Crete, were liers, said he true, or no? if ye say that he said truth, I
may well say^ that can not be well said, for if the people in Crete be liars,
then lied Epimenides, because he was a man their borne, and one of Crete, and
said they ware l^ers. Again if ye judge that Epimenid^s said false, and that
the people there, be no liars, then Epimenides said truth even when he said,
the people of Crete are liars, because he himself was a man of Crete. But this
subtlety is thus avoided, if ye will say that where as mention is made of the
people in Crete, yet all are not comprehended under the same, neither is the
Proposicion universal but indefinite, that is to say, not comprehendyng all but
certain, as thus. The people of C^ete are liars, truth it is, that many of
them be liars, and yet Epimenides may be excepted, and be a true man of his
word, notwithstanding. As also he yt was warned in his sleep not to give
credit to any dreams, did not think that dream vain, although he judged
many other to be little esteemed, and small head to be taken to them. For by this
dream he was warned not to believe greatly other dreams, and yet not
withstanding he was warned to believe this dream.

NOw that I have brought this rude work to some end, and for this time framed
it, so well as I could, I desire of al men th^re favorable help, to supporte
my weakness, or at ye least, to give me none evil report, for my well
meaning, and then I shall think my self sufficiently rewarded. But if
offense should breed through labor sustained, and no favor gotten, when
gentleness had been offered, it had been as good (in my mind) to play and
lose nothing, as to take pains, and lose all. But my trust being stayed upon
the honest and godly affected, I have travailed without fear, hopyng well
that my doings shall be taken without blame. And therefore this obtei^ed, I shall
desire al men for the love of God to embrace the truth, and not to wedde
themselfes to any opinion without some stay or sure foundation of gods
truth. And where as God is the author of peace and co^co^de, and loves the^,
that unfeignedly call upon him in truth: I shall heartily pray to God that al we
may draw after one line, and seek one uniform and sound doctrine, to the
praise of God, and the comfort of our souls. And because some heads are very
bold to enter farther, then wit can retche, or el^ have a mind vainly to
question, of things not ned^full: I thought it not amysse to set forth here
Aristoteles mind, as touching things that should not be brought in question.
There be four things (says he) which should not be examined by reason. And
first no man ought to argue of those things wherein if any one put doubt, he
deserves punishment. As to reason whether there be a God or no. And therefore
Tullie says very well, it is a wicked and an ungodly custom, to dispute or
talk against God, either in earnest, or yet in sport. Again it is fondness,
to reason of those things which our senses judge to be true. As to know by
reason, whether fire be hot, or no. the which were madness to ask, and
surely, if any one should so reason with me, I would bid him put his finger
in it. Thirdely, it is evil to reason of those things, which can not be
known by man's wit. As to know what God ye father is in person, what the
holy ghost is, how they sytte and are placed in heaven, or of what making the
soul of man is. Fourthlie, to talk and dispute of those things, which are
undoubtedly true. As in Arithmetike.iii. and.iij. are syx. In Philosophy. The
whole is greater then the part. In all which matters to move any earnest
question, or to doubt overmuch in things nothing doubtefull, is either stark
madness, or else plain foolyshnesse. Therefore I wyshe of GOD, that all our
reasonyng might be fastened upon such m^tters, as are necessary both for the
bearer to learn, and also good, for the godly reasoner, to teach. Wherein
though I have done nothing so well my self, as my good will was thereunto, yet
I trust al honest hearts, will testify with me, that I have most earnestly
minded the glory of God, and the setting forth of his holy name, throughout
the whole course of this my rude and simple book: the which ones done and
knowen^ I hope the gentle reader will bear with me in other things, and
pardone such faults, as through ignorance have escaped, or else for lack of
time could not well be altered. God be praised.

An admonition to the reader for faults escaped in the Printyng.
SO it was gentle and loving reader, that I wrote this book in such a time, as
when I had not so convenient leasour for ye good placing and true examinyng
thereof, as sense I came to the printing of the same I wyshed that I had. And
the manner of imprintyng being such, that whatsoever is not made perfect before
it comes to the prynte, cannot without the great loss and hynderaunce of the
Prynter, be then altered or amended. By reason whereof, certain sentences
herein are passed much sleyghter, then with aduisement, either they should, or
that I would have suffered, if other wise I might have remedied them. And
therefore most humbly and h^rtely I desire the, whatsoever thou be to read
this work friendly and favorably, and where cause of imperfection is found, to
set to thy amendyng hand, considering that no one thing that ever was wrought
by man, was made perfight at the first, and then shall I have no cause to fear,
but that these my labors shall be accepted in good part, howsoever either by
ignorance or by negligence, any thing shall seem to be omitted, or not done
accordyngly. And thus most heartily fare well.

Imprinted at London by Richard Grafton, printer to the Kings Majesty. Anno.
M. D. LI.

Cum priuilegio ad Imprimendum solum.




