The book of secrets of Albertus Magnus, of the virtues of Herbs, stones, and
certain beasts. Also, a book of the same author, of the maruaylous things of
the world: and of certain effects, caused of certain beasts.

Anno. M. D. LX.

To the reader.
Sith it is manifestlye known, that this book of Albertus Magnus, is in the
Italyon, Spanysh, French, and Duche tounges, it was thought if it were
translated into English tongue, it would be received with like good will and
frendshyp, as it is in those parts. Wherefore use thou this book, to mitigate,
and alacreate, thy heavy and troublesome mind, as thou have ben wont to do,
with the book commonly called the book of Fortune: for believe me, whatsoever is
promised in ^ther of the^ both, this, or that, is alonely to ye end.

The first book of the virtues of certain Herbs.
ARistotell, the Prince of Philosophers, says in many places, that every
science is of the kind of good things. But notwithstanding, the operation
sometime is good sometime evil: as the science is changed to a good, or to an
euel end, to which it works. Of the which saying, two things be
concluded: the one, and the first is, that the science of magike is not evil,
for by the knowledge of it, euel may be eschued, and good followed. The second
thing is also concluded for as much as the effect is praised for the end, and
also the end of science is dispraised, when it is not ordained to good, or
to virtue. It folo we^h then, that every science, or operation, is sometime
good, sometime evil, Therefore, because the science of Magike, is as a good
knowledge (as it is presupposed) and is somewhat evil in beholding of causes,
and natural things, as I have considered, and perceived in ancient aucthors:
yes and I my self, Alberte have found the troth in many things, and I suppose
the truth to be in some part of the book of Chirander, and of the book of
Alchorat.

First therefore, I will declare of certain herbs. Secondlye, of certain
stones. And thyrdely, of certain beasts, and the virtues of them.

Elitropia Marygolde. Urtica Nettell. Virga pastoris Wild tasyl. Celidonia
Celendyne. Prouinca Perwynke. Mepeta Calami^t or peniroyal Lingua canis Hondes
tou^ge. Jusquianus Henbane. Lilium Lylye. Viscus querci Misseltoe. Centaurea
Centorye. Saluia Sauge. Verbena Veruin. Melysophylos Smallage. Rosa Rose.
Serpentina Snakes grass
The first herb is called with the men of Chaldea, Elios with the Greeks,
Matuchiol, with ye Latynes, Elitropium, with English men, Marygolde, whose
interpretation, is of Elios, that is the Son, and Tropos, that is alteration,
or change, because it is turned according to ^ sun The virtue of this herb
is marvelous: for if it be gathered, the Sun being in the sign Leo, in
August, and be wrapped in the leaf of a Laurel, or baye tree, and a wolves to
the be added thereto, no man shall be able to have a word to speak against the
bearer thereof, but words of peace. And if any thing be stolen, if the bearer
of the things before named, lay them under his head in ye night, he shall see
the thief, and all his co^ditio^s. And moreover, yt the foresaid herb be put in
any church, where women be, which have broken Matrymonye on their part, they
shall never be able to go forth of the church, except it be put away. And
this last point has been proved, and is very true.

The second herb is called of the men of Chaldea Roybra, of ^ Greeks
Olieribus, of the Latynes, or Frenchemen Vrtica, of English men, a nettell. He
that holsteth this herb in his hand, with an herb called Mylfoyle, or
yarowe, or noseblede, is sure from all fear, and fantasye, or vysion. And if
it be put with the juice of houselyke, and the bearers hand be anointed with
it, and the residue be put in water, if he enter in ye water where fysshes be,
they will gather together to his hands, and also ad piscellum. And if his hand
be drawn forth, they will leap again to their own places, where they were
before.

The third herb is named of the Chaldeis Lorumboror, of the Greeks Allamor,
of the Latins Uirga pastoris, of English men, Dylde tasyll. Take this herb,
and tempre it with the juice of Mandrake, and give it to a bytche, or to
another beast, and it shall be great with a young one in the own kind, and
shall bring forth the birth in the own kind, of the which young one, if
the gome to the be taken, and deped in meat, or drink, every one that shall
drink thereof, shall begin anon battle, and when thou would put it away,
give to him y^ juice of Ualeria^, and peace shall be anon among them, as before.

The fourth herb, is named Aquilaris, of Chaldeis: because it spri^geth in
the time, in which the Egles build their nestes: It is named of Greeks Ualis,
of La tines Celidonia, and of Englishmen Celendyne. This herb springs in
the time, in yt which the swallo was, and also y^ Egles makes their nestes. If
any man shall have this herb, with y^ heart of a molle, he shall overcome all
his enemies, and all matters in suit, and shall put a way all debate. And if
the before named herb, be put upon the headde of a sick man, if he should
dye, he shall sing anon with a loud boyce, if not, he shall weep.

The fyfte herb is named of y^ Chaldeis Iterisi, of the Greeks, Uorax, of the
Latynes Proue^talis, or Prouinsa, of English men Perwynke, wha^ it is heate^
unto powder with worms of y^ earth, wrapped about it, and with an herb
called Semperuina, in En glyshe houslyke, it induces love between man and
wife, if it be used in their meats. And if it shall be put too the mouth of
the beast, called the Bugill, he shall breahe anon in the mids. And this was
proved of late time.

If the said confection be put in the fire, it shall be turned anon, vnt blue
color.

The sixth herb is named of the Chaldeis Bieith, of the Brekes Retus, of the
Latins Nepeta, of English men Calamynt, otherwise Penyroyal. Take this herb
and myxe it with the stoone, found in the nest of the byrd called a lapwyng,
or black poluev, and rub the bealy of any beast, and it shall be with birth,
and it shall have a young one, very black in the own kind. And if it be put to
their nosethrylles, they shall fall to the ground anon as dead, but a little
space after they shall be healed. Also if the foresaid co^fectio^ be put in a
vessel of bees y^ bees will never fle a wai, but the^ shall gather together
there. And if the bees be drouned and like as they were dead, if they be put
in the aforesaid confection, they shall recover their life after a little time,
as by y^ space of one hou re, for it is proporcioned to y^ qua litie lost. And
for a sure proof, if drowned fl yes be put in warm ashes, they will recover
their life aftev a little space.

The seuenthe herb is named of y^ Chaldeis Algeil, of y^ Greeks Dru^, of y^
Latins Lingua canis, of English men, Hondes tongue, put thou this herb with y^
heart of a young frogge, and her matrice, and put them where thou will, and a
fter a littel time, all y^ dogs of the whole town shall be gathered together:
And if you shalt have the before named herb under thy formest toe, all the
dogs shall keep silence, and shall not have power to bark. And if thou shall
put the aforesaid thing in the neck of any dog, so y^ he may not touch
it with his mouth, he shall be turned always round about like a turning whele,
until he fall unto the ground as dead, and this has been proved in our time.

The eyghte herb is named of Chaldeis Mansesa, of y^ Greeks Uentosin, of the
Latins Jusquianus, of English men Henbane. Take thou this herb, and mix it
Cum realgalis and Hermoda talis, and put them in the meat of a mad dog,
and he will dye anon. And if thou shall put the juice of it with the
aforesaid things in a silver cup, it shall be broken very small. And if thou
shall mix the aforesaid thing, with the blood of a young hare and keep it
in y^ skin of a hare all y^ hares will be gathered there until it be removed.

The nynth herb, is named of the Chaldeis Ango, of y^ Greeks Amala, of the
Latins Liliu^, of the English men a Lyly. If thou will gather this herb, the
son being in the sign of the Lion, and wilt myxe it with the juice of y^
Laurel, or baye tree, and afterward thou shall put that juice under y^ dunge of
cattle, a certain time, it shall be turned unto worms, of the which, if
poulder be made, and be put about the neck of any man or in his clothes, he
shall never sleep, nor shall not be able to sleep until it be put a way. And
if you shall put the aforesaid thing under the dunge of cattle, and wilt
anoynte any man with the worms bredinge thereof, he shall be brought anon unto a
fenex. And if the aforesaid thing be put in any vessel, where there is comes
milk, and be covered with the skin of any cow of one color, all the kye
shall loose their milk.

The tenth herb is called of y^ Chaldeis Luperax, of the Greeks A^ifena, of
the Latins Uiscus querci, of English men Myssell toe. And it grows in
trees, being holed through. This herb with a certai^ other herb, which is
named Martegon, that is Silphion or Laserpitiu^, as it is written in the
Almaynes language, it opens all locks. And if the aforesaid things, being
put together, be put in the mouth of any man, if he think of any thing, if
it should happen, it is set on his heart, if not, it lepeth back from his
heart. If the before said thing be hanged up to a tree with ye wyng of a swallow,
there the brydes shall be gathered together wrihin the space of five miles. And
this last was proved in my time.

The eleventh herb is named of the Chaldeis Isiphilon, of the Greeks Orgelon,
of the Latins Centaurea, of English men Centory, which says that ths herb
has a marualous virtue, for if it be joined with the blood of a female
lapwyng, or black plouer and be put with oil in a lamp, all they that
compass it about, shall believe them selfs to be witches, so that one shall
believe of an other, that his head is in heaven and his fete in the earth. And
if the aforefayd thing be put in the fire wha^ the stars shine it shall
appear, y^ the stars run one against an other, and fight. And if the
aforesaid plaster be put to the nosethrilles of any man, he shall flee away
sharply, through fear that he shall have, and this has been proud*

The twelft herb is named of the Chaldeis Colorio, or Coloricon, of the Greeks
Clamor, of the Latins commonly Saluia, of Englysh me^ Sauge. This herb being
putrified under dunge of cattle, in a glasyn vessel, brings forth a
certain worm or byrd, having a tail after the fasshion of the bird, called
a black macke or owsyll, with whose blood, if any man be touched in ye breast, he
shall lose his sense or feeling the space of.xv. days and more. And if the
aforesaid Serpent be burned, and the ashes of it put in ye fire, anon shall
there be a rain bow, with an horrible thunder. And if the aforesaid ashes
be put in a lamp, and be kyndled, it shall appear yt all the house is full of
serpents, and this has been proved of men of late time.

The.xiii. herb, is named of ye Chaldeis Olphanas, of ye Greeks Hiliorion, of
ye Latins Verbena of the English me^ Veruyn. This herb (as witches say)
gathered, the Sun being in the sign of the Ram, and put with grain or corn
of pyonie of one year old heals them y^ be sick of ye falling sykenes. And
if it be put in a fat ground, after.viii. wekes worms shall be engendered,
which if they shall touch any man, he shall dye anon. And if the aforesaid
thing be put in a dove house or a culuer house, all the doves or culuers shall be
gathered together there. And if the poulder of them be put in ye sun, it shall
appear that the sun is blue. If ye poulder be put in a place where men dwell
or lie between two lovers, anon there is made strife or malice between them.

The.xiiii. herb is named of ye Chaldeis Celayos, of ye Greeks Casini. of ye
Latins Melisopholos, of English men Smalage: of the which herb Macer floridus
makes mention. This herb gathered grene, and tasten with the juice of the
Cypress tree of one year, put in gruell, makes the gruell to appear full of
worms, and makes ye bearer to be gentle and gracious, and to vanquish his
adversaries. And if the aforesaid herb be bounden to an oxes neck, he will
follow the whether soever thou will goo.

The.xv. herb is named of the Chaldeis Glerisa, of the Greeks Isaphinus, of ye
Latins Rosa, of English me^ a Rose. And it is an herb, whose flower is very
well knowell. Take the grain or corn of it, and the corn of musterd seed and
the foot of a Wesel, hanged up these in a tree, and it will not bear fruit
after. And if the aforesaid thing be put about a net, fysshes will gather
together there. And if Magaris shall be dead and be put in the aforesaid
commixtion half a day, it shall recover the life, although it be not forth
with yet gotten.

And if the aforesaid poulder be put in a lamp* and after be kind led, all
men shall appear black as the deuell. And if y^ aforesaid poulder be myxed
with oil of y^ Olyue tree, and with quycke brymstone, and the house ano^nted
with it, the Sun shyning, it shall appear all inflamed.

The.xvi. herb is called of the Chaldeis Carturlin, of the Greeks
Pentaphyllon, of the Latynes Serpentina, in English snakes grass. This herb
is well enough known with us. This herb put in the ground, with the leaf of
the three leafed grass engenders read and grene serpents, of which if poulder
be made, and put in a burning lamp, there shall appear aboundau^ce of
serpents. And if it be put under the head of any man, from thence forth he
shall not dream of him self.

The manner of work^g all these aforenamed things, that y^ effect may be good
in their planets is, in their hours, and days.
THere be.vii. herbs, y^ have great virtues, after y^ mind of Alexander the
Emperor, and they had these virtues of the influence of the planets. And
therefore, every one of them takes their virtue from the higher natural
powers.

The first is the herb of y^ planet Saturnus, which is called Affodillus,
Affodilly, the juice of it is good against the pain of y^ reins, and legs:
let them that suffer pain of the bladder, eat it the root of it being a
little boiled. And if me^ possessed with euel spirits, or mad men bear it,
in a clean napkyn, they be delivered from their disease. And it suffere th not
a deuel in y^ house. And if children that breed their teeth, bear it about
them, they shall breed them without pain. And it is good that a man bear with
him a root of it in y^ night for he shall not fear, nor be hurt of other.

The second is y^ herb of the Sun, which is called Poligonia, or
Coraligiola. This herb takes the name of the Sanne: for it enge^dreth
greatly, and so this herb works many ways.

Other has called this herb Alchone, which is the house of the Sun. This
herb heals the passions, and grief of the heart and the sto macke.

He that touches this herb, has a virtue of his sign, or Planete. If any
man drink the juice of it, it makes him to do often, the act of generation.
And if any man bear ye rote of it, it heals the grief of the eyes. And if
he bear it with him before he have any grief, there shall come to him no
grief of his eyes. It helps also them yt be vexed with the phrenesy, if they
bear it with them in their breast.

It helps also them* that are diseased with an impostume in ye lunges, and
makes them to have a good breath, and it avails also too the flyxe of
melancholyous blood.

The third is the herb of the Moon, which is called Chynostates. The juice
of it purges the pains of the stomach, and bre^^ plates, the virtue of it
declares that it is the herb of ye Moon. The flower of this herb purges
great splenes, and healeath them, because this herb increases and decreaseth
as the Moon. It is good against the sickness of the eyes, and makes a sharp
sight. And it is good against the blood of ye eyes. If thou put the root of it
brayed upon the eye, it will make thy eye merualous clear, because the light of
the eyes Propinquatum mystion, is of the substance of the Moon. It is also
good to them that have an evil stomach or which can not disgeste their meat,
by drinkyng the juice of it moreover it is good to them that have the swyne
pockes.

The fourth herb is called Arnoglossa, plantayne. The rote of this herb is
merualous good against the pain of the headde, because the sign of the Ram
is supposed to be the house of the planete Mars, which is the head of the whole
world. It is good also against evil customs of man's stones, and rotten and
fylthy byles, because his house is yt sign Scorpio, because a part of it
holds Sparma, that is the seed, which comes against the stones whereof all
living things be engendered, and fourmed. Also the juice of it is good too them
that be sick of ye pery^ous flyxe, with excoriation or raysyng of the bowels,
continual tourmentes, and some blood yssuyng forth. And it purges them that
drink it, from the syckenesses of y^ flyx of blood, or emoraudes, and of the
disease of the stomach.

The fyft is the herb of the planete mercurius, which is named Pentaphillo^,
in English cinquefoyle or the.v. leued herb* of others Pentadactilus, of
others Sepe declinans, of certain Calipe^olo. The root of this herb brayed
and made in a plaster, hea^eth wou^des and hardenes. Moreover, it puts away
quickly ye swyne pockes, if the juice of it be dro^ken with water. It heals
also the passions or griefs of the breast, if the juice of it be dro^ke^. It
puts away also y^ to the ache. And if the juice of it be holden in the
mouth, it heals al ye griefs of ye mouth. And if any man bear it with him, it
gives wark and help. Moreover if any man will ask any thing of a king or
prince, it gives abou^da^ce of eloquence, if he have it with him, and he shall
optayn it yt he shall desire. It is also good to have ye juice of it, for the
grief of the stone, and the syckenes which lets a man that he ca^ not pysse.

The.vi. is the herb of ye planet Jupiter, and it is named Acharon, of
certain Jusquianus, He^bane. The root of it, put upon botches, heals the^,
and keeps the place from an inflammation of blood. If any man shall bear it
before the grefe come upon him he shall never have a botche.

The root of it also is profitable against the gout in the fete when it is
brayed, and put upon the place that suffers the pain or grief. And it works
by virtue of those signs, which have ^ete, and look upon the fete. And if the
juice of it be dronken with honey, or with wine and honey sodde^ together, it is
profitable against the griefs of the liver, and all his passions, because
Jupiter holds the liver.

Likewise* it is profitable to the^ that would do often the act of
generation, and to them yt desire to be loved of women, it is good that they
bear it with them, for it makes the bearers pleasant and delectable.

The.vii. is the herb of y^ planet Venus, and is called Pisterio^ of some
Hierobotane, id est, Herbo colu^baria and verbena, veruen.

The root of this herb put upon the neck, heals ye swyne pockes,
apostumes behind ye ears, and botches of the neck, and such as can not keep
their water,

It heals also cuttes, and swelli^g of the evil, or foundament, procedyng of
an inflammation, which grows in the foundame^t, and the Emauraudes. If the
juice of it be dronken with honey and water sodden, it dissolueth those things
which are in lunges or lights. And it makes a good breath, for it saves and
keeps the lu^ges and the lyghtes. It is also of great strength in venerial
pastymes, ye is the act of generation. If any man put it in his house or
vyneyarde, or in the ground, he shall have abunda^tly revenues, or yearly
profytes, moreover the rote of it is good to all them which will plant
vynyardes or trees. And infantes bearing it, shall be very apt to learn, and
loving learning, and they shall be glad and joyous. It is also profitable, being
put in purgations, and it puts abacke deuels. Yet this is to be marked, that
these herbs he gathered fro the.xxiii. day of the Moon until the.xxx. day,
beginnyg the gathering of them from the sign Mercurius, by the space of a
whole hour, and in gatherynge make mention of the passion or grief, and the
name of the thing, for the which thou do gather it, and the self herb,
notwithstanding, lay the herb upon wheat, or barleye, and use it afterward
too thy need.

Here begins the second book of the virtues of certain stones.
BEcause I have spoken now before of ye virtues of certain herbs, now in this
present chapter, I will speak of certain stones, their effects and maruaylous
operations.

Magnes, the lode stone. Ophthalmus Onyx. Feripendamus Sylonites. Topazion
Medoria, Memphitis, lapis iuxta me^phim vrbem in Egypto. Abaston Adamas,
diamo^d. Agathes Alectoria. Esmundus Amaristus. Berillus Celonites. Corallus
Cristallus. Elotropia Epistrites. Calcedonius Celidonius. Bagates Bena. Istmos
Tabrices. Chrysolitus Gerattides. Nichomai Quirim. Radianus Luperius. Ounces
Lazuli. Smaragdus Iris Gallasia Galerites. Draconites Echites. Tepristites
Hyaciuthus. Orithes Saphyrus. Saunus.
If thou will know whyther thy wife is chaste, or no.
Take the stone, which is called Magnes in English, the lode stone, it is of
sad bl^w color, and it is found in the sea of Inde sometime in parts of
Almaine, in the province, which is called East France. Lay this stone under
the head of a wife, and if she be chaste, she will embrace her husband, if she
be not chaste, she will fall anon forth of the bed.

Moreover, if this stone be put brayed, and scattered upon coals, in four
corners of the house, they that be sleapynge, shall flee the house, and leave
all.

If thou will be made invisible.

Take the stone, which is called Ophethalmius, and wrappe it in the leaf of
the Laurel, or Baye tree, and it is called Lapis obtelmicus, whose color is
not named, ^or it is of many colors, and it is of such virtue, that it blinds
the sightes of them that stand about. Constantinus carrying this in his hand,
was made inuisyble by it.

If thou will provoke sorrow, fear, terrible fantasyes, and debate.
Take the stone, which is called Onyz, which is of black color. And the kind
is best which is full of white veins. And it comes from Inde, unto Araby, and
if it be hanged upon the neck, or finger, it styrreth up anon sorrow or
heaviness in a man, and terroures, and also debate, and this has been proved
by men of late time.

If thou will burn any man's hands without fire.
Take the stone, which is called Fet^pe^damus, which is of yelow color, which
if it be hanged upon the neck of any man, it heals Areticu^, and also if
this stone be greped straytly, it burns ye hand anon, and therefore it must
be touched lightly, and gently.

If thou will kyndle the mind of any man too joys, and make his wit sharp.
Take the stone, which is called Sylonites, and it grows in y^ bosom of a
snayle of Inde, called Corcuses, and there is of diverse kinds of it, of white,
read, and purple color. Other say, that it is grene, and found in the parts
of Parsia. And also old Philosophers say, if it be tasted, it gives
knowledge of certain things to come. If it be put under the tongue, specially
in ye first moan, it has a virtue only for an hour. Therefore being in the x.
moon, it has this virtue in the first, or tenth hour. But there is mouyng of
the order, because, when it is under the tung, if our thought be of any
busynes, whether it ought too be or no, if it ought to be, it is fixed
stedfastlye to the heart, so that it may not be plucked away, if not, the heart
leapeth abacke from it. Also Philosophers have said, that it heals Ptificos,
and weak men.

If thou will that seething water come forth anon, after thou have put in thy
hand.
Take the stone, which is called Topazion, fro the I Will Topasis, or because it
shesheth a similitude of gold. And there be two kinds of it: one is utterly
like gold, and this is more precious The other kind is of the color of
saffron, of bryghter color tha^ gold is, and this is more profitable. It has been proved in our time, that if it be put in seething water* it makes it to
ru^ne over but if thou put thy* hand in it, the water is drawn out anon, and
one of our brethren did this at Paryse. It is good also against Emothoicam et
stimaticam, or lunatyke, passion or grief.

If thou will pluck of ye skin of thine, or an other man's hand.
Take the stone, which is called Medora, of the region Media in the which the
people dwelling are called Medi. And there be two kinds of it, black and
grene. It is said of old Philosophers and also of Philosophers, being in this
time, if the black be broken, and resolved in hot water, if any man wathe his
hands in that water, the skin of his hands shall be plucked of anon.

Philosophers say also, that it is good against the gout, and blyndnes of the
eyes* and it nourishes hurt and weak eyes.

If thou will that a man suffer no pain, nor be tourmented.

Take the stone, which is called Memphitis, of ye city which is called
Memphis, and it is a stone of such virtue, as Aaron and Hermes say: if it be
broken, and mixed with water, and given to him to drink, which should be
burned, or suffer any torments, that drink induces so great unableness
too feel, that he that suffers, feels neither pain nor tormentynge.

If thou will make a fire continually unable to be que^shed or put out.
Take the stone, which is called Abaston, and it is of the color of iron; and
there is found very much of it in Arabia. If that stoone be kyndeled or
inflamed, it may never be put out, or quenched, because it has the nature
of the first feathers of the Salamandre, by reason of moystye fatness, which
nourissheth y^ fire, kyndled in it.

If thou will overcome thy enemies.
Take the stone, which is called Adamas, in English speech, a Diamonde, and
it is of shyning color, and very hard, in so much that it can not be broken,
but by the blood of a got, and it grows in Arabia, or in Cypres. And if it
be bounden to the left side, it is good against enemies, madness, wyld beasts,
venomouse beasts and cruel men, and against chydyng and brawling* and
against venyme, and inuaston of fantasyes, and some call it Diamas.

If thou will eschew all peri^^ and all terrible things, and have a strong
heart.
Take the stone, which is called Agathes, and it is black, and has white
veins. There is another of the same kind, like to white color. And the
third grows in a certain I Will, having black veins, and that makes too
overcome peryls, and give strength to y^ heart. and makes a man mighty,
pleasant, delectable, and helps against adversities.

If thou desire to obtain any thing from any man.
Take the stone, which is called Alectoria, and it is a stone of a cock, and it
is white as the Crystal, and it is drawn out of the cocks gysar, or mawe,
after that he has been gelded more th a^ four years and it is of y^ greatness
of a bean It makes the bealy pleasant and steadfast, and put under the
tunge, it quenches thyrste. And this last has been proved in our time, and
I perceived it quickly.

If thou will overcome beasts and interpret, or expound all dreams and
prophe cye of things to come.
Take the stone, which is called Esmundus or Asmadus, it is of diverse colors,
it puts out all poison, and makes a man to overcome his adversaries, and
gives Prophesieng, and the interpretation of all dreams, and makes a man to
understand dark questions, hard to be understand or assoyled.

If thou will have good under standing of things that may be felt, and that
thou may not be made dronked.
Take the stone, whithe is called Amaristus, and it is of purple color, and
the best is found in Inde, and it is good against dru^kennes, and gives good
understanding in things that may be understand.

If thou will ouercom thy enemies, and slay debate.
Take the stone, which is called Berillus, it is of pale color and may be
seen through as water, bear it about with thee, and thou shall overcome all
debate, and shalt drive a way thy enemies and it makes thy enemy meke. It
causes a man too be well manuered, as Aaron sayethe, it gives also good
understanding.

If thou will foreiudge, or conjecture of things to come.
Take the stone, which is called Celonites, it is of purple, and diverse other
colors, and it is found in the head of the snayle. If any man will bear this
stone under his tunge, he shall foreiudge, and propheci of things to come. But
notwithstanding, it has no virtue, but shynynge, Prima cu^fuerit accensa, et
crescens monoytes in vltima descendente, so means Aaron, in the book of
virtues of herbs, and stones.

If thou will pacify tempests and go over fluddes.
Take the stone, which is called Corallus, Coral, and some be read and some
white* And it has been proves that it stemmeth anon blood, and puts away
the folishnes of him that bears it, and gives wysedom. And this has been
proved of certain me^ in our time. And it is good against tempests, and perils
of fluddes.

If thou will kendle fire.
Take the Crystal stone, and put it nygh under the cirkle of ye Su^ne, that is
to sai, against ye sun and put it nygh any thing yt may be burned, and
incontine^tly, ye heat of the Sun shyning, will set it a fire. And if it be
drunk with honey, it encreseth milk.

If thou will that ye Sun appear of bloody color.
Take the stone, which is called Elitropia. It is grene like to the precious
stone called the Emeraude. And it is sprynkled with bloody drops. The
necromancers call it Gemma Babylonica, the precious stone of Babylon, by the
propre name. But if it be anointed with the juice of an her be of the same
name, and be put in a vesselful of water, it makes the Sun to seem of bloody
color: as if the Eclypse were seen. The cause of this is, for it makes all the
water to bubble up unto a little cloud, which making the air thycke: lets
the Su^ne to be seen, but as it were read, in a thick color, a little after:
ye cloud goes away, by droppyng down like dew, as it were by drops of
rain. This also borne about makes a man of good fame, hole: and of long life.

It is said of old Philosophers: that a man an ointed with an herb of this name,
as we have said before: excels with virtue, and Elitropia is found
ofte^tymes in Cypres and Inde.

If thou will make sething water too be cold, which stands upon the fire.
Take the stone, which is called Epibretes, which put in water against the eye
of the Su^ne, puts forth fyery beams of ye Su^ne. And it is said of old,
and new Philosophers, if it be put in seethyng water, the bublyng up, or
seethyng will sone cease, and a little after, it will wax cold* and it is a
shynynge and ruddye stoone.

If thou will eschew illusions and fantasies and overcome all causes or
matters.
Take the stone, which is called Calcedonius, and it is pale, brown of color,
and somewhat dark, if this be perced, and hanged about ye neck, with ye stone
which is called Sinerip, it is good against al fantastical illusions, and it
makes to overcome all causes, or matters in suyte, and keeps thy body
against thy adversaries.

If thou will be acceptable, and pleasant.
Take the stone, which is called Celidonius, and of it there is some black,
and some some what read, and it is drawn out of the bealye of swallows. If
that which is somewhat read, be wrapped in a lynnen cloth, or in a calves
skyn, and borne under ye left arm hole it is good against madness, and old
syckenesses and diseases, and the sleping, or forgetful sickness, and Contra
epidimiam, which is a scabbe that runs thorough y^ hole body.

Euax says, that this stone makes a man eloquent, acceptable and pleasant.
The black stone is good against wild beasts, and wrath, and brings the
busynes begone to an end. And if it be wrapped in the leaves of Celydo^, it
is said that it makes the sight dull. And they should be drawn out in the
month of August, and two stones are found oftentimes in one swallowe.

If thou will be victorious against thy adversaries.
Take the stone, which is called Bagates, and it is of diverse colors The
ancient philosophers say that it has been proved in the prince Alcides,
which how long he did bear it, he had always victory: and it is a stoone of
diverse colors, like the skin of a kydde.

If thou will know before any thing to come.
Take the stone, which is called Bena, which is like a beasts to the, and put
it under thy tung. And as Aaron and the old Philosophers says, how long thou will hold it so always coniecturing, thou shall prophecy things to come, and
thou shalt not err in any wise for iudgyng.

If thou will that thy garme^te be unable to be burned.

Take the stone, which is called Histmos, which as Isidorus says, is like to
saffron. And it is found in a part of Spain. This stone blows like a pair
of bellows, by reason of y^ wyndinesse in it, it is found nygh the Gades of
Hercules, that is two Isles, by the further parts of Spayn beyond Garnade, and
if this stone be set in a garment, it can be burned in no wise, but it shyneth
like fire.

And some men say: that y^ white Carbunkle stone, is this kind.

If thou will have favor and honor.
Take the stone, which is called Tabrices, and it is like too the Crystal
stoone. The aunciente Philosophers, as Euax, and Aaron, say of it, that it
gives eloquence, favor and honor, and it is said moreover, that it
heals every dropsye.

If thou will drive away fantasies and folishnes.
Take the stone, which is called Chrysolitus, and it is of the same virtue with
Attemicus, as Aaron and Euax say, in the book of the natures of herbs, and
stones: this stone set in gold, and borne, dryueth away folishnes, and
expels fantasies. It is affyrmed to give wisdom, and it is good against
fear.

If thou will judge the opynions and thoughts of others.
Take the stone, which is called Geratides, and it is of black color let one
hold it in his mouth, it makes him that bears it merry and in savor, and
well esteemed with all men.

If thou will have victory and amity.
Take the stone, which is called Nichomai, and it is the same yt is called
Alabaster, and it is of a kind of Marble, and it is white, and shynynge. And
oyntmentes are made of it to the buryenge of the dead.

If thou will that a man sleapyng tell to y^ what he has done.
Take the stone, which is called Duirim, this stone is found in the neste of
the lap wynke or black plouer.

If thou would obtain any thing of any man.
Take the stone, which is called Radianus, and it is black, shyning through,
which when the head of a Cock is given to Emotes, or Pysmeres to eat, it is
found a long time after, in the head of the Cock. And the same stone is also
called Conatides.

If thou would make, that nether dogs, nor hunters may hurt any beast,
which they hu^te.
Put before them the stoone, which is called Luperius, and it will run soon
to the stoone. This stone is found in Lybia, and all beasts run to it, as to
their defender. It lets that neither dogs, nor hunters may hurt them.

If thou will burn any ma^s hand without fire.
Take the stone, which is called Unces, which we called before Principe^ apti,
which is fire, and it is as fire. If any man strayn hard this stone, it
burns soon his hand, like as it ware burned with a material fire, which is
a meruaylous thing.

If thou will cure melancoly, or a fever quartaine, in any man.
Take the stone, which is called Lapis lazuli. It is like to the color of the
heaven, and there is within it little bodies of gold. And it is sure and
proved, that it cures mela^cholye, and y^ fever quartayne.

If thou would make any m^^ wit sharp and quick, and augmente his riches,
and also prophecy things to come.
Take the stone, which is called Smaragdus, in English sp^ache an Emeraude. And
^^^^s very clear, shynynge through and plain, but it that is yerowe is
better.

It is taken out of the nestes of grypes or grystons, it does both comfort
and save, and being borne, it makes a man to understand well, and gives to
him a good memory, augme^teth the riches of him that bears it, and if any man
shall hold it under his tung, he shall prophecy anon.

If thou will make a rain bow to appear.
Take the stone, which is called Iris, and it is white like the Cristall, four
square or having horns. If this stone be put in the beam of the Sun, by
turning back it makes a rain bow soon to appear in the wall.

If y^ wilt make a stone, which may never be made hot.
Take the stone which is called Gallasia it has ye figure of hayl* and the
color and hardness of the Dyamonde, If this stone be put in a very great
fire, it will never be hot* And the cause is, for it has the holes so strat
together, that the heat may not enter in the body of the stone. Also Aaron and
Euax say, that this stone borne mitigateth, wrath, lecherye and other hot
passions.

If thou will know whether thy wife lies with any other married man, or no.
Take the stone called Galeritis which is the same that is called Catabres,
and it is found in Lybia and Brytannia, the most noble isle of the world,
wherein is contained both countries, England and Scotland. It is of double
color black, and of the color of Saffro^, and it is found gray colored,
turnynge to palenesse. It heals y^ dropsey, and it byndeth the bealyes that
have a laske. And Auice^na says, that if this stone be broken and washed, or
be given to a woman to be washed, if she be not a vyrgyn, she will pysse soon,
if she be a birgyn, she will not pysse.

If thou will overcome thy enemies.
Take the stone, which is called ^raconites, from the Dragons head, and if the
stone be drawn out from him alive, it is good against all poisons, and he
that bears it in his left arm, shall overcome all his enemies.

If thou will inge^der love between any two.
Take the stone, which is called Echites, and it is called of some Aquileus,
because the Egles put these in their nestes. It is of purple color, and it is
found nygh ye banks of the Ocean sea, and sometime in Persia, and it
co^teyneth always an other stoone in it, which sounds in it, when it is
named. It is said of ancient Philosophers, that this stoone hanged up in the
left shoulder, gets love between the husband and his wife. It is profitable
to women great with child, it lets untimely birth, it mitigateth the
peril of making a feared and it is said to be good to the^ that has the
falling syckenes. And as the me^ of Chaldea say, if poison be in thy meat^, if
the aforesaid stone be put in, it lets y^ that meat may be swallowed
down. And if it be taken out, the meat is sone swallowed down, and I did see
that this last was examyned sensiblye of one of our brethren.

If thou will make a man sure.
Take the stone which is called Tepistites. It is found in ye sea it is
shyninge and ruddy. And it is said in the book of Alchorath, yt if it be borne
before the heart, it makes a man sure, and refraineth and mitigateth all
seditions, and discordes. It is said also, that it mitigateth the flies, with
long hinder legs, which bourneth corn with touching of it, and deuoureth ye
residew, souls, clouds, hayle, and such as have power of ye fruits of the
earth. And it has been proved of philophers of lat time and of certain of our
brethren, that it being put against ye beam of the sun puts forth fiery
beams. Also if this stone be put in seething water, the seethinge will soon
cease, and the water will be cold a little after.

If thou will that strangers walk sure and safe.
Take the stone, which is called Hyacinthus, in English a Jacinct, it is of
many colors. The grene is best, and it has read veins, and should be set in
silver, and it is said in certain lectures, that there is two kinds of it, of
ye water, and of ye Saphyre. The Jacinct of ye water, is yelow, white The
iacinct of ye Saphyrs, is very shyning yelowe, having no watrishnesse, and this
is better, and it is written of this, in lecturs of philosophers, that it being
borne on the finger, or neck, makes strangers sure, and acceptable, to their
ghestes. And it provoke sleep, for the coldness of it, and y^ Jacinct of
Saphyre has properly this.

If thou will be saved from diverse chau^ces and pestilent bittes.
Take the stone, which is called Orithes, of which there be.iii. kinds, one
black, an other grene and the third, of the which, one part is roughe, and
the other plain, and the color of it is like the color of plate of iron, but
y^ grene has white spots. This stone borne, preserves from diverse
chances, and perilles of death.

If thou will make peace.
Take the stone, which is called a Saphyre, which comes from the East unto
Inde, and it that is of yelowe color is best, which is not very brighte, it
makes peace and concord, it makes ye myndepure and deuote toward God, it
strengthens the mind in good things, and makes a man to cole from inward
heat.

If thou will cure a vyrgyn.
Take the stone, which is called Saunus, from the I Will Sauna It does make firm
or co^solidate the mind of the bearer of it. And being bound to the hand of
a woman, trauayling with chydel it lets the birth, and keeps it in bealye.
Therefore it is forbidden in such a busynes, that this stone touch a woman.

Thou shalt find many other like things: in the book of Mines, of Aaron and
Euar.
The manner of doing these things, consists in this, that ye bearer for a
good effect, be clears from all pollution, or defylynge of the body.

Explicit.
ISidorus seems to say, ye Licania has in ye head (...) a stone of most
noble virtue, and is of white color, which brayed, given to them that have the
strangulion, to drink, it louseth perfectly the vryne* and shortly heals, it
puts away the fever quartayne. Also it takes away a white spot or perle in
the eye. Also if a woman with child, bear it on her she shall not loose her
birth. Also the flesh of them sodden, and eaten, is good to the^ that have an
exulceratio^, or sore in the lunges, with a consumption of all the body, and
spitting of blood.

Also the poulder of the beasts, with the rynde, or bark of trees with some
greynes of pepper, is profitable against the Emerodes and growinge out of flesh
about the buttockes. Likewise they being raw, brayed with ryndes or barks of
trees, break ripe impostumes.

The third book of Albertus Magnus, of the virtues of certain beasts.
Forasmuch as it has been spoken in the book before, of certain effects,
caused by the virtue of certain stones, and of their marvelous virtue or
operation: now we will speak in this Chapter of certain effects, caused of
certain beasts.

Aquila An Eagle Casso Bubo A shricke owl Hircus A got bucke Camelus A camel
Lepus An hare Expetiolus Leo A lion Foca A purpays Anguilla An eele Mustela A
wesel Upupa A lapwi^g, or black plouer Pellicanus A pellicane Cornus A crow
Miluus A kyte or gleyde. Turtur A turtell Talpa A molle Merula A black macke,
or owsel
Aquila, the Eagle is a bird known enough of men of Chaldea, it is called
Vorax, and of the Greeks Rimbicus. Aaron and Euax say, that it has a
meruaylous nature or virtue. For if the brain of it be turned into poulder, and
be myxed with the juice of the hem lock, they that eat of it, shall take
themselfes by the hear, and they shall not leave the hold, as long as they
bear, that they have received. The cause of this effect is, for that brain
is very cold, in so much that it engenders a fantastical virtue, shuttinge
the powers by smoke.

Casso is a beast known well enough, it is called Rapa, of the Chaldeis, and
of the Greeks Orgalo. Aaron says of this. If the feet of it be borne of any
man, he shall never be vexed, but he shall desire always to go for the. Also
he that bears the feet of it, shall always overcome, and shall be feared of
his enemies. And he said that his right eye, wrapped in a wolves skin,
makes a man pleasant, acceptable and gentle. And if meat be made of the
aforesaid things, or poulder given to any man in meat, the geuer shall be
greatly loved of him that receives it. This last was proved in our time.

Bubo, a shricke owl, is a byrd well enough known, which is called Magis of
the Chaldeis, and Hysopus of the Greeks. There be meruaylous virtues of this
foul, for if the heart and right foot of it, be put upon a man sleapyng, he
shall say anon to y^ whatsoever thou shalt ask of him. And this has been
proved a late time of our brethren. And if any man put this under his arm
hole, no dog will bark at him, but keep silence. And if these things
aforesaid, joined together with a wynge of it, he hanged up to a tree, birds
will gather together to that tree.

Hircus, ye got bucke is a beast well enough known, it is called of the
Chaldeis Erbichi, of y^ Ere kes Massai. If the blood of it be taken warm with
vinegar, and the juice of fenyll, and sodden together with a glass, it makes
the glass soft as dowe, and it may be cast against a wall, and not be
broken. And if the aforesaid confection be put in a vessel, and the face of
any man be anointed with it, marvelous and horrible things shall appear, and it
shall seem to (...) that he must dye. And if the aforesaid thing be put in y^
fire and there be there any man that has the fallinge sycknes, by put tyng to
the lode stone, he falls anon to the ground as dead, and if the water of
eeles be given to him to drink, he shall be cured anon.

Camelus, the Camel is a beast known well enough. It is called of the Chaldeis
Ciboi, of the Greeks Iphim. If the blood of it be put into the skyn of y^
beast called Stellio, and then set on any ma^s head, which is like a lysard,
having on his back spots like stetres, it shall seem that he is a giant, and
that his head is in heaven. And this is said in the book of Alchorath, of
Mercury, And if a lantern anointed with y^ blood of it, be lyghtenned, it shall
(...) that all men standing about have Camelles headdes, so that there be no
outward light of an other candeil.

Lepus, the hare is a beast well enough known, of the Chaldeis it is called
Ueterellu^, and of the Greeks Onollosa, the virtue of it is showed to be
merualous, for Euax and Aaron said that y^, fete of it joined with a stone or
with the head of a black owsell, moves a man to hardines, so that he fear
not death.

And if it be bounden to his left arm, he may go whether he will and he shall
return saufe without peril. And if it be given to a dog to eat, with the
heart of a Mesell, fro thens, forth he shall not cry out, although he should
be killed.

Experiolus, is a beast welly. nough known, if the cloue of it be burned and
consolidated, and be given in meat to any horse, he will not eat for y^ space
of three days. And if the aforesaid thing be put with a littell turpentyme it
shall be clear, and secondly it shall be maid as a cloud and blood, and if it be
casten a little in water, an horrible thunder shall be made.

Leo, a Lion is a beast well enough known, of the Chaldeis called Balamus, of
the Greeks Beruth. If thonges of lether be made of the skin of him, and a
man gyrded with them, he shall not fear his enemies. And if any man will eat
of the flesh of him, and will drink of his water for three days, he shall be
cured from the fever quartaine. And if any part of his eyes be put under a
man's arm hole and borne, al beasts shall flee away, bowynge down their hade
unto their low belyes.

Foca, purpays is a fysh well enough known, of the Chaldeis it is called
Daulaubur, of y^ grecia^s Labor, this fysh is of diverse nature. If the tung of
it be taken, and be put with a little of y^ heart of it in water, for a suerty
fyshes will gather there together. And if thou will bear it under thy arm
hole, no man shall be able to have victory against the, thou shall have a
gentle and pleasant judge.

Auguilla, an eele, it is a fysshe sufficiently known. The virtues of it are
meruaylous, as Euar and Aaron say, for if it dye for fault of water, the heart
remaining hole, and strong vyneger to taken and it be myxed to the blood of
the foul, called in Latin Uultur, which some call in English a Grype, and
some a rauyn, and be put under du^ge in any place, they shall all how many
soever they be, recover their life, as they had before. And if the worm of
this eele be drawn out, and put in y^ aforesaid confection, the space of one
month, the worm shall be changed into a very black eele of which, if any man
shall eat, he shall dye.

Mustela, the Wesell is a beast sufficiently known. If the heart of this beast
be eaten yet quaking it meketh a man to know things to come, and if any dog
eat of the heart with the eyes and tu^ge of it, he shall soon lose his voice.

Upupa, y^ Lapwynke or black plouer, is a byrd sufficiently known, of the
Chaldeis it is called Boridicta, of the Greeks I son, y^ eyes of it born, make
a man gross or great. And if the eyes of it be borne before a ma^s breast, all
his enemies shall be pacefied. And if thou shall have the head of it in thy
purse, thou can not be deceived of any merchaunt. This has been proved this
day of our brethren.

Pellicianus, the Pellicane is a byrd sufficiently known, it is called of the
Chaldeis Uoltri, and of the Greeks Iphalari. The virtue of it is meruaylous. If
young birds be killed and their heart not be broken, and if a part of her
blood be taken and be put warm in the mouth of the yo^ge birds, they will
receive soon again life as before. If it be hanged up to the neck of any
bird, it shall fly always, until it fall dead. And the right foot of it
under an hot thing, after three months shall be engendered quycke, and shall
move it self of the humor and heat, which ye bird has. And Hermes in the
book of Alchorath, and Plinius does witness this.

Coruus, called of some a raue^, and of others a crow, the virtue of this foul
is meruaylous, as Euax and Aaron rehearse. If her eggs be sodden, and be put
again in the nest, the raven goes sone to the read sea, in a certain I Will
where Aldoricus or Alodrius is buried, and she brings a stone where with she
touches her eggs, and the eggs be soon raw as they ware before. It is a
meruaylous thing to stir up sodden eggs. If this stoone be put in a ring,
and the leaf of the laurel tree put under it, and a man being bounden in
chains, or a door shut, be touches therewith, he that is bounde^ shall sone
be lowsed, and the door shall be opened. And if this stone be put in a ma^s
mouth, it gives too him understanding of all birds. The stone is of Inde,
because it is found in Inde, after certain wise men, and sometime in the read
sea. It is of diverse colors, and it makes a man to forgete all wrath, as we
have said above in the same stone Miluus, a Kyte or gleyde is a bird
sufficiently known, of the Chaldeis it is called Bysicus, of the Greeks Melos.
If the head of it be taken, and borne before a man's breast, it gives to h^
love and favor of all men and women. If it be hanged too the neck of an
hen, she will never cease to run, until it be put away. And if a cocks
comb be anointed with the blood of it, he will not crow from thens forth.
There is a certain stone found in the knees of this bird, if it be looked
craftily, which if it be put in the meat of two enemies, they shall be made
friends, and there shall be made very good peace among them.

Turtur, a Turtel is a byrd well enough known, it is called Mulon of the
Chaldeis, of the Greeks Pilax. If ye heart of this foul be borne in a wolves
skin, he that bears it, shall never have an appetyte to commit lechery
from thence forth. If the heart of it be burned, and be put above ye eggs of
any foul, there can never young birds be engendered of them from thenceforth.
And if ye feet of this foul be hanged to a tree, it shall not bear fruit
from thenceforth. And if an hearye place, and an horse be anointed with the
bloudde of it, and with water where in a Molle was sodden, the black hears
will fall of.

Talpa, a molle is a beast well enough known. The virtue of this beast is
meruaylous, as it is rehearsed of Philosophers. If the fore of it be wrapped in
ye leaf of a Laurel tree, and be put in the mouth of an horse, he will flee for
fear. And if it be put in the neste of any foul, there shall never come forth
young birds of these eggs. And if thou will drive away molles, put it in a
pot, and quycke brymstone kyndled, all the other molles shall come together
there. And the water of that decoction makes a black horse white.

Merula, a black macke or ow sell, is a foul well enough known, and the
virtue of it is mernaylous. For if the feathers of the right wynge of it be
hanged up in the mids of an house, with a read leaf, which was never
occupied, no man shall be able too s^epe in that house, until it be put away.
And if the heart of it be put under the head of a man slepyng, and he be
inquired, he will say all that he has done with an hye voice.

The manner of doing all these beforesayd things, that the effect may be good
and profitable is that it be done under a favorable planet, as Jupiter and
Venus, and this is in their days and hours. If any man therefore will do these
things truly, without doubt he shall find truth, and very great effect or
virtue, in the before said things as I have proved, and seen oftentimes
together with our brethren in our time. Therefore let him consider here, which
shall find plentye of the beforesayde things, that he possesses a lordship
and virtues. For if they be done in their contraries, as a good effect in a
maliciouse sign, his virtue and effect should be let for his contrary,
and so good and true things should be despised. We see very many to be
deceived, in sure and true things, which if they had known, and kept the
qualities of signs or times they should have obtained their will and effect,
in the aforesaid things.

Isidorus seems to say, that the ashes of a great frogge, born at a woman's
gyrdle, restrains greatly the coming of a woman's natural purgation,

And in a probatio, if it be bost den too an hens neck, there shall come
forth no blood of her or of an other beast.

Also if it be tempered with water, and the head or an other place be anointed
with it, hear will no more grow there.

If any man bear a dogs heart on his left side, all yt dogs shall hold
their peace, and not bark at him.

If any man will bynd yt right eye of an Wolf on his right sleue neither men
nor dogs may hurt him.

Here are ended some secrets of Albertus Magnus of Colone upon natures,
virtues, and effects of certain herbs, stones and beasts, and here follows
in what hour every planet has his dominion.
ANd that al things which has been said before, and also shall be said after,
may be applied more easily, to the effects of their desire, which have not
^^nning of the sterres. First thou shall note, that an hour is taken two
ways, that is equal and unequal. The equal hour is the hour of the dyall
or clock, which is always equal. The unequal hour is considered, after that
ye days be langer or shorter. For ye Astrologie^s consider always the time,
in the which ye Su^ne stands upon his half sphere, and they call it the day
or ye bow of the day, and by the contrary the might. They divide that time
which they call the day, in. xii equal parts, which be the hours of the same
dai, and whatsoever is said of the day, thou must understand co^trariwyse of
ye night. And that thou may understand more clearly, let us put the case,
the Sun comes out from his half sphere, at.viii. of the dyall* we have
unto the going down of the Sun.xvii. hours of the dyall, which we may
multiplye by.lx. as there be.lx. minutes of every hour of the dyal, and we
shall have nine hundredth, and three score minutes, which we may deuyde by.xii.
as there be.xii. hours of the day, applying to every hour his portion, and we
have.lxxx. minutes in an hour. Therefore every hour of a day shall have. lxxx
minutes, which shall conteyn.i. hour and one third of an hour of the dyall.
And in all that time y^ dominion of the planete of that hour shall be
considered, as the table beneth written shall show. Every hour of his night
shall not have but.xl. minutes, which thou shall understand likewise of
others, according to the rising of the Sun upon the ground, because that
hour which is in ye mids between night and day, which is called the dauning
of ye day is not called the day, but the day is properlye understand, when
the Sun may be seen.

Therefore thou willing too consider the dominion of every Planet, for in
every hour, every Planete has his dominion, thou shalt consider the hours
themselfes, after the way above written, and so thou may come to the end of
thy purpose. Also the beginning of the day is considered from one of the
clock of the day, going before after noone. So let the Sunday be divided into
two equal parts, and it is of.xii. hours, divide it into two, then the half
day shall be.xviii. and ye first hour following shall be the beginning of Mondaye.

Wherefore, thou shall consider that Sunday has his sign under the Sun.

Mondaye has his sign under the Moon.

Tuesdaye has his sign under Mars.

Wednisday has his sign under Mercurius.

Thursdaye has his sign under Jupiter.

Friday has his sign under Venus.

Saturday has his sign under Saturnus.

It is too be noted that every true act must be done under his planete. And
it is better, if it be done in the propre day of yt planete, and in his own
proprie hour as for an example.

Under Saturnus, life, building doctrine, mutation.

Under Jupiter, houor, thing desired, riches, apparel.

Under Mars, war, prison, matrimony, enemy.

Under the Su^ne, hope, lucre, for tune, he ire.

Under Venus, friend or feloweshyp, way, lover, stranger.

Under Mercury, loss, det, fear.

Under the Moon, polayse, dream marchaundyse, theft.

Of the hours of the days and nyghtes.
And first of the hours of So^ day, in his first hour, the Su^ne in the
second Venus, in y^ third Mercurius, in the fourth y^ Moan, in the fyfte
Saturnus, in the vi, Jupiter, in the.vii. Mars, in ye viii. the Su^ne, in
the.ix. Venus, in the.x. Mercurius, in the.xi. the Moon, in the.xii. Saturnus.

But in the first hour of the night Jupiter, in the second Mars, in the
third the Sun, in the fourth Venus, in the fifte Mercurius, in the.vi. ye
Moon, in the.vii. Saturnus, in the. viii Jupiter, in the.ix. Mars, in the x.
the Sun, in the.xi. Venus, in the.xii. Mercurius.

In the first hour of Monday the moon, in the second Saturnus, in the third
Jupiter, in the fourth Mars: in the fyft ye Su^ne in the.vi. Venus: in the.vii.
mercurius, in the.viii. the moon, in the.ix. Saturnus, in the.x. Jupiter, in
the.xi. mars, in the.xii. the Sun.

But in the first hour of Mondayes night Venus, in ye second mercurius, in
the third y^ moan, in the fourth Saturnus, in the fifte Jupiter, in the.vi.
Mars, in the.vii. the Sun: in the.viii. Venus: in the.ix. Mercurius: in
the.x. the Moon: in the.xi. Saturnus: in the.xii. Jupiter.

In the first hour of Tuesday Mars, in the second the Sun, in the third
Venus, in the.iiii. Mercurius, in the fifth the moon in the.vi. Saturnus, in
the.vii. Jupiter, in the.viii. Mars, in y^ ix. the Sun, in the.x. Venus, in
the.xi. Mercurius, in the.xii. the Moon.

But of Tuesdayes night in the first hour Saturnus, in the second Jupiter:
in the third Mars, in y^.iiii. the Su^ne: in the fyfte Venus: in the sy^te
Mercurius: in the seuenthe the Moon: in the.viii. Saturnus, in in the.ix.
Jupiter: in the tenthe Mars: in the.xi. the Sun, in the, xii. Venus.

Of the Wednisday, in his first hour Mercurius, in the second the Moon, in
the third Saturnus, in the fourth Jupiter, in fifth Mars, in the sixth the
Sun in the seuenthe Venus, in the eyghte Mercurius, in the nynth the Moon:
in the.x. Saturnus in the.xi. Jupiter, inye.xii. Mars.

But on Wednisday at night, in the first hour the Sun, in the second
Venus, in ye.iii. Mercurius, in the.iiii. the Moon, in the.v. Saturnus, in
the.vi. Jupiter, in the.vii. Mars, in the.viii. the Moon, in the.ix. Venus, in
the.x. Mercurius, in the.xi. the Moon, in the.xii. Saturnus.

On Thursdai in the first hour Jupite, in the second Mars, in y^ iii. the
Sun, in the.iiii. Venus in the.v. Mercurius, in the.vi. ye Moan, in the.vii.
Saturnus, in the.viii. Jupiter, in ye.ix. Mars, in the.x. the Su^ne, in the.xi.
Venus, in the, xii. Mercurius.

But on Thursday night in ye first hour the Moon, in ye second Saturnus, in
the. iii, Jupiter: in the.iiii. Mars: in ye* v. the Su^ne: in the.vi. Venus: in
the.vii. Mercurius: in the.viii. the Moon: in the.ix. Saturnus: in ye.x.
Jupiter: in the.xi. Mars: in the.xii. the Sun.

On Friday at one of the clock Venus: at.ii. Mercurius: at.iii. the Moon:
at.iiii. Saturnus: at.v. Jupiter: at.vi. mars: at.vii. the Sun: at.viii.
Venus: at. ix Mercurius: at.x. the Moon: at xi. Saturnus: at.xii. Jupiter.

But on Frydayes night at one of the clock Mars: at.ii. ye Su^ne at.iii.
Venus: at.iiii. mercurius at.v. the Moon: at.vi. Saturnus: at.vii. jupiter:
at.viii. mars at.ix. the Sun: at.x. Venus: at. xi, Mercurius: at twelfe the
Moon.

On Saturday at one of ye clock Saturnus: at, ii. Jupiter: at.iii. Mars:
at.iiii. the Sun, at.v. Venus: at.vi. Mercurius at.vii. the Moon: at.viii.
Saturnus, at.ix. Jupiter: at.i. Mars, at.xi. the Sun: at.xii. Venus:

But on Saturdayes night at one of the clock Mercurius, at ii. the moon, at
three Saturnus at.iiii. Jupiter, at. v, mars. at. vi the Sun, at.vii. Venus,
at viii Mercurius, at.ix. the Moon, at.x. Saturnus, at.xi. Jupiter, at.xii.
Mars.

And not that Jupiter and Venus be good, Saturnus and Mars, evil, but the
Sun and the Moon in a mean, and Mercurius is good with good and evil with
evil. (*)

Here begins the book of ye meruayles of the world, set forth by Albertus
Magnus.
AFter it was known of Philosophers, that all kinds of things move and
inclyne to them self, because an active and rationable virtue is in them,
which they guide, and move as well to them selfs as to others, as fire moves
to fire, and water to water.

Also Auicenna said, when a thing stands long in salt, it is salt, and if
any thing stand in a stynkynge place, it is made stynkynge. And if any
thing stands with a bold man, it is made bold, if it stand with a
fearful man, it is made fearful. And if a beast companieth with me^, it is
made tractable and famyliar. And generally, it is verefied of them by reasons,
and diverse experience, that every nature month to his kind, and their vere
fyenge, is known in the first qualities, and likewise in the second and the
same chances in the third. And there is nothing in all dispositio^s, which
moves to it self, according to his whole power. And this was the rote, and the
second beginning of ye works of secrets, and turn thou not a way the eyes
of thy mind.

After that this was graffed in the minds of the Philosophers and they found
the disposition of natural things. For they knew surely that great cold is
graffed in some, in some great boldenes, should not deny any meruaylous thing
although he has no reason, but he ought to prove by experience, for the cause
of marvelous things are hid, and of so diverse causes going before, that
man's understanding after Plato, may not aprehende them.

Therefore the lode stone draws iron to it, and a certain other stone draws
glass. So meruaylous things are declared of philosophers to be in things by
experience, which no man ought to deny. And that is not proved after the
fashion of philosophers which found that, for the philosophers says, that the
palm is a tree, and it has the male and the female, therefore when the female
is nygh the male, thou see that the female, bow down to the male, and the
leaf and branches of it are made soft, and bow down to the male.

Therefore when they see that, they bind ropes fro the male to the female,
Reddit ergo erecta, super seipsam quasi adepta sit Masculo per continuationem
^umis Virtutem masculi. Not withsta^dinge many of the ancient aucthors, has
showed meruaylous things, received now of the common people, and taken for a
truth. Therefore I shall show to the certain things, that thou may stablish
thy mind upon them, and to know it for a certain truth, which reason can not
stablish by feling, because the foresaid help in them. And therefore it is,
that the son of Messiah said in the book of the beasts. It a woman great
with child, put on the apparel of a man, and a man put it on after, before he
wasshe it, if he have the fever quartayne, it will depart from him.

And it is said in the book of beasts, that the Lybarde ^^eeth ye pryuy
members of a man, and in an other place it is said ^t Carneum, if an old man
be buried in a dove or culuer house, or be put where doves or culuers inhabit
or rest, there they are multiplied, until it be full of them.

And in the book De cyriaca of Galene, it is said that the Serpent which is
called Regulus in Latin, a cokatryce in English, is some what white, upon
whose head there be three hayres, and wha^ any man sees them he dies sone And
when any man or any other living thing hears his whiste lynge, he dies. And
every beast that eats* of it being dead, dies also. And aristotel said,
where there is summer.vi. Months and likewise winter, there is a flood in the
which adders are found, whose property is, that they never se them selves but
they dye, but when they be dead, they hurt not. And aristotele put craftly in
the mind of Alexander, that he should take a great glass, and walk with it
toward them, and when they did behold them selves in the glass they dyed*
This sayng of Aristotel was not believed of some men For Auicenna said against
Aristotel, if any man did see it, he dyed, wherefore there is no truth in his
speech. And they said, if any man would take of the milk of a woman, gyuing
souke to her own daughter of two year old, and let it be put in a glasen
bessel, or hanged up in a dove or culuer house where they go in and forth,
doves will abide and be multiplied there, until they be innumerable. And they
said, wha^ the mouth of a dead man is put upon him which complayneth of his
beallye, his beally is healed.

And Alexander said, wha^ anything is taken out of the nauyl^ of an infant,
which comes forth if it be cut, and be put under the stone, of a ring of
silver or gold than the passion or grief of the ^o like comes not in any wise
too him that bears it.

And Galen says, wha^ ye leafes of Sorell be eaten, they louse the beally. And
when the sede of it is dronken, it louseth the beally. And it is said, that
the root of Sorell hanged upon him that has the swyn pockes, it helps him.

And Philosophers say, when thou will that a beast return to his lodging,
anoint his forehead with Sepesquilla, and it will return.

And Aristotel said in the book of ye beasts. If any man put wrought wax upon
the horns of cowes calfe, it will goo with him whersoeuer he will without labor
And if any man anointe the horn of kye with wax and oil or pitche ye pain
of their fete goes away.

And if any shall anoynte ye tunges of, oxe^ with any talowe, they neither
taste nor eat meat, but they shall die for hunger, except it be wyped away with
salt and vyneger.

And if any man anoynte ye nether parts of a cock with oil, he nether will,
nor may tread an hen.

if thou desire that a cock ^rowe not, anoynte his head and fore head with
oil.

It is said in ye book of Archige nis quando came illa, of ye hare is hanged
upon him that suffers the colike, it profits him.

And Aristotel said ye Emeraudes goes away from him, which sits upon the
skin of a Lyo^.

And if the dunge of an hare be broken unto poulder and cast abroad upon a
place of Emotes or Pismeres, than the Pismeres leave there place.

Philosophers said, if the head of a goote be hanged upon him which suffers
swyne pockes, he is healed by it. If thou wylt that a woman be not viciate nor
desire men, take the prive member of a wolf, and the hears which do grow on
the chekes or eye bright of him, and the hears which be under his berde, and
burn it all, and give it to her in a drink when she knows not, and she
shall desire no other man. And they said, when a wom a^desyreth not her
husband, then let her housbande take a little of the talowe of a bucke got,
mean between little and great, and let him anoynte his priuye member with it,
and do the act of generation she shall love him and shall not do the act of
generation afterward with any

And they said yt when the snail is poysened, it eats the herb called
organy, and is healed, and therefore they know that the herb called organny,
has lain under poison. Also it is said when the wesel is poynsoned of a
serpent it eats rewe, and they know by this, that rewe is contrary to the
vemyne of serpents.

And a mouse put under the prickynge of scorpyons, delyuereth a man because she
is contrary and fears not him.

And philosophers have invented, that if any woman is barrayne wha^ there is
put to her a thing that makes a woman barrain, the woman is not barayne, but
fruteful, and contrariwyse.

And it is said that when a sponge is cast in wine mixed with water and after
drawn forth and strayned and wrynged, the water comes sorth of it, and the
wine remains, if it be not mixed, nothing comes forth.

Taberencis said, if a stone be hanged upon a sponge, on the neck of a
child, which cougheth with a vehement or great cough, his cough is mitigated
and restrained. And wha^ it is put on the head of an ass, or in to his
foundamente, Scarabeus, that is a fly with a black shelle, y^ breadeth in
coweshardes and is black, called a bitel, cutteth him and he turns, until
it be drawn from him.

It is said also, that if any stone be bounden to the tail of an ass, he
will not bray nor rore.

If the hayres of an ass be taken, which are nyghe his privy membre, and be
given to any man, broken in with any kind of wine in a drink, he begins
anon to fart. Like wise if any man takes the eggs of Pysmeres and breaks
them, and casts them into water, and give the^ to any man in a drink, he
cease not anon to farte, they do like wise with wine.

And it is said, if thou will make a ryng of a rod of a fresh myrte tree,
and put it on thy ring finger, it mitigateth or extineteth the impostume under
the arm holes.

In the book of Aristotel, it is said that the root of white henbane, when it
is hanged upon a man suffering the colyke, it is profitable to him. And wha^,
salt Peter is put in a vessel, and by neger upon it, it will boil or sees
mightily without fire.

It is said also in the book of hermes, when leeke sede is caste^ upon vinegar,
the eigrenes or sowrenesse of it goes away

Belhinus said, when thou take the white of an egg, and alume and anoyntest
a clothe with it, and washest it of with water of the sea: being dry, it
lets the dyre to burn.

An other said, wha^ read Arsenicum, and alume are taken, and broken, and
confected, or made with the juice of the herb called houslyke, and the galle
of a bull, and a man anoyteth his hands with it, and after takes hot
quyckened. And when thou buryest the fly called a bytel among roses, it dies,
if thou burye it in dunge, it quyckeneth.

And philosphers said that when the feathers of Eagles be put with y^ feathers
of other fowls, they burn and mortefye the^ for as he ouercometh in his life
all byrds, and has rule over them so y^ feathers of Eagles are deadly to all
feathers.

And Philosophers say, if the skin of a sheep be put in any place with the
skin of Adib, it gnaweth and consumes it. And he that puts on him clothe
of the wolle of a sheep which has eaten Adib, itchyng cease not from him,
until he put it of.

And if thou parfume an house or place with the lunges or lights of an Ass,
thou clengest it from every Serpente and Scorpion. And of this Philosophers
know that it is good against poison.

Tabariences says: if the tu^g of the Lapwynge or black plouer be hanged upon
a wall Obliuionem reddit eum memore^ et alienationes.

And it is said in the book of Cleopatra. If a woman have no delectation with
her husband take the marro we of a wolf, of his left foot, and bear it,
and she will love no man but him. And it is said, when the left hyppe or
haunche of a male ostriche is taken and boiled, or seethed with oil, and after
the beginning or ground of hayres are anointed with it, they grow never
again.

Architas said, if the heart of a serpent be taken, when he lives and be hanged
upon a man, being sick of the fever quartayne, it plucketh it utterly away.
And ye Adders skin, when it is strayt bounded upon the ankle of a woman, it
haisteth the birth, but after the birth, it must be removed away anon.

The tethe of all serpe^tes, wha^ thou pluckest them furthe by the roots, as
long as the serpente lives, if they be hanged upon a man, sick of the fever
quartain they take away the fever quartayne from him, and if the Serpent be
hanged upon a roth aching it profits. And if a serpent mete with a woman with
child, she brings forth her child before it be perfect. And if it meet
with her when she trauayleth of child, it hastes her birth.

And they sai, if thou will take the eye tothe of the beast called Crocodilus
in Latin, in english a Crocodile out of ye vppermore palase of the left side
of his mouth, and hang it on a man being sick of ye fevers, it heals him,
and the fevers will not return again to him. And they have said, that the
Lion is afraid of a white cock. And again that he fears the fire. And he
that is anointed with the talowe of the reins of the talowe of y^ rey nes of
the Lion, fears not too go among beasts, and all beasts are afraid of the
Lion. And he that anoynteth his body with hares dunge, wolfes be farayde of
him.

Et si teritur atsenicum citrinum, and be myxed with milk if a fly fall upon
it, it dies not. If thou will take y^ right foot of a snayll, and hang it
upon the right foot of a diseased man with the gout, it profits it: like wise
if thou hang up the left foot of a snayll to thy left foot, diseased with
the gout. And so the hand of it is profitable to the hand and the finger, to
the finger.

And if a fire be kendled before a man yt is brosten of grene wood of fygge
trees, his stoones will make a noise or bounsinge.

And it is said in the book of hermes, when both the eyes of the Ber^ be
bounden in lynen cloth, upon Sinistrum adiutorium, they put away the fever
quartayne. And it is said, if the wolf se a man and the man se not him, the
man is astonyed and fears, and is hoorse. And therefore if any man bears
the eye of a wolf, it helps to victory, too boldenes, vanquyshing and fear
of his adversary.

And it is said, if a ryng be made of the white houfes of an Ass, and he that
has the falling syckenes puts it on, suffers not the falling syckenes.

And they said, when y^ will that flies come not nyghe thy house, than put
Condicim et oppium, in white lyme, and after make thy house white with it,
thanne flies shall in no wise enter.

When thou will that thy wife or wenche, show to the all that she has done,
take the heart of a dove and the head of a frogge, and dry them both, and braye
them unto poulder, and lay them upon the breast of her sleping, and she shall
show to y^ all that she has done, but when she shall wake, wype it away from
her breast, that it be not lyfted up.

And they say, if any man put a Diamonde under the head of a woman sleapinge,
she manifests, if she be an aduoutrer, for if it be so, she leapeth back out
of y^ bed afraid, and if not, she embraces her husband with great love.

And they say, that an Ass skyn when it is hanged upon children, it lets
them to be afraid.

Architas says, if the wax of the left ear of a dog be take n, and be
hanged upon men sick in the fevers that come by course or fyttes, it is very
profitable, and specially to the fever quartayne.

And Philosophers say, that some kind or singular, which never had
sickness, is profitable to every sickness, and he that had never pain,
helps and heals a man from it.

And when the house is perfumed with y^ left houfe of a mule, flies remain
not in it.

And if the heart, eye or brain of a lap wynge or black plouer, be hanged
upon a man's neck, it is profitable against forgetfulness, and sharpeth ma^s
understanding.

If a woman may not conceive take an hearts horn, turned into poulder, and
let it be myxed with a cowes gall, let a woman keep it about her, and let her
do y^ act of generation, and she shall conceive anon.

A gross and styffe hair of a mares tayll, put upon a door suffers not
zauzales to enter.

The tothe of a fool or colte of one year old, put in the neck of a child,
makes his tethe to breed without pain.

The tothe of a mare put upon the head of a man, being mad, delivers him
anon from his furye.

If a woman may not conceive let a mares milk be given to her, not knowing,
let her do the act of generation in that hour, and she shall conceive anon.

The houfe of an horse perfumed in a house, dryueth away myse. The Same
chances also by the houfe of a Mule.

That all the hot water come forth of a caldro^. Take or blache, that is Terra
francisca, with pitch cast it in water, and it shall come forth all. That*fyre
may come forth of water, take the shel of an egg and put in it quycke
brymstone and lyme, and shyt the hole and put it into water and it will kendle.
And it is said, if the herb Ca^phere, be put upon water, it is ke^d led and
burns in the water.

That thou may take birds with thy hands, take any corn very well steped in
the dregs of wine and in the juice of he^locke and cast it too the birds,
every bird that tastes of it, is made droncken, and loses her strength.

And they say, if any man be anointed with y^ milk of an Ass, all the flyese
of the house will gather to him.

To write letters or bills, which be not readde but in the night, take the gall
of a snayle or mylk of a so we, and put it too the fire, or with water of a
worm shynyng late.

If ye myngell together many whites of he^nes eggs, a month after they are
made glass, and hard as a stoone, and of this being after this fasshion is
maid a Sophistical precious stone, called Topasius, if it be conjoined
before with Saffron or read earth.

Like wise, if the foam which is found about the stones of a heart, or horse, or
ass, being weery, be myxed with wine, and ye wine be given to any man to
drink, he shall abhor wine for a mooneth.

And if any manne shall have many eeles in a wine vessel, and they be suffered
to dye in it, if any man drink of it, he shall abhor wine for a year, and by
chance evermore.

And it is said, if a rope be taken, with which a thief is or has been
hanged up with, and a little chafe, which a whyrle wind lifted up in the air,
and let them be put in a pot, and set among other pottes, that pot shall
break all the other pottes.

Also take thou a little of the aforesaid rope, and put it on the instrument,
with which y^ bread is put in the oven, when he that should put it in the
oven, should put it in, he shall not be able too put it in, but it shall leap
out.

That men may seem without heads.
TAke an Adders skin and Auri pigme^tum, and greek pitche of Reuponticum, and
the wax of new bees, and the fat or grease of an Ass, and break the^ al, and
put them in a dull sething pot full of water, and make it to sethe at a slow
fire, and after let it wax cold, and make a taper, and every man that shall
see light of it, shall seem headless.

That men may seem to have the visage or countenance of a dog. Take the
fat out of the ear of a dog, anoynte with it a little new sylke, put it in
a new lamp of green glass, and put ye lamp among men, and they shall see
the vysage of a dog.

That men may seem to have three headdes.

Take of the hayr of a dead ass, and make a rope, and dry it, and take the
mary of the principal bone of his right shoulder, and myxe it with virgyns
wax, and anoynte the cord, and put it upon ye thras sholdes of the house,
they yt come into the house shall seem to have three headdes, and they that be
in the house shall seem Asses to the^ that enter in.

If thou will that a man's head seem an Ass head.

Take up of the covering of an Ass and anoynte y^ man on his head.

If thou will that a chicken, or other thing leap in the dyshe.

Take quycke silver and y^ poul der of Calamite, and put it in a bottel of
glass well spotted, and put it with in a hot thing. For seeing quycke silver
is hot, it moves it self, and makes it to leap or dance.

If thou will se that other me^ can not.

Take of the gall of a male cat, and the fat of an hen al white and myxe
them together, and anoint thy eyes, and thou shall se it that others can not
see.

If thou will understand the voices of birds.
Associate with the two felows in the.xxviii. day of October, and go in to a
certain wood with dogs as too hunte, and carye home with that beast,
which thou shall find first, and prepare it with the heart of a Fox, and thou
shall understand anon the voice of birds or beasts. And if thou will that
any other likewise understand, kiss him, and he shall understand.

If thou will louse bonds.
Go into the wood, and look where ye Pie has her nest with her birds, and
when thou shall be there, clymme up the tree, and bind about the hole of it
whersoeuer thou will. For when she sees the, she goes for a certain herb,
which she will put to the binding, and it is broken anon, and that herb
falls to ye ground upon the cloth, which thou should have put under the tree,
and be y^ present, and take it.

In the nest of the lap wyng or black under the earth within, al which be in
the lodgene, shall seem as they ware great men in the shape of horses and
Elephantes, and it is a very meruaylous thing.

An other perfuming, which wha^ thou make, thou see outwardly grene men,
and men of many shapes and infinite meruayles, which are not discerned for
their multitude.

Take Timar, that is vermilion, and the stoone Lazulus and Peneroyall of the
mou^tains and beat it all to poulder, and syfte it, myxe it with the fat of a
Dolphyn fyshe, horse or Elepha^t make graynes or corns after ye fasshion of
rise and dry them in a shado we, perfume in it when thou will and it shall be
don, that is said.

A perfumynge too see in our s^eape what thing is to come of good and evil.

Take the blood of an Ass congeled, and the fat Lupi cerini, and a sweet
ince^se or gum called Storax and also Storax, and also styrax, gather it
altogether by equal weyghtes, and let the^ be mixed, and graynes or corns be
made thereof, and let the house be perfumed with the^, than thou shall se him in
thy sleep, yt shall show to the all things.

A manner of making a match of a candell, or ca^del weke, which when thou shall
kendle, you shalt see men, in what shape soever thou will.

Take the eyes of an shriche owl, the eyes of a fyshe, which is called
Affures, and the eyes of a fyshe, which is called Libinitis, and the galle of
wolfes, break them with thy hands, and myxe them together, and put them in a
vessel of glass, than when thou will warke it, take ye fat of any beast
thou will, that this may be made in the shape of it, melte it, and myxe it
perfitely with that medicine, and anoynte ye match or candel weke, whatsoever
thou will with it. After ke^dle it in ye mids of the house, and the me^ shall
seem in the shape of that beast, whose fat thou did take.

An other match of a candell or a candell weke, that men may appear in the
shape of angels.

Take the eyes of a fyshe, and the eyes of Filoe, that is of a breaker of
bones, and break them with thy hands, and make them soft, and put them in a
vessel of glass vii. days After put some oil in them, and lyghten it in a
green lamp, and put it before men, which be in the house, they shall see
them selfs in the shape of angels by the light of the fire.

An other match or weke of a candell, making men to appear with black faces.

Take a black lamp, and pour in it oil of the elder or alder tree or quycke
silver, and pour in that oil or quycke silver a part of the blood of them
that be in lettynge blood, and put in that bloudde oil of the elder or alder
tree (some says of the bur tree) or quycke silver.

A meruaylous la^pe, in which appears a thing of terrible quantite, having
in the hand a rod and afrayeth a man.

Take a grene frogge, and stryke of the headde of it upon a grene clothe, make
it wette with ye oil of burtree or elder tree, and put in the weke and lyghten
it in the grene lamp, than shall thou see a black man standing, between whose
hands there shall be a la^p and a meruaylous thing.

An other weke which when it is kendled, and water is poured on it, waxes
strong, and when the oil is put in, it is put out.

Take lyme which water has not touched and put it with an weight, equal to
it of wax and the half of it of the oil of baulm and Napta citrina, with
equal to it of brymstone, and make a weke of it, and drop down like dew upon
the water and it shall be kendled, and drop down oil upon it, and it shall be
put out.

In other weke, which when it is ke^dled, all things seem white and of silver.

Take a Lyzarde, and cut away the tail of it, and take that which comes out,
for it is like quycke silver. After take a weke and make it wette with oil,
and put it in a new lamp and kendle it, and y^ house shall seem bright and
white, or gylted with stluer.

A meruaylous operation of a lamp, which if any man shall hold, he cease
not to farte, until he shall leave it.

Take the blood of a snayl, dry it up in a linen cloth, and make of it a
weke, and lyghten it in a lamp, give it to any man thou will, and say lighten
this, he shall not cease to farte, until he let it depart, and it is a
meruaylous thing.

A weke which when it is lightened, women cease not to dau^ce and be glad and
too play as they ware mad for great joy.

Take the blood of an hare and the blood of a certain fo wl which is called
Solon, and is like a turtell dove, and of the blood of the turtell male,
equale to the half of it. Than put in it a weke, and lighten it in the mids
of the house, in which are syngers and wenches, and a meruaylous thing shall be
proved.

If thou will make that lyce may appear runninge abroad in a man's bed that
he may not sleep, than cast in his bed the weyghte of one or half ounce of
Alcakengi, and if thou shall take pilos asturis, thereof shall be made a weke,
which when it is lightened, every sick man sees other by the vehemencye of
the syckenesse, and mynyshinge or extenuation.

When thou will that you seem al inflamed, or set on fire from thy head unto
thy fete and not be hurt.

Take white great malowes or holy hocke, myxe them with the white of eggs,
after anoint thy body with it, and let it be until it be dried up, and after
anoint the with alume, and afterward cast on it small brymstone beaten unto
poulder, for the fire is inflamed on it, and hurts not, and if thou make upon
the palm of thy hand thou shall be able to hold y^ fire without hurt.

If thou will that a thing be casten in the fire and not burn.

Take one part of glue of fish and an egual quantity to it of alume, let it
be perfitely myxed, and let vyneger be poured upon it, let whatsoever thing
that will be confected with it, cast it in y^ fire, anoint it with this
anoynteme^t it shall not be burned.

If thou will make a contrary, that is any image or other thing and when it is
put in the water it is kendled, and if thou shalt draw it out, it shall be put
out or quenched.

Take lyme not quenched, and mix it perfitely with a little wax and the oil of
Sesanum, and napta, that is white earth and brimstoone, and make of it an
image, when thou shalt put it in water, the fire shall be kendled.

If thou will make that when thou openest thy hands upon a lamp, the light of
it is put out, and when thou closest them upon it, it ke^dled, and it cease
not to do that.

Take a spice, which is called Spuma, after bray it, and after make it with
water of Ca^phere, and anoynte thy hands with it, after open them in the mouth
of the lamp, the light of it shall be put out, and close the^, and it shall be
kendled again.

If thou will see a thing drowned, or se deep in the wa^^r in the night, and
that it shall not be more hyd to the than in the day and readde books in a
darcke night.

Anoynte thy face with the blood


