A DIRECTION TO BE OBSERVED By N. N. If he mean to proceed in Answering the
Book entitled Mercy and Truth, or Charity Maintained by Catholics etc.

For I say by the grace that is given me, to all that are among you, not to be
more wise then behooves to be wise, but to be wise unto sobriety.

Ad Roman. 12. v. 3. When we treat of religion, that is, of the worship and
knowledge of God, they are least to be followed, who promising most liberally
proofs by reason, forbid us to believe. S. Aug. De vtil. Cred. cap. 12.

Permissu Superiorum, 1636. A DIRECTION TO BE OBSERVED
By N. N.
If he mean to proceed in Answering the Book entitled Mercy and Truth, or,
Charity Maintained by Catholics etc.
IN regard that he, who pretends to be answering the Book entitled Mercy and
Truth, or, Charity Maintained by Catholics etc.: Is strongly reported to be a
Socinian: before I give him his charge, it will be requisite, to open in brief,
what kind of people they be, who have appeared of late under the name of
Socinians. For by this means, it will be seen, whether his true intention be,
to defend Protestantisme, or covertly to vent Socinianisme. It will also
appear, whether all his pains be taken to any purpose. For Charity Maintained
having been written against Protestants, not intermedling with the Doctrine of
Socinians, he will never by thought to speak one word to the purpose against
that Book, if he answer out of Principles, which Protestants themselves will
profess to detest, no less then Catholics do.

CHAP. I. Of Socinianisme.
SOcinians take their name from one Fanstus Socinus, an Italian Apostata, that
is, upon the matter, an Atheist. For they are strangers to that wise and
gallant Nation, who imagine, they can by of any Religion, if they will not be
Catholics. The maine and capital doctrine of perfect Socinians, is, rather
Negative, and destructive of all Faith and Religion, then positive or
Affirnsatiue of any one. The Sum of all is this. Nothing ought, or can be
certainly believed, further then it may be proved by evidence of natural
reason, into which they resolve all Christian Irenaeus Philalethes lib. cui
titulus: Disquisitio breuis etc. S. Aug. Do vtil. Cred. cap. 1. Nosti^ enim
Honorate, non aliam ob causam nos in tales homines (Manichaeos) incidisse, nisi
quod se dicebant terribili authoritate separata, mira ac simplici ratione cos
qui se audire vellent introducturos ad Deum, and errore omni liberaturos.
Faith. Out of this universal ground, they do, and must (if they will speak
as they think, and think according to their own principles) reject all
infallible, supernatural, infused Faith, which they reduce to mere humane
knowledge, or opinion. And this the Answerer, as I am told, professes, and
endeauours to prove. They must then affirm, that Faith is not donum Dei, an
especial gift of God; but only the common light of Reason, or habits acquired
by a man's own ability and industry. Divine Faith being excluded, the other
two Theological infused virtues, Hope, and Charity, cannot subsiste. All
infused Revelations, and Prophecies; all Illuminations, and Inspirations of the
Holy Ghost; all preuenient, concomitant, subsequent, and, in a word, all kind
of whatsoever supernatural Grace, is derided by this graceless Sect.

And as they deny all supernatural Faith, so do they laugh at the belief of
all objects, that are beyond the sphere of natural discourse. And therefore
they utterly deny Joan. Volkelius de vera Religione lib. 5. c. 9.10.11.12.13.
the most Blessed Trinity, the Incarnation of the Son of God, the Godhead of
our dear Savior Christ, his satisfaction for the sins of men, and his Idem.
ibid. c. 20.22.
merit (and to prove this, they bring the same arguments, which Protestants
were wont to urge against the merits of just men, and works of supererogation)
the Divinity of the Id. vbi supra. cap. 14.
Holy Ghost, and Original Id. ibid. cap. 15.
sin. Eternal supernatural Felicity in Heaven for the Just, and endless
punishment in Hell for the wicked, they all must, according to their
Principles, and some of them do roundly deny. And they cannot place their
last Happiness in any thing, except some such poor imaginary good, as old
Pagan Philosophers dreamed of, but could never attain, nor so much as agree
among themselves, wherein it consisted.

They deny the Resurrection of our Bodies, and teach, that our Soul is to be
joined with a Celestial or spiritual substance, of a nature essentially
different from these our earthly bodies; and that our Blessed Savior in
Heaven, has such a Celestial Volkel. l. 3. c. 35.
Body.

That the world was created in time, by the free decree of God, and not from
Eternity, by a necssarie emanation from him, they believe no more, then can be
proved by evidence of natural demonstration. And I know some of them hold,
directly against holy Scripture, that it was from all eternity, by such a
necessary resultancie, as that.

They make small reckoning of Sacraments, as being, according to them, neither
signs, nor seals, nor causes of of grace; which grace, they hold to be a
mere fiction. Yea they teach, that it is an abuse of the word Sacrament, to
apply it to Volkel. l. 4. cap. 22.
holy rites. And as for the Eucharist in particular, one of their ring leaders
teaches, that it is no Ibid.
Sacrament; that for the matter thereof, if one cannot drink wine, he may use
Ibid.
water, without changing the substance of the Lord's Supper (as he speaks) and
that it may be administered by Lay Ibid.
Persons; and received even by such, as are not Lib. 6. cap. 14.
Baptized.

The same prime Socinian denies Baptism to be a Sacrament, and teaches, that
all are not obliged to receive it, but that some may be enrolled amongst the
number of Christians, without it; that the Church may either leave it off, or
at least can compel none to receive it; and, in a word, that it is a a thing
but adiaphorous, or indifferent; with other wicked Vide Volkel. lib. cap. 6. c.
14. per. totum.
absurdities, which I let pass.

Concerning holy Scripture; to such persons, as they hold not fit to be
entirely trusted by them, they will acknowledge them all; before other more
confident friends, they reject diverse parts of holy Scripture, received even in
the Protestant Church of England; and with men, who are fully acquainted with
their Principles, they must hold, not any one Book, Chapter, or line of the
whole Old and New Testament, to be the word of God, or written by the
infallible assistance inspiration, and direction of his holy Spirit. For
natural reason, which with them is the sole Rule of Faith, and Judge of all
Controversies, cannot possibly demonstrate these things. They may believe by a
kind of Humane Faith, that the Books of holy Scripture were written by such
particular men (as they believe the Works of Plato, Tullie, Linie, to be
theirs) but that those men were endued with an universal infallibility, even
in writing Scripture, they neither do, nor can affirm, but rather reach the
Volk. l. 5. c. 5.
contrary.

Neither yet does their impiety stay here, but one of them dares Io. Crellius
lib. de Deo, and Attributis eius c. 24.
affirm, that God could not know from Eternity futura contingentia, such
things, as do proceed from Free Will, and election; which is in effect, to
take away all infallible predictions prophecies of voluntary free actions. And
out of this gross error, some other more open Socinian, will proceed to the
denial of God himself. For how can God be, and be God, ans yet be ignorant of
any thing, that is possible, past, present, or to come?

If you ask these men, what they mean by the true Church; they must answer,
that there is no other true Church, but all Mankind, as it agrees in the light
of natural reason; and that there is no other authority, to which a man is
obliged to submit.

If again you inquire, in what Heresy does indeed consiste; they reply, that
it consistes only in opposing the dictamen, or judgment of a man's own
reason. They might as well say in plain terms: There is no such thing, as
Christians are wont to call Heresy. For it is impossible, that a man judge
contrary to that, which he judges. Intellectus non est hypocrita. Our
understanding cannot play the hypocrite with it self. A man's hands, looks,
words, or writing may belie his thoughts, and make him deserve the name of
dissembler, falsifier, hypocrite. But it implies a manifest contradiction, that
our internal thoughts should tell us, at the same time, that a thing is both
so, and not so; and therefore, according to their large definition, there can
be no Heresy at all. And their assertions tending to practice, are agreeable to
this their speculation. For they teach, that no man ought now to be punished,
either spiritually by Iren. Philalethes lib. cui titulus: Dissertatio de Pace
Fcclesia.
Excommunication, or Volkel. lib. 6. cap. 15.
temporally, with the loss of goods, imprisonment, or death, as long as he
follows the dictamen of his own Conscience; though otherwise he deny
Articles believed by all good Christians; as for example, concerning the most
Blessed. Trinity, the Divinity, of Christ our Lord, Original sin etc.

But why do I specify particulars, which would be infinite? For whatsoever
our Savior Christ, his holy Apostles, the Catholic Church, Councels,
Fathers, Doctors, Divines, Christians, propose to be believed above humane
reason, or with a supernatural infallible assent, is, to these men, no other
then a fiction, an imposture, an impossibility. Divinity, with them, can be
nothing but Philosophy. Reason alone is Faith; Sanctity consistes only in
Morality. Plato, or Aristotle, or any other, must be as soon believed, as the
testimony of our dear Savior; unless he prove what he says, by better
reason, the^ other do, Si autem Christo etiam credendum negant, nili indubitata
ratio reddita suerit, Christiani non sunt. Nam id aduersus nos Pagani quidam
dicunt, stulte quidem, sed non sibi aduersi, nec repugnantes. Hos vero quis
seratad Christum se pertinere prositeri, qui nisi apertissimam rationem stultis
de Deo protulerint, nihil credendum esse contendunt? S. Aug. De vtil. Cred.
cap. 14
What Christian can hear these infidelities, without detestation? What Church
can tolerate them, and yet pretend zeal in Religion? Nevertheless, this
ungodly sect spreades it self, being cunningly obtruded by some (and by the
Answerer in particular) and greedily swallowed by many, and duly punished by
none; although I ought not to dissemble, but do gladly acknowledge, and
deservedly publish in this occasion, for a pattern to other in this Realm,
the care of the chiefest Prelare in England, in prohibiting the sale of Books
tending to Socinianisme. Let men in the mean time speak their pleasure,
against the vigilancie of Prolats in Catholic Countries; against the
severity of Ecclesiastical Canons; against forbidding to read pernicious
books; against the Index Expurgatorius, and against the holy Office of
Inquisition in Italy, and some other places. Sure I am, through want of such
hole some means Heresies, Infidelities, and Atheismes, are hatched, and
receive growth; and innumerable souls eternally perish. And because the Reader
may well remain in wonder, how so very absurd errors, can possibly find
entertainment among Christians: it will not by impertinent, though besides my
first intention, to set down some reasons thereof, as they now present
themselves to my mind. And they may serve for the argument of the ensuing
Chapter.

CHAP. II. Some reasons, why so many embrace Socinianisme.
TO omit, that this Heresy give full scope to every man's understanding, to
believe, as his fancy shall dictate, and for his will, to sin without fear
of eternal punishment (yea and not to believe, that there is a God, if some
licentious impe can object against the Divine Existence, Providence, Iustiee,
Mercy, Wisdom, or other Artributes an argument, which he cannot solue, and
master the wit of whatsoever Atheist) I will, for the present, touch only
four reasons, drawn: first, from the doctrine of Protestants; secondly, from
the practice of the Church of England, joined with the disposition of
Socinians; thirdly, from the personal quality of Protestant Divines;
fourthly, from some circumstances of persons, time, and place.

First then, I say, that the very Doctrine of Protestants if it be followed
closely, and with coherence to itself, must of necessity induce Socinianisme.
S. Aug. De vtil. Cred. c. 16. Sola est authoritas quae commouet stultos vt ad
sapientiam festinent. Quandiu intelligere syncera non possamus, authoritate
quidem decipi miserum est: sed certe miserius non moueri. Si enim Dei
prouidentis non praelid^^ rebus humanis, nibil est de religione satagendum. Sin
vero and species rerum omnium, quam profecto est aliquo verissimae
pulchritudinis font manatire credendum est; and interiori nescio quae
conscientiae Deum quaerendum, Deoque seruiendum, meliores quosque animos quasi
public priuatimque hoteatur: non est desperandum ab codem ipso Deo
authoritatem aliquam constitutam. qua velut gradu certo innitentes, attollamur
in Deum.
This I say confidently, and evidently prove, by instancing in one error,
which may well be termed the Capital, and mother Heresy, from which, all
other must follow at ease; I mean, their heresy in affirming, that the
perpetually visible Church of Christ, descended by a never interrupted
sucession from our Savior, to this day, is not infallible in all that it
proposes to be believed, as revealed truths.

For if the infallibility of such a public Authority be once impeached;
what remains, but that every man is given over to his own wit, and
discourse? And talk not here, of holy Scripture. For if the true Church may
erte, in defining, what Scriptures be Canonical; or in delivering the sense
and meaning thereof; we are still deuolued, either upon the prinate spirit (a
foolerie now exploded out of England, which finally leaving every man to his
own conceits, ends in Socinianisme) orels upon natural wit, and judgment,
for examining and determining, what Scriptures contain true or false doctrine,
and in that respect, ought to be received, or rejected. And indeed, take away
the authority of Gods Church, no man can be assured, that any one Book, or
parcel of Scripture, was written by divine inspiration; or that all the
contents, are infallibly true; which are the direct errors of Socinians. If it
were but for this reason alone, no man, who regardes the eternal salvation of
his soul, would live or dye in Protestancie, from which, so vaste absurdities,
as these of the Socinians must ineuitably follow. And it ought to be an
unspeakable comfort to all us Catholics, while we consider, that none can
deny the infallible authority of our Church, but jointly he must be left to
his own wit, and ways; and must abandon all infused Faith, and true Religion,
if he do but understand himself aright.

The second reason, drawn from the proceeding of the Church of England, I
understand to be, that their aim and industry, tendes only to procure an
exterior conformity to the Laws of the Realm. In so much, that, if a
Catholic, for example, would resort to their Church Service, and Sermons;
take Oath of Supremacy; receive their Communion, and abjure the Catholic
Faith, though withal he protest to do it only for fear, and against his
Conscience; yea and that he dislikes their Service, Sermons, Faith, and
Communion. In this case, they are, and must be satisfied with the forced
actions of such a miserable man, though even his own tongue bear witnesses,
that all is done against his conscience. And what is this, but to neglect the
Soul, upon condition, to receive some kind of violent tribute from the Body?
This then being the spirit of the English Church, on the one side; and
Socinians, on the other, making no scruple (with what honesty, I leave to be
considered) to sort themselves, for the exterior, with what Religion soever;
no wonder, if by this means, they have a large scope, to instill their
Doctrine; and yet walk with as much freedom, as any Protestant can do.

The third reason, taken from the quality of Protestant Divines is this
Socinians destroying all supernatural belief, or infallible assent, to any
Object, surpassing the reach of Humane Reason, have as many, and as strong
objections ready at hand, against the Articles of our Faith, as the weak
understanding of man does find difficulties, in the knowledge of Divines
things. Now, the learning of Protestant Divines, consisting only in some
superficial talent of Preaching, languages, or elocution, and not in any deep
knowledge of Philosophy, especially of Metaphisicke, and much less of that
most solid, profitable, subtle, and succinct method, which we call School
Divinity; when they come to be pressed by Socinians, are unable to satisfy
their doubts, but either are caught themselves, as I know it happens not
seldom; or give occasion for the Socinians to be more settled in their errors;
and for others to be drawn into the same infidelity. And the Devil aimed at
no less then this total ruin of all Faith and Religion, when he first moved
Heretics to deride School Divinity, and to nickname the Professors thereof,
dunses.

The fourth reason, that casts so many, especially, of the best wits, upon
Socinianisme, both Divines, and other among Protestants, is, because they will
not be Catholics in these times; they cannot bring their understanding to be
Protestants; and so they take the large and easy way of helieuing, what they
list. And, to speak the truth, what learned judicious man, can, after
impartial examination, embrace Protestantisme? which waxes even weary of it
self (and this is an infallible mark of Sects and Heresies; for where the Holy
Ghost Directs, there can be no contrariety, or mutabilitie) its
Professors, they especially of greatest worth, learning, and authority,
declare themselves to love temper and moderation, allow of many things, which
some years ago were usually condemned, as superstitious and Antichristian;
and are at this time more unresolved where to fasten, then at the infancy of
their Church. Thus Truth, the Center of our understanding, maugre never so
long, or strong opposition, works powerfully, though patiently, and by
insensible degrees, calls men back from fierceness to doubtfulnesse, from
doubtfulnesse to certainty, that at length they may joy in a settled
constancy. And in this it is very apparent, that the Holy Ghost directs the
Church of Rome; which proceeding always upon the same grounds, and believing,
that Christ our Lord is still present with his Spouse, ascribes as much
infallibility to the present Church, as to that of the first fine hundred
years; and reuerenceth the late Council of Trent, no less then the ancient
Council of Nice. For the promises of our dear Savior, were not limited for
any Age; without the assistance of whose holy Spirit, no times, or persons, are
exempted from errors; and with it, all are sure not to err. And this is the
true reason, why the Roman Church is still the same, without opposition to it
self in any least Doctrine; whereas all other Sects, and Sectaries, are
notoriously known, to contradict both their Affociats, and themselves, as now
I was saying of the Protestant Church in England. For do not their Churches
begin to look with another face! their walls to speak a new language?
their Preachers to use a sweeter tone? their annual public Tenets, in their
Universities, to be of another style, and matter? their books to appear with
titles and arguments, which once would have caused a mighty scandal among the
Brethren? their Doctrine to be altered in many things, For example, the Pope
not Antichrist; Prayer for the Dead; Limbus Patrum; Pictures; that the Church
has authority to determine Controversies in Faith, and to interpret the
Scripture; about Freewill, and Predestination; Universal Grace; that al our
works are not sins; morit of good works; inherent Justice; Faith alone does not
justify; Charity is to be preferred before knowledge, Traditions;
Commandments possible to be kept, etc.
and even in those very points, for which their Progenitors forsook the then
visible Church of Christ? Their 39. Articles that is, the sum, the
Confession, and almost the Creed of their Faith, are patient; patient? they
are ambitious of some sense, wherein they may seem to be Catholic. To allege
the necessity of wife and children in these days, is but a weak plea, for a
married Minister, to compass a Benefice. Fiery Caluinisme, once a darling in
England, is at lenght accounted Herefie; yea and little less then Treason men,
in word and writing, use willingly the once fearful names of Priests. and
Altars. Nay if one do but mutter against the placing of the Altar after the
old fashion, for a warning he shall be well warmed by A little Treatise so
entitled, and printed An. 1636.
a Coal from the Altar. English Protestants are now put in Sunday no Sabbath.
A Sermon printed An. 1636. page 38.
mind that for exposition of Scripture, by Lib. Can. An. 1571. Can. 19.
Canon they are bound to follow the ancient Fathers; which if they do with
sincerity, every learned Protestant Divine, who makes a conscience to belie
his own knowledge, can tell, what doom will pass against Protestancie, even
by confession of Protestants themselves, as the Answerer once anouched (as
shall appear hereafter Chap. 5. n. 6.) and this being only a matter of fact,
and requiring no more then reading, and understanding the toungs, wherein the
Fathers wrote, or the Translations of their Works, he cannot in moral
honesty, and therefore, I hope, will not, gainsay his own words; nor can be
thought to speak sincerely, if he should forcedly now retract, what then he
freely wrote. And I know, that to some Protestants, he so clearly
demonstrated, the Fathers to be on our side, that they remained conuineed, and
have upon occasion acknowledged no less. But let us go on. The four prime
Protestant Church-Chroniclers, who pretend to deduce a succession of the true
Church (the Centurists, I mean) are without ceremonle demanded in a particular
occasion: with what face dare they vente such untruths? and with what
conscience dare they Sunday no Sabbath. page 12.
forge etc. their bad carriage toward the ancient Fathers is displayed; and for
a general Censure, they are told, that Their credit is eclipsed, and their
testimony abated by their Ibid. page 10.
doings. And to conclude all in one maine point. The Protestant Church in
England, willingly professes so small Antiquity, and so weak subsistence in
it self, that they acknowledge no other visible being for many Ages; but in
the Church of Rome. Which position drawn from them by mere necessity, must
force them to yield, that the Roman Church does not err in any point
necessary to Salvation, unless they have a mind, to be telling the world,
that in their own Church, for many Ages, none could be saved. They must
therefore be still content, to hear us tell them again and again, this most
necessary truth. You cannot be saved, unless you believe, that we in our
Church are capable of salvation; but we neither do, nor can yield, that
Protestancie is compatible with eternal happiness. For, to allow salvation
for men, disagreeing in Faith, Religion, and Communion, is one of the greatest
absurdities in Turoisme, or Socinianisme; and is but disguised Atheism. We
then are safe by your own confession; but you cannot be so, without
repentance, and reunion to our Church. Besides, if our Church enjoyed all
things necessary to Salvation: how can Protestants be excused from the
grievous sin of formal Schism, who separated from that Church, for points
confessedly not necessary to salvation? Yea, how are they not guilty of
Schism, who forsook that Church, which, before Luther, was only true Church,
if our Savior Christ had any visible Church upon earth? And what height of
dangerous madness is it, to leave a Church, which cannot err in points
necessary to Salvation; and join in belief and Communion, with private
persons, who may deceive, and be deceived, even in fundamental articles of
Faith? And I would gladly know, with what visible Church existing before
Luther, did he join, when upon pretense of Reformation, he departed from all
Churches extant, when he first appeared; and consequently how can he avoid
the just imputation of Schism? But I will not urge these points here, refering
my self, to what has been said in Charity maintained and even to what will
appear in those very Motives, which induced the Answerer himself to leave
Protestatisme; and afterward being resolved, not to remain Catholic, as not
conducing to his temporal ends, he finally plunged himself in Socinianisme,
seeing full well, that his own Motives could not be answered in the grounds
of Protestants. But it is time to return, and show, that I spoke not without
ground, in accusing Socinians in general, of such unchristian doctrines, as
you have heard, since you will see my word made good in particular Tenets of
one of them, which at this fit occasion came to my hands; and I willingly
impart them to the Reader, as they were given me; yet so, as in charity I
conceal the party taxed with them, no otherwise then I forbear to publish
the name of the Answearer. If guiltiness drive any one to ask: Math. c. 26.
v. 25.
Nunquid ego sum, Rabbi? Master, am I he? And that he chance to be answered
Ibid.
: Tu dixisti; Thou have said so; the blame and shame must rest on himself
alone, who alone would be discovering himself.

CHAP. III. Diverse enormous Heresies, maintained by a certain Socinian,
contrary either to the 39. Articles of the Church of England, or to the Faith
of all Christians.
1. THat the Son of God is not begotten, from everlasting, of the Father: is
not very, and eternal God, of one substance with the Father; and that two
whole and perfect natures were not joined in one person. Cont. Art. 2.

2. That Christ did not ascend into Heaven, in his Body, with Flesh, Bones,
and all things appertaining to the perfection of man's nature. Cont. Art. 4.

3. That the Holy Ghost does not proceed from the Father, and the Son; nor
is of one substance with the Father, and the Son, true and eternal God.
Cont. Art. 5.

4. That all the Books of the Old and New Testament, as they are commonly
received, are not equal in the authority, and infallibility of holy
Scripture. Cont. Art. 6.

5. That the three Creeds ought not thoroughly to be received, and believed;
for that they may be disproued by most certain warrants of holy Scripture; and
that among other falsehoods in the Creed of Saint Athanasius, this is one, that
if a man disbelieue any part of that Creed, without doubt, he shall perish
everlastingly: That the Apostles Creed, is no certain and authentical
Tradition; and that the Article of Holy Catholic Church, is not necessarily
to be believed. Cont. Art. 8.

6. That Original sinue is not the fault and corruption of the nature of every
man; nor deserves Gods wrath and damnation. Cont. Art. 9.

7. That any man may be saved by the Law or Sects which he professes; so
that he be diligent to frame his life according to that Law, and the light of
Nature. Cont. Art. 18.

8. That the Church has no authority in Coutrouersies of Faith, to oblige any
man's conscience. Cont. Art. 20.

9. That the Sacraments be only Badges, or Tokens of Christian men's
profession. Cont. Art. 25.27. And that they be not necessary to salvation.
Cont. Catechism. Protestant. Anglie.

10. That the Baptism of young Children is not to be retained in the Church,
as most agreeable to the instieution of Christ. Cont. Art. 27.

11. That the offering of Christ upon the Cross, is not a perfect propitiation
and satisfaction for all the sins of the whole world. Cont. Art. 31.

12. That the true Body and Blood of Christ is not in the Blessed Sacrament,
neither in a Real nor Spiritual manner; and that it is only a sign or token
of his Body. Cont. Art. 28.

13. That Faith contains no infallible certainty of the things believed.

14. That the reasonable Soul is not immortal, natural, and perse, but only
per accidens; as it is added to some Souls, by way of punishment or reward, to
be immortal.

15. That this immortality of wicked Souls is not to be extended, neither to
all eternity; and that it were unjust in God, to punish finite offenses, with
infinite torments.

16. That no point of Christian Religion is to be believed above Reason.

For an Epilogue to these gross errors, I could add an Apologue of his own,
and lay in his dish a couple of Frogs. He understands my meaning. If the
Answerer publish his Book, and yet will, not declare his opinion concerning
cucrie one of these wieked Positions: by omitting to plead not guilty in that
occasion, every judicious etc realous Christian will hold him to be guilty of
them all.


Tell me now, Christian Reader, what manner of man this Socinian is; and what
it is to be a Socinian, or Protestant, or any other Sectary, denying the
infallibility of Gods Church in all her definitions, concerning matters of
Faith? For, as I have said already, whosoever refuses to rely on such
Authority, must resolve the truth of his Faith, into the strength of his own
wit, or, to speak more truly, of his will, which is to take away all
infallible, supernatural Faith; without which (as the Heb. c. 11. v. 6.
Apostle avouches) it is impossible to please God.

And thus having showed, what Socinianisme is, and upon what ground it goes; I
may now oportunely deliver the Answerer his direction, least he chance to
mistake, and in lieu of maintaining Protestancie, hiddenly plant poison of
Socianisme, and leave Charity maintained, not so much as once spoken to, in
his whole Answer, as I noted in the beginning.

CHAP. IV. What the Answerer is to observe, if he will speak to any purpose.
FIrst it will be expected, that he declare his own opinion plainly and
particularly; and not think to satisfy by a mere destructive Sed quae rursum
ratio reuocabat, ne apud eos (Manichaeos) penitus haererems nisi quod ipsos
quoque animaduertebam, plus in refellendis aliis disertos, and copiosos esse,
quam in suis probandis firmos and certos manner? S. Aug. De vtilitat. Creden.
cap. 1.
way of obiecting such difficulties against Catholics, as, upon examination,
tend to the over throw of all Religion, no less then of Catholic Doctrine.

Secondly, that his arguments destroy not some of his own Tenets.

Thirdly, that he contradict not D. Potter, whom he pretends to defend; and
who maintains the infallibility of Gods Church, in fundamental Articles; the
Supernaturalitie of Faith; and diverse other points, which I know the Answerer
laughes at.

Fourthly, that he oppose not the 39. Articles of the Church of England.

Fifthly, that his grounds destroy not the bellefe of the most Blessed Trinity,
the Deity of our dear Lord and Savior, and of the Holy Ghost; Original
sin, and diners other doctrines, which all good Christians believe; yea and
all verities, that cannot be proved by natural Reason.

Sxithly, that he relle not upon such Principles, as must bring with them the
denial of diverse Books of holy Seripture, received into the Canon, both by
Catholics and Protestants. And if he asked, whether the Epistle of Saint
James, the Apocalypse of Saint John, with some other parts of Scripture, now
received by English Protestants, though heretofore controuerted, be Canonical,
let him not still think, to satisfy, by saying: These are captious questions.

Seauenthly, that he do not overthrow the infallibility of all Scripture, both
of the Old and New Testament.

Eighthly, that his Arguments tend not to prove an impossibility of all Divine
Supernatural infallible Faith and Religion, that either has been, or is, or
shall be, or possibly can be.

But now, the reason, why I prevent the Answerer, with these Directions, is
this. From Truth, no man can, by good consequence, infer falsehood. If then
the Answerer produce such Arguments, as either prove nothing, or else must
extend to prove that, which is confessedly false, it will remain very clear,
that his reasons are but Sophismes, and artificial falsities, though they
should seem not easy to be answered, especially to such, as are either not
learned at all, or superficially learned, and not versed in solid Philosophy,
or School Divinity, from whence Socinians are glad to borrow Objections, but
either dissemble, or understand not the Solutions. Wherefore, if the Arguments
of the Answerer be found to beat upon some of the foresaid grounds, and by
that means appear to prove too much, every one will see, they prove nothing
at all. And if (notwithstanding this Direction to the contrary) he will be
trenching on the said excesses, his Book is already answered, even before it
appear. But let him not interpret this my prevention, or Direction, to
proceed from fear, that his Book will be unanswerable, and that therefore I
seek before hand to disgrace the Author, and forestall the publication: For by
Gods holy assistance, his Book shall be answered, and the latent venom
fetched out, though perhaps he will lay wagers to the contrary; and with his
much confidence would persuade All Souls to believe him. And in truth, what
greater advantage could we wish against Protestants, then that they should
trust their Cause, and possibility to by saved, with a Champion, who often and
even not very long since, has professed, that he will never subscribe to their
39. Articles? and has set down in writing, Motives, which induced him to
forsake Protestantisme (to which indeed he never returned) and which are extant
still to be exhibited, if need be, under his own hand. But how soever, I
present a copy of them, in the next, which shall be the last, Chapter of my
Direction.

CHAP. V. The Motives, for which the Answerer for sooke Protestantisme.
1. BEcause perpetual visible profession, which could never be wanting to the
Religion of Christ, nor any part of it, is apparently wanting to Protestant
Religion; so far as concerns the points in contestation.

2. Because Luther and his followers, separating from the Church of Rome,
separated also from all Churches, pure or impure, true or false then being in
the world; upon which ground I conclude, that either Gods promises did fail of
performance, if there were then no Church in the world, which held all things
necessary, and nothing repugnant to Salvation; or else that Luther and his
Sectaties, separating from all Churches then in the world, and so from the
true, if there were any true, were damnable Schismatics.

3. Because, if any credit may be given to as creditable records, as any are
extant, the doctrine of Catholics has been frequently confirmed; and the
opposite doctrine of Protestants, confounded, with supernatural and divine
Miracles.

4. Because many points of Protestant doctrine, are the damned opinions of
Heretics, condemned by the Primitive Church.

5. Because the Prophecies of the old Testament, touching the Conversion of
Kings and Nations to the true Religion of Christ, have been accomplished in and
by the Catholic Roman Religion, and the Professors of it; and not by
Protestant Religion, and the Professors of it.

6. Because the doctrine of the Church of Rome is conformable, and the doctrine
of Protestants contrary, to the doctrine of the Fathers of the Primitive
Church, even by the confession of Protestants themselves; I mean, those
Fathers, who lived within the compass of the first 600. years; to whom
Protestanrs themselves do very frequently, and very confidently appeal.

7. Because the first pretended Reformers had neither extraordinary Commission
from God, nor ordinary Mission from the Church, to preach Protestant doctrine.

8. Because Luther, to preach against the Mass (which contains the most
material points now in Controversy) was persuaded by reasons suggested to him
by the Devil himself, disputing with him. So himself professes in his Book
de Missa Priuata. That all men might takeheed of following him, who professes
himself to follow the devil.

9. Because the Protestant Cause is now, and has been from the beginning,
maintained with gross falfifications, and Calumnies; whereof their prime
Controversy writers, are notoriously, and in high degree guilty.

10. Because by denying all humane authority, either of Pope, or Councels, or
Church, to determine Controversies of Faith, they have abolished all possible
means of suppressing Heresy, or restoring unity to the Church.

These were the Answerers Motives; and they are good ones indeed, and so
strong, that he could never since frame his mind to Protestancie: And the
Profession of Catholic Religion, not suting with his desires and designs, as
I said before, he fell upon Socinianisme, that is, a No Religion. I will not
here ponder the foresaid Motives: only I must say, as I noted in the precedent
Chapter, that since they all (except perchance the last) chiefly concern
matter of Fact, rather then any subtle points of Doctrine, he cannot with any
probable show of reason, retract them, and if he should, yet who would not
sooner credit his sincerity, whilst he speaks, against the current of the
times, in this place, and contrary to worldly hopes, then now, when all human
respects concur to sway his words, profession, and carriage, ^^en contrary to
his inward thoughts! But in the mean time, it would be sport, to behold Doctor
Potter confuting these Motives of the Answerer, while he is pretending to
defend Doctor Potter. And it may well seem a strange and preposterous zeal in
the Answerer (if he have any regard to the Church of England) to have been so
long careless in removing this scandal against Protestants, and answering his
own Motives; and yet now to show such fervor in writing against others: which
whether he do of his own accord, or by entreatie of Doctor Potter, or from
some Higher command, I am neither certain, nor sollicitous. My hearty wishes
are, that whosoever shall read these Motives, may, for the eternal good of
his own Soul, consider them with indifferency, and at leisure, and never
rest from soliciting the learned Protestants, either to give him
satisfaction (which is impossible to be done.) or else not take it ill, if he
hasten to the One, always. Visible, Catholic, Apostolic, Roman Church; out
of which none can, without presumption, hope to be saned, and of which Blessed
Cont. part. Donati Psalm.
Saint Austin says: Numerate Sace: dotes vel ab ipsa Petri sede; and in ordine
illo Patrum, quis cui successit, videte. Ipsa est Petra, quam non vincunt
superba inferorum portae; Reckon the Priests, even from the very Sea of Peter;
and see, who succeeded one another in that rank of Fathers. That is the Rock,
against which the proud gates of Hell do not prevail.

FINIS.

