Syrophaenissa OR, The Cananitish Woman's conflicts: In twelve several Tractats
discovered, Sectio prima. At Horndon on the hill, in the county of Essex. 1598.

Dulcescit Christus, Amarescit Mundus R. W.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed at London by Valentine Simmes, 1601.

To the Right Worshipful his loving Patron, Master Gabriell Poyntzs Esquier,
health and true happiness in this life, and in the life to come through Jesus
Christ.
WHen I call to mind, (Right worshipful) the te^porall benefits wherewith it
has pleased Almighty GOD to bless me, by those secondarie means of my
maintenance, which I have received, under his gracious providence from you, I
can not, but in the humblenes of my soul acknowledge with all thankfulness of
heart, his divine goodness, and I account it also a part of my duty, to
discharge some kindness and service unto you. Wherefore, in respect of the many
benefits reaped by your Worcester. accept, I pray you, this simple travel, the
first fruits of my deuinitie, your Scholars Newyeeres gift, presenting his
entire and hearty affection toward you: which at your leisure, may it please
you to pervse, and if you shall esteem this worth the view of the world,
hereafter (it may be) I shall be persuaded to pass the rest to the public
print.

The rather, because of late, I chanced to light upon a very scandalous
report, which an unkind Countryman of ours does inflict upon us in that
immodest Preface before the last edition unto the Christian directorie.

Wherein the Author confidently auerreth, that we the Ministers of the Gospel
(whom it pleases his fatherhood to term Scismatikes and Heretics) can set
forth no Books of true devotion, profitable to godly life. And he blusheth
not to render a three fold reason thereof: the one drawn from the testimony of
S. Paul the 2. Tim. the other from S. Peter. 2. Pet. 3. and the third again
from S. Paul, and so concludes, that we are all but mockers and deceivers,
when we talk of Mortification and a quickening spirit, for says he (to use his
own words) they can not preach this point of true piety, unless they should
impugn the principal Articles of their own doctrine.

What shall be done unto thee O thou false tongue? the Lord shall judge thee, did
I delight in this defamatorie kind of declayming I could annatomize some of our
Gentlemen like Jesuits, in their privy pleasant prankes so conceited, as would
easily procure the most mortified Catholic of Rome to blush and smile.

Is it a small matter, publikelie, and in print, so shamefully to belie and
scandalize an whole estate of a Realm? but, Quid non audet paternitas vestra?
suffices us we stand or fall to our God; and we pass very little to be judged
by you, or of man's judgment, he that judges us is the Lord, who will make the
counsels of the heart manifest, and then shall every man have his praise of God.

But if it had pleased his Fatherhood to have conferred with some of his own
Catholic brethren concerning this matter, they would (no doubt) have freely
confessed unto him (as they have found the practice of true Mortification in
some of their houses, where they have bin private prisoners, though it were not
in the wearing of the hair, nor in voluntary scourging of themselves.
Howsoever this man pleases him self and the brethren of his own brood with
these forgeries: Yet he that comes with any reverence to the reading of this
Pamphlet, shall confess, that we can preach and teach true Mortification.

Alexander was esteemed (and that worthily) a noble Prince, whilst he stood
in Megabizus school, and said nothing, but when he began to talk idlelie of
those things he knew not, the Schoolmaster told him, that even his little
children would laugh him to scorn.

I am loath to trouble your Worwith a number of vain words, for I perceive,
in many words there may be many slips, and so many trippes taken.

I commend this first adventure of half my substance unto the protection of
your favorable judicial judgment. And so I commit you and yours unto the
tuition of the almighty for ever.

Your Worcester. poor scholar R. W.

To the Christian courteous Reader, increase of all spiritual blessings and
temporal benefits.
COuntrymen, and my beloved, in the bowelles of Christ Jesus, these Chips (for
so they have been termed) of Divinity, I never purposed should have come to
the open light and sight of this world; but being corruptly taken (when they
were delivered) from me and then promised to the Press, I (rather than they
should come forth so maimed) was resolved (too rashly) to peruse, and so to
publish them: with what labor they are wrested and wrung from me, and with
what difficulty now at the last they are authentically allowed your sight, I
am coniured, not to discover: such as they are, I humbly commend to the
success of Gods blessing, and your favorable acceptance. Only this I cannot
pass over, which mightily prevailed with me, a Sentence which I then called to
mind I had sometime read in Clemens Alexandrinus, If (says he) the godly
minded Christian may not publish his holy writings, wherefore were Letters
invented? May the Epicure send abroad dishonest things? The Macheuilian his
Policies, and the base Ballet-maker his Rithmes, and shall not the simple
learned (but true hearted Christian) set forth such things as may for ever be
profitable?

Again, says Seneca in his sixth epistle, If Wisdom her self were granted
unto me, on this condition, to shut her up fast, and make my private use of
her, but never to publish her, I would utterly refuse her, for private
wisdom is but secret singularity.

Heerewithall somewhat animated, yet I could not but marvel, that in the church
of God here in England, where there are so many, endued with such singular
gifts and graces of Gods holy Spirit, there should be too many found, that
will not be persuaded to publish, their most excellent and exquisit labors, to
the common benefit of others; whereas they see, and may mark, the principal
cause whereby the Church of Rome begins to seem glorious at this day, is, for
that they that have the most plausible wits, and pleasing gifts amongst them,
as Bellarmine, Granatensis* Stella, Ferus and our Parsons, with such others,
whatsoever they have labored in, they have published and dispersed abroad.

But our admirable Divines, hold it a base indignity, that their grave studies
should come to the censuring of every Lay man's reading: neither can I justly
blame them, for what through the swarm of Atheists that increase by the heat
of the Sun, like Frogs in Summer, hearted on too much, by some of too good
calling.

And what for the number of privy prying Papists, that generally mislike all
the Treatises of Divinity whatsoever, that by any of the Ministers of the
Gospel are published.

And what for the crowde of our purer Puritanes, that allow of nothing, but
what they of their own brotherhoode shall broach. And lastly, what through our
prating Protestants that never commend any Treatise of Divinity, longer than
they shall runningly read it over, and mark the man's method and wit that
made it: thou heavenly Theology may be perchance reverently regarded,
whilst thou art for an hour, with sweet utterance and grave gesture
delivered: but if ever thou com to the public Press, thou shall feel and
find thy self too publickely oppressed, by the multitude of these thy
malignant ennemies.

Nevertheless, I could wish from my heart, that in these divine Discourses, if
any things justly mislike the Reader (as many things may) he would remember
Saint Paul's counsel, to follow the truth in love, considdering, as Saint
James says, In many things we may err all of us.

The God of all truth (I hope) will so bless these Labors in the truth,
that whosoever comes not with a preiudicate contemptuous conceit, to the
reading of these Conclusions, he shall, with the strength of this small Cake,
and with the comfort of this cold water, walk forth with Elias, even to
Horeb, the Mountain of GOD: And thus I leave thee, committing these my first
fruits unto the blessing of Gods holy Spirit, who grant us a right
understanding heart, with a charitable friendly judgment in all things.

R. Wilmott.

The Cananitish woman's Conflicts.
Matthew. 15. verse 21. Then Jesus went thence, and departed into the Borders of
Tyrus and Sydon.
GOD (says 1. Corin. 1. verse. 27. 28.
the apostle) has chosen the foolish things of this world, to co^founde the
Wise, the weak things of the world, to confound the mighty; and vile things,
which are despised, has God chosen, to bring to naught, things that are. And
this has been the Lords practice of old; for by Hushai he 2. Samu. 17. 8
effatuated the counsel of wise Ahithophel: by David's weak means, he brought
down mighty Goliath: 1. Sam. 17. ^0.
and by despised Iphtah, vile in the eyes of his brethren, he vanquished Judge.
11. 33.
the huge host of the Ammonites. But if ye desire in one person to see all
these three things palpably performed, look then into this history, and
consider with me, how by this foolish, weak, and despised woman, the Lord has
confounded, and condemned the wise, the mighty, and the scornful generation
of the Jews.

Therefore (says Austen) this Austin ser. 74.
memorable history is never to be forgotten; for it serves as a lively
mirror of true godliness: wherein an invincible faith may be seen lincked to
an humbled spirit: and I have observed in the discourse of this Story, five
notable points for our instruction, well worthy eternal remembrance.

First, the miserable condition of our natural man, which is such, as is not
only subject to the possession of the devil, but also, to his extreme
torments, and that even in this life.

Secondly, with what faith, fear, and reverence, Jesus Christ our Savior is
to be sought after, for help and succor in this life.

Thirdly, what grievous temptations and domestical afflictions remain for the
elect of God, sometime to be winnowed withal in this life.

Fourthly, what lovely care, and careful love, Parents and Tutors ought to
have, of the children committed to their charge, as also, what a charitable
mind every Christian ought to bear toward his afflicted neighbor.

Fifthly, the triumphant victory, and healthful reward, wherewith our
invincible faith is crowned.

These things so excellent, so comfortable, and so worthy the learning. I
beseech you accept as friendly, as they come from the ground of a kind heart
unto ye.

The Evangelist aims at these two marks, and hitteth them both in this
discourse.





In these words (which are used as an induction unto this history) the
holy ghost seems orderly to observe these three descriptions.

of the time when this miracle was wrought:

Topographie or description of the place where it was wrought.

Prosopographie or description of the person upon whom it was wrought.

Our Savior Christ had been in the land of Gennezaret, and thither came the
Scribes, Pharisees, and Elders of Jerusalem, with a great multitude, unto him,
of purpose to cauell with him, and to catch him or his Disciples in a snare.

But when he had roundly threatened them with the judgments of God, and soundly
laid open unto them the natural filthiness of their own hearts: then says
the Evangelist, Jesus went thence, that is, from Genezaret (as appears) and
came into the coasts of Tire and Sidon.

to depart and leave their company, amongst whom he was working the will of
his father: once was from the Gaderenes, and that was because of Mark. 5. 17.
their Covetousness; for they feared the loosing of their Swine.

Therefore he says, for his wicked covetousness I am angry with him, I Esaias 57.
17
have hid my self, and am gone away. And of the three caueats in the gospel
which our Savior Christ has Luke 12, 15.
given unto us, this is one, Take heed and beware of Covetousness: for though a
man have abundance, yet his life (or safety) stands not in his riches.

Hereuppon does the Author Hebr. 13. 5.
of the Epistle to the Hebrews, exhort all Christians, that their conversation
be without Covetousness, desiring them to be content with that they have: for
(says he) the Lord has said, Non deseram, neque destituam, I will not fail
thee, nor forsake thee.

The Lion (they say) cannot endure the savor of an hog, but whether it be so
or no, this I am sure of, The victorious Lion of the tribe of Judah cannot abide
the smell of Covetousness.

The other thing that drives Christ Jesus our Savior out of our company and
Country, is contempt and hardness of heart, which is always the forerunner of
confusion. And of all kind of people, there are none so much taxed with this
fault, as Pharisees, Lawyers and Hypocrites, of whom the holy ghost says, They
despised the counsel of God against Luke 7. 30.
them selves. But to meet with the contemptuous despisers, the Lord enacted a
very good statute, and that is this: He that blasphemeth the Lord, or speaks
presumptuously, or co^temptuously Numb. 15. 31
of his holy word, whether he be borne in the land, or a stranger, he shall die
the death. The reason is added, because he despised the word of the Lord:
Therefore does the Apostle S. Paul exhort the Thessalonians, neither to despise
prophesying, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 8.
nor the Prophet: for (says he) he that despises these things, despises not
man, but God: and in this respect our Savior Christ warranteth the departure of
his Disciples Math. 10. 14
from that place, and from that people, which neither reverently receive them,
nor regard their words; protesting, it shall be easier for the land of Sodom
and Gomorra in the day of judgment, then for that place, and people.

Thus you see what drives Christ Jesus our Lord out of our company and
coasts: and ye know, when the Prince remoueth, all the honor of the court
departs with him: So, when our Savior Christ departs from us, all his
graces and heavenly blessings take their farewell of us: for when the Lord
departs from Saul, by and by an evil spirit 1. Samu. 16. 14.
possesses and vexes him: As when the Sun is fallen from our Horizon, darkness
covers the face of the whole earth.

Our conclusion is, let us detest Covetousness, and beware of contempt, for
where these two infectious plagues are nourished, our Lord Jesus Christ cannot
abide to stay within their noisome savors.

Tirus and Sidon. These two Cities were great sea towns, or markets of
exchange, mightily frequented, rich and populous, yea, and famous to the very
days of S. Jerome; they were situated in the region of Phoenitia, bordering
upon the uttermost parts of Palestine, determining Joshua 19. 28. 29.
the bounds of the try be of Ashur, southward. Into these coasts, that is,
into the borders or suburbs of these cities came Christ Jesus at this time.

But it may be asked wherefore our Savior should go to this place: Obiectio
whereas he had heretofore charged his Disciples, not to go into the way Matthew.
10. 5
of the Gentiles, neither to enter into the City of the Samaritans.

It may be answered, Responsio
not a fit season for them as yet to undertake so great a labor; but unto him,
now was the hour and fulness of the season come to do his fathers will: for
now, when he saw this region began to be white unto the John 4. 35.
harvest, therefore was the sickle to be thrust in.

Again, he would not have them to go into the way of the Gentiles, to preach,
or to bring unto them, the glad tidings of the Gospel: Neither does he come
hither at this time, to that purpose, but as Saint Mark has it, he came to be
alone, Mark. 7. 24.
neither would he that any man should have known of his coming.

But there are two special reasons to be given which moved our Savior to go
to this place: Chrysostom.) Palam and aperta. The other is secreta and incognita.

The one is plainly to be gathered, which was to refresh, and ease himself
after his wearisome labors amongst the Jews; for this cause he entered into a
private house in the Suburbs, to be obscure for a season, in a place where he
was not known; prefiguring thereby, in a mystery, the ruinous fall of the
synagog, and the beautiful erection of the church of God amongst the Gentiles.

But if this weak body wherewith our savior Christ was clothed, had need of
the refreshing of his tired members, what unnatural men are they, that will
not allow to his ministers, (men of as weak constitution as our savior Christ
was) their christian recreation?

The Apostle saint Paul, as he charge us to be (...), laborers, so also he
would have us (...), lovers of our labors: but he that is tired like an horse
in the mill, or an ox in the plough, cannot long love his labors, and then
woe be to him that does the work of the Lord Ierem. 48. verse. 10.
negligently.

Our conclusion is: It is both godly and lawful for the minister of the
Gospel, when he feels himself weary in his holy labors, to refresh
himself with some christian recreation, so it be done (according to our
Saviors example in this place) discreetely.

Elias had a hartier welcome of the poor widow of Zareptah then of 1. Reg. 17.
Ahab, and all his counselors: so are the mercies of our savior Christ, more
magnified by this miserable woman, than by all the Rabbis of the Jews: for
such is the blessed virgins Luke 1. 53.
song. He has filled the hungry with good things, and the rich he has sent
empty away.

But let us therein considder the wonderful secret of Gods wisdom, whilst our
Lord Jesus Christ walked openly in the land of Iewrie amongst the peculiar
people, unto whom he was specially sent, alluring all men unto him; he
finds but few that regard his proffered grace: but so soon as he steps
out of Iewry toward the Gentiles, desiring not to be known, behold how
quickly he is found out, and his loving kindness most thankefully received.
So falls it forth with us even in these days, mark ye not how the sweet
secrets of Gods word are hidne from the wise Math. 11. 25. et ver. 5.
and prudent of this world? And are revealed unto babes and sucklings, and the
poor, very joyfully and greedily receive the glad tidings of the Gospel,
such is the divine wisdom, pleasure, and will of our heavenly Father; to him
be glory, Amen.

Haec rerum capita in hoc Tractatu, vt in reliquis, in longiorem orationem
dilata, and auditoribus applicata fuere, quae nunc de industria solummodo
capitulata and abbreuiata sunt.

Tractatus secundus
Verse 22. And behold, a woman, a Canaanite, came out of the same coasts, and
cried, saying:
WE are now come to the third description of the person, upon whom, or for
whose sake this same miracle was wrought. In the which description, we have
orderly these four points to be examined:

First, that the Evangelist says, she was a Woman.

Secondly, a Cananite, or a Cananitish woman.

Thirdly, she came, out of the same coasts.

Fourthly, she cried, saying, etc.

But first, in that the Holy Ghost uses this watchwoorde Behold: which is a
word of admiration and attention. Wheresoever you meet with it through the
whole Scriptures of God, noting some rare and wonderful matter, well worthy
the observation which insueth, as in that where the Prophet says, Behold, Esaias
7. 14
a Virgin shall conceive and bring forth her son. And again, that which
Saint John Baptist says, Behold the John 1. 2^
Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, etc. in the rest.

Here then our Evangelist meaning to set down a marvelous matter, and to
deliver a wondrous thing, he says, Behold. Let us then, as we are warned by
this watchword, lift up the eyes of our mind, mark, consider, and behold
this woman.

A woman, not such a one as was Sarah, who laughed at the promises of God in
the incredulity Genes. 18. 12
of her heart: but such a one as hoped beyond all hope; and believed, contrary
to the reason of belief.

A woman, not such a one as was Jobs wife, who when she saw Job 2. 9.
her husband punished of the Lord (she that should have bin his comforter)
begins to be his confounder, giving him counsel, to curse God, and die. But
such a one, as seeing her daughter tormented of the Devil, runs to GOD for
help, and with her importunate prayers never leaves him, until she was
released and eased.

A woman, whereby we are given to learn, the things, which by nature are very
weak, God uses (by grace) to make strong. For Jacob, Genes. 32. 28
though he halt in his thigh, yet is he made the Israel of God: and it is
most true which the Apostle testifies of the Saints of God in elder time, who
of weak became Heb. 11. 34
very strong. And Saint Paul had the experience thereof, he spoke therefore
that he had proved, where he says, When I am weak, then am 2. Cor. 10. 12
I strong. Truly therefore and sweetly sings Anna in her heavenly 1. Sam. 2
song; the weak have girded themselves with strength, as in little David,
weak Iudeth, and lame Mephibosheth may be seen.

Our conclusion is with the apostle, Gods strength is made perfect 2. Cor. 12. 9
in our weakness. Let us learn then (we that are strong in faith) to
support them that are yet weak, that they may gather strength in the Lord Jesus.

[A Canaanite] The second Mark 7. 26
point to be observed in the description of this person, S. Mark calls her a
Greek, which was a common name applied to all the Gentiles, she is said also
to be a Syrophenissian by nation, which was the place of her dwelling.

Chananea is by interpretation commutata, and truly every soul that seeks
for help and succor of our Lord Jesus, must be (with this good woman) one
changed, altered, and metamorphosed, turned from evil to good, from vice to
virtue, from prophanenes to holiness, a right Canaanite. Also some of the
Fathers have interpreted Syrophenissa, to signify profunde conuersa, deeply,
soundly, and one sincerely converted.

In this Syrophenissian we have then a notable example of a true repentant
sinner syncerely converted. And by both these brands set upon her, we find she
descended of the posterity of Cham, the father of Genes. 9. 25
Canaan cursed by the Prophet: Whereby we gather, that which by nature is
cursed, by faith may be made blessed, sanctified, and saved. For though the
waters of Marah Exodus 15. 25.
were by nature bitter, yet through Moses prayers by grace from above they
became sweet and healthful. By this was Rahab the common harlot of Jericho
sanctified and saved. Joshua 6. 22
And through this our Savior Christ says, that many lewd Publicans and vile
sinners shall enter into Math. 21. 32.
the kingdom of God. The Apostle says, we are all by nature the children of
wrath, as well as others: Ephesians. 2
but by faith in Christ Jesus our Lord, we are seasoned and sweetened with the
savor of eternal life.

[Came out of the same coasts.] This is the third point to be observed in this
description. Wherein we are given, Tire and Sidon: for Revel. 2. 13
the Lord says to his Church of Pergamus, that she dwells even where Satan's
throne is. As the Ark of God was sometime in the temple of Dagon: for good
wheat grows in 1. Sam. 5
the midst of tares, and sometime sweet roses spring and sprout up from a
bank of stinging and stinking nettles. Did not righteous Lot dwell in Sodom,
the sink of sin, Joseph in Egypt, and Daniel in Babylon? but to touch pitch
and not to be defiled with all, to live in the midst of a naughty and crooked
nation, and to shine amongst them as brightsome lights, Hic labor, hoc opus,
this is praise worthy: for a Monk to live virtuous in a wilderness, or an
Anchorist holy, locked up in a stone wall, is not worth the wonder.

Abraham was commanded Genes. 12. 1
to come out of his country, and from his kindred, and from his fathers house,
to go into the land which the Lord should give him. And Moses must come out of
Egypt Exodus 2. 1.
before he come unto the mountain of God.

Lot (as loath as he is) must leave Genes. 19. mark 5. 2
Sodom, if he will be saved: and the mad man possessed of the devils must come
out of the graves before he meets with Christ Jesus.

Let us also labor to come out of our selves, to leave our old dwellings in
sin, to forsake our natural inclinations, to fly from our own desires (to
whom we are so near allied) that we may meet with Jesus our true Savior.

Physicians use three special reasons to persuade a sick man, for the recovery
of his health to remove his dwelling.

The first is, the grossnes of the air: but I assure you there is no air so
contagious to the body, as sin is infectious to the soul.

The second is, the incommodious situation of the place, or house: but there
is no earthly mansion, which stands so dangerous, as that soul that lives
in sin.

The third is, the unkind neighborhood about him: but what neighbors may be
so barbarous to the body, as the devil the envious man is to the soul?

Our conclusion is: for the recovery of thy daughter: that is of thy souls
health (allegoricallie) come out of these coasts, to meet with Christ Jesus.



The first is, with this good woman to come out.

The second is, from her own coasts.

The third is, to cry out.

The first is, the state of them which begin to repent.

The second is, the state of them that have repented.

The third is, the state of them which are still in the practice of repentance,
which because it is the perpetual exercise of a Christian man's life, let us
look a little better into it.

[And cried saying,] Here in the Canaanitish woman had an excellent faith and
confidence in our Lord Jesus: for otherwise (as the Apostle says) how can Romans
10. 14.
they call upon him in whom they have not believed? and how can they believe in
him of whom they have not heard? Doubtless therefore this good woman had grounded
her faith upon the general promises of God granted unto the whole world in the
promised redeemer; as this: All nations in the world shall be blessed in him.
And again, he shall deliver the poor when he cries, the needy also and him
that has no helper. And again, he that puts ^enes. 12. 3.
his trust in him shall never be Psalm. 72. 12
confounded. These promises had Esaias 28.
she heard of, which she knew did specially belong unto the Messiah, and thus
she applied them to her self. If all the nations of the earth shall be blessed
in him, then are not we Cananits excluded from this blessing. And if he shall
hear the poor that cry unto him, then will he hear me so poor and
helpless a creature as I am. And forasmuch as whosoever puts his trust in
him shall not be confounded, then shall not I be disappointed of my hope: for I
have reposed my whole confidence in him.

Our conclusion is, that we thus learn to edify, and build up our most holy
faith, that she being founded and grounded upon this rock, may be able to
stand fast, and endure all the tempestuous storms of 1. Pet. 1. 7.
temptation, that the trial of our faith, which is much more precious then
gold, may be found unto our praise, honor, and glory, at the appearing of our
Lord Jesus.

(cried) for a strong faith sends forth earnest requests, as a feeble faith
makes faint prayers, for great miseries and perplexities will force forth
great out cries. Hence was it that Moses, when he (with the people of Exodus 14.
15.
Israel) was driven to such an exigent at the red Sea, having the mountains
on each side of them, their enemies behind them, and the deep before them ready
to swallow them up: the Lord asks him wherefore he does so cry unto him.
Even so good Hannah, a woman 1. Sam. 1. 15
troubled in her spirit, in the perplexity of her soul, she calls upon the
Lord, and wept sore, she prays weeping, and weepeth praying. And what a
continual exercise does the Prophet David Psalm. 61. 6.
make of this, as himself testifies? every night cause I my bed to swim in my
tears, and I water my couch with my weepings. And our Savior affirms, that
his elect cry day Luke 18. 7.
and night unto him.

Beloved, when we pray thus crying, and cry out in our prayers, as Ezechias
did, chattering like a swallow, and mourning like a dove, Esaias 28. 14.
how graciously the Lord accepts of these our cries, ye may perceive by
Marie Magdalen, and Peter that wept bitterly.

There are three kinds of prayers says Bernard, which never pierce the
heavens, Timida, tepida, and temeraria oration, a fearful one which faints
and vanishes like a vapor before the Sun.

The second, a luke warm prayer, which like a meteor, is neither hot nor
cold, neither fervent, nor fruitful, and that is consumed ere it come to his
center.

fidelis, humilis, et feruens, faithful, humble, and fervent, out of doubt it
never returns from the throne of God empty to our hungry souls. Here (me
thinks) I might frame this argument, that prayer which is without feruencie
and feeling, is no prayer with understanding: And what prayer soever is without
understanding, is no prayer in the spirit: and the prayer which is not in the
spirit, is not acceptable before God. Therefore, the prayer which is without
feruencie and feeling, is not accepted of God. Will ye then know the reason why
ye pray so much, and prevail not, ye ask so often and James 4. 3
receive not, S. James gives it, because (says he) ye ask amiss.

For indeed we neither ask in the same manner, nor in the same measure as we
ought to do. In the same manner so faithfully, in the same measure so
fervently, pouring out our souls like water into the Lords bosom, as it
becomes us.

Our conclusion is, before thou praiest, prepare thine heart and soul thereunto,
as the Preacher counsels thee. And when thou praiest, be not faint hearted in
thy prayers, but continue in prayer, and watch thereunto with all diligence,
and be thou assured, as the Angel said to old Tobias: so will the Lord say Tob
12. 14
unto thy soul, thy prayer and thy tears are accepted, and thou have found
favor and grace in his sight.

Lastly, this her cry our Evangelist notes to be vocal in this word saying.

There is indeed an internal cry of the soul, which the Lord highly
delights in, as was that which good Anna had when she was supposed 1. Sam. 2.
dronk, but not with the blood of the grape, but with the wine of true
devotion. And so says a Father, In Dei auribus desiderium vehemens magnus est
clamor, A vehement desire is a great cry in the ears of God, according to the
old adage, Non vox, sed votum. And this kind of speaking, though the Lord
regards (as he did Ezechias chattering) yet is not the labor of the lips
exempted: for the Lord that made both the tongue and the spirit, looks for a
tribute to be paid to him from them both: and for this cause is it that the
Lord opens thy lips, because thy mouth may show forth his praise.

He then that spares the travel of his tongue, because he has lifted up his
heart unto God, he has broken the common order of Gods service, and the
Apostolical rule in the order of the primitive Church which was this, that at
all our prayers and giving of thanks, the unlearned should say, Amen.

Tractatus tertius.
Verse 22. Have mercy upon me O Lord thou Son of David.
We are now come and proceeded to the words of this cry, wherein the reason,
and likewise the cause of her cry is discovered: her cry is a prayer and her
prayer is an outcrie: So that the first godly practice of this good woman's
faith, was a vehement and forcible prayer.

And if ye ask me what is the continual exercise of a Christian man's life? I
answer prayer for what should he else do but as the Apostle wills him pray
continually, and as 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17
our sweet Savior has exampled unto us, who in the days of his flesh, offered
up prayers with strong Hebr. 5. 7
cryings and tears unto him that was able to help him.

Follow thou then (if thou be a true Christian) that fathers counsel, who
says unto thee, Egrediens domo armet te oration, and regrediens de platea
occurrat oration. When thou go out of thy house, let prayer arm thee, and
when thou returnest from the street, let prayer meet thee.

Now in this good woman's prayer, you may see all those six conditions which are
necessarily required, in every true christian prayer. As first, that it be
faithful; secondly, fervent; thirdly, discreet; forthly, charitable; fifthly,
humble; lastly with an importunate perseverance in the acknowledging our own
miseries, and giving to God only and his glory the hope of our help; yet
neither prescribing the means how, nor appoynting him the time when to deliver
us.

Orderly these words may be branched into these three points: have mercy.
upon me. O Lord thou Son of David.

For the first, It is worth the marking how the Saints of God, the cleerer they
have seen into themselves, the more vehemently in their most piercing prayers
have they cried out for mercy. So the afflictions of David in his book of
Psalms do testify, as in the sixth Psalm, where he desires God to have mercy
upon him, because he was weak, and his bones were vexed. Psalm 32
In an other Psalm, he entreats mercy, because he was in trouble, Psalm. 5^
and his eyes, his soul, and his belly, were consumed with grief. In an
other, he craves mercy, because man goes about to swallowe him up, and
fights against him continually.

Mark ye not how Manasses in 2. Chron. 34.
the dungeon cries for mercy. Jonas in the belly of the whale remembers
Jonas 2.
the Lord his God of his old mercies. And the Publican in the Luke 15. 13.
Gospel, with his eyes in his heart says, God be merciful to me a sinner.

This is therefore the basis, the burden of all their petitions in the midst
of their miseries, Mercy good Lord, mercy we ask, this is the total sum;
for mercy Lord is all our suit, Lord let thy mercy come.

I cannot then sufficiently wonder at their madness, who forgetting their
own miseries, cry out in their prayers for the reward of their merit.

Surely, these men, for lying vanities, have forsaken their own mercy, yea
they have forsaken God himself, which is made of mercy, and compounded of
compassion; who, as a father pittieth his own children, so does the Lord
power out the bowelles of his compassion upon all them that cry unto him for
it, seeking and sighing for it most fervently,

Here we see this good woman sets mercy before God. Have mercy upon me O
God. For our God is always foremost in mercy, and he never ha^eth, until he be
hated. As a father says, derelinquunt homines Deum, non derelinquunt ur a
Deo: Men leave God, but they are not left nor forsaken of God: for his mercy
is over all his works.

Nevertheless, that we may not fall into Origens old heresy, who, to
magnify the mercies of God, supposed at the day of judgment, that all men
should be saved, as some profane Protestants are of opinion, that they which
have been once baptized, shall never be condemned.

To meet with these men, let us learn for a truth, to whom the mercies of
God do properly appertain: with thee there is mercy, (says the Psalmist)
that thou may Psalm 130. 4
be feared. And his mercy (sings the blessed Virgin) is on them that Luke 1.
50.
fear him throughout all generations

But who is he that fears God aright: surely, says Solomon, the P^ou. 9.
fear of the Lord withdraws, or withholds man from evil. And again,
the fear of the Lord is the beginning of his love: for there is no true love
(such as is the inferior unto his gracious superior) without some fear.

He therefore that fears the loss of the love of God, and so loves him that
he fears his displeasure, unto him appertains the mercy of our God for
ever.

The second branch ^o be followed is, for whom she prayed: to wit, for her
self, Have mercy on me.

In this point, these four points may be observed. Hippocrates twins, they
weep together, and they laugh together.

Therefore, when Hester the Hester ^.
Queen fasted and wept, Mardocheus with all the Jews mourned together with
her.

And when our Savior beheld how Mary, and the Jews bewailed John 11. 35
the death of Lazarus: he wept also with them for company.

Hence says saint Paul, who is 2. Cor. 29.
weak, and I am not infirm? who weepeth, and I mourn not?

Our conclusion is, whosoever greeueth for himself only, without any further
touch or inward feeling, of the general afflictions of the saints, his (though
a Christian affection) may be turned into sin.

we see the motherlie affections of a tender heart, which makes her childs
afflictions her own miseries.

Comfortably beyond all comprehension Esaias 49. 15
speaks the Lord by his Prophet. Can a mother forget the child of her womb?
could the true hearted mother endure before 1. Reg. 3. 26
her face the slaughter of her own infant?

Our conclusion is, so should all pityfull parents, when they behold their
tender young ones plunged in any strange striving pangs, cry out with David,
have mercy on me o Lord, it is I that have sinned, for 2. Samu. 12
what has this child done?

Thus the Lord beats the dog before the lion, the lamb before the damme, to
tame and bring down thy stony stubborn heart.

Have mercy on me, she bewrays the nature of true compassion, which as a
Father says, Est vitijs alienis tribulari non implicari, moerere, non herere,
dolor contrahi, non attrahi, To be troubled with other men's sins, not to be
tainted with them, to groan at them, not to grow in them, to grieve for them,
but not to be drawn into them.

But in truth very soothlie says Barnard, Impossible est ei afflictionibus
afflictorum contristari, qui experimentum afflictionis in se nunquam habuit, It
is not possible for him to be grieved at the afflictions of the afflicted, who
never had experience of affliction in himself: for true compassion is a Godly
affection of pity, both toward himself and other: for this cause did the
high Priest, first offer sacrifice for himself, and then for other. And the
Preacher counsels thee, Miserere animae tuae placens Deo, Pity thou first
thine own soul, for that is well pleasing unto God.

Indeed the Pharisie in the Gospel, Luke 18.
he was sorry for the Publican, but the poor Publican was most sorrowful for
himself And so was Saul pitifully minded toward Agag, 1. Samu. 15
but he had forgotten to be compassionate toward his own soul. Mark ye not
how the cock first claps his wings against his own side, and so rowzing up
his heart croweth. And the Lord by his holy spirit says, Exias a te peccatrix
Ierem. 27.
Babylon, Come out of thy self, begin with thy self, thou sinful soul of
confusion: Remember thy self, care for thine own cure, recover thine own
health, and then go and strengthen thy brethren.

The Athenians had a custom to sacrifice unto their own gods only, for
themselves, and their neighbors: So learn thou, first to sacrifice unto God,
the calves of thine own lips, with the smokie sighs of a groaning heart,
grieved for the sins of thine own soul, be mindful of thine own miseries,
and cry for mercy: first for thy self, and then for thy people.

Our conclusion is, he that with 2. Reg. 5
Nahaman at the commandment of the Prophet, sowseth not himself seven times
a d^y in the salt sea sorrows of his own soul, because of the filthiness of
his own flesh, he shall never be truly cleansed from the loathsome leprosy
of all his sins.

Lastly, in that she says, Have mercy on me, herein we see the threefold
effect of an excellent faith.

Themistocles, Qui omnium C^uium nomina tenebat, Who remembered the names of all
his Citizens. Also Cyneas, who in one day had learned to salute all the
Senators of Rome, every man by his own name. And of Lucullus, whom Tully so
much commends: But there is no object more excellent for the memory of man
continually to beat upon, then the comfortable promises of Gods eternal
mercies.

Jonathan did David) the truth of these promises, to meet John 21.
them, and greet them (as Mary did our Lord Jesus) betimes in the morning: and
to salute them by the dawning of the day, and then though sad sorrow and
heaviness has lodged with us all night, yet glad, joy, and cheerfulnes will
bring a merry morrow.

so shall thou find rest, health, and happiness for ever.

These are the flaggons of his Cantic. 2.
pure wine. These are the apples of his dear love, to revive, strengthen, and
stay thee.

But alack for pity! that this former effect of faith may be sometime seen,
even among hvpocrites, for Gene. 27.
Esau can remember the benefit of his birthright, and weep for it.

And the second, which is more glorious, is too common unto Reprobates, as he
that catches hold of a slender twine, in hope of help, when he is sincking
down to be drowned.

Did not the Jews in the days of Jeremy trust to the promises made to their
Temple and City of Jerusalem, Ierem. 19.
when the enemy was battring down their bulwarks.

But the third, (which is never wrought, but with the finger of Gods own hand)
that is peculiar only to the elect of God

This then is our conclusion, although our Savior Christ be a sovereign
salve, and a most precious plaster, able to recure and heal all the festred
soars and foul eating cankars of the soul: yet, if thou have not this
isntrumental hand of faith, wherewith thou may apply this medicine unto
thine own wounds, pouring this oil and wine, like the wise Samaritan, into
Luke 1^.
every place, that is perished within thee, without all doubt thou shall never
be soundly recovered of thy deadly diseases.

O Lord, thou Son of David.

In this point let us follow these instructions. not damnable devilish means
for her ease and recovery, she consulteth not with a coniurer, she whispereth
not with Witches, with one nail to drive out an other, as with one devil to
cast out an other, but she directly comes, cries, and calls upon Christ Jesus
for her succor.

And is not this mere madness when the God of heaven and earth our Father, (a
name of favor) wills Psalm 50
us to call upon him, to seek unto him, in the time of our trouble, promising
that he will hear us, and not that only, but he will deliver us, that we may
glorify him, and nos insensati, and we fools call upon his and our enemy:
who does, not only, not regard us, but never can deliver us: Is not this to
run round about in a maze, to be delivered out of an amazement?

Besides this foppery, I would gladly learn of these men, what help, or sound
hope of help can any Christian expect from the devil, or from him that makes
conuention with the Devil for him: surely August. 3. trinit.
their power failed them even upon slies, and they could not enter into the
Swine without permission. Mark. 5.


Beloved, a learned late writer Hyporius.
proves by three notable arguments (as me seems) that whosoever seeks,
either by calculation, or by any Magical stipulation to be relieved in his
troubles, he is utterly fallen away from the faith of Christ Jesus.



the chief creator, he honors and worshippeth that creature unto whom he so
seeks, and this is to commit Idolatry, and consequently, to fall from our
holy faith.



Our conclusion is, in this case he that seeks for any succor, and he that
helps by any extraordinary devilish means to succor any man in his
troubles, they are both flat Apostatas from the sound faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

natures, yea, upon two natures in one person, a perfect God for ever.

Well said the Orator, there is no nation so barbarous, that is not seasoned
with the savor of some god, this is that Natura naturans, nature her self,
which nurtureth and nuzleth us in this opinion: If there were no other helps
to prove the eternal deity.

Yet there is a hellish brood of Atheists, proud in their own wits, who
suffocating all light of nature, light of the creatures, and the glorious light
of the Scriptures, dare deny the manifest incomprehensible majesty of our
euer-lyuing God.

Did the Athenians banish Protagoras, because he set out a book, doubting
whether there were any Gods, and may any Christian common wealth honor them
that deride the blessed Trinity? These hell hounds should be answered with
arguments of blood, which we daily pray for. In the mean time cursed be they
with the great curse of death, and may it cleave to them, and al their
favorites for ever, (if they repent not) that maintain so foul a blasphemy.

David. In that she acknowledges him her Lord, she belieueth his deity. And
in calling him the son of David, she approves his humanity.

This Lord is the gracious beginning, the defensing, continuing, and final
ending of all creatures. This Lord has a name not to be named, a name above
all names, the Lord strong and mighty, the Lord of hosts, the Lord our light,
and our salvation, our glory, our tower, our refuge, and our protection for
evermore.

And as he is the Lord, even the the God of our forefathers, so is he also the
son of David, a man made of our seed, lineally descended from the loins of
Iesse, a branch of the same bough, a twig of the same tree: but a righteous,
not a rotten branch, and therefore is there more in him then in all the sons
of men, the posterity of Adam.

Our conclusion is, Let us with both eyes behold faithfully in all our
prayers, these two natures in one person Christ Jesus, his Lordship; wherein his
might, his manhood, wherein his mercy may be extended toward us, that so his
merciful might, and his might full of mercy, may graciously accept of our
petitions, and gracious requests. Amen.

Tractatus Quartus.
Verse 22. My daughter is pitteously tormented with a Devil.
THIS is the first assault given to this good VVomans Faith, which is expressed
in a most tragical complaint, every word having his weight of sorrow.
Therefore we will the deeper look into the greeuousnesse of this temptation,
by these four circumstaunces considered therein.

First, that her Daughter,

Secondly, is tormented,

Thirdly, pitteously, or grievously.

Fourthly, by the Devil.

In that she complains, that her daughter, a colop of her own flesh, her
dear child, weak by nature, because a woman, fearful by kind, because a
maid, and as near to her as the skin of her brows, because her own
daughter.

Thus we might stay a while to aggrauate the greeuousnesse of this temptation,
but it seems that this woman was no sooner converted to the true religion of
the God of Israel, but the devil by and by assaulteth her daughter, she
finds him, not only in her own house, in her own mind, in her heart, and in
her concupiscence, but in her own limbs, and in her own bowelles.

This was a weary welcome at the first unto this true religion.

She might very well have imagined, (...).
either this not to be the true religion of God, which brings such a sour
taste with it at the first relish, or else God regards not them, who in the
truth of his religion worship him, because he suffers the professors thereof
to be so grievously tormented.

But it is usual with the Israel of God (no sooner to set forward toward the
land of Promise, according to Gods appointment) but they shall find infinite
troubles, vexations, and hindrances in their journey. Man and the Devil on
every side rising up against them. For, in this case, the Devil is like a wild
Tygre robbed of her whelps, raging furiously.

So we find in the Parable of the Luke 11. ^4.
unclean spirit, cast out of the man, he takes no rest, until (if it be
possible) he has made his reentry, that the end of that man may be worse than
the beginning. And this is that Math. 10. 34.
sword which our Savior says he is come to bring into this world.

Whilst David is at home with his father, all is well with him: but when he
comes to the battle, and specially when he settes forward to fight with
Goliath: his own brethren become 1. Samu. 17
his heavy hateful enemies.

Our conclusion is, happy is he, who through the greeuousnesse of these
temptations (fastening upon him whilst he is yet but as a green blade in the
first spring) is not so offended heerewith, that he falls quite away from
the truth of his profession.

Chrysostom supposes this child to have been her only daughter, and
therefore the temptation was so much the more grievous: for, if a man has but
one precious Jewel which he esteems above all his riches in the world: to
loose that, or to be robbed of it, it were an exceeding grief to him, but to
be dispossessed of it by his greatest ennemy, who in despite of him, makes a
spoil of it before his face: this is a most intolerable injury.

When Abraham has but one Genes. 22.
son, the only hope of the Promise, and yet he must sacrifice him, this
touches to the quick, and runs very near the heart, vna salus victis. But
this woman's case, by many degrees, is more miserable then was Abraham's: for he
has an other son an Ismael: this has no child, but her only daughter,
himself sacrifices his child, The Devil butchereth her child.

He knows herein he pleases God: she knows, that neither God nor Man is
pleased in this deed. And yet these bitter pills, and unsavory sawces, are
sometimes most wholesome for our crazed souls. For Physicians hold there is
no surffet more perilous then that which is taken of too much honnie.

Therefore the dungeon in Babylon 2. Reg. 21.
was less dangerous to Manasses, then the throne of Judah. And it is good for
me says David, that I Psalm 119
have been in trouble, for now I have learned to keep thy law. Camamile well
trod upon, grows the thicker: and spices well pownded, smell the sweeter.

Our conclusion is, hard adversity is, for the most part, more profitable for
the children of God, then fair prosperity can be.

The second point is, that her daughter is tormented, for so tender a child to
have been possessed, had been a grievous thing, but to be tormented, is most
wretched.

The Greek word (...) is very significatiue, not as some translate it (but
not so aptly) furiata est, but a daemonio agitatur: which was indeed malum
praeter naturam: for this is such a disease, qui phisice curari non potest, she
was torn, harried, and peece-meale perplexed by the devil, as the good man's
son was, whom the devil, wheresoever Mark 9. 18.
he took, caused him to tear himself, and to foame at the mouth, gnashing
his teeth, and pining away.

Herein we note the furious might of the devil, for he had a threefolde power
over this poor maiden. The first was to enter into her, and possess her: the
second was, in possessing, to torment her: the third was miserably pitteously,
and grievously to do it And this power is granted of God, unto this common
ennemy of mankind, because of our sin: for as we did willingly and wilfully
cast away our loving obedience unto God: so, pari metria, by the like
proportion of justice, it is reason that Saul rule over them 1. Sam. 9.
that call for him to be their King.

And this permitted power of his, he does sometimes exercise (but as Gods
executioner) even upon them that are near and dear un to their loving and
beloved God* which he does either inuisibly in their minds, or visibly upon
their bodies.

In their minds three manner of ways, either abusing their incredulity, as
he did in Thomas. Or secondly, John 20. 18.
in drawing it into despair, as he did in Cain: or blinding or besotting
Genes. 4. 3.
their understanding, so that they cannot conceive that they have heard, and
read of heavenly matters, as he did the Apostles, in mistaking our Saviors
speech of Leaven: Luke 12. 6
and Saint Peter speaks of many 2. Pet. 3. 16
that so perverted S. Paul's Epistles unto their own perdition: Or thirdly,
confounding their memory, so that they have quite and clean forgotten, what
admonishment and forewarnings they have had by the Holy Ghost: as the Prophet
that had forgotten the commandment 1. Reg. 13.
to return fasting after his message. And Peter had forgotten John 13. 38
the watchword of the cock crow.

The Devil does also execute his power sometime upon the bodies of the Saints
and children of God, visiblie and sensibly, smiting them, as he did that holy
man of god Job. Yea, and he feared not to set upon th'immaculate body of our
Lord Math 4. 8.
Jesus Christ, carrying him from the wilderness to the tops of the high
mountains, and from the mountains to the city, and from the city to the
pinnacle of the Temple etc. So that I am easily drawn into this opinion, Omne
sublunare, every elementarie body under the Moon is maruellouslie captiuated
to this permissiue power.

And this has our Lord GOD granted unto him in his wisdom; Four notable
reasons justly urging him thereunto.

1. Sam. 9.
the house of Israel, they have not cast thee away: but they have cast me
away, that I should not reign over them: Therefore did he give them one in his
wrath to rule over them, and they did feel the smart of his tyrannous dominion.



Thus did he hamper and throw down the mighty Monarche of Babylon,
Nabuchadnezar. And thus Dan. 9.
did he bring him to the knowledge of him self to sit at Jesus feet that was
possessed with the Legion. Mark 8.


Tobias, when he Tob. 7.
understood that seven of his predecessors had been successively strangled
in their wedding bed, therefore did he with the more dutiful devotion by his
holy prayers sanctify the same, whereby the feind failed in his force, and was
put to slight. So, whosoever he is that follows the rule of the Gospel, to
watch and pray least he fall into temptation, he shall escape the snares of this
great hunter, and the grins of this crafty fowler, so that they shall not
fasten upon him.

Saul, because he was a King, for to the mighty remain mighty punishments.
And if there were no other reason, me thinks this might serve to convince
their consciences, in the confessing of God, because, by their experience they
have found there is a Devil, the executioner of mischief upon the sons of
men. Doubtless then there is his contrary, who is God, showing mercy and
compassion toward them that fear him.

Our conclusion is, Be the power and might of the Devil never so extreme, and
his tortures never so intolerable, yet whosoever he is, that abides in the
shaddowe of the Almighty, he that has made the Lord his hope, his fortress,
and his trust, he shall be delivered from this noisome evil. The Lord shall
cover him under his wings, and he shall Psalm. 81.
be sure under his feathers, his faithfulness and truth shall be his shield and
buckler, so that he shall not be afraid of the fear of the night, nor of the
arrow that flies by day, he shall call upon the name of the Lord, and he will
hear him, he will be with him in his troubles, to deliver and glorify him
for ever.

Erasmus (me thinks) does fitly term it Misere, howsoever the Greek word
is (...): but more significatiuely is (...), which is so pitiously that it
would pity any ones heart to see her torments* much more rent the mothers heart.
But her^by we note, that some the Devil possesses, and does not torment, and
some he possesses and tormenteth pitteously. He possessed and tormented not
Mary Magdalen, though Luke 7. 37.
we read there were seven diuelles in her: but he possessed, and very often
grievously tormented Saul. He possessed, but tormented not Acts 19. 16.
him that ran upon the seven sons of Sceua the Jew, and wounded them: Even so
he possesses many in these days, the children of disobedience, that live
according to the course of this world, but he seems not so greeuouslie to
torment them; for what may we think else of them, in whom the seven deadly
damnable sins rule and reign, has not Satan erected his throne in their
dwellings, and are they not possessed of him? What can ye imagine when ye
behold a painted faced wanton, set out with her strange tinckling head tire,
her curled perwigges, her costly glittering apparel, her fan, her mask, her
bracelet, her necklace, her rings, her chains, her muffe, her sweet savor,
her fine starched linen, her outstretched neck, her bare naked breasts, her
wandering eyes, her mincing gate, with her tinckling slippers? Can ye say
otherwise then that there is a puppet possessed (yea and after a sort)
tormented with a proud devil? And so we may affirm of all the rest, as of
envy and malice, whooredome and adultery, covetousness and gluttony, etc.

Our conclusion is, whenever the ennemy to our salvation does dangerously
possess, he would also grievously torment that party, but that he is for a
while restrained by the imperial power of powers. And therefore let us be
sober and 1. Peter 5. 8.
watch, because our adversary the devil goes about as a roaring lion, seeking
whom he may devour. Every word in the Apostles reason is full of force: As
first, because he is our adversary; secondly, he goes about, he labors and
plotteth incessantly; thirdly, like a roaring lion, full of might and malice;
fourthly* seeking, searching, and winding out in his subtlety; lastly,
whomesoeuer, rich or poor, high or low, he may devour, not only possess and
torment in this life, but the miseries of this vile life being come to an end,
he may swallowe up into everlasting perdition with himself for ever, whom
resist you (beloved) in your strong faith, and he shall flee from you.

The fourth and last point is, by whom her daughter was thus pitteously
tormented, namely, by the devil: if she had been tormented by some
extraordinary sickness, it had been grievous; or tormented by some
unnatural merciless men, (the more to be pitied) but to be tormented of the
Devil, the sworn ennemy unto all mankind, one that will not be satisfied
with the torments of this life, be they never so many, nor miserable: this is
as heavy, as woeful, and as grievous a case as ever was heard of: but herein
we are given to note these two things.

Adam, in the glory of Genes. 3.
his creation there was some equality, and betwixt him, and our Savior Mat. 4.
Christ, some match: but betwixt him, and this weak child, this seely gerle,
impar congressus, there was great odds in the conflict.

This has been his custom of old, to set upon the weakest, and therefore he
first assaulted the woman, Genes. 3.
whom he knew to be the weaker vessel, that for the love of her, the man
might the rather be drawn into disobedience. Afterward he assaulteth both the
daughters of Lot, that they might the easier entice Genes. 19
their father unto sin. So when he had leave to combat with Job, he first
lays his battery against his goods, then upon his children, and lastly, on
his wife, that he might thus have prevailed against that good man. And
(beloved) do ye not mark, that this is ordinary in the devils darlings, and
their worldly dealings? Do they not usually force the weakest to the wall: so
that they which worst may, must hold the candle.

Our conclusion is, The Saints Romans 8. 37.
of God in all these things are more then conquerors, through him that loves
them; for in their weakness, his strength, and in their infirmities, his power
is manifested to his eternal glory.

James says, Let no Iam. 1. 13.
man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God can not be tempted
with evil, neither tempts he any man, but every man is tempted when he is
drawn away by his own concupiscence, and is enticed: fitly therefore do the
Fathers define a temptation to be a corrupt affection, tending or enticing
unto evil, and to imagine this to come near to God is high blasphemy. The
matter therefore of our temptation is in us, even our own concupiscence, the
diuil needs but to bring his bellows unto this fire, and it is forthwith
kindled.

We may read indeed that God proves us, as Moses says unto Exodus 20. 20.
the people, fear not, your God is come to prove you: and so the Psalmist
sings, thou (O GOD) Psalm 66. 10
have proved us, thou have tried us, as silver is tried. Hence is it that we
say Gods trialles are like unto the finers work, upon the silver and gold,
the dross is consumed, but the metal is the purer. On the other side, the
Diuelles temptations are like unto Sampsons foxes, burning Judge. 15.
the good corn, and leaving nothing but the stubble, and ashes. Gods trialls,
they always tend to his glory, and our good. But the devils temptations, they
will always run to his rejoicing, and our shame.

Our conclusion is, God is faithful, 1. Cor. 10. 13
who will not lay upon his Saints above that they are able to bear, but will
give the issue with the temptation, to his glory, and our eternal comfort.

Wherefore, since we see how dangerous a thing it is to have the devil
domestical at home with us, either in our selves, or in our children, or in
any of our family.

Let us therefore, by the example of this good woman, lay open our sins
(whereby we are possessed, though we be not sensibly tormented by the Devil)
unto our Lord Jesus Christ, that of his mercy he may pardon that is past, and
hereafter, in that which is to come, albeit sin can not clean be cast out
of us, yet the power thereof may be dejected in us, that we may die unto
sin, and live unto righteousness and holiness for ever, Amen.

Tractatus quintus
Verse 23. But he answered her not a word.
IN these words we are proceeded to the second assault given to this good
woman's faith, the greeuousnes whereof may be the cleerer seen into, if we can
but consider a while with our selves, what a dismaie, and a discouragement
(over and above the inraging grief thereof) it strikes into the heart of any
suter, to make his moan and humble petition unto him, that neither hears nor
regards him: for who can endure still to entreat him, whom he finds
inexorable, or persevere to call upon him who is wilfully deaf and dumb.
Indeed Elias worthelie laughed at Baals 1. Reg. 18. 17
priests stabbing them selves and crying out unto that which was but an Idol
(that is the work of man's hands) which has ears but cannot hear, eyes and
cannot see etc. But it will make any man roar out in the horror of his heart,
when he has vncessantlie called upon his omniscient God, and can not be
harkened unto.

This makes the Prophet David Psalm. 13.
with such vehemency to expostulate with God, Vsque quo Domine? How long o
Lord will thou forget me, for ever? how long shall I cry unto thee? how long
will thou hide thy face from me, and how long shall I be wearied in my heart? In
such a case, or far more grievous was this good woman's at this time, which that
it may be the better examined, we will branch forth this temptation into her
three fold assaults, drawn from the words as they lie before us.







[But he answered her not a word,] The first word in these words aggrauateth
the acrimonie and bitterness of this temptation, for the Evangelist seems to
infer that this woman's outcrie was very patheticall and full of moving, but
Jesus Christ for all that seems to be no more touched therewith, then the deep
rooted oak is, with the blast of every little gale.

It is strange, and surpasses the amazement of reason, that our Savior Christ
should give out such kind commandments, and annex thereunto such large
promises as these: Ask largely: Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.
Again, Psalm 81.
Ask and it shall be given you. And again, Whatsoever ye ask the father Matthew.
7. 7
in my name* he shall give you, and such like, infinite. And now when a silly
needy weak woman asks seeks, knocks, and cries out aloude, he is as one
dumb and tongue tied.

There are three sorts of answers which in the common civility of manners are
usually shaped. The first is of necessity: the second of humanity: and the
third of superfluity.



demanded.



Our Savior Christ in this place is both urged, and mournfully requested, and
yet he frames neither of these answers unto her.

Questionles, our Lord Jesus Christ will sometime seem to his Saints in the
afflictions of their souls, as one deaf and dumb, not daining to answer
them. So seemed he to that holy man Job, as Job. 10. 20.
himself testifies: When I cry unto thee, thou hear not, neither regardest
thou me when I stand up. And the Prophet David witnesses, I have cried unto
thee in the Psalm. 22.
day time, and thou hear not, and in the night season, and thou regardest me
not: so that, day and night, and night and day, he that created the ear, he
does not hear, and he that said, Call upon me in the time Psalm. 50.
of thy trouble, and I will hear thee, and deliver thee, that thou may
glorify me. Yet even he I say some times seems not to respect the requests
and quests of our groanings.

And this is done, not because he cannot, or because he will not speak: but
there are four divine reasons in his heavenly wisdom that lead him thereunto.

First, because the vehemency of our longing desire, by this forbearance
should be the more incensed: for a joy deferred though for a time, P^ou. ^^.
it breeds the fainting of the soul, yet when it comes, it is a tree of
life. So use our Smithes to throw water upon their burning forge, that by the
blastes of the bellows, the enclosed fire may rage the hotter. And thus the
Lord seemed not to regard those outcries, which the people threw up into the
heavens, when they were in that extreme exigent upon the banks of the red sea
shore, that their miraculous deliverance might be celebrated with the greater
triumph.



This makes the haven so welcome to the seafaring man, who has been deeply
endangered with many a tempestuous storm. And this made the day of David's
coronation, and establishment in the throne of Israel so triumphant, when
through so many crosses and calamities, at the last he came to it: So is peace
the sweeter after war; and pining hunger makes homely fare very toothsome.

blaspheming him, whom he satisfies tempting him, and unto whom he sings
sweetly, when they stopped up their ears against him.

Here they see him not answering her that cries out unto him for help, and
there she sees them not answering him that night and day stretches out his
hand to embrace them, and lifts up his voice like a Trumpet, sounding unto
the^ that will not hear him. So shall Sodom condemn Jerusalem, and Tirus and
Sidon confound the pride of Capernaum in the revealing day of Gods Justice. And
so (I fear) the religious devotion of our ignorant Papists, will convince us
of stony coldness toward the truth of our Religion.

signifies unto us by that parable of that unrighteous Judge, who neither Luke
18. 2.
feared God, nor regarded man: for thus he concludes, shall not God hear his
elect which cry night and day unto him, though he suffer long; I tell you he
will hear and revenge them, and that quickly.

Some devils will not be cast out, but with long fasting and many Mark 7.
prayers, and some things may not be granted at the first hand. Mark ye not
how Abraham itterateth his Genes. 18.
prayers for the intercession of Sodom. And Elias must pray seven 1. Reg. 18.
times before he obtayneth rain in the days of Ahab. Ezech. 5.


Our conclusion is, as the Lord said to his Prophet, whether they hear, or
hear not, son of man, speak thou. So say I to you, whether he answer, or
answer not, yet let not us desist from our cries, let us not give over to call
upon him: for though he answer not, yet he hears, and in hearing he
conceiueth the necessity of our requests.



Was it not a general proclamation published unto all Nations without
acceptance of persons by the Prophet, Whosoever calls Joel 2.
upon the name of the Lord shall be saved? This woman had heard thereof, and she
fastneth the shoote-anker of her faith upon this promise, and hereupon she is
bold to cry and call, but he answers her not a word.

Mark ye not how he offers his succouring help to us that sought Genesis 3.
it not, and calls upon us for an answer, that would not willingly have heard
him. Yea he continues his heavenly talk with her, that wrangled with him at
Jacobs well: John 4.
but here, to a poor, careful, and comfortless creature, vehemently calling
upon him for it, he answers her not a word.

Indeed the Prophet protests Ezech 11.
in the name of the Lord, saying, are ye come to cry after me? As I live,
says the Lord, I will not answer you. But this was spoken to a people that
had despised his callings, and regarded not his admonitions. So says he by the
Kingly Prophet: The wicked shall cry, yea even unto Psalm 18.
the Lord, but he shall not hear them.

But in another place he sings, The Lord has looked down from his
sanctuary, out of his holy heavens has he beheld the earth, that he might
hear the mournings of the prisoner, and deliver the children appointed unto
death. Psalm 102


When Artaxerxes saw Nehemias Nehem. 1.
in the sorrow of his heart, with a sad countenance hanging his head, he
provoked him to speak and bewray the griefs of his mind, and he answered him
kingly and kindly, to his hearts liking. So the princes Ierem. 38.
of Israel had taken up a proverb in the days of Jeremy, The King can deny us
nothing: but this proverb seems now to be inuerted; for this bounteous King
of Israel will grant us nothing, no not so much as an answer of one word.

Hereby we are given to learn two lessons:

This had the prophet David very well practiced, as himself sings, Expectans
expectaui Dominum, Psalm 40.
I waited long, and sought the Lord, and patiently did bear. And so the
Prophet Esaias testifies, that he Esaias 28. 16
which believes, makes no have: for as faith is not at her first conception,
in her fulness, neither is her strength, perfected at her first birth.



So then, ex congruo, what reward may we look for, doing no more than our
necessary duty; or, ex condigno, neither doing it so often, nor so well as
it ought to be done.

Whether then we be not answered unto out cries, or if we be sometime
answered, as Solomon 1. Reg. 2. 2^.
answers his mother, making an unadvised suit for his brother Adoniah, thou
have asked this against his life, we are nevertheless to pursue the practice
of our prayers, submitting the success thereof to his favor, that both
understands them, and what is fittest for us.

Our conclusion is, let us not be weary of well doing; for, how soever they
went forth weeping, in Psalm 126
bearing of their precious seed, yet they made at the last a joyful return,
bringing their sheaues in their bosom.



So I read of one Pallas, whom the Emperor Claudius Caesar made a free man,
who forgetting his own late servile estate, would never vouchsafe to speak to
any servant; but when they moved any question unto him, he answered either
by a nodde, or by the poynting of his finger; or if the business so required, by
writing; but they could never wring a word out of his mouth unto them.

Good Lord that the king of Samaria, 2. Reg. 6. 27
in that extreme famine, being called upon by an unnatural mother, for some
help, at the last he gives her this answer, seeing the Lord does not
succor thee how can I help thee?

And yet this our King of heaven, in whom all health, help and succor is
heaped up, being so instantly urged by so faithful a woman, will not vouchsafe
her the answer of one word. Doubtless this temptation was exceeding grievous.

Had he said to her but as he did to blind Bartimeus, What will thou that I
do to thee? Or as he did Luke 19.
to Zacheus, I will to day dine with thee: or but as he said to the Devil,
Mark 5.
Hold thy peace; it had bin some comfort. But behold, the heavenly treasury of
eternal happiness is close shut up, and he answers her not a word.

Peter said very truly of this our sweet Savior. Thou have the words John 6.
of eternal life, not only the words of authority to command creation, and
the words of wisdom to direct and order, but also the words of grace and
health, to recover and cure; and the words of power to convert and save, and
the words of wonder to confound and destroy, and yet at this instant he will not
answer with one of all these words. If it had pleased him to deigne her but
that cold answer, which Phillip of Macedon sometime gave to the poor widow,
who had been a long suter in a lawful cause, Nondum est mihi otium, As yet I
have no leisure; yet this might have breathed some hope of help into her heart
against an other time, but not to answer her a word, neither good nor bad, not
once to open his lips, not to bestow the easy labor of one word upon her,
this pang pincheth passing sore.

Thus may we read, that thrice our Savior would not vouchsafe the answer of
one word when it was demanded of him.

The first was unto the high Mark 14. 61
Priest, and those perjured false forsworn witnesses that agreed not together
against him. The Evangelist says, but he held his peace and answered not a
word.

The second was unto Herod and his Luke 23. 9
men of war, despising and mocking him, who although contemptuously they
questioned with him of many things, but (says the Evangelist) he answered
nothing.

The third was unto Pilate, examining him, when he was accused of the chief
Priests and Elders, being urged to purge himself, hear Math. 27. 14.
thou not how many things they lay against thee? It follows, but he answered
him not one word, in so much that the Governor marueled greatly. Now then, if
that rule hold, that Omnis Christi actio est nostra instructio, then are we
learned hereby unto three kinds of men, sometime not to vouchsafe an
answer. The first are idolatrous priests and false witnesses: the second are
dissolute courtiers and desperate soldiers: the third are men pleasing Judges,
and meale-mouthed Magistrates.

But, to pass over these, as with a finger touched, in this silence our Savior
teaches us these two things.

Solomon affirms this to be one of the three things that bewraieth a fool,
even his too much babbling. Hence was it that Socrates taught his scholars to
learn a seven years silence with this experimental reason, Quamplurimos vidi
in grauissima incidisse peccata loquendo, tacendo nullos, I have observed many
to have fallen into great offenses by speaking, but never any by keeping
silence. The tongue therefore being so unruly an evil, has God locked up
within the two walls of the teeth, and the two bars of the lips. For it is
most true, Est irreuocabile verbum. And that father said wisely, Paruus sermo
leuiter volat, sedgrauiter vulnerat. Barnard.


Our conclusion is, with the Prophet David to set a watch before our lips, that
we offend not with our tongue, that we may learn to speak seldom, but sure,
and fitly to the purpose.

David's comforter Psalm. 21.
and his counselors, and how soever after diverse manners god in elder time
spoke to our fathers by the Prophets, yet in these last days he continues
Hebr. 1.
thus now to speak unto us by his own son in his most holy word. Let us
therefore search the Sciptures, for they testify of him, and in them, and by
them he still speaks comfortably unto his people.



Thus spoke the Lord unto Jonas Jonas ^.
in the bottom of the sea, and in the deep darkness of the Whales belly. And
so the Lord spoke unto Peter, mourning like a dove, and bathing himself in his
salt-brine tears.

Our conclusion is, we have his holy word, wherein we hear him speaking unto
us, and we have his holy spirit, whereby he speaks within us: Therefore the
Lord will not be silent for ever, he has not forgotten to be merciful,
neither will he shut up his tender mercies in displeasure.

This is our weakness, to suspect our all-seeing, all-hearing, and allknowing
GOD to be deaf, or dumb. Surely, though we be poor and needy, our GOD
thinks upon us, he will answer, and will help us. O Lord make no long
tarrying. Amen.

Tractatus Sextus.
Verse 24. Then came his Disciples and besought him, saying, send her away, for
she cries after us.
WE are now lanched into the maine stream of this history, wherein we find
the Disciples of our Lord Jesus Christ will have their oar, they will strike
their stroke, they will be actors and dealers herein; who not understanding
their Lords secret intendement, think it an impudent and a shameless part in
them to suffer this woeful woman ceaselesse thus to follow them, crying still
out, and bawling after them, and therefore they are now become suitors in her
behalf, desiring him to send her away. But that which disquieted them,
reioiced our Lord Jesus, for their coffeehouse in this case, pleases our
sweet Savior.

We will at this time, through the assistance of Gods holy spirit, prosecute
these words as they lie before us, drawn into this order.

Then came his Disciples and besought him etc.

Send her away.

for she cries after us.

Then came his Disciples,] By this coming of the Disciples unto our Lord
Jesus, this silly Syrophenissian might begin to conceive some comfort, for thus
might she argue within her self; He has not answered me one word; I grant
it, for I am unworthy to have that blisfull gracious mouth opened unto me. But
now that I hear his Disciples have made a motion for me, they are such as are
near and dear to him, whom he uses in most familiar kindness, surely their
Lord can deny them nothing: and therefore, since it has pleased them to
solicit him in my behalf, I am in good hope to prevail with him: For indeed
this has been a courtlike practice in the traffike of this world, according to
the French proverb:

He that will the French King win,
With his favorites he must begin.
So we read, when Absalom labored to recover his fathers princely favor,
and had procured Ioab to further it, when he perceived that Ioab went but
slowly about it, mark 2. Sam ^. 14
I pray you to prick him forward, what a pranck he played him.

So when Mardocheus warelie Hester 15
watched for an opportune access into the kings presence, which for him self
rashly to have dared to do, was the danger of his head: for this was the
Persian law, whosoever comes into the inner court of the kings Palace
uncalled, shall die the death, unless the king hold forth his golden Rod unto
him, therefore does Mardocheus wisely herein use Hester the Queens good help,
as a gracious means for him. Princes palaces, and rich men's houses have great
gates, large courts, and many a winding room, so that the out cries of the
poor oppressed may easily vanish in the empty air before they can pierce
into their private Parlours: I have heard a reverend and learned Lawyer of this
land protest once, with great vehemency, he could sail into France, travel
into Paris, and make his return, better cheap, then he was able to pass
through the Lord Chancelors great chamber, to come to private speech with him.
Hence is it that we usurp that old proverb,

In the Court, as thou art befriended
So shall thy suit be ended.
And again, Better is a friend in the Court, then a penny in thy purse. But
this was apud seclum prius, in elder times, when Courtiers cared not for pence:
but now that proverb is inuerted; for we find that thy penny in thy purse
proves thy best friend in the Court. Hungry hawks fly from empty fistes: and
were thou as good as Homer himself, Si nihil attuleris. Pierce Pennilesse, if
he be a suter in forma pauperis, must walk and wait at the gate, to attend
opportunity.

Nevertheless, I assure my self, the Lord our God will not suffer the
lamentable complaints of the poor afflicted to beat against our stony
walls, and iron gates in vain: But he will in his mercies, raise up some wise
Abigail, to molifie the niggardly 1. Sam. 25
Nabals of this uncharitable age: for howsoever that Dives, who is to Luke 16.
be buried in hell, neither hears, nor regardes hunger-starued Lazarus: yet
his very dogs will lick his sores, and lessen his sorrows.

Our conclusion is, He that speaks in the behalf of the poor, whose
outcries rent his heart, whatsoever his words do work, and howesoeuer his
speech does prosper, he has discharged the duty of a true Christian
neighbor, and has made manifest his mercifulnes, Misericordias, a misero
cord dictas, and seventy times seven times blessed are such merciful Matthew. 5
men, for they shall be sure to obtain mercy.

And besought him saying, etc. By these words our Catholic brethren of Rome,
think they have made a great conquest over us (as their Annotations in their
Rhemish Testament observe) but they triumph before the victory, they do bear
us down, hand over head, that we shall never be able to withstand their
Doctrine of the Invocation of Saints, if this place be well considered: For
thus they reason, the Disciples of our Lord Jesus beseech him, in the behalf
of this poor woman, Ergo, the Saints of God make intercession for us. Is it
not therefore necessary, that we call upon them, to continue this their
intercession for us? An other argument is this; If the Saints of God, compassed
about with their infirmities in this militant Church, praying one for another,
prevail with our Lord Jesus, how much more shall the Saints, now glorified
in the triumphant Church (making intercession for us) be heard of our Savior?

But to meet with these men, and their reasons, and (if it be possible) to
satisfy such as be not obdurate in this heresy: although it be generally
received in the schools, and it goes for good payment amongst them, that
Argumentum ab exemplis no probat.

The Disciples of our Lord entreat him for this woman: Ergo, the Saints pray
for us: and who is he that denies this Doctrine, so it be rightly understood
(as the nature of the Text leads us) of the Saints here upon earth yet alive,
as these Disciples now were? But to force this argument, a viuis, ad mortuos,
ab ente ad non ens, from the Saints now living, amongst us inured to
infirmities with us, to the Saints dead and departed exempted from the least
feeling or touch of any infirmities; is not this a preposterous reasoning?
Numquid viui consulent mortuos? shall the living ask counsel of the dead?



do not only not obtain, but they are repulsed in their request, so that by
the sight of this example, we are rather discoraged, than confirmed to call
upon the Saints. And whereas for the more gracious acceptance of this doctrine,
they talk of Porters, Warders, and many friendly favorites, who must be first
solicited before our Lord Jesus be acquainted with our petitions; out of
doubt, herein they show themselves great ennemies to the free grace of God in
our Lord Jesus Christ, and they offer his grace manifest wrongs.

For, may we imagine that he Revel. 2.
(who now stands at the door of our hearts) and knocks that he may come
into us, and dwell with us: when we shall knock at the gate of his mercies,
by our fervent and faithful prayers, will he not open, nor grant admission
unto our requests? Says not I pray you the Scripture, The Lord is near unto
all such as call upon him, yea al such as call upon him faithfully, etc. Also,
do they not know, or will they not understand, that al our payers oght to be
directed to the shoot-anker of our faith, and do any christians believe in any
of the Saints? We believe there are Saints, as there are Angels, and we
believe the Saints and Angels, that is, give credence unto their words,
answerable to the truth of holy Scriptures, but to believe in the Saints, is to
make them our gods, and this were gross idolatry.

Then, if it be not lawful for any christian, to believe in the Saints,
neither is it lawful to pray unto the Saints, for we must pray to them
only, in whom we believe.

Lastly, since the Lord has said, Psalm 50.
he that offers me praise, honors me: therefore we say, he that offers
praise or prayer to any but God alone, he dishonors him. Jeremy, If we be
deceived, thou have deceived us, o Lord, for thou have commanded us to call
upon thee in the time of trouble, promising that thou will hear us, and
deliver us, that we may glorify thee: To thee be glory for it. It follows.

[Send her away] This is the second point, the sum of their request, to be
rid of her they care not how, so they were eased of her. Wherein first of all
we may meet with this preposterous policy, the over weening wisdom of flesh
and blood, whereby she thinks she may out strip the counsel of the Lord. For
example, one is bade to go wash him self in Jordan, and he 2. Reg. 5.
shall be clean; and he replies, are there not as good and as goodly waters
in Damasco? Another binds the counsel of God to eight days, Iudeth 7.
or else he will surrender the city. The blessed mother of our Lord John 2.
Jesus Christ will learn him what he has to do, and tell him, they want wine
at the marriage. And the chosen Apostle Peter, will Math. 16.
not be behind in kindness, to remember his master, to spare him self.

The Apostolical canon is, that Phil. 4.
we should follow the truth in love, we must not out strip the truth.

Secondly, we must follow the truth, we must not direct the truth.

Thirdly, we must follow the truth, we must not follow our own conceits, or
the devises of our own brain: but this world is topsie turuie turned, and the
world runs backward. The patient will prescribe what the Physician shall
minister unto him; the sheep will choose and lead their shepherd; the
disciples will teach their master. Is not this mere madness amongst the
sons of men?

Truly said the Prophet, every man is a beast in his own understanding
Jeremy 7.
: and our Proverb is, quisque sibi pessimus magister, every man is a bad
Schoolemaister unto himself.

We conclude woe unto him that is wise in his own eyes: let us follow the
Lord leading us, captiuating al our understanding to the conduct and guide of
his will. For I assure you, the will and pleasure of God is the exactest rule
of all wisdom, equity and justice.

[For she cries after us.] This is the third and last point, containing the
reason of this their request; they desire to have her shaken off and sent away,
because she makes such an outcrie, and so bawleth out after them: they regard
not so much her help, as their own ease, so she were gone, that they were no
more troubled with her clamorous noise, that was all they wished.

Austen says, Deus aliquando voluntatem suam bonam per voluntatem improborum
malam implet, God sometime effects his good will, by the naughty will of the
wicked: as that wrongful imprisonment of Joseph, by that slanderous surmise of
Genes. 39.
Putiphars wife, as also that unnatural sale which his brethren made of him.
From these outrages the Lord fetches forth the means of their preservation
in the needful time of their trouble.

So likewise, from the most monstrous treason that ever this worlds eye
wondered at, which Judas committed, the Lord God wrought, and Math. 26.
brought out the redemption of mankind.

Plutarch reports, that a woman, in hope to kill Pericles, stroke him upon
the stomach with a stone so vehemently, that the blow brake an impostume, bred
within him, whereby he recovered his perfect health: even so the Lord applies
the ungodly proceedings of the wicked unto a good end. Notable is the saying
which Joseph uses unto his brethren, when you thought Genes. 45.
evil against me, God disposed it to good, that he might work, as it is come
to pass this day, and save much people thereby.

The wicked therefore run on in their wickedness, and God runs with them, not
staying their course, but turning their way to his glory, and the good of his
elect. Neither have the ungodly herein to rejoice, because God makes a
profitable use of their poyson-som sins, for thou art not therefore to be
excused, thou ungodly liver, because the Lord can convert thy ungodliness to
his good. Babylon was his hammer, and Ashur the scourge of his wrath: yet both
his hammer and his scourge (when they had done their offices) were thrown into
the fire, and burnt to ashes. We know that Satan himself is the executioner
of his will and service, and yet we 2. Peter 3.
know also, that Satan is reserved in chains under darkness, unto the
judgment of the great day.

Our conclusion is, The Lord reigns, be the people never so mad, he sits
above the Cherubins, be the wicked never so outrageous, and he so rangeth and
rules all their devises, be they never so diuilish, that they shall turn to
his glory, and the benefit of his elect.



He that lives to himself alone,
Is worthy to live with none.
The Lacedemonian commonwealth never allowed of two kinds of men, (...), the
lovers of them selves, nor (...), despisers and haters of men. The Apostle
Saint Paul says, We are all members of one body, and therefore the eye can 1.
Cor. 12.
not say, I have no need of the hand; nor the hand, I have no need of the
feet.

Demosthenes tells the Athenians a tale, but it has his Moral: the members
of the body (says the Orator) once fell at variance amongst themselves; the
eye, he was offended, because all that he looked after, was little enough to
please the belly; the hands were offended, because all they did, was little
enough to fill the mouth, and satisfy the belly; the feet were offended,
because all their travel was for the belly: Thus offended, they agreed every
one to withdraw his duty from the belly, so that in short time the belly
became hunger-pinched, and waxed so feeble, that the eye sight failed, the
hands shaked, and the feet trembled under their burden: inquiring therefore
the cause thereof, they found, it proceeded from the faintness of the heart,
because of the emptiness of the belly.

Wherefore they concluded amongst themselves, that for the recovery of their
former health and happy estate, they would join together again, as Nature had
taught them: every one in his place to relieve the belly.

The Fable has his meaning, for God has knit us all in a sociable mutual
bond of kindness, and it sometime falls out, that the Princely Lion stands in
need of the help of the seely mouse.

It is worth the marking, that David, howsoever he flies into the wilderness for
his own safety, yet even there he has a care of discourteous Nabals welfare:
see ye not how the 1. Sam 25.
heavens universally drop down their kindenes upon us all, and the earth
generally brings forth her plenty unto us all? yet are there a sort of
savage men, that desire to live alone upon the earth, they join house to
house, and land to land leaving not the poor, a stick, or a stone to rest
upon: the Proverb was in the days of Zachary, That which dies, let it die;
as though the affliction of Joseph concerned not them.

In time past it was said, Homo homini deus, Man was to man a god, in all
kindenes and courteous relief: but now we prove it, Homo homini demon, Man is
to man a Devil, and a dog, disturbing and devouring him: they say, Lupilupum
non laniant, One Wolf preyes not upon an other, and shall one man, nay more,
one christian, nay most one brother, for we have al one Father in Heaven, and
one mother (the Church) in earth, shall these seek the ruin, spoil, and
undoing one of an other? this is monstrous in Nature, preposterous in religion,
and devilish in the sight of God, and all good men.

Our conclusion is, with the Apostle, Be ye all of one mind, love as brethren,
let every man so far seek 2. Corin. 23.
his own private ease, as it hurts not the public good of any man, that the
private affections of your own profit, prove not the general afflictions of
your neighbors; so shall God be glorified, the common wealth comforted and
strengthened: And this shall be the crown of our joy, even the testimony of a
good conscience in all things before God and man, which God for his son
Christ Jesus sake grant unto us all Amen.

Finis Sectionis primae partis.
Errata.
52. line 21. for defensing, read defensive.

53. line 24. for gracious, read grant our.

94. line vlt. for Paruus, read Prauus.


