AN ALPHABETICAL BOOK OF Physical Secrets, For all those Diseases that are
most predominant and dangerous (curable by Art) in the Body of Man.

Collected for the benefit, most especial of House-holders in the Country, who
are either far remote, or else not able to entertain a learned Physician: as
likewise for the help of such Ladies and Gentle woman, who of charity labor to
do good.

Whereunto is annexed a small Treatise of the judgment of Vrines.

By OWEN WOOD.

Printed at London by JOHN NORTON for WALTER EDMONDS, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the sign of the Crown near Ludgate. 1639.

To the courteous Reader.
IN all civil and well ordered Commonwealths, even where best Schools of
Learning, and famous Universities are, you shall find published not only
methodicall discourses concerning the curation of infirmities of the body of
man; but Treatises also containing parable medicaments, which any one who is
endued but with a mean judgment, may apply to himself, whereas neither
Physician nor Apothecarie can be had. Great plenty of such Books are
published in the German tongue: for the Germans delight in uttering of
Pamphlets, promising the revelation of secrets in Physic, which prove nothing
else but trivial toys. England in like manner is reasonably ill stored with
such stuff, which emboldeneth no small number of bold Knaves, and impudent
Queanes to meddle with the Practice of Physic, to the utter ruin of no small
number of rude and improvident persons, who commit themselves to the Skill and
Cure of such unworthy persons. That this is a truth, the manifold complaints
which come to the Physicians College when the Fellows sit do make good. So
that it might seem requisite rather to suppress no^t of these I reateses,
then to publish any more of this kind. But this Book may be privileged to
come abroad, if you either respect the method or matter. The Remedies may
easily be found out, the Diseases being set down Alphabetically. The Remedies
are not to be rejected; but, seem to have been set down by one who was no
Stranger in the Practice of Physic. The Printer having been informed of so
much, was not willing to keep the Treatise within is private walls; but to
Print some Copies of it, and to present them to the public view and censure.
He only desires that his good intention, and purpose to further the public
good, may be taken in good part of those who have not too consuring Spirits. If
he shall find thy favorable acceptance of this Treatise, he will not spare
to publish Books of the like Subject come to his hands, if they shall be
thought worthy of the Press.

25 March 1639. ALEXANDER READ Doctor of Physic.

Martii 21. 1638.
IMprimatur: sed intra quatuor menses sin minus haec licentia sit irrita.

JO. ALSOP.

AN ALPHABETICAL Book of Physical Secrets.
A
An Unguent for Ache, Bruise, or Spraine.
TAke Rue, Vervayne, Dill, selfeheale Yarrowe, Mugwort, Comfrey, Adders-tongue,
red-(...), red-Fennell, red-Nettles, red-Dock-leaves, Valeryan, and Carduus
Benedictus ana M: ij, bruise all these in a Mortar, boil them in lb. i d. of
May Butter for a quarter of an hour still stirring it, add thereto oil of
Exeter, oil of Dill ana i, let them boil one walme more, first strain out
the herbs, then boil the oils, and anoint therewith.

Ache in any Member.
Boil Ox-gall, Aqua-vitae, of each a like in a Pipkin, scum it, and therewith
anoint the Member grieved with great labor and hardness, then cover it warm
with a piece of Furre till it be well.

Another for the same.
Boil fresh Butter not salted in Malmesey, bathe the grief very hot
therewith, make it up warm as before.

For any Ague fallen into the Legs, and swollen, the Cure.
TAke Plantine, Marigolds, Houndstongue, S. John's Wort, Bettony, red-Fennell,
Southistle, Dandelion, Smallage, and Plumtree-leaves ana M i: shred them with
Wheat-meale, then sees them in hot Cowes milk, to a Plaster so apply it,
this will dissolve the humor and digest it, by the serositie of the blood;
approved.

Aspasmus or Numnesse in Joints or elsewhere, to Cure.
LEt the Patient drink every morning fasting one of Camphire in a draught of
Bettony-water, wherein infuse some Stoechados, this cures in one month with
the use thereof.

Argentum vivum to Mortify.
FIrst beat an Almond in your Mortar, then put thereinto so much powder of
Verdigrease as a Bean, then put in your Quicksilver with a spoonful of strong
Vinegar, incorporate them all well together, this will Mortify it well for any
use.

Apoplex to Cure.
TAke Melilot, Pennyryall, Wilde-Tyme, Marjorum, Balm, Marjorum gentill ana i
M: boil them in water, and bathe or ^oment the head therewith warm, stamp
the herbs, put to them oil of Rue, and of Lyllies and i, apply them warm to
the head, if the weather be cold then anoint the head with warm oils, as oil
of Dill. Bever-cod, or Pyretrum, or such like, not only the head but also the
Neek and whole Back.

A Salve for the Apoplex.
TAke Calamus Costus roots ana iiij, Siler, or siler Mountain, Bazill seed ana
iij, melt and boil all these together on a small fire of Char-coale in white
wine until the wine be consumed, then mix the oils with it and anoint the
whole head and the back bone all the length thereof down to the end; if this
cure not, then shave all the head, and apply this plaster following, spread on
a piece of Leather, that all the head may be covered therewith. Take Galbanum,
Sagapenum, Opoponax ana i, Aloes succotirn i: Turpentine i, melt them, and mix
them together to a plaster.

Aqua Composita good for head, Memory, and all Diseases.
TAke the roots of Saxifrage, and the leaves, Parsley, Alexanders, Fennel,
Time, Hysope, Pennyryall, Rosemary, Lavander, Primroses, Mints, Origan, Sage,
Calamint, Avence, Bettony, Savine, Pennyryall, Lettice, and Violets ana one
small handful, then take Galingale, Pepper of both sorts, small and long.
Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs ana i, Cynamon, Cubebs, Setwall, Pellitory of Spain,
Lignum Aloes ana i di. stamp small the herbs, and pound the spices, then
infuse them all night in six quarts of red Wine, the next day distill them in
a Lymbeck, so is it finished.

Another Aqua Composita.
TAke Wormwood ii M. Enula Campane a great root, ii Crops of Horehound, Mints,
Parsley, and Centory ana i M: Infuse all these powdered and bruised in three
gallons of strong Ale or wine Lees, add thereto of Annis seed and Lycorice ana
iiij. bruised with some powder of Ireos and Calamus Aromat, distill them as
before is set down.

Aches or Lamenesse in Members or Joints.
TAke oil of Exeter, Aqua-vitae, and Oxe-Gall ana part aequales; Mix them
together in a great bladder shaking them well, anoint therewith warm twice a
day till you are well.

Aches old, the Cure.
TAke oil of Turpentine d i lb, oil of Bays iiij, Mace, Cloves, Nutmegs,
Cinnamon ana i, oil of Spike i, Iuniperberries viij, Castor, Euforbium ana i,
Brocks grease iij, Mummy i d. digest them for one month in horse-dung, then
distill them artificially, and anoint the grief therewith.

Ache in Bones or Joints, the Cure.
TAke black knobs of the Ash tree in the Spring time, grind them small, and
boil them over a soft fire with fresh Butter in an earthen pot sufficiently,
then take them from the fire, let them cool, and keep them close stopped,
then take as many of Broom flowers in May, grind them as the other, then mix
them all together, and boil them again with a quarter of a pint of Malmsey,
then keep it to anoint the grief therewith.

For all Aches in general.
TAke young red Sage, and Rue ana i lb, young Bay Leaves iij, Wormwood viij,
wash them not, shred them small, Sheeps sewet hot out of the Sheep iij lb,
mix the sewet and herbs together, beating them in a Mortar by a little at
once with the herbs till it be all green, and no white seen of the sewet,
then mix all in a Pan with your hand in one pottle of oil, then cover the
Pan close, and set it in some private place for eight days, then boil it
simpering, still stirring it with a spatula, when it is half boiled, add
thereto oil of Spike iiij; when it is boiled enough drop one drop on a bright
Sawcer, it will be very green, then it is well boiled, then strain it out
very close, rub the small of the back therewith, it helps the Stone as much
as a Pease, put into the ear with black wool, cures all griefs thereof, and
all Aches are cured therewith.

An Oil that cures all Aches in Man, or Beast.
TAke of pure Soap ij, Aqua-vitae iij, liquid Storax ij, and boil the
Aqua-vitae, and boil the other Simples therein, stirring it with a spoone till
it come to a thick Unguent, anoint the grief therewith twice a day rubbing
itvery well, and cover it warm with Furre or Cotton.

Ague, or burning Fever, to cool or help.
MAke a posset of new Milk and Butter-Milk of a pottle, take off the Card, let
the Patient drink so much thereof cold as he can, use it two or three times, it
cools the body, and takes a way the fit.

Item, after the Posset-Ale is disgested, let him to comfort his stomach drink
Mace-Ale made with small Ale.

Item, also let him eat either great Pears or Wardens cold being baked; they
comfort the stomach, and cool the body.

Ague, a Medicine to bind to the wrest, to Cure it.
MAke a plaster of Leather fit for the wrist pricked full of holes, and spread
it over with Venice Turpentine, then strew it all over with powder of Rue and
Frankincense ana, mix as much as will stick thereon, lay it to the wrist a
little before the fit comes, and let it ^ye until the fit be gone.

Ague hot, a cooling Iulyp.
MVndifie French Barley i M. then boil it in a gallon of raine-water, put
therein Raysins of the Sun stoned iiij, Damask-Prunes iij, boil them to the
Consumption of half, then strame it hard out and put them to the fire again,
and put therein Succory, Violet-leaves, Sanickle, Spinach, Strawberry-leaves,
Borage, Coltsfoot, Maydenhaire, Buglosse, Liverwort, Sinckfoyle, Endive,
Longwort-leaves, and Ribwort ana di. M. cut somewhat small, and boiled till half
be consumed, then strain it hard, for they commix therewith syrup of Vinegar,
the syrups of Lemmons and Roses ana iij, drink thereof cold at any time, it
both cools and comfort very much.

Ague to heal both in old and young, proved.
MAke a quart of posset Ale of Milk and Ale, th^n take the young tops of
Rosemary, Marigolds, Plantine, and young Bay leaves ana ij, cut them small, and
boil them in the posset Ale, until all their strength be forth, and drink a
great draught thereof warm a little before the fit comes, and sweat upon it;
do this some iij times, it will cure, being proved on many.

Aromaticum Rosatum which heals the weakness of the stomach, comfort all
parts of the Body, cleanses corrupt humors in the Breast, comfort the
Brain and Heart, and causes good digestion.
TAke pure red Roses xv, Lycorice mundified i, lignum Aloes, and yellow Sanders
ana iij, Cinnamon v, Mace and Cloves ij dj. gum Dragant ij di. Nutmegs, grains
of Paradise and Galingale i, Spikenard, Amber greese and Musk ana di, white
Sugar as much as suffices, and dissolve altogether in syrup of Roses.

Ague Tertian, the Cure.
TAke Burre roots i, three corns of long Pepper, stamp the roots and Pepper,
boil them in a pint of Ale with ij of Triacle till half be wasted, drink it
warm and sweat two hours.

Ague or Fever hot a Iulyp.
TAke Succory, Endive, Violets and Borage ana Mj: Fennell-roots pithed iM,
Lycorice mundified i, French Barley ii, boil them in a gallon of water to a
pottle, and drink thereof, it cools much.

Ague Tertian, the Cure.
TAke ix young red Sage-leaves, ix sprigs of Yarrow, three Bay Leaves, three
sprigs of Rue, boil all these in one pint of posset Ale, to the consumption
of a third part, then strain it hard, let the Patient drink a good draught
thereof very hot before the fit come, and sweat well after it, use this three
times.

Ague Tertian, the Cure.
TAke dry Orange Pills, Nutmeggs, roche Allom ana iiij, ten Cloves all powdered
together, give of this powder to the sick as much as will lie on a shilling, to
drink in iij spoonfulls of wine vinegar; two hours before the fit comes; if
you take therewith Bezor iij grains, it is the better, then take nine roots of
Maydenweede for a Man, and six for a Woman, put in a little bag, and hanged
nine days about the Patients neck, and six days about a Woman's neck, then
burn the bag and roots, and let the Patient be purged.

Ache, Grief, or Pain, an Unguent, the Cure.
TAke Cammomint, Mallows, Sage, Dill, and Marigold-leaves ana i M, stamp them
and boil them in Malmsey and Linseed oil ana di. pint, and fresh Butter out
of the Churn i lb, let them be well boiled, strain them, and anoint therewith.

For any Ague, sore in Knee or Joint. for Swelling or Sciatica.
FRy Alehoufe with fresh Butter in a drying pan, till it be soft, and not too
moist, apply it very hot to the grief or swelling till it be well, renew it
every twenty four hours.

Ague or Fever of Phlegm, Diary, or Quotidian.
TAke red Roses, Ivory, Buglos flowers, Coriander, Orange Pills ana iij, infuse
rhem in Vinegar and white wine ana iij, of Penides i lb, of Sugar or honey i lb
di. Your syrup if the stomach be empty or weak, or the Guts empty, then put in
all Wine and no Vinegar: this is an excellent syrup, for either by adding or
deminishing Simples here unto, according to the Infirmities and nature thereof
it may serve for any gross matter in any cold distemper.

Pills of excellent virtue to purge all Phlegmaitck Fevers or Agues.
TAke Agarick, Aloes, Acorus, Turbith, ana i Esula di. Coloquintida i. grain
salt Gem Mastick, Ginger, Wormwood, Lettice, Raysons mundified, Bdellium ana
iiij, let syrup of Roses be made up with these Pills, the Dos is ij more or
less, according to the Patients strength, give them after you have used the
other syrup ix days to digest it. These be good in any Tertian Ague, if you
add to them this following in any Phlegmatic Fevers or diseases, viz.

Item, Rubarbe ij, Spiknard dj., Diagridij, Mastick ana i, mix these with the
aforesaid, the Dos is di. more or less as the strength of the Patient is, and
the ve^emoneis of the Fever.

The poor man's Cure for this Fever.
FIrst digest the humor with Oxymell Compostum, then purge with the inner Bark
of an Elder an Eg-shell full or less, according to the Patients strength in a
draught of Wine, posset Ale, or any thing else warm, when he is purged give him
Aurea Alexandria with wine wherein Sage has been sodden, give it many times.

Ague or Fever Quartan of Melancholy.
FIrst digest the matter with Oxymell simplex, or with the decoction of Senna
Epithimum, and Hearts tongue, after that use some Oxymell Diureticum, then purge
with Diasena Diaboraginis sharped with Lapis Lazuli, and sometimes purge with
Hieraruty, and thus by little and little proceed: Or take Violet flowers,
Borage, Sena, Time, the juice of Fumitory and Lycorice, make your Decoction of
Whay, infuse therein some Elder bark, then add thereto iij sorts of
Myrabolanies ana iiij, stirred together on a soft fire, and after the strayning
add to it Lapis Acivenius ix times quenched in the same Decoction, and i
thereof made in subtle powder, minister this before day.

For the Fever Quartan.
THis Fever is cured by giving every morning j of Calamint fasting with
Triacle dj, Myrrh dj, if need be to comfort the stomach, add thereto some
juice of Mynts, this given many times together, has cured many after the body
is well purged.

Ague or Fever Tertian.
THe true Tertian is caused of burnt choler mixed with other humors, which
happens most to young people in Summer time, else it is no true Tertian
though it come of red choler, for choler when it is putrified in the veins,
causes a continual Fever, if without the veins it makes a Tertian, if
putrified in two places, it makes a double Tertian: A Tertian begins with
rigor like the pricking of Needles, and ends with vaporous sweat.

The Cure.
TAke of Endive, Succory both kinds, ana iiij, the four cold seeds ana i,
flowers of Violets, Borage, and water Lillies ana ij, red Roses iiij, Sugar i
lb, make your Syrup, and digest it with this, then purge as follows.

First use this Glyster.
. Violets, Mercury ana ii M. oil of Violets ii, boil and make your Decoction,
then strain it: Dissolve therein Cassia Extract, and Tamarinds ana i, oil of
water Lillies ij, make your Glister.

Then a Purge if need require.
. Of the digestive syrup aforesaid ii, Rubarb and Agarick ana i di. the seeds
of Endive and Spiknard ana di. Barley water, and Almond Milk ana iij; give this
in the morning.

If the Thirst be great in this Fever, take the four cold seeds, husk them,
boil them in water with Gum Dragant, stamp them well, and put to them a little
vinegar, let the Patient drink thereof in his fit.

Also if you give the Patient the uyce of Plantaine to drink before the fit
three several times, it cures all Tertians.

Also the seed of Nettles stamped with Salt and Cobwebs bound to the Wrist,
cures all Tertians.

B
Fever which comes of Blood, the Cure.
FIrst open the Basilica vein, then the Median on the same side or Arm, if
you let not blood, provoke the Nose to bleed: Then take Endive, Succory,
Mayden-haire, Rosemary, flowers of Politriticum ana iij, Barley di. lb, of all
the cold seeds ana ij Violets, the flower of Buglosse, Borage and Gillyflowers
ana iij, make your Decoction of iij lb, boil it till it come to one: Dissolve
therein Cassia extract j, oil of water Lillies iij, make your Glyster: Then
make a Ptisan of Barley viij, Lycorice bruised ij, Borage, Bugloss, and the cold
seeds, boil and strain it, and add ij of Vinegar, and drink it.

To purge Barley water di. lb, dissolve therein Cassia Fistula, Manna and
Tamarinds ana di., Vinegar ij, Sugar and Penedes quoth sufficit; give this in the
morning, and keep a good Diet.

Back weak to comfort.
TAke Knotgrasse strings, Strawberry strings, of Cats-taile, Cinquefoyle
strings, wild Tansey, Shepherds purse, Comfrey ana, boil these with Knuckles
of Veale and marrow of Beefes back, thicken with a little Ryce powdered, and a
few Raysins of the Sun stoned, two large Mace blades, eighteen great Cloves,
eat it fasting in the morning.

Back weak to restore.
TAke the Pith of the water boughs of an Ash i, the shells of new laid Eggs
powdered i, Clary, new Balm, white Mints j M, stamp them and strain them, then
take yolks of new laid eggs, beat and mix them with the juyces, and fry it
with Butter like a Tansie, with the powder, eat of this in the morning fasting,
and neither eat nor drink one hour after. Or,

. Roses iij, red Sanders ij, yellow Sanders i di. fine Bole ij, burnt Ivory i,
Camphire i, Wax i, oil of Rose buds ij, melt the Oil and Wax together with
the rest, make a Plaster, lay it to the Back, but for want of this Plaster,
take oil of Roses, oil of Violets, and water Lillies mixed together, and
anoint the back therewith; it cools.

Belly or Sides hardness, an Unguent.
Mix together Vng. Dialthaea iij, Agrippa, oil of Camomile ana i. make an
Unguent thereof, you may mix some Aqua-vitae therewith.

Blood to staunch.
HOld Shepheards-purse in your hand, look on it, or lay it on the wound, if it
be a vein that bleedeth, boil Rue in water, stamp it and lay it thereon, then
lap it up in Lambs wool never washed, or take a great Spider, put it in a
linen cloth, prick it with a Pin, and smell thereto.

Another excellent one.
. Sanguis Draconis, Bole Armoniack, Vermillion ana part. aequal. compound them
with the white of Eggs, beat to the form of a Plaster; this applied has
stayed the blood of a Woman's breast cut off.

Blood spetting to staunch.
DRink as much powder of Mice dung as will lie on a groat, in a little uyce of
Plantaine and Sugar, drink it first and last morning and evening till you be
well.

Blood-Pissing to stay.
Boil Spearemints, Bettony, Rue, Bursa pastoris, and Knot-grasse in Goats
milk, or other milk, drink of it three days first and last.

Black and blew in the face by a blow.
TAke Paper four double, wet it well in cold water, and lay it to the Bruise.

Blood bruised to avoid.
Boil Nep bruised in Wine or Ale, drink it warm nine mornings together, it
cures.

Breast swollen to ripe, break, and heal.
Boil Hollyhocks, Mallows, ana ij M. in water, then strain them through a
cloth the water out, then scrape red Clay from the Wall six spoonfulls, and
ten spoonfulls of wine vinegar with a little Hoggs grease, boil them with the
herbs all together to a Poultis, apply it very warm, use it till you are well.

Breast sore to break.
Boil Fenegreeke seed, and Linseed powdered ana ij, Figgs small cut, ten house
Snayles, Lilly roots bruised ana ij, boil them all together in strong Ale to a
Poultis, lay it on as hot as she can suffer it; so use it till she be well.

Bruise to cure and help.
STamp Solomon's seal green, and apply it to the grief; Parsley fried with
Butter soft and applied does the like. Egrimony stamped small, and rolled up in
round balls, then lay it in some place till it be moldy, then fry it with
Hoggs grease or May Butter till it be a green Salve, so use it on rotten
Apples, with a spoonful of Ryce boiled in Milk to a Poultis, does the like.

Burning or Scalding, the Cure.
TAke Sallet oil well beaten in fair water, therewith anoint the grief for
three days, this takes out the fire. Item, then take the inner bark of Elder,
Hart's-tongue, and House-leeke ana iiij, Sheep trickles i M, Sheepe-sewet
iiij, boil them together to a good thickness, and put thereto Wax i, then
strain it, and plaister-wise apply it to the grief till it be whole without
scarre.

Item, take the fat of Bacon in slyces, lay it in water two hours, then take
it out, and dry it with a cloth, and with a Needle and a twisted thread stitch
it together with a Bay leaf, between every slice two Bay leaves, roast it at
the fire, turning the throd in your hand, set under it a Platter with some
fair water, therein to receive the dropping, let it not burn in the rosting,
annoint the grief with the dripping.

Another for the same.
TAke oil of Roses ij, Cream iiij, Honey i mixed, and make an ointment,
therewith anoint the grief.

An Iniectivement or Lotion.
Boil in white wine Centory, Knotgrasse, wild Tansie, Yarrow ana di. M. honey
i, Allom powdered ii, inject this.

Bruises, a Plaster.
TAke Virgin Wax viij, Galbanum Colat, honey ana iiij, Sheeps Tallow viij
shred small, and boiled in a little white wine or vinegar, add thereto
Frankincense and Mastick ana iiij in powder, let it boil till all be melted
plaister-wise, apply it on the grief as hot as you can suffer it, till you be
well.

Breasts to cleanse of Phlegm.
TAke white Wine, and water ana one pint, Wine-vinegar ten spoonfulls,
English honey clarified with whites of Eggs vi, Fennel and Parsley roots, and
Lycorice all mundified, and then sliced ana ij, Enula Campana powdered ij,
Egrimony i di. Figs cut in pieces twelve, Annis and Cummin-seed, Hysope, Time,
and Penyryal ana i di. boil all these close covered sufficiently, then strain
it, drink thereof first and last till you be well.

Brain and Back to purge.
MAke a Dos of Pills of Bettony powder, and English honey, take two Pills
thereof as big as a small Nut when you go to bed, this will manifest it
self next morning in the Chamber Pot.

Brains, Nerves, Sinews, or Griefs of the Head, the Cure.
Boil in ten pounds of water, the flowers of Staecados, the seeds of new
Piony, and Fennel ana iiij, Time, Calamint, Balm, Organie, or wild Marjorum,
Sage, Bettony, and Rosemary flowers ana i di. let all these boil to the
consumption of half, then strain it, and boil the liquor again with honey
ana ij lb, to the height of a syrup, put thereinto Cynamon, Ginger, Calamus
aromaticus bruised ana ij, bound up in a thin linen cloth, take of this syrup
two spoonfulls at once, first and last.

Breath stinking, the Cure.
Boil in a pottle of white Wine, the tops of Rosemary i M, Anniseed bruised i,
Wormwood three sprigs, Sassafras, Orange pills bruised, Cloves and Cynamon
bruised ana i, Cummin-seed bruised i, let all these boil to the consumption of
one pint, drink thereof morning and evening a good draught warm in the
morning, cold at night.

In day time use to bite of a Nutmeg, and swallow some, also Mastick chewed
sometime is good.

Breath stinking, Lozenges to cure.
TAke the juice of Lycorice mundified ij, boil it in Hysop water to a good
hight, then work it up in your hands with some oil of Anniseed, and some Gum
Arabic, with three grains of Musk incorporate altogether; make Lozenges
thereof, dissolve one at once in your mouth.

Bones broken and Set, a Plaster to ease Pain.
TAke the fresh dung of a Sheep two parts, Barley meal one part, so much of
the white of Eggs beaten well, compound a Plaster, put therein a little
Bolearmoniack, lay it about the bone, remove it not in ten days.

Blood to staunch at Nose, or in a wound.
TAke the greatest Toad you can find, and hang it up alive, and so let him hang
all Summer, till he be as dry as a Stockfish, so keep him, let the party
bleeding smell to him, being wrapped up in a thin linen cloth, it stauncheth
the blood.

To skale a mortified black Bone.
TAke honey of Roses, dip Spledgets therein, lay them hot on the bone until it
does loosen, dress it every night for three nights, if it then loosen not by
the sides in feeling, then apply this Ointment.

Take pure Hogs grease di. lb, Argentum Vivum ij well mortified, and well
brayed together, warm the Unguent in a Sawcer, with a feather anoint the bone
evening and morning, and lay thereon Lint, and roll it up just, let him keep
his bed, and take no cold, and shortly the Bone will rise, then heal it up as
need requires.

Brulse or Bruises to Cure.
Pour out the white of an Egg, then fill the Egg up with Parmacitty, roast it
soft, then sup it up, and fast three hours after, use it till you be well.

Bloody Flux, Scowring, or Gonoria.
TAke the seed of white Poppy, Mallows, Quinces, and Pursleyne all powdered,
take also Mirtell, Gum Arabic, Gum Dragant, Pine kernells, Sugar, Lycorice,
Penedes, Psiloum musilage, of Almonds ana iiij, of fine Bole sanguis Draconis,
red Roses, Spodij, Myrrh ana i, mix them with Hydromell, and make it in
Trochis; they will last kept in a box in a warm dry place seven years, the
Dosse is i given in milk.

Burning or Scalding an approved at Medicine.
TAke the inner Bark of Elder, the leaves of Alexander, and the leaves of
Daysies, boil them in Hogs grease, then strain them well, and anoint the
Grief with a feather, and cover it with a red Colwort lease, and it will be
whole on warrantice.

Back Pains, the Cure.
THe Paracelsian Plaster laid thereon warm, cures.

Broth given in Consumption or Weakness.
TAke China iiij thin slyced, Maydenhaire, Parsley, Fennel, Smallage roots
ana i, Zarsa parilla iiij, infuse them four and twenty hours in three quarts
of water, then boil them till one quart be consumed, then put in your Pullet
or Chicken being first boiled one walme, and scum it, then let it boil all to
pieces being scafoned with Lettyce, Violets, Succory, Strawberries, and such
like, then strain it, and drink of this comfortable Broth at all times when
you please.

Bruise to Cure; also good for the Stone.
TAke the eyes of Crabs, powder them, infuse them in Wine vinegar warm, some
Parmacitty melt therein, take of this every morning fasting till you be well.

C
Canker in the Breast, or Polypus in the Nose.
THe water of Buck wheat distilled in Balneo, will stay the eating Canker or
Polypus, though held uncureable.

Canker, a Plaster.
MIx the juice of Selandine with Goats dung powdered, and plaster it on, it
kills the Canker any where.

A plaster made of Pepper, Bay Salt, the kemell of Walnuts beaten together
heals also.

Canker to extirpate and take out.
INcorporate the powder of Realgor with fresh Hogs grease, spread it on leather
fit for the Sore, strew thereon all-over the flower of Wheat somewhat thick,
and upon that honey thick, and lastly over that Woman's milk, then lay the
plaster on the Sore, and lay on the plaster the bottom of a new baked Loaf
of white bread, bind all fast on all night, on the morrow the Canker will be
dead on the Plaster: Note if it be in the flesh or sinews, thick water
issues out, if on the bone, thick yellow matter comes forth.

Canker, a Lotion.
TAke white Wine, di. Pint English honey iij, white Copperas in powder i di.
Roche-Allom powdered iiij, boil all these till one third part be consumed, then
wet double linen clothes therein, and lay it on the Sore or Canker: Or take
new Tanners Oose that never Leather came in, Sage, Bay leaves, Violet leaves,
and Woodbine blossoms ana i M: boil all these together, and use it for a
Lotion, first strain it.

Canker in Men's Privities, to Cure.
Boil Roche-Allom i, Verdigrease iiij in a pint of Smiths water till part be
consumed, then strain it, and use it for a Lotion.

Canker to Cure.
TAke the oldest Oyster-shell you can find in a dunghill (that shine most, are
best) powder them, then set three spoonfulls of white wine Vinegar over the
coals, put therein as much of the Oystershell powder as will thicken the
Vinegar, add thereto some Allom powder, then bind a linen cloth about a
stick and dip therein, rub the Sore therewith till it bleed, do this three
times therewith, it will be well.

Canker in the Body to Cure.
TAke the powder of the roots of Dragons i, lay it all night in water, on the
morrow put out the water, then put thereto a quarter of a pint of white Wine,
boil it well, let the Patient drink it warm three mornings together, it
helps.

Canker or sore Eyes.
TAke Dovefoot, Archangell, Ivy with the berries, young Bramble tops, white Rose
leaves, red Sage, Sellandine, and Woodbine leaves ana i M. cut small, then put
thereto powder of Allom i, white wine and clarified honey ana one quart: Aloes,
Epatick iiij, distill all these in a Lymbeck together, the water thereof will
kill any Canker, two drops put in the eye with Fennel water, takes away any
Pearl or filthiness.

Consumption, the Cure.
TAke six Cock Sparrowes, and two Wagtailes well dressed, Harts-horne and
Ivory ana ij, powdered China roots thin slyced iiij in two quarts of
Springwater, Rose water one quart, white Wine one quart; Infuse them in a
Pipkin close covered one night in the hot Embers, that the water may keep but
warm, then boil three spoonfulls of French Barley in three several waters;
then take Egrimony and Sorrel di. M. Borage, Buglosse, di M. Fennel two roots
picked and slyced, the bottom of a white Loaf steeped in Malmsey all night,
three large Mace, Raysins of the Sun stoned iii, six Cloves bruised, half a
Cock, six Knuckles of Veale, red Sanders i, Sage and Rosemary ana i M. six
Capdates stoned and cut, let all these boil close stopped one hour, then put
therein six Pearmaine Apples pared and slyced, let all these boil till it
come to a Mash, that there remain but five pintes, then strain it, drink of
this warm, first and at five of the clock in the afternoon, this will comfort
much, if it be too thick liquifie it with wine

Consumption a noted Cure.
TAke a quarter of a pound of lordan Almonds blanched and beat small, adding
thereto in the beating some Rosewater, one or two spoonfulls, then take the
thigh of a roasted Capon, flea off the skin, beat it in a Mortar alone, then
take fourteen Dates stoned, skinned and picked, beat them alone, then put
them all in a pint of Rosewater, boil them three walmes with some Sugar, then
take Cinnamon ij, Lignum Aloes both powdered i, put them in your Decoction,
stir them well together, then put it up in some Glass, take the quantity of
a Wallnut at once in the morning, the first three mornings add to it every
time Bezoar two grains.

A Diet drink for the Consumption.
THe first week in May infuse in your usual drink Succory, Devils-bit,
Scabius, Watercresses, Lungwort, Polypodie, Coltfoot, Penyryall, and Liverwort
ana ij M. bruised, and put in a thin linen cloth bag, and so put in your
drink when it is new tunned to work therein; drink no other drink for
fourteen days.

Cough of the Lungs to Cure.
TAke green Box dried, and powdered fine, take so much at once as will lie on a
groat, in a draught of warm white wine first and last till you be well, which
will be when you see your self void blood, then leave your Medicine for you
are well. Probatum est.

Cough of very hard Phlegm to cure.
Boil two quarts of Cream, half a pint of honey, and di. pint of Linseed
oil till it come to an oily substance, dip therein a red thick woollen cloth,
wring it hard, and lay it on the Region of the Stomach as hot as you can suffer
it, then cover it warm with another dry woollen cloth all night and morning
till you be well.

Cold hoarcenesse to cause to speak clear presently.
TAke a Porsnet of scalding water, put therein two Handker chiefes viij times
double folded, wring out the water, hold it to thy Nose and Mouth till it be
cold, then put that in the hot water, and take out the other and so one after
another till you be well.

Cough very old to Cure.
TAke Diatra gaganti frigidum diapendij, suis specibus ana i, the Liver of a
Fox powdered i di. Lycorice and May denhaire ijd. all powdered together, take
them mixed in the syrup of Mirtles as an Electuary on the point of a knife as
often as you see cause.

Consumpsion a Medicine.
TAke good Malmsey a pottle, put therein as much crumbs of Manchet hot out of
the Oven as will suck up all the Wine, add thereto of Cinnamon powdered iiij,
ten Cloves bruised, distill this, and put thereto so much Sugar, as fits your
Taste with two grains of Musk, the Dosse is three spoonfulls morning and
evening first and last.

Chollick a present remedy.
TAke Gum Hederae, warm it that it may spread on a piece of Scarlet the
breadth of a shilling or broader, apply it hot to the Navill; your best Gum is
sweet, clear, and soft.

Cough, and strong Consumption, a Potion.
TAke Malmsey one quart, roots of Mallows, and Fennel pithed, Lycorice
mundified, Anniseed bruised ana ij, Colts foot, Long wort, Violet-leaves,
Hysop, red Sage, Raysins of the Sun stoned, Figgs shred, white Sugarcandy ana
iiij, boil all these in a Pipkin close covered to half, then strain them out
hard, add thereto white Sugar iiij, of the roots of Ireos, Florentine ii, let
it boil one walme more, then strain it, and take of this first in the
morning, fast two hours after, and last to bedward, if you need to purge,
infuse in a draught thereof over night Sena iiij, strain it, and drink it in
the morning.

Chollick and Stone, the Cure.
TAke Parsly-seed, Gromell-seed, long Pepper, Ieat, Amber, Coral, Ginger,
Nutmeg, Bay Berries, Enula Campana ana ij fine powdered, drink of it warm in a
morning as much as will lie on six pence in white Wine or Broth, fast two
hours after.

Chollick of Wind.
TAke Seahorse Pizell, Hartshorne, and Enula Campana, ana i fine powdered, take
so much of this as will lie on a shilling in Anniseed-water fasting, or as you
need.

Chollick and Stone, the Cure.
TAke a pottle of white Wine in a Pipkin, put two fair flint stones in the
fire till they be red-hot, quench them one after another twenty times in the
Wine, then put therein Speare-Mints, Polypody of the Oak, Hysop, Sage, and
Rosemary ana i M. boil them a good while, then strain it, and put it in a
Vial close stopped: In the morning fasting drink a draught with these powders,
Parsley, Fennel, and Carroway seeds, Phily-pendula, Saxafrage roots, Grommel,
Brom, and Alexander seeds; the kernel of Cherrystones dried, the round bones
of the Thornback all powdered together ana iiij, drink of this powder every
morning in your wine one spoonful, fast two hours after, and last at night,
take this syrup, of Spiknard, of Juniper berries, of Grasshoppers the head and
feet cut off powdered ana ij; compound them together, and drink ij in a little
warm white Wine.

Colic the Cure.
EAt fasting every morning hot Broaths made of Alexanders, and drink the
compound water of them, and Aqua-vitae ana ij.

Also drink the powder of Juniper berries in Alexander water and stale Ale ana;
warm is good. Also S. John's wort small chopped, and put thereto Pigeons dung,
a good quantity of honey, fry them in fresh Butter, and very warm bind, it to
the navil.

Cramps, Convulsion, or shrinking Sinews.
TAke oil of Turpentine i lb, Turpentine di. lb, oil of Bays iiij, oil of
Spick i, Juniper berries di. lb, Castor, Euphorbium ana i, Cloves, Mace,
Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Frankincense ana ij, Mummy i, Brocks grease iij, digest them
all for one month in horse dung, then distill them according to Art, and
therewith anoint the place grieved; this also heals old Wounds and green
Sores.

Cramp, the Cure.
TAke Brimstone and Verveyne, bind it to the Pulse, and be ever freed.

Cods swelling to Cure.
TAke Rue, Bay leaves, Purslay, Bean meal, Fengreeke and Linseed ana ii,
boil it in new Cream, with a spoonful of Hoggs grease to a Poultis, so apply
it: Or take Rye Leaven, mingle it with strong Lie and apply it; this helps.

Camphire Water to heal.
TAke Camphire prepared with the white of an Egg, infuse it in Fumitory water,
mix them well together, use it to cool, heal, and skin.

Corns in the Toes to Cure.
TAke Marigold leaves, Hearbgrasse, and the broadest Plantaine ana i M. stamp
them in a Mortar, then put them in a close stopped Pot, with ten spoonfulls of
water, so let it stand twelve days till it stink, then strain out the liquor,
with it anoint the Corns, and wet a double cloth therein, and lay it on them
till they be well, so use it.

Carbunckles to ripen and break.
POwder Bay Salt small, mingle it with the yolk of an Egg, and lay it on the
sore; it heales.

Cankers inward or outward to cure.
Roast Sorrel cleansed of the stalks and strings, take only the pure leaf in a
wet brown paper in the Embers when it is soft, mix therewith half so much
honey, as much Wheat flower, and as much burnt Allom, compound all these
together in a Mortar to a plaster, apply it to the Grief cold, if the Grief
be inward Minister three Pills thereof morning and evening; wash the Sore with
a Lotion made of Plantaine water, burnt Allom, and so much calcined Vitriall as
will make it blood-red.

Cramp in Arm or Leg; the Cure.
TAke great Onions, roast them, make a Plaster thereof, and lay it warm about
the joint as hot as he can suffer it, dress it three times, and cured.

Canker or Pock in any part of the Body to Cure.
MIx the fine powder of Mercury with the powder of Bole, mix it so that the
color be very pale, this kills either of these griefs.

D
Deafness to Cure.
TAke oil of Castor ij, oil of Roset, and oil of bitter Almonds ana i,
Aqua-vitae ij, mix all together, and boil it till the Aqua-vitae be consumed,
then every night to Bedwards drop four drops one after another in the Ear,
stop it with Cotton that smells of Musk.

Another.
TAke a spoonefull of the liquor that fries out of a green Ashen bough burning
in the fire, and the oil of a silver Eele ana, of the Gall of a Hare, and
black bony ana, one spoonful of Singreene, boil them all together, and drop a
little in your Ear, as need requires.

Diseases many and general an Electuary.
TAke red Rose leaves dried, red Coral, Guiacum, Acorus, Carroway seed, Ivory,
Cinnamon, Bolearmoniack, Eg-shells all dried, Rosemary powdered ana ij, Nutmegs,
Cloves and Mace ana i, Sugar powdered ^j, Juice of Plantaine, Knotgrasse,
Shep^eards purse, Houselecke, young Bramble ^ops, and Sorrel ana i M. or so
much of the ^yces as will make it up an Electuary, take ^^e spoonful thereof
morning and evening warm, If it be for the Gonorhoea first fumi^ate him upon a
close stool with Frankincense, it stays bleeding, and is good against ^he
Plague, it is good for old Ulcers, and all Fluxes.

Dropsy, a Purgation for it.
TAke Mechoacan, Sugar, Diagrediij, Rubarb, Sena, Spiknard ana i o, Anniseed
^j, Cinnamon, Mastick, Ginger ana i, let all these be fine powdered, the Dosse
is i in white wine or Posset Ale three days together. Then take Hysop,
Violets, Rosemary, Vervine, Bettony, St. John's Woort, Mouseeare, Plantaine,
Avence, Sage, Fetherfew ana i M. wash them clean, then dry them, and bruife
them in a Mortar, then put it in a new glassed Pipkin, put to it one gallon of
white wine, so let it stand all night close stopped, and on the morrow sees it
to one Pottle, then strain it through a hair Sive, and put it up close, then
drink it first and last nine days together, at night hot, and at morning cold,
half a pint at a time.

Dropsy, a Medicine.
TAke Dragons, Spiknard ana i, Alchenet di., powder them, drink of this powder
in Ale or Beer, as much as will lie on six pence at one time.

Dropsy a Dyet-Drink.
TAke Juniper thin shaved, and the berries bruised, Ash Bark, Sassafras
roots, Wall wort roots, Caper roots, Camock roots, Marsh Mallow roots ana i M.
Parsley roots, Eringo roots, Fennel roots all bruised ana ij, Parsley and Fennel
seeds bruised ana ij, put all these in a Pipkin close covered, put upon them as
much scalding water as will cover them, then put it up, and paste it close, so
let it stand in hot Embers and not boil xxiiij hours, then put all these in a
Ferkin of new Ale of seven gallons, so let it work together till the Ale be
stale, drink no other drink during the cure, drink this at all times.

Dropsy or any other Disease, a Treakle to cure.
TAke the powders of Rue and Bettony ana x, Wormwood and Centory ana iij,
Gentian, Myrrh, Aristolochia rotunda and Ivory ana i, Pulverize and Cearse all
these, mix them with clarified honey to a Treakle.

Dropsy, an excellent Potion.
TAke Rue, Sage, Bettony, Polypodij of the Oak, Watercresses, green Broom,
Hysop, Parsley and Fennel roots pithed, roots of Lovage, of Flower-de-Luce,
Gladwine the middle, take of the Elder the small clot burre ana i M. boil them
in Barley water, and white wine ana, mix it with pure honey quoth. sufficit, let
the Patient drink of this first and last till he be well.

Deafness, a pretions Medicine.
TAke honey, the juice of Singreene, the water that droppeth from a green
Ashen Batt in the fire ana, compound them together, infuse it warm in the
deaf ears.

A Defensive to stay Impostumes or Inflammations from all grcene Wounds, apply
it both sides the wound.
TAke the white of two Eggs well brayed, put thereto Wheat flower, powder of
Bole-armoniack, and powder of Sanguis Draconis, mix all these well together,
and apply it as before, this stays and repercusseth all humors, if any heat
happen in the wound, then add thereto Vinegar, Rosewater, and Singreene, or
Plantaine juice, this will dissolve all Inflammations or heat quickly.

A Defensive for green Wounds.
TAke oil of Roses, Bole-armoniack ana ij, Terra sigillata, and Vinegar ana i,
Camphire ij.d. Nightshade, and Singreene ana i M. beat the herbs, strain the
juyces, mix all together cold, so apply it, if it be too thin thicken it with
Barley meal.

Dropsies, Pox, Consumption, or any Disease.
TAke a pint of spirit of wine, infuse therein Zarza perilla thin sliced, so
much as will color the spirit of wine, yellow as gold, the^ dissolve in it Gum
of Guaiacum ij, strain it, and add thereto natural Balm di., take hereof
one spoonful in a draught of small Beer or Ale morning and evening till you
be well.

Diascordium, an excellent Cordial to make.
TAke Cinnamon, Lignum Cassiae ana iij, Scordid or water Germander j, Dittany
or Candy, Tormentill, Bistorta or Snakeweed ana iiij Galbanum, Arabis, or Candy
Mustard Seed j dj. Gentian iiij, Bolarmoniack j dj. Terra Linen iiij, Opium j
dj. Storax, Calamint iiij, dj. Sorrell-seed j dj. long Pepper, Ginger ana ij,
pure honey ij lb dj lb. Conserve of red Roses j lb, Aromaticall wine dj lb,
boil all these two walmes to an Electuary.

E
Eyes red and watering, the Cure.
SPread the white of a new laid Egg on a red Colewort leaf when you go to
bed, plaster the eyes therewith; or the gall of a Partridge, or the gall of a
Turtle put into the eyes, helps the dimnesse.

Eyes that seem blind, the Cure.
TAke Smallage, red Fennel, Rue, Vervine, Egrimony, Bettony, Sage, Sink-foyle,
Pimpernell, Eufrage, Celendine, ana j M. wash them, and stamp the^ well, put
them in some vessel; take powder of xv pepper corns well searced, one pint of
wine, three spoonfulls of boys urine that is very young, boil them together
till the juice of the herbs be in the wine, then strain it out hard, and put
it in a Vyall close stopped, and with a feather drop it in the eyes cold for
fifteen days; during the Cure, drink Beer wherein is infused over night (to
drink next morning) Tormentill and Penny-grasse.

Egiptiacum to make.
TAke Verdigrease iiij, powdered Allom ij, Vinegar vj, Honey j, boil all these
till it be red, this cleanses and siccatriceth old sores.

Emrods, the Cure.
TAke two Handkerchiefes viij double, put them on a Chafing dish of coals in a
dish of white wine, ready to boil, or seething hot, then wring out one of them
hard, and lay it on the grief as hot as he can suffer it, let it so lie till
it waxes cold, then put that in the dish, and so do one after another; for
half an hour at once, use this till it be well, which will be some three
times; during the Cure some drink Milk-foyle in white wine, with the powder of
Egshells whence Chickens were hatched.

Emrods, or any other Swelling in the place.
TAke Scabius and Mulline, stamp them with fresh Butter and Hogs grease, and
make it yellow with powder of Saffron, lay it to the grief warm.

Or take the powder of burned Anniseeds, Honey, and Saffron, make a plaster
thereof, and lay it to the grief, every dressing wash it with white wine
wherein Scabius has boiled.

Emrods to Cure.
1 TAke the juice of the root of the great Burre, boil it, and bathe the
Emrods therewith very hot, then presently strew thereon the powder of red
Archangell.

2 Or take the powders of Lovage and Rue mixed with Honey, make a plaster
thereof and use it.

3 Also boil the leaves of Mercury very tender, apply it thereto as a Poultis
very hot, dress it twice a day and be whole.

4. If they bleed or water much, cast on them the fine powder of Letharge of
gold, it dries them.

5 Or stamp unset Leeks small, put thereto honey and flower, lay it on warm.

6 Or stamp in a dish of the best Soap with some garden Snailes without shells,
and the powder of some Muscle shells mixed and applied thereto twice.

Eyes to preserve by Medicines Local.
1 THe smell of Marjorum is good to preserve the sight, to drink Eybright in
Ale, Beer, or Wine, with the juice of Fennel, is very good, and nothing
better; the powder of Eybright in a rear Egg, or in any thing else is also
good: Good Spectacles much helps: Cinnamon, Cloves, Nutmeggs, Mace, and
Pepper, are all good. Also the water of Eybright, Fennel, Marigold, Perlewort,
or any of these put into the eyes, cures.

2 Item, Vervine gathered young in May, put in a Vyall close stopped, and so
let it stand till it putrify, and a juice sinking to the bottom of the
Glass, wherewith drop it into your eyes, it helps all blindness in man or
beast.

3 Item, in April gather the finest Fennel, put it into a Glass with a long
narrow neck some fifteen days, then take the glass softly for troubling it,
power out the clearest thereof to another glass to every dj lb thereof, put j
of Lignum Aloes fine powdered, and let it so stand fifteen days more, then
strain it twice to clear it out, of this drop a little in your eyes, it much
clears the sight.

4 Item, Lignum Aloes distilled in a Stillatory of Glass, the water of it put
in your eyes, it clears the sight miraculously.

5 Item, j of the distilled water of Rosemary flowers, with ij d. of the powder
of Salt Gem dissolved therein, and dropped in the eyes, cures the sight, and
dries all moisture from thence.

6 Item. the urine of a Child, or the Lie made of Ashes of Fennel stalks,
either of them dropped in the eyes, mends the sight.

Inner medicine to clear the Eyes.
1 TAke the powder of Eybright iiij, Mace j, mix them together, and take the
weight of iij d. thereof in Fennel water in the morning, fasting three hours
after.

2 Take the juyces of Fennel Vervin, and Roses ana ij, Eybright, Endive and
Celendine ana d j M: boil the herbs in two pints of water till half be
spent, then with the juyces and the Decoction, boil it with Sugar to a syrup,
take of this syrup ij, in Eybright water iij. If the body be windy, add to the
aforesaid powders Anniseed and Fennel seeds ana j.

Eyes that have Pearls, a medicine.
TAke Dazies and the roots, red Fennel, and Alchoofe, stamp them together,
take the juyces of them, and drop two or three in the contrary Ear warm, on
that side the grief is not, till the Pearl fall off, use this every day
morning and evening.

Eyes that have Pearl or Web.
1 TAke the white of two new laid Eggs very hard boyld, the shells and yolk
being taken away, put the white in a Mortar with j d. of fine powder of
Copperas, pound them together, then put to it two small spoonfulls of Rose
water, then strain it hard through a linen cloth into a Glass, let it settle
with the clearest water thereof, drop it in the eyes with a feather.

2 Or take the white of two eggs, very hard sodden, white Sugarcandy j, white
Copperas j, both fine powdered, white Rosewater one spoonful, stamp the egg,
Sugarcandy and Copperas together, then put the Rosewater thereto, strain it
hard into a Glass, drop thereof three times a day into your eyes.

Another.
3 TAke all the head of a black Cat burned to Ashes, blow some of that powder
with a quill thrice a day into the eye if the pain be great, especially in the
night, lay thereon some Oaken leaves doubled together, and wet in Rosewater on
the eye, renew them as need requires, it cures.

Another rare secret for the same.
4 TAke nine Worms, you shall find them in old hollow timber with many legs,
called Hogs or Swines Lice, if you touch them they will be round, stamp them
with the juice of Celendine or Betonie, then strain them well, let the Patient
drink it fasting warm, not eating in two hours after, use this three mornings
together, it will cure.

Or this.
TAke the white of an egg, and the juice of Pelitory of the wall beaten
together and scummed, one drop of that liquor in the eye cures, Probatum est.

For the eyes, The virtue of Tormentill.
Boil the herb Tormentill and roots in white wine, till the third part be
spent, let the blind drink of this Potion nine days together, a draught in the
morning cold, and at night blood-warm, and within that time (God willing) he
will recover: if the eye be hurt, boil this herb stamped in white wine and a
little water, bind or plaster it to the sore eyes. If you infuse a good
quantity of this herb in a small vessel full of wine, and no other drink
daily, it will recover sight though long blind.

Eyes to clear, An approved distilled water.
1 TAke the juyces of Rue, Fennel, Celendine, and Eybright ana ij, honey j dj.
Aloes tutiae, and Sarcocollae ana iiij, the Gall ofa Capon or a Cock ij,
distill all these in a Limbeck of Glass, drop this water cold into the sore
Eyes once a day three drops together, and use it till he be well.

2 Or take the waters of Roses, Vervine and Fennel ana iiij, strong white wine
iij, Tutia prepared, and Sugarcandy ana iij, Aloes hepatick ij, powder fine all
the simples that is to be powdered, mix them with the waters and wine, let it so
stand covered one whole day, then strain the liquor easily in a fair Glass,
and use to drop three drops at once in the eye.

Eyes to Cure all griefs.
TAke iij of unslak'd Lyme, infuse it in d j. lb of rain water in a Glass
vessel three days, then stir and mix them well together, let them settle
again four and twenty hours after, power out the clear water very clean,
then put thereto x of Salarmoniack the whitest you can get, very ^nely powdered,
let it therein dissolve by ^ong standing and often shaking; then let it settle,
and power the clearest water off it, or filter it away by Distillation, drop
three drops of this in the Eye at once, and so continue it three times every
day till it be well; this cures Spot, Pearl, Web, or any thing else in the
Eye, be it Canker or Burning.

F
Falling sickness, the Cure.
MAke two Plasters as you do of Mastick, of Sanguis Draconis, spread it with
a hot knife, and lay them to the Temple veins.

Falling sickness or Epilepsia the Cure.
FIrst every full and change of the Moon, Purge one day, and Vomit another,
then kill a Jay, and dress him, fill his body full of Cummin and Anniseeds
bruised, then put the Jay so-dressed in an Oven after bread is drawn, until
he be so dry that you may beat his body, sides and bones to powder, then take
of this powder j at a time in Broth, or any other way at pleasure morning and
evening till he be well.

Fever to prevent, or all other diseaeses by this cooling Cordial.
TAke Liquorice mundified j, Carroway seed, and Cardimonium ana dj, Hyssop, and
Carduus Benedictus ana dj M. of Galingale ij, bruise your drugs, and bind your
herbs in a bundle, boil them all in a gallon of water close covered, till one
pint be consumed, then let it so stand till you strain it six hours, then let
the Liquorice and Cardimonium remain still in your strained drink; take thereof
morning and evening at your pleasure, this works mervailously in preserving
strength.

Flux of blood to stop and Cure.
TAke the round mossie Bur that grows on the Briar that is the wild Rose,
dry it, and powder it, drink thereof in red or Claret wine morning and evening
first and last.

Flux or Woman's Menstrous to force or bring.
TAke Germander, Mugwort, Penny-ryall, Balm, Hyssop, and Mallows ana j M.
Rue, Sage, Wormwood, Soothernwood, and Marjorum ana dj M. Saffron j d. Castor
j thin sliced, Enula Campaine, and Cinnamon ana j powdered, boil all these in
a pottle of water to the consumption of a quart, then strain it hard, and put
thereto white Wine one pint, drink thereof first and last, morning and
evening.

Bloody Flux to stay, especially of Women.
MAke a pair of Beads of the Seahorsetooth, and wear them on both your
wrists, let no young woman wear them but on xxiiij hours, for fear of
further danger.

Flux of Blood, or Gonoria Pills to stay it.
TAke Marmalet of Quinces ij, Coral, Cinnamon, Amber, Shepherds purse
Alchenet, Acatia ana ij powdered and searsed, mix them together to a Mass for
Pills take four of these Pills morning and evening first and last.

Fistula, the whole Cure.
FIrst, purge the humor offending, then take the Soles of old Shoes dried,
burn them in a clean hearth with Oaken wood to a bright coal, then lay it
where it may consume to Ashes alone, then add to the weight of the ashes, so
much green Copperas fine powdered, as the Ashes of the Sole waigheth, and half
so much weight of the powder of burned Allom as the Copperas waigheth, and
half so much of the powder of golden Seacoale as of the burned Allom, then
grind all these together on a Painters Stone, or in a Mortar to fine subtle
powder, so put it close up till you use it either for Fistula or old sore: when
you are to use it, take the Cream of the morning milk of one Cow, set it by
it self all night and one day, the next day cast away the greenish water in
the bottom of that Cream, then lay a spoonful of the Cream on a Trencher,
then mix so much of the powders therewith as will make the Cream black and
thick, then make your Tents of one inch long and no longer, if the Fistula be
never so deep, and role the Tents well in the medicine, and tent the Fistula
therewith two times a day, and it will work out in small pushes, wheales from
the bottom, cover the Sore with a red Colewort leaf, when it is well
digested, heal it up with plasters fit for it.

A vulnary Potion for the Fistula.
Boil in a quart of Springwater, Cloves bruised, Pimpernell, Egrimony, red
Colewort, Valerian, Mouseare, Doefoot, and wild Tanzie ana j M. washed and
chopped, boiled all in a Pipkin close covered till half be wasted, then put
to it two spoonfulls of honey, and one quart of white wine, then let it boil
two walmes, and strain it hard forth, keep it in a close Vyall, drink of it
morning fasting at three in the afternoon, and last to bed; In Summer cold,
and Winter hot, until the Potion comes out of the Orifice of the Fistula,
which must be ever kept open with a Gentian tent.

Fistula or Cankers the Plaster, to Cure.
TAke Letharge of gold j lb, oil of Roses ij lb, white Wine Vinegar, and old
Urine ana dj lb, boil it till the Urine and Vinegar be consumed, add thereto
in the boiling Wax ij, Frankincense j, mix it, and it cures.

Fistula, a Lotion to wash, or Seringe that cures.
TAke Bolearmoniack iiij, Camphire j, white Vitriol iiij all powdered, boil the
Copperas and Camphire in a close stopped Pipkin till they be melted, still
stirring them till they grow hard, then powder them and the Bolearmoniack
together very fine, then put the powders up in a strong bladder, when you use
it, take a pottle of running water, put it to the fire till it begin to boil,
then take it from the fire, and put therein three spoonfulls of the powder, as
much as you can heap and press on, put all in a double Vyall, shaking it
twice every day for fourteen days before you use it, let it stand and settle
very clear, and apply it as hot as the Patient can suffer it; if it be for a
sore, wet a double cloth four times double, and apply it, if for a Fistula
use the Seringe, dress it morning and evening till you be well: this cures
old Sores, Fistula's, Pustuls, Cankers, Scabs in the head or body, green
wounds; if you will have it stronger, put unto it burnt Allom j powdered.

Fistula in the corner of the eye, or else where.
TAke Hempseed, Southernwood, Fennel, Parsley, Strawberry leaves and strings,
Ribwort, Tanzie, Smallage, Garden madder, red Colewort leaves ana j M. Nutmegs
powdered j, boil all these in three pints of water, then strain it, add
thereto honey iiij spoonfulls, therewith bathe the Fistula thrice a day, at
every dressing let the Patient drink of this Potion iiij spoonfulls warm; if
the Fistula be deep use a Seringe, and wet a red Coleleafe and lay thereon,
you need not tent it; let the Patient sometime with his Potion drink Triacle
diatessaron j, in a morning in his bed very hot, and sweat two hours after it.
If humors flow much, purge once in ten days, Also keep the Orifice open with
Gentian tents that it close not; Also after that make tents of linen washed in
a Buck and not in Soap, scrape lint of them, for tents wet them in fasting
spettle, then let them dry, and dip them in the Creames and powder before set
down.

Fistula or sore mouth, a Lotion.
TAke Guiacum iiij, Plantine, small Cranes bill, Comfrey, Knotgrasse,
Shepherds purse, Woodbine, and Briar leaves ana j M, boil all these in three
pintes of Smiths water till half be consumed, strain it in the liquor, and mix
it well, keep it to your use, if you will have it stronger, put thereto as
much burned Allom as two Nutmegs, use it always warm.

Face heat, the Cure.
1 FIrst, purge with Pillule aggregative j, then take Camphire j, prepared
Cinnamon ij, Brimstone, Ceruse, and Mastick ana ij all fine powdered, and
wrought up with oil of white Roses to a Cerote, anoint your face with a big
Pill made thereof as big as a Chestnut, ten nights together to bedward, in the
morning wipe it hard with a dry linen cloth, but wash it not all the ten
days, then wash it four mornings together with juice of Lemmons and
Buttermilk, the Lemmors sliced therein.

2 Also if you quilt bay salt fine powdered in a pair of linen Socks, and
wear it under your feet, it helps much, Abstain from salt meats, Spices,
meat brown roasted or fried, wine, strong drink, Onions, Garlike, or Mustard,
use in your Broaths Purslaine, Sorrel, and Violets, and all other cool herbs.

3 Or take a quart of sweet Cream, small Fern roots j M. cleansed and bruised
very small, boil them in the Cream till it come to a Salve, anoint the face.

Face to cleanse, a water that takes away all deformity.
TAke Pippins pared and coared, then sliced, Lemmons thin sliced, then take
pure Manchet, and crum it fine, put it in new milk, with all the other, and j
of Camphire thin shred, then distill all these in balneo, use this water as
you need it.

Face Moles to take away.
TAke the meal of Fengreeke, Honey, and Watercresses ana stamped, and
incorporate them together, make a plaster thereof, apply it to the Mole.

Falling sickness, the Cure.
TAke powder of the Mistletoe of the Oak, single Piony roots, the powder of
Man's scull dried hard in the fire ana j, Balm ij, Sage flowers, Rosemary
flowers, Marigold flowers ana ij, flowers of the line tree Lillies of the
valley ana iij, powder all these, and searse them, take iiij of this powder in
the warm Julip following every morning fasting: Take Cowslip water distilled j
lb, syrup of Cowslip iiij mixed together to the likeness of a Jelly. Also take
this syrup a day as occasion serves, roots of Piony, Mistell of the Oak ana
iiij, Cinnamon vj, Marigold flowers, Lilly of the valley, and Lavander flowers
ana M. red Rose leaves ij M. all gross bruised, and put in a vessel with a
narrow mouth, put thereto so much Aqua-vitae as will cover them four fingers
over, then stop it close, and put it in a balneo for four days, till it be
red in color, then strain it through an Hipograsse bag, then put to it
Sugarcandy powdered dj. lb, mix it well together, then put fire to it in the pot
as you burn Sack, and so let it burn to a syrup, then put out out the fire,
so take it; if he have any grief in the head, let him wear a Cap as follows.

Take Marjorum, Bettony, Balm, Rosemary, Stoechados ana dj M. red Rose leaves,
the rind of Citron ana iij, Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Cubbes, flowers of line
tree ana iiij, all gross powdered, and quilted with Cotton bombasse, covered
with Taffaty or Holland, make it in form of a Cap, and wear it on your head.

Face heat by humors flowing.
TAke Sorrel, Succory, Dandelion, and Sowthistle ana j M. the buds of young
Hops, Parsley roots ana vj, Fennel roots iij sliced and pithed, and boiled in
three Gallons of Alewort, put Yest to it, and drink it at four days old,
drink no other drink while it lasts.

Face very red pimpled, and Sans phlegm to cure.
POwder the liver of a Hare being well dried, drink of that powder in your
usual drink, but better in an Allom Posset-Ale, so much as will lie on a nine
pence first and last, morning and evening, probatum est by a Gentlewoman much
grieved with this Infirmity, and cured herewith.

Flux to stop.
1 MAke an Allom Posset, boiled in milk, drink of it first and last, it cures.
2 Or Make a Cake of Wheat flower, with the juice of Plantine and Comfrey, with
a little Alknet, bake it hard, sop it in good red Wine, with powder of
Cinnamon, eat the Sops, and drink the Wine; it cures.
Tents to make for Fistula's.
1 MIx the powder of green Copperas, and Bean meal ana, confect them
together with hard scraped French Soap in a Mortar tent therewith, it will
bring forth broken bones. 2 Or the powder of Euphorbium and Mastick ana mixed,
boil them in white Soap, when it cools make tents thereof, it consumes all
moystures.
Flesh to fret or eat away.
THe powder of Euphorbium will fret away flesh laid thereto.

For Fractures or Bruises, a Searecloath.
TAke Rozine and Wax ana iiij, Perosen ij, oil iiij, melt them hot together,
and add thereto the fine searced powder of Cummin, mix them well together,
then hot dip your Searcloath.

A strong Powder for Fistula or old Sores, apply it with Tents or otherwise.
TAke Auripigmentum, Verdigrease, gals, Salt Gem, salt Armoniack, Hearts horn
burned and powdered, the bones of a Hare burned, Man's dung burned, Egshells,
Oystershells, Muscleshels, all burned, Sanguis draconis, Tartar, Letharge of
gold, the shells of a water Crab burned, unslaked Lyme, Pepper white and black,
Ginger, Frankincense, Glass, Mastick, and an old Shoe all burned, and fine
powdered ana, then add thereto the powder of burnt Allom, as much as of all the
rest in weight, mix all well together, and apply it as before.

Fire wild, or St. Anthonies fire.
TAke the Lees of Claret or white wine, and the dreggs of Vinegar, the whites
and yolks of eggs well brayed and mixed together, and lay it to the grief.

Fistula's or foul Ulcers a Lotion.
Boil one quart of Spring water, Rosemary, Sage, Dazies, Dovefoote, wild
Tanzie, Egrimony, and Plantine ana j M, bruised Allom as much as a Walnut,
white wine Vinegar ten spoonefulls, English honey four spoonefulls, then
strain it hard, and put to the liquor so much powder of burned Vitrioll as
will color it like blood, use this with Seringe or Lotion.

For the Fistula a Potion used by the Ancients.
TAke Barley mundified, and the leaves of Celendine ana j, Centory, Egrimony,
and Plantine ana ij, Aristolochia longa iiij, the leaves of Olive, and Dropwort
ana ij, cut them all, then pound them, and boil them in white Wine with Sugar,
drink a draught of this Decoction every morning fasting one hour after.

F^lling-sicknesse, the Cure.
TAke the blood, livers, and hearts of Moales dried and powdered, give j of this
powder in Piony water, in the morning, fasting two hours after, use it six
mornings.

Fistula, a Tent.
MIx the powder of Hermodactills with French Soap, make a Tent.

Flesh dead to fret away.
LAy the powder of Hermodactills on the Sore, it will cleanse it.

The best Potion in the world to Cure the Fistula.
TAke twelve Cloves bruised, Pimpernell, Egrimony, Valerian, red Colewort,
Mouseare, wild Tanzie, Dovefoote, Strawberries, Plantine, red Madder, and
sharp Dock ana j M, bruise all these in a stone Mortar, boil them in two
quarts of Spring water sufficiently, then strain it ^ard out, put the liquor
to the fire again, ^dde thereto one quart of white Wine, ho^ey vj, let the
Patient drink thereof morning and evening first and last foy foureteen ^ayes;
this drink is of an incredible efficacy, for it clears all corruption from
the fistula in thirteen days, and broken bones. If the Patient vomit up this
Potion three days together at the first taking hereof, his Cure is to be
doubted; if he vomit not, no doubt of his health, in drinking thereof, put
Ginger thereto to allay the wind of the herbs.

For a Trush in a sucking Child's mouth, or any sore.
MAke a hole in the crown of a new laid egg, and take out all the meat, fill
the shell with Honey and burned Allom mixed, let it boil on the fire, still
stirring it with a Bodkin, then take it out, and dress the sore.

Foul festred Sores and Cankers.
TAke Ink, Auripigmentum, quick Brimstone, Salt Gem ana, dissolve them all in
Vinegar, and put them in an unglassed Pipkin, and close it well that the fume
go not forth, and burn it therein till all come to ashes, then powder it, and
wash the powder in Vinegar, or infuse it in Vinegar that is warm, and put
thereof presently on the Sore, as soon as it is quenched in the Vinegar, then
lay this ointment following thereon, viz. red Lead, the fat of a Goat, filings
of Copper, mix them, and make an Unguent thereof.

For fretting Sores, a Cure.
TAke oil of Radish roots and Salt, bray them together, and plai ster them on.

Flesh superfluous in wounds, or proud flesh.
LAy on the flesh the powder of Assa faetida, it takes it away, the ashes of
burnt wool does the same. Also the powder of wild Calamint or Scordium will
consume the proud flesh, and kill the worms.

G
Gowt, a Medicine.
TAke Mutton sewet untried iiij lb, the kidneys j lb dj. lb, green Bay leaves,
Wormwood, and Rue ana j lb, red Sage, and Mercury ana j M, let the herbs be
all ^reene gathered in the midst of May, and ^eat in a stone Mortar by little
at once as you may well, beat them small like greene^awce, then boil them in a
close Pipkin ^alfe an hour softly, add thereto Salletbyle j quart: let it
boil one walme, when it is near cold strain it hard, and put it in Gally
pots, and with this anoint the Gowt ^old, without heating it, then lay on this
Searcloath following, viz. Perosine dj lb, virgin Wax ij, melt them on the fire
in a Piokin, add thereto oil of Roses, and red Rose leaves powdered ana ij,
boil them all one walme, make your Searcloath, lay it on the Grief three
days, without removing.

Gowt, Medicine the King used.
1 TAke so many Raisins of the Sun stoned as will make a plaster for the
grief, pound them like mortar, then plaster there, if the Grief be extreme,
mi^ some Opium therewith, it will ease the pain. 2 Item, anoint the Grief
with oil o^ Wax, it eases much. 3 Item, the Gall of an Ox, and Aqua-vit^ ana,
as much oil of Exeter as all the other mixed together, and anoint the place
therewith warm, and wet a double cloth therein, and apply it thereto.
Gonorrhaea, a Pill that cures.
TAke Bolearmoniack, Turpentine washed in Plantine water, Mastick, Borax, dried
Eggeshells ana ij, Annifeeds, Dragons blood, red Corrall ana ij all pulverised
and searced, then compound them to a Mass for Pills, give thereof morning and
evening first and last ij Pills, drink often red Wine or Alegant.

Gonorrhaa or women's Whights.
TAke the powders of Sanguis draconis, Corrall, Cresses seeds, Alchenet, Acorn
cups, Terra sigillata, and Venice Turpentine all powdered ana iij, confect them
up with Triacle and ^^^serve of red Roses to ^ consistence, take thereof first
and last, morning and evening one or two drams till you be well.

Gonorrhaea, a Julip to strengthen the back.
TAke Capdates twelve, small Nuts five pints, stamp the kernels by themselves,
and the shells by themselves, take Brocklime, Nepe, Clary, Dazies, Dandelion,
and Plantine ana j M. the pith of an Ox back, the pizle and stones of a young
Ram, slit them, and make them clean, and boil them in five quarts of Alegant,
to the consumption of half, make it fit for your taste with Sugar, strain it,
and drink thereof first and last.

Gonorrhaea, Pills to cure it.
TAke Pearl and Comfrey roots dried, and powdered Corral, Amber ana iiij,
Bolearmoniack, bark of Guiacum, Terra sigillata, terra Lemnia ana iij, make
them up to a Mass for Pills with Venice Turpentine washed in Plantine water;
take of this seven Pills, as small as Cherry stones first and last, morning
and evening, fast three hours after in the morning.

Green sickness, the Cure.
1 TAke clarified honey one pint, Rue, red Sage ana j M, stamp them, and
strain out the juyces, mix them with the honey, stir them all together, then
boil them one walme, put to them a little powder of Pepper, drink every
morning hereof one spoonful dj. warm, and fast ij hours after, and last at
night the like. In the day eat Raisins of the Sun, and use some exercise
during the Cure, eat twice every day Pottage made of Water-Cresse and
Brocklime. 2 Sometime use this Almond milk, take Succory, Egrimony, Cardus,
French Wormwood, and yellow Dock roots ana, boil them in fair water, then
blanch bitter Almonds, take their milk and mix all together; this Decoction
drunk in the morning fasting cures. 3 Item, six bitter Almonds eaten in a
morning for one week, and fast one hour after, is good.
Item, your Ale must be reasonable in the Wort, whereof must be boiled
Egrimony, garden Wormwood, Costmary, Succory, and yellow Dock roots.

Green sickness, or any other grief, an Ale to drink in the Spring.
TAke Senna vj, Wormwood and Balm ana ij M, Anniseed and Fennel seed ana iij,
the juice of Scurvy grass iij pints, Watercresses, and Broke lime ana j pint,
let these be bruised and put in a thin linen bag, with a stone to sink it
into four Gallons of new Ale out of the Tun, so let it all work till it be
four days old, then drink thereof in the morning fasting dj. pint, if it
^urge not three or four Stools a day, then drink as much at night; use it
till you be well.

Gonorrhaea, all Fluxes of Blood whatsoever, and Women's Whights.
TAke of the four cold seeds husked, the seeds of white Poppy, of Mallows,
Quinces, Purslayne and Mirtles, Pine kernels, Gum Arabic, Gum Dragaant, white
Sugarcandy, Liquorice mundified, Penides, French Barley, Psilium, sweet Almonds
ana iiij, fine Bole, red Roses, Sanguis Draconis, Spodij, Mirrhe ana j, mix all
these being fine searced with so much Hydromill as will make it a Mass for
Trochis, make them all of the weight of dj a piece; when you use any of these,
dissolve one of them in six spoonefulls of very hot milk, if they grow so
hard that they will not dissolve, then grate or beat them in fine powder, and
put them in the milk; drink or eat this Dosse first and last, it cures in five
or six days: often proved, the body being before duly prepared.

Glysters to loose and fasten.
Boil a Sheeps head with the leaves of Hollyhocks, Mallows, and Mercury ana j
M, the seeds of Fennel and Parsley bruised, the roots of both pithed, Linseed,
all the seeds powdered, put in some Butter or oil, then strain out x thereof,
mix therewith Diaphenicon ij, or of Diacotholicon ij as the disease requires,
minister it no warmer then you may abide the bladder on your cheek.

Glyster for the wind Colic.
TAke Malmsey j pint, boil therein the seeds of Parsley and Fennel bruised ana
iij, mother of Thyme, Penyroyall, let them boil a good while, then put thereto
Ginger, Cummin, and Enula Campaine all bruised ana j, Sugar, Oil quod sufficit
for a Glister.

Gowt pain to ease quickly on warrantize.
STamp red Archangell in a Mortar with Vinegar, and bind it to the place
grieved, it will presently ease, if it do not, mix a little Opium therewith, it
fails not.

A Gargarizme to wash and cleanse a sore mouth.
TAke Plantin burned, Strawberry leaves, and Knotgrasse ana j M. Sorrel, and
Sage ana j M. red Rose leaves j M. dj. mix therewith long Pepper, Pellitory of
Spain ana j ij, boil them in a pottle of water to the consumption of half,
then strain it, put thereto honey of Roses i dj. and Oxymell Squilliticum; so
it is made.

Another good one.
TAke Hyera picra simplex iiij, Oximell Sillitticum ij, the distilled waters of
Hyssope, Bettony, and Organy j dj. mix them, and make your Gargarizme, minister
it warm to draw humors; but when you will stop them, use cold things in your
mouth as vinegar or Fountain water.

H
Head ache of Rhewme, the Cure.
TAke one Nutmeg, Cubebs, Piony seed, Setwell roots, Marjorum, Angelica roots
ana ij, dry all these, and powder them fine, and make them up with honey to a
Mass for Pills, whereof take every morning five small ones.

Item, fry fresh English Hops in Muscadine, and bind them as a Poultis very
warm to the Nape of the Neck, renew it as occasion serves; this helps.

Item, oil of Cloves to anoint the temple, is very good.

Item, two plasters of Flos unguentorum laid to the temples like Mastick
plasters, and on the Nape of the neck, helps.

Head beating or noise, to purge away by the nose.
PVt the juice of Beets, Bettony, Dazie roots, ground Jvie, or any of them put
in a Sawcer, and with a quill snuffed in the Nosthrill, let your mouth be full
of warm water, every time you do it, then drop two drops of oil of Amber
into your ears, be eating some Crust in your mouth when you do it, it will
enter the better.

Head ache, the Cure.
TAke oil of Roses, and oil of Camomile ana ii, wax ij, Rose vinegar six
drops, dissolve them on the fire, when it is cold anoint the temples therewith.

Item, if the pain be hot, add thereto oil of Violets, white Poppy,
unguentum Populeon ana ij, and ij d. of Camphire mixed.

Head, a Gargarizme.
TAke Bettony j M. Vinegar j pint, a little Cinnamon, as much Stavesacre, both
bruised, boil them together to the consumption of half, Gargarize with one
spoonful, thereof, but if the pain come from the stomach, boil the aforesaid
simples in good Gascon wine, and drink it with Cinnamon.

Or take Frankincense, Pigeons doung, Wheat flower ana j, temper them with the
white of an egg, and bind it to the aching place.

Humors from any place being settled.
TAke Bullocks Lights, and parboyle them, and then very hot, slit them, and lay
them to the place grieved, it will draw it away.

Hair to bring again.
TAke Bulls Tallow, honey, and oil of Tartar ana j, boil them together,
anoint the bald place therewith.

Hair to cause to fall or take away.
TAke bloudr suckers burned to ashes, mix the ashes with strong Vinegar,
washany hairy place therewith, it will fall away.

Or the blood of a Bat suffers no hair to grow.

For all diseases in head, as Megrom, Impostume, Dropsy, Fevers, Headache,
and corrupt stomach.
TAke the roots of Pellitory of Spain, Spiknard ana iiij powdered, Vinegar, and
Mustard mixed with the powders well together, keep it in a close Gally pot,
hold half a spoonefull thereof in the mouth a good while, and spet from him
the rhewme in a Basin as often as he needs, or for six days, then take this
powder for four days.

Take Galingale j, Nutmeg iij, Cloves and Cinnamon ana ij, Liquorice iiij,
Sugar ij all powdered, take thereof first and last in good liquor, the Dosse is
half a spoonful.

Hearing lost, to renew again.
TAke the Brine of Beef, the elder the better, boil it well, scum it clean
often, keep it in a Glass, take the clearest thereof, and wrap it warm to
the ears deaf.

Heat in the Body or Liver, a Iulip.
TAke pure French Barley ij M, boil it in a pottle of water, put therein
Raisins of the Sun, and Prunes ana j, Fennel and Parsley roots cleansed and
pithed ana j, Endive, Hearts tongue, Liverwort, Sowthistle, crops of Wormwood,
Mercury, Mallows ana iiij, boil them well together in a close Pipkin, then
strain it out hard, put the liquor to the fire again, and put to it red
Saunders powdered j, Sugar to sweeten it to a Julip what suffices, add to it
Musk three grains use the drink thereof warm.

Item, if you will have it more cooling, add thereto Violets, Lettice, Sorrel,
Borage, and Clivers the like quantity.

Dianthos, which helps all feebleness of the body, the Tissick, the grief
of the heart and liver after long sickness.
TAke Cloves, Galingale, Ginger, Spick, Nutmegs ana ij dj. Carraway, Annis,
Cardamonium ana ij, Liquorice, red Roses, Violets, and Rosemary flowers ana
iiij, honey cleansed, and Rosewater sufficient, let them be all fine searced,
then mix it with the honey and Rosewater, or simpred on the fire to a
confection, the Dosse is iij.

Head Megrome, or pain, the Cure on warrandize.
TAke gray Soap iiij, bray therein the whites of two Eggs, and put it in a
Box, when you use it, spread it on a double cloth, and lay it to the forehead
even to the ears, dress it twice a day for five days together, you shall
find ease at the first two dressings.

To cure any heat or Fever, a Iulip.
TAke Rosewater, or Violet water one pint, Sugar dj. lb, boil them together by
a soft fire, clarify it with the white of an egg, color it with red Sanders,
so strain it and use it.

Humors to stay that flows out, and will not be stayed.
TAke the waters of Endive, Sorrel, Lettice, and Vinegar, one pint of each,
boil them together by a soft fire with sufficient Sugar, drink thereof often.

Hemrods, a plaster to cure them.
TAke Lovage, and Rue powdered small mixed with honey, make a plaster and apply
it.

Head pains very old to cure.
TAke Gum Arabic, Myrrh, Saffron, and Euphorbium ana iij, bray them together
with the white of an egg well beaten, then applied plaister-wise on the
temples and forehead; this presently cures.

Hurts in the Seull.
TAke the juice of Pimpernell, and wet therein pieces of linen cloth, and
apply it oftentimes thereto, it will healeit quickly.

Head Megrome, pain, or wind.
PVt a lump of the best Mithridate in your mouth, as big as a good
Hazell-nut, there let it melt without champing, holding your breath as much as
you can, as it melts receive it into your stomach; this will ventose at the
ears, and presently ease the head.

I
Jaundies yellow, a sure and quick Cure.
1 TAke plantine water one pint, Jvory powdered ij, Saffron so much as will make
it yellow, boil them all two walms, then strain: drink a pretty draught
thereof warm first and last. 2 Or take the ashes of a Vine burned, lay them
thick on a board four square, devide them in nine equal parts, by making with
a knife three cuts one way, and three cuts another, then with the finger make a
deep print in every one of them, then fill every hole, or print with the
Patients own water, let it so stand nine days, adding thereto upon the Urine
in every hole three shives of Saffron undried; if you make nine cakes of the
nine heaps with the Patients water, and bake them, and then lay the Saffron as
aforesaid on every one of them for nine days, it cures. 3 Or take Sheeps
trickles new made, infuse them in a pint of Malmsie twenty four hours, and
one whole Burre root scraped, then strain it, and drink the Wine at three
draughts three mornings one after another, keep a good Diet; in the mean time
refrain all Eggs, fresh Beef, Goose, and Fish. 4 Or take Malmsie one pint,
Saffron, Honey one spoonefull, Broom flowers, stamped ana j M. infuse them in
the Malmsie, add the juice of Celendine a pretty quantity j M. of great
knotted earth-wormes black or yellow striped and washed, boil all these one
walme, then strain it forth, and drink thereof first and last.
Joints nummed, or nummed Palsy.
TAke red Sage and Hyssope ana, put them in two linen Baggs in strong Ale on a
Chafingdish of coals in a pewter dish, let them boil, then very hot apply the
Bags to the grief one after another for half an hour at once, use it every
day till the grief beasswaged, after so dressing with the bags anoint the
grief with the oil of earthwormes, oil of Peter, and oil of Spike ana, then
cover it warm with Furre till next day, so use it.

Joint ache, the Cure.
TAke Ox marrow and Sheeps sewet melted together ana j, Aqua-vitae ij, oil of
Tiles and sweet Almonds ana j, all mixed together very warm, anoint the grief
therewith morning and evening till it be well, after anointing apply a good
Searcloath thereto.

A Bath for the grieved joints before dressing.
TAke the inner bark of a young green Oak, red Sage, and Balm ana j M, boil
them all in strong Ale with j M of earth-wormes mundified, let them all boil
together two hours, bathe the joint therewith, warm ever before the other
dressing.

A Potion to drink during the Cure.
DRink first and last a good draught of warm Ale, Beer, or Wine boiled with
the roots of Cumfrey, Knotgrasse, Solomon's seed, Balm and Dazies ana j M. once
in the week in the morning in his bed drink a good draught thereof very hot
with j of Triacle Diatessaron mixed therewith, cover him warm, let him sweat
two hours.

Joint ache, the Cure.
1 MIngle Ox dung with Vinegar like a Poultis, apply it hot thereto, it swages
pain and draws out water. 2 Item, oil of Roses and Aqua-vitae (...) mixed
and warm anoint the grief therewith, then lay a linen cloth, wet in ^^negar
and water ana mixed, and dried on ^^^ry warm.
Joint numnesse and ache.
A Linen cloth wet in Dragon water, and applied very warm first and last
elpeth.

Item, drink six spoonefulls of Dragon water with j of Mithridate three
mornings together, and sweat every morning after it two hours; this cures.

Joint numnesse or ache, the Cure.
Boil in water and vinegar ana, town Cresses, Bettony, Mallow roots, and
white Willow leaves ana j M. till half be wasted, bathe the grief therewith
very hot by the fire half an hour, then bind the herbs thereto very hot for
xxiiij hours, so every xxiiij hours bathe it, and dress it till it be well.

Joint ache a medicine.
1 Boil dj. lb of Goose grease in a quart of Malmsey till it be black, and
therewith anoint the grief, if the pain remove, follow it till it be well,
then purge the humor offending.

Item, after the anointing apply the plaster of Diaculon simplex thereto.

2 Or take dj. lb of thin scraped Hartshorne, boil it in j lb of Linseed
oil, and a pottle of white wine till the salve be black, and the wine near
consumed, then strain it, and anoint it therewith warm.

3 Or cut Diaculon small, and melt it with oil of Roses, Mallows, oil of
Lillies and Camomile, boil it to a plaster, the first plaster must lie on
three days, the next two days, and the third one day, wipe the plaster twice
every day, warm it, and lay it on.

4 Or take great ground Mustardseed iij, Wine vinegar one pint, three
spoonefulls of Aqua-vitae, boil them to a plaster, put in the Aqua-vitae
last, let the other be in manner boiled first, apply the plaster hot to the
grief some three times, it cures.

5 Beat a Sheeps head, horns, bones, wool and all to pieces, boil it with
Mallows ij M. and Balm ij M. in water till the bones fall out, bathe the lame
member with it often till it be well.

For ache or swelling in joint or other parts.
STamp the seed of Mustard, Fengreeke, and Linseed ana j, Figs twelve all
together to a Pomace then boil them in oil and Aqua-vitae ana dj. pint to a
plaster, use it hot to the grief some four times.

Joint swollen with wind and water, to draw it out.
Boil in a pint of strong Beer dj. lb of strong black Soap, to the thickness
of a plaster, spread it on Leather and apply it, if it be too soft, put to it
in the boiling some Rozin, stir them well together.

Joint or Gowt swollen to mollify and ease.
Boil the seeds of Cummin, and Fengreeke ana j, Raisins of the Sun stoned dj
lb all together in fresh Butter from the Churne in May, oil of Rue, and oil
of Roses ana to a plaster, apply it hot.

Item, Rue, Wormwood, and Roses boiled in white wine with Mutton sewet to a
Poultis, and some Bean meal applied hot, helps all swellings, specially in
the Cods.

Item, strong Ale and good Soap boiled together to a thick Salve, spread on
leather and applied hot, helps all aches. Boil in Malmsie, and Wine vinegar
ana, Deeres and Goats dung ana, powdered to the hight of a plaster, lay it on
very hot, renew it every four and twenty hours, till you be well, which will
be some four times.

Item, May Butter and Wax ana boiled together with a little Aqua-vitae, dip
double clothes therein, and lay it to the grief very hot, it draws out the
water and swages the swelling.

A special unguent for Aches, Sciatica, or any other pain.
TAke Ox gall, Aqua-vitae, Oil, and the fresh young tops of Rosemary, let them
simper on the fire, close covered, till the rosemary be very soft, then grind
them all together in a Mortar to a salve, anoint the grief therewith by a good
fire very hot, then cool it with the clothes dipd in Butter and Wax aforesaid
and lap it up warm in furre or Cotton till the pain be gone.

To help any shrunck Sinews, or Ache hard in them.
MElt together Oil of Roses, iiij. Spermaceti j, anoint the stiff and lame
sinews therewith warm till it be well, twice a day, then plaster on the
clothes wet in Butter, Wax, and Aqua-vitae.

Impostume in the head to break and is good for headache and the hearing.
Boil in a quart of white Wine, Rosemary, with the flowers. Rice,
Pennie-royal, Winter-savory, and Camomile-flowers, j M. in a pot close stopped,
set a funnill on the top of the pot that all the vapor may go into the ear,
be champing in your mouth a Crust all the while, it will go into your head the
better, use it four mornings together, ever new warming, it will be well.

Impostume outward to heal in any part.
TAke Hollyhocke roots clean washed, boil it in water, till it be tender,
then power out the water, then take Fengreek and Linseed bruised, boil them in
the same water till they rope like Bird-lime, then stamp the foresaid roots
and put it all well together to a plaster, and lay it to very hot, within nine
days (God willing) he will be well.

Impostume to bring to matter or Suppuration.
TAke the yolks of Eggs j, white Salt, powdered Hens dung liquid like honey, mix
them together, without fire lay the plaster on morning and evening warm, it
will digest it, draw it forth, break it, and heal it.

Impostume in the the body to destroy.
VVAsh Tansy j M. Maiden-haire, flowers that grows in the wheat j M. bruise
them alone, take of either of their juyces j spoonefull, mix them with iij. of
Camomile water distilled, drink thereof very early every morning a pretty
draught warm; this purges the disease downward without pain, but in your
ordinary broth eat of the powder of Maiden hair thrice every day.

Item. The roots of Scabius dj. lb. stampd add thereto some powder of Coral mix
them well together, and drink thereof a draught in Camomile water, the
Impostume will break and be spet forth.

Impostume an Attractive to draw it forth.
TAke three great Onyons, two Lilly roots, Rye leaves j M. Mallow roots, then
boil all these in running water till they be soft, then strain them from the
liquor, and stamp them with Hog's Grease and black soap ana. j. fry them
together till they be thick with a little wheatflower, make a Poultis thereof,
lay it to the sore as hot as you can suffer it.

Joint ache the cure.
MAke a posset of Varges, or Vinigar and Milk, bath the joint very hot
therewith, apply the Cure as a Poultis very hot all night and after apply
thereto double Clothes wet therein very hot till you be well.

An Incarnative to cover a naked bone with flesh.
Boil in Vinigar, Oil of roses and Ireos roots powdered, then strain it and
put thereto honey of Roses, apply it to the grief, it will cover the bone.

Ipocras to make at all times with Wine, Ale, or Beer.
TAke Cinnamon vj. Ginger ij. Cloves, Nutmegs, ana j. Mace, Calamus Aromaticus
ana ij, and slice the Calamus, then put them in a quart of Aqua-vitae in a
glass of three pints close stopped with Wax xij days, shake it every day, so
keep it when you will use it to make Hipocras, take one pint of what you will,
make it sweet with Sugar, then take two or three spoonfulls of your compound
liquor to it, and bring it well together, and drink it.

Itch to kill.
Mortify Quicksilver with fasting spettle in a Vyall, mix it with so much Hogs
grease as will make it blackish, therewith anoint the palms of the hands, and
the soles of the feet till he be well, at night to bedward: in the morning wash
it with this water, viz. take Endive water and vinegar ana, Roche Allom, powder
of Enula Campane, boil them together, wash the itch or scurfe therewith; this
will destroy it, and kill the fluxion of blood.

Incision by a blister to make.
TAke Cantharides, Euphorbium, and black Soap, mix it, and apply it.

Item, Crowfoot bruised does the like. Also Garlike does the same.

Item, the inner bark of a Walnut tree does raise blisters, and being bruised
and infused in wine vinegar, it is strong.

Issues out of the body or members to stop.
TAke the waters of Endive, Sorrel and Vinegar ana, boil them with Sugar to a
Julip, and take it.

Impostume in the head that runs out at the ears.
Boil oil Olive on a Chafingdish of coals, put thereto two Cloves of Garlic
bruised, boil it therein, then strain it, and drop thereof warm into the
ears, and stop them with black wool.

Incision to make, and take out the Coare.
POwder Rose Alger fine, mix it with Hog's Grease, and lay it on so broad as
you would have the Coare come forth.

Impostumes to ripen and maturate.
Boil the roots of Mallows and Lillies in water tender, stamp them with fresh
Hogs grease, and meal of Linseed therewith, and apply it hot.

Joint ache benumbed or swelling an approved Bath.
TAke one gallon of Lie made of wood ashes, boil therein Sage, Rosemary,
Mallows, Wormwood, Bay leaves, Saint John's Wort ana j M. Annis and Cummin
seeds bruised ana j, Linseed oil dj. pint, bathe the lame member therewith as
hot as you can suffer it, till the Bath wax cold, use it till you be well.

Jaundies black and yellow, the cure.
TAke earth worms, wash them in 4 or 5 waters very clean, strip the^ every time
with your fingers all the earth out, then stamp them very small, put stale Ale
unto them, and strain them hard out, and drink it with Saffron, it cures at
thrice taking.

K
Kibes, the Cure.
ROast a Turnip, cut it asunder in the middle, lay the one half very hot to
the grief, renew it till it be well.

Item, make Brine of water and salt, bathe the Kibe with the clearest thereof
cold.

Item, melt Galbanum, Gum Dragagant, and Ox tallow together, and apply it.

Kidneys wasted, the Cure.
TAke and boil round Plantine well in white wine, then make a Posset with the
wine, then take the powder of Elder berries dried in an oven, that they touch
not one another; take as much of it as will lie on a groat, and put it in a
draught of the clear warm Posset-Ale, if the Kidneys be wasted, you may
know, for the Patients urine will be thick and bloody, drink hereof first and
last, it cures.

Kidneys ulcerated and is approved good, to mollify and cure them.
TAke Hollyhocks, and Mallow roots ana j M. fresh Eigs i, the Marrow of Veale
bones, Butter and Ducks grease ana iij, oil of sweet Almonds, and Camomile ana
j dj. Camomile and Balm flowers ana j, Barley and Wheat meal quod sufficit, to
make a plaster, compound all these together to pap, this you may do with all
Impostumes, apply it to the Kidneys on the back, use it till you be well.

Kibes or Blood-falls in the feet, to cure.
TAke Bay salt and a raw Turnip, ana in water, stamp them together that your
Salt be very small, then make it up in a (...), and lay it on a pewter dish
whelming on the one side, put that dish in another dish to receive the liquor
that runs from the Salt and the Turnip, and therewith anoint the Kibe or
Blood-fall till it be well.

L
Liver heat, the cure.
TAke Liverwort, Mayden-haire, Hearts tongue, Scabius, Strawberry leaves ana ij
M. Egrimony, and Hop buds ana dj. M boil all these in a gallon of good Wort to
the consumption of one quart, then strain it, and put it to the fire again
with the white of an egg, and one spoonefull of pure honey, let it boil
again, then with a spoone scum off the white of an egg, and put in it some
Sugarcandy, use to drink thereof every morning fasting till you be well.

Liver distempered, a plaster.
TAke oil of Roses ij, Wax iij, unguentum Populion dj., melt them together on
the fire well mixed, then take it off the fire, put it in a Mortar, add
thereto red Sanders steeped in Rosewater j spoonefull, and Camphire prepared j,
work all these well together with a pestle till they be well mixed, when it is
cold make a plaster thereof, and lay it on the right side against the liver,
use it till you be well.

Linseed oil to purify or prepare for medicine.
TAke fresh Oyster-shells wiped clean, and small powdered, put that powder into
the oil, it will draw out all the filth from the oil to the bottom, then
power out the clear oil from the corruption.

Lapis infernalis to make Insition or Issue, and Corrodates an Impostume.
TAke unslak'd Lime, Vine, and Willow ashes, Orgale burned, Salt-Peeter,
Mercury, Sublimate, Auripigmentum and Copperas ana all fine powdered, then put
them into a new red Pipkin, put thereto of the strongest Sope-makers Lie as
will cover them, so let it stand covered to infuse for three days, then filter
it clear, or draine the lie clean off, then boil it in a Pipkin close
covered, and power all the substance on a board to dry, then frame or cut your
stones to the bigness, fit for your purpose, when you would eat a hole with
one of them, make a fit hole in the midst of a plaster right against the place
you will open, lay your stone in the hole, and clap another plaster upon it to
keep it on, till you have your issue or hole therein.

Legs swollen, the cure.
Boil the juice of Walwort, Wax, Vinegar, and Barley meal to a plaster, apply
it hot, use it as you see cause.

Livers inflammation a Julip, or a ptisan for it.
TAke three quarts of Spring water, and husked Barley j M. boil them together a
good while, then put therein Violets, Lettice, Hearts tongue, Liverwort,
Sorrel, and Borage ana j M. Raisins of the Sun stoned, Prunes ana ij, when
they be well, so put in some Sanders, strain it and drink it warm.

Item, the Conserves of Barberries, Cherries Prunes, or Roses, or any of them
are good.

Another to cool the inflammation of the Liver.
TAke syrup of vinegar, simple, Endive water, Succory water, mix them together
with Sugar, and drink it.

Liver all griefs the cure.
TAke Endive water, Fumitory, and Seabius waters ana j lb, the syrups of
Vinegar simple, of Fumitory and Violets ana ij, Succa rosarum, Confectio
hamechana j, mix it, and put them in a Vyall, take thereof first and last at
once j or more if need be.

Liver and Milt oppilation, the cure.
Boil Smallage, and Elder, in Wine, and drink it often, it helps.

Item, the Potion taken warm with a ^ew Radish seeds, causes vomit also.

Lethargy or Epilepsie, the cure.
MAke an Electuary two parts of Lign. Aloes, and Cassia ligna, and the third
part of Euphorbium ana, Cardium, confect these with honey, and give the Patient
j at once, in the morning, at two of the clock in the after noone, and last at
night in Balm water.

Liver and Milt oppilation, the cure.
Boil Jvie and Hipericon in wine, and drink it often, it cures.

Lice and scabs in childrens heads, the cure.
TAke red Sage, chop it small, and boil it in fresh Butter, with some Peppe^
powdered, let it boil together, then strain^ it, and anoint their heads
therewith cold.

Leprosy, or Leper, the cure.
TAke Mercury, Sothernwood, Oridon^ Calimint, Rue ana j M. the juice of Beets
iiij, Annis, Fennel, and Cummin^ seed, and Rue ana j, oil of Bay ij, make
your Decoction, and therein dissolve Hiera^ picra j, make a Glyster, and
minister it, and anoint the belly with oil of Rue. Then digest the matter with
Oxymel Squilliticum, with the Decoction of Asarabecca, and Valerian, putting
thereto Diagalanga Diapenth ana iiij, mix them all together.

A Purgation for the matter digested.
TAke Benedicta laxativa, Hiera picra ana ij, Euphorbium, Spicknard, Mastick
ana two grains, make it up in Pills, let the Euphorbium be very gross
beaten, and tempered a day and night in Vinegar or juice of Orenges, and oil
of sweet Almonds.

Lethargy, the cure, and first the unguent.
TAke the uyce of Purslaine, white Vinegar, oil of Roses, an Wax quod
sufficit, to make an unguent, therewith anoint the hinder part of the head.

A Glyster for the same.
DIssolve in your common Decoction for Glysters Benedicta Laxativa ij, and use
it as need requires, then rub the extreme parts with salt water and Vinegar,
or with falt and vinegar strongly, use this every day for three days together,
after that anoint the hinder part of the head with this following ointment.

The Ointment.
TAke the juyces of Smallage, Rue, and Castor fine powdered ana ij, Wax and Oil
quod sufficit, and continually smell to Assa foetida and Galbanum.

Lastly, use Ruptories which must be laid to the hinder part of the head as
follows.

Take Mustardseed, dry Figs ana j, Cantharides j, incorporate these together
with strong vinegar, and apply it.

Lungs Impostume, the cure.
FIrst, let blood on the vein Basilica, on the right arm, the next day open
the same vein on the left arm, then use this following.

Take the syrups of Maydenhaire, and Endive ana dj. lb, of Succory, the four
cold seeds ana ij, Liouorice and Barley mundified, Raifins stoned ana iiij,
honey iiij, Sugar j lb, make your syrup according to Art, anoint the Patients
breast with this unguent, viz.

Take Fennel seeds bruised, Linseed bruised, and leaves of March Mallows, the
leaves of Bear foot, boil them well together in water, then stamp them, add
thereto in the stamping Butter unsalted, and fresh Swines grease, make your
ointment, use a good diet, with bread and broaths, made with Barley or Oatmeale,
and Almond milk, Chicken-broath, wherein the four cold seeds be sodden.

M
Mad dogs biting, the cure.
TAke powder of Crafish shells i, drink it in Dragon water with Mithridate j,
and apply to the sore the same powder mixed with Garlic bruised.

Meagrome in the head Impostume, Fever, and all head aches.
TAke of the roots of Pellitory of Spain j, Spicknard dj. beat them together,
and boil them in good Vinegar, then let them cool put thereto honey and
Mustard ana a sawcerfull, mix them well together, let the Patient put half a
spoonefull thereof in his mouth, and hold it there a good while, then spet it
forth, renew it so twelve times, when you go to bed drink a little down, use
this three days, and you shall be well.

Menstruous to provoke.
TAke so much of the powder of Aristolochia rotunda, Myrrh and Savine mixed
ana as will lie on a shilling in warm white wine, add thereto one race of
Ginger grated.

Menstruous, to stop the much flowing.
TAke the shells of a new laid egg, the inner skin pilled off, boil it in
water one hour, then dry it and beat it to fine powder, drink that powder at
twice in red wine warm, at every drinking go to the newest Moale casting, put
away the earth with her foot, and sit down and make water in the Moale hole,
use his till you be well, during this cure let her eat Ising less.

Morphew to cure.
TAke the juice of Orpinis mixed with strong vinegar, and many times anoint the
same.

Morphew, a Lotion.
TAke one spoonful of Mustard, Celendine, and wild Tanzie ana j M, stamp them
till they be thick like green sauce, then power to them strong wine Vinegar
sour spoonfulls, mix them well together, then strain the liquor hard out, and
therewith often bathe the grief till it be well.

Mother suffocation the cure.
TAke the leaf of the great Burre, lay it on the crown of the head, and lay
upon that a hard roasted egg crushed thereon, bind them fast on with warm
clothes, first shave the crown of the head.

Item, take the powders of Harts-home, Jvory, the hairs of a Hares skin, the
claws of a Sheep or Goats burned to powder, take of these powders in your
Broth.

Mother, the pain in a woman's body.
TAke Motherwort, Germander, Hyssop, Diptony, Thyme, Violets, and Marigolds ana
j M, boil them in ordinary Ale, scum it clean when it is half sodden, put to
it dj. pint of Bastard, and strain it, drink thereof warm morn and evening.

Maturative to bring an Impostume to suppuration.
TAke the juice of Smallage, honey, flower of Wheat, and yolks of eggs mixed
together, and applied.

Maturative, another.
TAke juyces of Dazies, Plantine, and Smallage ana, put thereto honey
clarified, stir them on the fire together, and thick it with Wheat meal,
when it is almost cold put to the yolks of three eggs, mix them and lay it on
with lint; this is also good for women's breasts swollen.

Milt oppilation, the cure.
TAke the juice of Docks with Storax liquid, and gum Armoniack, and Vinegar
infuse them three days, then boil them and strain them, add thereto Wax and
Oil, make a plaster thereof, and apply it to the grief.

Item, boil the Dock in wine or water, drink it, it will cure.

Morphew spots, or marks in the skin, to cure presently.
TAke the flower of Brimstone j, infuse it all night in strong wine vinegar
six spoonfulls, mix them well together, therewith anoint the spote, or wet
them well, and put linen clothes double, and wet therein, and apply them till
it be well.

Mouth sore, or sore gums, and to fasten loose teeth.
TAke Rose mary, burned Allom ana both powdered, a little white Salt, boil them
in water with English honey, therewith dress the mouth.

Mouth sore, or any other part, a Lotion most excellent.
TAke Celendine, red Sage, and Honeysuckle leaves, and flower ana three
handfulls, pure English honey one quart, Roche Allom j lb iiij small beaten,
grains of Paradise j, gross beaten or bruised, boil all these in one gallon
of Spring water in a close covered P pkin, from a gallon to a pottle, then
strain it, and put it up in Vyals, it is good to sun it six days, this
Lotion cures any sore being washed therewith.

Morphew or spots in the skin or in any part.
TAke oil of eggs what quantity you please, temper them with a good quantity
of Letharge of silver bruised, and anoint the spots therewith.

Item, the oils of Juniper and bitter Almonds mixed and anoint therewith. Item
take Hellebore ij, stamp it to pap, and mix therewith as much juice of
Egrimony, and a little Rose water, anonyt therewith the spots. Item, Camphire
powdered with two bitter Almonds then temper it with Rosewater, anoint. Item, in
using any of these medicines, eat morn and even syrup of Fumitory, and ^urge
with Confectio hameck. Item, let his drink be morn and even Fumitory and
Centory in Claret wine, boiled with a little powder of Jvory.
N
Nerve oil to make for all aches and bruises.
TAke Camomile, white Archangell, Plantaine, young Wormwood, Mints, Walnut
tree leaves, Sage, Violet leaves, Mallows, Rue, Chickweed, Brocklime,
Watercresses, Sothernwood, Smallage, and young Bay leaves ana j M. bru se them
all in in a Mortar then boil them in a pint of white wine close covered, till
the wine be near wasted, then add thereto Hogs grease and Dear swet and j
lb, Linseed oil, and Neats foot oil ana one pint, Rozin powdered six,
Galbanum prepared two, boil all these on a soft fire close covered, till the
unguent be green, then strain it out, and presently as it is hot, mix
therewith liquid Storax, and oil of Spicke ana one, mix it till it be cold.

Item, if it be for beasts, leave out the Storax and oil of Spick, and in
their stead put in their weight of Soap, you must make it in the midst of May.

Noli me tangere, to cure and cool.
TAke Stubwort and stamp it, and temper it with honey, make a plaster of it,
lay it cold on the sore, within four plasters it will mortify the grief.

Neck botches or other place, the cure.
TAke Dogs tongue, shred it, and stamp it small, boil it in Malmsie till it be
thick, then mix therewith the Melilot plaster, and plaster it to the grief,
it will dissolve and heal it without breaking.

Neck and cheeks swollen, the cure.
TAke the fine powder of Cummin seed dj. lb, Figs cut small, boil them
together in white Wine till it be thick, then mix therewith four spoonfulls of
Bean meal, make a plaster thereof, lay it to the swelling, ^^ continue till
it be well.

Nose ulters to cure.
TAke small Hollyhock, Plantine, and Shepherds purse their juyces ana j, the
white of two eggs, Camphire small bruited iiij, burned Allom, Coral, Amber ana
(...), Starch j dj. bruise all these together ^n a Leaden mortar some hours
together, use this four times every day till it be well.

Or take the juyces of Hazell leaves j, and Bettony iiij mixed, and with a
quill drawn up into the nose diverse times in the day, is likewise good.

Item, let the Patient purge with Pillulae cochiae, or Hierae picrae, or such
like.

O
Oil of Swallows to make.
TAke ten young Swallows, put them quick in a Mortar, put to them Lavander
Cotton, Spike, Camomile, Knotgrasse, Ribwort, Balm, Valerian, Rosemary tops,
Woodbine tops, strings of Vines, French Mallows, tops of Alchow strings, of
Strawheries, Tut^anie, Plantain^ Walnut leaves, tops of young Bays, Hy^^ sop,
Violet leaves, and Sage, Roman Wormwood ana j M. Camomile, and re^^ Roses ij
M. of each, stamp all these together, put to it one quart of Neats-foot oil,
or May Butter, Cloves fine powdered j, put all these in a new red Pipkin close
stopped, and laid for nine days in a Cellar under ground, then boil them in
Balneo six hours, add thereto Wax dj. lb, and one pint of Sallet oil.

Oil of Saint John's Wort, to make of the best.
TAke j lb of the flowers and leaves of St John's Wort, put them in a broad
Vial, with so much white wine as will cover the herbs, set them in the Sun
ten days, then put thereto Sallet oil ij. lb, let them stand in the Sun
other ten days, put thereto of Venice Turpentine iiij, Saffron powdered j,
Nutmegs, Cloves, and elect Myrrh ana iiij, Frankincense powdered j, put them in
a great bottle close stopped, let them boil in Balneo till no more vapors will
ascend into the head, which will be some 24 hours, then take it forth, and
strain it while it is ^^^t, put it in a glass close stopped, so is it ^^^de
up; this oil must be used always ^^arme, tent no wound therewith, but dress
^^^em all with clothes wet therein, and ^^^d thereon, so it heales best and
quickliest.

Another oil of Saint John's Wort for aches and bruises.
TAke Sallet oil one pint in a Vial, put thereto of Saint John's Wort flowers
^eaten ij M. of the leaves of red Rose buds, ^he white ends cut off, the
flowers or tops ^^f Rosemary and Camomile flowers ana (...) M. set the Vial in
the Sun till the oil ^e blood red, put thereto the powder of Alkanet iiij,
so it is made.

Oil of Snayles for any ache to make.
TAke in May black Snayles one pint, put them in a great Ox bladder, with one
pint of Aqua-vitae, and the substance of all the Ox gall let run into the
bladder to the rest, oil of Peeter ij, oil of Spick ij, tie the bladder fast,
and put into another great bladder, and hang it up fast tied for twenty days,
where no Rats nor Mice may co^^ then strain it, and keep it to your use, p^^^
with it liquid Storax j, it gives a good smell, and is also good.

Ointment to expel wind, pain in the back stone in the kidneys, Sciatica,
or any ache, anoint the place warm, being first rubbed with a dry cloth.
TAke an Ox gall, slit in the bottom, let it run out into a Pipkin, add
thereto Neatsfoot oil j lb, ground Jvie, Rue, Camomile, and Thyme ana j M,
pound them in a Mortar together, add thereto Aquavitae j, boil them all at a
soft fire three quarters of an hour, stir it often in the boiling, then
strain it, and so is it made.

Oil of Eggs to make.
TAke the yolks of thirty Eggs, sodden very hard, put away the whites, then put
the yolks in a Mortar, beat them small, then put them in a broad Pipkin, cover
them with a round Trencher, with a hole in the top, and with a rolling pin
through the hole still stirring them as they boil, till ^^ey be all turned
soft, then strain out the ^^llow yolk.

Oil of Bever-cod, good for pain in sinews and joints, Palsy and stiffness
of the neck, it allayes the cold of Agues if you anoint the backbone therewith.
TAke Bever-cod j, Euphorbium iij, Myrrh ij, strong white wine viij,
Sallet-oyle xij, let them boil close overed till the wine be clean spent,
then train it, and keep it to your use.

Oil of Camomile is good to open the pores, and sweatevents, it expells
vapors, and is good for pain, in sinews, joints, and guts.
TAke sweet Camomile flowers, as much as you will, put it in a preserving
glass, and cover it with sweet oil, then stop it, and set it in the Sun
fourteen days, afterward boil it in a Balneo, then strain out the
Camomile, and renew the oil with fresh flowers so often til it be erfect in
(...) and color, then use it as aforesaid.

Oil of Dill asswageth all pain, opens the pores^ consumes wind, and all hard
swelling, it taken away all shaking of Agues, causes sleep^ eases the pain of
the head in hot Agues, i^ you anoint the back bone therewith.
THis oil is made of the herb and fowers, as you make oil of Camomile, with
old oil.

Oil of Lillies heals all pain of cold in breast, reins, bladder, matrix,
and guts it digesteth and asswageth the Cough, ripens all Impostumes, dries
all foul sores in the head, diminishes all sweatings if you mix Saffron
therewith.
TAke the white leaves of Lillies, and prepare the oil as aforesaid.

Oil of Wax to make.
MElt j lb of Wax small chopped, mix therewith some ij lb of well burned Bricks
small powdered, or as much as will serve to work it up like soft paste, then put
it all up in an earthen pot, to distill with a glass lying along according to
Art.

Opiats to procure sleep in a melancholy madness.
FIrst, let the Patients hands and feet be washed with a Decoction of Dill,
Camomile, Lettice, Poppy, Mallows, and Willow leaves, and after anoint them
with oil of Poppy-feed by expression, or let him smell to this Opiat following.

Take i of Mithridate, five grains of Opium, three of Saffron, with one
spoonefull of Malmsie, and two grains of Camphire, put all into a Lemmon Pill
emptied of the juice, and smell thereto often about your hour ordinary to
sleep. If this fail, swallow twenty grains of Moglosse, or take dj. of
Philonium to bed, or some other wholesome Opiat going to bed well corrected.

P
Palsy, the cure.
TAke Cowslip flowers, or roots, red Mints Lavander, and Sothernwood ana j M.
stamp them small, and boil them in strong Ale one pint, put to it Bay salt j
dj. when your liquor is half wasted, take out the herbs and stamp them
again, then put thereto as much good Mustard as half your herbs, thereof
make a plaster. If the disease be in the tongue, lay it to the Nape of the
Neck. If in the jaws toward the ears or cheeks, if in the hand to the pulse,
and let it lie 12 hours, wash your hands where Sage has been.

Another by Potion.
TAke the distilled water of Sage iiij, Bettony water one spoonful, Triacle of
Venice, Conserve of Sage and Bettony ana dj., Conserve of Cowslips dj, and
Carduus water iiij, Chymicall oil of Nutmegs vj drops, powder of Castor dj.,
and Sugar quod sufficit, take four spoonefulls thereof first and last, or at
any time with the use of the foresaid plaster.

Palsy, Gowt, Cramp, Convulsion, Sciatica, old aches and Contractions.
TAke oil of Turpentine j lb, Venice Turpentine dj. lb, oil of Bays iiij,
oil of Spick j, Juniper berries dj. lb, Castor j, Euforbium ij, Cloves, Mace,
Nutmegs, and Cinnamon ana j, Lavander flowers, Sage, and Lillies of the Valley
ana j M. Mastick, Myrrh, Frankincense ana ij, Brocks grease iij, Mummy j dj.
digest them for one month in horse dung, then distill them, and anoint the
grief therewith.

Plague, an Antidote.
TAke Setwell roots, Calamus Aromaticus, Bole Armoniack, Tormentill roots ana
j, Sanguis Draconis, and terra Sigillata ana ij fine powdered, mix them all with
dj. lb of Triacle, so take it.

Piles the cure.
TAke burned Muscle-shells fine powdered, mix it with Honey and Saffron, anoint
your Piles therewith.

Item, boil in fresh Butter Pilwort, Elder leaves or buds till it be a Salve,
make it yellow with a little Saffron, anoint therewith.

Item, take Aniseeds burned, and powdered Honey, and Saffron, mix them well
together, make a plaster thereof, and apply it, first wash it in white Wine
wherein Scabius has boiled.

Plague, an Antidote.
TAke pure Triacle j lb dj. put it in a Gally pot, put to it Myrrh,
Bay Berries husked, Aristolochia rotunda, Gentian, Jvory, and Hartshorne ana
iiij, all fine searced and mixed with long Pepper, Annis, Carroway, and
Fennell-seeds ana iiij, stirring them with a Spatula in the pot of Triacle, the
Dosle is j alone, or with a Posset-Ale mixed.

Plague, a Defensive.
TAke Rue, Elder leaves, Sinkfoyle, or Tormentill, red Sage, red Bramble
leaves, Sorrel, Marigold leaves, and Angelica ana j M. stamp them all in a
Mortar, then put to them white Wine one quart, Wine vinegar dj. pint, white
Ginger powdered iiij, let it so stand in a Pot close stopped twenty four
hours, then strain it hard forth; let the elder people take every morning two
spoonfulls, fast two hours after, and children one spoonful, use it nine
mornings.

Plague to prevent and cure.
TAke Cinnamon j, Terra sigillata vj, Myrrh iij, feeds and rinds of Cytrons,
roots of Dittany, Burnet, Tormentill, Zeduary, and Coral ana ij, Unicorns
horn dj. yellow Saunders and red ana j, white Bean and Marigold flowers ana
j, Scabius Veroniack, Basil seed, bone of a Stags heart, and Saffron ana ij,
Sugar iij lb, then with the vinegar of Cytrons make an Electuary, the Dosse is
every morning j; this prevents infection, if one be infected with cold take it
in Wine, if with heat in Rosewater and Vinegar, and sweat two hours after.

Plague sore to ripen and bring forth.
TAke a great white Onion pilled and cut in pieces, fresh Butter iij, leaven j,
Mallows, and Scabius ana dj M. if you want the herbs, take Garlic j, boil
them soft to a Poultis, apply it very warm.

Polypus a grief in the nose.
TAke the leaves and branches of Buckwheat, distill it in Balneo, the water
thereof is perfect good to stay the spreading of the Canker, although thought
uncurable, then with the Magistrall oil heal it up.

Pox small, the cure.
LEt the Patient sweat first, then give him Mithridate iij grains, or as much
Saffron, any of these expells them, then when they are come to a scab, and full
ripe, that is, when they look yellow, then take a piece of fat Bacon, roast
it, let it drop in fair water; then take the droppings, and wash it again in
three several waters, and wash it at last once in Rosewater, then with this
fat anoint your face four times every day, this will defend the face from any
deformity.

For want hereof, anoint the face with oil of Roses iiij, and Spermaceti j
mixed.

Pleurisy or Stitch the cure.
MElt Dialthea ij, mix it with oil of sweet Almonds iiij, warm it, and anoint
the grief, then sprinkle on the place the powder of Cummin searced iiij, then
warm a Colewort leaf, and anoint it with fresh Butter, and lay it hot to the
place, bind it fast on.

But the surest way is, to let blood presently, and purge next day.

French Pox, the cure.
MAke a Pill of Sarsa, of Turbith mineral fine powdered, and mixed with
Mithridate, let him keep his Chamber the first six days, sweat as he is able,
and drink for that six days nothing but Posset-Ale.

Pox great, the soonest cure.
TAke Guiacum, from the Turners the thinnest chips j, of the bark of Guiacum
iiij, infuse them four and twenty hours in a Diet pot with pure water eight
quarts, the next day boil it soft simpering to the consumption of three
quarts, drink off this warm morning and evening a good draught, first strain
it from the, wood, then put the pot with the wood to the fire with eight quarts
of water again to boil, till two quarts be wasted, then strain it ou^, let
it be his usual drink at meals, and all day to drink cold.

Let him every second day drink a great draught of the strongest first, drink
very hot, and sweat two hours after in bed, and dry it with fresh linen, and
change his shirt, use this till all scabs, aches, etc. be gone, for till then
he is not sound.

His Diet.
EAt of the stalest white Bread or Biscuit, and some of the blewest Raisins of
the Sun for Breakfast and Supper, his Dinner must be a neck of Mutton, very
dry roasted, but once basted, or a Chickin or Rabbet dry roasted.

Item, before he enters his Diet, he must purge twice, and let blood once, and
once a week purge during his Diet.

Item, the first fourteen days let him keep his Chamber.

Item, let him always purge with ten grains of dulcified Mercury given in a
Pill of Mithridate.

Purgations to prepare.
TAke Zenna, Turbith, Diagredij ana iij, Epithimum, Galingale, ana j dj. Annis,
Cinnamon, Ginger ana j, salt Gem six grains, all fine searced and mixed, the
Doss is j in Dia prunis or Posset-Ale.

A Purgation which purges all Aqueous humors.
TAke Rewbarb, Turbith Hermodact ll^ Diagredij, Senna, Ag^rick, Mechoac^^ Sugar
ana ij, Cloves, Fennel, Ginger, Annis, Mastick, ana j, Saffron and Cinnamon
ana ij, pulverize and searce all these the Dosse is j in Succory water or
Posset Ale.

Item, for a Child of seven years old, o^ a Woman with child, between iij
moneth^ and vij, take Mechoacan fine searced, and of this former powder ana j,
give it in Sugarsops within dia prunis.

Pills that purges the four humors.
TAke Mirabolaus, and Rewbarb ana iiij, the juice of Egrimony and Wormwood ana
ij. Hermodactils, Agarick, Coliquintida, Polypody ana j, Diagredij, Turbith,
Aloes ana vj (...), Mastick, red Rose leaves, salt Gem. Epithimum, Annis, and
Ginger ana j, mix them and searce them, compound them in a Mortar with syrup of
Roses to a Mass for Pills, the Dosse is j^ in five Pills, taken in the pap of a
roasted Apple, ^^r any syrup.

Plaster Basilicon to draw and heal.
TAke Wax, Rosin, Cowes tallow, Pitch, Birdlime, elect Myrrh, Tar and
Oli^anum ana vj, melt the Rosin, Tallow, Pitch, and Wax, then strain them,
powder ^ine your Olibanum and Myrrh, then put them in, and last put in the
rest, stir them well till they be cold.

Plaster gratia Dei.
TAke Bettony, Vervine, Pimpernell, Dazies, Plantaine, Centory, Ribwort, and
Avens ana j M. herb gratia Dei ij M. both crops and roots, wash them clean,
and bruise them small in a Mortar, then put them in an earthen Pot, and put to
them a pottle of good red Wine or white, cover it, and boil it from a pottle
to a quart being boiled, let it stand twelve hours, then strain it through a
cloth, then wash the pot again with white Wine, and put in the liquor again,
and boil it, then take Wax dj. lb. Rosin dj lb, Galbanum j: Mastick j sm^^
powdered, let it boil well, still stirring a quarter of an hour, then take it
from the fire, put thereto. Turpentine iiij, stirre^ till it be well
compounded, then strain, through a strong canvasse cloth, the ne^^ morning put
some woman's milk of a m^^ child to it, melt it on the fire again reac^ to
boil, then anoint your hands with Oyl^ or Butter, make it up in rowles.

Plumbeous plaster, or of Lead, to heal and finish a sore.
TAke Chalk ij, Hog's Grease ij, Cerusa j, Lapis calamniaris j, then beat and
mix the Ceruse and Chalk in a hot brass Mortar with a hot pestle half an
hour, adding some Hoggs grease thereto in beating them, then make it up in
small rowles, when you use it spread it on leather a good thickness, let it
lie 24 hours unremoved, so use it till you be whole.

Plaster green to cure green and new wounds.
TAke clarified Sheeps-sewet, the leaves of green Tobacco, Hounds-tongue, ^^nt
John's Wort, Valerian, Plantaine, Rib^ort, Selfe-heale, and Tutsane leaves ana
(...) lb, Hogs grease dj. lb, chop the herbs, ^en boil them in the sewet and
grease ^^l the greenness be out of the herbs, then ^^aine it out, and
presently mix therewith ^enice Turpentine, and Wax ana ij, first ^elt the Wax,
and put it in so hot, mix all ^ell together.

Plaster that cures all waterish stinking humors.
TAke Chalk fine powdered j lb, Hogsgrease xij, compound them together with
your hands till they be thick like rung, then lay it on the sore dj. inch
thick till it be well.

Black plaster mundifieth all sores, and takes away all pain.
TAke Sallet oil and white vinegar a^ xij, white Lead and red Lead ana ij^ Wax
iij, boil all together till they b^ black, then add thereto Camphire prepare^
iiij when it is taken from the fire, an^ mix it well.

Plaster of Tapsus barbatus, that cures all Cankers, Fistulaes, Plaguesores,
hot bruises, botches or fellons.
TAke the juyces of Smallage, Carduus young Wormwood, Mullin, Walwort,
Pimpernell, Dovefoot, Plantain, Egrimony, Mugwort, Sage, Dazies, Nightshade,
an^ Fluellin ana j.

Woodbine iiij M. when they be stamped and strained, put to as much Honey in
measure as you have in juyces, then boil them together in a new red Pipkin
close covered, let them boil simpering, still stirring it till it come to the
thickness of Honey, then take it from the fire, and keep it in a new ^^then
pot close covered.

When you make a plaster for any the (...) aforesaid, then take of this Honey
iiij, ^^eat meal ij, boil all these together (...) walme, stir it still for
fear of burning, (...) take it from the fire, put to it presently ^^nice
Turpentine ij, mix it well with the (...), when it is almost cold power the
white (...) two Eggs well beaten thereto, mix ^^em together till it be cold:
now the plai^^er is called Diaflosmos.

A Lotion to wash the grief before you plaster it, dress it twice a day,
bathe it hot, or seringe it before the plaster be applied.
TAke Nightshade, Smallage, Egrimony, Fluelline. Sage, Carduus ana M. Woodbine
ij M. Allom iiij, Honey ij, Plantaine water and white wine ana one pint, boil
all these hearts small cut till their substance be forth, with the Honey,
Allom, Wine and water, strain it to your use.

A Potion to drink warm first and last during the Cure, with the Plaster and
Lotion.
TAke Sanicle, Fluellin, Pimpernel^ Cransbill, wild Tansie, Egrimoni^
Valerian, and Mouse-eare ana j M. brui^ them, then put to it Cloves bruised i
boil them all in one quart of white Wine and one pint of water, with three
spoone fulls of Honey, then strain it, and mix there with one pint of Carduus
water.

Plaster for any Ache, Grief, Sore swelling, or Pain.
TAke Rosemary, Camomile, Sage, Elder buds, Sothernwood, Lavander, Wormwood,
Costmary, red Mint, Rue, Lavander-cotton, Buglosse, and Brocklyme ana ij M.
black Snailes one quart, Frankincense iiij, Wax, Rosin ana ij, Hens dung and
Cowes dung dj. lb of each; Butter out of the Churne unsalted iij lb, Mace,
Cloves, Nutmeggs, and Cinnamon ana iiij fine powdered, boil all these together
close stopped, strain it, and put it in Gally-pots to your use.

Plaster for old sores.
TAke Olibanum, lapis Calaminaris Letharge of Lead, and Bole ana j powdered and
searced, Wax ij, and oil of Roses j, boil them to a plaster.

Pleurisy the Cure.
Boil Mallow roots iiij in water till they be tender, then take them forth,
and stamp them with Butter, Honey, and Pigeons dung ana ij, mix them well, and
apply it to the side affected.

Poison and Plague to prevent.
TAke the leaves of Rue, Figs, Juniper berries ana iiij, Walnut-kernells ij,
mix all these together in Wine-vinegar, infuse it therein all night, next day
begin to take thereof ij every morning.

Item, Bezar, Harts-horne, Jvory, any of these in Dragon-water or with
Mithridate does the like.

A Pill to give sleep and ease in all extreme pain.
TAke Cinnamon, Cassia lignea, Opium ana ij, Myrrh, both the Peppers ana j,
Castor dj, Saffron j fine powdered, and made to a Mass for Pills with Honey,
the Dosse is two Pills, no bigger then small Tares either.

A Purgation that cleanses the head, brain, and all the body of melanc holy.
TAke Senna vj, Ginger j, Buglosse j, flowers ij, infuse all in a close stopped
Ale bottle of stone, with a pint of Whay, of Goats milk, let them boil in
Balneo one hour, then let it cool, give it to drink warm in the morning:
this preserves against all passions of the brain, it helps hearing, smelling,
and seeing, and strengthens all the body, and unburthens the same of every
humor that abounds, as Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy: this was the practice
of Mathiolus Riolanus, and Achiaius.

A Diet that cures all Pox, Scabs, and Lamenesse.
TAke Zarsa perilla, and Hermodacts ana vj, Calaminaris iiij, Senna iij,
Turbith ij, Guiacum viij, bark of Guiacum iij, Bole ij, Liquorice iiij
mundified, French Barley vj, Fennel and Aniseeds ana iiij; put all these in a
Diet-pot with four gallons of water, stop it close, and infuse them all night
in the hot embers, then boil it on a soft fire four hours; in the end of the
boiling put therein Laudanum Paracelsus purified ij, Mithridate j, mix them all
together, drink thereof often a good draught, especially first and last: this
cures all aches in the limbs or body, French Pox, or any disease, strengthens
the spirits; if you use it for the Dropsy, put in good store of Mechoachan; if
for Pain in the head, put in Staecades or Bettony ana iij, when it is
strained, put to the simples again, so much water again, boil it as before
for small drink at meals.

Another Diet for Pox.
TAke Sarsa perilla iiij, Guiacum viij, bark of Guiacum iij, bruised not to
small stoecados iij, Liquor is mundified, and thin sliced, Anniseed bruised ana
ij, infuse all these in a Diet pot all night close stopped, with nine quarts of
water, next day boil it on a soft fire till a third part be spent, then
strain it, drink a good draught thereof first and last, use your self as
aforesaid.

A Plaster sanative and defensive, for Pox or old Sores.
TAke oil of Olive one pint, Virgin-Wax, Olibanum, gum Elemni, Lapis
calaminaris, and Rosin ana iiij fine powdered, dissolve all these on a small
fire, then strain them, add thereto Bole, Terra sigillata, sanguis Draconis,
all fine searced ana ij, Venice Turpentine iij, mix all these on the fire
again, still stirring it till it be cold, this is very excellent for all
ulcerations.

A Plaster attractive, or drawing, to heal sores or wounds.
TAke Plantaine, Bettony, Dazies, Mouseeare, Orpius, Mallows, Ribwort,
Vervine, and Sanicle ana ij M. stamp them with Sheep sewet sufficient to
boil them, let them so boil covered till the sewet be green, then put
therein Rosin small powdered j lb, Wax small cut dj. lb, boil them one walme,
then strain it, put it to the fire again, melt therein some oil of Roses,
Mastick, and Olibanum ana j, Myrrh iiij, Aloes, Succotrine vj, then take it
off the fire, and put to it Turpentine iiij, mix it and stir it till it be
cold.

Some slight Purgations of Senna.
IN primis, take Senna in your Broathes in some quantity, with some Ginger, for
pains of the head.

Item, some iiij with Ginger and Annis, may be given to women with child, and
children.

Item, it may be powdered with Ginger, and mixed with syrup of Roses, Laxative,
or Cassia in a reasonable Dosse.

Item, iiij infused all night in seething hot posset or white wine with Sugar
and Ginger, purges gently.

A good Plaster to heal, and dry a sore being cleansed.
TAke Hog's Grease viij, oil of Roses iij, white Lead ij, Olibanum, Mastick,
and Rosin ana ij fine powdered, Camphire j, mix them altogether, and make a
plaster thereof.

A Plaster of Musalage which heals and skinneth much, and is precious, and
comfortable for veins and Nerves.
TAke Letharge of Lead v lb, of white Lead j lb, of Wool oil one pottle, of
Fengreeke viij, powder all these, and searce them; take also Linseed and
Mallows ana iiij, boil them in white wine and water very soft and tender,
then take them up from the liquor, strain them, then set your oil and powders
on the fire, put in your powders by little and little at once, then stir them
well, put in the Musalages when it is off the fire, and stir them till they
be near cold, then make it up in rowles.

Plaster healing, called Jacobs Plaster.
TAke Lapis Calaminaris, Lapis Sanguinaris, Letharge of gold, Terra sigillata,
Ceruse ana j, Bole ij, all fine powdered, and searced, oil of Linseed dj. pint,
Wax v, Rosin iiij, Turpentine j, melt all together, then strain them, mix in
your powders before set down, by little and little, stir them well together,
and make your plaster.

Another of Jacobs Plaster.
TAke Lapis Emery, Adamants Letharge of gold, Ceruse, Letharge of silver, Lapis
sanguinaris, Bole, sanguis Draconis, Ox bones burned ana ij, Camphire j, Wax j
lb, Sheeps sewet and Turpentine ana dj lb, oil of Roses iiij, fiat emplastrum.

An excellent healing and cooling Plaster.
TAke Wax and Deares sewet ana iiij, Lapis calaminaris ij, May-Butter ij,
Camphire j, oil of Roses viij, mix and melt them together, and make your
liquid Plaster.

A very good Plaster called the black Plaster.
TAke red Lead viij, white Lead viij, oil of Linseed viij, red Vinegar iiij,
stir all together in a pan of a gallon, boil them on a Charcoale fire till
they be black, try one drop on a bright sawcer, if it be black and well, power
it out in cold water, wet your hands in oil, and so roll it up.

A Plaster cold, called Colemanes Plaster.
TAke oil Olive one pint, Wax iiij, Pitch iij, melt them all together, and
strain them, then put therein Ceruse, white Lead, Letharge of gold, Lapis
calaminaris ana iiij all powdered, then put therein the Gums, melt them
together, and stir them well, then take them off, and still stir them till
they be almost cold, then power it in cold water, and make it up.

A good Plaster to dissolve and cleanse a sore.
TAke Galbanum j, infuse it all night in white Wine, wash the sore therewith,
then mix the Galbanum working it in your hands, and so plaster it on.

A good Sanative, Incarnative, and Desicative Plaster for ulcers.
TAke a pint of oil Olive, and Wax iiij, in small pieces, boil them on the
fire till the Wax be melted, then put them in a Bole dish, put therein Lapis
Calaminaris powdered, mix and stir them together with a rowling-pinne till it
be cold, so make it to a plaster.

Powder to Incarnate and dry up sores.
TAke Frankincense, Dragons blood, quick Lime ana, make powder thereof.

Another powder to increase flesh, and heal.
TAke Dragons blood, Aloes, Olibanum sarcacolla ana j, powder it, and apply
(...)

A Plaster to incarnate, and mundifie.
TAke Rosin, and Wax ana ij, Turpentine iij, Frankincense and Mastick an^ j,
Saracole, Mummy ana iij, oil of Mastick, and Honey, of Roses ana iiij, Barley
meal ij, mix them on the fire, and make a plaster.

A Plaster maturative and ripening.
TAke the juice of Smallage, honey, flower of wheat, and the yolks of eggs,
mix them and make your plaster.

A Plaster or Searcloath for fractures or bruises.
TAke Rosin and Wax ana viij, black Pitch iiij, Perosine ij, oil Olive viij,
melt them, and put thereto Cummin seed ^ne powdered and searced ij, mix etc.

A Plaster to heal Sores and Scabs.
TAke the juyces of Celendine, Fumitory, Scabius, and red Docks ana iiij,
Letharge and Ceruse ana iiij fine powdered, mix them with Vinegar and
Hog's Grease ana, set them on the fire, and in boiling mix your powders by
little and little at once stirring them, and so use it.

A Plaster for the Cramp in arm or leg.
TAke great Onions, roast them tender, make a plaster, and apply it where the
pain is very hot, and in thrice dressing it will be well.

A good Plaster to heal and cleanse old sores.
TAke Rosin xij, Perosine iiij, Wax viij, Galbanum j, Mastick, sang. Drac. ana
iiij, Frankincense j, all powdered small, honey, and Boares-grease ana iiij,
Verdigrease i, melt them, stir them, and put it up to use.

Another Plaster to dissolve and ripen.
TAke Mallow roots, Lillies, Henbane, and Smallage, sees them tender, stamp
them, and boil them with May Butter, and oil of Linseed ana, in boiling put
some Honey therein, stir them well together, then thicken it with the powders of
Linseed and Fengreeke, when you heat it, put Milk and May Butter thereto, quod
sufficit.

A good Plaster deficative and clensing, lately used.
TAke Rosin, Wax, Hog's Grease ana ij, honey clarified i dj. put not in your
honey till the Rosin and Wax be melted, then stir them well, and in stirring
put in the powder of white Copperas, what you think fit for the Cure.

A Plaster to skin and heal very fast.
TAke oil of Linseed viij, new Wax iiij, melt them at a soft fire, stir
them, then put thereto Lapis calaminaris j fine powdered, still stir it, in
the cooling put in one spoonful of white wine vinegar, so make it, let it be
well mixed.

A Plaster to heal and dry.
TAke oil Olive and new Wax, melt them, put in fine powder of Calaminarum,
make it red with the powder of red Lead, if the sore be clean, dress it but
once in three days.

Another of the same nature.
TAke Lapis Calaminaris, grind it fine on a Painters stone, put thereto fresh
Butter, and Oil of Linseed, a little Bole and Ceruse, grind them on the stone.

A Plaster to assuage heat and inflammation of the liver.
TAke Barley meal mixed with the juyces of Sengreene, and Orpius, and Vinegar,
mix them with Populion and the cold white ointment, make a plaster, and lay it
to your right side.

A powder to correct and abate spungie flesh, or mortify it.
TAke fine Allom, Verdigrease ana ij, Bole iiij, all fine powdered and searced,
mix them, and use it.

A Powder to destroy Warts any where.
TAke Savine dried and powdered, if it be not strong enough, mix powder of
Mercury sublimat, which will destroy Itch, Canker, Pox, or Corns.

Item, burned Allom, or burned Copperas, or the green powder of Hollyworth,
etc.

A Powder praised of all Surgeons, for it scales bones, and stops the
watring of Nerves or sinews.
TAke burned Copperas j, Auri Pigmentum fine Combust i, Verdigrease fine
searced j, burned Allom fine powdered and searced iij, mix them together, it is
excellent in operation.

The Powder of Mercury sublimat.
TAke Mercury powder sublimat, put to it Bole, so that in the mixing the powder
may be but pale, a little red^ish; this kills all Pox, Cankers, old sores, etc.

Pox, or Plague, or any thing else, to purge out.
TAke the waters of Scabius, and Fumitory ana first and last, with Triacle,
Diatessaron, and Sugar quod sufficit.

A Purgation which wrought good effect.
TAke one pint of white Wine, boil therein Borage flowers, Violet flowers,
Succory, and red Roses ana dj. M, boil them close covered, till half the Wine
be wasted, then strain it, and put to it Allosuccotrine fine powdered iiij,
Anniseed powdered ij. take of this vj spoonefulls at once, it purges well with
Sugar.

Another gentle Purgation that is good against melancholy, and comforts the
spirits.
TAke the juyces of old Pippins and Borage ana, as much as will make a draught
heat it seething hot, then infuse therein a^ night Senna iiij, Manna, and syrup
of Roses ana j, Anniseed bruised iiij, next morning strain it, and drink it
warm.

Pain or Pustulls rising any where.
TAke white Wine, the Whay of Butter milk ana dj. pint, Damask Rose leave
dried, and Bean flowers or blosomes M^ boil them close covered a little
while, then take it from the fire, and presently mix d^ pint of oil of Tartar
made of white wine so let it stand close covered till it be nee^e cold, then
strain it, and foment the place very hot with double clothes a quarter o^ an
hour, this has cured and eased many.

A Plaster of Adders tongue and sweet Mandlin, all green, which cures green
wounds and old sores.
TAke Linseed oil j pint, Adders tongue, and sweet Maudlin both green, in May
and June ana iij M, strip forth their stalks, and bruise them, then boil them
in the oil, add thereto white wine, viz. let them all boil till the herbs
be very loft, then strain them out, and put the liquor to the fire again,
add thereto Rosin and Wax small broken viij, boil them till all be melted,
still stirring it, then take it off presently, mix therewith Venice Turpentine
vj, liquid Storax j, so it is made.

Pain in the belly, or any part to cure.
Boil in a quart of Posset Ale Maydenhaire j M, Anniseed and Liquorice
mundified and bruised ana iiij, Jvorie shavings one spoonful, boil them well,
strain it, and drink it warm.

A Pectorall Electuary that comforts memory, the sight, and all griefs.
TAke red Sage, Carduus Benedictus, and Rosemary dried and powdered ana j,
Lavander, Penyryall, Balm, Marjorum, Stoecados, Sothernwood, and Thyme ana
iiij, all dried, powdered and searced. Ginger and Liquorice mundified, Cloves,
Cinnamon, Mace, Annis, Caroway, Fennel, Coriander seed, Cardimonium, Cubebs,
Calamus Aromaticus, Ireos, Florentine, Galingale, Myrrh, lignum Aloes, long
Pepper, Zedoria ana iiij all powdered, shake and stir all these powders in a
quart of spring water, wherein has been boiled dj. lb of Raisins of the Sun
stoned and strained forth, then put in iij lb of English honey, put it to fire
again, let them boil a quarter of an hour, still stirring it with a spatula,
then take it again from fire, and put in the fourth part of a pint of
Rosewater, and Nutmegs viij powdered, when it is cold put it in close pots, the
Dosse is j at once alone, or better with Balm water, or drink a little Balm
water with Sugar.

Also boil with the former simples mirabolans embellick, and Bellerick stoned,
powdered, and searced ana ij, mirabolans Kebule and Inde stoned, powdered, and
searced ana j altogether.

Tissick, or infection of the Lungs.
Boil the leaves and seeds of March, Mallows, in Milk or Wine, let the sick
drink thereof.

Plague a defensive, and cures the sick of it.
Boil in three pints of Malmsie, Sage, and Rue ij M. till it be well boiled,
then strain it, put to the liquor again, boil it two walmes with Nutmeg,
Ginger, and long Pepper all mixed together j, then take it from fire, and
presently mix to it Mithridate j, Triacle ij, Aqua vitae iiij, mix them
together while it is cold, then put it up in a Vyall close stopped; take half
a spoonful every second morning for a Defensive, but if infected, one
spoonefull first and last, and sweat three hours.

Purging Lozenges, the Dosse is one or two drams.
TAke Senna iiij, Ginger and Liquorice ana ij, Turbith and Ruberb ana j,
Diagredij ij, Hermodactills iij, Fragrariae folium j, Mace dj., white Sugar j
lb powdered and searced, Rosewater viij, compound them, and so make them.

R
Reins running, or Gonorrhaea.
TAke Bole, terra sigillata, sanguis Drac. ana j, conserve of red Roses iij,
make it to a Mass for Pills, the Dosse is the quantity of a Nutmegge morning
and evening.

Another for the same.
FIrst purge well with new drawn Cassia j in a draught of white wine.

Pearl, Coral, Cresses seed and Madder ana iiij, Cumfry roots dried and
powdered, Venice Turpentine dried and powdered, Acorne cups powdered ana iiij,
make all these with Venice Turpentine to a Mass, the Dosse is vij Pills, as
big as Pease, take it first and last.

Rupture to cure.
TAke the white of an egg beaten like oil, color it red with Alkanet, anoint
the back or place where the grief is by a hot fire, keep it warm with a
Lambs skin, or take Dove-foote or Cranes bill powdered, give half a spoonefull
thereof in Claret wine or red warm for one and twenty days together morning
and evening, fasting two hours after; if it be for old people, add to it nine
Snailes shells powdered and dried, during the cure wear a Trusse, stir it not
much, and abstain from windy meats; or take Polypody of the old Horn beam
tree, stamp the roots thereof with the white of an egg, and bind it against
the place burst, renewing it every four and twenty hours for ten or twelve
days, all that time drink naught but small Beer or Ale, and infuse Cumfry
roots and Solomon's seal bruised.

Ringworme, Tetter, or creeping sore, the cure.
TAke of the rustiest yellow fat Bacon, cut it thin, fry the grease out of it,
then power it clean forth from the salt, make clean the Pan, and put in the
clear grease again, fry therein A plant.
Cup-Mosse, till it be dry like coals, then strain out the clear grease, and
mix it with dj, so much Tar: make an unguent of it, and anoint the grief
every day, or red Dock roots unwashed and thin sliced, steeped all night in
strong Vinegar, and with a clowt bathe it often.

For a Red gum, or Sansfleame face old or new.
TAke the juyces of Sorell, Smallage, and Plantaine ana, honey alike dj, the
white of an egg, add so much Wheat flower as will compound them to a Salve,
mixed all raw together, and cold without fire, and so apply it, it will
cleanse, abate the pain, and heal.

Or Pine nut kernels, bray them in water (make a Salve of it) let it stand till
a fat swim thereon, and with the fat anoint the grief.

Rhewme, or Toothache, the cure.
TAke Gum Armo. and Mastick ana j dj, boil them in Aqua-vitae iiij, Wine
Vinegar j, till the third part be wasted, then strain it, add thereto honey
iiij, Saffron viij grains powdered, incorporate them together, and with a clowt
on the top of a stick, apply it to the grief.

Or Staves acre, Pepper, Bay salt, and Pellitory ana, all pulverized together,
sow them in a linen cloth as big as a Nut, steep it in wine vinegar one
quarter of an hour, then put one of them in your mouth, champ it, and turn it
from one side to another, spet out the rhewme as it comes.

Or stamp some green Rue with some Bay salt, apply it to the gums grieved in a
linen cloth, it takes away the pain.

To stay and dry the Rhewme.
TAke a piece of white bread, dry, and hard, then soake it in Malmsie or
Muscadine, then strew on it Sugar powdered, Wormwood and Mints powdered, then dry
it, and eat it.

For Rhewme.
TAke Mustard seed boiled in Vinegar, hold it warm in your mouth where the
pain is spilt.

Ruptures or Dislocations.
Boil Rocket roots in water very tender, then bray them, and plaster them to
the grief, it cures.

S
Sores a drying powder.
TAke Frankincense, Vernish, Fengreek, Allosiccatrine, the powder of burned
bones ana ij, strew it thick on the sore.

Sores fretting or eating.
TAke the herb Female Fluellyn, bruise it and apply it to the sore, and drink
the juice of it in wine and water.

Sores running, leprous, and skin rugged.
TAke two parts of soap, a third part of auri pigmentum fine powdered and mixed,
anoint the grief.

Sores old to dry up, a Lotion.
TAke so much dulcified Mercury as will make xij spoonfuls of Plantain water as
white as milk, dip a feather in it, and dress the sore; it cures.

For the same Sore a Plaster.
TAke white Lead ij, Camphine dissolved in the white of an egg j Olibanum and
Mastick fine powdered, ana ij, incorporate all these in a mortar with a pestle
with oil of white Rose, and Virgins wax thin scraped to the stiffness of a
plaster, lay it to the sore after the water has dried it.

Sore, a Corrasive.
TAke green Copperas, small powdered and burned in a Crusible on a great fire
for xi^ hours, till it be as red as blood, grind it fine on a Painters stone,
lay this powder on the sore thin, dress it every xxiiij hours till the dead
flesh be clean out.

Sores great and old, a plaster.
TAke Oil of Roses j lb. di. lb. Oil of Myrtle, ointment, Populeon ana 4,
Hens grease, ij, Oxe-tallow j lb. di. lb. Hogs grease vij, Letharge of Gold and
Silver, ana iij, di., white lead and red lead, ana iiij, Wax vj, boil them
altogether sufficiently, then take it from fire, and mix to it Turpentine.

Sores hollow, a Lotion to mundifie.
TAke barbours lie j lb. honey of Roses iiij, Sarcacole iij, Smallage leaves and
Horehound ana di. M. boil them, strain them, and use it.

Sores swelling to assuage.
Boil in vinegar and verjuce sweet butter, dip double linen clothes in it,
use it hot.

Sores, or ulcers to mundifie, a water.
TAke Egrimony, Saint John's wort, Centory, Wormwood, Scabius, Crassula major
and Cumfry roots, ana j. M. stamp all these together, and boil them in j
gallon of water, and j pottle of white wine with di. lb, Sugar, till the liquor
be half wasted, then strain it and keep it to your use, seringe this water as
hot into your sores as may be: if you would have it more cleansing, add
thereto Melrosarum; if of greater cleansing and cooling, add thereto Plantain
or Nightshade water wherein is boiled a little Allom, this water cleanses
from the deep parts of corrupt and filthy ulcers and humors makes other
Medicines work the better.

Serpigo, or Tetter to cure.
TAke sallet Oil ij, Camphire iiij, flower of Brimstone, and Sugar ana j,
grind all together in a stone mortar, and put it in a glass, in the day time
anoint the grief, as often as you will with oil, wherein the golden Sea-coal
powdered is boiled, but at night with the former oil.

Serpigo, or Tetter: another sure one.
TAke the rustiest Bacon you can get, only the fat thereof, fry it in a frying
pan till you have all the fat forth, then power it clear out, and wipe the pan
clean, put in the liquor again, and fry therein j M. of Feltory, {italias}
Cup-mosse, clean picked and cleansed, fry it in the liquor till it be hard and
black, then strain it into some vessel, and put to it ij spoonfuls of tar,
and of liquid Storax iiij, stir them well together till it be cold, anoint
the grief therewith, and lay a linen cloth dipped therein on the sore.

Sores, Allom water that cures.
TAke j pint of unslaked lime, put it in a pipkin, put thereto of the newest
Tanners oose that never had leather in it very warm, then scum it over clean,
let it settle till the water be clear, and therewith wash the sore with wet
clothes, four double, and lay them on.

Sores old and Ulcers, an oil to heal and dry.
TAke oil or gum of Guiacum ij, incorporate it in oil of Roses ij, Ceruse
and letharge of Tin, Allosiccatrine and Turpentine, ana ij, mix all these
together in a mortar of lead, then with lint lay it on the sore, this will dry
and draw together the lips of sores.

Sores inflamed to cool much, and ease the pain.
TAke oil of Roses and Violets, unguentum rosarum, ana ij, juice of Plantain
and Housleeke, ana j, Letharge of Gold and Silver ana x Tutia, ij, Camphire j,
all mixed together and well ground on a stone.

Stone, an outward application.
TAke the crumbs of stale Rye bread, boil it in a pip in with so much verjuyce
of Crabs, as will boil it to a thick poultis, spread it on a cloth, and apply
it on the grief as hot as you can suffer it, if the pain remove, follow it
with your medicine, renew it hot till you be well.

Stone, a distilled water for it.
TAke Epithimum, Asparagus, Rape, Saxafrage, Parsley, Sea-thistle, Carret,
Fenill-roots, Maiden-haire, Gromill, Parsnips, Pellitory of the wall, ana j M.
beat your herbs and slice your roots, then beat cherry stones in a mortar j M.
infuse them all in three quarts of red Cowes milk a whole night, then distill
it, drink with white wine five spoonfuls of this at one time iiij mornings
together.

Stone, a powder.
TAke English Licorice mundified and bruised ij, Parsnip-roots, Carrots, March
Mallows cleansed and bruised, ana j, put them in a pot, pour thereon hot
seething water one quart, let it stand close stopped till it be cold, then
strain out a good draught, put into it a soft roasted apple, make it thick as
Lambs wool, drink thereof a good draught first and last morning and evening,
it forces urine, and opens the uriters.

Stone, straight passage of urine to help.
TAke Saxafrage, Ashenkeys, Broomseeds, Holly-berries, Parsly-seed, Hawes,
Bramble-berries, Alexanderseed, dry them and powder them, ana j, the stones of
a Boar j, take of this powder dj in a draught of warm white wine, use it at
need.

Shingles, the cure.
TAke the juice of Rue, Oil of Rose and Vinegar mixed, with so much C^ruse to
an unguent, therewith anoint the grief.

Or the juice of Nightshade, with oil of Roses, Ceruse, letharge of gold, as
before or Cats blood, anoint it therewith.

Sinews and veins cut to cure.
TAke the great red worms knit together, lay then to the grief; or Magistral
oil with Wine and Olibanum, does the like.

Stitch, a present cure.
SWallow so much of the powder of Ro^n as will lie on a xij pence in a draught
of Sack or Beer, or the powder of a Boares tuske, as much as will lie on iiij
d. in warm white wine, does it, or take Camomill and Dazies with the flowers,
ana j M. Cominseed bruised j spoonful, boil all these either in Malmsy or
Sack, thicken it with leaven bread to a Poultis, lay it very hot to the grief.

Sciatica, the cure.
MAke a plaster with Caranna or Taccha, Mahacca with oil of Roses, lay it on
hot let it lie ij or iij days, then take it off, wipe it and apply it again
warm.

Sweat to procure.
Drink a draught of Sack-posset very hot, with iiij Bay Berries husked and
powdered therein, cover him warm, and wipe off the sweat.

Squinancie, or any swelling in the throat.
TAke Camomill flowers red Rose leaves, Rosemary tops ana j M. and xij Cloves,
fill two linen bags therewith, heat them betwixt two platters on a chafing
dish and coals, with a pint of white wine, apply them to the grief, hard
wrung out one after another as hot as he can suffer it, as one cools, put on
another hot, so continue it for one half hour at every dressing with warm
white wine wherein is boiled Honey, red Rose-leaves, and Rosemary tops ana.

Scurvy, the cure.
TAke Scurvy grass, Devils Bitt, Watercresses and Brock-lime ana j M.
Wormwood, di. M. stamp and strain them with a quart of white Wine, alayed with
a pint of water, boil them all together vj walms, add thereto in boiling
white Ginger powdered ij, Enula Camp. j, a little Saffron powdered, drink
thereof first and last, let him infuse Saxafrage in his drink at meals, but
let him first purge with this following.

Take Senna Alexandrine, iiij, Epithimum ij, Raisins of the Sun stoned, j,
Fenell seed, Annis and Ginger, ana di., infuse them all night in very warm
Whay, in the morning wring it out hard, and give it the patient.

Swelling, or Inflammation a Pultis.
TAke Mallows, Camomill, and Violet leaves, ana j M. boil them in fresh Hogs
grease till they be tender, then lay on the herbs hot for a Pultis, if you add
the crumbs of Rye-bread, it will cleanse any corrupt Ulcer.

Swelling, or any ache an ointment.
TAke the marrow of an Ox and new liquid Hens dung, ana di. lb. boil them
together, add thereto powder of Alkanet, strain it out hard, and fricate the
grief warm by a fire with a cloth, then anoint it.

Swollen, or scabbed legs to heal.
TAke red dock roots and Plantain ana, boil them till they be tender, then
bruise them till they be small, boil them again in Sheeps suet, and apply it
as a Pultis.

To skin a Sore or heal a wound.
TAke oil of red Roses, infuse therein a little Gum-dragant, and a little
powder of Alkanet, let it stand till the Gum be like a gelly, then strain it
and anoint therewith.

Scabs, the cure over all the body.
TAke Devils Bitt, Scurvy-grasse, Watercresses. Brocklime, and Fumitory, ana j
M. Rosemary tops, di. M. bruise them and infuse them in clarified Whay, drink
no other drink for vj days.

Scabs, an unguent with the former drink.
TAke the juice of Scabius j, Enula campowdred j, oil of red Roses j, boil
them in ij of Vinegar til it be thick, anoint.

Stomach to cleanse.
TAke Centaury, Scabius, Devils Bitt and Egrimony, ana di. M. sprigs of
Rosemary tops four, or one race of Ginger grated, three large Mace, boil them
all in a quart of claret Wine sweetened with Honey, drink thereof first and
last till you be well.

Scaled head the cure.
MIx with Hogs grease the juice of Alexander, and a little Auri pigmentum fine
powdered, to make it look yellowish, melt it and put in the powder while it is
on the fire, make an ointment therewith, and anoint the grief.

Or take Soute, Oyle-Olive, a little Wine Vinegar, Feltery, Grass, boil them
together till the Feltery be hard and like a coal, then strain it and put
thereto one spoonful of Tar, stir it till it be almost cold.

Or take of the worst Salt-butter j lb. the juice of Celendine, fry them
together till it become black, strain it and anoint.

Swelling or pain between the skin and the flesh.
TAke the dung of a Dear, Goat, or Sheep fine powdered, boil it in Malmsy
and Wine Vinegar, ana, add thereto some powder of Cominseed, boil them to the
thickness of a plaster, apply it hot, and dress it every xxiiij hours.

Speech lost to cure.
TAke the juice of Sage and Primrose, boil it in white Wine, and Gargarize the
mouth therewith.

Strangury and Stone to cure.
TAke j quart of white wine, infuse therein all night the roots of Parsnips and
Carrets thin sliced, ana j, the next day strain the wine out, and infuse
therein the powder of a Hares hair, the powder of a Filberts shell, Licorice
cleansed and powdered, ana j spoonful, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, white Ginger,
Ivy-berries, Parsley seed, Caroway, Coriander and Fennill, all fine powdered
half a spoonful Sugarcandy powdered ij, shake all these together in the pot
with wine, so let it stand, drink a good draught of it first and last, fast
two hours after in morning.

Sores running to dry and heal.
TAke the Moss that grows on the black thorn, powder it fine, the bark of
Guiacum powered, powder of old rotten oaken post, powder of the burnt bones of
the jaws of a Pig, the powder of calcined Vitriall, and burned Allom ana j,
compounded with Honey to a plaster.

Stitch to cure.
APply to the place grieved crummes of Ry-bread wet with verjuice, as a Pultis
very hot, if the pain run on follow it with the hot Pultis till it be gone.

Stone to break.
TAke the shell or thin rindes of Acorns, the hips of the Briar, red
Holly-berries and Nutmegs, ana all dried and powdered, drink hereof first and
last in warm white wine, di. spoonful at once for six days or more; it helps.

For all Sickness, Fevers, Impostumes, or any other disease in Man's body.
TAke Hysop, Betony, Rosemary, Violets, Vervine. Saint John's Wort, Avence,
Mouse-eare, Plantain, Feverfew, ana j M. clean washed and stamped in a mortar,
then put them in a new earthen pot with one gallon of white wine, so let it
stand close covered to infuse all night, in the morning boil it close covered
to the consumption of half, then strain it through a ha re Sive into a double
Vial, then give the sick to drink thereof evening hot, and morning cold, a
great draught every time, this powder following to be drunk therewith.

Take Gallingale and Nutmegs ana iiij, Ginger j, Cloves, Cinnamon, Spikenard,
Enula Campain, ana ij, Licorice vj, Sugar four, all fine powdered and searced,
then mix one spoonful of this powder in one pint of the liquor aforesaid,
so morning and evening drink a great draught as is set down, Take first the
simple liquor vj days and vj nights, and then other four days and nights,
take it with the powder, this will cure you if ever you be cured.

Stitch, a remedy in the Spleen, or any part of the body.
CVt a a thin Turffe, having some short giasse thereon, broyle it on a
Gridiron, still basting it with vinegar, put it in a double cloth, and apply
it very hot.

Of the leaves of the smoothest Holly dried and powdered fine, drink thereof so
much as will lie on a six pence in any warm drink.

A Stone that makes water for any sore to bathe it, or heal any Canker in the
face.
TAke Allom and white Copperas ana j, fine powdered, then put them in an earthen
dish, make the powder hollow, or a hole in the midst of it, power on a little
white wine to moisten the powders, so let them boil till they be almost dry,
then put to it white and red Lead powdered ana ij, stir and mix them well
together till they be dry, then make the hearth very clean where the fire was,
lay the dish and powders with the bottomes upward thereon, then cover the dish
with hot embers, so let it he till the Powders dry, and the dish be cold, then
take out the stone made of the powders, and put iiij thereof into a pint of
Plantaine water, or white wine and water, and bathe the sore therewith warm,
and lay lint wet therein all day, and all night lay a plaster made with some
of this stone powdered, mixed with Honey and Camphire, but first bathe it with
the water, so use it till you be well.

Sciatica, an approved medicine.
TAke Malmsie, and Neats-foot oil ana dj. pint, the youngest tops of Rosemary,
the young tops of Bay leaves and Lavander, Spick, ana dj. handful, all cut
small, boiled till the herbs be tender, then stamped very small, mixed with
ten spoonefulls of Aquavitae, then mix it to a Salve and anoint therewith.

To skin a sore, and make it perfectly whole.
TAke Lapis Calaminaris powdered and searced, mix therewith fresh Butter out of
the Churne, and Linseed oil ana, a little Bole and Ceruse fine powdered, mixed
altogether, and apply it.

Sciatica, Gowt, or Ache, an excellent oil to cure it.
TAke Sallet oil one pottle, put it in a broad gallon glass, infuse therein
Rosemary flowers bruised j lb, let them so stand in the Sun close covered
till Midsommer, then take red Rosebuds j lb, take out the whites, Dill dj lb,
St. John's Wort j lb dj lb, Vervin dj. lb, bruise all these herbs, then put
them into the glass of oil, stop it close again, and sun it for ten days
more, then after a shower of rain, gather earth worms one quart, cleanse them
in white wine, and wipe them hard in a course cloth of linen, then take those
Worms, and Lavander, Spick dj. lb, and ten young Swallows out of the nest,
beat them so small till you can discern neither bones, nor feathers, nor guts,
then put them also into the glass of oil, and stir them well, and so let it
stand one night or two, power out all this egredients into a Pipkin covered,
add thereto one pint of Malmsie, and dj. pint of Aquavitae, let it simper
softly till the Wine and Aqua-vitae be wasted, then strain it hard, and put it
in a double Vyall close stopped, boil it in Balneo with some powdered Cloves,
and Mastick powdered ana ij for half an hour softly, then sun it again ten
days, then put it up, let it be ten weeks old before you use.

To eleanse and heal a sore with a fair linen cloth dry.
TAke Plantaine water, put thereto Mercury fine powdered, stir them well
together, and so let them stand infused all night, then pour the clear water
from the powder, then wet a clean linen cloth therein take it out, hang it
over the pot with Mercury to draine therein, so let it hang till it be dry, let
it come near no Sun, but let it dry in the shadow, then cut it fit for the
sore, apply it thereto till it be whole, renew it as you do other plasters.

A drink for the Stone that cleanses the back.
GIve him to drink Benedicta laxative in a draught of warm white Wine, then
cover him warm in his bed, let him sweat well two hours, this is excellent to
cleanse the reins.

To make Diacentauria, which purges the stomach, comforts the liver, Mitt, and
cooles the body.
TAke the powders of Centaury and Cumin ana j, Fennel, Parsley, and Hyssop,
Mint seed all powdered ana iiij, boil all these in white wine till the wine be
wasted, then bray all in a Mortar, and compound it all in a pan with
clarified honey, being cleansed with the white of an egg, let the honey be
three parts, and the seeds two parts by weight, then boil them one or two
walines, till it wax somewhat thick, still stirring it, then stir and mix
therewith the powder of Anniseed, Cinnamon, Galingale, and Liquorice mundified
ana j, let them be well Mixed, eat thereof at any time.

Excellent powders for the Stone.
TAke Smallage seeds, Parsley, Lovage, Saxafrage, roots of Philapendula,
Cherristones, Gromill, and Broomeseeds, Ashenkeyes ana j, powder them fine,
take of this one spoonful at once in any thing, fast three hours after.

Stone, a precious water to drink, and may be taken with the foresaid powder.
TAke strong Ale six days old three gallons, Liquorice and Annis bruised ana
iij, Birch leaves burned, Pellitory, Watercresses, Saxafrage, Gromill,
Philapendula, Alexander, Parsley seed, green Pennyryall, red bramble leaves ana
j M, Haw berries dj. pint, distill all these in a Limbeck, and keep the
water, which drink alone, or with the other powder.

A distilled Water to break the Stone.
TAke wild Myrtle like Butchers broom, Asparagus or Sparage, Eringus, Rapes,
Parsley, Mayden-haire, Gromill, wild Carrots, Endive, Fennel roots ana, cut or
brayed grossly, infuse them in Wine on a soft f^e, this breaks the stone, and
causes urine.

Stitching and drawing wide wounds together, without touching flesh or skin
with a Needle.
TAke Mastick, Dragons blood ana ij, Frankincense j, Milldust, and Bean meal
ana j dj., powder these fine, and temper it with the whites of eggs beaten in
a dish, and some Rosewater unto a thin Plaster, then spread it on two narrow
strong linen clothes, full as long as the wound, lay on each side of the
wound one of them, near the lips of the wound, let them there lie till they be
full dry, then they will stick fast to the flesh, then with a needle and thread
draw them together as near as you please without any touch or hurt to the
wound, which much eases the Patient.

Stinking mouth to cure.
TAke brown Nuts, boil them in wine Vinegar, wash the mouth and gums
therewith, and after rub them with dry Mints: this cures.

Or eat Rosemary fasting.

Stinking breath for the stomach.
TAke Cumin fine powdered, boil it in white Wine, from a pottle to a quart,
drink of it first and last hot it cures in fifteen days, probatum: drink a
pint every day.

Or the roots of Spear inints boiled in honey, drunk to bedward, or m xt with
the former medicine.

Or Mountain Thyme, or wild Thy me that grows on Molehills, wash it, stamp
it small, add thereto Cumin powdered dj., Pepper dj powdered, boil all together
in a pottle of white Wine to a quart, use to drink this always after meat, at
afternoon once, and last at night hot as you can abide; this likewise cures
in fifteen days.

Or sometime, dip a Laurel lease in Mustard, and hold it under the tongue, it
furthers the cure.

Speech used in sleep to remedy.
TAke the juice of Sothernwood mixed with white wine or vinegar and give it him
to drink when he goes to bed, this helps to sleep quietly.

Or take crops of Rue and Vervine ana, stamp them with vinegar, strain them,
and drink it last to bedward ten days together, it cures.

To help Children to speak quickly.
RVb the tongue with salt Gem and Honey mixed together, it will profit much.

An excellent Cordial to comfort the stomach, heart, and brain; quickens
memory, and much comforts the spirits.
TAke Calamus Aromaticus, Galingale, Cubes, Spicknard, Cardimonium, grains of
Paradise, Myrrh, Cloves, Ginger, Mace, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Coriander, Fennel,
and Anniseeds ij of each, Liquorice mundified, Conserve of red Roses, syrup of
Violets, Rosemary dried, and red Sage dried ana iij, Rosewater, Borage water,
Balm water ana j, or for want of the waters, the herbs dried and powdered ana
j, Honey clarified with the white of an egg j lb, pulverize and searce all
those simples that are to be powdered then in a broad gally pot mix all these
simples, honey and waters together to a Conserve, let the Patient take the
quantity of two Hazell nuts, in the morning fasting, two hours after, and last
to, bed-ward so much as a Hazell nut.

For foul Scabs.
TAke Scammony and vinegar, and apply it, it helps and dries mervailously.

For Scabs and Tetters.
TAke the juice of Lymes, old Oil, of Nuts and Tar ana, let them boil
together, then strain them, and mix therewith the fine powder of chimney soot,
make an ointment thereof.

Or the juice of the Dock mixed well, does the same.

For the Sciatica an unguent, probatum.
Boil a pint of old Malmsie, with dj. lb of Butter out of the Churne unsalted,
let them boil till it come to a Salve, therewith anoint the grief warm, use
this for any other pain.

T
Tetter, the cure.
TAke red Rose leaves, Sage, Camomile, and Rosemary ana j M. Pomgranat Pills,
and Allom ana iiij, boil all these in two quarts of white wine, to the
consumption of a third part, bathe the sore therewith, and apply on it a
plaster of Diapalmae.

Or black Soap, Ginger, and Pepper, make an unguent of it, and use it, it cures.

Tympanit or Dropsy, the cure.
TAke five pints of Rhennish or white wine, and three porrengers full of the
ashes of burned Broom, Cinnamon iij, infuse them all night together, next
morning run it through a jelly bag so often till it be clear, add thereto
so much Sugar as will fit your taste, bottle it up close, let it stand one day,
then drink it first and last, and one hour before meals, and after walk till
you be warm, at each time take a good draught cold, eat neither Milk,
Broth, nor spoone meat, salt meats, nor fried, drink but little at meals, no
wine at all, except the stomach be weak.

Thorns with splinters, and to draw them out.
TAke a piece of a Fox tongue, steeped all night in vinegar, bind it fast on
for forty hours without removing, it will draw it out.

Or take Ryce meal, Hazell nuts, black Soap, Tar, Goose dung, and Hens dung,
mix them, and boil them in milk to a poultis, plaster it fast on.

Or stamp the roots of a Reed, and lay it to the grief.

Or stamp Bettony, and use it.

Or take Egrimony, the grease of a Hare and Rye meal mixed, and apply it.

Or take honey, the gall of a beast, and chalk, and use it.

Toothache with rhewme, the cure
BVrne Ashen-keyes to ashes, and put them in a fine linen cloth, bound hard
together, then dip it in wine vinegar, and lay it in the hole behind the ear,
this raises a blister, and eases.

Or take Ginger and Liquorice mundified and Powdered ana iiij, salt Peeter j
fine powdered and mixed, then with a quill blow it up in the contrary nostrill
where the pain is; this works hard, but helps.

Toothache, stinking breath, and loose teeth to cure.
DIp a linen cloth in vinegar of Squils, rub your teeth and gums therewith.

Toothache of rhewme.
TAke English honey, melt it in a dish, then shred off the inner bark of a
white Bullas tree, Pepper, and white Ginger, as much as will make two little
Pills, so big as a black Cherry, wrap each of them in a thin linen cloth,
dip them in a dish of hot honey, hold them in your mouth one after another,
when one cools take another, do this till the pain be gone.

Ptysick or any disease of the lungs.
TAke the roots of Parsley, Fennel, and Succory ana j M pithed, the fresh tops
of Rosemary and Bettony ana j M, Anniseed bruised, Liquorice mundified and thin
sliced ana j dj., Enula Campaine roots powdered iiij, Raisins of the Sun
stoned iiij, English Saffron j, boil all these in three quarts of running
water one hour, then strain out the liquor, and put it to fire again, with
three spoonefulls of honey, when it boyles seum it, let it cool, and bottle it
up for your use, drink morning and evening eight spoonefulls thereof warm,
sometimes tossed a Fig, and eat it dipped in the powder of Bettony.

Of this make a syrup, which eat a spoonful often in the day and night.

Turn sole to make.
DIp linen clothes in Allom water, let them dry again, then take Elder
berries, and Black-berries, wring their juyces out, then dip the Allom clothes
therein, let them soke well, and keep them when it is well dried in.

For the Toothache, a medicine made by Doctor Butler of Cambridge.
TAke the rind of Caner roots, of the black berry bramble, the flowers of
Poingranates called Balaustia ana ij, Pellitory of Spain, white Henbane seed,
the rind of Mandrake and Roche Allom ana ij dj., Spurge of the garden j M,
boil all these together in very hard white wine, this is rough in taste,
therewith gargarize and wash the mouth often.

A Triacle, or rather a pretty Mithridate.
TAke Gentian, Aristolochia rotunda, Bay berries husked elect, Myrrh and Jvory
ana j, Ginger, Cinnamon, red Roses, Opium, Spicknard Castor Opoponax,
Frankincense, Fennel seeds, Parsley, Caroway, Wormwood, Calamus aromaticus,
Enula Campaine, Scordium, or water Germander, ana ij, Storax, Hartswort,
Sothernwood, Turpentine washed in Rose water ana vj, powder all that are to be
powdered, and searce them fine, incorporate them with honey clarified quod
sufficit: this is excellent for any strong disease, or other, it expells poison
from the heart of any kind; it expells wind and venomous vapors, it breaks
the Stone, it gives quiet rest and sleep, it takes away all pain, it causes
urine, and cures all inward griefs and sicknesle, the Dosse is j at a time.

A stomach drink that cures many diseases, if it be made and drunk in May, they
are safe all the year after.
TAke Scabius, Mugwort, Smallage, Devils bit, ground Jvy, Wormwood, Fumitory,
Fetherfew, Spicknell ana ij M. boil them long in Whay made in May, when they
be well boiled, in the last walm put in it the whites of six eggs, some honey
clarified, a little Saffron, the powder of twelve Cloves, then strain it, and
drink of it first and last.

Thighs ache, or feet.
TAke the roots of Walwort, scrape the inmost rind, stamp the midst, and
temper with Boares grease and plaster it on.

Thorns to draw out any where.
Stamp j M. of Dazie roots tempered with yolks of eggs and wheat flower, and
make a plaster thereof, and apply it, dress it twice a day.

For Tetters or any creeping eating Sores.
TAke honey clarified, mix therewith of Daffadill and the roots thereof, anoint
the grief, or take white Soap j Orpment ij, make an unguent therewith, but
first wash the place with warm water before you anoint it.

Or mix the powder of Salt Armoniack, with Soap anoint and be whole, probatum.

V
Vein broken or spitting blood.
TAke Mouse-dung powdered as much as will lie on a groat, put it in a little
draught of the juice of Plantaine warm, with a little Sugar, drink thereof
first and last till it be well.

Vein broken.
TAke Wormwood, Hemlock, Housleeke, ana dj. M. Honey, and Oil of Roses ana j,
Bole, and sanguis Draconis ana ij, beat them together, and plaster it to the
grief.

Ulcers, the cure.
TAke Roch Allom, powder it and calcine it till the pot be red hot, and the
Allom pure white, then add thereto Wine Vinegar so much as will cover it, then
vapor away the Vinegar till the Allom be black, then calcine it again till
it be as white as Snow; then mix it with Honey of Roses, make a plaster
thereof, and apply it.

Ulcers old to Siccatrize and cleanse.
STrew thin over the Ulcer calcined vitriall, then lay on a plaster of flos
unguentorum.

Vomit easy with intermission.
TAke the syrrop of Mints and Violets, ana four, boil them to the thickness
of Honey, then draw away the fire then mix them with the seeds of Tompions,
Raddish and Nettles dried and powdered, and Rose water ana four, the roots of
Asarabacca, dried in the shadow, pure chalk powdered, Cinnamon and Fe^^ilseed,
all powdered, ana j, confect them all together into an Electuary, the Dose is
iij, either in Barley Water, Whay, or Milk, or honied water.

Vomit to stay.
TAke Mints, Shepherds Purse, Plantaine, Knot-grasse and Cumfry, ana j M. small
chopped, boil them in a quart of red or claret Wine, drink of this Wine, and
plaster the herbs to the stomach in a double cloth.

Unguent mundifying.
TAke Rosin viij, Colophony four, Wax j lb. Oil one lb, Opoponax j, di.,
Verdigrease j, melt the Wax and Rosin together, then strew on the Gummes being
dissolved in Vinegar, then boil it a little on a soft fire, take it off, and
stir in your Verdigrease last in fine powder by little and little, so
plaster it.

Vnguentum Neopolitanum, to cure the French Pox.
TAke Oil of Spick. Oil of Tartar, Oil of Bay, Peterolium, and Swines
grease, ana j, Frankincense, 4, Euforbiu^ j, di., ung. dialtheae, and Agrippa,
ana j Quicksilver mortified with fasting spittle, iij, mix them well and
compound an Ointment thereof, anoint therewith but hands and arms to the
elbowes, legs and feet to the knees.

Unguent to heal a green wound at first dressing.
TAke Aloes, Siccatrine fine powdered, the powder of Perosine ana, Mix and
grind them with the white of an Egg, lay it on with a Spledget of Lint.

Unguent for Ladies chopped, or sore Lips.
TAke Butter out of the Churne, melt it with so much Wax, Rose Water, and fine
scraped Sugar, compound them together to an Ointment, and anoint therewith upon
the hands.

Unguent for deep thrusts or Wounds.
TAke Hogs grease di. lb. the juice of Plantain, Wormwood, Marigold and Dazies,
put to your grease so much Sallet Oil as grease, melt and mix them well
together on the fire, put therein so much fine searced powder of Alkanet as
covers the unguent red, this cures without Tent, and keep it open.

Unguent Incarnative and healing.
TAke English Honey and Turpentine, melt them on the fire, and scumme them with
a feather, then take it from the fire, and stir it, and put to it the juyces
of Dasies and Plantain ana, the yolks of three eggs, stir them well and mix
them to an Unguent.

Unguent to heal the Hemrods, and break them.
TAke the finest Soap, bray therewith Garden Snails without shells, and the fine
searced powder of burnt Muscle-shels, all mixed and brayed together, anoint
therewith, and in three dressings be whole, and then lay on a desiccative
powder.

Vnguentum defensivum and repercussivum.
TAke Oil of Roses four, Bole two, Terra sigillata one, Vinegar one, Camphire
di., Nightshade, and Sengreen, ana j M. pound, the herbs, and strain the
juyces out, mix altogether cold, fiat unguentum.

Vnguentum digestive, which brings a wound to fair matter.
TAke Honey and fresh Butter ana, incorporate them well together, with the
flower of Fengreeke, Linseed, and Wheat, melt them and mix them on the fire
together, make it so.

Unguent to mundifie.
TAke Rosin, Wax, and Pitch ana iii, Deeres Suet j, melt them together on a
soft fire, strain them purely without pressing, then set it on the fire, and
put there to Verdigrease, vj. Allom fine powdered, iiij, mix them well with vj.
great spoonfuls of Sallet Oil, and so it is done.

Unguent to cleanse and heal.
TAke white Copperas fine powdered four, Allom fine powdered, and Verdigrease
ana iij, Honey fine powdered, and Butter ana ij, Oil of Roses ij, boil all
together to a liquid unguent, then mix thereto Turpentine ij, lay it on with
Spledgets.

Unguent to skin any wound.
TAke Lapis Calaminaris powdered and searced j, fresh Butter, Oil of Linseed
ana ij, Bole and Ceruse ana iiij, powdered and searced, mix them all in a mortar
to an unguent, anoint therewith and lay Spledgets wet therein on it.

Unguent to force one to piss in any sickness.
INfuse and mix ten drops of Oil of Juniper in ij of Parsley water, drink it
fasting bloud-warm, use it till you be well, which will be at one or two
takings.

W
Wounds and small Cuts.
TAke powder of Storax, mix it with Oil of Hypericon and Alkanet, it cures
quickly.

Wounds green, a Balsome to heal quickly.
TAke the oldest white Wine j pint, Oil three pintes, Hypericon, Clownes
Alheale, and red Rose buds, ana j M. fresh and small shread, earthen worms
cleansed di. lb. boil all these in the Oil and Wine, til the Oil and Wine be
consumed; then strain it hard forth, and put it to fire again, digest therein
liquid Storax j, and Venice Turpentine j lb. Wax cut in pieces ij, mix them
well together when it is cold, put it in Vialls, and Sun it ten days, this is
a good tenting Salve.

Wounds green, a Salve to cure.
TAke the Oil of Linseed pint one, infuse therein Adders tongue and sweet
Maudlin small chopped or cut all night, so much as the Oil will cover, the next
day boil it close covered, till the herbs have lost their color, then strain
it, put the Oil to fire again, put thereto Wax and Rosin, cut in small pieces
ana ij till it be well melted, then mix and stir therein Venice Turpentine
ij being well mixed, take it from fire put it up to your use.

Wounds or Sores, a good Lotion.
TAke white Wine one pint, infuse therein so much calcined Vitriall as will
make it blood red, then put thereto the powder of calcined Allom, so much as a
Walnut.

Wenne to cure.
RUb the Wen on a dead body, a man on a woman, and a woman the contrary, prick
the Wen with a Needle in the dead body to be buried with him.

Worms to kill and cure.
TAke Cockle, and with the flower thereof make a plaster, temper it with the
juice of Wormwood, lay it the Navell.

Or take the powders of Betony, Savine, Wormwood, and Century, ana mixed, eat a
little thereof in broaths, or drink it in drink.

Wind Colic to cure.
TAke the powder of Setwell Roots, and put it in white Wine, it is very good.

Wind with pain and swelling in the Stomach.
TAke Avenice, Licorice and Annis, cleansed and bruised, Gallingale and Hyssop,
with the powder of Mace, and a little Gentian, boil all these in white Wine,
the Dose is in discretion, strain it and drink it warm.

Or oil of Roses, Wax, powders of Mastick and Mace melted together, and apply
it in a plaster to the Stomach.

Wild fire in the flesh to cure.
TAke the dregs or lees of red or Claret Wine, or White, and the dregs of
Vinegar, the whites and yolks of Eggs, bray all these together and apply it.

Water to dry and heal a Sore, and to dry a humor.
TAke white Copperas calcined and powdered fine, sees it in fair running
water, then let it stand and settle, take none but the cleerest thereof, or
strain it purely, and so use it.

Woman's milk hard in Breasts to cure.
TAke Mints, Walwort and Vervine ana, Hogsgrease, stamp them together, and as a
Poultis apply it.

Warts or Wens to cure.
TAke j lb. of the first tap of Sopemakers Lie, put it in a pot and mix there
with so much quick Lyme as will make it thick. then put it in a bag, hang it up
with a Basin under it, and let the water drayn into the Basin, then put a drop
of that water on the top of the Wart or Wen, and let it dry in three or four
times till it look white, then it will go away.

Water to eject or seringe the Secrets of Man or Woman, and a good lotion for
old Sores.
TAke water and white Wine ana j quart, Woodbine leaves and flowers, ana ij M.
Sage, Rosemary and Watercresses small chopped and well boiled together, half an
hour close covered, then put therein Allom iiij powdered, and Honey two small
spoonfuls, then boil them three walmes, strain it and keep it to use.

Woman's Paps swollen, or hard to cure.
TAke the juice of Herb Bener, bathe the hard Breast therewith, and wet a
double cloth therein and lay it thereon, bathe it and wet the cloth again, so
use it till you be well.

The Temperature, Nature and qualities of Plants and Herbs for Physic.
First Medicines temperate, hot in first Degree.
BEans, Water Lillies, Barley, Knowholm, Maydenhaire, Hogsgrease, sweet Oil,
Milk, Wax, White of Lead, Letharge of White Lead, Venice hair, or Walferne,
Tutty, or Licorice, Gourds, Citron, or, Orange.

Medicines hot in the first Degree.
Round Aristo'o chia, Hollihocks, sweet Almonds, Chestnuts, Figs, Wormwood,
Smallage, and Egrimony, Buglosse, Borage, Mercury, Devils Bitt, Hartstongue,
Walworte, Aloes, Wheat, Fenegreeke Linsced, Honey, Butter, Sugar, Whay,
Melilots, new Wine, Gronsell, Elder-tree, Mushrome, or Agarick.

Medicines hot in the second Degree.
Guiacum, Cyprus, Calamus Aromat. Piony, Nutmegs, bitter Almonds, Enula,
Campain, Comfrey, Branckerursine, Sainckle, Lions tooth, wild Rocket, Bennet,
Lavender, Cardamonium, Horehound, Garden Mints, Stone, Parsley, Scabius, Fenill,
Frankincense, Myrrh, Masticke, Saracole, Bryony, Madder, Fumitory, Clary,
Broom, Hops, Hyssop, Balm.

Hot in the third Degree.
Gentian, Aristolochia longa, Polipodium, Pellitory of Spain Hors-radish,
Dogstones, Galingale, Gladon, Ginger, Ireos, Watercrofoot, Mugwort, Chervill,
Cyprus, Selendine, Origany, Sage, Raperoot, French Diptany, Annis, Opoponax
Rosemary, Hyssop, Galbanum, Juniper, Coliquintida, Costmary, Saint John's Wort,
Privet, Rue, Savine.

Hot in the fourth Degree.
Garlic, Onions, Tinthimale, Mustardseed, Euforbium, Pepper, Petrolium,
Pelitory of Spain, Anacardus, Savory.

Medicines cold in the first Degree.
Chestnuts, Mallows, Pomegranats, Barbaries, Knotgrasse, Lillies, Arach, Barley,
Pears, Apples, Violets, Roses, Quinces, Cytrons.

Cold in the second Degree.
Peach, Orange, Gourd, Cucumbers, Primrose, sour Pomegranats, Lungwort,
Pleawort, Blossoms of Pomegranats, Acacia, Plantain, Endive, the yellow
Flowre-Deluce.

Cold in the third Degree.
Tassell, Housleek, Sorrel, Wild Endive, Tormentill, Purslain, the lesser
Housleek, Nightshade, Strawberries, Raspis, Camphire.

Cold in the fourth Degree.
Poppy, Opium, Hemlock, Henbane, Mandrake.

Medicines moist in the first Degree.
Enula Campain, Mallows, Buglosse, Borage, Butter, Spurge, Almonds, Lindseed,
Violets, Tar.

Moist in the second Degree.
Lillies, Lintels of the Fens, Flowre-Deluce, Lettice, wild Bore-brech,
Cucumber, Pursly, Primrose, white Mustard seed, Dates, Fleawort, Ammoniacum,
Arache, Lingwort, Eringus roots, Gourds.

Moist in the third degree.
Satyrion, wild Endive, Strawberries, Gourds, Colewort.

Moist in the fourth degree.
Quicksilver.

Medicines dry in the first degree.
Fennel, Hollyhocks, Devils bit, Elder, Pomgranats, Barley, Walwort, Chestnuts,
Fengreeke, Camomile, Mellilote, Saffron, Frankincense, Sarcacole, Beans,
Fumitory, Tormentill, Sorrel.

Dry in the second degree.
Aristolochia, Guiacum, Cyprus, Calamus aromaticus, Cinnamon, Dill,
Sothernwood, Camphire O^^^m, Centaury the lesser, Horehound, ^^icle, Lions
tooth, Hyssop, Broom, Pa^^ly, ^cabius, Pimpernell, Cardimonium, bitter Almonds,
Millet, the Indian Nut, Nutmegs, Myrrh, Verjuyce, Honey, Anniseed, Cyprus,
Juniper tree, Endive, Fennel, Lavander, Hops, Gariofolia, Balm, Mints, Figs,
Pomgranats, Mastick.

Dry in the third degree.
Lavander, Hogs bread, Gladen, Rape root, Pellitory of Spain, Gentian,
Galingale, Dragons, Wormwood, Mugwort, Crowfoot, Bettony, Celendine, Hemlock,
Hellebore, great Celendine, Privet, Town Cresses, Anniseed, Origan, Cinkfoyle,
Rosemary, Savine, Cockell, Tutsan, Garlic, Cumin, Sanguis Draconis, Galls,
Sothernwood, St. John's Wort, Pennyryall, Rue, Sorrel, Tormentill, Arabeck,
Chalk, Vinegar, Aloes, Millet.

Dry in the fourth degree.
Pepper, Spurge, Anacardus Savory, Oil, stone Parsley, Mustard, Euphorbium,
Garlic, tame Cresses.

To cure a green wound by the weapon, that gave it without sight of the party
wounded,
TAke of the Moss growing upon a Scull iij, of Ceres ij, May Butter clarified
two quarts, Dear sewet j, Bees Wax ij, Camphire dj., boil all these in the
Butter, till it come to a pint, then take Venice Turpentine j, and boil it a
walme with the rest being a pint, stir it till it be cold, put thereinto oil
of Snayles ij, while it is lukewarm, beat them all together with your hand,
till it be made into a Balsome.

The use of it.
TEmper the Balsome upon the palm of your hand, and therewith anoint the
Weapon that gave the wound, so far as it was in the wound, then take a fine
linen cloth and bind up the weapon, so far as it is anointed, tie it very
hard, and put it into a Trunk or other close place from air for xxj days,
the Patient shall be well.

How the wound shall be used in the mean time.
CAuse the wound to be washed twice every day with the water of the party
wounded, then dip a ragge of fine Holland in Spring water, filling it therewith
as full as it can be filled, and lay it close upon the wound, but if any bone
be broken or perished, so that it needs to be scaled, then let the wound be
washed and chafed with the Urine till it bleed at every washing.

His Diet must be temperate.
WHite Bread, Table Beer, fresh Meat, but let him abstain from Beef, Pork,
Goose, and all kind of fish.

How to make oil of Snayles.
TAke a quart of black Snayles in May, put them in a bag, with half a
handful of Bay salt, bruised, hang them up until they drop through the bag,
a quart of Snayles will make ij of Oil.

A brief Collection of all Herbs, Plants, Seeds, Spices, and Gums now used in
Physic, to purge the Body of Man, omitting all such Herbs and Plants as have
any great Danger to deal withal.
AGarick purges Phlegm and Melancholy, ministered with Spices, and corrected
accordingly.

Allo-Cicotrine in the pap of a roasted Apple, or any way else purges gently,
the Dosse is one Dram.

Astrabacca, the leaves purges upward and downward, if so gathered and
stripped.

BRiony white, take the young Sprouts thereof boiled, and eat it, purges by
stool, and urine phlegmes, so does the roots in decoction, but strong and
offensive.

Buckhome berries, powdered and boiled in the fat broth of flesh, one dram and
a half purges phlegm and choler.

Broom, the young tops boiled in wine, purges the Dropsy, or any waterish
cause.

Bettony, one dram, of the roots dried in water and honey powdered, purges
upward gross and filthy humors, and helps the Sciatica.

Borage flowers made in Conserve, purges Melancholy, and comforts the heart.

COliquintida, the weight of ten grains of the pith thereof in decoction or
otherwise, with Mastick and Spices fit for it, purges phlegm and choler.

Cowcumber wild x or xij grains of the juice thereof infused, purges phlegm.

Centory in Decoction, loses the belly, and cures the Sciatica.

Cassia Fistula purges choler and blood from Superfluities.

Cich, or wild Tar, or Orbus seed fine powdered, and taken with honey,
purges by Seige and Urine.

DAffodill root with Nettle seed, boiled in white Wine and Honey, purges the
blood and spots.

Dodar, that grows on Flax, boiled in white Wine, purges by urine, stool,
and choler.

Danewort j, of the seed bruised and taken with syrup of Roses, and a little
Sack, is a good Purgation for Gowt or Dropsy, it purges waterish humors by
Stool.

EPithymum, or mother of Thyme iiij powdered with Oxymell, and a little salt Gem
purges choler and phlegm, and cleanses the blood, so it will do boiled
green in Decoction.

Esine with the broad leaf j, of his inner bark, boiled in wine, purges
phlegm.

ENula Campaine the roots, candied, preserved, or in a Loche, to be licked,
purges clammy humors in breast or lungs.

Eldren the crops, leaves, or inner bark taken in Broth, purges phlegm, and
so does the seed infused in Vinegar, and afterward dried, then take j any way.

FVmitory the juice in syrup or decoction, purges by Urine, and Seige blood,
and hot humors.

Fennel giant j of the juice in an Electuary, purges phlegm and choler.

Flower-de-luce, the juice of his roots drunk with Whay, or otherwise, to
allay heat, does effectually purge Choler and waterish humors, and is good for
the Dropsy.

Fennel hogs, or Hogs fennel, the yellow sap of the root taken with bitter
Almonds and Rue, purges phlegm and choler.

Fleawort seed boiled, and the decoction made and taken, purges hot choleric
humors.

Fox gloves in Decoction boiled with white wine, and honey, or Sugar, purges
and ripens tough phlegm in the breast and opens the stopping of the liver and
intrails.

Fengreeke, the juice boiled with honey, or the Decoction of the seed in wine,
and a little vinegar, purges by stool all manner of corrupt humors from
stomach and Gowts.

Fetherfew powder drunk with Oximel, purges phlegm and melancholy, and
cheereth the lungs from pursivenesse.

Frankincense, herb, leaves, and roots, boiled with white Wine and Pepper,
purges Leprosy and Pox.

Glass, Saltwort, a little of the herb any way taken inward, purges by Urine
the Dropsy.

Gladden stinking the root infused in Ale, or any other decoction, purges by
Seige and Urine, but the seeds purges more by Urine then the roots does.

HEllebore black, or Beare-foot powdered i with sweet Wine, purges black choler.

Hops, the juice purges blood from choler, by Stool and Urine.

Hedge Hyssop ij bruised and boiled, purges waterish humors.

ISop the juice taken with Oxymell, purges phlegm.

LIllies red, the roots and leaves boiled inwater and honey, purges the blood.

Laurel, his leaves green or dry j, purges phlegm upward and downward, ten
grains of the seed does the same.

MAndrake, the juice of his roots in small quantity purges phlegm.

Mercury, the Decoction purges phlegm and waterish humors.

Mechoa can powdered j in Sack, purges phlegm and waterish humors.

Nightshade or bitter sweet, the wood hereof in Decoction in white Wine dj. M.
thin sliced, purges both Dropsy and Jaundies by stool and urine.

ORgany or wild Marjorum, in decoction purges by Seige and Urine.

St. PEeters Wort j fine powdered, a decoction of honied wine purges the belly.

Polypody of the Oak in decoction, purges phlegm gently, the Dosse is j.

Pruins damask dj lb, boiled with honey i spoonful, and Senna j, make an
Electuary thereof purges gently, it may be sharpened with any the precedent
Medicaments.

Palma Christ i both herb and seed boiled in decoction purges phlegm and
waterish humors upward and downward.

Peniryall with Honey purges the Lungs and Breast, and with j of Aloes purges
and helps the Crampe and Convulsion of Sinews.

Peach flowers or blossoms infused in warm water xxiiij hours, then strained
out and new put in as before, and so used and renewed vj times, then strained,
and the liquor boiled up with Sugar to a Syrup, take two spoonfuls thereof at
once, it is the gentlest purgation in the World, none better nor easier.

RUbarb two more or less to the parties strength infused or otherwise purges
Choler.

Southernwood seed j powdered and boiled in white Wine, purges phlegm by urine.

Scammony x or xij grains roasted in a Quince, and the Scammony cast away, then
eat the Quince or make an Electuary with Pruins and some viij grains thereof,
purges Choler and slimy phlegm.

Scabius the decoction purges Scabs and Sores of the Bladder by urine.

Seny ij, Mechoacan iiij, white Ginger j, Anniseed and Licorice, ana ij,
Saltgem, iii, all fine powdered and seareed, take it fasting j or ij spoonfuls
in warm white wine, it is a gentle purgation.

Sowbread root j di. with honied water, purges gross phlegm and filthy
humors.

Stecadose, or French Lavander, opens all stoppings in body, and expels all
corrupt humors, it is an excellent herb for Man.

TVtsane seed iij, small powdered in decoction, purges Choler and is good for
Dropsy, drink water two days after it.

Turnesole j M. boiled in white Wine, purges Choler and phlegm.

Turbith j di. in an Electuary with Syrup of Violets and Ginger purges phlegm.

Tinthimill seed or Spurge corrected, discreetly purges both ways.

Three-leafed-grasse, the decoction with Honey and Salt for a Glyster purges
the guts of slime and filth.

VIolets the syrup iij, purges gently, you may sharpen it with any the
precedents.

VVOad one pennyworth, of the seed boiled with water and honey, purges choler.

Wormwood purges by Siege and Urine a weak stomach, troubled with choler and
phlegm.

These herbs purge head and brain.
THe powder of the root of stinking Gladwine snuffed or taken with a Pipe.

The powder or fume of Tobacco taken as aforesaid.

The root of Lacerwort chewed in the mouth, purges and eases the Toothache.

The root of Primrose stamped and strained, snuff the juice, purges and helps
the Meagrom.

The root of Masterwort chewed.

The powder of the root of wild Helly boar.

The roots and leaves of Pellitory of Spain chewed, purges phlegm.

The juice of Betts snuffed.

Dazie roots and leaves stamped and strained, and the juice snuffed.

The roots and leaves of the wind flower.

The juice of Pimpernel gargarized, helps the Toothache, and purges.

The juice of Jvie snuff'd, purges and stays running ears, and cures old
sores in ears, mixed with a little oil of Roses.

The Spice called Grains chewed.

The juice of Pilewort or little Celendine mixed with honey, and snuffed.

The dry or green leaves of Spurge Laurel chewed.

The juice or powder of Bettony helps the sight, and purges.

The juice of young Sprowts of Nettles snuffed.

The powder of Pepper.

The juice of a white Onion snuffed, purges.

A brief discourse of the Colors and Judgments of Vrines.
URine fat and troubled, betokens a burning fever of Choler, or red and thick
all over with a black circle, shows sickness all over the body.

Urine white and thin little in quantity shows cold in the body.

Urine clear with a black circle, shows the sick has the Ptisick.

Urine red and thin with a bright circle, shows a bad Stomach.

Urine thin and greenish above shows a cold complexion, if blue in casting it is
the Ptisick.

Urine thin if it show black above betokens great loss of Nature.

Urine thick and troubled horspisse signifies headache.

Urine fat in the bottom, white in the midst, and red above, shows the Fever
quartan.

Urine fat like flesh with dregs in the bottom like shadowing, shows the
Dropsy of Cold, but if it be whey above, clear in the midst, and shadowing
beneath shows a hot dropsy.

Urine with black dregs in the bottom like gobbets of coals shows worms.

Urine with black contents as Mothes in the midst shows an Impostume under the
side.

Urine with contents like shavings of Parchment, in the bottom shows
stopping of the Reins and Pipes of the Liver.

Urine black and green with long white Contents signifies the Palsy.

Urine that has grains under the circle, shows the slomack is full of
worms, and also burning of the heart.

Urine foul above shows heat in the Heart, Lungs and Spleen.

Urine with black contents in the bottom shows Costivenesse.

Urine that is long lasting, betokens biting in the body and great Rheum.

Urine thick, little in quantity, and high colored, shows great burning in
the body.

Urine frothy, clear and a little red, show pain under the right side.

Urine frothy shows wind and pa^ under the left side.

Urine very red shows an Impostume on the Liver.

Urine as red as burned gold if it be Hydroptick betokens death.

Urine in a hot Fever, one part red, another black, another green, another blue
signifies death.

Urine in hot axis black and little in quantity and stinking betokens death.

Urine all colored as lead, shows a prolonging of death.

Urine dark and clear beneath signifies death.

Urine that shines raw and bright, if the scum in the bottom shines not, shows
death

Urine thin in substance fleeting above like a dark sky shows death.

Urine dirty, stinking and a dark sky shows prolonging of death.

Urine like water with a dark sky in a fe^er shows death.

Urine with dregs in the bottom ming^d like blood, shows death.

Urine black and thin, if the sick do loath ^hen he goes to the stool, and
speaks over^wart, or understands not aright, if his sick^se goes not from him,
signifies death.

Women's Vrines, their signification.
URine white, heavy and stinking, shows pain in the Reins, and Mother and Cold.

Urine that fleeteth fat above, shows pain in the Reins of the back.

Urine with black contents in the bottom, shows falling of Flowers.

Urine with white contents in the bottom, shows much falling of Flowers.

Urine colored as Lindseed, shows death if she have the Flux.

Urine red as gold with a watery circle above, shows she is with child: mark
if you see your face in a woman's water, if she be without a Fever, she is with
Child.

Urine of a woman with child shall have some clear strokes, the most part is
troubled in a reddish manner of a Tawny, this token never fails as soon as the
Child has life, if it be a Girl, the troublesomnesse will draw downward; if
a Boy, the troublesomenesse will be above, this fails not.

Urine bright as gold shows lust, or desire to marry.

Urine colored as white Lead, if she be with Child, shows the Child is
dead within her, if she be not with Child, and the urine stink and colored as
Lead, shows the Mother is rotten.

A rule to know the danger in falling sick, by the Diary judgment of the Moon.
1 IN primis, he that falls sick on the first day of the Moon, shall soon die
if the sickness be tedious or fierce. 2 Although he before sick, he shall be
cured. 3 He may with due regard in Physic be cured. 4 He shall be soon
restored to health 5 He shall be sick but ten days, and then restored. 6 He is
in no danger. 7 He shall enjoy life but three months. 8 He shall continue
sick and languish a long time. 9 He shall have health after nine days. 10 He
shall amend after ten days. 11 He shall be long sick, but at last recover. 12
He shall be sick xij days, and recover. 13 He shall have a long and grievous
sickness. 14 He shall be soon restored. 15 He shall easily escape death. 16 He
shall be in great danger, if he take the open air. 17 He shall not prevail
with any Physic to do him good. 18.19.20. Be good days. 21. Sickness is
mortal and incurable. 22 He shall escape after he has layn three months. 23
He shall die in few days. 24 He shall remayn a long time sick. 25.26.27.28.29.
Be all good days. 30 He shall hardly escape with many Medicines.
To know the Humor that causes the sickness by the Patients Spittle.
IN primis, if the Spittle be white viscous, the sickness comes of phlegm.

If black and clammy or like Lead, the sickness is of Melancholy.

If Cytron, yellowish or Glassie, it comes of Choler.

If tawny or reddish mattery color it comes of Blood.

If the white Spittle be not knotty, it signifies health.

If fumy or frothy, it signifies wind, and a raw stomach and cold.

If gleary like horn, it shows a stomach slack, raw, and slow of digesture.

A judgment of the state of Man's sickness by the Pulse.
LAy your four fingers on the Pulse, the^ mark which finger the Pulse is most
strongly under, if the pulse under the little be feeble and weak, and so under
every finger to the heart upward be more weak, it signifies death.

Contrariwise, if under the little finger it smite strong and under the
Ring-singer stronger, the middle finger more strong, and under the forefinger
next the heart strongest of all, it is a good sign and prognosticateth health.

FINIS.
That every one may know how to compound ^hese Medicines, without the help of
any other man, therefore the notes of all the weights which are used among the
Apothecaries, are ^laced underneath.

Grain has this mark, gr. Scruple has this mark,. Drachme has this mark,.
Ounce has this mark,. Pound has this mark, lb. Quart has this mark, qr. A
small handful, or as much as you can take up with three fingers. has this
mark, P. A great handful has this mark, M. Half has this mark, di. Of
each has this mark, ana. Receive. has this mark,. As much as is sufficient
q.s.

