An A. B. C. FOR LAYEmen, otherwise called, the Lay-mans Letters. AN ALPHABET
for Laymen, delivering unto them such Lessons as the holy Ghost teaches them
in the word, by things sensible, very necessary to be diligently considered.

AT LONDON; Printed by Robert VValdegraue for Thomas Man, and William Brom.
1585.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, his very good Lord, Sir William Cicill, Baron of
Burgley, Lord high Treasurer of England, etc. And to his honorable Patron,
Sir WALTER MILDMAY, Knight, Chancellor of her Majesty's Exchequer, GEORGE
WITHER wishes Grace and peace, with all heavenly blessings, from the father
of our Lord Jesus Christ.
IT is an usual manner (right honorable) for all those that go about to
publish any work or writing of theirs, to dedicate it to some one or other,
either to be a Testimony to the World, of their mutual love and friendship,
or else to witness their dutifulness or thankfulness for benefits received,
or else that under the protection, defense and favor of authority, their works
may the better pass^ and be the safelier guarded and defended against all busy
reprehenders. Wherefore unwilling to break the received custom, and looking
amongst the Honorable, to when for benefits I am bound: As I confess that
amongst them I have found many and great welwillers, so to you two, whom my
estate has compelled to trouble and use most, for your constant good will and
continued favor showed and benefits bestowed, I am above all others most
bounden, and therefore as a thankful remembrance have dedicated this simple
sily labor unto your honors. God in these our days, has raised up a number of
worthy, learned careful men for the Church of ^od, whereof some bestow
themselves wholly in teaching of their flocks; others for the more general
benefit of the Church, spend part of their time and pains in writing. Of the
latter sort, some translate into our tongue the learned works of other, some
set out learned Sermons, Catechismes and other treatises for the admonition and
instruction of the people: some show their learning in mightily refuting and
confounding the common adversaries: Yet amongst them all, one thing I see
wanting. For where I see that God has given unto men two manner of
Instructions and teachings: one by his word, another by his creatures, and for
to help our dullness ^o learn by his creatures, has by his Spirit in his
holy Word, given a meruellous number of Lessons drawn from things sensible.
In the former manner of teaching, God has bless us (in comparison of our
Fathers abundantly) But in the latter I have not seen any man of our time,
that of purpose has taken pains. Which want no doubt is some cause, that (by
these outward things, which God has appointed to be so many helps not
only for the present necessities of this life but also to Heaven) Men,
ignorant of the good Lessons which the Holy Ghost gives by them, for want of
further and deeper consideration, are detayned upon earth, and drowned in
earthly things, and do not possess but are possessed of their possessions.
Wherefore in some little part to supplye that want, but cheefelye to give to
others of greater learning and gifts, occasion to bestow this way some part
of their leisure: I have collected into the order of an Alphabet these few
Lessons given by the spirit of God: Wherein, as I have cheefely respected the
benefit of the ruder sort, so to accommodate my self unto them, I have
endeavored with playnesse as much breuitye and shortness as I possibly could,
and therein for the most part, I have delivered the very words of the Holy
Ghost, word for word: And wheresoever I have gone a little from them, yet
there the very words give manifest occasion of the collection. Which, that it
may of all men the better and with less pain be seen and viewed, I have in
the Margent noted not only every Chapter, but also every verse whence I have
gathered the note set down. If then any may be occasioned by mean hereof, by
the sight and using of earthly blessings, to lift up their minds to heavenly
contemplation, and thankful consideration of the Power, Wisdom, and
goodness of God; then have I my desire, and that which I only seek for. Thus
I commit your Honors to the protection of Almighty God, whoeuer preserve both
you and yours.

Danbury, the 29. of January. 1585.
An Alphabet for laymen, delivering unto them such lessons as the holy Ghost
teaches them in the word, by things sensible.
Abundaunce.
WHen God blesses us with Abundaunce, Deutr. 10.14.
then are we to call to mind whose gift and liberality it is: Psalm. 24.1
namely, that the earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, and that
manifold are his works, all which he has in wisdom made, and the earth is
full of his riches. Psalm. 104.24 28.
He gives it to men and they gather it, he opens his hand, and they are
filled with good things. Yet notwithstanding they must beware of covetousness.
For though they have Abundance, yet their life stands not therein. Luke. 12.15
But they must remember that they which be rich in this world, are charged to
be ready to give and glad to distribute. For if they have this worlds good,
1. Tim. 6.18
and see their brother have need, and shut up their compassion from him, 1.
John. 1.5.
the love of God dwells not in them. And then shall this judgment light upon
them, that as their goods increase: so shall they increase that eat them, and no
good shall come to the owners, but the beholding of it with their eyes, and
they shall beget Sons, Eccles. 5.10. and 13.
and in their hands shall be nothing else, though they have riches, treasures and
honor, and want nothing of all that their heart desires, Ecclesi. 6.2.
yet they shall not have power to eat thereof, but strangers shall eat it up.

Adamant.
BEcause wicked men are impudent and stif-headded, and also in great number and
countenance, therefore God promises his assistance to his Ministers, and to
give them boldness and constancy in their calling, Ezech. 3.9.
and to make their foreheades as hard as the Adamant, so that they shall not
fear the great looks of them that rebel against God.

Adder.
THE Adder expresses the nature of obstinate wicked men. For as he is by
nature inclined and desirous to sting and to hurt with his poison whomsoever he
may: Psalm. 58.4.5.
so all their counsels tend to the increase of wickedness and mischief. And
as this evil in the nature of an Adder can by no means be redressed, no not
by enchauntment, for he stops his ears against the charmer. So there is no
hope of the conversion of these obstinate wicked ones, who stubbornely refuse
to here all wholesome doctrine and good counsel that proceeds out of the
Word, whereof we have example in the counsel that stoned Steven, Acts. 7.^7.
for they stopped their ears. And in the Papists amongst us, who will not
come into those places, where the Word is read and preached.

Age.
TO live long is a blessing given of God, to them that duly and dutifully
honor their Parents. Exodus 20.12. 2. Kin. 22.20
But sometime God takes them away sooner for their benefit. For Age is not to
be gloried in, but when it is found in the way of righteousness, we must
honor the aged, Prou. 16.32.
and rise up before the hoare head. Leuit. 19.32
The children that forgot this duty, God showed heavy judgments upon them,
2. Kin. 2.23.24.
by causing wild bears out of the wood to tear them in pieces, Gods arm is
not shortened, his hand is stretched out still. Therefore we must not rashely
rebuke an old man, 1. Tim. 5.5.
but beseech him as a Father. And further we must take heed how we forsake the
counsel of old men, 1. Kin. 12.13 14.
who by reason of their long experience know much, and betake our selves to the
counsel of young men, which for the more part is more bold then wise.

Ambition.
AMbition is a dangerous evil, it does not only overtake ye wicked, but it
often creeps into the Godly, Math. 18.1.20. verse, 24.
and daungerously infecteth them, so that Christ him self diverse times finds
his own Apostles deeply touched with it, till men reform this vice, and be
as free from it as little infants, 18. verse. 3.
they can not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Nay they can not believe so
long as they are greedy to be honored of men, John. 5.44.
and seek not for the honor that comes from God alone. Let them think of
this, Genes. 3.5
that hunt after honor and dignity, and mark from Caine foreward, what
mischiefs this wrought in wicked men. It was the cause of the fall of Adam.
11. verse 4.
It caused men to give the attempt to build the Tower of Babell. It caused
Chore, Dathan, and Abiron, and the rest to rebel against Moses and Aaron. Number.
16.3.
It made Haman think all his honor riches and estimation nothing, Ester. 3.6.
as long as Mardocheus who would not serve his ambitious affection) lived, and
such like.

Appels.
APpels made of Gold, and beautiful pictures framed of silver, are neither so
precious nor so comely, Prove. 25.11
as a word spoken and uttered in due time and place.

Alms.
Give Alms, sell that which you have and give Alms, Luke. 11.41.12. verse
33.16. verse. 9.
make you bags which wax not old, a treasure which can not fail in heaven:
make you friends of the riches of iniquity, that when you want, they may
receive you into everlasting habitation. What a man sows, that shall he reap.
Galathi. 6.7. 2. Corin. 9.6
He that sows sparingly shall reap sparingly. Our Alms if it be franckly
bestowed is a sacrifice of sweet savor, Philip. 4.18
and pleases God very well, but yet we must do our Alms secreatly, Heb.
13.16 Math. 6.2.
least we hunt for the praise of men by doing it openly, and so show our selves
to be Hipocrites.

Anger.
WHen we be provoked to Anger, or see other angrye, then let us think that he
which is slow to Anger is better then the mighty man, Prou. 16.32
and he that rules his own mind, is better th^n he that wins a City, 14.
ver. 17.
and that he that is hasty to anger commits not only folly, but also in the
judgment of GOD is a murderer. Math. 5.22
Wherefore let us learn so to be angrye that we sin not. Psalm. 4.4
And when we deal with hot and hasty men, let us abstain from grievous
words, for they stir up Anger, Prou. 15.1.
and rather use soft and mild aunsweares, for they put away wrath. Further,
an angrye man stirs up strife, which he that is slow to wrath appeaseth,
above all take heed of angring the Prince. Ibidem 18.


Apparel.
BY our first creation we were not subject to the injuries of the weather,
neither yet had we any thing to be ashamed of, or that we need to hide.
Genes. 2.25
Therefore before Adams transgression he ware no apparel. The putting on and
off and shifting of our garments should cause us to remember out of what
felicity we fell, and therefore should not increase, but rather repress pride.

Genes. 3.21.
The first garments that Adam and Eve did wear, God made and put on, which was
to them and their posterity a sign and seal of Gods goodness, that he
would not deal with them according to their deserts, considering that when
they had most grievously offended, then he most graciously provided for their
necessity.

Psalm. 102.25.26 Hebr. 1.12
As our clothes when they wax old, we change them: So heaven and earth and all
that is in them shall be changed.

Math. 9.16
An old rotten tottered garment, cannot be comely peeced with new, whole, and
sound cloth: so they that plant and place their righteousness in fasting and
other external exercises, can not admit that righteousness that comes only
and wholly by Christ.

Soft silks and other ruffeling bravery in apparel, Math. 11.8
very often bewrays climing spirits, and therefore are ordinarily to be
found in kings Courts.

When we see men by apparel or such other outward means, hunt after the
estimation of men, then let us call to mind what Christ spoke in like case of
the Pharisees: Math. 23.5
namely that they do all their works for to be seen of men.

We are to be contented and to satisfy our selves, 1 Timothy 6.8
if God give us meat for our bellies, and clothes for our backs.

Finally, Saint Peter teaches us not to beautify and deck our selves with gay
apparel and costly Jewels, 1 Pet. 3.3.4
But with the incorruption of the heart, and meekness and quietness of
spirit.

As other men desire to be gorgeously apparelled, 2. Corin. 5.4
so the children of God desire to be clothed with their house which is from
heaven.

The proud man does think violence as comely for him, Psalm 73.^
as a decent and a fit garment.

The garments that are laid by till they be moth-eaten, James 5.3.
shall witness against the owners of their pride and superfluity.

Army.
AN Army of men should make us remember that the Lord he is GOD of hosts,
that is, that all strength and force of men is at his beck and commandment.
For both it withdraws us from procuring the curse of God, in making flesh our
arm, and also causes us to despise the might of men that seek to destroy the
Church and truth of God. For he has given his Aungelles charge over the Godly,
and they encampe them selves round about them that fear him. Psalm. 27.3 91.
verse 11 34. verse 7
Further, we are to remember that as the army of heaven is innumerable, and
the sand of the Sea unmeasurable: even so God will multiply his Church. Iere.
33.22


Armor.
THe sight of Armor should bring to mind, how convenient it is for us to put
on ye Armor of light, Romans 13.12.
that is such defenses against sin, as light: that is, knowledge and
understanding of the Word does lead us unto. Further, by it we are admonished
how many and great enemies we have to do with all, Ephe. 6.13
and therefore that it is necessary to be armed at all points with such
Armor as God in his word has appointed unto us. For otherwise we can not
withstand the assaults of so mighty, so fierce, and so wily adversaries. But
against the might and power of our God nothing can prevail.

Arrows.
BItter words pearce like arrows, they are secreatly shot at the innocent,
they suddenly strike him and wound him when he least thinks, Psalm. 64.3.4
and when he imagines no hurt toward him. 102. verse 4.
But God with his Arrows mightily shot, shall pay home again the guilfull and
deceitful tongue.

As Arrows are at the commandment of the owner to be used: Psalm. 127.4
So children at the commandment of Godly parents. And as Arrows are an
excellent Weapon of defense to a strong and a mighty man, that can shoot them
with courage: So children godly brought up, are a special protection and
defense to their Parents. And as the strong man's quiver, the better it is
furnished with chosen shaftes, the better defense he has: So, the more such
Children, the greater is the happiness of the parents.

Ass.
MAn, if he look back to his birth, and consider how little wisdom, a silly
new born Babe brings with him into the World, shall see that the Ass Colt,
Job. 11.11.12
which of all other beasts ^s counted the veriest dullard, brings more wit
and ability to help him self then he. So that whatsoever we have, we have it
afterward ^y the gift and liberality of God.

Axe.
WHen we see men hew down wood with Axes, we are to remember, that they whose
ministry and service, God uses to destroy to plague others, are so in ye hand
of God, as the hatchet in the hand of the hewers or workman. Esaias 10.15.
As therefore on the one side we are to comfort our selves in affliction,
because God is the moderator thereof: so on the other, if God use us against
others, we must take heed of pride, and of exalting our selves against him that
moves us. As men throw away their worn and broken tools, so God when he
has finished his work, Esaias. 10.12
then casts away them, whom only he uses as instruments of his wrath.

Balances.
THose that buy and sell, whenever they look upon their balances, Prouer.
11.1
are to remember these admonitions of the holy Ghost: that false balances are
an abomination unto the Lord, and a perfect weight pleases him. Diverse
waightes and diverse measures, both these are abomination unto the Lord, 20*
verse 10
and deceitful balances are not good. You shall have just bal^lances, true
waightes, Leuit. 19.36
a true Ephah, and a tru^ hin, for I am the Lord.

Bag.
WHen rich men look among their bagge^ let them call to mind, Haggi. 16.
that except the seek diligently for the kingdom of God, the are like those
that put their earninges into broken and bottomless bag.

Bands.
THe bands of the godly, are by God turned to the preferment of the Gospel.
Phil. 1.12.13 Ierem. 5.5. Psalm. 2.3
When we see broken Bands, then are we to think of them, who when they have
known the way of the Lord, and the judgments of their God, yet have broken
his yoke, and burst his hands.

Barrenness.
THe Barrenness of a woman that after a long time childeth signifies unto us,
Esaias. 54.1.
that though Gods people be never so few, and the Church never so small in
number, yet God will multiplye and increase it.

Our sins procure and provoke God to make our fruitful land barren. Psalm.
107.34.
For when the earth deceives us and does not yield her fruit, sure it is,
Esaias. 24.5.
because the inhabitants thereof have transgressed the law, changed the
ordinances, and broken the everlasting covenant, Deuteronomy. 28.23.
for then the heaven over us shall be Brass, and the earth under us Iron.

Beasts.
WHen we see wild Beasts devour that, that has been diligently planted and
preserved, Psa. 80.12.13
and now is neglected and unfenced. Let us tremble and quake at the judgments
of God against his own people and Church, Esaias. 5.4.5.6
who after he has heaped all manner of benefits upon them, ^sa. 4.5.6.
for their ingratitude and unkindness, gives them over into the hands of those
that waste and spoil them. Also let us be thankful to God for his marvelous
goodness, who when wild cruel raging beasts are abroad all night seeking
their pray, ^sal. 104.20 ^1.22.2.3.
does so terrify them with the light, that in the morning they retire
themselves and couch in their Dens, that the day may be commodious for man to
go to his work and necessary labor abroad.

Wild and fierce beasts are often by the industry of man tamed and loose
their desire to hurt: ^sai. 11.6.7.8
which when we see we are to consider, that as they are by nature, so we be
glad and desirous one of another hurt, ^9. ver. 25.
till God work an alteration in us by his holy spirit and reform us.

^erem. 10.14
Men, if God do not illuminate them, but leave them to their own knowledge, are
like brute beasts.

The Teachers in the Church, if they seek not the Lord, he pulls away their
understanding, so that they become no better then beasts. Iere.. 10.21.


When we see any Beast ouer-laden and ready to sincke under his burden, except
there be present help at hand to ease them, then are we to think what a great
and grievous burden of sin we bear, Math. 11.28.
and what danger we stand in, of sincking into the pit of perdition, and let
us fly to Christ, who only and alone can unburden us, and ease and refresh us.

Beasts and Birds may be tamed: James. 3.7.
but the tongue is so unruly, that no man can tame it.

Men whom God has advanced to honor and dignity, Psa. 49.20.
and yet understand not how much and how greatly they are beholding to God,
are no better then Beasts, whose end is utter destruction.

Banner.
A Banner borne in triumph, should admonish Warriors, Psalm. 20.5
that in confidence of none other thing but of God, they should advance their
standerdes. 60. verse. 5
And when God by them does give victory to his Church and people against
their enemies, then let them acknowledge that God gave them their Banner to
fight under.

Further Gods Standerd is advanced, when people that know not God, are stirred
up to war upon and destroy other wicked Nations, Esaias. 13.2. 11. ver. 10.12.
John. 3.14.
that have been plagues to the people of GOD. Christ is also set up of GOD for
a Standarde, not only for the dispersed of Israel and the scattered of Judah
to assemble to, from the four corners of the earth, 8. ver. 28.12. ver. 32
but also for all Nations to seek to.

Bear.
A Bear robed of her whelps is meeker, Pro. 17.12.
and a man may meet her with less danger the^ an angry raging fool. ^mos.
5.19.
They that fly from the Lord, are like them yt flying from lions light upon
bears.

Bible.
AT the sight of the Bible we should call to mind, ^om. 14.4.
that whatsoever is written, is written for our learning, and therefore should
be stirred up diligently to learn those things which God would have taught.
And further, we must remember that the examples of Gods judgments and wrath
therein contained, are writ for us, ^ Cor. 10.11
upon whom the ends of the world are come, that we might be afraid to
provoke God as our Fathers did.

Birds.
AS the Birds falls not into the Snare where no Fowler is: Amos. 3.5.7
so God reuealeth not his secreates to his people but by his Prophets.
Sparrowes and other small birds taken by the Fowler and offered to be sold,
should make us call to mind how provident and careful a Father we have in
heaven, Math. 10.29.
whose providence stretches it self to the smallest things upon the earth,
for not one of these poor birds are caught without the will of our heavenly
Father.

When we see birds fly to their nestes, then are we thankfully to remember to
how vile, Math. 8.20
pore and base estate, our Savior Christ abased himself, that he might
enriche us, seeing he had no place of his own in the earth to rest his head
in, So that in worldly respect he was worse provided for then poor birds.

Further, Math. 6.26
our preposterous care in heaping up goods for our selves and our posterity,
is rebuked by the poor fowls of the air, who notwithstanding they look but
for their present necessity, yet God feeds them.

Bitte.
AS a sharp Bitte put in the Horse mouth makes us able to rule his whole
body, James. 3.2.3
and compels him to obey us: so he that can bridle his tongue, shall the
better rule all his other affections.

Blindness.
WHen we see long continued Blindness and ignorance begun to be taken away
by preaching of the word, Esaias. 35.5
then we are to acknowledge that the time of ye kingdom of Christ is come,
which Esaias prophesied of saying: the eyes of the blind shall be lightened, and
the ears of the deaf shall be opened.

The groping of a blind man for the wall, when he knows not how to come by a
guide, Esaias. 59.10
plainly expresses the heavy judgment of God upon us, Where are such numbers
ignorant and destitute of leaders, not knowing by whom to be guided.

Further when we see them that take upon them the place and state of leaders
to be as blind as the best, then let us know that the vengeance threatened to
the Church by the Prophet Esaias is come upon us, seeing our watchmen are
blind, and have no knowledge, Esa. 56.16.
they are dumb dogs, they can not bark. Those that content them selves to
be led by them shall perish with them. Therefore Christ counsels us to leave
them. Math. 15 14.


Blood.
MEn that delight in blouddines, shall have their recompense with blood. Ezech.
35.6.


Without shedding of blood there is no remission of sins: Heb. 9.22.10. ver.
4.
but it is impossible ye the blood of Bulls and goats should take away sins:
wherefore it was necessary that the blood of Jesus Christ Gods own Son should
cleanse us from all sin. 1. John. 1.7.


The stone cries out of the wall, the Beam out of the timber shall answer
it, Aba 2.11.12
woe to him that builds a town with blood, and erecteth a City with
iniquity.

Body.
THe body compacted of many members, sets before us the unity that ought to
be amongst all true Christians, 1. Cor. 12.12 13. Ephe. 4.4
who are the mystical body of Jesus Christ. The multitude of the members of
our body with the variety of their uses and offices, 1. Cor. 12.8.9.10.11.
declares the variety and measure of Gods gifts diversely distributed to the
particular members of the Church, according to the good will of the giver. That
every member has need of an other, and every office of each member is
profitable for the whole body, teaches, that even so the variety of gifts
diversely distributed unto the Church, Ephe. 4.7.
are given to profit withal, and to edify the whole body of Christ in love.

Further, that those members which seem most vile, 1. Cor. 2.25
carry a marvelous necessity with them that they cannot be spared, It
admonishes us to beware of division, which grows often by contempt of those
who want the greater and more excellent gifts, and yet whom the Church can
not spare.

Lastly, Roma. 15.1
as the bones being the stronger, bear up the skin and f^eshe which is the
weaker: so we whom GOD has endued with greater strength, should learn to
bear with many infirmities in others.

When we see any vile or loathsome body, Phil. 3.21.
then let us remember that it expresses our present miserable estate, which
notwithstanding shall be changed by him that is able to subdue al things to
him self, to a glorious immortal state.

Bondmen.
By Bondmen and bondwo-men compared with the state of those which are free, we
learn the difference of the two Testamentes, Galat. 4.24. and so to the end of
the chapter.
and the freedom that we are called unto by Christ, with the slavery that
they remain in which are not of the Church of God.

Barrelles.
BArrelles newly tunned with Liquor that works, if they have not vent break,
John. 32.19
which shows how painful a thing it is for that man to hold his peace, that
loves to speak, and is delighted to here him self.

Bows.
LIke as a Bow bent with an arrowe ready set in it to shot at any thing,
Psalm. 11.6 37. v 41 erse.
So are the devises of the wicked against the godly. As he whose Bow breaks
in drawing misseth his mark* So the enterprices and endeauours of the wicked,
even then when they think to destroy the godly, are broken and come to naught.

Brandes.
WHen we see Brandes-endes burning, which very shortly will be burnt out or
quenched out, Then we are to remember that the holy ghost compares to them,
the devises attemptes and threatninges of wicked Kings, Esai. 74.7.
when God does not establishe and ratify their Counsels.

Bread.
BRead should bring to our mind, Ioh. 6.48.51.
that Christ is the Bread of life. And as Bread perishing, nourishes us in
this life for a small time* so Christ the Bread that perishes not, John.
6.58.
but endures for ever, norisheth to everlasting life. Ioh. 6.26, 27
Therefore our labor and pains for the Bread that perishes should warn to
take greater pains for the bread that came from Heaven. Ioh. 6.35.40
And as he that will be nourished by Bread, must eat it: John. 6.55 1. Cor.
10.17
So he that will be benefited by Christ, must believe in him. Further, the
properties of the bread, eaten represents unto us, the properties of Christ's
flesh, in whom we believe.

Finally, we are admonished what unity should be amongst our selves, by
eating of one bread, made of many grains.

Books.
THe sight of a book clasped, should make us fear the vengeance of God, for
our unkind contempt of his word, Esa. 29.11.12
least he leaving unto us the Books of his Law, yet take away our wit and
understanding, so that ye having of the books profit us as much, as the
looking on the backside of the book, does benefit them that cannot open it,
or the looking of the inner side does to them that cannot read or know a
Letter.

Bottelles.
AS easy as it is for men when they have filled Bottelles with Wine, to spoil
and break them by dashing them together: Iere. 13.12.13.14.1
So easy is it for the Lord to fill all estates and sorts of them that
despise him with drunkenness, And then by setting debate and dissension
amongst them, utterly to destroy them.

As new Wine with the strength of the working thereof will break old
bottelles: so that if in them it should be turned, it were but spilte and
lost: Math. 9.17.
so those who have placed righteousness in the outward exercises of religion,
can-not savor, taste or receive the Doctrine of righteousness by faith only
in Christ.

As an earthen bottell, when it is broken to pieces, the shardes cannot be set
together again: So when God is disposed to punish wicked people, Iere.
19.10.11.
no man can help or heal them.

Breast Plate.
IN putting on a Breast Plate, the Soldier is to consider what a perilous
enemy the Devil is, 1. These. 5.8.
and how safely Faith and Love does protect our breaste and heart against him.

Breath.
KIngs, Princes and Judges can not abide the breath of Gods displeasure: Esa
40.23.24
for at it they wither away and come to nothing.

Man's breath is in his Nostrelles, therefore he is not to be feared nor
esteemed nor trusted unto: Esa. 2.22
For his breath departs, he returns to his earth, Psalm. 146.4
and then his thoughts perish.

As breath is to the body of man: So is a godly King to the people whom he
governs. Lam. 4.20.


Brooks.
MEn, when they see in Summer brooks dried up ye ran with abundance of
water in Winter by reason of rain or Snow thawed, Job. 6.14.15.16.17.18.
are to remember that they resemble men that fail, forsake, and give over their
friends in the time of greatest need, and when their help and comfort is most
wanted.

Brides.
THe joy that the new married Bridegroom makes over his bride, represents
unto our consideration, the rejoicing of God over his spiritual Jerusalem,
Esa. 62.5.
that is to say, his Church purchased to him by the blood of his dear Son.

As ye bride pertains to none but to the bridegroom: So the Church pertains
to Christ alone. Hose. 2.19. 2. Cori. 11.2. John. 3.19.
And as every true freende to the Bridegroom reioyseth to see the brydegromes
voice obeyed, so every Godly man is glad to see every member of the Church to
frame them selves to the obedience of the word of Christ.

The decking of the bride sets out the glorious estate of Gods glorified
Church. Apoc. 21.2


Building.
WHen we see men building we are to remember, Psalm. 127.1 Ierem. 22.13
that that which God builds not, men labor about it in vain: Therefore, Woe
is justly pronounced against them that build their Houses by
unrighteousness, and their Chambers without equity.

As a building set up with untempered Mortar, the Mortar Crumbleth and washes
away, with every storm, Ezec. 13.10.11
So is the peace and prosperity, that false Prophets promise the people, and
preach unto them out of their own hearts, when God has not sent them.

luke 14.28.29
By the Care that builders, have to consider before they begin, how the
chardges may be defrayed: we are admonished to consider what the greatness
of our profession of Christianity requires.

Christians are Gods building. 1. Cor. 3.9.


When we see one man build a house, and an other man dwell therein, Amos. 5.11.
then let us consider that such shall our reward be, if we oppress and rob
the poor.

As those that build without a good foundation, either the wind or water
overthrows it, so they which in matters of faith stay not themselves upon
the Word, Math. 7.27
but upon the credit of their Teachers, shall not be able to withstand the
subtilties of the Devil, but be ouerthrown.

B^lles.
AS wild bulls, young lusty and strong, so is the rage of malicious wicked men
in persecuting. Psalm. 22.11.


Bulwarks.
When we see mighty strong bulwarks to strengthen an hold, Esaias. 26.1.
then let us call to mind that salvation it self is the bulwark or safe
defense of the City of God.

Burial.
BVriall, should put us in mind of our burial with Christ in Baptism, Romans
6.4. Collos. 2.12.
and that we ought to live as men dead to sin, and yet raised again to newnes
of life.

Butter.
BVtter in smoothenesse and softness represents unto us the words, Psalm.
55.21.
and speech of the wicked, when they most of all intend to deceive, and
beguile the simple.

Cage.
AS cages do ordinarily serve for keeping of Birds: So the Howses of wicked
and ungodly men, do ordinarily serve for inuenting of deceites: And as for the
most part, cages are full of Birds, Ier. 5.27.
so the dwelling places of the wicked, are replenished with all manner of
guiles, whereby they become great and wax rich.

Candle.
THe Godly after the darkness of Affliction and trouble, being restored to
prosperity, are like a candle lighted up in a dark house. Psalm. 18.28.
As a Candle light, ought not to be put under a Bushel, but set upon a
Candlestick, that all they that come into the house may see light by it: So
the Ministers of the Word, ought not to hide their gifts, Mark. 4.21.
but so plainly to set forth the light of Gods most Holy Word, that every
man in the Church may thereby be guided and directed in his calling. Mat.
5.15.16
Further, as the Candle lights every man in the house: So should our good
and wise dealing and conversation shine bright before men, 1. Pet. 2.12.
that GOD by us may be glorified. Now that this light may so shine in us,
Luke. 11.33.34.
we must be careful to follow the true light, and that we deceive not our
selves, making that our light which is but darkness.

The prosperity of the wicked, Job. 21.17.
is like a Candle which is often put out.

Canker.
THe Canker and rust fretting and consuming, even those things that amongst
men are so precious, Math. 6.19.
should alienate our minds, and estraunge our affections from those things
on earth, which so shortly perish.

Carpenter.
MInisters, like wise and skillful Carpenpers, should lay the Foundation
which only may be laid, which is Christ Jesus, And then take marvelous
heed that they erect nothing thereupon, 1. Cor. 3.10.11.12.
but that which will abide the Fire of GODS own examination.

Carelessness.
WHen we see Carelessness of religion increase in the world, and men frame them
selves to live in security which way so ever the world turn, Esaias. 28.18
thinking to make falshoode their refuge, and to hide them selves under
vanity: Then let us remember that their covenant with death shall be
disanulled, 1. These. 5.3
and their agreement with hell shall not stand, when God sends a scourge it
shall take them, and they shall be trodden down by it: even when they say peace
peace, all is safe, then shall sudden destruction come upon them.

Cart.
AS a Cart that is laden with sheaues of corn in harvest is pressed under the
load. Amos: 2.13
So God is pressed with bearing with those that are given over to sin and
wickedness.

Job. 12.7
Cattaile.
THe Cattaile of the field, the Fowls of the heaven, the fish of the sea,
they set forth and declare their Creator.

Psalm 62.12.
Cedres.
THe height of Cedres in a ground fit for them does express and show how
highly God does advance the righteous.

Cheese.
THe making of Cheese, and the tourning of milk to Curdes, Job. 10.10.
and the setting of them together, represents unto us our making.

Childbirth.
SO often as Women with child feel griefs and pains, Genes. 3.16.
either in their travel or before, let them think that it is a penalty first
laid upon Eve for sin, and after together with sin derived to her
posterity. And further let them assure them selves that God in all other, as
well his threatenings as his promises will be so found true, as they by
fearful experience have found him true in this from the beginning of the
world to this present day.

When we see women travailing in Childbirth, Esaias. 37.3.
and not having strength to bring forth, then let us remember, that even so it
is with us in the days of trouble and tribulation, if God therein leave us and
forsake us. Also let us call to mind that, that which is borne of flesh is
flesh, John. 3.6.
and so be mindful of the corruption that we brought into the world by our
first nativity, and most earnestly call upon God, that he will vouchsafe by
his mighty working of his most holy spirit, to make the Word preached the
seed of a new birth, and the beginning of a new life to us. The exceeding joy
of the mother for the birth of her Child, immediately after the great sorrows
and griefs in her travel, John. 16.21.
teaches to us the maruailous change of the state of the godly in this life,
with that which is to come.

The great and wonderful pains of a woman in childbirth, Gala. 4.19.
expresses the great pains, toil, and grief which true Ministers of Christ
take, to form and fashion Christ in them that pertain to their charge.

Children.
CHildren of our children are a crown and a blessing unto us, and if we fear
GOD then are we also their glory. Pro. 17.6. Psalm. 128.6.


The bearing of children in arms, and the lulling of them, does offer to our
consideration, how lovingly and kindly God deals with his people. Math. 11.16.
Children that are of such heavy sad mould, as that they are never moved with
mirth, nor with the crying of other children, do represent to us the dullness
of a number of people in hearing of the Word, who are no more moved with the
judgments of God to fear, nor allured with the sweet promises of God to love
and like, then if they were so many stocks or stones: but how so ever
Preachers behave and frame them selves, either to severity or mildnes they give
evil words.

The simplicity and plain dealing of little children, together with their
humility, teaches us to learn those points of them, if we regard or esteem
to be meet and fit for the kingdom of Heaven. Math. 18.3.


The difference betwixt the knowledge of children in their infancy, and of men
grown to understanding and ripe judgment, does shadow unto us the wonderful
difference betwixt the imperfect knowledge which we now have, 1. Cor. 13.11
and the perfection which we shall have in the life to come.

The simplicity of Children, 1. Cor. 14.20 1. Peter. 2.1.
admonishes us to become like them in malice, guile, dissimulation and envy,
but like men in understanding.

We ought not always to be children in knowledge, and to be carried about with
every puff of doctrine, Ephe. 4.14. Heb. 5.12.13
and continually to need to be taught the first rudiments of religion and
principles and beginninges of christianity.

As Fathers correct their children whom they love, so does God also by us. And
as children take patiently correction at their Fathers hand, Heb. 5.6.7.8 9.10.
though sometime it be preposterous and otherwise then it should be: So ought
we to take that which God lays upon us, knowing that God always does it for
our benefit.

Chafe.
WHen we see Chafe blown abroad with ye wind and scattered, Job. 21.18.
Then should we remember that such is the state of the wicked when God
blows upon them with the breath of his displeasure. Psalm. 1.4.
Therefore how great, how mighty, how terrible, how fast grounded soever,
they seem now to be, Psalm. 35.5.
we need not fear them, for in respect of our God, they are as Chafe before
the wind. Esaias. 17.13
But let us endeavor to live so, and to embrace our Christ, that when God shall
fan the Corn and Chafe asunder, we be not cast away as chafe into
unquenchable fire. Math. 3.12
As fire consumes Chafe and stubble: So God shall make the wicked, Esaias.
33.11.
overthrow, destroy and bring to naught their own devises.

Church.
WHen we see how careful they that are of the Church, Ephesians. 5.14.
are to obey and to do their duty to God, Then women are to learn how
careful they ought to be to obey their husbands. Also we are to remember that
the church of God shall be perpetual, Math. 16.18.
and hell gates shall never prevail against it.

Ceremonies.
WHen we see men very diligent in an outward show of serving of God: Then are
we to remember, Psalm. 50.10
that such please not God except his fear be planted in their hearts. Esaias.
1.14. Psalm. 51.17.
For God will not take Bullokes out of our houses nor he Goats out of our
Foldes. He hates our solemn Feasts, they are a burden unto him: H^ is weary
with bearing of them, But the sacri^fice that pleases God is an humble and a
con^trie heart, For that he will not despise.

City.
WHen we see a City what by nature, and what by the industry and diligence of
man, so fenced, that it seems impossible to be won by strength: Prou. 18.19
Then let us consider that a Brother offended is harder to win again then
that. And therefore let us be as careful and diligent to keep his amity, and
love, as we would be heedefull to keep such a City from turning to the enemy.
As a City the walls and defenses whereof are broken down, Prou. 25.28.
is in danger of every enemy, that is of force and might: so a man that has
no stay of his appetite, affections and desires, is always easy to be spoiled
of any that will seek it. As it is to no purpose to seek to take by force a
City so well fenced and manned as it may be: Iere. 1.18.19
so vain are the attempts of them that oppose them selves to Gods ministers to
hinder them from doing that for which God has sent them.

The first City was builded by Caine, and inhabited by his brood, Genes. 4 17.
wherefore the godly a great time did dwell in Tents to show that here they
have no abiding City, but look for one to come that is Heaven.

Clay.
AS that which is made of clay is brittle and easily broken, Job. 10.9.
and soon returns to earth again: So man is frail and quickly shall
return to dust again. God therefore has compassion on them that fear him,
because he is mindful of how brickle a moulde he has made them. Psalm.
103.14.
As it is an absurd thing for a piece of Clay wrought by a Potter to challendge
the Potter of want of wit or understanding: So is it a wonderful follye for
men to persuade them selves that they have such deep reaches and fetches, Esa.
29.15.16
and that their Councelles are so priuye and secreate, that they can escape the
eyesight, knowledge and understanding of God. As it is unreasonable for a
piece of clay to challendge the Potter for the form, Rom 9.20.2
shape or use that he is made for: So it is an intolerable presumption of man
to reason against his maker, for the end that he is made for, whether it be
honor or dishonor. The Prophet Esaias teaches us therefore, in respect that we
are in the hand of God, Esaias. 64.8.
as clay in the hand of the Potter, to crave mercy and the forgiveness of our
offenses.

Cloutes.
Foul, filthy, mattery and stinking cloutes, do lively and aptly represent
unto us our righteousness and goodness that is in us. Esaias. 64.6.


Clouds.
THe sudden vanishing of clouds puts us in mind, Job. 7.9.
how soudenly our life vanishes away, as in dry weather Clouds that threaten
rain, but are indeed empty and vanish: So is the liberality of great
braggers and boasters, which will promise apace but perform slowely. Pro.
25.14.
As of clouds when they be vanished away, there is nothing seen: so the
sins of gods people, Esaias. 44.22
when he forgeueth them, are clearlie put both out of sight and remembrance.

As a morning cloud that at the Sun rising, vanishes away: Hose. 13.3 2.
Peter. 2.
So is the prosperity of the wicked. False and untrue teachers, are like these
empty clouds, which are blown away with the Wind, Jude. 1.12.
for they bring not that which they brag off.

Cloakes.
AS a good and fair cloak being large, so covers a man that many things may
be carried under it and conveyed cleanly, which we would be loath and ashamed
to have seen: 2. Cor. 4.2.
so hypocrites* craft and deceit, hides and covers their untruth, which to
be plainly seen and perceived they would be ashamed. Also we are to take
heed that we make not Christian liberty, 1. Peter. 2.1
a cloak to cover the satisfiyng of our lewd lusts and wicked affections
withal.

Coals.
AS we see one coal kindle another, and wood to be apt matter to make a
fire, Pro. 26.2
so those that be disposed to contention and brawling, be apt to kindle strife,
and to set men together by the ears.

Contribution.
Romans 15.27. 1. Cor. 9.11. Galath. 6.6
WHen we see any Contribution or gathering made for Preachers, then we are to
remember; that it is but duty, that men should minister to them carnal
things, that made them partakers of spiritual things.

Corn.
Corn that is blasted before it be ripe, admonishes us of the state of such
cities, Esaias. 37.27
as God has determined shortly to destroy for the ^innes of the inhabitants,
continually provoking him unto wrath.

Council.
WHen we see men run upon head, and that there is no man amongst them that
gives good and wholesome Council, Prou. 11.14
there we may well conclude that they shall shortly perish. But where there are
many that can give good Council, and there Council is obeyed and embraced,
Esaias. 30.1.
the common wealth shall flourish. But good councellers must not trust to
their own brains and wisdom, but must seek to direct them selves according
to the Word and wisdom of the Lord, otherwise God does accurse their
Councels.

Prou. 19.20.21.
Men that will be wise in their latter end, must hear Conuncell and receive
instruction. For the devises of a man's heart are many, but only the Council
of the Lord shall stand. Otherwise the Councels of the wicked, of what might or
wisdom so ever they be, Esaias. 7.5.6.7
they shall not take effect, nor be brought to pass.

Craftesmen.
THe gains that comes by Idolatry to diverse and sundry sorts of craftsmen
purchases their friendship, Act. 19.24.25 26.27.
and makes them earnest enemies against the Gospel and truth of God. Exodus
28.3.
Otherwise the skill and cunning of craftsmen, are the good and praise worthy
gifts of almighty God, Exodus 35.41
such as no common wealth without great inconvenience and danger can want or
be without. 1. Sam. 13.19
But these craftesmen must take heed that for covetousness they make them
not parteners of other men's sins, Ephesians. 4.28
in becoming instruments to beautify idolatry, superstition, vanity,
curiosity, etc, But labor only that which is good, that they may not only
be able to suffice their own need, but relieve others.

Creation.
THe omnipotency of the Word, seeing by it all things were made, is declared
in the creation of the world, Genes. 1. Psalm 105.5. John. 1.3. Romans 1.18.19.20.
and of all that is in it. Whatsoever may be known of God is manifest and may
be seen in the creatures, and in their creation, so that though men had no more
teaching then that which the works of God represent to their eyes, yet are
they left quite void of scuse for ignorance: Psalm. 19.5.103.20.21.
more the creatures rejoice to keep their course to work his will, and to
execute his commanndement. But above all, they are exceeding glad, that GOD
has glorified him self, by redeeming his people, Esa. 44.23.
and bringing them into an assured expectation of being delivered from the
servitude of corruption.

Crown.
A Crown, because it is a token of the highest dignity and honor in this
life, 1. Cor. 9.25.
the holy Ghost uses it to express the greatness of the dignity and honor,
2. Tim. 8.
whereunto the children of God shall be advanced in the life to come, an
incorruptible crown, James. 1.12.
a crown of righteousness, a crown of life.

Cruelty.
WHen we see the meek oppressed and the godly scorned, and cruel men raging
and taking on at their pleasure: Esaias. 29.20.
then let us call to mind that the time shall come, when the cruel man shall
cease, and the scornful shall be consu^med, and all that hasted to iniquity
shall be cu^^off. For cruelty is proper to the wicked and vn^godly, whose very
bowels are cruel. But even as they do, Pro. 12.10. Judge. 1.7.
so God does pay them home again, and judgment merciless shall be to them
that show no mercy: namely, depart ye cursed into euerla^sting fire, James.
2.13.
which is prepared for the Devil and his angels. Math. 25.41.


Cup.
AS we see men take the cup one at an others hands, and drinck in course: so
we when we have tasted of the cup of Gods wrath for our sins, Esa. 52.21.22
if we repent are to comfort our selves, that it shall be taken out of our
hands, Ierem. 51.7.
and given to our enemies, even to those which hitherto have made a spoil of
us, and they shall suck out the dregs thereof. Ezech. 23.1^32.33.34.
The people by whom God plagueth others, are likened to a golden cup which
serves to make many drink withal. Those who have seen others taste of the
cup of Gods wrath, and yet persevere and go forward in the like sins as they
have seen others punished for, shall drinck of the same. They which are the
Scholars of Christ, Math. 20.23
are to make account to drinck of the same cup that their master did.

When we see cups very fair on the out side, and within s^uttishly kept,
Math. 23.25.
then are we to remember, that they are a plain pattern of hypocrisy, and to
look into our selves, least seeming something to the world, we be careless
how we appear to God, who looks to the heart and inner parts. Apoca. 17.4.
Also a fair cup that has dregs or bad drink in it, should make us
mindful of the cup full of abominations and filthiness, which is in the hand
of the Romish Antichriste, otherwise called the Whore of Babylon, Apo. 18.3.4.
and whereof all the kings of the earth have druncke: and heedful least we all
be partakers of her sins, and so receive of her plague.

Day.
Gene. 1.3.16
FIrst, in the creation of day, which was mad^ 3. dais before ye son, we have
to consider ye almighty power of God, who is not tied to any in^feriour or
instrumental causes. For carnal reason and wisdom, is not able to reach to it,
or to conceiu^ how daylight should be without the Son. John. 11.9.
Se^condly, as they that use the benefit of the day t^ travel and walk in,
needs not to stumble an^ fall at the things that lie in their way, for yt
the^ have light to direct them by: so they that direc^ the^ selves in their
calling by the light of ye wor^ go aright and upright, because God does give
them. Romans 13.13
Therefore it is sometimes used for know^ledge, gotten by reading and hearing
the wor^ preached. Thirdly, the day of the Lord shall no^ come soudenly and
unlooked for upon the chil^dren of light, 1. These. 5.6.
stealing upon them as it were thief in ye night, for yt they be endued with
god^ly knowledge, and therefore live in continua^ expectation of his coming,
and watch lookin^ for it. Heb. 3.7.8. and 13
Lastly, we are to exhort one another, while it is called to day, and also to
obey them (...) whom God does speak to day, both because (...) know not
whether he will speak to us any more, and also least we be excluded out of
his (...) as our Fathers were.

Darkness.
THe Darkness of dongeons in prisons where prisoners are void and destitute
of all comfort, Math. 8.12
does shadow unto us the terriblenesse and fearfulness of Hell. Romans 13.12 1
verse 21
The works of darkness are so called, either of ignorance of the doer, which
the Darkness of the mind causes, or because they are commonly done in the
night, Esaias 29.15
or closely out of sight, or else because the dooers of them dare not, 1 These.
5.7
and love not to come to try their doings by the light of the Word, or else
because the rulers of the Darkness of this world, John. 3.20
work them in the reprobate.

Darkness should make us remember what we sometime were, 1 Ephesians. 5.8.
and what we be now called unto, and how we should therefore walk and lead our
lives, John. 12.46 3 verse 13
least we declare our selves to be unfaithful, and show that we love
Darkness better then light, which is flat damnation.

Dawbers.
AS Dawbers that dawbe Walls, with Mortar which was never tempered, cannot
make those walls continue, Ezech. 22.28
for that the mortar crumbleth away: So false and lying Prophets, that speak
in the name of the Lord, that which he never commanded them, can not make
their words true or to come to pass as they have promised.

Death.
Gene. 3.19.
THe death of all men does admonish us of the truth and constancy of gods
word, and how certain that is which he once has uttered.

The Death of the godly which yield their souls to god joyfully, should make
us consider, yt though death be the last enemy that shall be destroyed, ^. Cor.
15.26 45.55.
that is to say, abolished, yet he is already swallowed up by our Savior
Christ in victory, and his sting taken away, and so after a sort for ever
destroyed, Esaias. 25.8.
because his power of hurting and harming Gods people is taken from him.

Esaias. 25.8.
When righteous and merciful men dye, and are taken of the earth, It is time
for us to look for euilles which God will send upon us for our sins, 1.
Cor. 11.30
from the sight and grief of which, God has taken them away.

Romans 5.12.
By this that all men dye, we are taught that all men are sinners.

When we see how hard a thing it is for a man, be he never so good, or so
well-beloved, to find another man to suffer Death for him: We are to consider
the unmeasurableness of the love of Christ, Romans 5.7.8.
who died for us, not only when we were most sinful wretches, but also most
spiteful enemies to him.

Further death should teach us to dye to sin. Romans 6.2.


As the bands of matrimony are set free by the Death of one of the married
couple: Romans 7.3.4.
So are we by Christ, made dead to the Law, and freeed from the yoke,
servitude and bondage of it.

When we see God plague us with the sickness and Death of great numbers: 1.
Cor. 11.30
Then are we to enter into our selves diligently to spy the cause thereof, And
especially to look whether our gross contempt of the Word, and vnreuerent
abusing of the sacrament, have not procured the same.

Dead men can do nothing that living men should do: Ephe. 2.1.
So when we are dead in sin, Col. 2.13.
we could do none of those things which declare and show forth our life
in Christ. As great a miracle therefore as it is for dead men to be raised
again: So is the change that Christ has made in those that be his. 1.
Peter. 4.6.
Christ by dying, not only overcame death, but also him that had Lordshippe
over Death (that is) the Devil, Heb. 2.14.
and that to this end, that Death now should be no more fearful and
terrible to us.

Defense.
ALl outward means of Defense, when men passing by God, put their confidence
in them are but vain: Esaias from the 7. verse of the second chapter to the.4.
ver. of the. 3.
As Silver, Gold, Horses, Charriots, high Towers, strong Walls, victualles,
^trong men, valiant captayns, honorable persons, ^age and grave couneellers,
etc. Put not therefore ^our trust in princes, nor in ye sons of men, for ^n
the^ there is no help, Psalm. 146.3.
But know yt he is accursed that makes flesh his arm. Therefore, though some
trust in Chariots, Psalm. 23.7.8.
and others in Horses, yet the people of God advance their standerdes in the
name of the Lord. And when their mighty enemies, are brought down and fallen,
they rise and stand upright.

Dew.
AS the morning Dew, soon after the son rising vanishes away, Hose. 13.3.
So the strength, glory, prosperity and pride of the Idolaters, is by God soon
brought to naught.

Debtors.
IF we, when we have poor and needy debtors, pitying their poverty do forgive
their debtes, and then think that by good right we may challenge love, Luke.
7.43.
and the more love, where we have most forgiven: then are we to think, how
much and how deeply we are bound to love Christ, by whom so many and so
great things are forgiven us.

Dearth.
DEarth is procured to countries and nations, by their great and grievous
offenses, especially by Idolatry, Iere. 3.3.
whereof we have example in the days of king Achab; next by perjury, as
appeared in the days of King David, ^ King. 17.1.
three (...) and ready to kick against their keepers: so is it with very many
men, Deuteronomy. 32.15
the more temporal blessings and worldly commodities God heapeth upon them,
the more they kick against him, and will be the less ruled by his Ministers
and Word.

Father.
THe natural piety and compassion that Fathers and mothers have toward
their infants, Psalm. 103.13.
does teach us how much greater the compassion of our heavenly Father is
toward us his children. Math. 7.9.10 11.
And if our Parents are ready to give their infantes good things when they
beg or crave: Mat. 6.31.^2.
then much rather we shall be denied nothing, if we in faith do beg and crave
of God. And if Parents be careful according to their ability, to provide
things needful for their children: how can we want any thing at the hands of
our GOD, which he knows to be good and needful for us: Also Christ has
therefore in praying taught us to to call him father, Math. 6.9.
that we might be admonished to come with such reverence as Children owe unto
their Fathers, that we come not in confidence of our selves or any thing in
us, but in confidence of his mediation, by whom and in whom we are made the
children of God: and that we do not envy prosperity to such children of God as
he aduaunceth, neither yet disdain nor contemn the basest of those, to whom
God vouchsafes to be a Father, and aduaunceth to the dignity of his children.
Luke. 15.23.24.
The joy that a father conceiueth and expresses when his son that has been
wild and an unthrift, returns to frugalitie and thriuing, expresses to us
how pleasant and acceptable a thing to God the conversion of a sinner is. 1.
Cor. 415.
He by whose ministerye it pleases God to regenerate us and beget us a new,
ought to be esteemed of us as our father.

Fathers.
THe ordinary course of the world teaches us, that fathers get and lay up in
store for their Children, and for that purpose make no spare of labor,, 1.
Cor. 12.14.15.
travail, and toil, in viewing whereof, the ministers of the Word are to
learn the pains and care that they should have for their flock, 2. These.
2.11.
of whom God has made them fathers, to make no spare of them selves, but to
bestow them selves and all their gifts fully and wholly upon their flock.
Psalm. 78.6.
And as a Father comfort, exhorts and beseeches his children: Heb. 12.7.
even so ought a Minister his flock. A father ought carefully to teach the
law of the Lord unto his children, and moderately to correct them.

Fatherless.
WE are to take heed how we contemn or neglect the fatherless, Psalm. 68.5.
for God is the Father of the fatherless, and his fatherly care is howrely
seen in providing for them.

Feast.
WHen Friends meet at Feasts and banquettes, Pro. 15.15.
they give them selves to be merrye, and exile all cares and thoughts, that
might hinder mirth out of their minds: then they should remember, Esaias. 5.12.
that those joys that their banquet brings them to at that time, a good
conscience would aforde them continually, and therefore should study and care to
keep a good conscience. Further, in the middle of feasting, men must take heed
that God be not for-gotten, nor his liberality unthought on, but that there be
of it amongst them a thankful remembrance.

Fields.
WHen in the Corn fields we see Tares grow amongst the wheat till Harvest,
which can not well be rooted out before: Math. 13.29.30.
we are admonished that wicked hypocrites and other evil men, of whom there is
hope that they may be converted, shall be always in the outward account of
the Church till the end of the world. But it is evil husbandry, to let tyne
and such other weeds grow, as both may easelye be discerned, and also are
noisome and hurtful unto the corn. Also if we hurt our neighbors field, we
are to make recompense with the best yt grows in our own field. Exodus 22.5.
Further we ought not to encroch by removing ye bonds or taking away the Deuteronomy.
19.14
landmarkes of our neighbors field.

Fire.
GOD takes vengeance of his enemies by Fire. Esaias. 5.24.
For as Fire quickly consumes stuble and straw: so the wrath of the Lord
kindles as Fire, Ierem. 4.4.
and consumes the wicked for contemning his word, and for the wickedness of
their inventions. Genes. 19.24
Experience hereof we have in the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha, by Fire.
The burning of Nadah, Leuit. 10.2
and Abihue, Aarons sons. The plaging of the people that murmured by fire.
Number. 11.1.16. ver. 35
The burning of two hundred and fifty that offered incence unto the Lord by
Fire that proceeded from the Lord. 2. King. 1.10 12.
The consuming with fire from heaven of the two Captains and their bands
which were sent for Eliah. It appears manifestly therefore, that our God is a
consuming fire, Esaias. 10.17
and that all his enemies are but as thorns and briers, which are easily and
quicky consumed by fire, Esaias. 43.2.
but fire shall not hurt the godly, because God is with them and protecteth
them. Daniel. 2.27
Hereof we have manifest experience in the three children cast into the fiery
furnace by the King of Babell. The word of the Lord has also the same
property that God has, Ierem. 5.14.
for it shall be to the ungodly as fire to consume them, and the ungodly to it
as wood to be consumed by it. The Church of God also, Obadi. 1.18
shall by the just judgment of God be a fire to consume the ungodly withal,
even all the enemies of his people. Zacha. 12.6
The Princes and Captains of Gods people shall be unto their enemies round
about them, as Coals of fire to wood, Luke. 12.49.
and as fierbrandes in a sheafe of straw to consume all that lift up their
hands against them. 2. Cor. 3.14.15.
The gospel also is a fire, which Christ by his preaching kindled upon the
earth. As by fire mettalles, so by the word every man's works shall ve examined
and tried what they be. Iam. 3.5.6.
As a very little fire kindles never so great a heap of matter apt to kindle:
so the tongue sets the whole course of nature on fire and is kindled it
self of hell. 1. Pet. 4.12.
Fire purges and fineth metalles: so God purges the dross of his children by
afflictions. And as it is a common matter to try Gold and Silver by fire: so
it should not seem strange to the children of god to be tried by tribulations.

Fisher.
AS Fishers with nets and hooks catch fish in great number: so shall they
that GOD stirs up to execute his judgments against any people, Iere. 16.16.
catch and destroy great plenty of them. Ezech. 47.10
On the other side, when it pleases God to bestow his graces in abundaunce,
then his Preachers shall be like ye Fishers that fish in the maine Sea, and
shall catch men with the preaching of the Word, in as great abundance and
variety as Fishers do fish. Mark. 1.17*
Therefore Christ called his Apostles from fishing, and made them Fishers of
men. And when they had labored all night and caught nothing, Luke. 5.5.6.
yet in the day they cast out again at the commandment of Christ, and
enclosed a great number, to teach us never to despair, though we do not see
that we win any by the word. For God will for us espy opportunity for that
purpose.

Firmament.
THe brightness of the firmament sets out, Dani. 12.3.
the glorious estate of those in the resurrection of the just, who shall be
found wise with godly wisdom.

Flax.
THe care of Christ in bearing with the weakness and infirmities of his
children, Esaias. 42.3.
is set out in the similitude of not quenching of smoking flax.

Flesh.
THey that trust in the help of men and not of God, Esaias. 31.1.3.
of flesh and not of spirit, because of the multitude of their warlike
furniture, shall fall and perish together with their helps. Iere. 17.5.
For cursed is the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and
with-draweth his heart from the Lord. Cease therefore from man, whose breath is
in his nostrelles. Esaias. 1.21.
For wherein is he to be esteemed. Trust unto the Lord with all thine heart,
Prou. 3.5. Romans 8.7.
and lean not unto thine own wisdom: for the wisdom of the flesh is
enimytie against God, and therein dwells no goodness. Romans 7.18. Gala.
5.17.19.20.21.
The carnal man is sold under sin, and flesh longs continually against
the spirit, and the fruits thereof are all kinds of impiety and wickedness.

Flood.
GOds blessing in abundance, Esaias. 44.3.
is like floudes of waters, and as the ouer-flowing of them, makes dry
grounds fruitful: Iere. 47.2.
so his blessings are welcome to the people of God. As floods ouerflow and
destroy all: so those by whom God plageth any land or people. But if God be on
our side, Psalm. 124.5.6
though the enemies like a flood make account to overthrow and ouerwhelme all,
yet their waters shall not drown us, nor their stream go over our souls.
Luke. 17.26.27.
But floudes many times happen suddenly, and when we least look for them, as
Noes flood, which should make us remember how suddenly and unlooked for,
Christ shall come to judge the world.

Flies.
THe great power of almighty God is herein seen, that by so small and weak a
creature, as Flies are, can tame the prowdest Tirant and make the stoutest
upon earth to stoop to his pleasure. Exodus 8.28.
The Flies are busy in Pothecaries shoppes, and if they happen to get into his
glasses of sweet syrops and ointments and there die, they stink and spoil his
syrop or ointment: Ecclesi. 10.1
even so does a little folly him that was had in great estimation for his
wisdom.

Flower.
AS a flower so soon as it blows is cut down, or very shortly gathered: So
is the continuance of a man's life. As the beauty of a Flower which suddenly
fades, Job. 14.2.
so is all the glory and graces of all flesh. Therefore we are not to rejoice
in wealth, Psalm. 130.15.
honor, and dignity: nor set our whole mind to seek after them. For they shall
vanish as sodainlye as does the Flower of the grass: Esaias. 40.6.7.
But we are by ye consideration hereof to leave seeking these worldly things,
and seek earnestly for the immortal seed of the word, Iam. 1.10.11
whereby we may be regenerate and begotten again of God to everlasting life,
1. Pet. 1.23.^4.
and so enjoy his mercies which endure for ever.

Flint.
GOd makes his Ministers harder against the ungodly and wicked, ^xech. 3.9.
then is the Flint.

Flayle.
GOd shall make his people like a thresshing instrument, Esai. 41.15.
and they shall thresh the mountains to powder, and the hills to chafe, that
is all their lofty and proud enemies, that rise up against them.

Flocks.
WHen we see the plentiful increase that Flocks of Cattle bring, and that
they multiply exceedingly: Ezec. 36.37.38.
Then we are to remember, that though god sometime wast his people for their
sins, yet he will exceedingly multiply it, and increase it again.

Fools.
THey that do mock and scoff at their own sin and offenses are fools, and
in so doing bewray their folly. Prou. 14.9.18. verse 3 17. verse 21.
Their mouth shall be their destruction, and their lips a Snare for their
soul, he that begets such, gets him self sorrow, and the father of a
fool can have no joy. But there are many sily simple ones, in worldly
respects, but Fools which go before us in embracing of religion, Romans 10.19.
in knowledge of the word, and in framing their life according thereunto. The
consideration whereof, should make us to understand, that God provoke us
thereby to emulation of their weldoing, and so stirs us to contend to
overtake and ouergoe them* Wherefore let no man deceive himself. If any among
you seem to be wise in this world, 1. Cor. 3.18
Let him be a fool that he may be wise.

Folly.
THe wisemen of the world always esteemed it folly and madness to believe in
Christ crucified. 1. Cor. 1.24 25.
And the preaching of the Gospel is thought folly of the wicked worldlinges,
and therefore contemned. But by this foolishness it has pleased God to save
believers, even all that believe. And this folly is wiser then the wisest men,
and has prevailed against al their wisdom, from the one end of the world
to the other.

Food.
1. Tim. 6.8
WHen we have food and apparel, we should be therewith contented.

Foot.
AN unfaithful man in whom a man reposeth confidence in trouble, is like unto a
sliding foot that lays his master in the dirt. Prou. 25.19
A man's foot so sore that it cannot be healed, and puts the other parts of
the body in danger to be infected by it, is wont to be cut off for the
preservation of the rest: which admonishes us what we have to do with our
friends, Math. 18.^.
or any commodity earthly, when they become hurtful to our souls, and
endaunger us to looze life everlasting, how necessary and needful soever they
seem to be, for this our present state.

Fowls.
THe Fowls of Heaven are good proofs of Gods providence: for notwithstanding
they make no provision but for the present time, yet God of his merciful
goodness feeds them, Math. 6.26
and therefore they should teach us in due order to hang upon his providence. If
any corn be spilt or shed in any common way, the Fowls presently fall upon it
and devour it, Math. 13.19
and suffer it not to remain there any longer: so also the seed of the word,
that falls into hard hearts, is by and by taken away of the Devil and wicked
spirits, and so cannot remain there, nor be understood.

Foundation.
AS buildinges can not stand, except they be borne up by their foundation: so
Christians are in an unstable state: 1. Cor. 3.11
except they stay themselves upon Christ. Whosoever therefore goes about to
build, 1. Cor. 3.10
in any other Foundation, is an unskillful builder, lays his Foundation upon
the sand, in winds and stormy raines, his work cannot stand.

Fountains.
AS Fountains dee continually in great plenty cast out waters: Jeremy. 6.7.
So do the wicked their malice. One Fountain can not give forth both sweet
and salt Water, Iam. 3.11.12
yet we see that out of one mouth very contrary things proceeds, even
blessings and curssings, which shows what an unruly evil the tongue is.
Psalm. 114.8
God gives unto his, Water pooles out of the hard Rocks and Fountains, out
of the flint stones.

Fruit.
THe dangers that proceeded to our first parents, by the view of the fruit of
the Tree of knowledge of good and bad, Genes. 3.6
should admonish us how dangerous a thing it is, to give liberty to our
senses to judge, and then to follow our own judgment and reason in any
matter, wherein God has once pronounced sentence. The Church of God shall
grow and be fruiteful, Esai. 27.6.9
and the world shall be filled with the Fruit thereof, and this is the fair
and pleasant Fruit, that it shall bring forth, namely, that the iniquity of
Jacob shall be purged, and all his sin put away. As the goodness and badnes of
trees is discerned by the goodness and badnes of their fruits: Math. 7.16.
so men, especially such as take upon them to be teachers of others, are
discovered by their well or evil doings. And as the Fruit cannot be good except
the tree be first good: So from the evil heart of a wicked man, Math. 12.33
nothing that is good in the eyes and sight of God can proceed. Good ground,
which when it is tilled and sowed, brings forth Fruit plentifully, Math.
13.23
is an image and representation of those which receive the word preached
gladly, believe it steadfastly, and express it in life accordingly. In the Law
the offering of the first fruits, all the Fruits of the earth were sanctified:
1. Cor. 15.20.
so by Christ, the first Fruits of them that sleep, the promise of the rising
again of our bodies to life everlasting, is to us confirmed and assured.
Nothing is judged fruitful but that which brings forth Fruit plentifully:
so it is not one or two good things, Phillip. 1.11.
whereby we must be judged good Christians, but we must be filled with the
Fruit of righteousness.

Friends.
HE that will have friends must show him self freendly, that his friends
may think that he esteems and sets store by them: Prou. 18.24 17. verse.
17.27. ver. 9.10
For a sure friend is more to be esteemed and set by, then the nearest
Kinseman that is: for the love of such a freende is at all times showed, and
his heartye Counsel does rejoice the heart: Therefore him that has been thy
Fathers freende and thy freende, forsake thou not.

Frogs.
Frogs was one of the great plagues, wherewith God plagued Ggipt, Exodus 8.3.
there was neither feelde nor house free: For what place could they be kept
out of, Psalm. 105.30.
when the kings privy chamber was annoyed with them.

Foxes.
THe foxes excel in subtilty and shifts, wherein false Prophets and corrupt
teachers do rightly resemble them. The foxes have hoales and boroughes in the
ground, Ezech. 13.4
where to repose them selves and their young ones, Math. 8.20
but the Son of man has not of his own, where to rest his head. They
therefore, that pretend to follow Christ, and yet seek them selves, and
their own benefit, profit and commodity, look to be in better estate then
their master, and often times being deceived, change their course.

Gain.
Greediness of gain troubles the house of the covetous person, Pro. 15.27.
and often brings him self in danger. For they which will be rich fall into
temptation and snares, 1. Tim. 6.9. and 10.
and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and
destruction. For the desire of money is the root of all evil: 1. Tim. 3.3
It makes men err from Faith, and pearce themselves through with sundry
sorrows. Therefore filthy lucre is to be fled from and shunned of all men,
but especially of the ministers of the word.

Gawle.
THe bitterness of affliction of the soul of the godly, Lam. 3.3.19
when the Church and people of God is cruelly persecuted of the ungodly, is
like unto the bitterness of Gaul: Acts. 8.23
So also is the impiety, and wickedness of the heart of the ungodly.

Gardens.
WHen we recreate our selves in our Gardens, the liberality of God present: is
thankfully to be considered, Genes. 2.8
by occasion whereof, we are to call to mind how pleasant that Garden was,
which God him self planted and placed our first father in, and with how great
unkindness and ingratitude God was recompensed a gain, whereby both Adam and
we ever since have been deprived of so great felicity and happiness.

Girdle.
AS a man girdeth himself with his Girdle: so God tieth his people to
himself. Ierem. 13.11.
And as a soldier girdeth his armor to his body with his arming Girdle,
Ephesi. 6.14
that his armor do not hang loose or fall of from him: so must we our
spiritual armor, with the Girdle of truth.

Giant.
AS a Giant is too strong for mean men of middle size, and as his voice and
look is fearful to such enemies: Esaias. 42.23
so will God be to all such as rise up against him. This is a special comfort
to all those that for Gods cause are assailed of wicked men, Ierem. 2.11.
and therefore are assured that God will stick to them to defend his own
cause, and ouert^^^w their persecutors.

Glass.
SUch difference as there is betwixt vewing of a man in a dark or dim
Glass, and the sight of him face to face in a bright day: ^. Cor. 13.12.
so much difference is there betwixt our present knowledge of God in this life,
and that which shall be in the life to come. As he that looks his bodily face
in a Glass, and by and by departs away about other business, Iam. 1.23.24
25.
and forgets his fashion and form: such are the forgetful hearers of the
word, which never practice that which is taught them. But as a man may the
better both spy his spots that he may wash them, and also set his attier in
the better order about him, if for that purpose he diligently veiwe him self
in a glass: so he that is careful to avoid that which he should not do, and
to execute that which he ought to do, has very great help by hearing the
Word, and printing of it in his mind.

Gold.
THe godly are tried of God by tribulation, Job. 23.10.
and come forth like tried Gold out of the Fire. Wisdom cannot be bought
with gold or any earthly treasure, Job. 28.15.16.17
of what price soever it be. The word of the Lord gives Wisdom to the
simple, and therefore is more to be disired then gold, Psalm. 19.7.10.
yea, then much fine gold. It is better to us then thousands of Gold and
silver. The Church of God, when it is afflicted by persecution, is like dim
gold, Psalm. 116.72
which though it be fine, has lost his glorious brightness and shining
color. Lamen. 4.^
Though wicked Cities have never so great heaps of gold and treasure, yet God
in his good time shall spoil them. Zachar. 3.4
That gold will abide the fire and pass through the more pure: 2. Cor. 3.12
14.
teaches us that we should build upon Christ, that which will abide the
trial of the word. Gold though never so well tried and pure, yet in
continuance wastes and corrupts. But faith approved by good trial,
endures to the appearing of our Lord Jesus. We are not redeemed by gold or
any corruptible thing of what price soever, 1. Pet. 1.7.
but by the blood of the undefiled and unspotted lamb Jesus Christ. 1. Pet. 1
18.19
Gold that lies in the coffers till it be rusty and canker fretted, shall be a
witness against wicked and covetous hoorders at the last day: James. 5.8.
and a cause to increase their torments.

Goats.
AS often as we see Goats, we should remember the miserable estate of them
that Christ shall place at his left hand in the day of judgment, and the
terrible sentence of condemnation which shall be pronounced against them:
which should make us fearful of encurring the like, and careful to live
here, so as that there we may be acquitted and discharged of that sentence.

Graffing.
WHen we graffe or see others graffing, Romans 6.5.
we should consider that as the graffe is translated from his native tree, to
grow in another: so we, as many as be true Christians, are translated from
Adam to Christ, and from being Gentiles, Romans 11.17.
to be of one body, with the posterity of Abraham: that as the graffes now
lives not by his natural juice, but by the juice or moisture received from
the root of the stock, whereinto he is graffed: So we now live by the power of
Christ's spirit working in us, or rather Christ lives in us. And as to that
end we graffe, yt the verdure of the stock may correct and amend the taste of
the fruit, that it may be the more pleasant to the eater: so we should have
our corruptions corrected and amended by Christ and his spirit working in us,
that we may better taste to God.

Grapes.
AS every man that eats sower Grapes, his own teeth shall be set on edge:
So shall every one that commits iniquity dye, Iere. 31.30.
not for others, but for his own sin. When Grapes be full and ready for the
press, who knows not that vintage is at hand: Joel. 3.13.
So, when wickedness abounds, Gods vengeance cannot be far of.

Grass.
THough the wicked flourish like the grass or green herb, Psalm. 37.2.
yet quickly shall he be cut down and wither away. He shall be like the
grass on the house top, Psalm. 129.6.7.
which for lack of root withers before it can grow up to be mowed, or to any
other good use: So is also the flourishing prosperity of such cities and lands,
as by manifold wickedness provoke Gods wrath and indignation against them.
Esaias. 37.27.
The godly therefore, are to be of good comfort, and not to fear any mortal
men: Esaias. 51.12.
for, as withered grass, so shall they be shortly.

Graves.
Graves, upon which lie fair stones, costlye engraven with imagery, and having
inscriptions in brass, and the arms of them that lie in them fair set forth,
Math. 23.27. and* 28.
and blazed by heralds cunning, having within them nothing but a rotten
stinking carrion: does plainly set out hypocrisy before our eyes, which
outwardly bears a glorious show and inwardly is most foul, filthy, and
loathsome. The grave always craving for more, and never satisfied, Romans 3.13.
is an evident and a plain pattern of the insatiableness of the throtes of
the wicked.

Grasshopper.
Grasshoppers should make us fearful obstinately and stubbernly to withstand
God as Pharaoh did, Exodus 10.14.15.
least by Grasshoppers he consume all the green things that the earth brings
forth for our necessary sustenaunce. Esaias. 40.22.
Further, the great and mighty upon the earth are in comparison of him, but as
Grasshoppers.

Grief.
Wisdom is not gotten without grief, neither can knowledge be increased
without labor, Ecclesi. 1.15
and sorrow.

Ground.
A Waste Ground broken up, and rid of those things, wherewith it was
ouergrown, and the fruitefulnesse thereof hindered, Esai. 35.1.2
and by good husbandry brought to flourish and to be fruitful, expresses the
state of the Church, when after persecution it pleases God to send peace and
prosperity thereto.

Guestes.
BY Guestes, which when they be bidden to a banquet refuse to come, Math.
22.5.6 7.
or evil entreat the messe^gers that are sent for them, and so make them
selves unworthy of the good cheer which was provided for them: we understand
how justly God has deprived the Jews of the knowledge of his truth, Luke
14.9.10
and how deservedly all froward refusers of his graces offered, are by him
rejected and cast off. As it is honesty for a man when he is bidden to a feast,
to be removed hier, then he proffereth to sit, rather then to be removed
lower: Luke. 14.13.14.
So humility in our dealinges brings honor and estimation. Also, when we
bid Guests, we are to bid them that can not recompense us again, if we will
have recompense at the hand of the hiest.

Gifts.
Gifts great and liberal or rather magnificent, which great princes in their
triumphs after conquestes are wont to bestow upon their captains and
seruitors, Ephe. 4.8.11
should make us thankfully to record the liberality of Christ in his
glorious and triumphant ascension, not only in all other spiritual and
heavenly gifts: but especially in furnishing his church with teachers. Prou.
22.14.
Gifts given in secret pacifieth anger, and seasonablie they stop and cease
great wrath. Exodus 23.8.
But the receyuer had need to take heed: for Gifts blinds the eyes of the
Wife, Esaias. 1.23.
and peruerteth the words of the righteous. And he that loves gifts and
hunteth after rewards is next Coosen to a thief.

Hail.
AS a mighty tempest and storm of great hailstones where they fail, do beat
down and destroy, Esaias. 28.2.
all the fruits of the earth: so, the armies and hosts of men, which God
stirs up to plague any people withal, do bear down and destroy all
before them.

Hammer.
WHen we see smithes with their Hammers beat out the iron and steel, and frame
it to that fashion, Iere. 15.20.
that they will have it: and again, when we see ye freemasons do the like upon
hard stones: Then are we to remember of how much greater force they be, whom
God uses as his hammers to break down and to destroy kingdoms and nations
withal. Iere. 50.23.
Further, we are to consider the almighty power of God, who can also break
down and destroy them that have been hammers to the whole world.

Hand.
THe breadth of our hand should teach us the shortness of our days. Psalm.
39.5.
Our hands are weakened, and our hearts melt within us, when God will have us
overcome of our enemies: Esaias. 13.7.
example hereof have we in them of Jericho, when the spies which Joshua sent,
Joshua. 2.11.
came thither. Friends and other commodities earthly, though they be as
necessary, and can as hardly be spared as our hands, yet if they hinder and
stop us in our right course to life eternal, Math. 5.30.
or allure or entise us into the snares of death and hell, are to be renounced,
forsaken and cast off.

Harp.
HArpes and other instruments of music, Psalm. 33.2
which God of his great liberality has given us to recreate our spirits by,
ought to be used to set out the praises of our God. The harp, if it make a
confused noise and gives no distinct sound, it delights not, it recreateth
not, because no man can tell what it is that is plaide: so he that speaks in
the Church in a language which other men understand not, 1. Cor. 14.7.5
cannot edify, because men understand not what he speaks.

Harvest.
WHen we see men that have great Haruests, seek carefully for laborers and
many times want: Math. ^9.37 38.
then we are to remember how much greater Gods harvest is, and what wonderful
want of laborers is therein, and therefore we ought earnestly, to pray to the
Lord of the harvest, who alone can remedy that matter, to thrust our
Laborers into his Harvest. Further, Harvest should make us remember, how
great a blessing of GDD it is to ministers, when GOD has made the people ripe
and ready to be reaped and carried into the barn: Ioh. 4 37.38
and how great an ease it is for us by God to be called to those places,
wherein others before us have faithfully and fruitfully labored.

Hatred.
1. John. 3.15. Job. 5.2
Whosoever hates his Brother is a murderer. Yea, the fool fretteth him self
to death through envy. Wherefore hate not thy Brother in thy heart, Leuit. 19.17
but plainelye rebuke thy neighbor, and suffer him not to sin. For though
thou think thy self to be in the light and hate thy brother, 1. Ioh. 2.9
11
yet art thou in darkness, and walk in darkness thou wottest not whither,
because darkness has blinded thine eyes. Pro. 10.12
Further hatred stirs up contentions, and therefore it is not lawful for
them, Mat. 5.43.44
who ought to seek to be at peace with all men, to hate their mortal enemies:
Psalm. 139.21 22.
yet it is lawful for us to hate, and that with perfect hatred the enemies of
God. Also we which profess the name of Christ, Math. 10.22.
are to look for none other in the world, but to be hated of all men for his
name sake.

Heaven.
IF man by search can not find out the height of Heaven, Job. 11.7 Psalm.
8.3.4.5.^.
much less is it possible to attain the perfection of God. But beholding the
Heavens with the visible creatures thereof, we should wonder that God would
vouchsafe to give such worship, Psalm. 19.1
glory and dominion unto man being but earth and dust. For the Heavens declare
the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handie work. Psalm. 11.4
Yet though heaven be his Palace and throne, his eyes will consider, his
eyelids will try the children of men. Psalm. 113.5.6 Psalm. 103.11
Though his dwelling be on high, yet he abaseth him self to behold things here
below in earth: His mercies showed to them that fear him, Math. 5.18
surmount the heavens in height. This heaven and this earth shall perish and
pass away: Esaias. 65.17
but every jot and title of his word shall be fulfilled. But God will create
a new heaven and a new earth, 2. Pet. 3.13.
which we look and wait for according to his promise, wherein dwells
righteousness. Iere. 31.37
So long as man can not measure the height of heaven, nor search the
foundations of the earth, 2. Peter. 3.7
so long (I say) God will never forsake his whole Church. The heavens that now
are, and the earth are reserved by the word in store unto fire against the day
of judgment, Colos. 3.1
and of the destruction of wicked men. Wherefore the godly should not seek nor
savor earthly things, but things in heaven above, where Christ being risen
again, sits at the right hand of God.

Hedge.
MEn Hedge their grounds round about, Job. 1.10.
to keep them from being spoiled with cattle: Esaias. 5.2.
even so God does fence those which fear him round about, that they may be
defended against all evils. And as the grounds are eaten, wasted, devoured,
and rooted up, when the hedges and fences thereof are neglected and suffered to
lie open: Esai. 5.5.
so fares it with them that profess the name of God, when God provoked with
their sins, withdraws his friendly defense and fatherly protection.

Heap.
WHen we see great Heaps of rubbishe, and marvelous ruins, where great and
famous cities have been: Esa. 25.2.
we are both to glorify God who is of such might and power, and to fear least
we by continual provoking of his wrath, bring our land and cities into the
like case.

Hairs.
Psalm. 40.12.
WHo can number the Hairs of his head, but his sins in number far exceeds
them: how great then ought the troubles and sorrows of his mind and heart to
be therefore. But God has nombred all the hairs of our head, which is a
special comfort unto us, Math. 10.30.
seeing his providence stretches unto the smallest things, and vouchsafes to
have care of those things which we lest regard.

Hen.
THe Hen clocking and calling her Chickens together, Math. 23.37.
and lovingly spreading her wings to keep them under, and to protect and
defend them from all things that would iniure them and hurt them, should
make us consider, how lovingly God continually by the preaching of his holy
word, does call men to the embracing of his mercy.

Helmet.
AN Helmet saves the head of a soldier in the day of battle: Ephe. 6.17.
so salvation which comes from L the ord, saves and protecteth us from the
deadly wounds of our spiritual adversaries.

Hearts.
THe Hearts desire the water brooks, even so should our souls long after God.
Psalm. 42.1.
As the Heart when he can find no pasture is poor and bare of flesh, and void
of strength when he is hunted and pursued: Lam. 17.5.6.
so are the princes and rulers of those countries, which by the just judgment
of God are oppressed and over run with foreign nations.

Heath.
AS Heath in the dry and desolate wilderness, where no habitation is, is apt
and good for nothing, and yet easy to be consumed with fire: So the man that
puts his trust in man, Iere. 17.5.6.
and makes flesh and blood his strength and defense, and passes not on the
Lord, shall not see any good, but shall perish together with his helps.

Heresies.
WHen we see Sects and errors grow amongst the people, 1. Cor. 11.19
then we should remember to walk the more carefullye and heedfully, because
GGD him self appoynteth such days and times for the trial of his.

Hire.
THy workemans Hire shall not abide with thee till morning. Thou shall give him
his hire for his day, Leuit. 9.13
neither shall the sun go down upon it, for he is poor and therewith
sustaineth his life. Deuteronomy. 24.13
For otherwise he shall cry unto the lord, or rather the hire that he is
defrauded of shall cry, and shall enter into the ears of the Lord. James 5.4


As hired servants will not tend men's sheep and cattle longer then there is
money, John. 10.12 13.
and profit coming to them for it: so they which serve in the Church of God,
if their end be their own profit and promotion, Philip. 2.2
then they surely give over and change their copy, when days of prosperity
fail, and when storms and persecution for the word begin to grow.

Honey.
Prou. 16.24. Prou. 24.13.14.
Fair words are like the Honey comb, sweetness to the soul and health to
the bones. As Home is good, and the honey comb sweet unto the mouth: so also
is the knowledge of wisdom unto the soul.

Hold.
WHen men in times of trouble and of war are compelled to fly to hold: Nah.
1.7.
then are they to remember that there is no hold so strong, as the Lord is to
them which put their trust in him.

Holiday.
WHen we see our Holidayes spent and consumed in idle pastimes and belly
cheer: Exodus 32.6
then are we to remember, that as the children of Israel took that corruption
from the Egiptians, 1. Cor. 10.17.
so to us it is come from popish idolaters and idolatrous Papists.

Hook.
AS in fishing when the Fish deceived with the bait, Esaias. 37.29
have the Hook in their mouths, men draw them and make them follow whither
soever please them: so God withdraws mighty tyrauntes from executing their
devises, and from obtaining their enterprises.

Houses.
WHen we see wonderful great Houses, John. 14.2.3
containing many rooms and costly furniture and rich array, large and
sufficient to receive many princes with their trains of Nobles: then are we
to remember, how large a palace the house of our heavenly father is: what
multitude of mansions there are, and that there is one head and captain
Christ, who in his good time will come for us, and bring us all thither where
he is, for there is rome and provision sufficient. Again, the careful and
clean keeping of those houses do admonish us, how carefully we should keep
the house of God, Heb. 3.6.
whose house are we, if we hold fast the confidence and rejoicing of the hope
unto the end.

Householder.
AS a careful Householder is not only content with provision for the present
time, Math. 13.32.
but provides a fore hand, and has by him store of things needful both
old and new, as well for his household as for the entertainment of his
friends: so he that is a Teacher in the Church of God, ought by long study and
meditation aforehande, to be thoroughly furnished and stored with all manner of
doctrine and comforts needful for every sort of men. The householder that
fears thieves, Math. 24.43.
will cause his house to be diligently watched and looked unto, least the thief
come upon him at unawares: of him we should learn to be watchful, and to be
prepared for the coming of our Lord and Savior, who will come in an hour
wherein he is least looked for.

Horses
WHen God by his Ministers does teach and instruct us in the way that we should
go, Psalm 32.8.9 Psalm. 33.17.
and we continue as before ignorant, neither understand the thing which is
taught us: then we be like Horses and Mules which must be ruled with bitte and
bridle. In battle an horse is but a vain help, neither can he deliver his
rider thorough his much strength. Pro. 21.31.
For the horse is prepared against the day of battle: but salvation is from
the Lord.

Husbandmen.
AS Husbandmen that misuse their Landlord and his servant which he sends to
them for the rentes and profits of his land, are worthily and justly thrust out
and others planted in their rooms: Math. 21.41.
so we have seen the Jews cut off from being the people and Church of God
for misusing of Christ, his Apostles and prophets, and so assuredly shall al
they be, that despise and naught set by, and cruelly misuse and entreat the
Ministers of the gospel, and the preachers of the truth which are sent unto
them. As husbandmen wait patiently forth fruit of the earth, and tarry for
the former and latter rain: James. 5.7.
so all Christians ought patiently to abide and wait for the coming of our
savior Christ.

Husbandry.
Fields barren and unpleasant, made fruitful by pains and good Husbandry,
1. Cor. 3.9
do show unto us what difference there is betwixt us in the time of
ignorance, and our selves, when God by the teaching and pains of his
ministers has made us his husbandry.

Idleness.
BY slothfulness the roof of the house goes to decay, Eccle. 10.19
and by idleness of the hands the house droppeth thorough, and is neither
able to keep out wind nor rain.

Idolles.
THe images of the gentiles were silver and gold, Psalm. 115.4. Esaias. 46.7.
Ierem. 2.28.
so were the images of the Papists. They were borne by men and set in their
places, and so stood and could not remove themselves from thence. Abuck. 2.18.
According to the number of their Cities and Uillages, so were the multitude of
their Patrons represented by images: Esaias. 44.17.
They did think them books and teachers: They fell down before them and made
prayers unto them. Joshua. 23.7
They swear by the names of their Idolles. They did ascribe unto them help and
delivery from dangers, 2. Chr. 28.23
yet could they not help them selves. For by Gods just judgment they were
taken and broken down, 1. King. 19.18
and destroyed and consumed by fire: so are the images of the papists. Esaias.
73.19
But there rests a sentence of malediction, woe and curse, as well to the image
maker, Abuck. 2.19.
as to all that say to wood, awake: or to stone, rise up.

Idolatry.
IDolaters in falling down to images do humble them selves to hell: yet they
are very constant in their religion, Esaias. 57.9.
and very rarely and seldom give over and forsake their false Gods: Iere.
2.11.
which constancy of theirs ought to make us ashamed of our inconstancy and
coldenesse in professing the truth, Iere. 4.17.18
yea they ascribe the blessing of plentye to Idol serving, and penury and
misery to the leaving of that service.

Ignorance.
WHen we see in this light of the gospel many vile and gross sins: Romans
1.21.28
let us remember that it is the just judgment of God against this unthankful
world, partly for that men that know him do not glorify him as God, and
partly for that in so great and diverse means to know god, many have had no
regard or care to know him, and therefore are given over into reprobate minds.

Image.
WHen we enter into the Churches of Papists, and see how they be decked with
Images of all sorts, Psalm. 115.8
which notwithstanding they be well shapen, yet have no manner of sense in them:
then are we to remember, that by the just judgment of God, in sense and
understanding of matters pertaining to GOD and the life to come, Psalm. 115.8.
such as the images are, their makers are also, together with all them that
put their trust in them. Psalm. 135.18.
The image makers are vanity it self, and God has shut their eyes that they
can not see nor understand. What an absurd thing it is, when they have burnt
one piece of a tree to make an image of an other piece of the same, Esaias.
44.9.15 17.
and to bow down to it.

Therefore when we see them in their churches, cense their images, Esaias. 42.8.
knock, kneel, and pray to them, then let us call to mind that God says, I
am the Lord, Esai. 46.6.9.
this is my name, and my glory will I not give to an other, neither my praise
to graven images. Act. 17.29.
For he is God and there is none other, and there is nothing like him, or
whereby his likeness may be expressed. 1. Cor. 4.4
Therefore we may not imagine the Godhed to be like silver or gold graven or
carved, Collo. 1.15.
by the art and invention of man, Christ our savior is the very Image of God,
Heb. 1.3.
in whom God has revealed and made known him self, and he is the express
form of the fathers person.

Judging.
WE are to take great heed, and to be very careful in Judging of others,
Math. 7.1.
and when we judge, we are to judge justly, which we can never do, John. 7.24.
except we judge by the Word, the judgment whereof, must stand at the last
day, and when we do judge others, John 12 48.
we are diligently to view and consider our selves, whether the like or greater
falts be not in us worthy reformation. For otherwise we shall both bewray our
selves to be blind hipocrites, Math. 7.5 Math. 7.3. Romans 2.1.3.
and also ignorantly when we think not of it, give sentence aganst our selves
as David did. Besides in outward and indifferent things we must take heed how
we judge our brother, 2. Sam. 5.12. Romans 14.4.10.
for he is not our servant, he stands or falls unto his Lord, he and we all
shall stand before the judgment seat of Christ and be there judged.

Judges.
Judges are adorned with the name of Gods, Psalm. 28.2*
because they are Gods deputies amongst men, and for that cause are to be
highly reverenced of men. Exodus 22.18.
wherefore such are to be chosen as are of courage, that is, Exodus 18.21
such as fear not ye face of man. Men dealing truly and hating
covetousness, such as in judgment neither for pity to the poor, Leui.
19.15.
neither for reverence to the rich decline from justice, neither can be drawn
to follow a multitude, Exodus 23.21
nor in judgment to follow the sentence of many to overthrow right, but
always seek and search to give true judgment to all, as well strangers as
Citizens, having always before their eyes, that they execute not the
judgments of man, Deuteronomy. 1.16 2. Chro. 19.6
but of the Lord, who is ever present with them in the examination and
judgment of the cause.

Jewel.
Look how evil a ring or Jewel of gold becomes the filthy snowt of a
swine, Prou. 11.21
that is always rooting in the dirt and mier: so uncomely is beauty to a woman
that has not wit nor discretion to behave her self.

Iron.
AS with Iron tools sharp Weapons are made of Iron, so does one Friend help
to sharpen, encourage and enbolden the face of an other.

King.
IT is folly for a king to put his trust in the multitude of his host and army.
^salm. 33.16
The death of kings and Princes shows us how vain a thing it is for us to
put our trust in men, ^say. 37.24
or in the sons of men, for there is none help in them, for their breath
departs, ^sal. 146.4.5
they dye and turn again to their earth, and then their thoughts perish.
^rou. 20.8 p. 28.
If a King will see evil and wickedness driven and chased away out of his
realm and land, he must severely punish the wicked. Yet he must mingle mercy
with justice, ^rou. 29.14
for mercy shall establishe his throne. ^^ou. 28.4.
He must also have an especial care to defend the poor in truth, for that is
an other mean to uphold him in his kingdom. He must abstain from the love of
gifts, for otherwise he shall destroy his country. He must meruailously take
heed of giving ear to untruths, otherwise he shall be sure to have wicked
servants. When dross is taken away from Silver, there proceeds a vessel
for the finer: so take away the wicked from the king, and his throne shall be
established in righteousness. As the height of heavens and the deepnesse of
earth, Eccle. 4.13.14.
so the kings heart is unsearchable. Yet his heart is in the hand of God, he
turns it which way so ever it pleases him. A poor child that is wise, is
better then an old foolish king that can not abide to be admonished or
counseled. For out of prison he comes forth to reign, when he that is
borne in a kingdom comes to poverty and misery. Woe to the land where the
king is as a child without wisdom, Eccl. 10.16.17.
and where the Princes and Rulers give them selves altogether to
voluptuousness and pleasures. But happy is that land, whose king God has
endued with celestial wisdom, and all graces meet for government. We must
beware of speaking evil, Eccle. 10.20
or thinking evil of princes: For though we do it never so secreatly it
cannot be kept close. So necessary as breath and life is for the body, so be
good kings and Princes for their people and common wealth. Though kings and
princes sometimes conspire against Christ, Act. 4.26.2
to destroy the Church, and to quench the light of the Gospel, yet we are
assured that all they can do nothing, but whatsoever Gods hand and counsel
had before hand determined to be done. The king is the minister of God to take
vengeance on them that do evil. Therefore let evil doers be afraid of him,
for he bears not the swoorde for naught. Finally, the king must have Gods
book continually with him, Deuteronomy. 17.10
and therein for his continual direction he must read all the days of his
life.

Laborers.
WHen we see painful l^bourers, if we be ministers we should by their
example learn, what pains we ought to bestow upon Gods flock: if we be
common persons, we are in them to view the care and pain, that vigilant
pastors take for us, and to consider how worthy they are of their reward. 1
Cor. 3.9.
Again, when we see either for want of laborers, or by negligence of those
which are set on work, Math. 10.10
things do perish and be lost: then we should consider, how many thousands
of souls are in danger of perishing, Math. 9.37.38.
for want of painful and careful ministers, and should earnestly call upon
God to thrust out laborers into his harvest,

Further, the view of laborers sweating, toyling, and taking pains, Job. 5.7.
should put us in mind whereunto we are borne, and also that that there is a
penalty laid upon men by God, Genes. 3 19.
in the sweat of their brows to eat their bread. To the painful labourer
sleep is sweet, Eccle. 1.11
whether he eats much or little. He that for need stole, let him steal no
more, Ephesi. 4.28.
but let him labor with his hands the thing which is good, that he may both
eat his own bread, ^. These 33.12
and also be able to give to him that needs.

Lamb.
WIth such patience and meeknes as a lamb is carried to the slaughter, Ierem.
11.19
with such are the Prophets and preachers of God brought by the wicked to most
cruel death. John. 1.29.
For his meekness and innocence, wherein a lamb resembles him, Christ is
called the lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world. And
because that as a lamb is dumb before his shearer, Acts. 8.33
so he was led to the slaughter, not opening his mouth.

Lying.
AS uncomely as magnificall talk is for a poor fool, Pro. 17.7.
so vnmeeete is lying and untrue talk for a Prince. John. 8.44.
As the devil is the father of lies, so lying is an evident token of his
Children. The gross and apparent lies commonly believed and received in
Popery, 2. These. 11.
is a manifest token of Gods just vengeance upon them to their damnation,
that they are given over to believe lies, because they received not the love of
the truth: which punishment, we see how it lighted upon the Jews, Iere.
5.31.
whose Prophets preached lies, and the people delighted therein. Who soever
loves or makes lies, Apoc. 22.^
shall never enter into the gates of the Heavenly and Celestial Jerusalem,
but shall have their part and portion in the Lake which burns with fire and
Brimstome. 21. ver.
Yet we may complain with David, Psalm. 12.1
that there is not a godly man left, and that the faithful do fail from
amongst the children of men.

Liar.
Prou. 17.4
THe ears of the wicked are always open to the lips of liars, and Liars are
glad to hearken to the tongues of them that are accustomed to lies, Exodus 23.7.
yet we are commanded to fly from lying, because it is amongst the things
that God abhors. Pro. 6.16.17.30. verse. 8
Therefore we are earnestly to request at Gods hands to remove far from us
vanities and lies, Ephesi. 4.5.
and to teach us to speak the truth, every man to his neighbor.

Lightning.
SO quicklye as the Lightning in the East, is seen unto the Weste: Math. 24.27.
so suddenly shall Christ appear unto the whole world, at his second
coming.

Light.
^ob. 18.6
AS a dark or dim light which a man can not discern any thing by, nor use to
his benefit, Psam. 27.1
but is ready so soon as it is stirred to go quite out: so is the prosperity
of the wicked: but God is the light of his, Psa. 611.10^
and gives them eyes, and wisdom to eschew all the perilles, and dangers of
their spiritual enemies. As men in the night because of the darkness, use
Lantern and Lights, that they may see their way: so we ought in this blind,
dark and ignorant world, to use the Word as a Lantern unto our feet, and a
light to our steps, John. 1.9.
that we may walk in those ways that God has provided for us to walk in.
For Christ preached, in the word is the true Light which lightneth all that
come into the world, that are lightened. The benefit that we receive by
light, Ioh. 3.19.20.
sets out the benefit of the knowledge of Christ. And as they that love it
hide their doings in the dark, it is a manifest token, that their own
consciences bears them witness that their doings be naught: So they that
love and choose rather ignorance, then the knowledge of Christ, It is a
manifest token that they loath to see the filthiness of their own works.
Moreover, it is a manifest token of condemnation, when they shut their eyes
against the truth.

As Light endures not always, but darkness succeeds: so the times and
means to get knowledge, endures not always: John. 12.35.
but we are to use them whilste God does give them. Otherwise, as he that
goes in the dark, catches a shrewde turn before he wotteth of it: John.
14.46.
so he that walks in ignorance, runs headlong to destruction, when he
least thinks of it. Whosoever think that they believe in Christ, and yet
abide in their old ignorance, and care not for knowledge, deceive themselves.
The light that shines unto us out of darkness, 1. Cor. 4.6
is the knowledge of the glory of God in Christ. And those which are endued
with this knowledge, are now light in the Lord whatsoever they have been, and
ought carefully to walk as is comely for the children of light. Ephesians. 5.8.
For many things which whilste they were in darkness and ignorance seemed not,
and were not thought of them to be faults and vices, are discovered and made
manifest by ye light of knowledge, Ephesians. 5.13
and therefore to be diligently avoided and eschued of the^, which willingly and
wilfully will not continue in wickedness. For it is a vain persuasion for me^ to
think that they have fellowshippe with God, who is light, 1. John. 5.6
and in whom is no darkness, and yet walk in darkness still. Also they are fowly
deceived that think themselves to be in the light, 1. John. 2.9
and yet hate their brethren.

Lilly.
AS the lilly does flourish and spring in the feeld or garden: so God does make
the penitent, whose sins he forgiueth and pardons, to grow and ^lorish.
Hose. 14.6
The lilly of the feeld, whose beauty exceeds the glory of the richest
raiment that ever any king or potentate in the world ware, Mat. 6.28.24
declares what God is able to do for those that rest and repose themselves
upon his providence, when ordinary means fail.

Lion.
GOd kills up them yt disobey the voice of his words, by the cruelty of
raging of lions: So was the Prophet that prophesied against Ieroboams calfes,
for eating in Bethel contrary to the precept of the Lord destroyed and slain
by a lion. 1. Kin. 13.24
So were the Samaritans newly planted by ye king of Ashur in the land of
Israel, 2. Kin. 17.25
for not fearing the Lord, destroyed by lions. But God can shut up the lions
mouths, Dani. 6.27.
and make them calm and meek to them which fear and serve him. As lions rage
and roar when they seek after their pray: Psalm. 7.2
so do wicked men, when they seek to destroy them that fear God. Psalm. 57.4
So fearful as the roaring of a lion is: so terrible is the wrath of a king.
And as the lion and lions whelps fiercely rages on his pray: Prou. 19.12
so shall God on the enemies of his Church, when he rises up to defend it.
Esa. 31.4
Ravening lions express the nature of tyrants, that make hauock of the people
committed to them. The lion caught in a net or pitfall, expresses the
miserable estate of a king taken captive, Eze. 19.5.6.7 19. verse 4.8.
and held in captivity. As a raging lion spoileth and deuoureth all that he
can catch or come by: so the Lord deuoureth and spoileth the wicked that fall
from him, Hose. 5.14.13. ver. 78.
and exercises all manner of cruelty upon them. As when ye lion roareth,
whosoever is within his danger, can not choose but be afraid: Amos. 3.8
so, when the Lord speaks, what prophet or preacher of his can hold his
peace?

Leopard.
AS impossible as it is for a black-more to cast away his Skin and to become
White, Ierem. 13.23
and for a Leoparde to put away his spots: So impossible it is for them that
noosell themselves and accustom them selves continuallye with evil doing to
change their custom, and to endeavor to do well. Abuck. 1.8
The swiftness of the Leopard is not comparable or equal to the pace of their
horses, whom God stirs up to plague the wickedness of them that that provoke
him to wrath or anger.

Leaven.
A little leaven hidden in a great lump of Doughe: Math. 13.33.
by little and little leaueneth all: which teaches us not to be amazed or
astonished at the small and unlikely beginnings of the gospel, but patiently
to wait and abide Gods leisure, Math. 16.6
till the fruit and increase thereof be made apparent: And as sweet Dough is
made sour by a little leaven: So is the sweetness and comfort of the
doctrine of truth corrupted, if it be never so little entermedled with humane
doctrine or man's traditions. 1. Cor. 5.6.7.8.
The like is to be seen in our conversation, If the leaven of malitiousnesse
and wickedness remain in us. We must take heed therefore of suffering a
little evil, and fostering a few wicked persons amongst us. For it does
quickly corrupt much and many: Gala. 5.9
the beginnings therefore of wickedness are to be refrained.

Life.
AS that is counted the life of men, wherein they most delight and rejoice: So
that is a good ministers life to see his flock stand fast in ye Lord. 1. These.
3.8 Ezec. 20.11
God gave unto his people stacutes, and declared his judgments unto them,
which whosoever does, Romans 5.12.23.
shall live in them. But this life all men lost, and death prevailed in all,
because all men sinned, that is to say, transgressed the law. But God of his
mere mercy, favor and goodness, has given us life eternal in Christ: and when
we were dead in sin has quickened and raised us again in Christ, Ephe.
2.5.6
and has revealed it to us by the preaching of the Gospel, 1. John. 1.2.
John. 3.16
to the end that all that believe should not perish, but be partakers of life
everlasting.

Man.
WHen we see any possession kept by strength and force of armed men, which
cannot be removed, but by greater strength and force: then also we are to
remember, that eue^ so, we were kept by ye prince of this world, whose
possession we were and whose force could be by no means removed, but by the
might of our God showed in his son Christ, Mark. 3.27
that victorious lion of the tribe of Judah, by whom the prince of this world
was cast out of doors. When we see a man robbed or woundded, or in any other
kind of necessity: then are we to remember, Luke. 10.37.
that he is that man's nearest neighbor, that deals most neighborly by
him, and gives him most and best comfort, how far soever he dwell from him,
or whatsoever enimity or strangeness have been between them.

Marriage.
AS often as we are present at any marriage, and see man and wife, coupled
together in holy matrimony: Ierem. 2.2
so often we should remember how much God has done for us to couple us as his
spowse to him self. Hos. 2.19.20.
The keeping of the promise and faith of marriage inviolable, should admonish
us carefully to keep the like to our God. And the detestation that the good
husband conceiueth against the wife, Iere. 2.19.20
if she play the Harlott, should make us to think how grievous the anger of
God is against us, if we forsake him. And as it is against good manners for a
man to mourn at the marriage of his friend: so it is against duty for men
not to rejoice with thanksgiving, when they by evident testimones, perceive the
favor of God toward them in coupling them to him self, Math 9.15.
Whereby they are straightlyer conjoined then they can be in this world,
Math. 12.49. 1. Cor. 7.29
by any band of aliance or kindred. Yet we must take heed that marriage make us
not worldly minded, nor yet be an impediment to Gods matters.

The institution of it was in paradise with this condition, Genes. 2.21.1.
verse. 28
that whatsoever friends were nearest or dearest by nature were to be left and
forsaken, that the married couple might cleave and continue together. The
blessing thereof was by Gods own mouth, that the face of the earth might be
replenished with mankind. The estate of it is honorable for all men, Heb. 13.4
and the bed thereof impolluted and undefiled. But marvelous necessary for
them which have not the gift of continency: 1. Cor. 7.2.4.7. verse 4
the bond thereof is mutual and tieth either to other. The prohibition of
marriage to any sort of men or women, 1. Timo. 4.3.
is a doctrine which the papists learned of the devil himself.

Maids.
THe mindfulnesse of maids to deck and trim up themselves in the best manner,
who hardly or never forget those things which they think may beautify them,
shall serve to our condemnation, which can so easily and so lightly forgette
God, Ierem. 2.32
and so quickly quite exile, and banish him out of our minds.

Measure.
FAlse and unjust measures are an abomination to the Lord, Prou. 20.10
he cannot abide them: but by his just judgment he recompenseth them into
their bosom by one means or other. Math. 7.2
For what soever measure we meat, the same we must look for to be met to us
again. Therefore thou shall not have in thy house diverse measures, a great
and a small, but thou shall have a right and a just waighte, Deuteronomy. 25.14.15.16.
a perfect and a just measure shall thou have that, thy Days may be lengthned
in the Land, which the Lord thy God gives thee. For all that do such
things, and all that do unrighteously are an abomination unto the Lord.

Meat.
Psalm ^9.1
THe wicked run here and there seeking for Meat, and shall not be satisfied,
but the godly have as great delight and desire to please God and to perform
his will, John. 4.34
within compass of their several callinges, Romans 14.14.
as to eat their meat when they are an hungered, and when they see men labor
and toil hard to have wherewith to feed them selves and their families: John.
6.27
then they call to mind how much rather they are bound to labor for that
meat that endures to life everlasting. And as often as they see meat of what
sort soever, they remember that no creature of God, is of it self unholy or
unclean, but that all meats are sanctified to the receiver by the word of God
and prayer, Romans 14.20.21.
and therefore they abhor that deuilishe doctrine of the Pope, which at
sometimes not for civil policy, 1. Cor. 8.8
but for conscience sake commands some meats to be abstayned from as
unlawful. Wherefore as they condemn none for using their lawful liberty, so
they them selves are careful, least that in rash or unadvised use of their
liberty they should offend, or be occasion of backsliding to their weak
brethren. For neither the using or abstayning from meat, makes a man the more
or less acceptable to God, but always in eating or drincking, or what soever
else doing, they have a thankful consideration of Gods liberality, to glorify
him for his benefits.

Millstone.
IT was in the old time, the office of slaves to grind in the mill, Esaias. 47.2
and is at this day the punishment of masterlesse men and vagaboundes, and the
sight thereof should make us remember, to what vile slavery God threatens to
bring the enemies of his people and Church to. Further, as he that is thrown
into deep waters with a millstone about his neck, Math. 18.6.
is sure to perish and to be drowned: so we were better to sustain that, or
any other bodily punishment, then to hinder weak and simple Christians from
the truth.

Mockers.
MOckers and scorners at the gospel and truth of God, Psalm. 1.1.
are in the highest degree of impiety. Wherefore be no mockers, for if ye Lord
for the ungodliness of the inhabitants, Esaias. 28.22.
decree a consumption upon the whole land, much more shall he destroy the
scorners. For the cruel man shall cease, and the scornful shall be consumed,
Esaias. 29.20.
and all that hasted to iniquity shall be cut off.

Minister.
WHen we see the church abound with blind, idle, ignorant covetous Ministers:
then let us fear the plague, that the like brought upon the Church of the
Jews, Esaias. 56.10 11.
whose watchmen were all blind, had no knowledge, were dumb Dogs, could not
bark, delighted in sleeping, had never enough. Ignorant ministers, that
oppose themselves against Preachers and preaching, are to be terrified with
the curse of Christ, which he gives against those that take away the key of
knowledge, Luke. 11.52.
and neither would enter themselves, nor suffer them which would: which also
stretches to them that maintain ignorance to be the mother of devotion, and
also to them which with their traditions, and impure glosses have corrupted the
true sense and plain meaning of the word. 1. Cor. 3.4.
And when we have as excellent ministers as can be, if we stay and ground our
selves upon them, and not upon the word, we are carnal and not spiritual.
Romans 10.15.
Howbeit, the feet of them that bring tidings to us of our salvation ought to
be meruellous welcome, Luke. 10.16.
and those that despise them, despise Christ him self.

Moates.
WHen we see the sun so clearly to shine that we may see the motes that fly
up and down in the Sun-beaems: Math. 7.3.4.5.
Then we are to consider how many greater things there are in our selves and
others, which we see not: And thereby we are to learn to look narrowlye to
our selves, that we be not curious in spying small faults in others, and
either blind or rechlesse in passing over great faults in our selves
unespied, and so bewray our hypocrisy.

Moon.
THe light of the moon should make us mindful of the promises GOD made unto
his Church, Esaias. 60.19.20.
that their sun should never go down, and their moon never be hid, for the
Lord shall be their everlasting light. Job. 25.5.6.
If the moon be not brighte, nor the stars clean in the eyes and sight of
God, how much more filthy is the son of man, which is but an earth-worme?

Money.
THe image of the Prince, together with his inscription upon his money coined,
teaches us that those external things are his, Mark. 12.17.
and that in those we owe him subjection, and are to be at his commandment,
for they all are his, and we his subjects have them of him, and under him, and
by the benefit of his Laws: Romans 13.6.7
and therefore we are commanded to give him tribute because to him it
belongs.

Moath.
AS moathes eat garments, and Worms wool: so the wicked shall be fretted
away and consumed. Wherefore we need not greatly to fear their reproaches,
rebukes and threats. And GOD shall be come like a moth and rottenness, Hose.
51.8.
to those that bear the name of his people, and yet abound in wickedness. The
moath eating, Math. 6.19.
the canker corrupting, the thief stealing, should cause us by the
consideration thereof, to alienate our mind from that, which either so shortly
perishes, or, so quickly changes his owner, and therefore can tarry with us
we know not how little while. Those that let their clothes lie by them, till
they be moath-eaten, seeing every day a number of naked souls to want them,
James. 5.2.
shall have their own moath-eaten garments to be a witness against them, to
their condemnation at the day of judgment.

Mourners.
WHen at burial and at other times, we see men mourn and in heaviness, then
we are to remember, that we are to mourn, and lament for our wickedness and
sins, Ezech. 9.4
If we look to be spared at the hands of God in the day of the general
destruction of the Land for impiety.

Morsel.
Prou. 17.1.
A Dry morsel is better for man with peace and quietness, then a house full
of al delicates with brawling and strife.

Mortar.
WHen we see things bruised and broken in a mortar, then are we to remember,
that all correction is in vain bestowed upon a fool, Prou. 27.22.
to bring him to learning and wisdom: for it will not be as long as folly
abides with him, which can by no means be chased from him.

Mountains.
AS far as the great and huge mountains exceed the rest of the earth: so
far do the justice of God exceed and excel the righteousness of any
creature. Psalm. 36.6


Mire.
AS a man or Beast that suddeynly falls into a deep quagmyre, whereof he
can find no bottom, Psalm. 69.2
must needs perish, except there be some at hand to draw him out: so he that
falls into extreme adversity, except God do help him out, must needs be
therein ouerthrown and perish.

Mite.
WHen we see men give largely to good and godly uses, Mark. 12.43 44.
and amongst them, some poor men give gladly of that little which the Lord
has lent them: then are we to remember that it is not the quantitye of the
gift, 2. Cor. 8.12.
but the cheerfulness of the giver, which the Lord likes.

Mustard.
THe smalnes of the seed of mustard, compared with the greatness of the
increase thereof, teaches us from how small and unlikely beginnings God does
bring forth his Church to a wonderful increase, Math. 13.31 32.
and largeness. The consideration whereof is a great comfort to those, whose
labors. God employeth in those places, where least likelihoode is that they
should do good.

Milk.
Milk serves vsuallye to feed children and infantes: 1. Cor. 3.2.
which when we see, we are to remember, that all are not capable of one, and
the same manner of instruction, but we ought otherwise to deal with
yonglinges, and nouices in Christ, then with those that are grown to more
strength and knowledge. For the rudementes of religion, and the first
principles, and as it were the A.B.C. of Christianity, Heb. 5.12.13.14.
is as milk for babes in Christ. And a deeper insighte and knoweledge of the
true understanding of the word, and of the doctrine comprehended in ye same, is
meat for the^ which are further grown and are me^ in Christ. Therefore, if we be
regenerate, and borne again in Christ, 1. Pet. 2.2.
we are to desire the sweet and sincere milk of the word, without any
mingle mangle of traditions or humane doctrine, that we may grow thereby.

Needle.
THe smalnesse of the eye of a Needle, compared with the greatness of a
Camel, should make men remember, how great and dangerous an evil it is for
men to be possessed of their possessions: Mark. 10.24.
so that as it is impossible for a Camel to go thorough the eye of a needle:
so also is it impossible for such a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
heaven, for he has made his gold his God, though he do not so think nor
persuade him self.

Net.
AS the net craftily laid, Psalm. 31.4
encloseth a number of fish: so ye wicked by their privy devises, seek to catch
and draw into their danger ye godly. Ezec. 12.1^
But god on ye other side, both makes them fall into their own nets which they
have laid for others, and also makes the hands of their enemies to be nets
and snares to catch them. Further, they that ascribe their wealth and other
blessings of this life, to the outward means, and instruments whereby they
have gotten those things, are like fisher men which when they have sped well do
go and burn incense, Aba. 1.16
and offer sacrifice to their nets.

Nurce.
Even as a Nurce does favor and with all mildness foster and cherish his
Children, 1. These. 2.7
even so ought a minister with all kindness and lemtie to cherish his flock.

Obligation.
THe making, sealing and giving in evidence of Obligations and other hand
wrightinges, should make us remember that there were as many hand writings
against us to condemn us in the time of the law, Collos. 2.14
as there were ordinances of the law to be executed or exercised of us: and
the cancelling, discharging, and defacing of obligations or other such
writings, should bring us to a thankful remembrance of Gods great goodness
and kindness in Christ, who when we stood so many ways indebted, has not
only paid our debts, but also has put out and cancelled the obligations and
hand, writings of the law which were against us.

Obstinacy.
WHen we see any place wherein the graces of God most mercifullye offered by
the preaching of his Word, Math. 11.20 21.22.23.
are obstinately refused and maliciously resisted: Then are we most heartily to
lament their miserye, for that their state and condition in the day of
judgment shall be far more miserable and wretched, then the condition or
estate of Sodom and Gomorrha, Mark. 6.11.
or any other upon whom God has executed most just judgments and most
terrible punishment.

Oath.
WHen we see men believed upon their Oath, Heb. 6.17.
then let us remember how much more we are bound to believe the promises of
God, seeing to show the stablenesse of his council, James. 5.12.
he has bound himself thereto by his Oath. Men in common speech are not to
swear, 1. The^. 2.5
but their communication must be yea, yea, nay, nay. But it is lawful for them
to swear, Romans 9.1. Heb. 6.16.
so it make for the better credit of the ministry of the word, for the readier
believing of the doctrine of the truth, for the preservation of love amongst
men, Deuteronomy. 6.13.
and for the ending of contentions. But then in our oaths we must use the name
of God with exceeding reverence, Exodus 20.7 Deuteronomy. 5.^1.
not for every light and trifling matter, neither falsely nor untruly, but in
truth, in justice and judgment, Zachary 5.4.
so that all that see and hear our reverent dealing may bless and praise our
God: Ierem. 4.2.5. verse. 7. Sopho. 1.
but to swear by any thing that is not god, is a flat falling away from God.
So is it also in swearing to join any other thing with God.

Olife tree.
IN the midst of the miseries of this world, the godly man, when he seems
to be of men rejected and cast of, the sight of a green Olife tree should
comfort him, that he may say with David, yet I shall he like a green Olife
tree in the house of my God, Psalm. 52.8
for I trusted in the mercy of God for ever and ever. Further, a flourishing
Olife tree should bring us to a diligent consideration, of the covenant and
promise of blessedness made by Abraham and his posterity. Boughs broken or
cut off, Romans 11.17.
should make us remember, what nombers naturallye descended from Abraham, are
for the neglecting and contemning of the covenant cut or broken off, and the
graffing in of griftes, should make us thankful to God for his goodness, in
accepting of us in their rooms.

Olives.
AS in the time of gathering of Olives, a few berries escape here and there
ungathered: Esaias. 17.6.24.13.
so when God does bring general destruction upon any land, for the impiety
of the people therein, and for the contempt of his Word and ordinances, a very
few here and there shall escape.

Oil.
IN the old time the use of Oil was manifold, especially to annoint them that
were consecrated to great offices, as to be Kings and Priests. For by Oil
the plentifulnes of gods graces powered upon them, for their better enabling to
execute their offices was represented, and therefore that unmeasurable
abundance, wherewith our Lord and Savior Christ was endued, Psalm. 45.^.
Heb. 1.6.
was called the Oil of gladness, and we that believe called his fellows, 1.
Pet. 2.9.
brethren, and partners, because that out of his fullness, we also in some
measure have received, so that we also are made Kings and Priests.

Ointment.
AS an Ointment well compounded of sweet and odoriferous things, cannot but be
acceptable to the sent of all men: so that unity which begins at religion,
Psalm. 133.2
and stretches to the uttermost borders of the Church and common wealth, can
not but both please God and all good men. Prou. 27.9.
And as the sent and savor of a sweet ointment or perfume, is comfortable to
the brains and heart: so is the wise and hearty council of a man's assured
friend. Eccle..7.3
A good name is sweeter then a most pleasant ointment.

Ornaments.
WHen we see the Children of them that be great and rich men decked with
chains of gold and other costly Ornaments, Prou. 19.
then we are to remember that there is no such beautifiyng of a Child, as is
the diligence and pains of Father and mother in seeing their child taught, and
instructed in all kind of literature and nurture.

Oppression.
WHen both by craft and subtlety, and also by outward and open rage, the
tirants of this world oppress the church of God, and go about utterly to
destroy and to root it out from of the face of ye earth: Then the providence of
God in preserving his people in Egypt, ought to be our comfort and consolation:
Exodus 1.12.20.
for he is the same God still and is not changed. When Oppression has gotten
from justice her authority, Amos. 5.7.11
and cruelty reigns in steed of equity, then judgment is turned to
wormwood. But the judgments of the Lord shall follow those cruel
oppressors, for they shall build houses, and not dwell in them, and plant
vineyardes, and not eat the fruit of them. Therefore since God is so severe a
revenger of oppression and wrong, 1. These. 4.6.
we are diligently to take heed that no man oppress or defraud his brother,

Oven.
AS in an Oven or furnace, the fire does quickly consume the wood which is put
therein; Psalm. 21.9.
so the wicked in the day wherein God will show forth his anger, Mala. 4.1.
shall quickly be consumed. Or rather with what facility and speed, straw or
stubble is consumed in the heating of an Oven, with the like the wicked shall
be destroyed.

Owl.
AN Owl does not only keep alone and not show her self in the day time, but
also if at any time she happen to be seen, Psalm. 102.6.
all other birds do wonder at her. Wherein we see the state of a godly man
well expressed, when he happens to dwell alone amongst a number and multitude
of wicked men, he neither delights in their company, and yet is a common
gasing or wondering stock, when he happens to be among them.

Palm.
THe nature of a Palm tree is always to be green, and the more it is pressed
with any weight, the more to grow and flourish, and therefore in those
Countries where it commonly grows, Psalm. 92.12.
is apt to express the blessings of God upon the righteous.

Pellicane.
A Pellicane is wont to keep a lone and without company of other Birds, his
voice or singing has no pleasantness in it. Psalm. 202.6
Wherefore it well expresses the state of a sorrowful man, and an heavy heart
forsaken of all men, even of those whom sometime he took to be his dear
friends.

Pearl.
Math. 13.46.
WHen we see Pearls of great price, such as we can well be content to bestow
all our substance and wealth on, thinking thereby to be great gayners: then
are we to remember, how much more precious the kingdom of heaven is, and that
for the attainment thereof, no earthlye treasure is to be spared.

Pen.
AS the letters carved in stone or other hard mettalles with tools of iron and
steel, are wont to be set up for a perpetual memory of that which men will
have remembered: Ierem. 17.1.
So God never puts out of memory the froward sins of obstinate wicked men.
As the Pen of man serves to commit to writing those things whereof he would
have the remembrance continued: so the holy ghost registreth in the hearts of
the children of God, 2. Cor. 3.3.
those things which God sees necessary for their salvation to be recorded
of them.

Pot.
AS in the fining Pot the goldsmiths tries the Silver: so does God by
tribulation try the hearts of men. Esaias. 30.10.14.
As an earthen Pot so broke to pieces, that a shard of it can not be found
fit for any use: so shall ye destruction of such be whose ears can not abide
the truth, but will needs have their Preachers flatter them in their sins,
Ezech. 24.6.
and foster them in their errors. As a pot of meat seething on the fire which
no body skommeth, must needs be full of loathsome filth: So Cities and
Countries continuing in blouddy violence with out repentance and amendment,
must needs be loathsome and abominable in the eyes of God. And as no man can
accuse the Potter for making of the same lump of clay a drinking pot and a
chamber pot: Romans 9.21.
so none ought to quarrel or find fault with their creator, whose work manship
they are, framed at his good pleasure and will.

Pismire.
THE nature of the Pismire is, to be diligent in gathering and carrying to her
Hillocke in Summer that, wherewith she should live in winter: wherefore
Solomon sends the slothful idle man, Pro. 6.6.7.8.
to the Pismire to learn to labor in season for his living.

Pillowes.
WHen we see men sowing soft Pillowes and cushions for men to lean on, Ezec.
13.18
or sit on, then are we to remember to be heedefull, that we be not persuaded
by false and lying Prophets, to look for at the hands of God, peace and
prosperity, when our contemptuous and obstinate sins deserve the contrary.

physician.
Math. 9.11
Physicians for the body, should put us in mind of the heavenly Physician of
our soul. And as they that are in health, have no need of the Physician,
Mark. 2.17.
and therefore seek little or nothing after them: so they that know not the
dangerous diseases of their souls, Luke. 5.31
but think themselves in case good enough, do seek little after Christ, and
set little by him. It is dangerous also for them that are bodily sick, to
trust to the cunning of the Physician, 2. Chr. 16.12
and not to seek the Lord.

Plants.
IN rooting out unprofitable Plants and throwing them out of our Garden: we
are to remember that every Plant which God has not planted, Math. 15.13.
shall be rooted out of the Church.

Planting.
WHen we see men in their gardens diligent in Planting and watring, 1. Cor.
3.7.8.
and taking great pains upon hope of the fruit thereof: Then Ministers are
admonished what pains they owe unto the church of God, and other men are
thankfully to remember what pains God has laid upon his Ministers, for the
saving of their souls. As it is reason that he which planteth a vineyard should
eat of the fruit thereof, so also it is reason, that the teacher of the gospel
should have a living of them whom he teaches for him self and his charge. 1.
Cor. 6.7.


Place.
WHen we see men glad to hide them selves in secreat places from peerill and
danger: Then are we to remember that there is no secreat place so safe for us
to fly unto, Psalm. 32.7
as is our good God.

Plowing.
THE discretion to take time fit to Plow and sow, Esaias. 28.2^
the skill to use the diversity of instruments belonging to Husbandry, and
the wisdom to make choice of ground apt and sit for every kind of seed,
comes of the teaching and instructing of God, and therefore is to be thought
upon with a thankful and kind remembrance. As plowing, reaping and eating the
fruit, do successively follow one an other: so he that ploweth wickedness
shall reap iniquity, Hose. 10.13.
and eat the fruit of lies. Without breaking up of our fallow grounds, Ierem.
4.4.
it is but a folly to lay on seed, and when the follow is broken, and has his
due tilth, which is the hardest part of the plowgh-mans work: then such as he
sows he is like to reap. Hose. 10.12.


When we see men wax weary of the plow, and give over labor and pains: then
we are to remember, that he that continues not in the vocation wherein God
has planted him for the benefit of the Church, is not apt for the kingdom of
God. Luke. 9.62.


Poor.
Art thou poor, miserable, and afflicted, there is no such way as to cry
unto the Lord, for he will deliver thee, and rid thee out of all troubles.
Psalm. 34.6
The miserable estate of men to whom the glad tidinges of Christ their
deliverer out of all those miseries are welcome, are set out unto us by poor
broken hearted men, captives, blind and bruised. Luke. ^ 8.
If God have blessed thee with wealth, and granted thee to live in delights,
and given thee both abundance and delicacie of fare, daily take heed of
being unmerciful, and let not poor Lazarus be neglected, Luke. 16.23
much less despised at thy gate, least thou follow the rich glutton into
hell. For he that despises or mocketh the poor, reprocheth him that made him.
Prou. 17.5.
And poverty is the more patiently to be borne, because it was consecrated in
Christ, 2. Cor. 8.9.
who being rich, for our sakes became poor, that we through his pouertye
might becomme rich. Prou. 15.16.
And a little with the fear of the Lord, is better then great treasure and
trouble therewith. But if any of our brethren fall to poverty, Deuteronomy. 15.7.
we must neither harden our hearts nor close our hands.

Post.
THe speed that Posts make on their journey, Job. 9.15.
does admonish us with what speed and have our days of this miserable life do
pass and haste away.

Pit.
MEN that devise mischief, and seek by subtlety to hurt others, are at every
Pit they pass by admonished to fear the just judgments of God, who
oftentimes makes them to fall into the pit which they dig for others. Psalm.
7.15.6
Further, pits and snares do admonish us to take heed of provoking God to
anger. Ierem. 48.44
For when he will punish, he that escapes one punishment, shall surely fall
into an other. Deep pits, Zacha. 6.11.
and yet dry in the Bottom, should bring us to mind that God will deliver
his Church out of all dangers, how great soever they seem to us to be.

Preaching.
Esaias. 6.10.
WHere the Word is preached, and yet men grow not in understanding and
knowledge, but continue the same (or worse then they were before) still, then
the judgments of God are to be feared, least he will not have them converted
and so saved, For so the Prophet concludes against king Amaziah saying: I know
that God has determined to destroy thee, both because thou have done this, 2.
Chro. 25.16.
and have not obeyed my counsel.

Pricks.
Act. 6.5.
AS he that beats his heels and kicketh against sharp pricks, does nothing
but hurt his own heels: so he that strives against God, preuayleth nothing
but harmeth himself.

Prophets.
THe killing, stoning, and misusing of the prophets of God sent unto men, 2.
Chth. 39.16.
is an evident token and a most certain fore-shew of their destruction in
short time following. How be it, how soever the rage and cruelty of men, Math.
23.37
seem to make havoc of the Prophets and people of god: yet they shall not so
root out the Church of God, Romans 11.4.5
but that God will always have some remnant according to the election of grace
remain to him self. Prophets at this day are such as labor to expound and
apply the doctrine of the Word. Follow after love, and covet spiritual
gifts, 1. Cor. 14.3.
and rather that ye may prophecy. For he that prophesies speaks unto men
to edifiyng, to exhortation, and to comfort.

Pride.
WHen men feel them selves exalted in heart, Prou. 16.18
proud, and high minded, then let them know that their destruction is at hand,
and their fall draws near. Luke. 10.52
For God scatters the proud in the imagination of their hearts, and puts
down the mighty from their seats. Dani. 4.27.
Hereof have we example in king Nabuchadnezer, and in Hamman, Ester. 5.11.
who prepared the gallous for Mardochaie, that he was hanged upon him self.
Therefore, though a man's pride mount up to the heavens, 6. verse. 14.
and his head reach the clouds, yet shall he perish for ever like the dung,
and they which have seen him shall say where is he? Job. 20.6.7.
The tokens then of pride that abound and are plentiful amongst us, do show
sharp vengeance and judgments at hand. Esaias. 3.16.17
Because the Daughters of Sion are hautie, and walk with stretched out necks,
and with wandering eyes, walking and minsing as they go, and making a
tinckling with their feet: Therefore the Lord shall make the heads of the
Daughters of Sion balde, and the Lord shall discover their secreat parts. 1.
Pet. 5.5.
For god does resist the proud, and gives grace to the humble and meek.

Pleasure.
WHen we see foolish men drowned in voluptuousness and pleasures, and not
having any regard to godliness, honesty or comeliness, then are we to
remember Salomons admonition, Prou. 19.10
that pleasure is never comely for a fool: and most commonly the immoderate
love of pastime, brings them to poverty and beggerie.

Rain.
THe Rain makes the new mowen grass freshly to spring again, and showers so
comfort the earth, Prou. 21.17.
that it yields the fruits thereof: Even so shall Christ refreshe, foster,
nourishe, and cherishe his people. As a raging Rain beats the Corn down,
and washes away al before it: Psalm. 72.6
so when one poor man oppresses an other, commonly it is without pity or
mercy. Rain and snow falling from heaven retourneth not thither again, Prou.
28.3.
but waters the earth, and makes it fruitful: Even so the word that
comes out of Gods mouth shall not return void, Esaias. 55.10.11.
but shall accomplish and bring to pass that which God will, and shall
prosper in that whereunto he sent it. The rain falling from Heaven, and
causing the earth to yield her fruit, was at all times and is still to all
ages, Act. 14.17.
an open and a plain evident testimonye of the goodness of God, so that no
man can excuse him self of ignorance. The earth that drincketh in the rain
that comes often upon it, Heb. 6.8.
and brings forth nothing profitable for the use and behoof of man, shows
what is to be hoped of that man, whom the knowledge of the Word does in no
part reform.

Rasour.
AS a sharp Rasour with the least touch that can be, Psalm. 52.2
shaueth and cutteth, so does also the tongue of a mischeuous lying man.

Rebellion.
WHen we see a stubborn froward and unruly Woman, brawle, skoulde, chide and
rebel against her husband, Ierem. 3.7.8.9.
we are diligently to look into our selves, how ye case stands betwixt us and
God: for commonly, yt expresses unto us our unruliness and rebellion against
God: but all that resist God, Esaias. 45.24.
shall be confounded: for rebellion is as ye sin of witchcraft, and
transgression is wickedness and Idolatry. Therefore, Samuel said to Saul, 1.
Sam. 15.23
because thou have cast away the word of the Lord, therefore the Lord has
cast away thee from being king. Romans 13.2.
To resist man, whom God has set over men, is to rebel against GOD.
Wherefore, Deuteronomy. 17.12.21. verse. 21.
God him self has set upon rebellion and contumacy against magistrates and
parents, no less penalty then death. His wonderful judgments against such,
Number. 16.32. 2. Sam. 18 9
are to be seen in Core, Dathan and Abiron, and also in Absalom.

Reed.
A Reed shaking too and fro, with every little small wind, declares the
inconstancy and mutability of the common sort of people, Math. 11.7.
whom every small trifle does cause to alter their mind and judgment. Math.
12.20
When we see any pass by a bruised reed and not break it: we are to remember
that our savior Christ did bear with many infirmities in those which were
his, least he should break of or quench those good things, which began to
appear in them. And of him we are also to learn by bearing and forbearing, to
cherish and foster such good as we see begins to live, and grow in our
weak brethren.

Reward.
AS the price or best game for running cannot be obtained of any that either
run not, or else give over before they be at the end of their race: so none
can attain the celestial Crown of glory, 1. Cor. 9.24.
but they which persevere in the right trace of Christianity unto the end. And
as they which run in a race, having only regard to the reward, make them
selves as light and as nimble as they can, and therefore throw away whatsoever
is heavy, or may hinder their swiftness: so we in our course to heaven, having
that glory only before our eyes, Heb. 12.1.
should throw from us sin, which like an heavy burden hangs upon us, and
whatsoever else may hinder us in the way and course to life everlasting. Yet in
this course, the greatest pains that can be taken, and the greatest
perfection which is possible for men to attain unto, Luke. 17.10.
is not meritorious, neither can deserve life. And therefore our Lord and
savior teaches us, when we have done all that is commanded us, Math. 5.12.
to say and confess that we are unprofitable servant, though he of his
mere liberality for our better comfort and encouragement in all good things,
Heb. 10.35.
has promised large and liberal rewards.

Robbery.
WHen we see men which have no conscience in getting, liberal to the poor,
and to other things, in common intendment good: Then are we to put them in
mind, that God hates and abhors to accept robberye or theeuerye for burnt
offerings. Esaias. 1.23.
To love gifts and to hunt after rewards in princes and men of Authority, is
cozen germain to robbery.

Rocks.
AS ye rocks that are hard to be clambred unto, are good refuges for the
afflicted to fly unto from the face of their pursuers: Psalm. 18.2
So God is the safetye of all such as in distress, do fly to him for succor.
As he that sets the foundation of his house upon a firm rock, may be
sure that the Foundation shall be able to bear the weight of that which shall
be set upon it, Math. 7.24.
and that no rain or floude shall wash it away: so he that builds his faith
upon Christ, Math. 16.18
as he is set out and preached unto us in the gospel, shall be sure that hell
gates, that is, all the power, force, and cunning of the Devil, shall never be
able to prevail against him.

Rod.
SO often as the child sees the rod, he is to call to mind these lessons
following. First, that it is fit for the back of him that wants wisdom,
Prou. 10.13.
and that therefore correction is necessary for him, Prou. 5.11.12 ^3.
that is to be enstructed and taught. For correction, and instruction, is the
very way and path to life. 6. verse. 23.
Wherefore they must think, that if Father or Master spare his rod, that he
loves not his Child: but that then, he loves him when he begins to
chasten him betimes. Prou. 13.24.
For naturally, folly is bound to the heart of every child, But the rod of
correction does drive it or scowre it away: Prou 22.15
Therefore parents should not withold correction from their children. For as
the common proverb is, birtch breaks no bones, neither moderate correction
brings danger or death, Prou. 23.13.
but oftentimes it bridleth and keeps back him that otherwise would run
headlong into hell, and so is a mean to save his soul. For it brings him to
a wise consideration of duetye, Prou. 26.15.
where otherwise if he be left at liberty, he oftentimes brings his
Parents to shame. When strangers and Aliens prevail against the people of
God, Esaias. 10.24
then are we to comfort our selves, that they are but God his rods, and that
therefore God will not always for that purpose use them, but that in short
time they shall be broken, Esaias. 14.5
worn to the stumpes and thrown away. When we see scholars, very fearful of
their schoolmasters, coming toward them, with a rod in his hand: then are
we to remember and to take heed that we so behave our selves toward them that
are over us in the Lord, that they rather use us to the sweet and spiritual
comforts of Gods promises, 1. Cor. 4.21
then the terrible severity of Dicsipline.

Rushes.
AS Rushes and other green things, that commonly grow in watery places, If in
whot weather they want moisture, Job. 8.11.12.13.
do quickly consume, wither, and come to naught: so the ways of the wicked,
and the hope of the hypocrite shall perish.

Riches.
AS the glutton that ouerchargeth his stomach with meat, Job. 20.15.
is compelled to spue and cast it up again: so the greedy Cormorant that
gathers great riches, and deuoureth and swalloweth up great substance,
Psalm. 37.16
shall loose it again, for God shall even draw it out of his belly: so that
the smallest blessing of worldly wealth, which God gives to the just man, is
much better to him, Psalm. 39.6.
then great riches and wealth, which the wicked and ungodly do possess. For
experience teaches how vainly men disquiet themselves in heaping up riches,
Prou. 3.9.10.
which they know not who shall possess: wherefore he, which with riches
will have the favor, and blessing of God, must be liberal and frank to all
such uses, as tend to the service, honor, and glory of God. For, if we procure
his anger, Prou. 11.4.
indignation and wrath against us, our riches and treasure shall nothing auail,
profit nor help us. Prou. 2 2.1.
Therefore a good name is above riches, and favor above silver and gold. It is
therefore a very vanity to travail too much for riches: 23. verse. 4.
when a man thinks he has them most sure, then sodainlye they slip and
fly away.

He that looueth silver shall not be satisfied with silver, Eccles. 5 9.
and he that loves riches shall be with out the fruit thereof. When we see a
rich man suddenly die, Luke. 12.20.21.
and those to possess his wealth, whom he never gathered it for: Then are
we to remember what a vauitye it is for a man to disquiet him self in heaping
up of wealth, Collos. 1.27
and how much better it is for a man to be rich in God, or to make Christ
his riches and wealth, for whose sake every Christian ought with joy to suffer
the spoil of his goods, Heb. 10.34.
knowing that in heaven he has an enduring substance, and that the worldly
rich man together with his wealth, shall vanish as the flower of the grass.
James. 1.10
Wherefore, we should not follow the fashions of this world, in accepting
and regarding of men, only for their riches and wealth, which commonly they
heap together by tyrannous oppression, and by persecuting the saints of God,
James. 2.2.3.4.5.6
joined together with the blasphemy of his most holy name. They that desire to
be rich fall into many temptations and snares, 1. Tim. 1.9.
and many foolish and noysom lusts. And the desire of monye is the root of all
evil. 1. Tim. 6.17.
Wherefore rich men are to be warned, that they be not proud, nor trust in
uncertain riches, but in God, who abundantly gives to every one.

Roller.
WHen we see Husbandmen use rollers to break great and hard clodds and to
make them fall to power, Esaias. 41.15.
then are we to call to mind the power of God and his Christ, to break down
the might and force of his enemies, though as high and mighty as the highest
and greatest mountains.

Rainbowe.
Whenever we see the Rainbowe, we are to call to mind Gods judgments
against the world in the days of Noe for their wickedness, Genes.
9.12.13.14.15.16.
and also ye kindness of God, who in mercy has promised us that he will
never aagaine destroy the whole world with Water, and has given us the
Rainbowe in the clouds as a pledge, and seal thereof, for our better
assurance.

Shadow.
AS now the sun is shadowed with clouds and by and by shines forth bright:
so subject to change is the life of man. Job. 8.9
And as the servant working abroad in the whot Sun longs for, Job. 7.2.
and is glad of the cool shade: so men in affliction and misery are glad of a
little ease.

Sacrifice.
THe persons of Infidelles and impenitent wicked men God abhors, and
therefore the Sacrifice of such is abominable. Prou. 21.27.
But God favorably accepts the Sacrifice of the faithful. Heb. 11.4.
And these are the Sacrifices left now unto the Church of God: 1. Contrite
Spirits, broken hearts, Psalm. 51.17.
such as tremble at his Word, 2 Our reasonable serving of God, Romans 12.1.
that is our serving him according to the prescription of his will. 3
Martyrdom for the testimony of his truth. Phil. 2.17
4 The fruit of our Lips, that is, Praise and thanksgiving unto his most
holy and blessed name: Heb. 13.15. verse. 16.
5 Benefiting our brethren, and distributing that which God has blessed us
withal to the needy, For with such sacrifices God is pleased, 1. Pet. 2.5
and for that cause he has made us priests that we should offer up
spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Christ.

Salt.
AS often as we see Salt stones, we are to remember the strange punishment,
wherewith God punished Lots wife for disobedience, Genesis 19.26.
and to fear the like or greater. Mark. 6.49 50
Salt also as well because it is savor it self, as because it seasoneth all
other things, expresses unto us the duty of good ministers, as well in life
as doctrine.

Sand.
IF the sands of the sea be innumerable, so that it is impossible for man to
take in hand to number them: Then how great is the sum of Gods cogitations,
Psalm. 139.17.18.
and how far beyond the reach of man. And though the people of God be
sometimes for their chastisement given over to the enemy, who thinks utterly
to extinguishe them, Ierem. 33.22
and to root them out, yet God will again multiply, and increase the number of
them, that they shall be as innumerable as the sand of the sea.

Savor.
2. Cor. 2.15 16.
THe sent and Savor of the Minister of the Word, is very delectable and
pleasant to those, whom God has appointed to be saved: but unto the other who
perish he is an odious, loathsome and deadly savor.

Sea.
Psalm. 117.23.24.25.26.
THe marvelous storms that Mariners and passengers abide oftentimes at Sea,
show forth the mighty and wonderful works of god. The calm that often
suddenly follows, and the bringing of men into their desired harborrow:
26.28.30. Esaias. 33.2.16
sets out the love and kindness of God to such as call upon him. For God
for his people does make away in the sea, and a path in the mighty waters. As
the sea when it rages, the waters thereof cast up dirt and mier: Esaias. 57.20
so the wicked in their outragiousnes, show abroad their filth. But God rules
the raging of the sea, and stilleth the waves thereof. Whereby we understand
his great power and might, Psalm. 89.9
and that there is none in ability like him.

Sedition.
Fear the Lord and the king, and meddle not with them that are seditious,
Prou. 24.21 22.
for their destruction shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them.

Sepulchers.
Sepulchers and Tombs which are costly builte and richly adorned, Math.
23.27.28.
and have nothing within them, but a stinking Carkas and rotten boanes, do
aptly represent the notable goodly outward shows, which hipocrites make, their
hearts being full of all wickedness and corruption.

Seeds.
AS the seed once sowed, wheresoever it pleases God to grant his blessing unto
it, whither the sower sleep or wake, or whatsoever he does, Mark. 4.20.
and howsoever he is occupied, grows and increases, till it come to
maturity and ripenes: so ye word by the minister of God being scattered, where
God works withal by his holy spirit, there it brings a great, marvelous,
and an unlooked for increase. Romans 9.29.
As a number of things should yearly decay, and come to naught, except seeds
of them were saved, whereof they are by sowing renewed: so the people that bear
Gods name upon earth, should in the day of visitation of their sins be
clean and utterly destroyed as Sodom and Gomorah, Romans 9.29.
but that God spares some remnant to be as it were a seed, for the increasing
of his Church, and people again. Seeds yt are sowed, except they corrupt grow
not again: so our bodies except they consume rise not again. And as the same
seed in substance, that is sown springs again, yet altered in form and
fashion: even so our bodies shall rise again the same in substance but
meruellously altered in qualities: so our bodies, 1. Cor. 15.37 38.
except they consume, rise not again, yet altered in form and fashion, even so
our bodies shall rise again the same in substance, but meruellously altered in
quality.

Such as the seed is, such is the life of ye which proceeds from it. As
therefore of mortal and corrupt seed, 1. Pet. 1.
men are first borne to this mortal and corruptible life: so must we of the
immortal and incorruptible seed of the word, be borne again to a life
immortal and incorruptible, ver. 23.24 25
if we will live ever.

Serpent.
THe sight of a serpent should bring to mind the subtilty and malice of the
devil, whereby he deceived and seduced our first father Adam, and induced him
to transgression, Genes. 3.1.
and disobedience, and also it should make us the more heedful and careful to
espy his crafts, and to withstand his malice, seeing that we are eazlier now
to be overthrown, by reason of our corruption, then Adam was before his fall:
We also that are ministers should also thereby learn to be wise, Math. 10.16.
considering the manifold dangers, which are incident to our calling.

Servant.
THe diligence of our man-seruants, Psalm. 123.2
and maid servant in attending upon us, and doing their duties, upon hope
of finding help, and friendship at our hands: is a good lesson, as well to
teach us how diligently we ought to be in pleasing God, and also how well
content we should be to tarry his leisure, for those graces and mercies which
we look for at his hand. A wise servant is a great pleasure to his Lord and
master, Prou. 14 35
but a lewd servant always provoke him whom he serves to anger. Prou. 17.2.
A discreet servant, is better then a lewd son, and shall divide the heritage
amongst ye brethren. As impossible as it is at one and the same time, Math.
6.24.
for one man to serve two diverse and sundry masters, for yt he cannot be
dilligent, and employ him self about and upon the business of the one, but he
must needs neglect the others affairs: so impossible is it for man, Math. 8.8.9.
to addict him self to God and riches. When we see our servants at our beck
and commandment, and diligent to do those things which we appoint them: then
we should remember by how better right and equity, we, and all creatures
should redilye obey the voice of God our creator and of Christ our redeemer.
If thy calling be to be a servant, ^. Cor. 7.21
care not, but if thou may be free, use it rather. For he that is called in
the Lord to be a Servant, is the Lords Freeman: But learn that the
propertye of a good Servant, is to give all reverence to his master, obeying
him in all things, ^. Tim. 6.1.
and that in singleness of heart, and in the fear of the Lord, endeavoring
always to please him, Collos. 3.22.
yea, though he be froward, executing the trust that is committed unto him
as well in his masters absence as in his presence. 1. Pet. 2.18.
If a liberal, good and bountiful master to his servants, Math. 24.45.46.
can not but be very angry and much offended, if any of them deal cruelly
with their fellows, Math. 18.33 34.35.
how much more justly shall God withdraw his mercy from them that deal
unmercifully with them that live amongst them. If men be bountiful unto such
servants, whose faithfulness and diligence they have good trial of, as well in
their absence as presence, and on ye contrary side, angry, severe and sharp to
them which deceive their expectation, and do not answer the trust, Math.
24.45.46.47.48.49 50.
which is reposed in them: how much more justly shall God put the like
difference, in rewarding or punishing, the good endeavors or negligence of
them, to whom he has committed services of trust in his people and Church.
As men have just cause with more sharpness and greater severity to punish
those servants, Luke. 12.47 48.
to whom they have showed their mind and will, and yet their business is
neglected, then others who therefore do it not because they know it not: So
GOD to whom soever he has revealed most, and upon whom he has bestowed
most greatest gifts of knowledge, them, if notwithstanding they be negligent
in using their gifts to the profit of Gods Church, will he most severely and
sharply above all other punish. Servants, be they never so diligent in
executing that which is committed unto them, Luke 17.9.10.
yet cannot justly vaunt themselves, that they have done any more, then bounden
duty: So we then, when we have travailed as much as for us is possible, yet
are to confess our selves unprofitable servants. It is an old saying,
Service is no heritage: Therefore, when we see servant, when they have served
a time, Ioh. 8.35.36.
change their masters, and are either masterlesse, or serve others: then let
us remember that so unstable and uncertain is our condition in the Church of
GOD, except we have the spirit of freedom: namely, the spirit of adoption
of children, and so by Christ and in Christ, be truly made free. Romans
6.16.22.23.
Men are their servants, to whose commandments they yield all obedience.
Therefore, if we obey sin, we are the servants of sin, and our wages is
death. But if we obey God, then are we the servants of obedience to
righteousness, and our end is everlasting life. For the most part, some
private respect of commodity, Romans 16.17*18.
and the service of their own bellies, is the cause that men stir up
division, and contention in the church of God, contrary to the doctrine
received, and delivered unto us in the word.

Shepherd.
WHen we see Sheep well kept, by reason that they have a good, Psalm. 23.1.
diligent painful Shepherd, who carefully provides as well to feed them as
to fold them: Then are we to remember, that the people of God can want
nothing, because God is their shepherd. For he feeds his, Esaias. 40.10.
he gathers his Lambs, into his arms, and carries them in his bosom, and
guides them that be with young. But when we see idle shepherds, that suffer
their sheep to run astray and to scatter and perish: Then we are to lament
the state of the church, Ierem. 23.1.2
wherein we see such idol ministers, as these idol shepherds do represent to
abound, Ez^ch. 34.2.
and if we our selves be such then are we to tremble at the woe and heavy
judgments of the Lord, verses. 11.19
pronounced against us by his prophets. God him self will seek up his sheep,
14.23.24.
he will find that which was lost, and bring again that which was driven away.
He will bind up that which was broken, and will strengthen the weak: he will
cause them to lie in a good fold, and to feed in a fat pasture: he will
remedy all their evils, by setting a shepherd over them even his Christ.
Math. 9.36.


Shepherds, that do but bear the name of shepherds, and show no care of
their flock, and do small or no duty to them, God shall deprive them both of
strength, Zac. 11.17.13 Math. 9.36.
wisdom, and judgment. The loss of a good, diligent painful shepherd is
the discipation and scattering abroad of the sheep.

When we see numbers of people for want of the word in their own parishes,
do stray and scatter abroad hither and thither to hear the word: then are we
to lament this present estate, and to have compassion upon that people, because
they are as sheep scattered and dispersed without a shepherd. The diligence
of a shepherd, in seeking up any of his sheep, Math. 18.12.13.
yt are gone astray, is an example to us to spare neither pain, nor diligence,
to reduce them which are gone astray from God by reason of any error. And the
joy of a shepherd in finding of his sheep again, shows how joyful the
conversion of a sinner ought to be unto us. John. 10.11
Shepherds that refuse no pain nor peril, but do endanger, and that most
certainly their life, do represent unto us the goodness of our Christ, who most
frankly and freely gave his life for us. When we see shepherds careful and
diligent, about their flocks to feed, John. 2.15.16*17.
and cherish them: then we are to call to mind, that it is the chief, and
almost ye only means, whereby Christ does require his ministers to testify their
love toward him: namely, the feeding of his sheep. It is lawful for a
shepherd that feeds a flock, to eat of the milk of it: Therefore it is
lawful for the ministers of the gospel to be partners of the temporal
blessings of their hearers. 1. Cor. 9.7.


Sheep.
Sheep driven to the shambles to be slain, represents to us the state of
Gods Children and people here upon earth. Psalm. 44 22
Sheep unruly to be driven, Esaias. 53.6.
and running hither and thither astray out of the way, show to us our own
unruliness and aptness, to straye out of those ways which God has appointed
for us to walk in. That sheep brought to be shorn, Esaias. 53.6.
or to be slain, are dumb and open not their mouth, it represents unto us
the great and wonderful patience of our Christ in dying for us, Acts. 8.32.
which we are also to learn at his example. As sheep do represent the people
of God, so the good pastures and pleasant waters, do represent the word of
the Lord wherewith he feeds his, and the treading down of the pasture,
Ezech. 34.18.19.
and the troubling and stirring of the water whereby it is made thick and
foul, shows forth the corrupting and mingling of the word with human
inventions and dregs of man's brains.

Math. 10.6
Sheep in the country which abound with wild beasts, lost or run astray out
of the custody of their shepherd, represent unto us the dangerous estate of
me^, Math. 15.24.
so long as they are not brought, or continue not under the custody and safe
keeping of our Lord Jesus Christ. Mat. 12.11.2.
If it be lawful on the sabbath to pull sheep or other cattle out of a pit or
ditch whereinto it is fallen, and wherein it would otherwise perish: how much
more is it to do good and to relieve any kind of necessity of our neighbor
the same day. Further, the very sight of sheep, and goats, should make us
call to mind the state of men at the last day of judgment, Math. 26.32
and make us carefully to endeavor that the notes and marks of Gods sheep
may be found in us, that we may be parteners in the sentence, come ye
blessed, etc. Amongst other marks this is the principal, that as sheep
harken to the voice of their shepherd, so we give ear to, Romans 8.36.
and obey the voice of Christ. When we see sheep in the butchers shop
appointed for the slaughter, then are we to remember, that such is the
condition of the godly in this wicked and frail life. When we see sheep from
going astray, returned home to their fold and flock again: Then let us
remember, that we lately in ye days of ignorance were astraye, and lately by
the benefit of almighty God, who has suffered the son of knowledge to shine
amongst us, 1. Pet. 2.25.
returned to the shepherd and bishop of our souls.

Shettle.
THE sliding to and fro of the shettle in weauing, do admonish the weauer how
speedely and fast his days of this life do slide away. Job. 7.6.


Shield.
AS a shield defends the body from blows and wounds, Psalm. 5.12
so the great mercy and favor of God, defends those which are his from evil.

Ships.
SHips in which men are carried in safety thorough the raging seas, should
make us remember Gods heavy judgment upon the world in drowning it for sin,
Genesis 6.14.15
and to give him thanks for his great mercy, that he would not utterly destroy
mankind, but taught him to frame the first ship that ever was, for the
safegarde of him self and his family. As a ship being never so great and
huge, is turned about with a very small rudder, whither so ever it please the
master of the ship to direct it, so the the tongue though it be a small
member, James. 3.4.
oftentimes ouer-ruleth the whole body, and sets it out of course.

Shoes.
WHen we see broomes and other things bartered for old shoes, then are we to
detest the intolerable corruption of bribing officers, who for the price of a
pair of shoes, Amos. 2.6.
or such a trifle, are ready to pervert justice, and to sell the cause of the
poor which is able to give him nothing. The sight of shoes should cause us to
remember how vile and base the most excellent, and most reverend ministers of
the Word are, if they be compared with Christ, seeing as they are not worthy
so much as to unbuckle his shoes. Mark. 1.9.


Sickness.
WHen we are grieuouslie sick, we are to call to mind the greatness of our
sins. Psalm. 38.3.
For if there be nothing sound in our flesh, it is because of Gods anger: And
when there is no rest in our bones, it is because of our sins. Yet we are
with this to comfort our selves, that it is Gods loving chastisement, to the
end that we should not be damned with the world. 1. Cor. 11.30.32.
Therefore though sin be the cause of our affliction and sickness, and
though we be brought even unto deaths door, yet let us with true and unfeigned
repentance cry unto the Lord, Psalm. 107.17.20.
he will heal us and deliver us from our griefs. And let us look about that
our vnreuerent abusing of the holy mysteries of Christ's body and blood, be not
a cause that many be sick, 1. Cor. 11.30.
and many dye amongst us.

Silver.
AS pure as Silver is, being seven times tried and fined: so pure is the word
of GOD. Prou.. 2.4.
With such labor and diligence as we would seek for Silver, and search for
treasure, with the like we should study for the knowledge of God in his
Word. For the wisdom therein learned, Prou. 3.14 15.
is more worth then Silver, more gainefull then Gold, more precious then
pearls, and without all comparison to be preferred before any thing which we
can desire. He that loves silver, Eccles. 5.9.
shall not be satisfied with silver, and he that loves riches, shall be
without the fruit thereof. Though wicked covetous men do heap silver together
as dust, Zach. 9.3.4
and gold as the mier of the streats, yet the Lord shall spoil the^.

Further, the sight of silver and gold, and such like as passing through the
fire consume not, should admonish us to endeavor that our works may be such,
1. Cor. 3.12 13.
as may abide the touchstone of the Word, and the fire of Gods examination.
Moreover it was neither silver nor gold, neither any other earthly thing, how
precious soever it was, that could redeem us, but only the blood of the
immaculate and unspotted lamb Jesus Christ. 1. Pet. 1.18.19


Schoole-maister.
AS a Schoolemaister serves not for his scholar continuallye, but till such
time as the scholar may grow to some good ability to go forward at his book
by his own study: Gal. 3.24.
So the Lord fears his people with his law, not always, but till such time
as they have sufficiently learned to know them selves, and therefore to fly
from them selves to Christ Jesus, who freeth them from the curse and
condemnation of the law.

Sleep.
AS often as we rise from sleep, having our weary limbs refreshed, and as it
were revived, so that we feel our selves in better case and ability to do
any manner thing then before, so often we should remember, that death unto the
godly, 1. These. 4.13 14.
is but a resting of their weary bodies and bones till they rise again,
exceedingly bettered by immortality and glory, Prou. 20.13.
and therefore termed by the name of sleep. But love not sleep, least thou
come to poverty. Open thine eyes and thou shall be satisfied with bread.
E^cles. 5.11.
Sleep is sweet to him that trauayleth and takes pains whether he eat
little or much.

Silence.
SIlence in open places, is to be observed of women, as a token of their
dutiful subjection where under God has put them. 1. Cor. 14.34
Men also ought to be swift to hear, and slow to speak, for in much speaking,
James. 1.19.
sin cannot be wanting.

Smoke.
AS Smoke vanishes and comes to nothing, so the wicked and ungodly perish
at the presence of God. Psalm. 68.6
As smoke vanishes and passes away, Esaias. 51.6.
so heaven and earth and all that in them is, shall vanish and pass away.

Sparrow.
IN time of persecution, when we cannot be suffered to frequent the assemblies
of those, which truly serve the Lord. The state of the poor sparrow or
swallow, which are there suffered to build their nestes and have their young,
seem to us more happy then our own, so great a desire have we (if we be
godly) to be with them among who^ or at whose meeting, Christ has bound
himself by his promise to be present. The sale of sparrowes, and such other
small birds in markets or other places, should bring to mind, that seeing
these fell not, Math. 10.29
nor were caught without the providence of God, it can not be, but that he,
whose providence extends and stretches to such small things, should also
have a special care, regard, and eye to those that are his.

Speaking.
AS it were a madness, or at the least a great folly for one man in
communication with an other, 1. Cor. 14.9.11.
to speak in a tongue which the other understands not: so is it much more
for a man to speak to a multitude, or a whole congregation in that sort or
order. And where God grants not to people to have his word so spoken and
preached unto them that they may understand, it is a manifest token of his
anger and wrath against them for their unbelief. verses. 21.21


Spots.
AS spots deface the things they light on, which ought to be clean: so false
prophets and false brethren, defile, and stain the societye and fellowship of
Christians. Jude. 1.12.


Snaile.
AS a Snaile melts and consumes to slime and earth: Psalm. 59.^
so shall God consume the wicked and bring them to naught.

Snares.
WHen we see diverse and sundry snares and engines set for beasts, Ierem. 48.44
vermin and fowls, and we see those that have escaped diverse, in the end to
be trapped in one or other: then are we to remember, that though some wicked
do at times seem to escape the heavy judgments of God, yet in the end they
shall be snarled.

Sodom.
WHen we here, read, or by any means remember the heavy, fearful, and
terrible judgments of God upon Sodom and Gomorrha, and the places adjoining,
Math. 10.14 15.
which God destroyed with fire and brimstone from heaven: Then are we to look
about, and to consider what and how much more intolerable estate and condition
remains for us, if we continue contemptuous refusing and misusing the
messengers of God now sent to us.

Sun.
WHen we see the sun shine in his full brightness and beauty, then we are to
remember that, that light is but for a season. But that God which is for ever
and ever is the everlasting light of his Church. Esaias. 60.19.20.
But in the mean season, the constant course of the Sun, according to the
appointmente of God in the beginning, Psalm. 104.19. Psalm. 136.8.9.
teaches us our obedience to our creator. That the Sun staide his course in
the days of Joshua, Ios. 10.13.
that it returned backwarde in the days of Ezechias, and that it withdrewe his
light at noone days, Esaias. 38.8.
in the death and passion of our Lord and savior, shows the glory and
omnipotency of God, Mark. 15.23.
who can whenever it pleases him, change the whole course of nature, and
make it serve whatsoever turn pleases him.

Soldier.
A Soldier takes wages of them for whom he fights and goes on warfare:
Therefore a minister of the gospel, 1. Cor. 9.7.
may lawfullye receive maintenance at the hands of them to whom he
preaches the gospel. A Soldier, if he be not shod but barefooted, shall
quickly be surbated, and unable to travail. A Christian not having the
gospel of peace cannot endure. As it is an absurdity for a soldier, to put
himself into the field naked, without armor, and Weapon, as well to strike the
enemy as to defend him self: so also is it always necessary for a Christian to
be armed at all points: Ephesians. 6.15 16.17.
especially, to have the sheelde of Faith, the helmet of salvation, the sword
of the spirit which is the word.

A soldier pressed forth to the wars, 2. Tim. 2.4.
entangleth not him self in other civil affairs. Whereby Ministers which be
Gods soldiers learn, that they should keep them selves free, from all such
things as might hinder them from their calling. Luke. 3..14.
Finally, soldiers should learn to leave spoiling, pilling and polling, and
to content them selves with their own wages.

Son.
BY the two Sons, whereof one promised to do his fathers will, and yet did
it not: the other refused to do it, Math. 21.28.29.30.31.
and yet after repented him of his stubbornness, and did it: We learn that
there is greater hope of the conversion of open and notorious sinners, then of
close hipocrites, who under a fair show, deceive them selves and others.

Sower.
THe yearly necessity of sowing, whereby the sustenaunce of man is every
year renewed, does well show unto us the necessity of preaching, Math.
13.3.19.20.
without the which it is as unlikely for our souls to be preserved to life
everlasting, as it is for our bodies in this life to continue without any
ordinary provision.

Standarde.
AS good soldiers to their Standarde, so all faithful are appointed to flock
to Christ. Esaias. 11.11.12


Stars.
SO bright and so glorious as one star appears above an other: so much
shall the state and condition of our bodies at their resurrection, excel the
state and condition that they are now in, during this time of mortallitie. 1.
Cor. 15.41
False Prophets for their gifts of knowledge and vtteraunce think them
selves, and are thought of others, to shine bright like stars: but yet as
shipmen can not guide them selves by wandering stars without danger of
shipwreck, their course is so uncertain and wandering: Iud. 5.1.13.
so no Christian can without assured destruction make those Prophets his
guides, for that they stay not them selves, upon the only and infallible rule
of truth.

Southsayers
WHen we be provoked or counseled to seek to southsayers or fortune tellers,
then let us remember, Esaias. 44.25.
that God will destroy the tokens of the southsayers, and make them that
conjecture fools. Esaias. 47.10.11.
He will also destroy them suddenly and unawares, who trust and think to be
foretold of all things by their southsayers. Therefore let all such as to take
upon them to deceive others be put to death, Leuit. 20.27
so shall their blood be upon their own heads.

Stumbling.
WHen we see men through rechlesnesse, and for want of heed taking, stumble and
fall at that, which if they had given but a little heed, they might easily
have avoided: Romans 3.3
Then are we to remember, that even Christ him self to some is a stone to
stumble at, Math. 11.6.18. ver. 6.7.
but happy are they that stumble not at him. Howbeit we must carefully take
heed that we in using of our liberty, give none occasion of offense of
stumbling or falling unto our weak brother. Romans 14.13.
Our liberty stands in using or refusing, at our own choice outward things,
left free unto us by God, and the Magistrates put in authority under him, for
the things of this life are subject to their commandments.

Steward.
THe unjust steward making his masters debtors his friends which will be
liberal, imparting to them his masters goods, teaches us by being liberal
of that wherewith God blesses us, Luke. 16.2.3 4.5.6.7.8.9
to the poor, to provide for life after this, because God does accept as don
unto him yt, which is bestowed upon them. The sight also of Stewards or factors
disposing of their masters goods to his gain, should cause us that be
Ministers to remember, that the secreates of God, and mysteries that concern
the salvation of man, are committed to us to dispose, and that God does look
for it at our hands, that we should be diligent and faithful disposers of
them.

Storke.
THe Storke and other fowls, know their appointed times of their coming and
withdrawing them selves, Ierem. 8.7.
but they which bear the name of God upon earth, and profess to be his
people, understand nor know not his judgments.

Strangers.
AS strangers and trauailers abstain in the Countries where they are
strangers, from many things which would but hinder them in their voyage: so
we in our passage through this world, should abstain from the lusts of the
flesh, which hinder our souls from life everlasting. 1. Pet. 2.11.


Stubble.
AStrologers, star-gasers, Prognosticators, shall be as stubble, the fire shall
burn them, they shall not be able to deliver their own lives from the power
of the flame. As stubble also, shall God make them which persecute his people,
Isay. 47.14. ^bad. verse. 18. Nahum. 1.10
and shall raise a flame amongst the persecuted, to consume their persecutors.
Stubble, straw, and hay, and such like, quickly consumed by fire, do
admonish us to look to our ways, that our works which we suppose to be good,
and to be works of obedience, 1. Cor. 3.12 13.
be not such as turn to ashes, so soon as the fire of Gods examination by
his word touches them.

Stones.
WHen we see the chief corner stones of great and huge buildinges, Heb. 4.6.
to bear the weight of the whole building: Then we are to remember, that the
whole congregation of the faithful is Gods house or building, whereof every
one of us are parts or lively stones, 1. Pet. 2.5.
and that the people Circumcised and uncircumcised that believe, Ephesians. 2.12
are the two walls, which in Christ were coupled, and upon him as upon the
head corner stone, Act. 4.11.
do rest and are vpholden. When we see precious stones, then are we to comfort
our selves, Psalm. 118.22.
that though we now with the residue of the Church are afflicted: Yet as these
stones exceed the common sort of stones in estimation and price, so we also
shall exceed in glory. The very stones in the walls shall cry woe to him
that builds with blood, Esaias. 54.11.12.
and erecteth and sets up with iniquity. Stony ground, which in the spring
first waxes green, Habac. 2.12
and of all the rest seems forwardest, and after when the weather waxes
whotte burns and seareth away: Math. 13.5.^ 21.25.
represents unto us the hasty forwardness of many, who at the first in
days of peace seem to receive the word joyfully, and afterward in time of
persecution, by their speedy shrincking show, that it had never good and
settled root in them.

Subjection.
LEt every soul be subject to the higher power, for there is no power but of
God, and the powers that be are ordained of God, Romans 13.1.2
whosoever therefore resists power, resists the ordinance of God. Amongst
the powers, the king is the highest. 1. Pet. 2.13.
They are appointed of God for the benefit and wealth of their subjects, to
suppress evil, and to mainetayne those which are good. Rom 13.3.4.
Therefore we are most earnestlye to pray for kings, 1. Tim. 3.1.2
and all that are in authority, that we under them may lead a quiet and a
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty.

Swine.
AS Swine will moozell up and down in the mier, whatsoever precious thing
shall be offered them: so wicked contemners and despisers of the word do (as
it were) tread under their feet, Math. 7.6.
whatsoever promise is offered, or judgment threatened to them out of the Word.
The destruction of an heard of Swine was of more force to make the Gaderenes
weary of Christ, Mark. 5.17.
then the saving of the man possessed with the Devil, was to cause him to be
welcome, and to be well accepted and received of them. Such is always the
estate of Christ, and of his gospel amongst worldlinges, whenever it is
joined with any loss or danger of worldly benefits. Wash swine never so
clean, yet so soon as they can find a miery plat, they will wallow and tumble
them selves in it again: 2. Pet. 2.22.
so bestow never so much pains to reduce the wicked and ungodly from their
impiety, they will shortly pollute and defile them selves again.

Sword.
Swords that new come from the cutlers, newly whet, which cut whersoeuer they
touch, do lively set forth the qualities of wicked and ungodly tongues. Psalm.
57.4 64. ver. 3.
So also do they of the wrath and anger of God, kindled as well to destroy and
consume the hipocrite, Ezech. 21.9 14.
as him that is openly and notoriously wicked. Further they do most plainly
represent, Math. 10.34 35.36.
the nature of dissension and disagreement in religion. For there is no band so
strong of nature, affinity or friendship, which it does not clean break and
cut a sunder. The sharpness of a two edged sword, does lively express the
lively and mighty operation of the word, which cutteth a sunder the strongest
things in man that oppose them selves against it, Heb. 4.12.
and pearceth into the most secreat and hid corners of them, which cover them
selves with hypocrisy against it.

Sorrow.
SOrrow is increased by increase of knowledge. Eccles. 1.18.


Song.
THe sharpest rebuke of a Friend, is better and more delectable to the ear of
a wise man, Eccle. 9.7. Psalm. 30.4. Psalm. 83.1.2 Collos. 3.16. Ephesians. 4.19
James. 5.13
then the pleasauntest song of a fool. It is a comely thing for the saints of
God, to set forth the praises of the Lord, with songs and Psalms, and in
singing of them, to observe that which makes for their admonition, and
instruction. They take therein a singular pleasure, they make it their mirth and
recreation.

Tabernacle.
WHen we see in any fayres, markettes or camps, tents or booths, set up for
men's present necessity to abide in a little while: Heb. 11.9.
let us remember that our bodies are but tents and tabernacles, lent unto us to
dwell in here for a time, and that therefore we should live here, like
strangers and pilgrims, looking and tarying for an eternal mansion, 2. Cor.
5.1.
or city in heaven: the author and founder whereof is God.

Talent
THe great and fearful punishment of him that received a talent of his master
and went and dug it in the earth and hid it: do teach us to fear the
heavy and grievous judgments of God against us, Math. 25.30.
If we have received any gifts of God, and do not employ them to the common
use, benefit and profit of the Church and people of God.

Teachers.
THose teachers dishonor God, and slander his gospel greatly, Romans
2.17.18.19.20.2^ 23.24.
which openly fall into those gross vices and sins, which they reprove in
others: As they are very welcome, and received joyfully of us, which bring us
tidings of that which we greatly desire: so ought the feet of our preachers,
Romans 10.1^
to be esteemed beautiful, which bring to us the glad tidinges of peace, and
reconcilement with God. For the which cause, they are reckoned, amongst the
most precious gifts and greatest treasures that Christ at his glorious and
triumphant ascension, Ephesians. 4.12.
enriched his Church withal: The devil envying this felicity, thrusts out
lying teachers, which bring in damnable sects, 2. Pet. 2.1.
and draw upon their own heads, and the heads of their followers swift
damnation.

Tempest.
WHen we see any great raging tempest, which bears down a number of
things before it: Ierem. 23.1^
Then are we to consider how much more violent, Ierem. 30.2
the wrath and anger of the Lord is against wicked and ungodly men.

Tears.
WHiles the wicked prosper against the people of God, and do freely blaspheme
God, and make waste and havoc of the Church of God: Psalm. 42.3.80. verse. 5.
the Tears of the godly powered out from greef, are to them in steed of meat
and drink: but the time shall come, Esaias. 25.8.
when the Lord shall wipe all Tears from their eyes, and shall take away their
rebuke from out of the earth: Luke. 6.21.
for blessed are they that weep now, for they shall laugh.

Tiethes.
TO withdraw and witholde Tieths and offerings, by ye law appointed to the
living and sustenaunce of Gods minister, Mal. 3.8.
is to rob God and to steal from him. They that Tieth truly, and yet in the
rest of their life are lose and dissolute, do rightlye express unto us them,
Math. 23.23.
that make great conscience in outward things commanded by men, and yet make
not so great a matter of leaving their calling, and giving over their flock,
to the which they were tied, both by the laws of God and man. In payment of our
Tieths, we should consider, what a great dignity, and what an honorable
calling, Heb. 7.4.6.
God has advanced his ministers unto, and therefore yield them that honor,
and reverence due unto their calling.

Thief.
AS a Thief taken in stealing with the deed doing, is brought to open shame:
so Kings, princes and nations putting confidence in idols, Ierem. 26.27 23.
and yet deceived in finding no help in them, in time of their distress are
put to manifest shame and confusion. A thief as near as he can, comes
closely to rob an house then, Mar. 24.43.44.
when men think least of him: so upon a like sudden, when men least think of
it shall Christ come again to judgment. Wherefore we ought at al times to be
ready for his coming. 1. These. 5.4.
When we see thieves and such other malefactors executed for their deseruings,
we are to take heed, 2. Pet. 3.10.
that we when we suffer, suffer not as murderers, thieves, evil doers or busy
bodies: 1. Pet. 4.15.16.
but if we suffer as Christians then are we not to be ashamed.

Thirst.
BLessed are they that hunger and thirste after righteousness, Math. 5.6.
for they shall be satisfied.

Thorns.
Thorns cannot be touched nor handled, except men's hands be fenced with
hedging gloves: so are wicked neighbors very cumbersom except a man be well
defended, 2. Sam. 13.6.
and take great heed unto him self. As a fire made of Thorns burns fiercely
for the time, and keeps a great noise and cracking, Psalm. 118.12
but yet is speedilye burnt out and consumed: so the attemptes of the wicked,
are for the time violent, and dangerous, but GOD in his good time does with
speed extinguish and quench them. Nahum 1.10
A hedge or good fence of thorn, is hard to ve passed thorough: Prou. 15.19
so is every way of gayning or getting to the slothful. It is impossible
that Corn should grow or prosper, and come to good among the bushes of
thorns: so likewise is it, that the seed of the word, should become the
seed of new-byrth, Math. 13.22
to him that continues full of worldly cares, and is snared with the
deceitfulness of riches.

Throanes.
Whenever we see throanes or Chayres of state, wherein it is not lawful for
any but princes, Math. 19.28.
and great estates to sit: then are we admonished to remember the great
majesty and glory whereunto Christ will advance those that follow him.

Temples.
TEmples, Churches, Chappelles, which places we therefore esteem holy, because
they are dedicated to the service of GOD and holy exercises of religion,
should bring to mind that we are also the temples of God, 1. Cor. 3.16 17.
and therefore ought also to be holy.

Tooth.
AS the stump of a tooth is unprofitable to eat withal: So they in whom
there is no faith nor credit to be reposed, Prou. 25.19.
are friends unfit and unprofitable for a man in the day of trouble.

Top.
THe house top should put us in mind, how much better it is for a man to be
quietlye matched, Prou. 21.9.
though he dwell in never so small a corner, rather then have never so pleasante
and roomthy an house with a contentious brawling brabbling wife.

Tongues.
THe gift of speaking with strange tongs, though it be very commendable and
excellent: yet if it be not used to the common benefit and profit of those
among whom we live: 1. Cor. 13.1.
It makes a man no better then a piece of sounding brass, or a tinckling
cimbal. 1. Cor. 14 11. verse. 23. verse. 21.
They that speak to other in a tongue that the other understand not, are as
strangers to them, to whom they speak, so are they yt speak lattin to the
unlearned multitude at church. Men cannot judge them to be well in their
wits, whom they hear talk and prate to them in a tongue which they understand
not. Further, when things are so uttered in the church, that they can not be
understood of the hearers, it is a plain and manifest token of Gods anger
against them for their unbelief.

Travail.
ONe great travail that God has given unto men to humble them thereby,
Eccles. 1.13.
is to learn and gather wisdom, by the diligent, and advised consideration,
and view of all things under the sun.

Trees.
WHen we see trees dug up by the roots, not to the end to destroy them,
Job. 8.18.
but to plant them in another place, where they may grow better, and more
conveniently: then are we to remember, that the grievous troubles of the
righteous sent to them from God, are of the like sort, for their better
planting in another place. Psalm 13.
A tree pleasantly planted by the water side, prospering and bringing forth
fruit in great plenty, Ieram. 17.8
does admonish us, how we which pretend to be graffed in Christ Jesus, should
abou^d and be replenished with all good works. Psalm. 28.5
The strength of a Cedre tree; or of a great Oak, suddenly rent or pulled up by
the roots, Psalm. 38.35
and the grene flourishing of a bay tree, suddenly blasted and withered away,
do represent unto us the strength and prosperitye of the wicked, how momentany
they be, and how sodainlye they perish. A tree, the fruit whereof, is good for
preservation of life and health, and therefore of many much sought for, Prou.
15.4.3. verse 18.
should bring to mind, how wholesome a good tongue is, and carefully Wisdom
is to be sought after. Trees in Winter, which for that they are naked, and
void both of leaves and of fruit, do seem for the time little to differ from
dead and starued trees, and yet have secretly hid in them their juice, Esaias.
6.13.
which makes them spring again, and as it were revive again in summer: do
represent unto us the state of the Church of God, which though in bitter
persecution, seems to be as it were quenched and extinguished: Yet when God
gives some peace and rest flourishes and springs again. When we see a
little twig spring out of an old sear stock such as we would have thought it
impossible for any thing to grow on it: then are we to remember in what decay
the stock of David was when Christ was borne.

The Church of God after persecution shall like a fruitful Tree, Esaias. 11.1.
take root again, flourish and grow till the world be filled with the
fruit thereof. When we see some trees, higher, fayrer, greater and stronger
then others: Esaias. 27.6.
then are we to remember, that even so, is the great power of those Nations,
which God above other has exalted. As trees are known to be good or bad by
their fruit: so men are discerned by their doing. Ezech. 31.3.
And as men are wo^t to hew down ye trees, yt either are unfruitful or else
bring forth bad fruit, and make firewood of the^: so God in his good time will
root out of his church al wicked men, and throw them into eternal fire. When
trees blossom and shoot forth buddes, we are assured that summer draws
near. So when we hear of wars, Math. 24.6.7
rumors of wars, pestilence, famine and earthquakes, then are we to know
that the end of the world draws near.

Troubles.
GReat are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord riddeth them out of them
all, Psalm. 34.19
and in the mean space comfort them in the midst of their troubles, that
they may be able to becomme instruments of comfort to others, 2. Cor. 1.4.
and able to cheer others in their affliction, by that comfort which they them
selves received of god.

Trumpet.
WHen we hear the trumpet sound out aloud, to give soldiers and seruitors
warning to prepare and put them selves in a readiness for that which they are
appointed for: Then are ministers to remember, how much they should strain
their voices, and how loud they should cry, Esaias. 58.1.
both to Princes and people, to show them the dangers that are iminent and at
hand for their sins. As the Trumpeter that is set to watch for the coming
of his enemies, is guilty of the blood and death of his Citizens and people, if
through his negligence and for want of warning by his trumpet the enemy steal
upon them, and make slaughter and hauock of them at unawares: so the ministers
of the word also, if the people without continual admonition and calling upon
to repent, do perish in their sins. If the trumpet should give an uncertain
sound, it should not profit: for so the soldier should not be warned, to
provide for the battle: even so the tongues which the people understand not
are not profitable to be spoken withal in the church. 1. Cor. 14.8.9
And by the sound of the Trumpete, we are warned to hearken after, and to
look for the sound of the last trump at the noise of the which, 1. Cor. 15.25
the dead shall rise incorruptible and we shall be changed. 1. These. 4.6


Treasure.
THe gathering of treasur^, by deceitful tung and speech is a vanity: even so
delighting men, Prou. 2.6.
and as commonly exercised of men that seek their own destruction, as the
tossing of a tennice bal. As in treasure howses or store-howses, men keep all
manner things to serve their purposes: so God keeps in store, weapons of his
wrath to revenge him self upon the wicked, Ierem. 50.21
for the injury and violence done to his Church. Treasure that by some occasion
has been long and closely hid, Math. 13.24.
It is a rare matter to find it: which shows how few there be, that
understand and know of the riches of the kingdom of God. And as the man that
finds the treasure, can not justly enjoy the same, except at his great
charge, he first strain him self to purchase the soil. So heavenly riches
cannot be had but of them, which (if need so require) can be content to
forgo all their worldly wealth for it. 2. Cor. 4.7
As great and rich treasure is many times hid in an homely earthen vessel: So
it pleases God to put the precious knowledge of him self, and his truth into
pore, weak, and frail men.

Vapor.
AS vapors appear for a little while, and afterward vanishes quite out of
sight: So the life of man is quickly vanished and gone.

Vessel.
A vessel how profitable soever it has been to the owner, and how necessary
for his turn, yet when it is broken it is thrown away and regarded no longer,
which is a plain image and an express form of a man forsaken of those,
Psalm. 31.12.
whose friend he has been so long as he was able to stand them in steed. As
in a great house there be many vessels of sundry sorts, to diverse uses, not
only of gold and silver, but also of wood and earth: 2. Tim. 2.20 21.
some for honor, some for dishonor: so in the outward society of the Church,
there be men of all sorts appointed for diverse ends: wherefore we are
diligently to look about us, that we may be vessels apt and meet for the
Lord, 1. Pet. 3.7.
being prepared for every good work. A vessel, the weaker it is, the more it
is to be favored and spared, if we will have it continue: so a woman, because
of her infirmityes, is much to be borne withal.

Vine.
AS a vine when the fences thereof are broken lies open to the waste, and is
spoiled of every beast of the feelde: so the people and church of God, Psalm.
8.12 13.
when for their sins God seems for a time to withdraw his protection and
defense, is subject to the injuries and violence of all sorts of the wicked. A
vine planted which neither for choice of good ground, neither for any other
thing, which the hand of the husbandman might do to it, can justly complain of
any want, and yet deceives the husbandmans expectation, and makes him to
loose both pain and cost, express the unkindness of people often times, who
would be couuted for the people of God, and whom God has diligently called
to the knowledge of himself by the preaching of the word, Esaias. 5.1.2
and yet proceed in impiety and ungodliness. Of the shredings of the vine
comes no profit, neither can they serve for any other use but for ye fire:
Ezech. 15.1 2.3.4.5.6.7
so those whom God cutteth and casts of from his church, can serve for none
other end, but for the hell fire. A Vine represents to us Christ, the
branches represents Christians. John. 15.1.2.3.4.5.6.
As branches can not bring forth fruit except they abide in the Vine: so
Christians cannot bring forth fruits of righteousness, except they abide in
Christ. The husbandman or dresser of the Vine, represents to us God the
father. For as the vine-dresser cutteth of every branch that brings not
forth fruit, and lets it wither, and makes a fire of it: so God does cut
of fruitless Christians, and throw them into hell fire. And as the
vine-dresser does purge the fruitful branches, that they may bring forth
more fruit: so God by diverse means does purify and cleanse his children, that
they may be the more fruitful.

Virgin.
Christ, by the parable of the five wise, and of the five foolish Virgins,
teaches us how profitable and good it is for us, ^ath. 25.1.2 ^.5.6.7.8.9
^.11.12.
if we watch and be prepared against his coming again in glory. And again,
how dangerous it is if we be a sleep, and unprepared at his coming.

Viniger.
VIniger is as bad and hurtful to the Teeth, as smoke is to the eyes: and yet
more hurtful then either of both, ^ou. 10.26.
is a slothful servant to him yt sends or sets him about any business.

Viper.
AS Vipers brood destroys them that breed them: So generally the children
of them that murdered the prophets, Math. 3.7. Math. 23.33
and showed cruelty to the saints of God, fulfill the measure of their fathers,
and are unmercifully bent against al those that seek their life and salvation.

Wages.
WHen men receive the wages which they earne: Romans 6.23.
then let them take heed least they earne at Gods hand by sinning: for the
wages of sin is death.

Way.
AS often as we walk in the high ways, and common paths, Psalm. 25.4
we should call to God to direct us in his ways, and to guide us in his paths,
for the way of the wicked is as dangerous to walk in, Ierem. 23.
as an exceeding slipperye way to them that walk in the dark. Yet it is very
broad, and well beaten, Math. 7.13
and marvelous many tread it, though it lead to destruction. As often as we
walk to a place, John. 14.6.
whether leads no more ways but one, we should remember that Christ is the
only way to heaven, and that no man can come to the Father but by him.

Wall.
A Wall when it begins to bow, or is shaken will shortly fall: Psalm. 62.3.
even so ruinous is the seat of the wicked, howsoever it seems to be. A
whited or painted Wall, the bravery whereof, serves for no profit, but for a
mere show, seteth forth the profit that comes to the common wealth by
those judges, Act. 2.3
which sitting in place of Justice, do wrong to men contrary to the laws.

VVaights.
TO buy by an heavier weight, and to sell by a lighter, is abominable in the
eyes and sight of God. Prou. 20.10.


Waste.
AS soil that has lain long waste, by good husbandrye is rid and often
brought to flowrish with corn or grass: so the Church of God after long
persecution, Esaias. 35.1.2.
Is by the power and goodness of God, brought again to a flourishing estate.

War.
Civil dessension and war, is commonly by Gods just judgment sent into
those lands for their sins, ^say. 19 2.
which he will afterward destroy and bring to desolation in short time. The
root and welspring of all contentions and wars grow from our corrupt lusts
and affections, James. 4.1
that fight and strive in our members. Upon stubborn tra^sgressors of Gods law,
God will send a sword to avenge the quarrel of his covenant, Leuit. 26.25.
And when they fly into their City, he will send pestilence among them, and
they shall be delivered into the hand of their enemy. In war peace is to be
offered, and to be performed to them which peaceably yield themselves, Deuteronomy.
10.1^
and are content to become Tributaries. If we be of great skill in warlike
affairs, Psalm. 144.1.
we are to bless God, who teaches our hands to fight, and our fingers to
battle.

Water.
SO often as we see ye waters of ye sea, we are to praise the goodness of the
Lord, Genes. 1.9
who gathered them together on a heap, and to marvel and wonder at his power,
Psalm. 3 3.7
who has set them bounds which they may not pass, and doors and bars,
Job. 38.10.
whereby they are kept within their appointed limits, and can not return to
cover the face of the earth. Psalm. 104.
As the raised waters with great raines fall suddenly with great rage and
peril of drowning to many: so are the persecutions of the Church, Psalm. 124.4
if God do not miraculously rescue it from them. But though his people pass
through ye waters he will be with them, Esaias. 13.4.
and through the floods, yet they shall not overthrow them, For God makes for
them away in the sea, and a path in the mighty Waters. As water refreshes the
thirstye, and as floods do moysten the dry land, and make it fruitful: so God
by his spirit rejoices the people of his Church, Esaias. 44.3.
and powers out abundance of his blessings upon them. As water runs and
falls away, so shall all hands be weakened, Ezech. 1.17.
and knees shall shrinck, when God shall punish impiety and wickedness. As
clean water washes and makes clean our bodies, Ezech. 36.26
so the spirit of God makes our hearts and souls clean in the eyes and sight
of God. As the water of mighty floudes do with great violence and rage flow,
Hose. 5.10.
and can not be stopped: so the wrath of the Lord comes upon the wicked,
who pervert al laws and all religion. A cup of water should bring to mind,
that the least liberality that can be given for Gods cause, shall not escape
unrewarded at the hands of God. Math. 10.42.
If he that is a thirst does greedely and joyfully receive a cup of water to
quench his thirst, and to ease him for a little time: how much more greedely
should we receive the water of life, whereby the thirst of our soul shall be
quenched eternally. ^oh. 4.14.15.
As waves of water are tossed and carried away by force of wind: ^ames. 1.6.7.
so he that prays without faith, must needs be carried of every forcible
affection, and therefore can not look to obtain his peticions.

Wax.
AS wax melts with the heat of the fire: Psalm. 22 14.
so the heart of man faints with the greatness of troubles and tribulations.
Psalm. 68.2
And as wax melts at the heat of the fire: so the wicked perish at the
presence of God. Mate. 1.4.
For how can they abide his presence when the great, huge, and mighty
mountains do melt thereat as wax. Micah. 1.4


Web.
AS the Spiders web is now whole, and straight ways broken, almost for the
least thing that may happen unto it: so the expectation of the wicked fails
and deceives them. And as of those webbes no man can make cloth to cloth
him: Job. 8.14.
so they who bend their wits to conceive mischief, and whose whole labor is
to bring forth iniquity, shall not reap profit by their devises and pains.

Weapons.
ONe Nation stirred up against an other, Esaias. 59.5.6
to execute the vengeance of God, are the weapons of Gods wrath.

Wells.
AS wells dry in the bottom, Esaias. 13.4.
deceive them which seek for water in them: So they which look to learn a
truth at the hands of false Prophets, 2. ^et. 2.17.
are deceived of their expectation.

VVeather.
MEn easily wax cunning to foresee what Weather will shortly happen by the
standing of the wind, by the gathering of the clouds and by other tokens, Luke.
12.54.55.56.
which as it did condemn the sloth of them which lived in the time of
Christ, because they were not careful, not diligent to mark the tokens,
whereby they should have known the coming of Christ: So also it will
condemn us, if we mark not, neither observe the tokens of the Second coming
of Christ.

Wheat.
WHeat except it be sowed in the ground and there dye, John. 12.24
and not spring again, and so multiply: so the knowledge of those benefits
which we have by Christ after his death, increased, grew, and multiplied
throughout the whole world.

Wicked.
WHen we see wicked men, whose whole delight is in wickedness, and all whose
studyes are vanity and abomination, then we may well conclude that these men
have said in their hearts, Psalm 14.1.53. ver. 1.
that there is no God.

Widow.
WHen we see a Widow in extreme grief for the loss of her husband and of her
children, Esaias. 47.9.
because she is now destitute of all help and comfort: then let us remember,
that such grief and affliction God will bring upon all those, which when they
flourishe and are in prosperity, are proud and unmerciful. The continual
weeping of a Widow, Lamen. 1.1.2.
forsaken of all her friends, represents to us the woeful estate of a City
destroyed and desolate.

Wife.
HE that finds a good Wife, finds a good thing, Prou. 18.22.19. ver. 14.
and receives favor of the Lord. Houses and riches descend from parents,
to their children by inheritance, but a wise and prudent Wife, is the gracious
gift of the Lord.

Wilderness.
WHen men are driven to hide them selves in wild and desert places, Exodus 16.35
where all things are wanting yt should serve for ye necessary sustenance of
man: Number 20.11.
Then are they to comfort them selves with the power and goodness of God, who
has taught us by good experience, that he can and will extraordinarilye
provide for his, by giving food from heaven, water out of the hard rocks, by
making their apparel neither to wear nor tear, 1. King. 17.6.19. verse. 8.
by making ravens to feed them, by giving extraordinary strength to endure with
out meat a great time.

Wind.
AS wind suddenly passes away with a blast: so also suddenly passes the life of
man. Job. 7.7.
As they which have nothing to feed on but the wind, do famishe and pine away
and so perish: Hose. 12.1.
so they which are fed with fair promises, and set their hope and confidence
in the defense of men are deceived, and left destitute in their most need. The
wind blows in what quarter of Heaven it lists, and where it begins
blowing, and where it ends no man can tell, neither can any man devise means
to stop the course of it: even with the like liberty, and with the like open
apparaunce works the spirit of God, where and in whom he will, John. 3.8.
and no power nor ability of man is able to resist and withstand it.

Wine*
AS new Wine will burst the vessels, which it is put in, except they have a
vent: So a man desirous to hear him self, Job. 32.19
can by no means hold his tongue. Wine is a mocker, and strong drink is
raging, Prou. 20.1
and whosoever is deceived therewith is not wise. Look not upon Wine when it
is red, Prou. 23.31
and when it shows his color in the cup, and goes down pleasantly, in the
end thereof it will bite like a Serpent, and hurt like a Cocatrice. When we
see men make no conscience, how they get but think al well enough, Amos. 2.8
so they bestow some part upon God, and good uses, we are to remember the
threatening of the Prophet against them, that drink the wine of the condemned
in the house of their God.

Wisdom.
Wisdom is better then al manner of warlike provision and furniture. Eccles.
9.18.
Yet when in Gods matters, and in matters of life to come, we are allured and
intised away by worldly wisdom and fleshly reasons: then are we to beware and
take heed of consenting, Romans 8.^
because the wisdom of the flesh is enimity against God, it is not subject
to the law of God neither can be. When we hear in the pulpit Rethoricall
flowers of speech, and an overmuch affection, and seeking to show learning: 1.
Cor. 2.4.^
Then let us call to mind that preaching ought not to be in the intising
words of man's wisdom, but in the plain evidence of the spirit and of
power, that the faith of the hearers may rest, not in the wisdom of men, but
in the power of God.

Wise.
THe rebukes of the Wise, are more profitable to be hearkened unto, Eccles. 7.7
then the pleasant songs and melody of fools. The continual unkindness and
unthankfulness of nations, for the manifold benefits which God bestows upon
them, causes God against the day of deserved destruction, to make their wise
men fools, and to cause their wisdom to perish from them. When we wonder
that so many wise and learned men do not know nor embrace the evident and
clear truth of the gospel, 1. Cor 2.6.7 8.9.10.
then are we to call to mind, that it is not the wisdom of the world, but of
God, and that therefore no man can know it. ^. Cor. 3.20
But he to whom God by his spirit does reveal it. But as for all the
thoughts and conceits of the wise of this world, God knows that they are
but vain.

VVood.
Genes. 3.8
Woods that grow thick, and are meet for evil men to lurcke in, should make
us remember how great a mischief disobedience to God is, and that that was the
first cause that made men ashamed and afraid to show their face, and therefore
to seek covert to hide them in. Wood serves to kindle and keep fire,
tale-bearers stir up and nourishe strife. Prou. 26.20.
Dry wood is apt to burn, and green wood, though not so quickly will be
consumed with fire: so both strong and weak, high and low, rich and poor,
one and an other go to wrack, Ezec. 20.47
when God punishes impiety and wickedness.

VVhoore.
THey that forsake their husbands, and give them selves over to strangers,
Ezech. 23.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8
and so become common Whores, do represent to us the state of those which leave
God and the truth, which some time they professed, and commit Idolatrye, and
cleave to superstitions.

Women.
WHen we behold women, we should thankfully acknowledge the goodness of God,
who provided them to be helps and comfortes unto men. Genes. 2.18.
Women also thereby are admonished to be aunswearable to their creation in
their doings and dealinges. Esaias. 26.17
A woman in travail in the middle of her sorrow cries in her pains, Esaias.
42.42
even so is the estate of God his Children in the midst of persecution, and
as a woman then desires with speed to be delivered, so God will be at once
avenged upon the enemies of Gods Church. As the heart of a woman faynteth and
yields in travail, Ierem. 49.24
so the hearts of strong men faint, when God will be enemies, afflict and
scourge their country. And when women prevail with men in their suites by
great importunity: Luke. 18.7.
Then are we to remember, that by prayer without ceasing, we shall obtain our
requests of God.

Words.
WHen we see men given to be full of words and delighted with much prating:
then let us remember that in many words there can not want iniquity, Prou.
10.19
and that for every idle word that scapeth us, Math. 12.36
we shall be called to account at the last day. Howbeit, he that sins not
in word, must needs be a perfect man, James. 3.2.
and well able to bridle his affections.

Wormwood.
THe bitterness of Wormwood represents to us the bitterness of affliction
and oppression. Lamen. 3.19 Amos. 5.7
Judgment is as bitter as wormwood when a man by it is untruly oppressed and
condemned.

Wrestler.
IF they which run or wrestle for the best game, do of their own accord
abstain from all things, which may either make them short winded, or hinder
their lightness, strength, or nimblenesse: 1. Cor. 9.25
much more then we should willinglye cast of and abstain from all those
things, which might hinder us in the way and course of everlasting life. The
wrestler obtains not the crown or garland, exeept he strive for it according
to the laws of wrestling: 1. Tim. 2.5.
so ministers are not to look for any reward, except they do their diligent
endeavor, 2. Tim. 2.5
to do their duties faithfully.

Wolves.
Wolves breaking into a flock of sheep, devouring some, and scattering the
rest: do resemble false Teachers, which creep into the church of God, Act.
20.29
and bring to destruction those whom they can allure within compass of their
nets, and divide and separate the rest by dissension and debate.

World.
SUch safety as sheep have amongst wolves, such must the Ministers of God
look for in this World. Math. 10.10
For the love of the World, and the love of God can not abide together in one
and the same man. 1. John. 2.15.
But this is the comfort of the children of God, 1. John. 2.17.
that the World with all the desires thereof shall pass away, but they that
seek to fulfill the will of the Lord, shall abide and endure for ever. John.
15.18
If the World therefore hate us, it is no matter: it hated Christ first. And
there is one and the same cause of hating, both because Christ and all his true
followers do witness unto the World, John. 7.7.
the wickedness of their works. For it is a continual work of the spirit,
in all those which are therewith endued, to convince the world of sin. John.
16.8.
Whosoever therefore joins in friendship with the world, James. 4.4
forthwith becomes the enemy of God. Love not then the world, 1. John. 2.15
nor the things that are in the world. For if any man love the world, the
love of the Father is not in him.

Woork-men.
AS often as we pay Woork-men their hire, we should think, Math. 10.10.
how much better do they which labor in the Church of God, for the salvation
of our souls, deserve the reward allotted and appointed them for their pains,
and therefore we should gladly bestow it.

Worms.
THe Palmer Worm, the canker Worm, the Grasshopper, the Catterpiller, and such
like, devouring the fruits of the earth: Job. 1.4.
do inuit and stir us to repentance, seeing they are sent of God to plague
us for our sins. When we take small Worms in our hands, Acts. 12.23
then we are to remember, that God needs no greater nor mightier soldiers,
to tame the proudest Prince upon the earth.

Yokes.
WHen we see cattle and Horses, strong, young, and wanton break their Yokes
and bands: ^erem. 5.5.
then we are to consider the great estates of this world, who being exalted in
honor, and aboundding in wealth, though they know the way of the Lord, and
the judgments of their God, yet can not submit their necks to the yoke of the
Lord, or be subject to his discipline: yet is his yoke very sweet, Math. 11.30
and the burden which he lays upon his very light. When we see yokes very
strong, Acts. 15.10 28.
great, and heavy, combersome for cattle to bear: Then are we to remember,
to give God thanks for his great mercy to us Christians, in delivering of us,
and setting free from the yoke of the Law.

FINIS.

