THE CONSIDERATION AND IVDGEMENT, Of the Divines of the Electorall Principality
of Saxony, in the University of Wittenberge: they being required by the
University of Iena:

Upon the Question:

Whether a State of the Empire ought not well to consider, whether he be bound
to aid and assist the Roman Emperor or no, in these Wars of Bohemia?

Faithfully translated out of the High Dutch Tongue, according to the printed
Copy.

M.D.C.XX.

Whether a State of the Empire ought to aid and assist the Roman Emperor in
the Bohemian Wars.
AFter the high and mighty Lord and Prince, Lord John Ernestus Duke of Saxony,
Gulick, Cleue and Mont, Landgraue of Thuringia, Marquess of Misnia, Earl of
the Marck and of Rauensburg, Lord of Rauestein, our gracious Lord; has
graciously sent unto us the Doctors and Professors of Divinity in the Princely
Electorall University of Wittemberge, the reverend and learned John Mayor
Superintendent, and John Gerhard, both Doctors and Professors in Divinity, in
his Princely Graces University at Iena, with gracious Letters of Credence,
bearing date at Weiumar the 20. of January 1620. for to speak and confer with
us, concerning some great and weighty considerable causes, and to understand
our good meaning therein: So have we with submissiue, dutiful, and honorable
respect unto his Princely Grace, the 24. of January, most willingly, and in all
things sufficiently heard both the said Professors of Iena, and thereby
understood in what respect his highly remembered Princely Grace, so earnestly
desires to know our opinions upon the hereafter following Questions, which
were in writing delivered into our hands. And thereupon have also at large in
the name and fear of God, not only discoursed with them pro and contra, even
the selfsame day, of those Questions they brought unto us; but also the next
day following did withal, collegialiter, even in all our several Conuents and
Meetings, so far forth as was any way necessary, thoroughly debate the same,
agreed upon an Answer, and upon the sore-said written gracious desire, have
also (for the preventing of all misconceiuing and doubtfulnesse) committed the
same unto Paper, as it here follows to be read. Namely:

1 If the Emperor do assault them, who affirm and assure with solemn
protestation, that they seek not any thing else, then only the maintenance of
their Freedoms, Privileges, and the liberty of their Religion and
Conscience, promised and confirmed unto them by sundry Grants and Covenants;
and be therefore set upon and persecuted as Enemies.

2 Amongst whom there are many good, zealous and faithful Protestant
Christians, addicted to the true Lutherane Protestant Religion; whose
suppression will be furthered, if a State shall aid and assist the Emperors
Majesty against them.

3 Who are taken and received into the Peace of Religion.

4 Are ready, and do offer themselves, to make an orderly and lawful
acknowledgement thereof.

5 With whom there have been sundry especial Agreements, Unions, and
Confessions accorded and made.

6 But now contrarily on the Emperors side, a man should join himself with
the Pope, with the Spaniards, with the Italians, and with the greatest and
bitterest Enemies of the Gospel.

7 And it is much to be feared, that if a man shall help to suppress and
extirpate these Protestants, that the Pope will then also afterward, by his
Adherents and Instruments earnestly seek the Banishment, yea, the utter rooting
out, and final destruction of the rest which remain, according to the
Tridentine Councels direct prescription.

8 And it is also further to be feared, that by such actual assistance, their
own Lands and Countries may be brought into uttermost peril and danger.

9 And lastly, thereby should also foreign Soldiers be brought in, to manage
and sway the whole business; a thing directly opposite and contrary to the
Capitulations, and fundamental! Laws of the Empire.



Luther, as that we cannot in our consciences either reject it, or yet know
how to better it; but find it (in regard of common equity and reason) to be
altogether agreeable and consonant unto Gods revealed holy Word.

And although we with other Lutherane Divines could well have wished, and even
from the bottom of our hearts, that it had not now at all been needful to
have had this Question moved; and especially that we had been spared, and not
been troubled therewith, according as we entered into the same very
unwillingly, and would much rather that the matter had been elsewhere
propounded, and the burden thereof laid upon others, then upon us: yet seeing
it is as an high and weighty, yea, a leading Case of Conscience, laid upon our
Consciences to answer, as being the Informers of men's Consciences; we would
not use any dilatory excuse, (as also it is not meet we should) albeit we
cannot otherwise expedite the preposed case, ( De causa nobis aut Theologis
proposita, iuxta principia Theologica, of a cause propounded unto us or unto
Divines, according to the Principles of Divinity,) then that in such an
exigent, a Protestant State of the Empire, ought justly, well to consider and
bethink it self, whether it be to give aid and assistance to the Emperors
Majesty or no.

And first of all, for the better informing of men's consciences, we neither
can, nor ought now, or at any time will forbear to remember, how that all high
and low Estates (whether they be of Spiritual or Temporal calling) ought
with the greatest and most diligence possible, to endeavor, that the Roman
Emperors Honor, Reputation, Authority, and Majesty, (although he be not of
our Religion) and especially in this present dangerous time of Commotion, and
flocking together of Soldiers, may be wholly without all impeachment,
supported, preserved and mayntayned in safety. And that besides the daily
pouring out of fervent Prayers for him, there may also be given unto him all
due Reverence, Obedience, Submission and Tribute, in regard that it is Gods
Ordinance; and for that the Son of God was borne into the World under the
Roman Emperor, as under a Monarchy, which Daniel in his Vision conceived,
that it should abide until the Day of the great Glory of Jesus Christ, when
he shall come again to judge the Quick and the Dead and for that, the high
Justice of God, has at all times severely punished the Despisers of
Magistrates, as Gods, (as holy Writ calls them) and as them, by whom he in Gods
stead rules and governs the World; and therefore has forbidden that any
should presume to curse the King, no not in the heart and thought, and the rich
not in his Bedchamber. For the Bird of the Air shall carry up the sound of
the voice, Ettles. 10.20.
and that which has wings shall tell the matter, as it is written in the tenth
of the Preacher.

And that therefore we ought ever to give all honor unto, and faithfully pray
not only for the good and gentle, but also for the froward and wicked Kings
and Princes set over us of God; that so we may seade a quiet and peaceable life
under them in all godliness and honesty.

Now secondly, for so much as concerns the fundamental maine point of this
our forementioned Answer, unto the propounded Question in case of Conscience;
albeit the same might be very largely handled, and much be alleged for it;
yet we will now at this time let it rest, and content our selves only with
that which is contained in the Commandment of the love of God, and the love of
our Neighbor; as upon which two (according to Christ's own Doctrine) depends
the whole Law and the Prophets: And therein consider, whether the aboue-said
aid and assistance will not fall out, to be as well against the love of God,
as against the love of our Neighbor?

It is against the Jove of God to aid them that persecute the Gospel.
shall of all men in the holy Empire be honored without impeachment, upon the
avoiding of the heauiest and seuerest, both Divine and Humane punishments: So
is it never a whit the less, but much more befitting, that also the Honor of
the Almighty high God, and of his beloved Son Jesus Christ, the Truth of his
holy sacred Word, the pure Religion, and the enlarging of the Christian Church,
should be taken into consideration and care, to the uttermost that all humane
reason by advice and action is possibly able to provide for: As being the very
means, whereby the euer-lasting salvation of many and innumerable souls, is
to be wrought and effected; the Kingdom of Heaven to be planted; and a
perpetual Church to be builded and increased; by whom with all holy Angels he
shall be for evermore praised and blessed, the King of all Kings, the Lord of
all Lords, even God the holy and indivisible Trinity blessed for ever.

And when here it concerns the Honor of God, and the honor of men, as
whether is to be preferred before the other; then that belongs hereunto,
which once Saint Peter, and the other Apostles said in the like case, Act. 5.
God must be more obeyed then men. Whereunto also well agrees Doctor Luthers
Meditations, Tom. 6. at Iena in Dutch. fol. 282. in his Admonition to his
beloved Countrymen of Germany, where he thus says.

The first reason, that thou in such a case shall not obey the Emperor, and
go on warfare with him, is, that thou (even so well as the Emperor) have
sworn in thy Baptism, to hold and maintain the Gospel, and not to persecute
it, nor to fight against it. Now thou can not but know, that the Emperor is
herein stirred up and set on by the Pope, and is by him deceived and seduced to
fight against the Gospel of Christ, seeing that our Doctrine was openly found
at Ausburg, to be the true Gospel of Christ, and agreeable to the holy
Scripture. And therefore thou shall thus answer and say, upon any Summons which
the Emperor, or thy Prince shall make; Yea honored Emperor, honored Prince,
If thou hold and keep thy Oath, and Vow made in Baptism; then shall thou be
my honored Lord, and I will be obedient unto thee, to go to war whenever
thou will. But if thou will not hold and keep thy Vow in Baptism and
Christian Covenant made with Christ, but persecute the same; then let a Knave
if he will, obey thee in my stead. I will not for thy sake blaspheme my God,
and persecute his Word, and so desperately run and cast my self headlong
with thee into the deepest bottom of Hell.

Now this first reason comprehends in it, many other very great and fearful
reasons. For he that strives and fights against the Gospel, he must
likewise needs fight against God, against Jesus Christ, against the Holy
Ghost, against the precious Blood of Christ, against his Death, against Gods
Word, against all the Articles of the Christian Faith, against the Sacraments;
against all the Doctrine which is given, established, confirmed, kept and
nourished by the Gospel, as that of the Magistrate, and of a temporal Peace
and State; and briefly, against all the Angels and Saints, against Heaven, and
against Earth, and all Creatures. For who so strives and fights against God,
he must also needs fight against all that is Gods, or that holds with God: and
what end that will have at the last, thou shall (though too late) find by thy
own ouer-deare bought experience. And that which is yet worst of all, such
striving and warring is done of knowledge wittingly: for men know and
acknowledge, that this our Doctrine, is the Gospel indeed; whereas the Turks
and Tartars know not that it is Gods Word. And therefore there cannot any be
so bad, as thou art; nor shall any be so grievously punished, as thou shall be.
For thou shall be ten thousand times more deeply damned, then all Turks,
Tartars, Heathen and Jews. Hactenus verba Lutheri: Hitherunto are the words of
Luther.

Yea and for so much as the children of Darkness, who are learned Catholics,
will not cease nor be weary to restore again, to spread abroad, to propagate,
and to defend their Religion, with goods and blood, with body and life,
thereby to honor God (as they think;) which Religion of theirs
notwithstanding, is not any thing else then the very damned Babylon already
begun to fall; the very Antichristianisme, and as James Herbran (a well
experienced learned Divine) writes in the Preface to his Theological
Disputations; Sentina and cloaca Satanae, in qua omnes suas sordes,
abominationes, impietates, and idolatrias, quot quot excogitari possunt,
ingessit; The very sink and iakes of Satan, whereinto he has cast all his
filth, abominations, impieties, and idolatries, that can possibly be devised.

How much more then will it become us, as the Children of the Light, not any
way to hinder, but by all means to propagate the said holy Truth, which out of
Gods unspeakable mercy and goodness, he would have first commended even from
Heaven above an hundred years since, not unto any others, then even unto us
Germans, and especially unto us Saxons by Doctor Luther, and from his hand
unto our faithful hands.

Such aid is against the love of our Neighbor.
that such aid and assistance will extend it self against the love of our
Neighbor, if that the Lutherane States of the holy Empire, in the Case
propounded, shall and will run and join with the Soldiers of the Pope of
Rome, and of the King of Spain, as the extremest and mortallest enemies of the
Gospel; against such Protestant Christians, as are mentioned in the propounded
Question, to the destroying and rooting out of it, and them. Yet so that the
word Neighbor, be not taken most generally, but in particular for them, who
most earnestly take part with us, and hold the unity of the Spirit, by the bond
of Peace, in the only true Faith, as the same comes nearest unto the
Prophetical and Apostolic Writings, contained in the unaltered Augsburg
Confession, and in the Book of Christian Concord; that have with us one God,
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and one Lord Christ Jesus; one Baptism,
one whole vnmangled Lords Supper, in the true Body, and the true Blood of Jesus
Christ; who in that respect are one Body with us, and we altogether the
Members of one Body: of which the Apostles rich and spiritual Exhortation is
well known; and according to the same, every understanding man uses to take
heed unto himself, that wittingly he do not with his own hands, any hurt
unto his own Members. How much more then, should all good and religious true
Christians well foresee and duly consider Christ his mystical Body, (which is
the right faith full true Church;) that they persecute and hurt it not at all,
no not in any few and small Members thereof? According as also the very style
both of the holy Lords Praver, Our Father; and of the holy Creed of the
Apostles in the words, The Communion of Saints, does even daily put us in mind
of, and that we Christians should both strive and pray one with another. And
who can tell for whethers Prayers sake, our Lord has many times hitherunto bin
moved, to stay and keep back many fierce incursions, and cruel invasions of
the Turk, and other furious inuading people? Whereunto also in some sort the
words of the Apostle agree, 1. Cor. 12.21. etc. to 27. and as it further
follows, saying: The eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee:
nor again the head to the feet, I have no need of you: Nay much more, these
members of the body which seem to be more feeble, are necessary. And those
members of the body which we think to be less honorable, upon those we
bestow more abundant honor, and our uncomely parts have more abundant
comeliness. For our comely parts have no need: But God has tempered the body
together, having given more abundant honor to that part which lacked: That
there should be no schism or division in the body: but that the members should
have the same care one for another. And whether one member suffer, all the
members suffer, or one member be honored, all the members rejoice with it. And
that Christians in such an accident for love sake toward their fellow
Christians, should also not be discouraged for any inconvenience, yea or any
peril whatsoever (that may thence arise unto themselves) to stand as one man
for their brethren, against their enemies; Christ would expressly have us to
learn it, by that saying of his beloved Disciple, 1. John 3.16. Hereby
perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us; and we
ought to lay down our lines for the brethren. (...). John 3.17.
But who has this Worlds goods, and sees his brother has need, and shuts
up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him?
Whence doubtless came the meaning of the old Proverb: Si non pauisti,
occidisti: si non defendisti, obruisti: If thou have not fed, thou have killed:
if thou have not defended, thou have overthrown and destroyed. The great and
high God could indeed of himself without others help, speak and send down
hither the Word from Heaven, for the deliverance and safety of the afflicted
and distressed Christians, against their Enemies fury: But he will hereby try
and prove the rest of other Christians, whether they will more obey his
Commandment, or the commands of men. And Christ will amongst other things, say
thus also at the Day of Judgment, unto his true Servants that did partake with
his childrens afflictions: I was persecuted, and by force of Arms fought
against for the Faiths sake, and ye had then a fellow-feeling, and suffered
with me.

We will not at this time say any thing, whether there must not needs by such
ayding and assisting, offense arise amongst others, both friends and enemies,
when they shall see those of the same profession of Faith, one to strive and
make war against the other, and that even for matters of Faith; whence it may
also easily come to pass, that some weak Christians shall hereby be moved
and occasioned, though of weakness, to forsake the old Lutheran Faith, and so
making relapse, fall again unto Popery.

And it is not concealed but manifest, how that in regard of giving of offense
in the World, the Son of God has cried out his heavy Woe; and, which is the
more offensive and worse, if that hereby the enemies shall be so much the more
by us strengthened and hardened in their errors.

Now as concerning what was the judgment in this point, of that our great
Prophet, D. Martin Luther: It is recorded that Master Luther in the year 1529.
upon the Question moved unto him, whether a man might defend himself against
the Emperors Majesty, in case he should by force indenour to overrun any
man for the Gospel sake, answered generally; That no man that will be a true
Christian, shall rise up, or oppose himself against the Magistrate, whether
he does justly or unjustly; seeing that Sins deprive not the Magistrate of
his Office and Calling; and seeing also, that the Subjects of all Lords and
Princes within the Empire, are also the Emperors Subjects, yea, and more then
they be their Princes. Wherefore men ought to let their people and Countries
stand open to the Emperor, and be faithful unto him, even to the hazarding of
body and life; and not to hold or take part with the greedy Cormorants, who
under pretense of defending the Gospel, will for their own advantage, set and
band themselves against the Magistrate.

This his saying is to be found in his 6. Tom. in Dutch, printed at Iena, sub
Anno 1533. but does indeed belong unto the year 1530. But yet after this, in
his 5. Tom. in that his excellent Book, whose Title is; A warning to his
beloved Countrymen of Germany, he sets down three strong reasons, and also
proceeds so in amplyfying of them, that it may well make a man's hair that
reads it, stare and stand upright at the horrible lothsomnesse or ugliness of
Popery; and therewithal concludes: That if the Emperor suffer himself to be
induced, to make wars for the Popes behoof and benefit; then should not any
man obey him. And seeing that Treatise is very excellent, forcible and
necessary; but is withal ouerlong to be here transcribed and inserted: We do
therefore earnestly entreat and desire all well-minded and honest hearts, that
(in regard of the dangerous times whereinto we are fallen) they would wholly
read it through out, and often over. And amongst other things he there
shows, that by such a proceeding, men shall draw down upon themselves, all
the abominations that are done and committed in and under the Papacy; and
shall as much as in them lies, ouer-throw and destroy all the excellent good,
that is now restored and again erected by the holy Gospel.

The like is also to be read in his 7. Tom. Title of Resistance, for the space
of ten leaves together; where he distinguishes between the Emperor, as
Emperor; and between the Emperor, as being set on and stirred up by the Pope
to make war. And even so concludes in respect of aid and assistance to be
given or not, as we have above concluded.

Now if men shall lay all this which has been here proved and alleged,
(although it be but very short) on the golden balance of their Conscience,
then will the matter it self teach them, that they are to follow the Apostles
Rule, as it is to be read in the 2. Cor. 6.14. Be ye not unequally yoked
together. Wherefore according to the same we conclude: That as the Case now
stands, a Lutherane Prince is justly occasioned well to consider, that in
case his Imperial Majesty be incited and stirred up by the haters of Peace and
Quietness, to make war against Gods pure Religion, then he is not bound to
aid and assist him therein. But he is much rather bound to mediate for those
that be oppressed, by interceding, and by admonishing, and by beseeching; yea
and in a word, to use all the possible good means, that humane Reason can
devise and think upon, for the procuring of their assured ease, liberty, peace
and quietness.

And this is that which we thought our selves bound in duty, humbly to
answer unto our gracious Lord Duke John Ernestus, as unto a right worthy Lord,
and true Lutherane Prince, upon his gracious desire and command. And we do
beseech the most high God, that he will be pleased for Christ Jesus his sake,
so to enlighten his Imperial Majesty by his holy Spirit, that he may with
all his heart and soul (for the salvation of his own soul) truly more love
God then himself; And that he may hold and esteem them for godly and honest
Christians, who do, and will also more love God then the Emperor. And
likewise that he would after the examples of Cyrus, Darius, Artaxerxes,
carefully enquire and seek out, whether that we Lutheranes have the right or
the wrong on our sides. And if he shall find that we have the right, that then
he will so much the more (and the rather for the advancement of Gods Honor,
and the Salvation of his own soul) publish such godly Mandates and Edicts,
for the further propagating of Gods holy Truth, as did the foresaid three
Kings; withdraw all War, and cause sincere Peace to be spread and
established; whereby also he may at the last Day appear before God, as one,
that had so much furthered and procured Righteousness as the Sun does
lighten the Firmament. Which our good God grant, and vouchsafe graciously to
work and effect in him; to the only Praise, Honor and Glory of his Divine
Name, Amen.

Given at Wittenberge on the day of S. Paul's Conversion, being the 25. of
January; in the year of Christ, 1620. (L. S.) Decanus Senior, and other the
Doctors of the Faculty of Divinity, in the University of Wittenberg.

FINIS.

