THE FLEA: Sic parua componere magnis.



LONDON Printed for John Smethwick and are to be sold at his shop in Saint
Dunstanes Churchyard in Fleet Street, under the Dial. 1605.

The Epistle Dedicatorie. To the giddie multitude.
Custom (that imperious King, or rather cruel Tyrant) has so far prevailed
in these our days, that every Pamphlet must have his Patron, or else all the
fat is in the fire: Now I not knowing any one whose name I might be so ^olde
with, as to make a shelter for this substance-wa^ting shadow, dedicate it to
you al, so shall I be sure to offend none. And as he that speaks in the
defense of women, having a flock of femals for his Auditors (how-soeuer his
cause be) is sure to want no words on his side: So let him that shall speak
against this Toy, look for more fists then his own about his ears, and take
heed of Club law, since the brainlesse multitude has vouchsafed to take it
into their protection. Now therefore, thou many headed beast, censure me at thy
pleasure: like or dislike what thou listest; but have an especial care of this,
that thou be not over constant in thine opinions: But what even now thou
praysest to the heavens, by and by dispraise again, as the vildest stuff thou
ever heardest of. Extol that with admiration, which but a little before thou
did rail at, as most carterly: And when thou sit to consult about any
weighty matter, let either justice Shallowe, or his Cosen Mr. VVeathercocke be
foreman of the Jury. Thus relying on thy Moon-like constancy, I will shrowde
this shadow under thy alwaies-vnstedfast favor.

P. VV.

The Epistle to the Reader.
I Will neither call thee gentle nor ungentle reader, for I know not thy
disposition^ neither will I term thee learned nor unlearned, for I was not
acquainted with thy education: Nor yet will I praise this Pamphlet (as
containing pleasure or profit) for if thou be wise, thou can perceive it
better then I; if otherwise, it will be in vain, for I shall never be able to
make thee conceive it. If thou like it, thou have wherefore to thank me, for
procuring thy delight; if thou dislike it, lay it out of thy hands, for it were
great folly wilfully to procure thine own discontent. If thou do reap any
profit by it, the more is thy discretion^ if none at all, the worsse is thy
fortune. Thus not looking to be enriched through thy favor, I shall still
remain:

Thy poor friend, Peter Woodhouse.


In laudem Authoris.
HOmer (the glory of the learned Greeks)
To wright of Frogs and Mice did think no scorn.
Th'admired Roman Maro also seeks
With his sweet songs the little Gnat t'adorne.
Great Orpheus Harp laid by, they will fill their cheeks
As other Shepherds done with pypes of Corn:
Yet can at will lay by their Oaten reeds,
And sing of battles and of knightly deeds.
One tells us of a metamorphos'd Ass,
An other Folly highly does commend;
He proves nath'lesse, his wit unchanged was,
And this his time often time could better spend.
Neither of those but at his pleasure, has
Matter of worth with good aduisement pend.
Either of those (the wonder of his age)
Under base subjects shadow matter sage.
Now let who list this as a toye despise,
Such worthy Patrones since thou have in store:
What though thy subject be of little price?
Thy wit app^eres thereby to be the more,
Then let thy Flea step forth, since Frogs and Mice
And little Gnats have led ^he way before.
Fear not though Momus brood still carping be,
He snarl'd at Homer, let them bark at ^hee.
R. P. Gent^
DEMOCRITVS his Dream. OR, The Contention between the Elephant and the Flea.
WHen Titans Carre in The Ocean was drencht
and Phoebus burning heat by Tethis quenched
And Arcas through the sky did drive his Teame,
My r^stlesse sprite met with this merry Dream.
DEmocritus (me thought) chancing to meet
Weeping Heraclitus, thus did him greet.
What madness does possess thy better part,
That wilfully thou ^at'st up thine own heart?
Call back thy thoughts, and veiwe this wide worlds stage,
Behold (with me) the follyes of each age.
Mark for what trifling royes, young men do sell
Their wealth and strength, Heraclite mark them well:
And see again when the one foot's in the grave:
The less men need, how still the more they crave.
This mark^, with laugh^er sure thy sides (...)
Or else I hold thee of the Gods accursed.
Not so (quoth he) I know I am a man,
Needs must I greiue to see men's follyes than.
That man is void of all humanity,
Who is not touched with others misery.
Can one be such as you your self profess,
And see the shape of man prove reasonlesse^
Can he see this, and yet his eyes be dry?
He is no true Philosopher think I.
Reason's the form of man, he who wants this,
May well be like a man, but no man is.
Mark this with me; and then I make no dout,
Thou Wilt laugh no more, but weep thine eye-balles ou^.
Thou Art much deceived ( Democritu^ replies)
To think that this could make me wet mine eyes,
Unless much laughter caused some tears distill;
Should I so far partake an others ill
As hurt my self, for seeing him so doe^
He plays the fool, should I be foolish too?
But see how mighty men weak o^es despise,
See how rich fools contemn the poor, though wise.
And see again, how in their own conceit,
The least will not give place unto the great:
See this and laugh^ if this too little seem,
I Am sure thou wilt laugh if thou but hear my dream.
To hear of these disorders makes me weep
(Quoth he) let us hear what mirth comes from your sleep
List then: Me thought a crystal stream did glide
Along a valley, by a Forest side:
Through which an heard of Elephants did swim,
From forth the desert, to the hither brimme:
Me thought it did me good (even as I slept)
To see the goodly order that they kept.
The elder had a care, till all were over
To keep the weak and youngest still before;
For so with lesser peril might they pass,
whilst yet the quiet stream untroubled was.
And if that any danger hapt beside,
For their defense they better might provide.
No sooner had the last set foot on land,
But all the rest about him make a stand:
When thus the big bone'd beast the rest bespake:
Perceive you not how all the Forests shake
When I do pass along? how every tree
Do bend their tops (in duty) unto me?
What beast in desert can with me compare:
I speak not now of the sex-chaunging the Hare is said by Aristotle and Pliny
to be one year male, an other femal
Hare,
The Earth deluing Coney, or the subtle Fox,
The nimble Ape, nor of the labo^ring Ox,
The watchful Dog, nor of the long-lyu'd Heart:
For most of these at their own shadows start.
My awful presence casts into a fear
The glut'nous Wolf, and the ^leep-fat^ed Bear:
The swift-foot Tiger, and th'adulterous Parde
(Which yet to wrong the Lordly Lion dar'de)
Fea^es ^ine aspect: the spo^ted Pa^t^er too
Does stand in dread, and so all the others do.
Why should I place unto the Lion give?
I know there is not any Beast does live
Who dare compare with me in any thing:
B^t all would give their voice I should be King.
Content thee son (his Mother then replide)
Though thy great strength can no way be denide
Misgouern'd strength (o this too well I know)
Often procures his owners overthrow.
Then brag not of t^y strength, o would it were less!
Thy too much strength may work thine own distress:
Though Can and Will not be a noble thing,
A Subjects can's not grateful to his King.
Keep thee within thy bounds, and then thy might
Will glad thy friends, and will thy foe^ affright
Tush, tush, quoth he, leave off your talk I pray,
There Is no Beast dares my peerles worth denay.
But all this talk a li^^le Flea did hear,
Which sat close feeding underneath the ear
Of a poor Sheapheards Curre^ the which for fear,
Was crept into a bu^^ and hid hi^ there.
The Swa^^e himself (when ^e these beasts did se^)
Did (for his safetye) climb into a tree.
But the bold Flea (not any whit aghast)
To his proud ^peech, this answer m^d^ a^ last.
How long shall vn^o^t^^^^ed arrogance
Exalt itse^^e^ how long shall (...) ^^^ance
Without or check, o^ curb^, hi^ hateful cre^^^
Let Flies then harbor in the Eagles nest:
Let little stars compare them to the Sun,
Let all to the first confused Chaos run.
Who ever thought such insolence to find,
In this huge lump^ of ^olly, this bace hind?
Thou thought perhaps, my vaunts now no beast hea^es:
Yes; know that fields have eyes, and woods have eares^
Is there no beast who can with thee compare?
Yes very many, who both can and d^^e.
Even I my self (though of a thou^and least)
Do estimate my self a nobler beast
Then thou, or any of thy lumpish race:
And fear not so to tell thee ^o thy face.
The Elephant hearing a little noyes,
Said thus: my friend^ from whence proceed^ this voyce^
Toward the bush he cas^s his scornf^ll eyes,
Where the poor Cu^^e half dead for ^eare h^ spies.
Alas, why should he fea^e ( Her^cli^e said)
He trespas^ not, why should he be a^^^aid?
But (quoth the other) he relei^'d his for,
Did he no^ wrong him (think you) doi^g so?
No, what he did wa^ done against his will,
The mind^ does make the fact, or good or i^^.
I, but (quoth he) the thought we cannot ^ee,
As is the fact, so must our iudgemen^ b^^.
What though the Dog had done no (...) at all^
Yet if the other pleased i^ so to ^all,
He durst not stand to justify the deed.
For why? we see the slender-yeilding reed
Does stand, when as the sturdye Oak does fall.
For mighty men must not be striu'n withal,
To fawn and crouch, and tell a soft smooth tale
Does often speed, when force will not prevail.
This knew the Dog who better days had seene^
(for in his youth he had a Courtier been)
With faithful service he to please did strive:
But honest faith, takes not the way to thrive.
But why do weep? Heraclites then wept,
Yet listening to his speech, he silence kept.
I weep (quoth he) to hear, that flattery
Should often better speed then verity.
I weep to see how rich ones take delight
To entertain each plump-cheekt Parasite.
All doors stand open to every claw-backe lout,
Whilst honest truth is forced to stay without.
How wisdom finds but slender entertain,
Whilst doltes and fools do lick up all the gain.
No marvel quoth the other so let be
Dawes best with dawes, like with their like agree^
Then forward with your Dream ( Heraclite said)
You left where as the dog was sore afraid,
Then thus: forthwith out of the bush he cralles^
Before the Lordly beast he prostrate falls.
He humbly lickes his feet, and then him prays
To weigh with favor his distressed case^
Most mighty Lord (quoth he) I hope you see,
That gain^t my will this villain dwells with me:
Betwixt my teeth I soon would crush the patch,
If I could find the means the dwarf to catch.
But good my Lord no more of this (quoth he)
(Leaning his mighty limbs against a tree)
I pardon thee: but where is that bold squire
Who durst compare with me? I much desire
To see that caytiffe, that presuming elfe:
Here am I (quoth the Flea) and showed him self.
Here am I (quoth the Flea) ready to prove
What erst I said, and down he throws his glove:
Then try the quarrel, when and how thou dare^
Thou h^ar'st I dare my self with thee compare.
The Elephant (then smiling in disdain)
Said thus: know wre^ch, I count thy vaunts but vain^^
For why? if to this strife I should agree,
I should disgrace my self and honor thee.
Alas, what glory should I thereby gaine^
If thou, and all thy eluish race were slain?
But it were a credit for thee for to dye,
Slain by so great and mighty beast as I:
The nimble Flea, thus interrupts his speech,
Thou striu'st in vain my worth for to impeach^
This is a cowards common used pretense,
It stands not with mine honor: this defense,
Serves for a shield to shelter cowardice,
But is derided of such as be wi^e.
What? do I not esteem my life as dear
As thou thine honor? nothing but pale fear
Does daunt thy courage only fear's the let,
Then th'Elephant, thou do thy self forg^t:
For (each one knows) unstained nobility
Keeps us alive, although our bodies die.
Do I forget my self (the Flea did say)
But who did then forget him self I pray,
When this vnweildie mass of thine, did dare
Unto the Lions grace it self compare?
Do I forget my self? I do thee right:
I offer thy huge bulk the single Fight.
Thou standst upon thine honor: I tell thee
I Will prove my self the nobler beast to be.
Thy blood is stayn'd by this vilde traytrous act:
Admit it were not, thou wilt denay the fact.
I Will prove when that thou were the best of all,
Thy worth (compared to mine) would be but small.
And let what Beasts thou will, judge in this case,
Till when, I will not yield to thee an ace.
Each Beast in his own cause is partial,
And in his own conceit, each dwarffe seems tall.
(Quoth th'Elephant) By others, let us be tried,
Let others censure, this debate decide.
Who fears the trial, does his cause mistrust;
So do not I, knowing that mine is just.
Choose thou an arbitrator for thy part,
And promise from his censure not to start.
I Will do the like^ let this be done with sp^^d.
See yonder Bull which he^r below does ^^^d,
Shall be my days-man, if that he agree.
And (quoth the Flea) yo^ The Elepha^t stands in fear of ye mouse for that
she will (...) up his tr^nck^ and through it into his head sometimes.
Mou^e shall be for me.
Why do thou start? why art thou so dismayed?
What (on the sudden) makes thee so afraid?
The Mouse (quoth he) shall never judge my cause:
He is mine enemy, wherefore the laws
Permit me from his censure to appeal,
With that vile vermin I will never deal.
Is this the beast (quoth he) vaunted even now,
Each other beast would at his presence bow?
And see! a little Mouse does make him quake:
No marvel though the very trees did shake
For awful fear, as he along did pass.
Is this the beast? sure it some other was.
But since the little Mouse (which I did choose)
(For that he is thy ^oe) thou do refuse:
I Will name an other, though I might defend
Me from the Bull, because he is thy friend.
Thy friend said I? you are of one kindred all:
For When Pyrrhus King of Epirus warred against ye Romans he had Elephants in
his army which the Roma^^ having ^euer seen any of the^ before, termd Bul^ of
Africa. Plutarch in the life of Pyrrhus.
Bulls of Affricke some folk did you call.
I refuse none, from greatest to the least,
And lo, the Wesell, that same Princely bea^t,
Who (armed with Rue) aduentrously dares ^ight
With the soul Ba^^liske, which killes with sight;
He dares encounter that same poys^nous breath,
Which unto many mort^lles causes d^^th.
That Prince shall be my dayes-man (if he please)
I choose him arbitrator for the Fleas.
Imagine all agreed, the dayes-men set,
Bent to decide the cause for which they met.
The Elephant did first the silence break.
(For It was his lot that he the first should speak)
The arbitrators had such order taken,
That either should his own cause first explain,
Without all interrupting, or impeach,
If the one then could except against the others speech
He briefly should declare wherein, and why:
And they would give their censure by and by.
The Elephant (by lot) the first place wins,
And thus with bold erect^d looks begins.
My Lords (who set to arbitrate our cause)
I hope you shall not need long time to pause,
To pass your censure, when both parts you hear,
For I shall make it very plain appear,
This little Skip-iack beast, his worth is small.
Why grace I him so much? no beast at all.
For every beast produces his own kind:
But Fleas to breed of sweat and dust we find.
As his beginning is obscure, and bace,
So of his life is the whole course and race.
Yet grant he were a beast, grant him so much:
What judgment is so blind to think him such,
As that he may be likened unto me?
Whose breath oreturnes ten thousand such as he^
Look on our statures, see what odds there is,
Such difference is there 'twixt my worth and his.
His person's little, little is his worth:
What act praiseworthy can such dwarffs bring forth
You see my limbs are large, my joints are strong,
Able to further right, or right my wrong:
Let me speak boldly, there is no beast in field
But that (for strength) to me will easily yield.
Behold (my Lords) this Castle-bearing back,
And think what strength is in this dwarfish jack.
Yet durst the elfe provoke me to the fight;
Well might the world henceforth contemn my might
If with this atomye I should contend.
But too much time in that is well known I spend.
Leaving the body, let us come to the mind:
How many virtues therein shall you find?
My fortitude in this most plain appears,
That man (who rule over all creatures bears)
Have often vs'de my service in the wars.
Even Kings of men, in their most bloody iarres,
One against an other, vs'de my help and aid.
Who ever (in their wars) the ^leas help pray'de?
The Kings of wealthy I^dye us do choose
As their chief champions, and our help use
In all their battles: and in us does stand
Their confidence, and hope of all their band.
And not without great cause: for I have been
Whereas my father fighting I have seen,
His The like was done by the Elepha^t of K. Porus in his war against
Alexander but this was after ye time of Democritus who is supposed to dream
this dream
rider being down and almost slain,
He which his trunk did set him up again:
And forth his bleeding wounds the arrows drew,
Did never Flea like haughtye courage ^^ewe:
Nay more, we fought (o let me vaunt of this)
Against the worlds wonder, proud S^^ira^^^.
Against her we ^ought, gain^t her we did preuails,
When as the King of Ind' she du^st a^^aile.
Let my foe show when he wa^ such a f^^ld,
And I the victo^y to hi^ will yield.
He turns his feeble might against his friend,
And suckes their blood who do him harbor lend.
But I convert my force against my ^oes,
The wakefull Dragon, and Rhenoceros
Armed with strong scales, and with a peircing horn
Upon his wreake^ull nose, who holds in scorn
But once to speak to such a wre^ch as thee:
Yet both their ^orces cannot conquer me.
To prove my fortitude this shall suffice,
Because I know (my Lords) you both are wise.
Now if my diet you will estim^te,
(I dou^ not) you will grant me temperate:
For temperance consists (as I think)
Chiefly in th'vsage of our meat and drink,
And Venus sports: in these (this virtue's plaste)
He Is temperate, who sober is and chaste.
My food is such as from the earth does spring,
I live not by the death of any thing.
I feed not (as the Flea) on others blood,
But the green gras^e con^ents me for my food.
My drink is such as the clear Fountains gi^e^
And thus do I (not harming others) live.
As for the usage of the act of kind,
Not any beast more temperate shall you find,
We bath our selves both before c^i^^re,
As likewise when it is done: thus a^e we su^e
T'auoyd uncleanness: and our selves suffice
To use this whilst we live but twi^e or thrice.
In our lives length our temp'rature appeeres,
For many of us li^^ three hundredth yee^es.
Whilst such as thou (the truth if you will confess
Shorten your lives with riot and excess.
Xenopho^ Libr. 1. de Insti^: Ciri.
Physicians which can bo^^h up your health,
Like vultures (whilst you live) pray on your wealth,
As garments which are rent, bo^chers piece ore;
Your crazie bodies (they) with drugges restore.
Thus are your lives a living misery,
And death's procured by some extremity.
But I with temperance my life prolong^
And never (with Phi^icke) do ^y body wrong^
My hope of health in mine own guiding stands^
I list not put my life int'others hands.
O thrice unhappy he, whose good or ill,
Stands in th'aduenture of an others skill.
Now will I speak of prudence: which in deed
Should have been spoke of f^^st, bu^ ^le pro^eed^
Religion (which should be natural
As meat and drink) as common unto all^
Though it of some slightly regarded be,
Yet is esteemed and practiced by me.
Of prudence this I hold the chiefest part,
From service of the Gods no whit to start.
And to be brief, I carry such a brain,
Of Letters I the knowledge can attain.
What would you more? even this same excellence
Betwixt us two declares the difference.
Here might I speak of justice: I wrong none,
But give that which is due to every one.
Of curtesi^ here might I something say,
How when I meet one straying from his way,
I do direct him how his course to bend,
And him from force of hurtful beasts defend.
I could say more, but what need more be said?
I only this will add: all beasts were made
To serve the use of man, who does this best,
In this approues him nobler then the rest.
My strength auailes him much: and when I dye,
I leave my teeth which men call Iuorye^
Alive or dead the Flea does nothing else
But troubles every one whereas he dwells.
If this be true; as I in nothing li'de,
Why pause you to give sentence on my side?
Thus did the Elephant lay open his case,
And then with silence to the Flea gave place.
What (quoth Heraclite) did he gain his suite?
What said the Flea? was he not quight struck mute?
Tell me Democritus what said the elfe?
Even thus (quoth he) he answered for him self.
Grave arbitrators, now your selves have tried
This beasts proud arrogance and daring pride,
But hear me plead (with patience) for the Fleas,
Then may you give your censure as you please.
The One part unheard, who lets his verdit pass,
Though he judge right, no upright judge he was.
I know you do reserve the one ear for me,
Though not so great a beast, as well as he.
Indeed I was not hid as in a Tomb
For two for so long time is it reported y^ Elephant going with young.
years space within my mothers womb.
Yet look what odds is between slyme and dust:
Such difference is twixt our beginnings iust^
At first the earth did every creature breed,
Yet he contemnes the earth as impure seed.
Proud beast who dares our common mother call
Impure and bace, th'earth's mother of us all:
But he triumphs in his vnweildye mass,
Let this go current, it will come to pass
That you (my Lords) and all beasts else save he,
Yea even the Lions self despised shall be.
He would ore crow me, for I am so small,
Let this be suffered, he will out-braue you all.
Virtue consists not in the quantity,
But rather is an inward quality.
We more esteem the little Rhemora
Then the huge Whale: this little fish can stay
A Ship that is under sail, in her swift course:
In a rough storm, against wind and waters force.
Who makes a do^t but little Philomel'
The iron stomackt Estridge does excel:
And though fair Ladies much esteem her coat,
She more delights them with her sugared noate.
The Ceder then the Vine is much more tall,
And yet the Vine is more esteemed of all.
What wants in stature (oftentimes we find)
Nature repayes it double in the mind.
But with his mighty strength he does me press,
Against which I set mine active nimblenesse.
If that he fall, he cannot rise again,
But like a logge he lies upon the plain.
By this means is he made the hunters pray,
When with a half out tree they him betray.
In that great The Bat in this fray took part with beasts and therefore after
the victory was int^^^d this punishment never to fly but by twilight.
battle and that bloody fraye
Betwixt the beasts and birds: we lost the day,
Not through their strength (as they themselves confess)
But rather through their active nimblenesse.
My service that day to you all is woll known,
And therefore need not vauntingly be shown.
Then was I well esteemed of great and least,
Who then made dout if that I were a beast?
I see a Soldiers service is forgot,
In time of peace the world regards us not.
But to proceed; he pra^es of fortitude,
And, that he is valiant would feign conclude.
He counts strength valor, but he judges wrong
Who ^aith the Oak has valor: yet 't is strong.
But he (he says) has many battles fought,
I, but true valor never danger sought.
Rashness, it self does into peril thrust:
That Is only valor where the quarrel's just.
But when as unsought danger does betide,
His prowess then true valor will not hide.
For such as without all foresight are bold
Fool hardye, and not valiant we hold.
Let this great warrior, I pray you show
For what just cause these wars he did pursue^
What, is he mute? then I the cause will tell,
For that his Lord to fight did him compel.
He says that man his help does often times crave,
It Is false, he does command him as his slave.
No, do not think such judgments to delude,
Amongst some fools vaunt of thy servitude.
Men use your service often to their cost,
For one day's won through you, there are three lo^t.
Not war alone, but other fear^ull things,
(And chiefly such as death often with it brings)
Are fortitudes true objects^ heerin lies
His ch^ifest force these perrils to despise.
When man with pressing nail seeks me to kill,
My guts about my heels, I march on still.
And though in this great broyle I was ^eere slai^e,
The danger past, I boldly bite again.
Was thy Syre's valor (think thou) like to this,
When as thou fought against proud Semiramis?
Have thou no The Elepha^t being wounded, rages against all yt come in his
way, and so does more hurt on his own party
wound? may be thou will not start,
But I fight having lost my hinder part;
Even half my body being taken away,
I fly not but dare still maintain the fray.
I dare adventure in each dangerous place,
And beard the boldest Ruffen to his face:
What dare I not? I know that I am f^ee,
And do enjoy most perfect liberty.
He brags that he is entertained of Kings,
And so am I, but yet for diverse things.
He as a drudge or as a sturdie slave,
My company at bed and board they will have.
The fairest Ladies that do live in Court,
Will sometime entertain me in such sort;
As he would hang himself to find the grace,
But once to harbor in so sweet a place.
O, this is such a sweet felicitie^
That men envying my prosperity,
Ovid.
Have wished to be transformed into Fleas,
That so they better might their fancy please.
By this desire of theirs is plainly shown,
They thought my state was better then their own:
And therefore men (for all thy haughty vaunts)
Never desire to become Elephants^
For if they so were changed, they plainly see^
Their state should be made worsse, not betterd bee^
My shape they wish for, thereby to obtain
This liberty which else they cannot gain.
The coyest dames in City or in Court,
Afford the Flea free scope him self to sport
In their soft bosoms: and without denay,
At his best pleasure he may lower stray.
I say no more of this least I be blamed,
But thus conclude, I am a Courtier framed.
My face and legs, will suite a Prince his hall,
For the one I know is smooth, the other small.
Vaunt on and spare not of thy migh^y foes:
I will rejoice I have such friends as those.
Much of thy sober diet thou do preach
The Fox hates grapes when they are out of his reach.
So needy beggars speak of poverty,
And gelded men vaunt of their chastity.
Thou never knewst what better diet meant,
And therefore art with such base stuff content
Man, who deuoures both birds, and beasts, and fish,
Will spare his blood for me to be my dish.
Thus I revenge the blood of beasts ar^ slain^
To feed his paunch; and shed his blood again.
I think in this thou quit'st us free from lust,
In that thou say we breed out of the dust.
Thou tel'st us also of thy courtesy,
Are these the marks of thy nobility?
These virtues which thou nam'dst may gentry trye^
But wherein art thou nobler yet then I?
That thou can learn to know a Letter? ^ush:
I count that learning hardly worth a rush.
To what good purpo^e can thou this apply?
Bu^ I am skillful in Astronomye.
I can foretell what wea^her s^all ensue,
And thereof before hand by signs I show.
When I bite sore, the Plowman knows plai^e
(Foretold by me) he shortly shall have rain.
When h^ does snor^ secure, I him awake,
That to good thoughts himself he may betake^
Thus do I wisely things far off foresee,
And not such only as before me be.
Art thou religious? I am so too,
For look what men awak't by me s^all do
Is mine^ mine are their vows and prayers all^
What good they then shall do, I may mine call.
And to be brief, thus I conclude in fine:
All that they think, or say, or do, is mine.
Thou say thy teeth are good, they are: but when^
When thou art dead: they are never good till then.
What good thou living do, that is thine all:
But good done after death, scarce ours I call^
How long thou live I care not, nor can tell,
How long we live it skils not, but how well^
And for man's service I come not behinde^
He proffits but the body, I the mind.
Thus have you heard (my Lords) both him and (...).
And both of us awai^e for your decree.
If that he do except against my speech,
With favor hear mine answer I beseech.
Thus did the F^ea (me though^) conclude his Theame^
At which I hea^tily laughed even in my dream.
How now Herac^^^^s, do not laugh yet?
At what quoth he? me thinks this tale should ^et
Tears from the hardest flin^: laugh I do ask?
What, to see vice thus put on virtues maske^
To hear a villain tell so smoo^h a ^ale,
And hipocrites set up so full a sail?
To see how great ones still would greater be^
And none contented with their own degre^^
How lightly others virtues some do weigh,
Whilst that self love does bear so great a swaye^
O, when I hear that beasts use reason, then
I weep to think beasts li^e in shape of men.
But on, I pray you on, your dream pursue,
And let me know what verdit did ensue.
Nay stay (quoth he) you are too forward, ^ie:
First pray you hear the Elephants replye.
My Lords (quoth he) before you fur^her go,
I pray you hear me speak a word or two.
Mine enemy thinks with a glo^ing tongue
And smooth filde speech, to boul^ter out his wrong.
Thou tells how great ones do thee entertaine^
And yet even those thy company disdain.
But do they ^arbour t^ee, and give thee food^
The more ungrateful thou to suck their blood.
This is the wicked custom of our days,
To seek their ruin who first did them raise.
Foul sin has set her marks upon thy back,
And (like her self) hat^ clothed thee in black.
Do Ladies harbor thee? thou do them wrong:
They all would rather have thy room then throng
Too many such intruding mates we have,
Who boast how Ladies do their presence crave.
Thou rau'st gains^ great ones, rail'st against their life,
Such foul mouthed curres are now adays too ri^e.
So use base grooms seeking themselves to raise^
Discredit others, others do dispraise^
Wanting desert, he to your favor flies:
But heerin (as I think) true bounty lies,
That you may be enforced to wrong none
For that you do entend to give to one.
For many oftentimes such gifts do make,
They are inforst from others for to take.
The envy of my greatness makes him speak,
He must have vent, or his swollen hear^ will breake^
As shadows still attend upon the Sun,
So glory ye^ could never envy shun.
Where as fire is, there always will be smoke,
Envy will ever seek virtue to choke.
Thus have you ^eard in brief what I can say,
Thus ends my speech, I for your censure stay.
But the^ the Flea; yet hear me a (...) words
(According to your order) reverent Lords.
He says, among great ones I my self intrude,
And then does charge me with ingratitude,
O see how well his speeches do agree:
Observe them well, you will find them contrary.
Either their entertain must willing be,
Or from ingratitude acquit me free.
Am I in debt to him who did me good?
Yet to his power alwaves the same withstood?
The wise oft-times reap profit from their foes,
Yet who accounts them bounden unto those?
If that turn good which for my hurt was meant,
I Will thank my fortune, and not his intent.
But was he willing? then I may conclude,
He wrongs me much, who says I did intrude.
Favor and force, never so well agree,
That both at once can in one subject be.
But when he saw his speech truth's color lack,
He wrangles at my color, cause it is black.
Mislikes he black? heerat much marvel I:
He never could abide his It is written of the Elephant, that he cannot away
with ye sigh^ of white color.
contrary.
He knows not well what 't is stands in his light,
He neither can away with black nor white.
I envy not thy greatness, for with all,
Such as thou art (I know) will be thy fall.
Little I am, and little will I say,
But here I end, and do your verdit pray.
Heroclit^ said show what their censure was^
I long to hear on which side it did pass.
Then must you lose your longing (i will be plain)
Or else must stay until I dream again.
I thought (to hear the verdit) to draw near,
And so awak't, and thus my dream you hear.
What do not laugh' thou art no man at all:
Laughter to man is always natural,
And to We read how ye Crocodile will weap by nature: the ^ye^^ will counterfe^
(...) and (...), bu^ no (...) man) can laugh by nature.
man only: if thou be not such,
Though thou laugh not, I will not marvel much.
No man quoth he? why, do thou count him none
Who is not touched with each affection?
Well, be it so: although I laugh not now,
I could (if I see cause) as well as thou.
But here were rather greater cause to weep,
If cause of either can proceed from sleep.
For when as all these ^oggie fumes are spent,
Which to the brain, were from the stomach sent.
Our restless fantasies repeat things ore,
Which we imagined the day defore.
For nothing comes in our intellgence,
Which was not let in by the door of sense.
The seu'rall things which we awake recite,
In dreams our ^ancies oftentimes unite.
As when of gold and mountains has been told,
Our dreams present us mountains all of gold.
We talk of horses, and of flying things,
And then we dream of horses that have wings.
It Is like of beasts, and strife, has been thy theme,
And that from thence proceeds this idle dream.
Idle do call it? quoth Democritus)
Yet rather had I thou should term it thus,
Then to interpret, or to wrest it, so
As curious and busy heads would do.
What by the Flea? what by the Dog was meant?
What by the Elephant, was his intent?
They Will aim at this, and that particular,
And each thing as it pleases them transfer.
Such fools as these would descant on my dream,
And it interpret, as it best shall seem
To their weak wit, and blunt capacitye,
Censure each word, each sentence misapplye.
If I should light on such a giddie ass,
I Would scorn to answer him, but let him pass.
But unto thee an answer must be sought,
You say dreams do repeat but things forethought,
In such 't is true, as sleep free scope afford,
But such as I use sleep, not as a Lord,
Not suffering it to rule, but serve our need,
And thus from this same sort of dreams are freed.
Such dreams as these on morning sleepers ^reep,
And hap to such as glut themselves with sleep.
In sleep our souls So says Cici. in his book de senectute, alleging it out
of Xenophon de exped. Cyr^
use their divinity,
And hence we prove their immortality.
For whilst we sleep, our bodies are as dead,
And then they stand our souls in little stead^
And yet ^ost perfect in her works is she,
Whilst that she ^hus is from the body free.
Her faculties now can she use so well,
That things to come she sometime ca^ fo^etell.
And since she life does to the body give,
We know she can without the body ^^ue.
To such as do their ^oules vncombred keep,
The Gods reveal their secr^ts in their sleep.
Thus unto me perhaps the Gods have done,
And therefore I^^lon (God (...) son)
Showed me this vision, thereby to ^aske
Some vice, which thus in shape of beasts did m^ske.
The Elephant^ the Fl^^; t^^^es general:
So every one of either kind we call.
Some kind of faults, and not some ^aultie me^
Are heerby noted it appears then.
Why make you this Apology (quoth he)
I hope you ^a^e me no ^^ch fool to be
Thus to coni^cture; how so ere it seem,
I let it pass knowing 'twas but a dreame^
The Gods have something else to do beside,
What man? Democr. held opinion that there were many worlds, with Alexander the
great hearing of, wept, because he had not fully conquered (...) of the^.
you say th'a^e many worlds to guide.
Think thou the Gods will lea^e their heavenly ioy^s,
And thus molest themselves with such like ^oyes?
No, no, they are bu^ idle fantasies,
Which from thy ^i^th-deuo^ed thoughts arise.
No, no, fond man, these worde^ he w^eping spoke,
This same name (man) makes (...) all mirth forsake.
For what is man? naught else but miserye:
No sooner borne, but he begins to dye.
He Is weeping borne; which proves he is borne to weep^
And all his life's or spent in woe, or sleep.
Nay this his misery does prove most plain,
That not one man could become young again.
On this condition to repeat over,
Both th'woes and pleasures which he had before.
O no, there is no man so fond, but knows
That for one pleasure, he had twenty woes.
Here tears did drown his speech (which ^a^t did fall)
Thinking to com^or^ him, I wak't with all.
A Shadow of a shadow thus you see,
Alas what substance in it then can be?
If any thing herein amiss do seem:
Consider 'twas a dream, dreamt of a dream.
FINIS.
Many, many things have written,
When they had better still have sitten.
Peradventure so had I:
Yet I know no reason why.
It Is a foolish toy I written
And in folly most delight:
Then (I hope) it will please many,
And not be dislikte of any,
Even from tales of Robin Hood,
Wise men always pick some good.
None (I trust) offend I shall,
So I take my leave of all.
Peter Woodhouse.

