TO THE NOBLE YOUNG GENTLEMAN, Sr. JOHN SMITH, Knight; only Son to the
honorable Knight, Sr. THOMAS SMITH, Governor of the East India Company, etc.
The Author of these Exercises, heartily wishes all true happiness whatsoever.
SIR;
MVch has been the respect, and many the courtesies; which, I have received
from your noble Father. And the greatest requital I can give him; is, to make
my self (as far as in me lies) such a one, as that he need not repent, nor
be ashamed of the respect he has shown me: and that, if I should dye unable
to repay his kindnesses; he might yet, have some cause, to think his favors not
altogether lost upon me. Nay rather, might reckon them among the good deeds
he has done) in regard I have made use of them, (not to follow my pleasures,
but) to enable me in some good endeauours.

Of which, this little volume is a part; and knowing, I should well witness my
love unto him, whenever I gave good testimony of mine honest affection
toward you. Lo, as a pledge thereof, I consecrate to your use, these Exercises.
And, with your name, deliver them over to the world. That, when, and
wheresoever they shall be read; you may be remembered, both for a lover of these
kinds of studies, and a Favorer of his, who was desirous to be honestly
employed. For, such have you approved your self toward me, both in your
courteous familiarity: and by that free access, which in my meditations, I
have always had to your Library.

Accept then these papers; and let it not be tedious unto you, sometime to read
them over. For, though I may be thought fitter by many, to accompany you in the
way of pleasures: then to present you with any sound precepts of morality, or
Religion. Yet, I hope, you shall find me an Instrument: readier to encourage
you, in every of those virtues, wherewith your education has acquainted your
youth: then to whisper ought, that may bring you in love with those vanities;
whereunto, ouer-many other of our Gentry, are so much enclinde. For, though
that way, I might have more bettered my fortunes, and esteem, among some men.
This way, I am sure, I shall better satisfy my conscience, and my duty to God.

Nevertheless, I prefer not this to instruct you; but, to be a Remembrancer,
of those things, in which you have already been instructed. For, your good
Father, has not only largely provided for you, the temporal felicities: but,
as much, as in him lies, prepared you for that Blessedness, which is treated of
in these Exercises. More he cannot do; seeing, it must be every man's
particular endeavor, that shall purchase him this treasure, being the most
invaluable that can be. For, the greatest Monarch of the world, has neither
power to give, nor take it, from you. Yea, and without it, the more of other
blessings you possess, the more miserable they will make you. But, I know, you
will be happy in the prosecution thereof, that you may treble that happiness,
in the possession of it. And, to that end, you have my prayers, who am

most faithfully yours. G. W.

To the Reader.
I Know, that many of you, e're this time, expected the first Decade of the
Psalms, according to the promise, in my Preparation. And therefore, when you
behold here, but a tenth part of it, I shall be thought to come too much short
of what I intended. As indeed I do (seeing, I then wanted not much, of having
finished the whole Decade in that manner, as I purposed to set it forth) But,
if it were here fitting (or any way for your profit) to discover them, I might
give undeniable reasons (to excuse my self) which I now conceal.

Only thus much, I will say. Few men consider, how many painful days (after
the maine labor is ended) the writing over again of such a volume will ask;
how many months it may be afterward attended at the Press; how much charge,
the Authors little means, may (without any profit of his labors) be put to;
nor, through how many unlooked for troubles and businesses, he must make way
unto the performance of it. For, if they did know, and weigh this; so many,
that are idle ones themselves, would not so often (as I hear they do) blame
my idleness. But, rather wonder, how; and when, I got means and time, to
perform what is already done.

Discouragements, and hindrances, I have had many, since I began to meddle
with the Psalms. But helps, or encouragements, I have had none; no, not the
least part of one: save the comforts, which I have found, within mine own
heart. And they are so great, that I am still resolved to proceed in this work,
as I shall be enabled. For, though it may come the more slowly forward, by
reason of some lets: yet, I am persuaded, God will supply, by his grace,
whatsoever, I am that way deprived of. And (if I can have patience) bring what
I intend, to much more happy perfection, then if I had received no obstacle in
the performance.

This Psalm, in the mean while, my friends were desirous of; and have wished
me thus to publish the rest, by one or two together, until a whole Decade be
imprinted: That so (every Psalm, being an entire thing of it self) those
poor men, who are desirous of them, and unable to spare so much money
together, as will buy a greater book, may by little and little, without any
hinderance furnish themselves of all. And beside, they think the portablenesse
of it, may make it the more frequently read; for which causes I have hearkened
unto them.

Take then in good part, this little beginning. Value it, as it shall deserve
to be esteemed; And, let not my unworthiness be any blemish unto it. For,
though I am no professed Divine; yet, my profession is Christianity, and these
my labors, having the approbation of Authority, are not to be despisedly
reckoned of, as mine; but received as the doctrines of the Church: who has
now, by her allowance, both made them her own, and delivered them over unto
you. So; Gods blessing on you, and me, and farewell.

G. W.
The several Exercises upon this Psalm, are these.
1. A Preamble: wherein the Author, the Person, the Matter, the Method, the
Occasion, and Use, of this Psalm, are treated of. page 1. 2. The Metricall
Translation of this Psalm, with short notes, to justify the questionable
places in that version. page 9. 3. The Several Readings of this Psalm, in
most of the ancient and modern Interpreters. page 15. 4. An Exposition,
divided according to the parts of the Psalm: the first part begins, page 19
the second, page 89. 5. Meditations in verse, upon the same Psalm, beginning:
page 123. 6. A short Paraphrase in prose, wherein the words of the Psalm are
wholly preserved. page 159. 7. A Prayer, taken out of the Psalm, petitioning
for the blessings; and to be delivered from the unhappiness therein mentioned.
page 163.
EXERCISES UPON THE first PSALM.
1. Of the Author of the first Psalm, and the person speaking there: Of the
matter also, and method of it: with the occasion, and use.

THe first Psalm (which has no title in the Hebrew) most of the learned
Fathers ascribe to David; as Origin, Ambrose, Basil, Augustine, Cassiodore,
etc. yea, and S. Jerome (though he elsewhere follows the opinion of the
Hebrew Doctors in his time) in one of his In Epist. ad Paulin* de omnibus
sacris Scripturis.
Epistles, attributes this Psalm to David. Some also there be, who suppose it
to be composed by Esdras, who is affirmed by Athanasius and Hylarie, to have
gathered the Psalms into one volume. But since the Scriptures make no certain
mention thereof, urging no man to follow this or that opinion, I leave it as
indifferent; although I must confess, that I my self am more inclined to
their side, who impute this Psalm, with all the rest, to David. But doubtless,
whosesoeuer it were, or by whomsoever the whole book was thus ordered; this,
was most properly made a Proeme to the rest, for that it treats of
Blessedness, which is the principal end of all Instructions.

The person speaking in the 1 Psalm, and the matters handled in it.
The Person principally speaking in this Psalm, is the Holy Ghost, by the mouth
of the Prophet, who does hereby first teach us who is truly happy, verse. 1.2.
Secondly, by a Similitude, we are made to understand the excellent estate of
him, that is so blessed. verse. 3. And lastly, we are here informed, that the
wicked being nothing so, dream of a false uncertain felicity, and are, both
in respect of their present and future condition, most miserable. verse. 4.5.6.
In brief, this Psalm may be divided into two parts, the first three verses,
set forth the blessedness of the Church in Christ, and the other, declare the
lamentable condition of all that seek for happiness without him.

Something I will say, The occasion of this Psalm.
concerning the ground and occasion of this Psalm; for, I have shown you
before in my Preparation, Vide Prepar: to the Psalter. cap. 5.
that there were certain divine subjects, some of which the holy Prophet
always made the first Objects, of his contemplations; and the means, whereby
he ascended unto the clear knowledge of the high Mysteries, delivered in every
Psalm. Now, although here be no Title to show us so manifestly, what he made
the foundation of his contemplation, that we should peremptorily conclude it,
to be this, or that particular; yet, by the matter of the Psalm, we may (I
hope) without injury to the Holy Spirit, give our meditations leave to aim
thereat. And to me it plainly appears to be that Double-Law of God, which
was given in Paradise. For, though at the beginning, God created man, that he
should know, love, enjoy him, and be made blessed in that fruition; yet, he
would not that such blessedness should be obtained without some condition. And
therefore he gave him an easy, but (as I said before) a Double-Law, Genes. 2.
partly affirmative, partly negative: the affirmative part was, that he should
dress the garden, and eat freely of every tree therein: the negative was, that
he should not eat of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil. And there was
both a promise of reward, for his obedience; and a commination of punishment,
if he transgressed: but Adam, who by obedience, might have been eternally
happy; by disobedience, was thrust out of Paradise, into a world of miseries,
to wander for ever in coffeehouse, and in the unhappy shadows of death.
Which God beholding with pity, bestowed on him, in place of original
righteousness which he lost; a means of Justification: and (changing the
accidents, though not the essence of his first command) gave to him in his
Word, that general Law of Faith, by which he, and his posterity, might be
directed out of the way of perdition, and ariue again at true felicity. This
Mystestery, being the first in the holy book of God, that most nearly
concerns us, the Prophet, as it seems, contemplated, and made it the object
and groundwork of this first Psalm: For, as God gave to our first Parents in
Paradise, a negative and affirmative Law, so in that universal Law, imposed
since their fall, some things are commanded, and some forbidden to be done;
and that Law, in respect of the essence, is one throughout all the ages of the
Church. Moreover, as Adam, if he had kept the Commandment of God in Paradise,
should have there lived a happy life, and peradventure been translated from
thence without death, into a more glorious blessedness in Heaven; so we, by
keeping the Law, which is since given unto us instead of the Tree of life in
this world, shall obtain the blessedness of Grace in Gods Church for the
present, and the perfection of all happiness (even the life of eternal glory)
hereafter. Contrariwise, as Adam, by contemning the Law of God, with the tree
of life, in eating the forbidden fruit, lost thereby the Estate of
blessedness, and incurred for the breach of a double Law, the danger of a
double death; so, those which transgress the twofold Law of Faith and Works,
which he has since given in his Word, do both deprive themselves of the
forenamed felicity, and are the second time (and that irrecouerably) in the
way of eternal damnation.

The effect hereof is opened in this Psalm; and therefore it may with good
probability be supposed, that he took the Parable, whereupon he compiled this
Hymn, from the Mystery of the Tree of Life planted in Paradise, and from the
Law and Charge which was there given unto Adam; and he shows, that as the
transgression of the Commandment, is the way that perishes; so the fulfilling
of the Law of the Lord, is the only means which is left us, to recover again
the happiness that we have lost.

The use of this Psalm.
This Psalm we may sing, or meditate, when we are disposed to praise and set
forth the blessed and unspotted life of our Redeemer; or else, when we are
discouraged with the prosperity of wicked worldlings (which seems to be the
only happy men) we may hence, both inform our selves of their end: and
comfort our souls, with remembrance of the blessed estate, of a good Christian.

The metricall Translation of the first Psalm.
Here the Prophet has expressed,
Who alone are truly blessed;
All things prosper with the just,
But the wicked perish must.
THe Man is a blessed, who walks not b astray
In their c lewd Counsels, that ungodly are,
Who neither stands in the sinners way,
Nor with the scornful sits in their chair.
But, in the Law of the d eternal LORD,
e Sincerely places he, his whole delight,
And in his Law, f his euer-blessed Word,
Does g exercise himself both day and night.
He shall be like a tree, which close beside
The h Rivers set, his fruit does timely give;
His leaf shall never fade, i but fresh abide,
k And whatsoever he takes in hand shall thrive.
But with ungodly men it is not so:
For they are like the chafe, which ( l being fanned)
By puffs of wind, is driven to and fro.
In Judgment, therefore shall not sinners stand.
Nor the ungodly n (be admitted) where,
The righteous shall o in one assemble p then:
For, q GOD well knows their way yt Righteous are
But perish shall, ye path of wicked men.
a Blessings, or all happy things, belong to that man, etc. For some take the
Hebrew word to be a Substantive plural, and some an Adjective plural; but
which soever it be, it is fully enough expressed in this our English phrase,
Blessed, or, Blessed is the man.

b The word, astray, seems here to be added only for the verse sake, but the
sense indeed includes it, seeing it is an erroneous walking from God, which
is meant in this place.

c This Epithet is not added in the Original, nor other, which I sometime use
in my metricall translation of the Psalms: nevertheless, I think I may, with
a good conscience, insert them; where they are either such, as are warrantable
in some other places of holy Scripture, to be well used in that sense: or such
as may be naturally proper to the subject, which they are applied unto. As I
think this is.

d This word, Eternal, is an attribute most proper to God, and indeed not to
be applied to any other. For, nothing can be rightly called eternal, but that
which ever u, was, and shall be, without beginning or ending: and therefore I
have added it to the word, LORD, that it might the better express here, the
Hebrew Tetragrammaton, (...)

e This, and many other such like words, may seem to be added in diverse
places of my translation; whereas, the power of the Hebrew being considered,
they will be found included in the Text.

f These words are added, explicandi causa, and therefore put in a different
character: which liberty, all Translators have taken, even in their
prose-translations; and to authorize me herein, I have not only the example
of modern Interpreters, but of the Septuagint also, who both explicandi, and
ornandi causa, have added many words in their translation. As in the fourth
verse of this Psalm, (...), and in the second verse also, (...), neither of
which, are in the Hebrew.

g The word, exercise, which is used in some English Translations, does (in my
opinion) better and more fully express the meaning of the Holy Ghost, then the
word, meditate; seeing it may as properly be applied to the heart and tongue,
as to the hand; whereas the word, meditate, is never with us used so largely,
although it be sometime so taken, with the Latins.

h Rivers, of it self, as well expresses the meaning of the Prophet in our
tongue, as Rivers of water; for, as by Flames, without other addition, we
understand Flames of fire: so, without other addition also, by Rivers, we fully
enough understand, the water, dividing it self into many streams.

i These words are explicandi causa also, as that, spoken of before in the
second verse.

k And he shall make what e're he does, to thrive; so it may be read also; for
some translate the words thus, Et quicquid faciet, prosperare faciet.

l Explicandi causa, as before.

m The direction letter is here left out in the verse; and therefore refer this
note to the word, Sinners, in the last verse of the fourth Stanza.
In the first verse, because there are degrees of Sinners mentioned, and (in the
Hebrew) distinguished, by three several words, which the Latins interpret
Impij, Peccatores, and Derisores, that is, the Ungodly, Sinners, and Scorners,
therefore in that, and in all such places, where is meant more then one sort of
offenders, I have called them, which the Latins term Impij, the Wicked, or
Ungodly; and those which they call Peccatores, I have termed Sinners: but in
this, and such like places (where one kind of evil doers is only spoken of)
I have indifferently named them, sometime the Wicked, sometime the Ungodly,
sometime Sinners, and sometime by such other names, as I knew were usual in
our tongue, to denote such Sinners, as the Holy Ghost there poynted at; for,
howsoever the circumstances do in many places appropriate these words, the
Sinners, or the Ungodly, to particular degrees of Offenders: yet in our tongue,
we indifferently use either of them, to signify the congegation of
reprobate-members of the Devil.

n These words are included in the sense, though not literally expressed, vide
annotationes Francisc. Vatabl.

o This is added, explicandi causa; for here seems to be meant, that great
Assembly of the Faithful, which at the general Judgment, shall be perfectly
made one in Christ, who is the head of that mystical body.

p I may seem perhaps, to have inserted this word, then, more for the rimes
sake, then for any force it here has; but, being well considered, it will
appear to be necessarily added, for it has respect to the time of that
judgment (spoken of before) in which will be congregated that principal
Assembly of the righteous, out of which all unrepentant sinners shall be
undoubtedly excluded.

q I told you in my Preparation to the Psalter, that where soever in
translating these Psalms, I met with the Hebrew tetragrammaton (...) I would
either express it by the word LORD, as the Apostles, the Septuagint, the
Fathers, and some English translators have done; or else by such a word as
should somewhat estentially express the Godhead: and distinguish it also by
writing the same in Capital letters; as in this place, the word GOD is
Charactered: Which (how ever some may think) is a significant, essential name
of the Deity; yea, (except the Hebrew Tetragrammaton, whose mysteries I am not
able to search into) I think there is no one word of any language, more
significant to express the essence of the Deity, then is the word GOD, which
though it be for difference sake a little otherwise pronounced, is the same in
signification with the word GOOD, an English tetragrammaton (out of whose
number and form of letters, if it were to any purpose, I durst undertake to
gather mysteries equal to many of those which some Jewish Rabbines and
Cabalisticall Doctors have framed out of the letters and form of the Hebrew
unspeakable Name.) It comprehends in it self all attributes whatsoever, which
are expressed in the known Names of God, used throughout every language of the
world, for eternity, omnipotency, beauty, knowledge, love, providence,
blessedness, with the perfection of these, and all other excellencies; serve but
to make up one Summum Bonum, one Chief good, and that is GOD: who, is the
perfection of all Goodness, and he, to whom only this essential Name ought
to be given. As appears in St Mathews Gospel, Chap. 19. verse. 17. where
Christ himself tells us, that there is none to whom this name of GOOD,
appertains, but to the Deity: There is none good, but one, says he, even
God. And this is made somewhat the plainer, by considering the english word, by
which we signify him that is Gods opposite; for, we call him not as other
Nations do, by a name comprehending some one attribute of his, as the
deceiuer, or so; but we impose a name on him, which at once, expresses all
that can be said of him in a thousand words, to wit, the Devil; for, all the
particular vnhappinesses, mischiefs, and wickednesses of the world, put
together, do make but one perfect evil, and he in whom they meet is properly
termed the Devil, or the evil, for so it seems to have been aunciently
pronounced, until the Saxon Character being somewhat like our D. made us loose
that pronunciation; and as we call him that is the fullness of all Good, GOD;
so; him that is the perfection of all evil, we name the Devil. These notes I
have added, to show the Reader, that in my translation I took no vain
liberty, but made conscience of the least variation, and passed over nothing,
until I had some reasonable warrant for what I did.

Variae Lectiones.
VEr. 1. Musculus, and translationes Anglicanae reddiderunt in praesenti, sed
Graecus, and Latina vulgata, and reliqui, ta^ veteres, quam recentiores, legunt
in praeterito; and alijhabent accedit ad consiliu^, alij ambulauit in consilio,
preterea Grec: vertit (...). i. in sede Pestilentiaru^, vt est, in vulg: lat:
sed leronim: habet, Cathedra derisorum, sic est etiam in recentioribus.

Ver. 2. Deliciae ipsius, recentior: voluntas eius in lege domini, vulgat: lat.
In lege Iehovae: recenti^or: in statuto, Chaldeus. Pluraliter in statutis,
Arabs: intelligens quaeuis instituta Dei. and vbi est, in lege eius meditabitur
in vulg: lat: translatio Anglicana nouissima, and alij habent, Meditatur, and
Chaldeus, in luminatione eius cantat, sive Iubilat.

Ver. 3. Etest velut, etc. alij legunt, and fuit, Graecus (...), i. and erit.
Quae fructum suum dat: recentior: dabit Genev: fructum suum concoquens, ad
maturitatem producens, Chaldeus. Folium eius non marcescit, recentior: non
defluet, Vulg. Lat. and omnia, quaecunque faciet, prosperabuntur, Vulg. Lat.
Chaldaeus sic reddidit, Omne germen quod germinat, grauescit, and prosperatur.

Ver. 4. Non sic Impij recentiores. Sic est etiam in Vulgat: Lat. and in
Septuagint. sed idem repetunt, vidt: (...). Non sic impij, non sic, and in fine
versus addunt, (...) a facie terrae. Sic etiam and Arabs. Tanquam gluma
recenti: Puluis, Vulgat. Lat. sed idem significat, nos enim in occidentali
part Angliae vocamus tegumentum tritici, Dust.

Ver. 5. Non stabunt impij recenti: alij legunt, Consistent, Graecus, (...),
Non resurgunt. Sic Vulgat. Lat. In iudicio, recent: in Die Iudicij magni,
Chaldaeus. In fine, Arabs: denotans extremum Iudicium, in fine Mundi. In
Congregatione Iustorum recenti. Alij in Caetu. Alij in Concilio. Graec: (...).
Vulg: Lat: In Consilio Iustorum.

Nota, quod in libris Graecis and Latinis, versus tertius in duos diuiditur.

The reason why I have here inserted these various Readings, and in Latin,
rather then in English, appears in the third chapter of my Preparation to the
Psalter.

The first part of the PSALM.
1. BLessed is the man, that does not walk in the counsel of the ungodly, nor
stand in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat of the scornful.

2. But his delight is in the Law of the LORD, and in his Law does he meditate,
day and night.

3. And he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of waters, that will
bring forth her fruit in season, his leaf shall not fade, and whatsoever he
does, shall prosper.

The Exposition.
In nomine Patris, and Filij, and Spiritus Sancti.

BLESSED: As a word of comfort, and a sign of good speed to my labors,
stands here to make happy my beginning of this endeavor: and I humbly beseech
the Everliving God of David, both to make blessed my proceedings, and grant
that my end may be crowned with the glorious reward, of eternal Blessedness.
For, that is the precious Jewel, which ever since the world begun, The way of
Blessedness, is by most men mistaken.
has been the principal aim, whereat every man shot, and the prize, after
which they have run. But indeed, the way to it has been often mistaken, and
among the Philosophers, which were accounted wisest, it was a long time
questionable, both wherein this happiness consisted, and by what means it was
to be attained unto. Nor in the times of heathen ignorance only, were men
deceived in their aims; but even amongst us also, at this day, the greatest
part run wide, proposing unto themselves, a happiness in the enjoying of those
vain things, whereby, they are often hurried quite beside it. For, some place
their felicity, or Summum Bonum, In what things the Worldling places his
happiness.
in having the sovereignty and authority over others; some, in abundance of
riches; and the greatest part, Epicure-like, in fleshly delights and pleasures,
Let us eat and drink (say they) for to morrow we shall die. 1 Cor. 15.
But the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, Romans 14.17.
as the Apostle says; and therefore that men might not still be deceived, and
so weary themselves in a wrong course; the Author of this Psalm has here
decided the matter in question: and shows us, that true Blessedness, neither
consists in observation of the moral virtues, as Philosophers thought; nor
in the worship of many Gods, as the Pagans suppose; nor in observing the Law of
Moses, as the Jews dream; nor in enjoying the pleasures of this life, as
great Courtiers and Epicures believe: But quite overthrowing the opinions of
all these, and their foolish expectations, who build their contentment on
honor, riches, and such like things of this world; he affirms, that man only
to be most truly blessed, and in the path to highest happiness, who, shunning
the ways of mere natural men, endeavors also to avoid the custom of
sinners, to separate himself from the scornful enemies of the truth, and to
continue sincerely, embracing and rightly professing the doctrine of Gods word.
And this kind of Preface, the Holy Ghost, as it seems, Why the Holy Ghost used
this preface.
has used; because, by discovering (at the first view) so precious a Jewel,
as Blessedness; he would allure men, to give the more heed unto those
mysteries and instructions, which are afterward delivered: and, if it were
possible, make them more willingly conform themselves unto the courses, which
are inclusiuely propounded. The like kind of beginning has the heathen
Philosopher, Aristotle, used in his Ethics; and which is more to be heeded,
our Savior made it the Exordium of his Doctrine: as appears in that his first
Sermon preached in the Mount, where he begins to pronounce, Matthew. 5.3.
who are blessed: Blessed (says he) are the peace makers, Blessed the poor in
spirit, Blessed the meek, etc. and so says our Prophet. Blessed, that is,
according to the original, Blessedness, Blessings, or all happy things,
appertain unto that man, who walks not in the Counsel of the ungodly, nor
stands in the way of sinners, as it follows in the Psalm. And this his
Blessedness is double; for, he has the hope and means of happiness in this
world, and assurance of eternal glory in the next: or, as the Apostle
expresses it, 1 Timothy 4.8.
both the promise of this life, and that which is to come.

Now, what the blessings of this life are (which God has ordained, for such as
walk in his ordinances) you may read in the last book of Moses; Deuteronomy. 28.3.
Blessed, said he, shall thou be in the City, and blessed in the field;
blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, the fruit of thy ground, the fruit of
thy cattle, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep. Blessed
shall be thy basket, and thy store; blessed shall thou be when thou go out,
and blessed when thou come in. Yea, as it is in the same chapter, among many
other temporal blessings, God shall make thee holy unto himself, if thou
keep his Commandments Or if you would, in a word, receive a glimpse of the
perfection of the blessedness, which belongs to the godly man. S. Paul gives
us the best knowledge of it, in showing how far it is beyond the reach of our
knowledge; 1 Cor.
for, says he, neither has eve seen, nor care heard, nor can it enter into
the heart of man, what God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9.

This Psalm, as I said in the Argument, consists of two parts; in this first
part, is set forth the blessed estate of the Just, and who is such an one: in
the other part, the miserable condition of the wicked. In the two first verses,
the Blessedness, and Piety of the man so happy, is both negatiuely, and
affirmatively described; for, 1 Pet. 3.11. Psalm. 34.14.
the Prophet has begun, according to that saying of S. Peter, Shun evil, and
do good: and indeed, true righteousness consists, as well in eschewing what
may provoke, or displease God, as it is expressed in the first verse; as in
seriously performing, or endeavoring that which may please him (which is
declared in the second.) And, as a well experienced Physician, does first purge
away all the ill humors, that occasioned the sickness of his weak Patient;
before he will administer those Cordials, which are prepared to recover his
health: So, by this order, in his description of a blessed man, the Holy Ghost
does show us, that before the physic of his Word, can work effectually in our
hearts, for the salvation of our souls; we must be cleansed from the
corruptions, which we have gotten by the euillaffected counsels of our own
hearts, or, the infectious society of the wicked: and, as it were, diet our
selves, by abstaining from their abominable customs; which Diet, is here
first prescribed in the negative: And it is, as if he had said thus. If you
ever intend to recover the health of your souls, and become partakers of true
blessedness; you must neither walk in the counsels of the ungodly, nor stand
in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat of the scornful: for these are the
courses which he shuns, that does arrive at happiness.

What manner of expression the Holy Ghost uses.
But, the Holy Ghost has not here used the ordinary manner of speech, in his
description; but rather, by way of Metaphor, expressed it: and the Divine Muse,
has into three Triads, or triple-heads, divided this Negative. In which are to
be considered three subjects, three qualities, three actions. And there is an
admirable gradation in all the parts: first, in the subjects, or persons; from
an ungodly man, to a sinner: from a sinner, to a scorner. Next, in the degrees
of sin; as, from the counsel, to the way: from the way, to the seat. Lastly,
in the manner of it; from walking, to standing; from standing, to sitting: and
their wickedness, is increased to the full.

By the ungodly, The first Triade.

The ungodly, who they are.


such are here understood, who are still in their original corruptions; and
being ignorant of God, and his service, incline to those evil affections,
whereunto their nature is subject. Yea, by the ungodly, are principally meant
Infidels; such as are ignorant of religion, and the divine worship of God,
according to his Word: such, as employ all their endeauours, without thought of
him, to become happy in this life; giving themselves over unto covetousness,
pleasures, with such like vanities, whereunto their affections lead them.

The word ungodly, in our tongue, does of it self, very well answer to this
Explication; for, as Godliness most properly appertains to God and Faith;
so, ungodliness expresses the contrary thereunto. The Original imports
such a crew, as are so restlesly affected with worldly cares; and evil
perturbations of the mind, that they are endlesly, hurried to and fro in their
ungodliness: like the sea, which has no power to stay it self. Isa. 57.20.
And so Esaias describes them, The ungodly (says he) are like the troubled sea,
when it cannot rest; whose waters cast up mire and dirt.

Walking.
By walking, is Metaphorically understood, the ordinary proceeding of men in all
their actions, Psalm. 119.1. Genesis 5.24.
whether of faith or works. And in this place is meant, 2. Chron. 22.3.
a departure from God in the progress of their lives. And although in my
metricall translation, I have expressed it by adding the word, astray; it is
nothing from the natural sense of this verse: seeing there is meant an,
erronius walking, or wandering from the right way; as the word abijt in the
vulgar latin, very well manifests: for, it signifies most properly, to go
away. And Saint Augustine says, Ille abijt, qui recessit a Deo.

By Councels are here meant the internal deliberations of the mind; Council.
and that natural inclination of man to evil, which God spoke of when he
said; Genesis 6.5.
that the Imaginations of the thoughts of his heart, Genesis 8.21.
were only evil continually. For, Council is not here so strictly taken as
Aristotle defines it in his Ethics; Arist. 3. Eth. 3.
where he says, that Council is the finding out of the fittest means to
bring any thing to pass; but Council in this place, signifies rather
Temptations, then such Council: and it has as well respect to the inward
persuasions of our own lufts, as to the outward advise of others. Every man,
Iam. 1.4.
says Saint James, is tempted, when he is drawn away and enticed by his own
corruption, Iam. 1.4. But if you will know further, and more particularly what
the external Councels of the ungodly be, whereto they tend, and what events
follow them; you may read it in the Proverbs of Solomon, Chap. 1. verse. 10. 2.
Sam. 19. 21. Genesis 37. etc.

Triade 2.
Now, we come to the second Triade in the Negative, which says; that the
Blessed man, is such a one as does not stand in the way of sinners, and here is
expressed a degree of wickedness beyond walking in the Councels of the
ungodly. Sinners who they are.
For, by those that are said to stand in the way of sinners, are such
understood; who are not only led by the vain devises, and imaginations of
their own hearts (which proceed from original guiltines) or such, who are
simply ignorant of God, and Religion (as the heathen nations are) But, those
are thereby meant also, who have followed the Council of their own lusts, to
put them in execution, with such as are willingly ignorant of the worship of
God; negligent of the means of their conversion: and offenders against the
precepts of the first, To stand, what it means.
and second Table of the law. These are said to stand, not because they walk
no further in the path of unrighteousness: but rather, because they not
returning back to the way of Godliness, follow their wicked actions, with a
settled delight in them: Stant quia in peccato delectantur, says Saint
Augustine; yea, they are such as persevere until they have gotten a habit in
sin, and made (as it were) a beaten path in unrighteousness. For, such is
the Emphasis of the word, as it imports a continuance and insisting in evil:
not a falling by infirmity, as David, and Peter fell; but a reiterating and
heaping of sin upon sin, through the whole course of their lives. What the
way is, Psalm. 86.11. Acts. 18.25.
For, the word way both here, and in other places of Scripture is many times
Metaphorically used for Doctrine, or Religion; and sometimes for the manner of
our living, whether good or bad. But, the way that the Prophet here means, is
that broad and much trodden way, leading to destruction, whereof our Savior
spoke, Ma. 7.13.
in the Gospel of Saint Matthew.

And to make the matter more plain; those that stand in the way of Sinners,
are not such as unwillingly, or through infirmity offend: For, there is no man
on the earth that does good, Eccles. 7.22.
and sins not (says the Preacher) but those who settling their love upon
evil, have gotten (as I said) a habit in sinning: Who they are that stand in
the way of Sinners.
and suffer themselves to be carried headlong by the concupiscence of their
hearts into all wicked actions, until they have by continuance made themselves
not only servants to sin and uncleanness: but even blushlesse, and without
shame, both of what they do; or before whom, they commit their follies.

Such, were the Sodomites, that pressed into the house of Lot; Gen 19.4.
such sinners, were the Beniamites of Gibeah; Ind. 19.22.
such, are all the keepers of public houses of iniquity; such, are those
common swearers; that when you tell them of their oaths, will in sport (to
make an unsavory jest) swear that they swore not: such, are they, that go to
bed late, Esaias. 5.11.
and rise early, to follow drunkenness; such, Pro. 23.29.
are those that spend all their youth in ridiculous vanities, and are
distinguished from the children of God, by their language: For, it often
sounds God damme me; and such, are those Gallants amongst us, as dare,
impudently, bost of their beastliness, or in merriment publish their own
lasciviousness: even these are such, Genesis 13.13. Sam. 15.18. Math. 6.45. Luke
7.37. Job. 9.16.
as the Holy Ghost means in this Triade; and distinguishes from other
offenders, by the name of sinners; as appears through both Testaments.

The 3. Triad.
The last part, or Triade of this Negative is: he must not sit in the seat of
the scornful (that is) he must not have fellowship with obstinate Heretics;
What it is to sit in the seat of the scornful.
nor carelessly, stubbornly, or against his own knowledge, continue in
unrighteousness or unbelief: nor scoff at Religion, with the professors
thereof: nor insult over good men in their miseries: nor by blasphemous
speeches, or erroneous doctrines, maliciously oppose himself against God, and
his truth: nor be associated with such men, as are wholly given over to a
reprobate sense. For, by scorners, the holy Ghost means those, Scorners who
they are.
who are not only guilty of original uncleanness; or polluted with actual
sins; but so rooted in them, that they have there, set up their rest; yea, they
are such as, being hardened by their continuance in sin, grow incorrigible,
incredulous of Religion, contemners of God, and so presumptuous; as they dare
reproach, blaspheme him, pervert his truth against their own knowledges; and
yet as it were in despite of him, promise unto themselves impunity: Such they
are also, as ungraciously deride the ordinance of God; and make Jests at his
word. And such, Saint Peter said, Pet. 3.3.
there should be in the last days; even scoffers, walking after their own
lusts, and saying, where is the promise of his coming: for, since the Fathers
fell asleep, all things continue as they were? Such sinners, and scorners as
these; were the Jews that despised Christ: Such, are they that for temporal
aduancements, maintain Doctrines against the known truth, and their own
Consciences; such, are those that make Religion a color for their villainy;
Mat. 23.14.
Devouring widows houses, under the pretense of long prayer: and these, The
Chair or seat of Scorners.
if they once get into the Chair, and sit there; are those sinners which shall
never be forgiven: For, by the Chair, or seat, is understood; a desperate
security, and a devilish obstinacy in malicious wickedness; and he is
properly said to sit there, To fit; what it means.
that continues in his perverseness, without repentance, unto the end of his
life. And the reason why there is no redemption for such, is; not because there
is want of mercy in God: but by reason there is no repentance in man.

These, make up the three degrees of comparison, and the third and last step to
the Devil: For, to walk in the council of the ungodly (which is the purpose
of sinning) is bad: To stand in the way of sinners (which is the action of it)
is worse; But to sit in the seat of the scornful (which is to die impenitent
in his wickedness) is worst of all, and the highest degree of a Reprobate.

But, A brief of what went before.
to draw into sewer words this exposition of these three-folde Negatiues; by
the ungodly, are meant unbelievers; by sinners, those that are unjust and
dishonest in their actions; by scorners, obstinate Heretics; by the Councels
of the ungodly, are understood the vain cogitations of mere natural men,
with the superstitions of Jews and Pagans; the way of sinners, is a vicious
course of life, as the breach of the morrall precepts; and the Chair of
Scorners, is the obstinate profession of false Doctrines. Now, he that believes
not the promise of the Gospel, walks in the Council of the first; he that
adicts himself to Pride, Covetousness and such like; stands in the way of the
second: And he, that dies in the maintenance of a false worship, or in any of
these sins, without repentance; is seated in the seat of the Scornful. The
Chair of Pestilence.
Which the Septuagint calls; the Chair of Pestilence. And it very well
expresses the nature of that sin: For, as the plague of Pestilence, is a
disease most dangerous; infectious; and the sudden deuourer of mighty
congregations: So, those kind of sinners do by their doctrines, contemptible
speeches of God, and evil example; quickly infect, poison, and kill the souls
of an innumerable multitude of men. And therefore obstinate Heretics,
Atheists, false Teachers, Scorners of the Truth, Deriders of Religion, and
unrepentant sinners; may very well be said to sit, in the Chair of Pestilence:
For, they are the plague of the world; and to be abhorred as a most dangerous,
and infectious Pestilence, to the soul of Man.

And thus have you this gradation opened; which may be either understood
according, to the ordinary course: to wit, as from the positive, to the
superlatiue; in this manner. He that is a blessed man, must be careful, that
he walk not in the Council of the ungodly; much more that he stand not in the
way of sinners: but above all things, he must be most circumspect, that he
shun; the infectious seat of Scorners, Or else it may be inuerted thus: The
man that would be blessed; ought not only to avoid the pestilent scate of
Scorners and obstinate inrepentant sinners: but eschew also as far asin him
lies, the action, or iteration of any sin; nay, he should not so much as
suffer his thoughts willingly, The Doctrines and Observations arising out of
this verse. Ob. 1.
to wander after the ungodly persuasions of carnal desires.

The Doctrines and Observations, which may properly be gathered out of this
verse, are these. First, I observe, that there be but three steps to Hell, the
purpose of sin; the action of it; and an obstinate continuance therein,
without repentance: and unless we be very watchful, we may stip down those
three stayres, before we be aware: For, Facilis descensus Anerni; it is an easy
way to Hell: and the nature of sin is such; that it insinuates by degrees,
into the heart, without being perceived. First, it scrues into good liking; and
gains the consent, or purpose; then proceeds it unto action. And so forward,
until it grow ripe; even to the contempt of God: and this is the policy of the
Devil; The policy of the Devil, to draw us unto the Counsels of the ungodly,
and so forth to destruction.
to deceive men: For he knows, if he should persuade at first ouser, to
renounce God: it is so unnatural a sin; that it would seem abominable, to
the worst disposed men: and the heart would not admit such a persuasion to take
place. Therefore, he makes not that appear to be his aim; but presents them,
rather with such bayts, as seem to have no danger in them. He counsels them
(according to the natural enclination of their hearts, and the example of
worldlings) to seek preferments, riches, pleasures, with such like vanities;
he shows them the glory and use they may have; he persuades the Christian,
who is in a mean degree of life, that if he would seek after honors, he
might thereby become a Patron, for the afflicted members of the Church, or
Commonwealth. But he knows well, the old saying will prove true, Honores
mutant mores, Honors change manners: and that preserment is able, not only to
make them forget many good thoughts, and resolutions, which they have in a
lower estate: but to blot out of memory also: friendship, kindred, and the
knowledge of themselves (as we daily see it does) yea, the Devil is sure,
that if he can procure a man, but once to climb the ladder of promotion; it
will so entangle him with the love thereof, that it is twenty to one, but that
he will renounce God, before he will yield to step one degree back again.

Others, he tempts with ease; and makes them (poor souls) believe, that if
they might disburthen themselves of such businesses, or such and such cares,
that they should then better attend to the service of God, and with a more
quiet mind, follow their devotions. But the Deceiuer is subtle, and has by
experience seen, that afflictions make those seek God, often and earnestly,
that being delivered of their cares, cannot find one hour in a month, to
serve him.

Others, again, he allureth with the love of riches: and that he may may do
so, he causes them to imagine (perhaps) that if they were wealthy, as some men
are, whom they know: there should not so many poor people, go thinly clad;
nor such numbers die, for want of sustenance. So many Churches should not lie
ruined; nor so many works of Piety, or for the public profit, be
unperformed. Yea, he persuades them, that these temporal things, may not only
be sought after, and enjoyed, without the displeasure, or dishonor of God; but
serve him also for his service, and the better setting forth of his glory. And
indeed, so they may; where they are moderately sought after, and gained by
honest means But, Few seek the things of this world temperately, as they
ought.
where there is one that seeks them, with such temperance; there are ten, who
settle their minds so upon them, as they choke up all these good
determinations, that were at first springing in their hearts. For, a man that
is not contented with his estate, but desires things out of his own
concupiscence, without respect unto the will of God; that man has given the
Devil advantage, and is walking in the counsels of the ungodly, even after
the vain cogitations of an unregenerate heart. And not considering the
dangerous advise, that his appetite gives him; he first suffers his thoughts,
to be busied about those vanities; next, approoues of them; and then hastens,
to put them in execution: which advantage, the Enemy of man's safety having
gotten, he causes him to iterate, and augment his transgression, until his
heart grows hardened, and his conscience lose the sense and feeling of sin.

And so it comes to pass, that he, who made no account of the transitory
things of this life, and was touched with the guilt of such, as the world
accounts most venial sins; before he was allured unto the Counsels of the
ungodly: having walked a little in them; steps suddenly into the way of
sinners. Which is a great broad path, that leads down a steep hill, until
(without the great mercy of God) he ariue at the seat of the scornful, or the
chair of obstinate impenitency: and when he is once so low, and seated there;
the hill of repentance proves so steep, that he never returns again; but
there continues in a desperate estate.

Hereby then we are taught, Doct.
that if we will be preserved from the danger of sin, we must avoid the
custom of sin; yea, the first enticements, and least occasions thereof; and
not presume upon our own strength: for, he that is content to hear evil
counsel, tempts God; and is not sure, whether he will therefore draw his grace
from him, and suffer him to be deluded by it. Concupiscence; if it be not
resisted, will turn to action; action, to iteration; and, at last, comes
hardness of heart: for, he that feels in himself, the evil motions of lust,
and can hardly restrain them, having no objects to entice him; how much less,
will he be able to curb them, if he come, where he may have the beauty, and
wantonness of another, to inflame him? Or, if he could not bridle his
affections before he had committed uncleanness, when he had more grace, more
shame, more denials, and many more stops, to hold him back, from wickedness:
Alas!why should any man think it possible, for him to forsake it, at his own
pleasure, when he has put himself out of the way of virtue; and has neither
inward grace, nor outward means, to prevent it? If, when thou had two eyes,
thou could not keep the way, being in it: can thou hope, having never an
eye left thee; to find it, when thou art out of it? No doubtless, if we
cannot keep the sea from ouerflowing us, when the banks are whole; surely,
after they are once broken, the breach will increase, and the floods will come
in, until they have quite ouer-whelmed us: unless the merciful hand of a
greater power, then our own, help to recover us. A little water will
extinguish a cole; but a flame is not so easily quenched. And therefore, we
ought to kill these Cockatrices in the egg, and be wary, not to give the
least advantage, unto the infirmities of evil. We have examples enough to
warn us. David was a good, and an extraordinary man; yet, giving his eyes too
much liberty, the evil counsels of ungodly affections, got by those windows,
into his heart, and drew him on in their walk, until they brought him to the
way of sinners; where he stood a long time, heaping one offense upon another:
And had not God sent a Prophet of purpose, to call him out of that way; as holy
a man as he was, he had never of himself returned, until he had taken up his
seat with the scorners. And yet, for all this, we, even we weaklings, dare
give our selves any liberty. We can willingly run thither, The bold
presumption of man.
where we know before, that we shall here see; nay, be compelled, to be
partakers of sin: and notwithstanding, warrant our own safeties.

Some, I have heard say; that in all companies, they could bear themselves
temperately, and among Drunkards, escape free, though all their company failed
of that government: but alas, they see not their own deformities; for, I have
known, that some of them, were even then distempered, when they said so.

Others, I have heard, so confident in their own virtues; that they have
professed themselves able, to resist the strongest temptations of incontinency:
and that, though they were all alone, with the most tempting beauty, and where
they had the greatest prouocations to folly; they could nevertheless keep
themselves, from any dishonest act. This I have heard: and believe me; I think
such a thing possible, if they rely more on Gods grace, then their own
abilities; and came into this temptation, by accident, without wilful seeking,
or desiring any such occasion. Yea, many (no doubt) have escaped such trials.
But, if any man depend upon his own chastity, and purposely tempt himself
with opportunities, to do evil; he, walks the way which God approoues not:
and therefore it shall perish; yea, although he intended, at the first, no
more, but to have it in his power, to do evil; it is a thousand to one, if
God give him not over, to be vanquished by that sin, which he foolishly
presumed to overcome.

Genes. 39.
Whilst Joseph was about his business, the allurements of his Mistres had no
power over him: and so, whilst with him, we seek well to employ our selves;
though counsels of ungodliness, be rounded in our ears; and strange
unlooked for temptations, with fair opportunities, lay siege against us: yet
they shall not prevail; no, not these that seem Mistresses over our
affections, and powerful enough to command us. But, if we leave to be honestly
busied, and, as many of us young men do, being idle our selves, seek out
those, who are every way as idle; and with vain discourse, or unseemly
gestures, pass away our precious hours. Questionless, sometime or other, we
shall be betrayed to commit that, which we little thought perhaps, to have
been guilty of; and grow, after a while, so base, to seek that thing of the
Maid, which we presumed the Mistress could neither have commanded, nor wooed
us unto. Nay, I am persuaded; that Joseph, who has gotten the title of Chaste:
if he would have left his affairs, and ventured himself, as some of us do,
in effeminate court-ships; it is to be feated, that the Spirit of God would
have left him, as it forsook Sampson, or David. And then, a meaner woman then
his Mistress, might have wrought him to her will; and it is a question,
whether he would not have proved the Attempter, of hers, or some others
Chastity.

The second observation, Obser. 2.
that we may take from hence, is this; that if there be degrees in sin, and
several steps, that lead us from the way of blessedness; we must not think
it enough, if we can avoid some one degree of sin. Nay, it is not sufficient,
if we shun all but one: for, he that has gone but one step back from the
right way; if he do not come back that one step, he is never likely to ariue
at happiness, though he never go further on in a wrong path. But it is
impossible, to stay upon any one degree of sinning (without repentance) and not
to step into another: as appears in the former observation.

Obser. 3.
Thirdly, if we must be wary, to avoid the Counsels of the ungodly, and the
impiety of misbeliefe; as well as to shun the way of sinners: which (as I said
before) is the committing of actual sins. Two sorts of men, heee warned to
repent.
Then, two sorts of men are hereby warned, to amend themselves, if they ever
will intend to be blessed: The first, are those moral men, that think it
sufficient, so they can be counted just pay-masters, quiet neighbors, honest
plaine-dealers, and such as do no men hurt; though they never know what
belongs to God, or Religion. The other, are such Professors, as suppose; that
if they have heard Divine Service, twice every Saboth; six Lectures in a week;
and slubbered over their ordinary devotions: it is no matter, how dishonestly
they live; how uncharitable, and contentious they be among their neighbors;
nor how irregular they be in the course of their lives. But, both these ought
to know, that God promises not any Blessedness to such Triflers, as do his
service by halues; but unto them, that having both religion, and honesty;
faith, and works; neither walk in the Counsels of the ungodly: nor stand in
the way of sinners. For, all others are in danger, to take up their seat with
the scornful.

Verse 2.
Thus much, of the Blessed man's description, by the Negative, contained in the
first verse of this Psalm. On which I will enlarge my observations no further;
but come to the Affirmative, contained in these words. But his delight, is in
the Law of the LORD, and in his Law, does he meditate day and nigh.

Three things obseruable in the second verse.
In which Affirmative, there are three things to be observed, by the blessed
man; and they are opposed to those three, which are to be avoided in the former
verse: To the walking in the Counsels of the ungodly, is opposed, a delight in
the Law of the LORD: to standing in the way of sinners, is opposed; the
meditation of the Divine Word: and, to sitting in the seat of the scornful, a
continual perseverance, both day and night, in the true service of God. Yea,
these words have in them, an excellent Antithesis, or contradiction, to the
courses of the wicked; who, employeth al his counsels, endeauours, and actions,
in seeking vain ends, and advancing his own ways: while the just man,
setting at naught, all earthly affairs and delights, in respect of Gods will;
is heartily in love with his Word, and continually exercising himself, To
meditate, what it means.
in the serious meditating, teaching, and practice thereof. For, Psalm. 35.28.
Psalm. 36.30.
the word Ieghe, which is interpreted to, meditate, has reference, as well to
the words and works, as to the thoughts (in which sense, it is not used in the
Scriptures only; but the Poet also says, -- Meditabor arundine Musam.) And it
was well expressed in the word, Exercise, in our old English Translation.

By the Law, is understood, What is signified by the Law.
not only the moral Laws; for then, Blessedness might have been obtained,
by working, according to the moral virtues, as the heathen Philosophers
taught. Nor, is here meant the Ceremonial Law alone; nor that, and the moral
together only. For then, the wicked Jews, though they continued in their
unbelief, might become partakers of this happiness. But the Law, in this
place (as I told you in my Preparation to the Psalter, it was sometime to be
understood) signifies the Law of God, as it has at once, respect to all the
ages of the Church, from Adam, until the end of the world: and therefore
comprehends the Law of Grace also; yea, all the Doctrine of God, contained in
his Word. And this Law, is called the Law of the LORD; or if you will have it,
according to the Original: The Law of (...); of (...), the Hebrew
Tetragrammaton, and the word Jehovah.
or, IHVH (if we may express the Hebrew Tetragrammaton in our letters.)

And these Characters, some late Interpreters read Jehovah; supposing the form
of that word, to imply as much as; He that is, that was, and that is to come.
For, Reu. 11.17.
say they; le, is a sign of the time to come. Ieueth; He will be. Ho, of the
time present. Hoveth, he that is. Vah, of the time past. Havah, he was. Which
we will not deny to be a probable, and ingenious conceit: but indeed, the
word Jehovah, it self; is not confessed to be so much as heard of, to be an
Hebrew word, among the Jews: neither does it signify any thing in that
tongue. Nor can we have one Testimony, that the Hebrew Tetragrammaton; was ever
anciently so pronounced. And therefore, unless we had better authority, then
probabilities, and uncertain conjectures, of new Gramarians: I see no reason,
why we should venture, to put this unknown name upon God. Which if it be the
right: yet, not so sufficiently warranted, to be truly revealed unto us; that
we may use it, with the same confidence, wherewith we pronounce the other names
of God. As you may see more at large, in the thirteenth Chapter, and third
Section of my preparation to the Psalter.

But, to teach us then, that this law; in which it is here said, the blessed
man delights; is not the law of man, but of God; know that the
vnpronounceable Hebrew word here used (and insteede of which, the Jews spoke
Adonaj, or Elohim; the Septuagint, and Apostles, (...): the Ancient latin
expositors, Dominus; and the authorized english Translations, for the most,
LORD) is an essential and uncommunicable name, of our great, eternal, and
everliving God; who is most truly called, He that is, that was, and that is
to come: and therefore, wheresoever you find this Tetragrammaton, (...). You
may be assured, that there is to be understood, either one, or all the Persons
of the sacred Trinity. For, whereas the word, Adonai, and Elohim, are sometime
communicated to others; that is never so. And therefore, because the word LORD,
by which we (according to the Apostles) have expressed it; may be communicable
to men: You shall understand; that, wheresoever in the last English
translation, you find LORD, thus in Capital letters: there, is that glorious,
and most essential name of God, to be understood; which never ought to be
applied unto any other.

But (which I had almost outslipt) you must note that the Holy Ghost, uses
here the word Delight; to show us further: The meaning of the word Delight.
to show us further: that the devotions of a blessed man; are not constrained,
or servile: but rather, proceeding from a true and affectionate pleasure, in
the worship of God, with the study of his word. It must be unto him, as it was
to David: Psalm. 19.10.
More to be desired then fine Gold; and sweeter then honey, or the honie-combe.
Yea, the excellence of his affection; is further, and another way manifested;
in that he is said to meditate thereon, Day and Night, what it signifies.
Day and Night: For, the Day and Night, in holy Scripture, has a threefold
understanding: Temporal; Morrall; and Allegorical. Temporal, is the day
which we enjoy by the presence of the Sun: Genesis 1.16.
the night thereof, is that which is made by the absence of the same. Morrally,
it is taken for life and death; Prosperity and adversity, or such like: and
this is also Metaphorical. Allegorically, the old Law, is called the Night;
and the Gospel, termed the Day: and therefore Zachary in his song; wherein
he spoke of Christ, Luke 1.78.79.
and the light revealed unto Mankind in the new Testament, says; that The
dayspring from on high has visited us; to give light to them that sit in
darkness. But Saint Paul, writing unto the Romans, concerning the faith of
Christ Jesus; says in playner terms: Romans 13.12.
That the Night was past, and the Day was at hand. Even thus many ways, are
the Day and Night to be understood, in the book of God. But in this place;
they are to be considered, according to all and every of these. The blessed
man; meditateth on the Law of the LORD, day and night; that is: He pondereth
all the mysteries of Jesus Christ; as they were promised, figured, and
prophesied of, in the old Testament (which, as the Night, shadowed them over)
and then believes and confesses them, as they were fulfilled in the new
Testament; which was the Day that made them apparent to the whole world: Yea,
he is continually inclined unto the study of Piety, without intermission;
Morning and Evening, at Nooneday and at Midnight; both in Prosperity and
Adversity; Openly and Secretly. For, many can be content, perhaps, to spare
some little time in the Day, for the meditation of Gods word: but there are
very few, that will break a sleep; and arise at night, with David, to praise
God: many can be content, whilst they gain any outward benefit, or
preferrement by their profession; to be hot and earnest in the study thereof:
but few dare abide, the black and terrible night of persecution. Nay, a little
adversity, or worldly inconvenience, cooles all their zeal. Hypocrites by Day,
that is; openly in the eyes of the world; will be very forward, and seem to be
stout professors: but, in the Night, that is, secretly, and by themselves;
where none but God is witness: they can laugh at their own dissembling; and
with those people, of whom God speaks by the Prophet Malachi, they say thus:
It is in vain to serve God; Mat. 3.14. Ob. 1.
and what Profit is it that we keep his commandments? Again, there be
others, that by Night, with Nicodemus, dare, peradventure, come to God; yet by
Day, are afraid (or ashamed) to be seen in a Religious man's company. But
neither of these, have well understood what is meant by Meditating Gods word Day
and Night: nor are they yet in the way of Blessedness.

Out of this verse; I do observe these things. First, that there is no true
happiness, without the knowledge of God; and the continual meditation of his
word. And that those, who are sincerely adicted to his service, and the love of
his Truth, are in the right way to Blessedness; howsoever Atheists, and
worldly men, think them simple fools; and their study lost labor.

Blessedness; that frames a Religion, or way to serve God, out of his own
brain; though never so strict, or seeming holy: For, it must not be the Laws,
or traditions of men; that, he must meditate, but the Law of the LORD.

Divinity; and practice of Christianity. First, that there must be a love unto
the heavenly word: Secondly, a progress, or going forward; in the meditation
thereof: and lastly, such a constant perseverance therein, from time to time,
and at all times without limitation; in so much, that there must be some part
of every day and night, separated for the service of God; that we may say with
David: Evening, Psalm. 55.17.
Morning, by Day, and at Midnight, will I pray unto him.

And, Verse 3.
he shall be like a Tree planted, etc. Having delivered in the two former
verses, who is a Just and blessed man, both by the Negative, and Affirmative;
he now confirms his former proposition: First, by a similitude, taken from a
fruitful Tree, everlastingly green: Secondly, by the end, and prosperous
success, of all he takes in hand. By which illustration, we may not imagine,
that they are compared with any intent to be made equal (For, the blessed
estate of a good man, is far beyond all earthly comparisons) But by such
known things, the Holy Ghost applies his demonstrations to mean capacities.
And this kind of teaching, was usual with our Savior; as appears by his
illustration of Faith, Mar. 4.30.
and the kingdom of Heaven, in likning it unto a grain of Mustardseede; Mat.
16*19. Luke 13.19.
or comparing Doctrine to Leaven, and such like. Nor has it been neglected
among profane writers: For, a lively Simily, is esteemed among all the Poets
(as well ancient as modern) to be one of the principal ornaments of their
Poesy. The Elegancy of whose Poems, some have not been ashamed to prefer,
before these inimitable Odes: whereas, Vide Epist. Henr. Steph. before
Marlorets commentary upon the Psalms.
were they as learned in these; as they would seem to be in the other (at
lest, if they could read them with the same desire and affection) they should
here find; even, in the literal excellency; as many rare, and admirable
expressions. Observe well this first illustration; and see in what Author you
can better it.

For, although men may, for many respects, be resembled unto Trees; by reason
of some similitude in their condition (as thus: Every Tree is either for
building, or fire wood; and so, all men are either prepared to build up the new
Jerusalem withal; or, appointed fuel for hell fire) yet; there are certain
choice Trees, which do more properly serve to figure out the estate of the
Blessed: as here in this Psalm, and by this comparison; you shall understand.
For; hereby, Five things obseruable in this illustration of a godly man's
happiness.
five things are made remarkable in the upright man's happiness. First, he is
resembled unto a Tree that is planted. By which, the stability, and certainty
of his estate is signified: For, as such a Tree; is, where, by the carfulness
and diligence of some gardener, or husbandman; he may be manured, and preferued
from the choking of Thorns, and violence of beasts; He is Planted.
whilst the wild Trees of the Forest, are ever in danger of some ruin: So,
the just man, who in the Scripture is resembled unto a Palm tree; Psalm. 92.
has this sure and blessed hope for his comfort: That God, who first planted
him; will also protect him from being spoiled of his leaves by the storms of
adversity; or ouerturned by the malice of the adversary. When it shall come
to pass, that (as Christ said) Those plants which his heavenly Father has not
planted, Math. 15.13.
should be rooted up.

Moreover, a Tree planted; insteede of that wild nature which formerly it
retained; is bettered, and made more fruitful by a new plantation: and in
like manner; that man, who had else been naturally apt to bring forth nothing,
but the sour fruits of the flesh; being planted in the vine-yeard of Gods
Church, by the hand of Grace: regenerates, and yields forth plentifully, the
sweet fruits of the spirit.

Secondly, Secondly, he is placed by the Rivers of water.
it is planted by the Springs, or Rivers of water; by which, the blessedness
of the Just man, is further illustrated: For, as that tree, can neither be
barren thorough the sterrile drought of the soil; nor endangered by the
scorching heat of Summer: whose root is ever moistened, with the nourishing
waters of a pleasant stream; So, the regenerate man, having his root in
Christ (where the ever springing fountains of his Grace; with sweet dewes of
mercy, continually cherish it) even he, shall always flourish. For, neither can
he be consumed as the wicked are, by the burning fire of Gods indignation; nor
made unprofitable for want of nourishment. To the same effect speaks the
Prophet Jeremy, Ierem. 17.18.
in his illustration of such a man's happiness; by a similitude taken from the
like Tree. He shall be (says he) as a Tree that is planted by the waters; and
that spreads forth her roots by the River, and shall not see when heat
comes: but her leaf shall be green, and shall not be careful in the year
of drouth, neither shall cease from yielding fruit. By the Rivers of water,
The Rivers of waters, what they mean.
in this Psalm, is Allegorically meant; the word of God, and his Sacraments:
which, are the means whereby he infuseth into us, the graces of his Spirit;
keeps us growing in Faith; and nourishes fruits, to eternal life.

Thirdly, it gives fruit in due season: Whereby is manifested another
property of the blessed Iustman: Thirdly, he is fruitful, and that in season.
By the fruit (says our Savior) the Tree is known; and so is the just man
by his works: Who, in bringing forth his spiritual fruits, may (not unfitly)
be resembled to a Tree. For, as the Tree brings forth fruits for others, rather
then for it self: So, the upright man fructifies, and sends forth good works,
and deeds of Charity; not, thereby to merit ought for himself; but to
glorify God, and to benefit others. Which is a noble Blessedness. For, as the
Apostle says; it is a more blessed thing to give, then to receive. Acts. 10.
Further; we have the Pronoune His: The pronoun His.
to show us, that as the Tree gives forth no fruit but his own, and
according to his kind: So, the righteous, does the works proper to a
regenerate man; all the good deeds which he performs, are done with that
which is his own: and so cherefully; that they may be called His. Yea, he
yields forth good fruits, according to the measure, and quality of those
gifts which he has received. Lastly, the Tree gives forth her fruit in
season, When, fruit is given in season, or in time
or in time: that is; in her time of fruitfulness; and so; the upright man,
does good in due time; even upon the first occasion offered. He is never
barren, when necessity requires fruit. If in one day, a thousand men need his
comforting hand; he is ever willing, according to his ability, to give redress
unto them all. Neither too soon, nor too late comes his charity: but, like
sweet and well ripened fruit, is ever, then ready to be received; when it may
be most acceptable to God, timely, in respect of himself; and very profitable
to others. But indeed, by the fruit here is principally meant Faith, Fruit,
what it signifies.
and the confession of salvation by Christ: which can never be, without works.
And that is it, which our Savior meant, when he, Job 15.8.
said: Herein is my Father glorified, that you bear much fruit.

Fourthly, His leaf shall not fade: Yet; Fourthly He is ever flourishing.
the similitude holds very properly, in that the blessed man is resembled unto
a tree, not only fruitful, but flourishing also; and ever adorned with the
comely ornament of green leaves. For, as the Palmetree, whereto the Just man
is likened, in the 92 Psalm (and from which tree, it is very likely, this
similitude was taken) is never, Plin. lib. 16. cap. 20.
as Pliny says, without fruit; and therefore must, consequently, be always
green: so, the Just man is continually beautified, with all the
accomplishments of a Christian; full of holy thoughts, plentiful in profitable
words, and seriously exercised in good actions, without weariness in
well-doing: and to accompany that fruitfulness, enjoys such a perpetual
happiness, as grows at no time subject to any momentary change. What storm
soever happens, he is still in a flourishing and prosperous estate: yea, when
the ungodly (like those trees which are altered, according to the disposition
of every season) must lose, in the winter of their trial, all that uncertain
glory, gotten in the springtime of their prosperity: even then; the happiness
of the righteous is so permanent, as the coldest frost of adversity, can never
strip him of his fair leaves: that is: no persecution shall be able to take
from him, the fair livery of his profession, nor put him, beside the Crown of
an immortal glory.

5. Whateuer he does, prospers.
Fifthly, whatsoever he does, shall prosper: In these words, he does (as it
were) sum up, and make perfect his expression of happiness. And the Prophet
does it without the Metaphor; for, I have observed, that to express one and
the same-sentence; partly by the figure, and partly without: is ordinary in the
Psalms. Yet, the great Scholar, and Cardinal, Bellarmine; in his Comment
upon this Psalm, would have these words (whatsoever he does, shall prosper)
to be referred unto the Tree. Then, having interpreted the Hebrew Verb,
Iasliach; prosperare faciet, will make to prosper: he gathers from thence, an
active virtue to be in the tree; helping on the ripening of his own fruits.
And, by the application of the similitude, would also note unto us; that, there
were an active virtue of free will in man, concurring with the Divine grace, to
meritorious works. But, by his leave, it seems to me, not so to be
understood; for, that interpretation, is both harsh in the sense, and
contradictory to the opinion of most Expositors. Yea, one of his own faction,
Lorinus, a learned Jesuit, writing on this Psalm, says; that it ought rather
to be understood of the Just man, then of the Tree. Lyra, a very ancient
Expositor, has so taken it also: and so have the greatest number of most
authentical Writers. For which cause; I rather allow it: but especially, by
reason I believe it, to be indeed the best, and natural sense of this Text;
agreeable to the happy estate of a good man; and the same blessing, which the
Scriptures testify, to have been vouchsafed to such as fear God. For, Cenes.
39.
it is said of Joseph: The LORD made all that he did, to prosper in his hands.

A Caveat.
But from hence, we must neither gather, that all those are good men, who
prosper, and thrive, in the things of this life; neither imagine, it is here
promised, that the Righteous shall be without troubles, or hindrances, in
their temporal affairs. The meaning rather is: that al things, (even those)
wherein they seem to the world most miserable, should redound to their
comfort; and prosper them in the way to eternal life. According to the saying
of S. Paul; Romans 8.28.
All things work together for good, to them that love God. David also
confirms the same, out of his own experience: for, says he; It was good for
me, that I was in trouble. And indeed, it is the end which crowns all, and
that which makes the undertaking prosperous, or unfortunate: not the
occurrences, that happen well, or ill, in the proceeding. For, though a
Commander in the wars find, that all his determinations proceeded ill, in
the ordering of his Battles; and that all his Stratagems, turned a while, to
his hinderance: yea, though with the loss, of many thousands of his men, and
the effusion of much of his own blood, he has endured a terrible, and sharp
encounter. Yet, if at last, the victory be on his side, he has his aim; and
thinks, that his undertaking prospered in his hands. So, though a Christian man
has, in this life, suffered innumerable miseries; though matters have
succeeded so ill with him, that sorrow upon sorrow, and mischief upon
mischief, overwhelmed him, and every thing that he endeavored, tell out
contrary to his expectation; yet, if at last (as questionless he shall) he
reap the Crown of immortal glory: we may very well say, that whatsoever he
did, has prospered. Yea, his miseries and infirmities, were for his good,
suffered to come upon him; even they also, prospred in his hands; and were the
means to make him, a right blessed man.

Bessednesse, twofold. Luke 14.15.
For, you must understand, that there is a twofold Blessedness; Beatitudo in
via, and in Regno; A blessedness in the way, and in the Kingdom. That in the
way, is also twofold; one, on the right hand; and the other, on the left: The
left hand happiness; is the abundance of temporal prosperities. For, the
Psalmist having reckoned up many temporal benefits; concludes with these
words. Blessed are the people, Psalm. 144.15.
that be so. Happiness on the right hand, is the gift of spiritual graces,
bestowed in this life. For, says our Savior, Blessed are the poor in spirit,
Matthew. 5.
the humble; those that hunger and thirst after righteousness, etc. But the
last of these blessings; appertains only to the children of God: the other,
are indifferently bestowed, both on good and bad.

The Blessedness in the Kingdom; is that, which is principally meant in this
Psalm: and indeed, the most perfect complete happiness. The possession of
that, we have now in hope only. None, but the sons of God, can enjoy it, in
the other world (as is aforesaid) nor, can any man, but those that have their
hearts enlarged, by the Holy Ghost; enter into a worthy thought thereof, 1 Cor.
2.9.
here. For, as S. Paul says; It is that, which eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, neither comes it into the heart of man, to conceive what God has
prepared for them, that love him. It is so many degrees, beyond the felicity of
this life, that the most blessed man is miserable here, in comparison of the
happiness, which he shall be crowned with all, after his death. And
therefore, if you have respect to that, which may most properly be called
Blessedness, it must be looked for in another world; for, as the Poet says:
-- Dicique beatus
Ante obitum nemo, supremaque funera debet.
We none may blessed call,
Before their funeral.


What makes perfect Blessedness.
But, because carnal men, are too too much persuaded, that true felicity may
be enjoyed in this life; I would have them learn, what is required, to the
making up of a perfect Blessedness. For, they must know, there are three
things, which are of the essence of true felicity. The first is, Ioh. 17.3.
the knowledge of the Chief Good; this is eternal life, to know the only true
God, and him whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ, says S. John. Secondly, there
must be a fruition, and full enjoying of that Chief Good, being so known. And
lastly, a perfect delight, and contentation in that which is enjoyed. Without
every of which circumstances, there is no perfect happiness. For, he that
enioyes, and is contented; without the full knowledge, of the certainty, and
worth of that, which he enioyes: has but a dull uncertain contentation; and
is deprived of a great part of his felicity.

In like manner, he that knows what it is to be happy, and has it not in
possession, is so far from happiness; that he is the more miserable, by the
apprehension which he has, of the great good he wants. But if he did know,
and enjoy to; yet, if he had not the blessing of a contented mind, it were as
much, as if he enjoyed nothing.

Cap. 3.
S. Augustine has a speech, much to this purpose, in his first Book, De
Moribus Ecclesiae Catholicae: For, says he, Beatus neque ille (quantum
existimo) dici potest, qui non habet quod amat qualecunque sit; neque qui habet
quod amat, si noxium sit; neque qui non amat quod habet, etiam si optimum sit.
That is: Neither, as I think, can he be said, to be blessed, who enjoys
not what he loves, whatsoever it be; nor he, that attaineth to what he
affects, if it be hurtful; nor he, that is not pleased with that, which he
possesses, although it be the best thing. And he gives this reason: Nam,
and qui appetit quod adipisci non potest cruciatur; and qui adeptus est, quod
appetendum non est, fallitur; and qui non appetit quod adipiscendum esset;
aegrotat. Id est: For, he which desires what cannot be attained, is vexed;
he that has attained unto that, which proves not worthy desiring, is
deceived; and he which affects not, what is indeed worthy the enjoying, is
sick; or faulty in himself. And so, not one of these, can be blessed:
because, neither of their souls is without vexation and misery. For, if it
might be so; these two contraries, Blessedness, and Unhappiness; should
dwell together at the same time, in one man: which were impossible.

This Blessedness, True blessedness consists not in temporal things.
cannot then, consist in temporal and transitory things. For, though we may
have the knowledge of their utmost good, and get also the possession of them;
yet, it is impossible, they should give us a content, beyond which, nothing is
to be desired. For, the soul of man, is of a spiritual nature; and of so
large an apprehension, that the whole world is not able to fill it. Though you
should feed the boundless desire of man, with Kingdom upon Kingdom; he
would never find end of desiring, until he had the possession of the whole
world, with all the creatures therein: and though he could compass that: yet,
because the mortality of his body, would ever put him in fear, to be deprived
thereof; he would nevertheless be full of disquiet. Nay, were it possible, that
fear, might be taken away also: it would then discontent him, that there were
not more worlds, and new things, to covet and possess. And so, he would be
unhappy, in the midst of all that happiness.

Eccles. 1.17.
This, made Solomon say (when he had searched into the nature of all creatures,
and sought to please his soul, in whatsoever it longed for) that all things
under the Sun (even knowledge, and those which are accounted the best) were
vanity, and vexation of spirit. And this* if worldly men did better consider,
doubtless, they would not so much adict themselves to the things of this life:
but seek to have their souls, rather filled with the knowledge of God; who is
only able to satisfy them, and without whom, they are ever empty, and seeking
up and down for that, which should fill them. For, the end to which God
created the soul of man, was (as S. Augustine says) That she might know him;
in knowing, love him; and in loving, enjoy him: wherein consists perfect
blessedness, never to be lost again; and that, which is principally meant in
this Psalm.

The Doctrines, that we may gather from this third verse, are these.

Doct. 1.
First, that if the Blessed are planted, and not as naturally growing trees:
then, the efficient cause of our salvation, is God. For, it is of his gracious
favor, that we are planted in the Vineyard of his Church; otherwise, we had
been as wild Oliue-trees, growing on the barren mountains.

Doct. 2.
Secondly, in that it is said. The Blessed is as the Tree, planted by the rivers
of waters: We are taught, what the isntrumental causes of our salvation are;
even the Word of God, and his blessed Sacraments. What the Rivers of waters
signify.
For, by the Springs, or Rivers of waters, are those allegorically understood
(as I said before) and in that, they are said to be planted; thereby, we also
gather further, that such as are out of the Church, till they be there seated,
by the fountains of (life and inoculated into the mystical body of Christ)
are not yet in the state of Blessedness.

Thirdly, Doct. 3.
we may hereby know, whether we belong to God, or no. For, if we be trees
of his Vineyard, we cannot but be sensible, of the sweet graces and
operations of his Spirit: and shall not be found barren, of those spiritual
fruits, which God will look for, in their due time. And be assured, that if we
be unprofitable; though we carry never so many fair leaves of hypocrisy, to
cover our sterility: we shall one day be stripped of them, and cast into the fire.

Fourthly and lastly, Doct. 4.
we are here taught, not to judge of men, by their prosperity, or adversity;
but, howsoever their outward affairs succeed, to esteem them blessed, and
happy men, that love and honor God. And so, I conclude this first part of the
Psalm, which does in brief deliver thus much: That he, which would be a
blessed man, ought to avoid all manner of sin, love Gods Word: meditate it,
practice it, go forward in that practice, bring forth fruits of
righteousness; and continue unto the end of his life, in that course.

The second part of the PSALM.
4. THe ungodly are not so: but are like the Chasse, which the wind drives
away.

5. Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the
Congregation of the righteous.

6. For, the LORD knows the way of the righteous: but the way of the ungodly
shall perish.

THe Prophet; or, rather the Holy Ghost, by the mouth of the Prophet, having in
the former part of this Psalm; Ver. 4.
in an excellent manner, set down unto us the blessed estate of a good
Christian; and in diverse particulars discovered, and illustrated his matchlesfe
Blessedness; that we might be thereby drawn to love and seek it. Does now,
in this other part, briefly (yet as fully) acquaint us with the miserable
condition of the unbelieving sinner. even in these few words: The ungodly are
not so. For, they carry in them a direct Antithesis unto the whole first part
of the Psalm; and imply every whit as much, as if the Prophet had said: The
wicked are such; as neither discontinue their walk, in the Counsels of the
ungodly: nor shun the way of evil doers; nor avoid the seat of the
scornful. And therefore, are in no possibility, to be so happy as are the
righteous. And this the Septuagint, very powerfully expresses, by doubling the
Negative, (...), The dissimilitude that is between the wicked, and the
righteous.
the wicked are nor so, nor so. To wit: nor so holy in their life; nor so
blessed in their end. They are not so studious of Gods word, as the righteous;
and therefore he takes no such knowledge of their ways: they do not so
affect the way of his service; and therefore he suffers their way to perish:
they are not so planted; and therefore not so safe, but in danger to be rooted
up, by the judgments of God: they are not so situated, where they may be
nourished, by the moisture of the Rivers of Gods grace, conveyed by his word
and Sacraments, into their hearts; and therefore, not so flourishing; but in
danger to be withered by the burning heat of his Indignation: they are not so
fruitful; and therefore, likely to undergo a curse, with the barren Fig Tree.
They are in nothing answerable to the condition of the well planted Tree, here
spoken of: but ungodly men, and Hypocrites, for the most part, yield no fruit
at all. If they bring forth any; it is not good. And then it is no better then
if they were unfruitful: For every Tree that brings not forth good fruit,
Math. 3.10.
shall be hewn down, and cast into the fire. Or though it might, perhaps, for
some respects, be called good fruit, which they give; then it is none of their
own: For, they do, like most of the great rich men in these days; who, other
while indeed, relieve a few poor souls. But it is with the fruit of other
men's labors. Yea, they leave many goodly shows of Charity behind them; with
that which had been, with extreme covetousness and oppression, torn, as it
were, out of the throats of their poor Neighbors. Or if we should grant that
it was their own fruit they gave; yet, it would be found to come out of
season, and when there is no great need of it: whereas a cup of cold water;
given unto a poor man in extremity: comes in better season, then a great deal
of vain liberality at other times. But, if we should yield them this; that
their fruit came in season; The Worldlings season in which he brings fruit.
it is in their own season then: And when is that? Forsooth, now and then;
perhaps at such times, when as the customs of their Country require public
hospitality. And then; it is but forced, sower, and unsavory fruit. For, most
commonly, for one honest man that shall satisfy his necessity among them; two
Russians shall be made drunk. Or else their season is, when they may take
occasion to make most show to the world, of the seeming good they do: like the
Pharisees, that blew Trumpets, when they gave alms. But indeed, the
principal time and season of their vintage is; Math. 6.2.
when the Axe is set unto the root of the Tree. Then; when the leaves of their
youth, and prosperity are fallen off; the branches quite withered; the body
rotten, ready to stink with putrefaction; and they in case no more to hoard
up, or keep it unto themselves; then (if the Devil do not come before they
be aware, and carry them away by the Roots; as sometime he serves old Trees
in the Forest) it may so fall out, that they leave a few unseasonable fruits
behind them: which often, in fine painted Almeshouses; make show of more
relief, then is half performed.

Nor are the ungodly, in respect of their unfruitfulness, or vntimelinesse in
bearing fruit (only) so contrary to the righteous: but even their leaves,
those their fair leaves; that make them seem so flourishing, are but the
Summer ornaments of prosperity; and must wither and fall off, in the winter of
their trial. Yea, nothing they take in hand shall prosper them in the way to
true happiness; therefore all their undertakings are in vain. And as the
holyGhost here says: It is nothing so with them, as with the Godly.

Thus; exceeding elegantly, has the Prophet described the misery of the
wicked, by opposing it unto the felicity of the Just. Which he yet makes more
apparent: and, howsoever the world esteems her own as fortunate men; he
shows the contrary. Seeming also, not contented to set it forth by a
similitude, directly contrary to the former; he leaves the first Metaphor, and
resembles them, to the vilest and lightest Chafe: as if else, he should not
have made them contemptible enough, in his expression.

Why the wicked are resembled to Chafe.
And here I could show, how properly the wicked may, for diverse reasons, be
likened unto Chafe. As in regard of that lightness, which makes them
inconstantly carried away, with every vanity: or in respect of their sterility,
with such like. Which (because every reasonable capacity can apprehend them) I
will omit: and only desire you to take from hence this observation. To wit,
that the enemies, and oppressors of Gods Children; with all other ungodly men
(though they be admired of the world, and seem mighty and immovable in their
own haughty opinions) are, (nevertheless indeed) poor base things; mere
Chafe. Nay, the worst and lightest of it: even that which is scattered every
way with the wind. Or worse, if worse may be: For, they are not only
unsettled, and restlesly driven too and fro, in their own vain practices; or
tumbled up and down by the distempered fury of their miserable affections:
but their riches, honors, powers, and their very place of being (as David
says) shall decay, and be no more found. For, the terrible wind of Gods
wrath, shall puff all, into everlasting perdition. Yea, Gods judgment will
rush upon them on a sudden, and inuisibly, as a wind: which shall come they
know not from whence; and carry them they know not whether. Nor shall their
strength, eminence, or greatness, defend them. But, as the wind makes most
hauock among tall Cedars, on high Mountains: So, shall their pride and
loftiness, make them more subject to the tempest of Gods indignation. As
appeared in Pharaoh, Nebuchadonezor, Herod; and such other. But some may say;
many ungodly men live free from all those miseries and crosses here spoken off.
Truly, it seems so for a time; but the greater will be their sorrow at the
last. Nay, I am persuaded, that even in this life, and at the best; they have
so much bitterness, to make unsavory all their delights: The unhappiness of
worldly men in this life.
as, if we could look into the hearts and consciences, of those that seem
happiest men to the worldward. I believe we should discover so much horror, and
disquietnesse; as would make us set light by our discontentments. For, many of
them, amid their abundance of wealth and honors; are more distempered with
toys; then a constant Christian is, with his greatest afflictions. And if
trifles will not move them; they have matters of greater consequence to
disturb their rest. One grieves, to see the family, which he thought to make
honorable, by his own policy; quite rooted out by the improuidence of his
Children: Yea, the miserable Catiue, lives to behold his sons prodigality,
consume his usury; and yet has not the power to afford himself the benefit of
his own labors, neither to do one good deed, that may purchase a prayer for
him; until it is too late. Another, has labored for the applause of the
people; and with vexation of spirit, comes to hear his name made the just
subject of Libels; and himself reputed odious in the commonwealth. One, is
sick, for some disgrace received from his Prince. A second, grieved with the
unkindness of those whom he thought his best friends. A third, mad at the pride
of his equal. A fourth, ready to hang himself for the insolence of his
inferior. A fifth, pines with envying at his superior. A sixth, sleeps not for
desire of preferment. A seventh, trembles through fear of losing his office.
The eighth, has a wife that is more shame, and discontent unto him, then all
these. And, which is worse then that too; he knows not what shall become of
him at last. For, sometime he thinks that men die like beasts, without hope of
another life. And then, it grieves him, that he must for ever, leave the world,
which he so much loved. Another while, he remembers he has heard of a God; and
a Day of Judgment. Which, puts him into such a desperate fear; that he is
never alone, but his heart quakes; and his guilty Conscience so stings and
threatens him, with hell and damnation; that he sometime wishes he were
indeed, realy dust, or Chafe; and that, the wind might scatter him into
nothing.

Oh God! that I were able so to scrue this, into the hearts of worldlings; as
to make their muddy apprehensions, more sensible of their unhappiness: and
allure them, to seek for that true and perfect felicity, which is here
promised. But alas! it is beyond my power. For the whole world (almost) has
run through all the degrees of wickedness; and the greatest part, are become
Benchers, in that damnable society of Scorners: with whom, it is impossible to
prevail. Nay, my God; would thou might be pleased (though it were but so
far, to enable me with thy spirit) that the apprehension of these things,
might ever continue in my self, so fervent, as at sometimes they be. For, by
that means, I should not only; never more again, be carried away by those
vanities and infirmities, whereunto youth and the frailty of my condition is
prone; but become also, so highly delighted with the contemplation, and hope of
that incomparable blessedness which is prepared for the lovers of thy Law:
that the worlds minions should see, I did not merely in word; but truly in
deed; neglect, and despise all those things, which they account either
felicities, or disasters in this life. Yea, they should perceive me, so far
from thinking my self a miserable man; For being in poverty, slandered,
neglected, contemned, tortured, with such like: or, from imagining my self a
happy man, in the fruition of that vain favor, honor, wealth, ease, fame,and
respect, which they glory in* as, they should with envy be forced to confess
within themselves; that, by a means which the world knew not, I had arrived at
such felicity; as in respect thereof, their happiness, was but as dirt, and
dung to Gold and Silver. And perhaps also when they were in their greatest
earthly pomp: It should more vex them, to behold me (whom they account
miserable) disdayning those things as triuiall, wherein they place their
highest blessedness; then it can delight, or content them, to possess those
pleasures or preferments which they enjoy. This, oh Lord were possible; if thou
would always preserve in thy servant, the consideration, which at sometime
thou vouch safest to bestow upon me. But I am the meanest of thy children; and
I confess that these good affections, and apprehensions, which I sometime have
of the blessedness here promised: do often; yea,too often fail in me. And
then, I do not only shrink as much as any other, under the burden of
temporal afflictions: but my heart is also entangled, with those desires, and
preposterous contentments, that vainest world-lings seek after. Which
weakness; I both heartily pray thee (Oh God) to heal in me; and surely
believe also, that thou will do it, when it shall be most for thy glory, and
my furtherance, in the way of truest Blessedness. The thought whereof; has
now so highly transported me; that, I had almost forgotten what I had more to
say, touching the infelicity of the wicked. But now I descend again, to speak
of them.

Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the Judgment, Verse 5.
etc. You have formerly been given to understand, of the great difference,
that is between the Righteous and the ungodly; both in their condition, and
their reward. Now, he shows that a difference will be betwixt them; not in
this life only: but also in the last day. For, that is the principal Judgment
here meant: and spoken of, per Antonomasiam, as the Arabic Interpreter, by
these words, in sine, does plainly denote.

They shall not be able to stand in the judgment, To stand, what it signifies.
nor in the congregation of the righteous.

That is; they shall not be approved but have judgment pronounced against
them, to their overthrow, at the general Doom. For, so are these words, shall
not stand, to be understood. And the phrase is not only proper to the
Hebrews; but usual among the Latins, and us also. Cicero has, Causa cadere;
which, is after the same manner of speaking: And Terence, where he says, Se,
vix stetisse; means, that some of his Fables were scarce approved of, by the
common people. And when, with us, a man comes to his trial, before a Judge: we
often say, He cannot stand out. Or, that, He will have a fall; when we mean,
his cause shall not receive approbation.

Now, the reason, why the ungodly shall not stand in Judgment, etc. is partly
showed in the former verse. And that is, because they are but as the Chafe;
even the refuse of mankind, vain, light, unnecessary persons, without fruit,
wholly void of that worth and weight, which should make them of esteem in the
sight of God. Yea, such as cannot be able to endure his judgments; because,
they will be unto them, as the wind, scattering Chafe. Alas! who would
imagine this (seeing the bravery of this worlds Favorites) but that the Spirit
of God has said it? Now, they are so mighty, that they think it impossible,
to be moved. They have Counsels, in which the Righteous are not to walk:
Ways, wherein they must not stand: Judgments, in which the innocent dare not
appear: And they have Assemblies, and solemn meetings, from which they
exclude all good men. But, when the Judgment here spoken of, comes (for there
will come such a day) the poor dispersed, and despised members of Christ,
shall be gathered into one Congregation, whereinto no unclean thing shall
enter. Nor, shall the ungodly mingle among them, in their Assembly; but be
separated from them, and thrust unto the left hand of the Judge. And although,
here they may appear powerful; make great boast of their authority; and,
perhaps, in our Courts of Judgment on earth, be able to stand out, until they
have ruined the innocent (for, in any cause, favors are to be had, among the
corrupted Judges of this world.) Yet, in the general Doom, when every man
shall appear naked, without bribes; and before a Judge, that can never be
corrupted. Alas! what will those things? those vain things, profit them,
wherein they now glory? Then, those noble Tyrants shall be glad, to sneake into
corners, and cranies of the earth, to hide themselves from the presence of God.
They shall not have power, to stand among those poor men, over whom they have
heretofore tyrannized; nor be able to abide the least trial of Gods Justice:
but, affrighted with the terrible aspect of their angry Judge, and tortured
with the horrors of an accusing conscience; shall be utterly amazed, dejected,
confounded, and with a distracted fear, be glad (and in vain be glad) to
entreat the hills, that they would fall down, and cover them. That you may be
confident, of the terror of this Judgment; and that, there will be a
separation of the wicked, from the Congregation of the righteous (as it is here
said) See, what our Savior speaks, Matthew. 25.
in the 25 chapter of Saint Matthewes Gospel, to this purpose.

What Judgment the Holy Ghost means in this Psalm.
But, this place may have respect to other Judgments. For, beside that great
and general Doom; there is a twofold Judgment, in this life; wherein the
wicked shall not be able to stand. One is, the Judgment of themselves; when
their own conscience shall accuse: and condemning them as guilty, cast them
down headlong into despair. The other is, when the plagues and judgments of
God are suffered, to lay hold of them in this world, for the example of others.
Now, in neither of these; shall they be able to stand out before God.

Note here, that those Hebrew words, which are interpreted in our Translation,
They shall not stand, are in the Septuagint, and vulgar Latin Translations,
turned thus, (...), Non resurgunt, that is, They rise not again. And thence,
some have weakly and ignorantly gathered, that the wicked shall not rise in the
flesh, to come and receive Judgment in the last Day. Yea, with this opinion,
was that learned Father, Origin, a while deluded. But, it is a great heresy:
for, they shall surely be raised, and summoned to that Doom (as appears in
many places of holy Scripture) but there indeed, they shall not be able to stand
out in their own Justification, as belonging to the Assembly of the righteous.
Because, when they shall think, to excuse themselves; the King shall turn
them forth, with this terrible sentence. Go, ye cursed, into everlasting
fire, Matthew. 25.41.
which is prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

Obser.
Hence then I observe; that there shall be a general Doom, wherein both good
and bad shall be summoned, before the Tribunal Seat of God. And that, although
Hypocrites, like tares amongst wheat (or rarher, like good wheat) may be
suffered, in this life, to shroud themselves in the Church of God, and come
into the Congregation of the Righteous, under the name of Christians: yet, in
the harvest (that is) in this Judgment; he will separate them. And the
ungodly shall not be able to stand, in that Assembly of the Just; Matthew. 13.14.
but, The Lord will gather the Righteous, which are the wheat; into his
Granard: and cast the sinners, which are the chafe; into unquenchable fire.

But, A Caucat.
that no weak conscience may be driven into despair. I desire the Reader, not
to imagine, that every man, who has the pollutions of sin, is in danger of
this separation; for, every man is so guilty of sin, that if God should mark
all that were amiss, and enter into Judgments with his servants: None were
able to stand in the Judgment. No, not the most Righteous; neither should any
flesh be saved in his sight. Two sorts of sins.
We must then consider, that there be two sorts of Sinners. The one regenerate,
who offends unwillingly; and falling into transgressions, through infirmity, by
repentance, true contrition, and amendment of life, rises again; and seeks
forgiveness, in his Redeemer, Jesus Christ. The other, unregenerate; who, out
of wicked impiety, and malicious wilfulness, follows without repentance, the
study and practice of sin; obstinately refusing, or neglecting the grace of
Christ. And they are such, whose estate is so miserable, to be excluded, from
the Assembly of the Righteous. The other, laying hold on Christ, are by faith
made righteous in him, and shall be reckoned among the faithful and happy
Congregation.

Ver. 6.
For, the LORD knows the way of the righteous, etc. The reason is here given,
why the Just man is so much more happy, then the Sinner; and how it comes to
pass, that, he walks not in the Counsels of the ungodly, nor stands in
the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornful. And why, in the
last Judgment, there shall be a separation made, and a difference put
between the good and the bad. And it is this, God knows the way of the
righteous, and the way of the ungodly shall perish. Which implies, that there
is a contrariety in their way* and that therefore, they cannot meet in one
Congregation.

But why is it said, God knows the way of the Righteous? Does he not also
know the way of the wicked, you will say? I answer, yes. For, Gods divine
knowledge extends itself to all. Yet, in this place, the word, knows,
includes, especially, a regard, or approbation; and is, as if he should have
said, God acknowledges, takes care for, regards, or allows the way of the
Righteous: and, because their endeauours and aims are, to shun the Counsels
of the ungodly, and by obedient directing themselves, after the rule of the
Sacred Word, to seek his glory, with those ways, that perish not. Therefore,
this God, of his free grace, keeps them in the right path; and by that direct
course, conducteth them to the same blessedness, whereunto he foreknew it
would lead them. And, that this word, knows, may be understood, as is
aforesaid, to imply a regard, Job 9.21. Prou. 12.10.
or approbation, appears in these ensuing places. Psalm. 101.4. Romans 7.15. 1
John 3.2. And so much may be also proved by that place of Matthew, where
Christ uses the contrary speech, to show the disrespect that he would have to
the wicked. Matthew. 7.23.
I never knew you (will he say) depart from me, ye workers of iniquity. This
word, knows, may have respect also to the foreknowledge of their election.
For (as some understand it) to that purpose, S. Paul uses it in his second
Epistle to Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.19.
chap. 2. and the 19. verse. And writing to the Romans, he says. Those, Romans
8.29.
whom he did foreknow, he did also predestinate, to be conformed to the Image
of his Son.

But the way of the ungodly shall perish. And that is; because, God regards
not, neither is delighted with their courses. They propose unto themselves a
happiness; but come short of it: because, their counsels, endeauours, and all;
are ouerthrown, before they can attain to the possession thereof. And needs
must it be so. Seeing it is, neither the right means, which they use; nor, a
true happiness, which they seek. For, where to tends their aim? Sure, not to
Gods glory; nor, to seek their spiritual well fare; nor any greater
blessedness, then the compassing, or enjoying of some brutish, or transitory
pleasures. Which, before it be long, either altogether fail them; or, instead
of a desired happiness, are a means to bring upon them the curse of some
unexpected misery, which is ever the period of such paths. So, they at length,
perceive with much discomfort, that their labors are lost, their time
misspent, and that (as the Prophet here says) Their way must perish, and come
to naught. In brief then, I understand these words, The way of the ungodly
shall perish: As if the Prophet had said. The ungodly come short of
blessedness, and shall be excluded from the Congregation of the Just; because,
the Lord is regardlesse of them; and so, those vain ways and courses, which
they follow, shall fail to bring them thither.

Obser. 1.
Hence then, we are taught, how to esteem the world, with all those titles,
honors, and favors, wherewithal she allureth us, to settle our hearts, upon
the painted and uncertain felicities of this life: and to be heedfull, that
they draw us not into the way of destruction. And, as the first part of the
Psalm, ought to win us, in respect of the felicity, promised to the way of
the Righteous: so, the ruin, that is here threatened, may terrify us from the
way of sinners.

Further, we may hence learn, Obser. 2.
not to be dejected, in our miseries, though we are mercilesly oppressed, by
our Adversaries; nor, be discomfited: because, the world neither pities, nor
takes notice, of those many slanders, and secret injuries, which we unjustly
suffer. For, if God (as it is here said, he does) knows, and regards, the
way of his servants, we may be certain, that he sees every affliction in
this journey, and will not leave our oppressions unrevenged.

We may also hence be taught; Obser. 2.
not to take offense at the short prosperity of the wicked; nor, to be allured
with the pleasantness of their ways. For, though they be delightful to the
sense, and goodly broad paths; yet they lead to destruction, and, as it is
here told us, they shall perish.

Thus, according to my ability, I have gone through with an Exposition upon
this Psalm. Wherein, though I have followed no one; yet, I have run the
ordinary way, with other Expositors. But, because I believe with S. Augusline,
there is no Psalm, wherein the Author of it, had not respect to Christ. I will
show you, how it may be so aptly applied unto him, as you shall easily
believe; that, although it may be accommodated to all the Saints; yet, above
others, the Blessed Man (as we say) per Antonomasiam, means Christ; and, that
this Psalm, was principally intended of that Just One.

For, it is a Song, or Psalm, wherein blessedness is ascribed, to that thrice
godly Man, who is no way guilty of any kind of sin; whether it be of
transgression, omission, or original. And who, but He only; (or those, who
have received it by Him) can be honored with such innocence; or capable of so
high a dignity, as this true Blessedness: who alone, perfectly fulfilled the
Law? And was obedient, even to the death? Doubtless, none. For, all that are
so called, are so entitled by him And he, is that for-euer-blessed Man, whose
foot never walked, in the crooked way of the ungodly; nor, stood in the slippery
path of sinners.

He it was, who in true humility, taught the simple truth; and neglecting the
vain dignities of the world, never reposed himself, in the imperious seat of
the Scornful, whith the disdainful Pharisees. He it is, whose delight is in
fulfilling the Will and Law of his Father; and in the accomplishment thereof,
he seriously exercised himself, both day and night. He, is that flourishing
Tree, planted by the pure rivers, of water of life; clear as crystal, and
proceeding from the Throne of God: even that Tree, which is planted in the
midst of new Jerusalem, and has brought forth the fruit of our salvation, in
due season, and in the fullness of time: according to the Scriptures.

This is he, whose leaf shall not fall. That is; his words shall not fall to
the ground, but remain ever flourishing, Revel. 22.
and serve to heal the Nations; according to the Prophecy of Saint John. And
doubtless, whatsoever he does shall prosper. But the wicked are not so: that
is; the Jews and other wicked persecutors of Christ; with such as by Faith,
put not on his righteousness; are in a quite contrary estate. Like Chafe
scattered with the wind; yea, in a miserable, vain, and unsettled condition.
And therefore, when this our redeemer shall enter into Judgment with the
world; such an Antipathie will be between him, and unrighteousness; as they
shall not be able to stand before him. But, when the Children of his kingdom
shall be congregated at his right hand, to partake with him in eternal bliss;
as they have been partakers with him, in his graces here: then shall the
wicked be shut out of their assemblies; to be cast into eternal perdition. And
of this separation, the reason is; because the Righteous do follow Christ in
the way of his Gospel; and walk in the Faith which he has approved. Whilst
the Jews, and such as are without the Church: seeking salvation by the works
of the Law, or following some such wrong, or by paths; their way fails them,
and comes unto an end, when it has brought them to the left hand of the Judge.
Where; they are farthest off from Blessedness.

Meditations, upon the first PSALM; in verse.
The Contents of these Meditations.
The Muse, first sings the heavenly Bliss; and shows how vain the earthly is.
The wrong way thither, with the right: are here, laid open to your sight.
The just man's, glorious weal it shows. the sinners, matchless, endless
woes.
And good, and bad, are both expressed; that you may learn, and choose the best.
YOu; whose ore-weary, restless souls desire;
The prime content, to which all creatures tend;
And to that matchless Blessedness aspire:
Which (though most seek) most fail of in the end.
Lo; here a heavenly Muse points out the way,
Wherein you safe may run, and never more
In those blinde-crooked paths of danger stray;
Which have misled so many heretofore.
No prize unsought, or trifting news she sings;
But that, for which your many adventures are:
That, which to gain; Rich, poore-men slaves and Kings,
do howerly, watch and labor, sweat and war.
Yet most perhaps in vain; For, what they get
By their endeavor in the Common Course
Yeeldes no felicities but Counterfeit:
And often, drives them on from bad, to worse.
Young bloods, are snared with the painted sweetes
Of lust, or beauty: and believe that there,
Is full contentment. The rich glutton greetes
His boundless appetite, with curious fare.
The worldling, makes inquest for happiness;
And dreams, to find it in a trade of gain:
He in his Avarice himself does bless,
And as his thirst is, such his bliss does feign.
The happiness of some, in rich attire,
High Titles, or vainglorious pomp depends;
A loving wife, another does desire:
Good-toward Children, or unfeigned friends.
Kings, in their awful thrones of Sovereignty;
And uncontrolled prerogatives delight:
The Courtier, sooths up them in vanity;
And thinks it heaven, to be their Favorite.
But they are all deceived; For, all these be
Vaine-fruitlesse aims; like grass will beauty fade,
Lust, will to loathing turn, and then shall he
Who there sought happiness, be haples made.
A hungry famine, may those Creatures wast
Which glut crammed Epicures: or some disease,
May take away the pleasure of the taste.
And where is then, the happiness of these?
Fire; water, thieves or Rust, consume the store
Of richest men; and he, that but to day
Had great possessions, is tomorrow poor:
Or dies; or sees it, to his foes a pray.
Gay clothes, to Rags we have exchanged seen.
Foul stinch, and worms the proudest ruined have.
And those; that dearer then their souls have been,
Have shared their wealth, and laughed the to their grave
She; that has kissed, embraced and sworn to day
A Thousand vows of kindness in thine arm:
When thou art cold, and in a sheet of clay;
Shall keep another bed and bosom warm.
Those Princes, that have largest kingdoms got,
Are never quiet, whilst there do remain
Some other Emperies which they have not:
Nay, if they might, the next, and next obtain
Till they had all. Perhaps they would be sad
(If not for some poor toy or Humor crossed)
That more things were not known which might be had:
Or lest, what they enjoyed should be lost.
What bliss affords a Crown; when treasons, war,
And nightly cares, disturbes the owners rest?
More sad amid their armed troops they are,
Then he that walks alone with naked breast.
Though all the means, to be secure they take
Some horror, still appears their souls to grieve;
And greatness, never such a guard could make,
But sorrows would get in, and ask no leave.
Though, they had all the pleasures of the sense,
And ten times doubled their prerogative;
Though Parasites applaude their Excellence,
And yield them adoration while they live:
Though they attained to as much, as he
Who on the Jewish Throne next David sat:
Had so much wisdom, and could prying be
Through every Creature, to behold their state.
When that were done; but little hope had they
From any thing on earth, content to gather.
That great wise Prince, made trial; and could say:
That, to the soul they brought vexation rather.
And, when pale death assailes; the thoughts and fear
Which trouble poorest men: shall ceaze their soul.
Their pains, shall be as sharp as Bond men's are;
Their flesh shall stink as much; and be as foul.
Yea, er'e their breath forsake them one whole hour,
Their greatest glory, may be turned to scorn;
But in one Age, the Rumor of their power
May be no more then his, that is unborn.
And then; alas! to what poor fortunes brought
Are those; whose bliss, on will of these, depends?
Such; as nor do, nor speak, nor scarce think ought;
But that, which to their Princes humor tends?
For these; are Honors tennants but at will;
Which when he list, the giver may recall:
And causeless (if he please) object some ill;
To justify his dealing, with their fall.
And what a miserable state were this,
For any, to be deemed happy in?
Poor souls awake; see; see what trust there is
In that, wherewith you have deluded been.
Let wantons, seek in lust what is not there.
Let Epicures, at Feasts for bliss enquire.
Let Misers look on dust, till dust they are:
And wordly men, the worlds vain love desire.
Let Kings of Earth; affect an earthly Crown.
Let Courtiers at the Court attend their Fates.
And whilst they catch the bubbles of renown;
Let fools; still wonder, at their happy states.
But you; that have the end of these, descernd,
And surer grounds of blessedness would know:
Come, hear what of a Prophet, I have learned:
Who, sung this heavenly subject, long ago.
He taught my Muse; and you, she teaches how,
Best beauties, best perfection to embrace.
With Angels food, she will replenish you;
And make you richer, then old Adam was.
In stead of men's false friendships, and their love
Imperfect, and inconstant, here below:
You, shall be dear unto the Saints above,
And into fellowship with Angels grow.
Where you shall love, and be beloved of all;
Without (the least) distrust, or Jealousy:
And death, or time, or naught deprive you shall;
But yield content (at full) eternally.
If, with your vanities, you can dispense,
And slight those favors, which each worldling craves;
You shall be Favorites, to that great Prince,
To whom, Earths greatest Monarks are but slaves.
Such wished honors, She shall bring you to,
As Kings can neither give; nor take away.
And, that you may not fear, what flesh can do,
Shall be as free; and full as great as they.
Yea, that true Bliss, to which all writings tend;
And most are yet to learn: here, know you shall.
By knowing, may enjoy it in the end;
Enjoying, be contented there withal:
Until your souls, enriched with that store,
Shall never know desire, or lothing more.
But, you must listen with attention then;
And hitherto, your utmost power enforce:
For, it is not; it is not (oh you sons of men)
Obtained, by every ordinary coarse.
The way to bliss; is neither made by strength,
Nor humane policy. Though many a tract,
Makes show of leading thither; yet, at length,
It turns another way, and brings to wrack.
The Pagans, had a thought, some God head should
Direct them thither; and in fear they might,
Miss that good Deity, which guide them could:
They served too many Gods, and lost it quite.
The old Philosophers (not knowing this;
That Nature, by our fall, was grown corrupt)
By Moral Virtues, only sought for bliss:
Which did, their hoped Passage, interrupt.
For, when they had done all, which might be
By strict Morality, to gain their pass;
And time, their course, unto an end had brought, wrought,
Their aim they mist; because, Christ wanting was.
For, though some good they did; yet, missing him,
To sanctify their virtues, and to take
Those faults away, which bad escaped them:
Into this rest, no entrance could they make.
The blinded Jews, by ceremonious laws,
And strict observing of their ancient guise,
Have labored for it; but, upon some cause,
That way was long since changed, and from-ward lies
By vain will worship, others go. And some,
By formal shows, of Zealous sanctity.
By way of their own merits, many come:
And come far short, of true felicity.
A thousand other, crooked paths there be;
Which seem, to be direct; yet, lead astray:
Lest therefore, some of those, miscarry thee,
That have a longing, to the blessed way;
Who happy are; lo, here it shall be shown,
And how, thou may thy self, be such an one.
VERSE. 1. Blessed is the man, that does not walk in the counsel of the
ungodly, nor stand in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat of the scornful.


FIrst, get thee out of that ungodly way,
(The way of Nature) in which, all the race
Of Adams Progeny; have gone astray.
Walk out of it, into the way of Grace.
To which, there lies no hard passage, thence:
For, if thou wade, but through Baptismes ford,
And pass the thorny hedge, of Penitence:
Thou straight art guided thither, by the Word.
Yet, take thou heed, when thus thou entered art;
Lest that corruption, which does still remain:
By vain affections, ill-aduise the heart,
To walk with the ungodly, back again.
Cast not thine eyes about, on those gay bayts;
That grow, beside the way of Blessedness:
But, shun thou all occasion, that awayts,
To draw thee into paths of wickedness.
Let not the love of honor, pleasure, ease,
Revenge, lust, envy, pride, or avarice:
Nor any such ill Counselors, as these;
Thy feet, unto an evil course entice.
Pursue not wordly things, as worldly men,
That know not God, or true religion, do:
But, give his Honor first respect; and then,
With moderation, seek the creature to.
Let no desire, without that compass stray;
Which honesty, and piety has set.
For, if thy thoughts do ever break away,
And Counsels of ungodly longings get.
They will not leave thee; but, from lust, to lust,
Allure thee on, in the ungodly path:
Until, they bring thee, to some act unjust.
And there, the sinners way beginning has.
Oh! if through weakness, and attending to
Ungodly Counsels; thou shall thither rome:
As all indeed (though all their best they do)
Into the way, of evil doers, come.
Yet, stand not there; continue not in sin:
But, by repentance, soon return again:
Lest, thou should, by insisting long therein;
Affect it, and for ever there remain.
Use, gets a habit; and the habit got,
The title of a Sinner, gains thee:
And sin, in this gradation rests not,
Till to a Scorner, thy Commencement be.
And then beware. For, if degree thou take
So far; and be a Doctor of their Chair:
The next progression, thou from thence can make;
Is either hell immediate, or despair.
In thinking ill; we do from heauen-ward go;
In acting it, we further run astray:
But, if we to deride religion grow;
There Is hardly hope, that we repent us may.
For, though God can the course of nature turn;
Bid air descend, and earth above it rise:
Quench heat in fire, make frozen water burn;
And in all creatures, change the qualities.
Yet, that he therefore will; it follows not.
And so; although he can repentance give,
To such, as have a wicked habit got:
And, in despite of him, and virtue live.
As Soon, shall I believe; that desperate Churl,
Who, from a rough steep cliffe, or high Tower wall,
Himself a furlong from the top does burle;
May raise himself, in midst of the fall:
As that; the Sinner, who, of wilfulness,
Has cast himself down, from the hold of grace;
Can leave that deep-deep gulf, of wickedness,
And in the rock of mercy, get a place.
It is a rare-gain'd favor, when God daignes
That vicious liver grace, at his last breath:
Who, from no sin, for love of Good, refraines;
Nor, thinks to ask forgiveness, until death.
But, it is a Miracle, if ever he
Shall, in his life, or death, forgiveness get;
Who knows, and scorns, the means that profer'd be:
For, never was it found exampled yet.
Of these three steps; oh! be ye wary then;
To sit, or stand, or walk, do you forbear:
In seat, or way, or counsel, with those men;
That Scorners, Sinners, or Ungodly are.
Nor, will this be enough. For, as the Swain,
Who sits down, when he himself has lost:
Is no more like, to reach his home again;
Then he, that quite another way does post.
So they, who think it is enough, to shun
The ordinary path, that Sinners tread;
And take no heed, what good is to be done:
Shall never, of true happiness be sped.
Or, like as they; who, without Stern or Card,
Dare seek an unknown Coast, for golden ore:
May crown their voyage, with a rich reward;
As Soon as those, that use nor Sail, nor Oar.
Right so; as well may such, as loosely live,
The prize of happiness attain unto:
As those; who hope, they shall at bliss ariue,
Although not one foot thither-ward, they go.
And therefore listen, my advise unto:
That you may learn, what you have yet, to do.
VERSE. 2. But his delight is in the Law of the LORD, and in his Law does he
meditate, day and night.


WHen Gods great mercy, safely brought thee has;
From all the counsels, ways, and seats of sin:
Lest thou stray back again; take up the path
That just against it lies; and walk therein.
Keep on foreright; let nothing tarry thee:
For, non-progression, there; regression is.
But, if thou in continual motion be;
(Though slow it does appear) it brings to bliss.
To help thee on, two sacred Scrowles there are;
Which may direct thy Pilgrimage throughout:
They profer'd are, to every Passenger;
And can inform them, where they stand in doubt.
The first sure mark, that tells us we are right,
In this blessed progress, and have quite abhord
The way of Sinners; is a true delight,
Unto the Law, of our eternal LORD.
Whilst that affection holds; there is no fear,
Or danger of relapse. No wicked train,
Which the ungodly roundeth in thine ear,
Can move thee, to partake therein again.
But, lest thy heart deceive thee (for man's heart
Is false, and often betrays him to his foe)
Make trial of his truth (if wise thou art)
And I will show thee, how thou may do so.
Search, if there be no carnal vain respect,
That draws on this delight; or, if to thee
Those volumes, which thou seem to affect:
Be pleasing, as the Word of God they be.
Try, if thy Conscience, will for witness come,
That thou have, with a true endeavor, sought
To exercise his Law; abroad, at home,
By day, by night, in deed, in word, in thought.
For, know well this, that by the Night and Day,
It is not only meant, in weal and woe:
Or, that thou should, from time to time assay,
Untired, in the way of Bliss to go.
But, thou with knowledge, must proceed therein.
By pondering Gods Law, both in the Night,
Of his Old Testament, which veyl'd it in:
And in the New; that Day-like gave it light.
First, thou must meditate, how man was made,
And (being made) a Law from God received:
How he transgrest, and fell; and falling, had
That Law (with some new circumstance) revived.
Thou must consider, how the same was writ,
First, in the heart by nature; then in stone:
And how, in Essence, never altring it.
Of Accidents, God added many a one.
Thou must conceive; the prime Essential part
Of this great Law, was Christ: and Christ, the End
Of all those things, which thou informed of art;
Throughout the book, before his coming pend.
Thou must observe, how every passage there,
Does shadow out that substance; and foretell,
In holy riddles, what did plain appear;
When his, so long-expected Day befell.
Then, having passed over the cloudy Night,
Of Types, dark Figures, hidden Prophesies,
And deep Aenigma's; thou must seek the light,
To be instructed in these Mysteries.
Thou, in the Day, Gods Law must meditate.
The Day of his New Testament; wherein,
The Morning Star appeared: and set a date,
To that thick darkness, which so long had bin.
And, when thou see how all the visions, dreams,
And Prophesies obscure, discovered are;
By those bright-shining, and thrice-glorious beams,
Which, at thy Saviors coming did appear.
Thou must (in that fair sunshine of his grace)
Consider, with what infinite respect,
God daign'd to pity, thy distressed case:
And how much, He, thy well fare did affect.
From point, to point, thou well consider must;
The Law in his New Testament declared,
The Law of Faith, which makes the sinner just:
And opes the gate, which Adams crime had barred.
Thereon affix thy heart; and learn to know,
How God, from age to age, this Law derived.
How, that of Moses, did abolisht grow:
With, what must be performed; and what believed.
For, those who thus much learn; and teach, and then
Continue practice, in a course upright:
May best enstiled be, those happy men;
That meditate Gods Law, both Day and Night.
If this thou reach; or, but endeavor well,
To that degree of Grace, which God shall daine:
The Worthies of the world, thou shall excel;
And win the prize, for which they seek in vain.
Yea; cheer thy soul; and let nor pain, nor care,
Nor loss, nor height, nor depth, nor ought at all,
The world can tell thee; make thy soul to fear;
For this; to Blessedness, conduct thee shall.
Nay, thou already, therein; blessed art.
And even, those storms of troubles, that oppress,
and hem thee round about, on every part;
Shall make more perfect, thy true happiness.
Which will be such; as tongue-tide eloquence,
Shall be unable to report thy bliss:
Yea, so unthought of, is that excellence,
No heart, e're half imagined, what it is.
And, ah! what pleasures can be more excelling;
Then those, that are beyond both thought, and telling?
VERSE. 3. And he, shall be like a Tree planted by the rivers of waters, that
will bring forth his fruit in season, his leaf shall not fade, and whatsoever
he does, shall prosper.


But, sensual men, must have a sensual touch,
Of what we tell them; and some objects view:
By which, their reason, may perceive as much,
As, either words, or signs, have power to show.
For else, although the portion be but small,
Which they (at best) of these things can conceive;
That little portion will be naught at all.
And (as in vain) our labor we may leave.
That (therefore) you, some little glympse may see.
Of that abundance of contentment; which
Must wait on those, that this way happy be:
And make them, without want, or lothing, rich.
Mark well, those euer-green-leafe-bearing Trees;
Which, in some fruitful valley, planted are:
Where; with their nature, soil, and clime agrees;
And rivers flow, to moist them, all the year.
Where, neither Summers heat, nor Winters cold,
Nor sterrile drought, nor rotting wet, offends.
But where, the air does such good temper hold,
That flowers do leaves, and fruits still flowers attend.
For, as those trees, may so much moisture take,
As they shall either need, or can contain;
And nothing miss of, which complete may make,
What to a trees well-being, does pertain.
So, by the love of Gods eternal law;
Men's souls, are set anew. in Paradise.
Where; from the Rivers of Gods grace, they draw
The nourishments, of true felicities.
Their state is constant, lasting evermore.
And not one true contentment, can be found,
In Earth, or heavens immesurable store;
But, with that wished perfection they are Crowned.
Their souls have all that full of happiness,
Which can in any soul, contained be:
As trees, best planted; have that fruitfullnesse,
Which most becomes the nature of a Tree.
They in the Church, Gods Garden planted are;
Where Christ, that living rock, remains still.
And, from his side (the crimson Fountain there)
Life's precious liquors, plentiously distill.
His blessed Sacraments and faithful Word,
Preserues their growth, and makes them fructify;
Till they, do fruit for every Month afford,
And bear the leaves, of blessed eternity.
Never; no never, can their beauty fall
from ripe perfection; but, as you have seen
A goodly bay tree flourish: So, they shall
Be, winter, summer, spring and Autumn green.
And then; in all things, they shall prosper too;
What er'e betide them; or what ere they do.
VERSE. 4. The ungodly are not so: but are like the chafe which the wind
drives away.


But, lest that all which has been said, should fail
To make you well conceive, how much it may
Redound to every several man's avail;
To grow approved, in this blessed way.
And since, the natures of most men, are such;
As that, the promises of best contents,
Do seldom half prevail with them so much,
As slavish fear, of threatened punishments.
Know this; that whatsoever mortal wight,
The way of life, here taught him, does refuse:
He shall not only, be deprived quite,
Of these; and all those hopes, that he pursues.
But, his condition, from the blessed, shall
So far be differing; that, no strife, unrest,
Shame, horror, or misfortune, can befall:
But, his dispairing soul, it shall arrest.
If you e're noted have, how far we prize
The lightest chafe, beneath the weighty grain;
How safe the one is kept, how firm it lies;
How vile we count the other, and how vain.
Betwixt the worldling, and right blessed man;
Such difference is there. For, as every wind,
The slighted chafe, does this, and that way fan;
And no abiding place, will let it find.
So, that ungodly, irreligious crew,
Who make their heaven on earth; and scorning these
True paths of blessedness, those toys pursue,
Which may their own proud eye, or belly please:
Even those; by puffes of windy vanity,
Strong-raging passion, and untamed lust:
Are hurried, with such strange incertainty,
To this, and that, every act unjust.
As, whatsoever rest they seem to take,
Their life is wholly restless; and no day,
No hour, no minute, sleeping, or awake:
In any settled peace, continue they.
The Glutton would be rich; but is perplexed,
To think, that he must then abate his fare.
The Miser, would have honor; and is vexed,
To see how costly, courts and greatness are.
The Ambitious, couets ease; but finds it mars
His high designs: and may his hopes deface.
The Coward, would have fame; but fears the wars:
And Leachers, doubt diseases, or disgrace.
Yea, in their hearts, so many strange desires,
Are often lodged, and those so opposite:
That, by enjoying what one lust requires,
They bar themselves, some other wished delight.
But grant, their outward state were settled more,
More thriuing, and in loss, and changes less:
That they have ease, and honor, with their store;
And to the world-ward, settled happiness.
Yet, neither can they wake, nor sleep in peace.
Their conscience, like a flaming-fire within;
Will sear, and scorch, and burn: and never cease
Until despair, to nestle there begin.
Or say they escape this to. And whilst they live,
So stupid grow, that in security,
They senseless lie; until their souls, it drive
Into a helpless, hellish lethargy.
Yet, which is worse; far worse, then what is past:
(And makes me tremble, when I call to mind
Their fearful cause) there is a Day at last;
In which they pay for all, that is behind.
But, those sad terrors will my Muse rehearse,
In what she sings, on the following Verse.
VERSE. 5. Therefore the Ungodly shall not stand in the Judgment, nor Sinners
in the Congregation of the Righteous.


OH you! whom neither Gods eternal love,
Nor virtues beauty, nor his sacred Law;
Nor promises of matchless Bliss, can move:
Nor threatened loss thereof, preserve in awe.
You; that are neither wooed to repent,
Your follies, for this life's uncertainties:
Nor won, to seek the way of true content;
By inward fears, nor outward miseries.
Though none of these, can gain you to assay,
For that high Blessedness, which crowns the good;
Nor force you, to forgo that damned way,
Which seems pleasing, unto flesh and blood.
Oh yet! for that rare privilege, which those,
Who love Gods Law, shall have; when flaming fire,
Does all this massy Globe of earth enclose:
To rectify your course, I you require.
For know; there are not only, in this world,
A thousand mischeefes, plagues, heart-stinging cares,
And dreadful Judgments; ready to be hurld,
From Heavens high Battlements, about your ears:
But, after death, there is a time will come,
To hasten all, which is delayed here.
A Day of vengeance, and a Day of Doom:
In which; all Adams Offspring, shall appear.
The dreadful Judge, in glory will descend;
With his great Host of Heaven, compast round.
Seas, Earth, and Hell, shall at his Bar attend,
With all their prisoners, when the Trump does sound.
A hideous Bonefire, through the world shall blaze.
The Roof of Heaven, shall like a parchment scrowle,
At his appearing, shrink; and with amaze,
The dead shall rise; the living, frighted howl.
And, neither sex, condition, nor degree;
Shall have respect, or place: but every one,
Without distinction, shall in person be;
Before the great Almighties Judgment Throne.
Your purest beauties, shall attract no more,
That Judges eye; then foulest ulcers can.
He, shall not bribed be, with Indian Ore:
Nor moved, by the flattring tongue of man.
Kings, are in his esteem no more that Day,
Then slaves: or, poorest wretches on the earth.
He, prizeth no man, for his rich array:
Nor ought regards, nobleness of birth.
In his Grand Court of Justice; he admits,
No subtle Trauers, no Demurs, Repeales,
Delays, Injunctions, neither any Writs
Of Error, nor Excuses, nor Appeals.
No bribed Favorites, has He to raise,
By motions at his Bar: On him, attends
No Grooms, nor Kinsmen, that his Lordship swayes:
To wrest the course of Justice, to their ends.
No great man sends his letters to entreat,
To change his sentence; nor a costly fee:
That hires him any way to mitigate,
What he has once, resolved to decree.
You sons of Adam; you shall doubtless come,
(Though slight perhaps my counsel may appear.
To such a Judge; to such impartial Doom:
And find all true, that I foretell you here.
Yea; if you harken not to the command
Of your Creator; nor, his Law delight:
You shall not in that Judgment guiltless stand.
But fall condemned, in the Judges sight.
And, when the Righteous, are assembled there:
With, Come you Blessed. And at full possess,
(According to the promise, made them here)
The joyful Crown of endless happiness.
Then, with a curse excluded, shall you go;
Amongst the damned spirits, into hell:
Shut out from bliss, into a world of woe;
Amid those tortures, which no tongue can tell.
And when, as many hundred thousand years,
You have endured; as there be on the shore,
Small stones, or sands: the time no shorter wears;
Nor will your plagues grow fewer, then before.
Nay, though you were reserved for no more pain,
Nor other coffeehouse, then the miss,
Of that great good, to which the just attain:
In (such privation) hell enough there is.
We see, that when ambitious men have got
Respect, and means enough, to live at rest:
Yet, if they miss some mark, where at they shot;
They fret, as men without compare unblessed.
We see that Worldlings; who, on tempting gold,
Have set their thoughts, can ten times better bear
The brunt of labor; hunger, thirst, and cold:
Then live well fed, and warm; with coffers bare.
We likewise know; that Lovers, barred the sight
Of their dear Mistresses; can never receive
Content; nor cause of comfort, or delight:
Though free from outward pains, or want, they live.
Nay rather; it torments, and greeueth more
Their vexed souls, then smart of body may:
And more, themselves, they think insulted ore;
Then if, for trial, on the Rack they lay.
This we have known. And if, privation can
On earth so torture; where even torments are
Imperfect. Oh! how much more grievous than,
Shall those souls find it, that must feel it there?
If here; thou can not brook contempt, disgrace;
To be deprived of honor, or the view
Of those false beauties; wherein thou do place
Contentment here. Ah! what will there ensue?
How? how, will thou endure it, wretched Elfe?
When thou shall know, what riches they possess,
Who shall be blessed: and perceive thy self
Debarred, for ever, of that happiness?
When thou eternally, shall be a scorn;
Of thy contentment stripped; of peace, of friends:
Of all the fellowship of Saints, forlorn;
And no Companions left, but damned Fiends.
When thou; to endless darkness banished,
Shall burn with the desire, of seeing Him.
With whose perfections, Angels eyes are fed:
And in respect of whom, the Sun is dim?
Oh! what a passion will torment thy soul;
When thou shall miss that sweetness? And embrace,
Instead thereof; deformity, as foul,
As hell, can put upon her loathsome face.
What will thou do, alas! when thou must bear
All this great horror; and sharp pangs withal?
For thus; even thus, will the ungodly fare:
When that great Judgment, overtake them shall.
And it shall add, unto their torment to;
What e're they suffer, say, or think, or do.
VERSE. 6. For, the LORD knows the way of the Righteous: but the way of the
Ungodly shall perish.


But that no righteous Man, deterred may be,
From laboring, for his blessedness, through doubt,
That the Almighty, does nor mark, nor see:
How many painful steps, he paceth out.
And likewise, that no Sinner may, vnwarned,
His own vain way pursue, with false surmize:
That God does ouer-passe, as undiscerned;
The course he takes; or wink at villainies.
Know this, you happy men, that would attain
To perfect Bliss. That, howsoever you seem
Obscured on earth; and often to spend in vain,
Your labors, and your lives, without esteem.
There Is not a drop of blood, a sigh, a tear,
An inward smarting, or an outward groan.
A slight unkindness, or a scoff you bear:
But the Almighty knows them, every one.
If you but sweat a little, in this path:
He sees it; and in time, reward it will.
Not one sad thought, your heart in secret has:
But God both knows thereof, and minds it still.
Though you close prisoners were, in strictest thrall,
Neglected of the world, and seen by none,
But such oppressors, as would smother all,
Which for your praise, or comfort, might be known.
Though you were mewed, where none might come to tell,
What you have done, or suffered,in this way:
And being in some dungeon, forced to dwell;
Had mourned, to death, shut from the sight of day.
Yea, though your foes should labor, to obscure
Your good endeauours, with a slandrous fame;
And brand you, with vile actions so impure,
That all men thought you, worthy death and shame.
Yet, God; whose bright, and all-beholding eyes,
Viewes present, past, and every future thing:
Sees vndeceiu'd; and whatsoever he spies,
To light, will one day, to your glory bring.
He knows; and knowing, does approve your course.
And what he does approve, shall never fail.
Nor Man, nor Devil; policy, nor force:
Against his power, or knowledge, can prevail.
Oh therefore! droop not, though a thousand storms,
Or likelyhoods of ruin, may appear:
For, when despair puts on her vgliest form;
Then; is your most assured safety near.
Nor boast, you Sinners; as if you had found
A readier course, unto the truest bliss,
Then righteous men; because, your way is crowned
With more vain honor, then their labor is.
Nor, let your painted pleasures, gull you so;
To make you dream, that God deceived will be.
Or, that an unsuspected course you go:
Because, the world your danger cannot see.
For, though a while you prosper, and delude
With shows of happiness, the blinded eye
Of fools; and the abused multitude,
That are in love, with your gay vanity.
Yet; ruin, shame, and desolation shall
Confound your way. And upon every one,
That therein walks, will destruction fall.
Even then; when least (perhaps) you think thereon.
Though, in the world; you long have had the names
Of honorable, honest, just, and wise:
Walked in a course approved, and left your fames
To after ages; in large Histories.
Though you are great; and Orators can hire;
To cloak your foul proceedings, with fair shows;
Or, to defame the Righteous, here conspire.
And make abhorred, the path in which he goes.
Though, at your deaths, with formal piety,
And works of public love, you often do
Conceal, your rotten hearts hypocrisy:
Deceiving so, your selves, and others to.
And, at your funerals, have preached abrod;
A glorious rumor, of a blessed end:
Those clouds, can never blind the sight of God.
But ruin, shall your wicked course, attend.
Though you; the ancient Heathens praised moralities;
The Jewish strictness; the hot Zealousnesse
Of Schismatics have learned: with Romes formalities.
To trim your way, with shows of happiness.
And though, the Passenger that walks it, carries
A lode of pardons: mumbling, as he goes,
Five thousand Creedes; ten thousand Ave Mary's:
And, of his own good merits, adds to those.
Yet, all will fail him; yea, there is many a one,
By you, for Saints canonized; whom your path
Has thither brought: where, now they lie and groan,
Beneath the burden of Gods heavy wrath.
For, he, approues no means of happiness,
Or way of serving him; but that which he
Has taught himself: And, it is wickedness;
Another course to seek, what e're it be.
This you have done, you sinners; so, for this:
Your way, and you, shall perish. And while those,
Whose course you have derided; dwell in bliss;
You; all contentment, shall for ever lose.
That (since you would not understand aright,
The path that leads to safety; whilst you might)
You should, when you are past returning; know,
It was the Way, that you despised so.
THus; have I sung the sum, of what the Muse
Of our great Prophet; in this Ode, pursues.
The way to Bliss. Which, as my weakness can,
I strive to level so; that every man;
Yea, little children, may come walk along:
And make it short, and easy, with a song.
Here, warn I all; but here, I cannot say
Enough, to perfect all men, in that way.
For, some lack one thing; some another miss,
To further on, theirvoiage unto bliss.
Some, faith; some, works; some, love; some knowledge want.
In some, repentance; in some, grace, is scant.
The greatest part; defective find, I shall,
Of most of these; and many men of all.
Then, some despair; and some presume as far.
Some, too secure; and some, too pensive are.
Some, pray not; and some, praise not God aright.
That each man therefore; he, well furnish might,
For this adventure; and with means divine,
Assist him, from his heavenly Magazine.
To fit their several wants; he offers you
A hundred nine and forty (in a row)
Of such Instructions: as, who e're shall please,
To weigh their use, and live, and walk, by these.
My life for theirs; at length, they shall attain
That happiness, their souls, desires to gain.
And to assist their weak simplicities,
That cannot suit, their own necessities,
In that rich treasurye. My humble Muse
Shall be their Guide; their Servant; and refuse
No pains (if Gods great Providence permit)
Till all these sacred Oracles, she fit
To their capacities. So, I shall be
A help to them: And they may further me,
By their good prayers, in that blessed path:
Whose end, contentment, everlasting has.
THE PARAPHRASE; WHEREIN THE WORDS of the Psalm, are wholly retained: and
distinguished from the rest, by a change of LETTER.
BLessed is the man, that, Verse 1.
being in the first estate of innocence, does not walk from it, after the
evil affections of corrupted nature: in the lewd Counsels of the ungodly; By
consenting unto evil concupiscences, Nor stand in the broad way of sinners,
acting, and perseuering in evil: Nor sit, in the infectious seat of the
scornful; scoffing virtue, deriding religion; or, by false doctrines (and
evil examples) perverting others.

Verse 2.
For, he is such an one; who, is not careful only, to avoid evil. But, is
inclined to good also. His delight is seriously in the Law of the LORD. And, in
his eternal Law (that he may know, teach, and fulfill it; in thought, word,
and deed) does he meditate, upon all occasions; and at all times; even, Day and
night, without intermission.

Verse 3.
In this; consists the means of his felicity. And he shall be like a
flourishing Tree; which, the Divine Providence has planted, by the rivers of
waters. For, as such a Tree, being nourished by those streams, has the means
that will enable it, to bring forth his fruit in due season: so, the Blessed
Man, being planted by the fountains of Grace, flowing from the Holy Spirit of
God; brings forth in due time, the fruits of faith, and good works, to
eternal life. And, in the greatest drought, receives such refreshing; that
his leaf shall not fade. A word of his, shall not be in vain (though, for the
present, it seem to fall to the ground) but it shall take effect. And
whatsoever he does, shall prosper, at last; both to his everlasting glory, and
the instruction of others.

Now, the ungodly; because, Verse 4.
they walk after their own Counsels, are not so blessed: neither, does any
thing they take in hand, so prosper. But, they, are like the chafe, which the
wind drives away. For, as that is dry, unfruitful, and therefore carried
about with every puff; so, they wanting the moisture of grace, are therefore
ouer-light; and the spirit of the Devil, the wind of pride, temptations, and
evil affections: vnsetledly hurrie them to and fro, without rest.

Verse 5.
And, by reason of this; even because, these vanities carry them from God.
Therefore, the ungodly shall not be able to stand, as innocent, before him, in
the Judgment. Whether it be that, which he shall be pleased to inflict on
them, in this life: or, at the last Day. Nor, shall false worshippers, or such
Sinners; who have neglected this means of Blessedness: be admitted in the
Congregation of the Righteous, among those, to whom God (having separated them
at his right hand) shall hereafter say: Come, ye blessed of my Father, etc.

Verse 6.
And all this, comes thus to pass. For that, the LORD accepts, knows, and
allows, the undefiled way of the Righteous, and the courses, which they
follow, to attain this blessedness. But, contrariwise, so abhors the way
of the ungodly; that the endeavors, of those Reprobates, shall perish, with
them, in eternal damnation.

The Prayer:
Wherein, the scope of this Psalm is considered: and the blessedness there
mentioned, implored of God.

OH thou eternal Son, of the everliving God. Who, art the way of life, the
means of all true Blessedness, and the only Happy One; who, continuing in
thy integrity, have both avoided, all manner of sin; and every way fulfilled
the whole Law, and will of thy Father. Thou, oh Christ; who art that tree of
life, which brought forth the fruit of our salvation, in due season: and
without whom, none can ever have sure hope, to become happy. Grant, oh sweet
Redeemer; that by the imputation of thy righteousness; we, who are fallen from
our first Integrity, may be regenerated, and made spotless again, in thy
sight. Sanctify our polluted hearts, that they may no more wander after, the
vain counsels, of ungodly affections. Let them not have power, to allure us
into the way of sinful actions. Or, if we do (through frailty) at any time,
stray from Thee, into the trodden path of Sinners, which leads to destruction
(as we must acknowledge, we often do.) Bring us back, oh sweet Jesus; and let
us not stand there, until we lose the feeling of our sins: and forget for
ever to return; but, let every slip be attended, with immediate repentance, to
whip us up again; left the iteration of sin, bring us at length, to the seat
of Scorners, and the denial of Thee. Keep us; oh keep us, from that low ebb
of grace; yea, although we often run far into the way of sinners; and many
times carelessly stand still, when thou call us from thence: yet, of all
mercies, we entreat thee, that we never be suffered to stray so wide, from
the way of Blessedness: to sin against thy Holy Spirit. Or, to sit down in
that seat of pestilence, which may infect our souls, to eternal death.

And, to enable us the better, to shun such dangers; we beseech thee, possess
our hearts with thy love; and a true delight in thy Word. Let thy Law, day and
night, openly and secretly, in adversity and prosperity, be our principal
study, and practice, all the time of our life. Fashion us, to thine own Image;
let thy right hand plant us, in thine own Vineyard.

And, that we may be, as fruitfullflourishing Trees, bringing forth seasonable
fruits, to thy glory, and the profit of thy Church. Let the plentiful Rivers
of thy Grace, water us; until we grow up, and become fit to be replanted, in
thy eternal Paradise. Let our words, as the leaves of a fruitful tree; be a
continual ornament unto us: serving also, to heal the wounded consciences of
our weak brethren. And although, for a time, thou suffer us, to appear
miserable, and unhappy; yet, let all things (even the afflictions which we have
had) prosper us in the way, to everlasting Blessedness.

And, forasmuch, as those, who delight not in thy service, are in a miserable
condition; and nothing so happy, as thy children, whatsoever they seem to the
world. Grant, o Lord, that we (being warned by thy displeasure against them)
may truly worship thee, and have ever such a measure of faith, and of thy
grace; as may keep us settled in our consciences, and quiet, from the fury of
those affections, that carry them headlong into endless unrest. And when thou
shall cast that chafe, into the fire; purge us, thy servants, from corruption;
and lay us up, as pure wheat, in thy Heavenly Granard.

Hear us, oh dear Redeemer; and when that dreadful day comes, wherein thou
shall summon the whole world to Judgment. Let us not, be thrust amongst those
guilty ones, who shall fall, and be confounded with horror, at thy presence.
But make us able to stand, in that fearful doom; place us at thy right hand,
in that righteous Congregation, into which, no unrepentant sinners shall be
admitted. And, when thou shall turn them off, with that terrible answer; I
know you not. Let us; oh let us, be received into thy mercy. And seeing, we
seek for Blessedness, by that way and means only, which thou have
appointed: Acknowledge it, as thine own ordinance; and, though we are a while,
the scorn of the world, make us at length, Inheritors of that unspeakable
felicity, which we shall enjoy in Thee. So, both in our safeties, and in the
destruction of thine enemies also; shall thy name be glorified, now and for
ever. Amen.

To fill up the vacant pages of this sheet, here is added, as necessary, to
stir the Reader up to these studies; a metricall Paraphrase, upon the first
eight verses, of the 12 Chapter of Ecclesiastes, beginning thus: Remember thy
Creator, in the days of thy youth, etc.
NOw Young Man; thy Creator think upon;
Before the prime, of lusty Youth be gone.
Now; e're at hand, that evil day appears;
With those unwelcome and abhorred years:
When thou (dejected) shall, the world contemn,
And grieved say; I have no joy in them.
Now; whilst Sun, Moon, and Stars, their light retain,
And no black clouds, do threat a second rain.
Before, the Keepers of the house do shrink.
Before, with trembling knees, the Strong-men sink. prye.
Before, the Grinders less'ned, quiet lie;
And they grow dark, that through the windows
Before, the Doors without, fast closed bin,
Through their base sound, that faintly grind within.
Before, the Bird to rise, does summon thee;
And Musiques Daughters quite abased be.
Before, the lofty thing do thee dismay;
And shuddring fear surprise thee in the way.
Before the Almond put his flowers abroad,
The Grasshopper, become a heavy lode,
Desires decay, and lothed Age thou meet;
Or troops of Mourners, waiting in the street.
Oh, do not thou the time, till then prolong.
But mind him, whilst the silver Cord is strong.
Now; whilst the golden Ewre, vncras'd is found:
And at the Fountaine-head the Pitcher sound.
Before the Wheel, be at the Cysterne tore,
Or Dust grow earth, as earth it was before:
And, from the bodies quite dissolved frame;
The soul return to God, from whence it came.
Thus spoke the Preacher. And he told us why:
For all (said he) is vainest vanity.
The same, another way paraphrased, according to the signification of the
several Metaphors.
NOw; whilst warm blood, with fresh and kindly heat,
Does through each part, with lively vigor beat:
And all thy beauties, in their springtide be;
Think on thy God, that so created thee.
Accept this fit advantage of the time.
Give him, the First-lings of thy golden prime.
Before, thy last unwelcome days, begin
To bring those years, thou have no pleasure in.
Now; while thou see prosperities bright Sun,
Enlightens thee, the way thou have to run:
And Gods pure Word affords a cheerful light,
To guide thee safely, through black errors night.
Do not forget, that thou a Maker have,
Till all the morning of thy life be past.
Nor waste the time (from storms and troubles clear)
Till greefes on greefes; like clouds on clouds appear.
Those hands, that youth a while does powerful make;
Unsteady (through their feeblenes) shall shake.
Those legs, that strongly do uphold thee, now;
With aches pained, shall beneath thee bow.
Thy few loose teeth, will cease their food to grind;
And thy dim eyes, stand in their cazements blind.
Thy jaws, their nimble motion quite shall lose.
Thy lips sunk in, their double wickers close.
Thy wonted sleep, thy temples shall forgo;
And daily raise thee, when the Cock does crow.
Thy listening ears, their sense aside shall lay:
And every rub, disturb thee in the way.
The silver hairs, thou on thy head shall have:
Wilt show thee ready ripened for the grave.
Each trifling thing, shall be a burden to thee.
The vain desires of youth, shall all forgo thee.
Thee; to his house, shall Age with panting breath
Conduct; there lodge thee, in the bed of death.
And those, who thither, thy attendants were,
Shall mourning, home return; and leave thee there.
Oh thou! that would a needful comfort find,
In those black days; now thy Creator mind.
Before thy nerves their sinewie vigor lack:
And strength, and marrow, leave thy weakened back,
While neither cares, nor sorrows, craze thy brain:
Whilst thy sound liver, fills up every vain.
Whilst thou art yet in health; and feel'st thy head,
By no heartbreaking pang distempered.
Ere flesh dissolve to earth; and spirit be
Returned to Him, that first did give it thee.
For then; this saying will most true appear:
That all is vain, and naught but vainesse here.
Glory be to God. Amen.
Correct these faults with thy pen.
Page 8. lin. 15. for seems, read seem. page 14. lin. 7. for Catalicticall,
in some coppies, read Cabalisticall. page 119. lin. the last, for whith, read
with. page 121. lin. 9. for Righteousness, in some coppies, read
Unrighteousness. page 124. lin. 23. for thirst, read thrift.

The Authors Preparation to the Psalter, sometime mentioned in this Book, is
to be sold at the sign of the golden Unicorn, in Pater Noster Row, by John
Harrison.


