ANIMADVERSIONS UPON LILLIES GRAMMAR, OR LILLY SCANNED. An Extract of
Grammatical PROBLEMES. Gathered out of the Inquiries, and Disputes of the most
judicious GRAMMARIANS. Set down by way of Question, and Answer. Wherein, Many
difficult Knots in the English Rudiments, and Lillies Grammar are unloosed:
many Obscurities enlightened: many Errors and Incogitancies discovered: many
Deficiences supplied, the Original and Reason of many Terms of Art
manifested, and not a few accessorie Questions discussed with much brevity and
perspicuitie. Very necessary, and profitable for all those that desire to be
exact Grammarians.

LONDON Printed by W. Stansby for Richard Hawkins, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Chancerie Lane. 1625.

Animaduersions upon LILLIES Grammar, OR LILLY scanned. An Extract of
Grammatical PROBLEMES.
Of Grammar, and the parts thereof.
MAy every one that teaches Lillies Grammar, be called Grammaticus in
propriety of speech?

No: If he be able to teach those Rudiments only, he is rather to be called
Grammatista?

What difference is there between Grammatista, and Grammaticus?

Among the Ancients he was called Grammaticus, who did not only teach how to
speak a tongue well, but also did examine, and discuss all the difficulties
in Poets, Historians, Orators, Philosophers, etc. he that taught the Elements
of Words, Letters, was called Grammatista. Grammaticus with them was as much as
Literatus, a learned Scholar, or Critic, whom we now call a Philologi audiunt
Ludouicus Viues Julius Scaliger, Casaubonus, nec non Ben. Ions^ius Poetarum
facile princeps, and non sine doctrinae, and humanitatis honorifica praefatione
nominandus (...) Ioh. Seldenus.
Philologer; Grammatista as much as Literator, an Elementarie Pedant. They
differ in effect as much as a Fiddler, and an exact Musician. Sueton. de claris
Grammaticis.

May that speech, which is compared according to the rules of Grammar, be
called congrua oration, in the propriety of the latin tongue?

So it is commonly called by most Schoolmasters: but to speak properly;
loqui congrue, is to speak fitly, and oppositly to the purpose, which is the
part of a Logician, an Orator, a Moralist: but to speak according to rule, is,
Grammatice loqui, which is not opposed to Barbare loqui (for there may be a
rude impolisht and barbarous expression, where there is no breach of rule, and
Priscians head is untouched) but to castigate, or terse, or emendate loqui, to
speak trimly and elegantly, according to the example of the purest Authors;
according to that saying, Aliud est Grammatice, aliud latin loqui: Congrue
loqui, respects the fitness of the matter; Emendate loqui, the purity of the
style; Grammatice loqui, the regularitie of the construction.

Is that division of Grammar into four parts, Orthographia, Etymol. Syntaxis,
Prosop. an exact division?

Priscian, Melancthon, and their followers so divided Grammar: but Crasse.
(...), rather then Exact.
(...), it may more artificially and compendiously be divided into two parts,
Etymology and Syntaxis: for these two do, as integrall parts, take up the
whole body of Grammar: the other two, Orthogr. and Prosodia, like Particles are
contained in these, and spread through the whole Grammar.

Of ORTHOGRAPHIE.
IS Orthographie still the same?

No: It has been often changed, and therefore the rule of it must be custom.
The Hebrews, Syrians, and Arabians, begin to write from the right hand to the
left. They of China, from the top of the leaf to the bottom in a direct line.
Other Nations, from the left hand to the right, which motion of the hand seems
to be most natural.

Of the Letters.
How are diphthongs made?

By the diverse dispositions of the vowels.

Whence have the diphthongs their names?

Of the Greek words (...), bis, and (...), loquor; because there is a
conflation, and coalition of two vowels in a diphthong, which are to be
uttered and breathed out as one entire syllable.

What is the meaning of that passage in the first page of Lillies Grammar? S,
suae cuiusdam potestatis litera est?

Lilly having divided the Consonants into Mutes, as b, c, d, etc. and
semi-vowels, as l, m, n, r, s, x, z, he subdiuideth the semi-vowels into
liquids, and double consonants, and since (s) will not be changed in either of
these ranks, he calls it suae cuiusdam potestatis literam; such a letter as
is (as it were) of its own head, sits by it self, will not be marshalled in
that (...) literarum.

Why are x and z called, literae duplices?

Because they have the force of two consonants, as x may be resolved into Cs,
or gs, as appears by the genitive cases of nounes ending in x, Rex, Regis,
Dux, Ducis. z is changed (being a greek letter originally) into ss, as Massa,
of (...): Patrisso, of (...).

How many ways is the letter (I) taken?

Three ways: as in this word ieiunium: in the first syllable, I is taken for a
simple consonant, in the second for a double one, in the third for a vowell.

How does it appear that (I) between two vowels, is a double consonant?

Because the Ancients, in stead of Mayor, Peior, were wont expressly to write
Maijor, Peijor.

Has (I) between two vowels always the force of a double consonant, as Lilly
tells us here, and in the rules of Quantity?

No: The rule is true only in simple words, not in words compound, for in such
we find the syllable which comes immediately before I between two vowels,
made short in the Poets: as in Bijugis, Quadrijugus.

Martis equi bijuges, and magni currus Achillis. Virg.
Centum quadrijugos agitabo ad flumina currus. Idem.
Lilly in the division of his letters, tells us, that two is a semi-vowell: how
then comes it to pass, that anon after he says, y and z, latinis dictionibus
nunquam admiscentur.

It is very strange a man should so soon forget himself: there is a manifest
contradiction, from which I cannot acquit him.

Are not k or y mixed amongst other latin letters, as Lilly affirms?

K is judged by the modern Gra^marians to be an unprofitable letter, but Haec
tribus in Latio tantum addita nominibus.
Ausonius says, it is prefixed before three latin words: which some assign
to be, Kaput, a Chapter, Kalendae, Kalumnia: and as for y, if it be not mixed
amongst latin letters, how is it that we find in Propria quae maribus,
Tybris, Lybs, Tybur: proper names, Phryx, Gryps, Hydrops, Siren, Hyems, etc.
appellatiues: nay, how is it that in the very same page, where he affirms
this, we find these words: Hymnus, Trisyllaba, Hieronymus. Here as elsewhere,
bonus dormitat Lilius.

What are the literae majusculae put for when they are set alone?

A. for Aulus, as A. Gellius; Aulus G. but some Critics write Agellius.

B. among the Schoolmen, is put for Beatus.

C. V. Celsitudo Vestra.

C. M. Caesarea Maiestas.

D. Diuus. Doctor, Dominus.

E. T. Excellentia Tua.

I C. Iureconsultus.

M. Marcus, and Magister.

N. Nomen ignotum, vel Nota.

P. C. Patres Conscripti.

P. L. Poeta Laureatus.

P. C. Poeta Coronatus, vel Palatinus Comes.

R. Rabbi. R. T. D. Reuerenda Tua Dignitas.

S. Sanctus. S. P. D. Salutem plurimam dicit.

S C. Senatusconsultum.

V.C. Vrbs condita etc. vid. Lilium.

Is not a great decorum to be observed in the Poets, by the repetition of
diverse letters, to express to the life the matters themselves?

Yes. E. serves to express lamentation, and sorrow: as, Lachrymae peredere
humore exangues genas.

F. To express blowing: as, Terras turbine perflant.

I. To express thin, and peircing things. Accipiunt inimicum imbrem, nimisque
fatiscunt.

L. To express low, and soft things.

Qualem virgineo demeseum pollice florem
Seu mollis violae, seu languentis Hiacynthi. Virg.
M. To express great things: as, Dorsum immane mart summo: as also to express
admiration. Deum immortalem! hominum! fidem!

N. has a contrary use; it contracts. Frangitur inque sinus scindit sese vnde
reductos.

R. To express fury, and anger; and rough, and terrible things. Imprecor arma
armis.

S. By this Virgil describes the noise of a tempest, Emissamque hyemem sensit
Neptunus, and imis stagnae refusa vadis.

T. To express slownesse: as, Nec nos obniti contra, nec tendere tantum.

V. To express obscure things: Tu plaeusu, fremituque virum, studijsque
fauentum.

What words are to be written with great letters?

1. Proper names, and such as are thence derived, and the names of Arts.

2. Beginnings of Sentences in Prose and Verses in Poems.

3. Names of Offices, and Dignities.

Is it lawful to mix letters of another tongue with latin letters?

Yes sometimes, but very sparingly: as, Liber phrase(...)n, signum
dioerese(...)s.

Of Syllables.
Can we say that ea, ei, and (...), are words of two and three syllables, when
as they consist only of vowels simply, and severally pronounced?

We may for want of a better term: but properly syllaba coming of (...).i.
concipere, signifies a comprehension or uniting of diverse letters in
pronuntiation with one tone, or spirit.

How many letters has the largest syllable in the latin tongue?

Not above six: as stirps.

Of the distinction of Syllables.
What rules have you for the distinction, or division of Syllables?

Diverse: first, in the division of a word, those letters are to be joined
together, which may be joined in the beginning of a word: as in Magnus
Aruspex, the last syllables must be gnus and spex, because gn and sp may be
found in the beginnings of words, as gnatus, spectrum. Secondly, if a single
consonant be put in the middle betwixt two vowels, it shall belong to the
latter, as Pa-ter: if two consonants be geminated, the first belongs to the
first syllable, the latter to the latter, as An-nus. Thirdly, if the latter
syllable begin with a vowell, the former shall end in a vowell, as De-us.

Does not the second rule sometimes fail?

Yes, in composition, as ab-utor, the former syllable ends in a consonant, the
latter begins with a vowel; so abs-temius, of abs and temetum.

Of Pronuntiation.
Whence has a tone its name?

From the Greek word (...), to screw up, or slacken the strings of an
instrument of music. As by the intention, or remission of the strings the
sound is flat, or sharp: so according to the tone, or accent a syllable is
shrilly, or depressedly pronounced.

In a word, whose penultima syllaba is doubtful, or common, where is the
accent to be put?

In the antepenultima, as Celebris, Mediocris, Volucris, Funebris, thus in
Prose; but in Verse, the accent is according to the measure: as Pecudes,
pictaeque volucres.

Is the accent to be placed in antepenultima in these words: Deinde, proinde,
perinde, aliquando, siquando, nequando, hucvsque, etc. as Lilly would have it?

No: for it is an undoubted rule received amongst the best Grammarians.
Polysyllaba, quae habent penultimam positione longam penultimam acuunt vt
deinceps, duntaxat, problema, extemplo: and herein Lilly thwarts his own third
general rule of Tones: and he is thwarted by Quint. Instit. l. 1. c. 5. where
he says, Duabus longis sequentibus primam acui noster sermo non patitur.

Have propemodum, admodum, nihilominus the acute accent in antepenultima, for
this reason only, to distinguish them from prope-modum, admodum, nihilo-minus,
as Lilly bears us in hand?

No: but the reason why they are so accented, is, because these by composition
being made one word, have their penultima short by quantity.

Lilly tells us, that duntaxat, deinceps, deorsum, have the accent in
antepenultima, to difference them from other words: Is that assertion true?

No: for we read no where dun taxat, dein ceps, de orsum, as distinct words,
as per inde, pro inde.

How is amabo the aduerbe of flattering to be pronounced?

Some pronounce it amabo, to distinguish it from the verb amato, but better
authority teaches us to pronounce (...)mabo: as, Dic verum mihi Marce dic
amabo. Mart. where amabo has the penultima long by quantity.

How is Ti before another vowell to be pronounced?

Always as in the word Oration, where (t) does liquescere, and is to be
pronounced as z, as if it were written orazio, except first, in the beginning
of a word, as tiara: secondly, if s come before it, as iustior: thirdly, in the
poetical infinitiues, as mittier: fourthly, in borrowed words, as Politia,
pragmatia.

How are Greek words, being made latin, to be pronounced?

According to their Quantity, not according to the tone, or accent they had in
their own tongue: as, we are not to pronounce Nicodemus, but Nicodemus; not
Demonicus, but Demonicus; not Basilius, but Basilius; not Caesarea, but
Caesarea; not Eubulus, but Eubulus: for the penultima of these is long by
quantity.

Of the Quantity of Syllables.
Are we to write patrizo, as Lilly does in the rule concerning words long by
position, or patrisso.

I think we are rather to write patrisso for z is not a letter proper to the
latin tongue and I find other verbes of imitation ending in sso, as
Platonisso, Philonisso, Atticisso: nay, Lilly himself says in his rules of
the species of verbes. Imitatiua sunt etc. vt Patrisso etc.

Is that rule, vocalis breuis ante mutam sequente liquida communis redditur, to
be understood indifferently, and equally of all the four liquids, l, m, n, r?

No: but of (l) and (r) very often, of (m) and (n) very seldom.

When of l and r?

In simple words, or such co^pounds whose mutes together with the liquids
pertain to the same syllable: and this is very necessary to be observed for
these words; obrodo, obrepo, obligo, obrumpo etc. though they have a short
vowell before a mute, and a liquid, yet are they long, and are never found
short, for as much as the liquid and mute in any of them, being compound words,
do not concur to the constitution of a syllable: for these words are to be
divided, thus: ob-rodo, ob-repo, as appears by the rules of distinction of
syllable before.

When of m and n?

In Greek words, as Cygnus, Progne, Atlas, or such as imitate greek words.

Give some examples of l, r, put after liquids, making the precedent syllables
common?

L is put after mutes in these words, Hybla, Agathocles, Abodlas, Ciniflo,
Noegla, Locuples, Atlas.

R in these, Celebris, Volucris, Exedra, Africa, Denigno, Apri, Arbitror.

Why is the last syllable save one in Cai, Vultei, Pompei, etc. long in Poets,
whereas as one vowell comes before another?

Lillies Grammar does not except these words from the general rule vocalis
ante alteram etc. but the reason of this production is, because amongst the
Ancients they were written with (ji) and so were long by position, which manner
of writing, though it be not now in use, yet the quantity of the syllable
still remains.

Do only innuba, pronuba, compounds derived of nubo; dejero, pejero, the
compounds of juro, by composition change their long quantity to short?

No: diverse other words also, as Omnipotens, Sacrosanctus, apud Buchan.
Bardocucullus, Mart. integer, ab in, and aeger: aeuiternus, ab aeuum, and
aeternus, nihilum, a ne, and hilum: the second syllables of which are short in
composition, long out of composition: so siquidem, -- siquidem ieiuna remansit.
Ovid. iubeo, a ius, and habeo; whose first syllables become short by
composition.

Is that generally true: in t desinentia breuia sunt?

No: such words are to be excepted which have a consonant before t, as amant,
est, refert, and such as are long by contraction, as, Nomen abit, aut vnde
redit maiore triumpho. Lucan.

If all nounes ending in e have e short by quantity, except the ablat. of the
fifth declension, how is it that we find e in fame long in Virg. a noune of
the third declension, as,

Amissis (vt fama) apibus morboque fameque.

It is not so made by Caesura, because it is not a syllable produced after a
foot full and complete falling any of the kinds of Caesura in Grammar
specified, we must therefore say that anciently (fames) was of the fifth
declension, but now used only in the third, yet here retains the same
quantity which it had in former times, when it was of the fifth.

Is that true which Lilly has: Pes vna cum compositis, vt praepes, bipes etc?

No: Praepes signifies swift, not on foot, but in flying, it is not compounded
of prae, and pes, but derived rather of praepeto, to hasten to with speed: it
is commonly used in the Poets, as an epithet of the Eagle, which is
consecrated to Icue, Praepes adunca Iouis, Ovid. In Tully, praepes auis, is the
bird that first shows himself to the Augur, whereby he declares things to
come: it may appear by analogy very evidently, that praepes is no compound of
pes: bipes makes bipedis, quadrupes quadrupedis in the genit. case, but praepes
praepetis, not praepedis.

Is that rule of Lilly true, Longae sunt omnes voces quartae inflexionis in us
praeter nom. and voc. sing.

No: for the dat. and ablat. plural in us, of all words of the fourth
declension are short, as well as the nom. and voc. singular.

Of ETYMOLOGY.
WHat is the meaning of that definition of Etymology in Lilly. Etym. est ratio
cognoscendi casuum discrimina?

The meaning of it is this: that in Etymology is handled the differences of
terminations of Nounes, Pronounes, and Participles, by declining of Verbes by
their coniugating from their first themes: as for example, the variations of
Musa in the oblique Cases, are called Casuum discrimina: so likewise the
differences of endings of doctus, whether it be varied by declining as doctus,
a, um; or by comparison, as doctus, ior, issimus, are called casuum discrimina.
Casus here is not to be taken in so strict an acception as it is afterward,
where it is said, Casus sunt sex, for it is attributed to a verb also, for the
variation of the verb Amo in all Tenses, Persons, and Moodes, from its simple
self are called in this definition, Casuum discrimina. But yet me thinks the
definition is too narrow, though we do stretch the words after this manner,
and comprehends under it only the declineable parts of speech, for though
almost all aduerbs derived from adjectiues be compared, and so be varied in
termination (yet they have this nature as derived rather then as aduerbs) and
some few prepositions, as supra, superior, etc. yet not any conjunction, or
interjection admits of Casuum discrimina, and very hardly any aduerbe which
is so primitiuely, and originally.

Of the parts of Speech. Of a Noune.
How are there eight parts of speech, since a Pronoune, and a Participle have
the same things which belong to a Noune, to wit, Number, Case, Gender, and
Declension?

A Pronoune, and a Participle agree, and communicate with a Noune in these, but
yet they have several and peculiar differences by which they are
distinguished, and constitute several parts of speech: a Pronoune is
distinguished from a Noune by difference of Person, and from a Participle by
Time, and signification.

Why do you say that a Noune admits not difference of persons: when as
Magister in the nominative case is of the third person, in the vocative of the
second person, according to that rule. The second person is spoken to, as, Tu,
Thou, and of this person is every vocative case?

A vocative case is said to be of the second person, not because it is so of
its proper signification, but by reason of the pronoune, Tu, with which it does
agree in the same case by apposition.

This answer is given by some to make Lillies definition of a noune good, but
in the definitions of Frischline, Melanchthon, Scaliger, and Finkius, there is
no want of difference of Person mentioned to difference it from other parts of
speech.

It Is true: The stream of best Grammarians run, that a noune has Persons, but
thus is distinguished from a Pronoune, which signifies a thing with difference
of Person as well as a Noune: a Noune signifies first, a Thing; secondarily, a
Person: a Pronoune, first a Person; secondarily, a Thing.

If all Aduerbs, Conjunctions, etc. be parts indeclinable, how comes it to
pass that some of them are the Nominative Cases to their Verbes, and have
Adjectives joined to them, agreeing with them in case, gender, and number, as
in Martial: Dic mihi cras istud Posthume quando venit: and again, Magnum
semper inane soph(...)s: or thus, Et est coniunctio, Penes est praepositio. Vah
est interjectio.

Cras, and Soph(...)s, and the other particles before the verb est, are not
nounes, but as it were nounes inasmuch as they supply the place of a nomin.
case before the verb, they are not properly nounes, but (...), artificially as
Melanchthon speaks: and in the same manner are verbes sometimes used.

Matutinum portat ineptus ave. Mart.
Quis expediuit Psittico suum (...). Per.
Scire tuum nihil est. Idem.
Do not the nounes, Hora, Dies, Mensis, Annus, signify difference of Time, as
well as a participle; does not the Time of an Hour differ from the Time of a
Day, and the space of a Month from the space of an Year? how is it then that
Lilly says, a noune does not signify difference of Time?

It Is true indeed, that these nounes considered co^paratiuely among them
selves, do signify Times which differ among themselves, but considered
absolutely, and each by it self, they do barely signify a space of Time, not
consignifie Time besides its prime signification, as a participle does; as
amans does not only signify the action (or rather passion) of loving, but
consignifies the present time.

Are not some substantives varied by three terminations.

Yes: we read Syngraphus, Syngrapha, Syngraphum: Intybus, Intyba, Intybum:
Vesper, and vesperus, ra, rum.

How does that definition of a noune substantive proper, hold: Quod vni soli
conuenit; when as we read many proper names in the plural number?

The definition is true notwithstanding that exception: for a proper name in
its own nature is attributed but to one in the same species, but by accident
to many. First, when the same name agrees to many men: as, Virgilij, Simones,
Scipiones. Secondly, when a noune metaphorically notes a property or
similitude: as, Catones, for Wisemen. Thirdly, when the names of Nations, or
Families, take upon them the nature of appellatiues, as the Latini from
Latinus, Fabij from Fabius, the Authors and Founders of that Nation, this
Family.

Of the Accidents of a Noune. Of Species.
When is a word said to be of the primitive species?

A word is said to be of the primitive species, which is as the stem, or
root, whence other words as branches do sprout forth; or as the fountain,
whence other words as rivolets do issue and flow forth, which are therefore
called deriuatiues, as the noune of the primitive species is nauis, of the
deriuatiue species, are, nauigo, nauicula.

Is species taken properly in Grammar, or metaphorically?

Metaphorically: species properly signifies an image, picture, or resemblance
of any thing: the reason of borrowing this word, is this: as the image which
represents it self to the eye of the body by a direct ray, is the prime image;
that which is represented by a reflected ray is a second image begot of the
first: so that word which represents it self to the Understanding (which is
the Eye of the Soul in its prime estate, is a word of the primitive species,
that which issues from the former of the deriuatiue.

What is a noune collectiue?

A noune which collecteth, gathers, and unites a company, or multitude, in
the singular number: as, Exercitus, an Army; Grex, A flock of sheep; Examen,
A swarm of Bees.

If Quis be sometimes a noune interrogatiue, sometimes a noune indefinite; how
comes it to pass that Lilly claps it in amongst the pronounes afterward, and
subioynes to the rules of pronounes a catalogue of the compounds of Quis?

It seems to be placed out of due order; unless peradventure it visit the
pronounes by reason of some seeming affinity it has with Qui.

It is said in the English Rudiments, that Quid is always a substantive of the
neuter gender, is that true?

No: Quid is not a substantive, but is put sometimes substantiuely with a
genitive case: as, Quid noui?

Is not Quid sometimes used for Magnum?

Yes: as, Nescio, quid certe est, and Hylax in limine latrat. Virg.
Nescio, quid certe est, quod me tibi temperat astrum. Pers.


So among the Greeks, (...) used for (...), as (...), Plat. in ap. Socr.

Why are Vnus, Duo, Tres, Quatuor, etc. the first kinds of numerall nounes of
the primitive species, called Cardinals?

Because the digit numbers are the first and chief numbers, upon the which the
rest do depend, and turn as the door upon the hinges, which in latin are
called cardines, the rest being but resumptions of them. So the four great and
chief winds, are called the Cardinal winds, and the chief, and main point
in any business, is called, Cardo causae.

Whence is a noune Patronymicke derived?

From the Greek words, (...), a Father; and (...), a Name; which has its name
from the father. So it only signifies, being strictly taken according to the
Etymon. as Tydides, the son of Tydeus; Pelides, the son of Peleus; but yet
it is used in a larger extent, to signify many other relations by marriage, as
Aeacides, the son, or nephew of Aeacus; Nerine, the daughter or niece of
Nereus; Menelais, the wife of Menelaus.

Of Figure.
What do Grammarians mean when they ask that question: Cuius est figurae est
hoc nomen?

They ask whether it be a simple noune, as parabilis, or a compound as
reparabilis, or a decompound as irreparabilis.

Does not composition sometimes change gender?

Yes: for (...) is of the mascul. genesis but atomus the compound is of the femin.
(...), is of the mascu. gender, but diphthongus is of the femin.

Are there not diverse words which are used by latin Authors, which are
compounded of greek and latin words, and latin and greek words?

Yes: these are compounded of greek, and latin words: Monoculus, for which
some had rather say Vnoculus. Bigamus, for which some had rather say Digamus.
Anthropouorus, for which some had rather say Anthropophagus.


Archigubernus, Protonotarius, Archidux, etc. These of latin, and greek
words: Of this rank Cooper in his Dictionarie makes Homocapnus, which he
englisheth most ridiculously, One that sits always in the smoke, or by the
fire, as it were a compound of homo and (...): whereas indeed it is wholly a
greek word, and signifies, One that enioyes the same fire, or smoke with
another, an epithet given to a wife by Arist. l. 1. Polit.
Prologus, and therefore they make the first syllable long; Epitogium, Elogium,
Grauitona, Semidiameter, Bissyllabum, Imbuo, ab in, and (...), Induo, ab in,
and (...), etc. vide Rod. Boclen. prob. Gram. l. 3. 29. p.

Of Number.
Is that rule true concerning all nounes; the singular number speaks of one,
the plural of more then one?

No: some nounes are singular by position, or termination, but plural in sense
and understanding, as Turba, concie, exercitus, etc. Again, some nounes are
plural by position, and singular in sense: as, Athenae, literae, etc.

Of Case.
Is it necessary to make a seventh or eighth Case?

No: the seventh which Grammarians make by an ablative case with a preposition,
is altogether superfluous, for no preposition enters into the essence of a
case, so likewise is their eighth case, for it is the dative put for the
accusative, with the preposition ad: In coelum is not a good interpretation.
as, It clamor coelo. i. ad coelum. Virg. Quaerere sibi adiumenta honoribus. i.
ad honores consequendos. Cic.

Why is the Ablative called Latinus Casus?

Because it is proper to the Latins; the Greeks altogether want it.

How then is it that we find in Tully lat. prepositions which govern only an
ablative case, construed with greek nounes?

It Is true, there is such syntaxe found in Tully, as 13. Ep. ad At. Id ab
(...) est remotissimum: and elsewhere. Prudentia cum (...): where the words
(...) and (...), though they be the dative case, take upon them the nature of
the ablative.

Of Gender.
Does not the feminine gender sometimes imply the masculine, as well as the
masculine the feminine?

Yes; hereof are diverse examples in Authors. Plaut. in Cistell. Scen. Nisi
quid. Eam (rem) vult suae matri, and patri, etc. vbi (suae) innuit (suo)

Curtius is called Fama by Virg. in Culice.

Hic and Fama vetus nunquam moritura per aeuum. Curtius.

Maiestas vestra, is the ordinary title of a King.

Potestas, does signify Magistrates, and Judges: Fenest. c. 26. De Procuratore
Caesaris, caeterisque Romany potestatibus. Sueton. in Claud. Caes.
Iurisdictionem de fidei-commissis quotannis, and tantum in vrbe delegari
magistratibus solitam in perpetuum, atque etiam per prouincias potestatibus
demandauit. So Saint Paul Romans 13.1. uses (...), which Beza renders,
potestates supereminentes, to signify Kings: so Nobilitaes, is in Lucan put
for the Nobility, or Peers of a Land. Nobilitas cum plebe perit.

Are all names of Males of the masc. gender, of Females of the feminine; and
all nounes that signify both sexes of both genders?

No: sometimes one and the same gender does agree to both sexes, as is apparent
in the names of birds, fishes, and other creatures, whose sex is not set forth
by several words: as in Passer, Aquila, Ostreum. So Liberi, though it be
only of the masculine gender, is put both for sons and daughters, and
mancipium of the neut. gender, only signifies a bondman, or a bondwoman, a
He, or a She captive.

Is that a proper speech which is set down in the English Rudiments: the
masculine gender is declined with this article, Hic?

No: it is very harsh and insolent; no gender, being the accident of a noune,
can be said to be declined; but every noune which is declinable is declared
to be of the masculine gender, having the article Hic prefixed.

Why are articles used in Grammar?

Not to point out an indiuidium, or particular Thing, or Person, nor to
distinguish sex, for Grammar considers not the natures of things, but the
names only, as Lilly himself confesses, but to difference one gender from
another: an article does not make a noune of such, or such a gender, but
demonstrates it to be so: it is not the cause of the gender, but the sign.

Upon Propria quae maribus.
Is that marginall note true, which the Poser of the Accidence has in his
margent upon the first general rule touching proper names, viz. Cocytus, the
name of a Fenne in hell, is of the fem. gender.

No: I find it of the masc. gender in the most refined Authors:

Visendus ater flumine languido Cocytus. Hor. 2. Car.

Inamaenum forte sedebat Cocytum iuxta. Stat. 1. Theb.

Is that exception of Stockwood to the second general rule of proper names,
good, viz. that Epidaurus, the name of a City is of the masc. gender?

No: for I find it of the fem. gender in Martial. Aereis imposta iugis,
medicamque Epidaurum.

How are the proper noune, Opus, a City, and the appellatiue, Opus, a work,
distinguished?

By their genitive cases: Opus, the noune proper makes Opuntis: Opus, the
appellatiue, Operis.

What is contained in the first general rule?

Thus much: These all are masculines: the names of Gods, the names of Men, of
Months, of Winds, of Floods.

Are none to be excepted?

Yes: Styx, and Lethe, which are rivers of hell, found in the Poets of the
femin. genesis -- Styx inde nouem circumflua campo. Stat. -- soporiferae biberem
si pocula Lethes. Ovid. we need not excuse Lilly, by saying they are Fennes,
not Rivers. So Albula of the fem. genesis as, Albula pota Deo, where we need not
force a Syncheris; the rule must be squared to the examples, not the examples
to the rule.

What is contained in the second general rule?

Thus much: the names of women, Earthly and Divine, of Regions, Cities, Isles,
are feminine.

Are none to be excepted?

Yes: besides those which are expressed, these, Londinum, Eboracum, Brundusium,
Pergamon, are of the neut. genesis as Virg. Miramur Troiae cineres, and flebile
victis Pergamon.

Of the general rules of Appellatiues.
If suber, and siler be rightly placed in appellatiua arborum etc. how is it
that we find them again in the second exception of neuters, from the third
special rule?

I cannot excuse Lilly herein, it is a vain exception, or Tautologie.

Of Epicens.
May not the rule, sunt etiam volucrum etc. be spared?

Yes, as I conceive: for first, it belongs not to a Grammarian, but to a
Philosopher, to consider the difference of sexes. Secondly, the genders of the
names of birds, wild beasts, and fishes, are to be known by the rules
following. Thirdly, if this rule show the gender of those nounes in the same
specified, how is that we find the genders of them set down again: of
birds, as Halcyon, Bubo, Perdix, Phoenix, Nycticorax: of beasts, as Elephas,
Linx: of fish, as Halec.

If all nounes appellatiue ending in um, be of the neuter gender, according to
that rule, Omne quod exit in um. why does Lilly say again in the second
exception from the first special rule, Et quot in on vel in um.

I think that part touching nounes ending in um, might be spared, and the rule
better thus contracted.

Neutrum nomen in e, si gignit Is vt mare, rete.

Et quot in on, sea Barbiton. Et pelagus, lacoethes,

Hippomanes, virus. Neutrum modo, mas modo vulgus.

What is the meaning of Inuariabile nomen?

Not only every substantive undeclined, as the Poser of the Accidence speaks:
but also all nomina (...), viz. all clauses which are the nominative case to
the verb, as in that clause, didicisse fideliter arts Emollit mores;
didicisse fideliter arts must be conceived to be of the neuter gender, as also
all verbs of the infinitive mood used substantiuely, whether they come before
their verb, or follow after; as, Velle suum cuique est. Pers. Videamus beat
viuere vestrum quale sit. Cicer. Plaut. in Curc. sc. 1. Ita tuum conferto amare
semper si sapis. Ne id quod ames, populus si sciat, tibi sit probro. Idem in
Bacchid. sc. Iamdudum. Hic vereri perdidit i, e, verecundiam.

What do you think of that which is annexed to the first special rule,
Labes, labis. Pestes, pestis.

Pestes is here set down by Lilly (or I know not who) as the nomin. case,
which word is not found in any pure Author, nor in any Lexicon: and it seems
rather to be an error of the Composer then a slip of the Printer, inasmuch as
he would have pictis by analogy, the genesis case of pestes, as labis of labes;
this has passed in all editions that I have seen without correction: the true
nomin. case is pestis.

Does Lilly speak properly, when he says, Scriba, Assecla, Lixa, etc. are
the names of men?

No: for in propriety of speech they are not the names of men, but of the
offices, or employments of men.

Is that generally true, Mascula graecorum quot declinatio prima fundit, etc.

No: for as learned Ramus observes in his Grammar, there be many words borrowed
of the Greeks by the Latins, which being of the masculine gender and first
declension, of the Greeks are of the feminine gender in latin Authors; which I
have comprised in this Distich:

Foeminei generis sunt haec Graecanica. Charta, Gausapa, Margarita, Catarracta,
and Catapulta.

Are funis, and sentis of the mascul. gender?

Ramus, and Stephanus say, they are of the Common of two: so also Trebell. in
Prompt. Sentis com. g. test Phoca. asprae sentes. Virg. Aeneid. 2. Funis tam
masc. quam foem. test Gellio lib. 13. citante verse. Lucret. Aurea de coelo
demisit funis in arua.

Is rete always of the neuter gender?

We read both retis, and rete, rete is always of the neuter genesis retis of the
masc. Varro. this is a noune redundant: as also, Barbiton, for we read in
Horace, Barbitus, of the fem. gender. Age dic Latinum Barbite carmen. Carm. l.
1. Ode 32.

Is Halcyonis of the doubtful gender, as Lilly bears us in hand?

No: in this word Lilly was foulely deceived, and by this has deceived others.
First, he was deceived in that he took for a word which did not increase in
the genesis case, where as it is in true the genitive case of the nominative,
Halcyon, a King-fisher, so called, because she builds her nest in the Sea,
and there hatcheth her young. Secondly, in that he says it is of the doubtful
gender, where it is always found with a femin. epithet. as Vir. Dilectae
Thetidi Halcyones.

Nunc ego desertas alloquar Halcyonas. Proper. Maestae.
Halcyones lugubre dabant per littora carmen. Mant.
Secondly, he deceived others, amongst them the Construer of Lillies Rules,
who swallowed down this fly, putting Halcyonis for a King-fisher, and other
ordinary Schoolemasters following him, are deceived also.

Is ficus for a disease, of the doubtful gender?

No: Martial Epigr. l. 1. Ep. 66.
Martial who knew the gender of it better then Lilly, says, it is of the Sic
quibusdam e plebe Grammaticis videtur: ego autem in Thomae Farnabij viri (...)
sententiam pedibus eo; cuius verba in Notis ad hac Epigramma operaepretium erit
recensere. Cum nihil hic de genere moueatur, neque apud probae notae autorem
quempiam reperiatur ficus pro morbo in alio, quam foemineo genere, vt and (...)
Graeca exponunt e suos liberos famulos, pueros delicatos.
masc. gender.

Dicemus ficus, quas scimus in arbore nasci
Dicemus ficos, Caeciliane, tuos.
What is the meaning of the second special rule, Nomen crescentis etc.

The Poser of the Accidence, says, this is the meaning: that every noune
substantive common, increasing sharp, or long in the genesis case, that is, being
lifted up in pronouncing, or pronounced long, is of the feminine gender.

If Lilly mean by syllaba acuta, a long syllable with an acute accent upon it,
then many of the words put in the rules of exception, are in vain excepted,
for many of them increase short?

It Is very true: amongst the masculines excepted, these increase short, Sal,
salis. Vir, viri. Mas, maris. Pes, pedis. Grex, gregis. Phryx, phrygis. Amongst
the doubtful: Scrobs, scrobis. Grus, gruis. Amongst the Common of two: Dux,
ducis. Bos, bouis. Sus, suis.

Why does Lilly say, Glis gliris habens genitiuo.

To distinguish it from Glis glissis, Potters clay, and Glis glitis, a Thistle,
both which words are of the feminine gender.

Is not that rule, Mascula in er, or, and os, faulty?

Yes, and it may be thus compendiously amended: Mascula in er, or, and os, seu
Crater, conditor, heroes;

In Dens, quale bidens: Torens, nefrens, oriensque

Add gigas, elephas, adam^, garamasque tapesque

Atque Lebes, magnes, hydrops, dodransque meridi-

Es. Phoenix, bombyx, thorax, vervexque coraxque

Sunt haec foeminea in n and or, Siren, soror, vxor.

Why do you turn out of this rule, Cures: Quae componuntur ab ass vt
dodrans, semis; and Mulier?

Cures is a defective, as Gabij and Locri.
First: Cures is no noune appellatiue, but a proper name of a town of the
Sabines; which is read only in the plural number. Tutioque seni, Curibusque
seueris. Virg. Secondly, Dodrans, and Semis, are no compounds of As; first,
Dodrans is no compound, as appears by its signification, for it does not
signify, nine pounds, which it should if it were compounded of dodra and as,
but nine ounces: as also by analogy; as of december and as comes decussis, of
centum and as, centussis; so by analogy of dodra and as, should result
dodrassis, not dodrans: and herein Lilly forgot what he had written before in
the first exception of the first special rule, that ab assenata were
masculines, not increasing in the genitive case. Secondly, semis is not found
in any pure Writer as a simple word; it is not the nom. case of Semissis, but
semissis is it self the nom. case, compounded of semi and as, which semi is
always found in composition, as Semianimis, semivivus, semicircularis,
semipedalis. Semibouemque virum, semivirumque bouem. Ovid. and is derived of
the greek word (...), which being turned into latin, in stead of the asper
spiritus, does prefixe s, as (...), super; (...), sylua. Thirdly, Mulier,
though in modern Poets it be made to increase long, yet in truth it does
increase short, and so the best Critics pronounce it: that it increases short
may be thus confirmed. First, it is found, the last word in many verses in
Terence, which do commonly end in an Iambicke foot. Secondly, it is found, in
any place of Virgil or Ouids works in any oblique case, and it is more then
probable, that a word of such common use would not have been baulked by them,
had not the three first syllables in the oblique cases made a tribrachus, of
which their verses are altogether incapable. Thirdly, that Iambick Scazon in
Martial, where (erum) makes an Iambus: for a Scazon never admits of a spondaeus
in the second odd place, put all out of doubt. Amethystinasque mulierum vocat
vestes.

Is perdix of the doubtful gender?

It can scarce be found in any Author of the masculine gender, ordinarily of
the femin. as Ovid.

Garrula ramosa prospexit ab ilice perdix.

Mart. Et picta perdix.

Mant. Daedala perdix, etc.

How may that rule, Sunt commune parens, etc. be bettered?

Thus: Communis generis sunt haec infans adolescens,

Dux, illex, haeres, exlex, autorque parensque

Latro, cliens, custos, bos, fur, sus, atque Sacerdos.

Why is Bifrons turned out?

Because, though it be sometimes used substantiuely, yet indeed it is an
adjective, an epithet of Ianus.

Saturnusque senex, Iunique bifrontis imago. Virg.

Is author used only concerning Persons?

No: sometimes concerning Things, as, Multi ingenio sibi autore dignitatem
pepererunt. Cic. Calor author leuitatis. Cometa sideris autoris sui sequitur
naturam. Scal.

Is Presbyter, which is called in Gra^mar, Vox Ecclesiastica, a good word or no?

No: it has been used by modern writers, but is in truth a barbarous word:
the true latin word is Presbyterus, borrowed of the greek (...).

What feminines are excepted from the third special rule? Ordo, though it make
Dinis, is of the masc. genesis because it is not an hyperdissyllabon: and Macedo
is of the masc. gender, because though it be an hyperdissyll. yet it makes
donis, not dinis, in the genitive case.


In Do, vel Go, Nomina hyperdisyllaba gignunt.

Quae Dinis, atque Ginis sicut dulcedo, propago. To which these may more
completely be added:

Virgo, grando, fides, compes, teges, arbor, amazon,

Bacchar, hyems, mulier, syndon, gorgon, seges, icon.

What do you think of that rule, Graecula in as, etc. caspis, cassis, cuspis.

I think that therein Lilly was in part deceived, for cassis and cuspis are
originally latin words, not to be found in any greek Lexicographer.

Is every word, signifying a thing without life, ending in a, of the neuter
gender?

Yes, if it increase short in the genitive case.

How is then that many Grammarians have affirmed, that polenta, though it
increase not at all in the genitive case, is of the neuter gender?

It is true, Alexander, Sulpitius, Nebrissensis, Baptista Pius, and Calepine,
affirm so; and Mantuan being deceived by the Grammarians of his time, did use
it so, saying: Montibus artocreas, and pingue polenta comedi. But in Apuleius
we find, polentae caseatae offula. In Varro, Obijciunt his polentam
hordeaceam: the error arose first from the misse-construction of that verse in
Ouids Metam. Dulce dedit testa, quod coxerat ante polenta: they coosined with a
comma after ante, put in by the non-intelligent Printer, thought polenta the
accusative, which was the ablative, as if the Poet had meant, dedit dulce
polenta: which if it be searched into will be found nonsense, for polenta
signifies dried barley, with which beer is brewed, but is not of it self any
liquid thing which may be drunk: the verse is thus to be construed; Dedit
dulce.i. dulcem potum, She gave to Ceres sweet drink, quod coxerat ante
polenta, which before she had boiled with dried barley. Ovid takes dulce here
in the neuter gender substantiuely, as afterward, liquidum. Iuuenemque cum
liquido mixta perfudit Diua polenta; Vide Raphaelem Regium, Ouidij Interp. in
5. Metam.
Ceres besprinkled the impudent boy which derided her, with the dry barley
mingled with the liquor: so Niniuita.

If verber be read, Robinson contradicts Lilly, affirming, that only verberis,
and verbere are read.

It is no marvel though they disagree, since in patching up our Grammar they
did not confer their notes together.

Does iter belong to the rule of neutrall words, excepted from the third
special rule, since it is declined iter itineris, whereas those which increase
in the genitive case, are to exceed the nom. only in one syllable, and not in
two?

The genitive case Itineris is of an old word Itiner, which is grown out of
use, not of iter, which is succeeded in its room.

Pecus pecoris seems to be of the fem. gender, as well as pecus pecudis, by
that verse of Ovid. Hoc Pecus omne meum, multae stabulantur in antris. Multae,
in this verse, does not agree with pecora, but pecudes understood.

What is the meaning of Onyx cum prole?

That onyx with the offspring, or compound thereof, Sardonyx, is of the
doubtful gender.

Is it any where found in the feminine gender?

No where, always in the masc.

Et crocino nares myrrhcus vngat onyx. Propert.

In dextra candidus ardet onyx, etc.

Are Augur and Aruspex used in the fem. gender, as well as in the masc.

I do not think any example can be showed, where they are used in the
feminine gender: the Romans had a College of Augurs, but we never read of
any woman admitted fellow there. Plautus would not use Haruspex for a
Shee-diuiner, but Haraspica.

Is princeps always a substantive of the common of two, as it is in Lilly?

I think that it is primarily a substantiuely, yet used sometime in the room
and place of an adjective, as in that verse of Horace:

Principibus placuisse viris non vltima laus est.

Of the first declension.
Do all nounes of the first declension, ending in a, make the genitive in ae?

No: for we read Paterfamilias, Materfamilias, Filius familias in the genesis
even in the best and purest Authors: and in the Ancients, vias, terras: the
genitive of via, terra.

Why did they write so?

In imitation of the Greeks, amongst whom all substantives ending in (...),
and a with a vowell before it form the genitive case by as.

It seems that some latin words end in am, as well as Hebrew in the nom.
case. I read in Plautus; Ego patriam te rogo quae sit tua, where patriam
seems to be the nominative case: for if the sentence be construed, the words
must be placed thus; Rogo te quae sit patriam tua?

The words cannot be so placed: but here is an Antiptosis, the accusative put
for the nominative, patriam for patria.

If all nounes of the first declension in as, make the vocative in a, how is it
that we read in Terence, Pythias in the vocative case, Quid festinas, aut quem
quaeris Pythias, in Eun. Act. 4. sc. 3.

In this there is an Atticisme: the Atticks in all declensions make the
vocative like the nominative, and yet we find regularly in the same Scene;
Paululum si cessassem Pythia, domi non offendissem.

Are a Musa, a Magistro, ablative cases?

The vulgar Gra^marians confound Syntaxis with Etymology, when in declining a
noune that say in the ablat. ab hac Musa, ab hoc Magistro; this is
construction, not declining: if they will say, the preposition is prefixed
only as a sign; I answer, that this sign is nor perpetual; this appears
in Siquis, ecquis. Nequis, nunquis: for none will say, a siquo, ab ecquo, a
nequo, a nunquo. Goclen. problem. Gram. l. 1. p. 24.

Does not anima sometimes make the dative, and ablative cases plural in abus,
as well as Dea liber^a etc.

Yes, and sometimes in is also: for we read in Cicero. Tullius Terentiae, and
Pater Tulliolae duabus animis suis salutem dicit.

Do not words of the first declension make the dative and ablative cases
plural, regularly in is?

Yes: but these which follow are to be excepted, whereof some make is and
abus, as nounes redundant; others abus only: which for the help of memory I
have reduced into this distich:

Filia, nata, anima is faciunt, atque abus, at abus Tantum, Ambae, atque duae,
liberta, equa, sic dea, mula.

Of the second Declension.
How many terminations be there of the second declension?

Eight: the examples of them I have compiled in this Hexameter:

TemplVM, annVS, vIR, apER, SatVR, Orpheus, IliON, ArgOS.

Is there an imitation of the Attick dialect of the Greeks, which forms the
vocative like to the nominative, in that verse of Ovid. Latmius Endymion non
est tibi luna rubori, as Lilly supposes.

I see no reason for that supposall, for Latmius Endymion is the nominative
case to the verb est, not the vocative: the Poet according to the true
original copy, does not direct his speech to Endymion, but to the Moon: the
meaning is, that Diana was not ashamed to descend to the loving embracements of
Endymion on the hill Latmus. Endymion was an Astronomer, and for the cleerer
sight of the stars, did often go to the top of that mountain, which gave
hint to the fable.

What words be those of the second declension, which make the vocative in e
and in us?

These six: which to help the memory, I have comprised in this verse:

Haec: vulgus, lucus, populus, fluuius, chorus, agnus.

Do not Quercus, and Laurus, form the vocative in e, or us, as well as these?

Yes; but not in the same respect: for they form the vocative in e, as of the
second declension: and in us, as of the fourth declension.

Does vulgus make the vocative in e, and in us, as of the masc. gender.

No: it has that double termination in a double consideration: as it makes e
in the voc. it is of the masc. gender, as us of the neuter: and here also may
be noted, that the ending of the rest of the nounes in us in the vocative case,
is an Archaisme.

How do greek words in os, as Logos, make the vocative?

As the latin words in us regularly.

What is the reason that Panthus, and Oedipus, make the vocative in u?

Because they come of greek words in (...), which make ^ in the vocative, which
is rendered in latin by u.

Of the third Declension.
What nounes of the third declension make the accusative case in im only?

These; which for memories sake may thus rhyme: Vim, rauim, sitim, tussim,
Charybdim, maguderim, and amussim.


What nounes make the accusative both in im, and in em?

These: Im, Em. faciunt, febris, buris,
Peluis, puppis, and securis.
Torquis, turris, aqualis, nauis.
Et bipennis, restis, clauis.


If the genitive case of the third declension end in is, how comes it to pass
that we read duri miles Vlyssi. Immitis Achilli?

Concerning Vlyssi, which Virg. uses in the genitine case, in the second of
his Aeneid. (and the same is to be said also of Achilli) we must observe that
it is of the third declension of the contracts amongst the Greeks, whose nom.
ending in (...), and genit. in (...), as Vlysseus, Vlysseos; the ancient
Grammarians were wont to divide (...) into two syllables, whose genitive they
made (...), divided also, as Vlysseus, Vlyssei; and the vowels so divided, they
did again contract into the diphthong (...), by Synecphonesis, as Ulysses, for
Vlyssei: and afterward by Synaeresis they pronounced the diphthong by i, as
Vlyssi for Vlyssei.

Do any nounes of the third declension decrease in the genitive case?

No: those that imagine that Jupiter makes Iouis in the genitive case, are
deceived; and those that decline it so, may as well say. Nom. Phoebus. Genesis
Apollinis, says the Grammarian. Probus Institut. l. 2. Jupiter is a Synonymon
of the ancient nominat. case: Iouis, which was declined Iouis in the genitive
case also, but now the nominative is out of use, and Jupiter used in stead of
it; but the other cases keep their ancient form.

Is that rule of Lilly generally true, that Adjectives, except those which end
in is, and en, and make e in the neuter gender, make the ablative both e and i?

No: for adjectives ending in ns, do not make the ablative promiscuously in e
or i: in this we must be very obseruant of the use of authors, we may say, me
perlubente, me imprudente; but we may not say, me perlubenti, me imprudenti:
neither may we say gaudenti, libenti, patienti, absenti illo factum est: for
the ablative of the participle of the present tense, being joined with another
word put absolutely, ends only in e: yet we may say in another kind of
construction, animo Gaudenti, patienti, laetanti faciam. Goclen. probl. gram.
l. 1. page 16.

Is that rule of Lilly generally true. Comparatiua bifariam facient ablativum
in e vel i?

No: the comparatiues of the foeminine gender do most commonly make the
ablative in e, as laetiore fame, secundiore fortuna, vocis contentione maiore,
grauitate acriore, commodiore valetudine, longiore via. Comparatiues of the
neuter gender most commonly make the ablative in i, as a Marori, a Pari, a
fortiori; ardentiori studio, Cic. vide Goclen. ibid.

Of the fourth Declension.
What words of the fourth declension make the dative, and the ablative cases
plural in ubus.

These comprehended in this distich for memory sake.

Haec in vbus, ficus, portus,
partus, specus, arcus
Sic lacus, atque veru, sic
quercus, acus, tribus, artus.
Of the fifth Declension.
Is plebes, plebei to be used by any one that would write purely?

No: it was a word anciently used, but now is exolete: if plebs be a noune
redundant, as Robinson says, then plebes must be the other nominative case;
not plebis, as he says in his rules of Heteroclits: plebis is no where found
but in the genitive of plebs.

Upon Quaegenus, etc.
What do you think of that rule, Haec genus, ac partim flexum variantia, etc.

I think it might very well have been spared. Pergama seems to be the
plural of Pergamon, found in Virg. rather then of Pergamus. Some say that
supellectilia is the plural of supellex, but is scarce to be found in any pure
author: it fell not within the verge of the reading of the composer of these
rules, and therefore he says, Quod nisi plurali careut etc.

What are nounes aptote?

Not such as have no cases, but such as do not admit of difference of
terminations in oblique cases, they are derived of a, a privative particle, and
(...), cado.

Are cornu and genu such?

Yes.

Yet we read that these have other terminations, as cornuum, cornibus, genuum,
genibus.

The rule is to be understood of these in the singular, not in the plural
number.

What part of speech is fas?

A noune adjective, used only in the neuter gender; and of the same natue is
nefas.

If Instar be a noune, as Robinson says, how comes it to pass that in the
syntaxis of aduerbs we find this rule, Instar aequiparationem, mensuram etc.
significat, etc.

It is an evident contradiction, and no marvel, since our Grammar is a Cento
made up of the shreds of several men.

Is not the rule touching Triptots faulty?

Yes: first in that he says, frugis, and ditionis want their nominative
cases, whereas fruges, and ditio are found in good authors, and are not
scrupulously to be refused. Secondly, in that he says opis, has the plural
number complete and perfect: it is true, opes is read in all cases in the
plural number, but it has not any respect to opis, but is a fcminine plural,
wanting the singular number, and is to be referred to that rule, Haec sunt
faeminei generis, numerique secundi, etc. Again the significations of opis:
and opes, though they have some kindred, yet they differ much; opis, help,
opes, riches. If he will say that opis has the plural number, he may as well
say that delicium has the plural number also, for deliciae is every where
read: and that Tricae, apinae, plugae, has the singular number, for trica,
apina, pluga are found frequently in the singular number in different
signification.

Does omnis want the vocative case?

No: we read in the Poet, Dijque Deaeque omnes. O all ye Gods and Goddesses.

Have no Pronounes the vocative case,

but only noster, nostras, meus and tu?

Yes: Ipse has the vocative case also; as in the Poet, Ipse meas ether
suscipe sum preces.

How may Robinsons rule be mended?

Thus: Et Pronomina, praeter

Quinque notanda. Meus, tu, nostras, noster, and ipse.

What Nounes want the plural number?

All, or the most part that for brevity sake are comprised in this distich.

1. Propria, 2. Virtutes, 3. Arts, 4. Pensa, 5. Vda, 6. Figura.

7. Morbi, 8. Herbae, 9. Vitia, 10. Aetates, 11. Frumenta, 12. Metella.

1. As Thomas, Richardus. 2. Prudentia, Iustitia. 3. Grammatica Logica. 4.
Piper, Saccharum. 5. Aromatices. 6. Synecdoche, Metaphora. 7. Podagra,
Cephalalgia. 8. Amaranthus, Amaracus. 9. Desidia, Auaritia. 10. Iuuenta,
Senecta. 11. triticum. 12. aurum ferrum.

Is not sanguis read in the plural number?

Yes, in ecclesiastical writers, but then the word is forced to express an
Hebraisme, as, vir sanguinum.

Lilly says that nemo is of the common of two, Robinson that it is of the
masculine gender; what do you think of their variance?

Phocas, and other Grammarians side with Robinson, and they add, that Homo
also is of the masculine gender, of which nemo is a compound. Neither of these
nounes are found with an adjective of the feminine gender: it is true that
Terence has in his Andria, Scio neminem peperisse hic: and Virg. nec vox
hominem sonat, speaking of Venus: and Sulpicius in an Epistle to Cicero,
(wherein he comforts him for the death of his daughter Tullia) has these
words, Quae si iam diem suum non obijsset paulo post tam ei moriendu^ fuit,
quam homo nata erat: where nata does not agree with homo, but Tullia
understood; and the deriuatiue humanus is attributed to a woman in Horace,
Humano capite (to a woman's head) ceruicem pictor equinam Iungere si vellet,
etc. as appears by what follows, mulier formosa superne; but hence cannot be
any infallible conclusion drawn, that Homo is of the feminine gender; and so,
neither by consequence that nemo is of that gender: in this let every one
follow what he himself sees best grounds for.

Is it true that Cassida, ae, is formed of Cassida, the accusative case of a
Greek word Cassis cassidos; as Panthera of Panther, as Robinson would persuade
us.

No: he, and his brother Lilly herein draw in the same line of error: cassis is
primitiuely a latin word.

Is that true which Robinson has in his rules of redundant nounes, that ador
and ados are both read in the nominative case?

No: for ador is only to be found, not ados; the rule may be corrected by
putting odor for ador, odos for ados, for both these words are read in good
authors.

Are puber and pubes of the same signification, as Robinson tells us?

No: pubes is properly a sign of ripeness of age in men, at fourteen
years, in women at twelve, but puber signifies one that has arrived at those
years.

May those luxuriant adjectives which are derived of Arma, iugum, neruus, etc.
be used promiscuously?

No: for though they be found in old writers, yet many of them are rejected by
those which have refined the Latin tongue: we must not use inermus so
frequently as inermis, nor sublimus but sublimis, nor procliuus but procliuis,
not synceris but syncerus only, not imbellus but imbellis.

Of Adjectives and their Comparisons.
How many terminations be there of adjectives in the positive degree?

Nine: all adjectives end as one of these adjectives:

SoleRS, excelleNS, locuplES, sublimIS, and audAX.

BelligER, atque satVR, prefulgidVS, atque Rauenn AS.

and here we may note by the way, that Rauennas, Arpinas are declined as
Nostras.

Is vnus never used in the plural number, except it be joined with a word
which wants the singular number.

Yes, among the Poets, who for verse sake often use the plural number for the
singular, as Virg. satis vna superque vidimus excidia.

What adjectives be there which may be increased, or diminished in
signification, and yet are not compared in pure writers?

These; Vulgaris, vetulus, balbus, syluester, equester,

Delirus, crispus, claudus, canusque canorus,
Gallicus atque cicur, memor, almus, caluus, egenus, etc.
What adjectives are not compared at all by a proper comparison?

1. Those that end in us, purum, as egregius. 2. Participials in dus, as
colendus, which is used by some in the superlatiue, colendissimus: it were more
pure to say, maxim, or admodum colendus. 3. Adjectives in plex, as quadruplex,
except simplex, multiplex. 4. In imus, as maritimus. 5. In ivus, as fugitiuus:
but yet we read festiuior, festiuissimus. 6. Deriuatiues in inus, as matutinus.
7. Compounds of fero and gero, as legifer, corniger.

Is that true that the comparatiue does signify the positive with magis.

No: for the comparatiue does magis significare. i. has a larger signification
then the positive, though it does not significare positiuum cum magis, because
the denominatiue does not signify the Noune from which it is derived, but the
Thing after another manner: so the comparatiue signifies a thing, not a noune.

Which adjectives want the positive degree?

Besides, deterior, potior, ac oeyor, those which are derived of these
prepositions, comprehended in this verse: Ante, infra, supra, extra, intra,
vltra, post, prope, citra.

Which adjectives want the comparatiue degree, yet have the superlatiue?

These: Inclytus, atque sacer, falsus, fidus, meritusque

Nuper, and inuiius, nouus, and iurisconsultus, etc.

Which adjectives want the superlatiue, yet have the comparatiue?

These: Longinguus, iuuenis, decliuis, and infinitus.

Atque senex, ingens, adolescens, atque propinquus. etc.

What adjectives ending in dus may be compared?

Such as are primitiuely adjectives, as, Iucundus, ior, issimus: limpidus, ior,
issimus: faecundus, ior, issimus: but nounes adjectives participials may not be
compared: it is true that some modern writers have compared them according to
Analogy; but yet therein they have swarued from the use of the most pure
authors; and this liberty they took to express the abundance of their ardent
affection, respect and observance to their Patrons and Superiors; and
therefore we seldom or never find them compared, except in the frontispices
of Dedicatory Epistles. But Certissima loquendi magistra consuetudo, says
Quintilian: we may not say, reuerendissimo viro, but reuerendo: not, Vir
recolendissimae memoriae, but colendae, recolendae: nor venerandissimus, but
cum primis, vel maxim venerandus. Goclen. Prob. l. 1. p. 22.

How are verbals in bilis to be compared?

Not beyond the comparatiue. We read, formidabilis, formidabilior, but never,
formidabilissimus, so amabilis, amabilior, but never amabilissimus.

How can noune substantives be compared, since they cannot receive any increase
of signification?

When a noune substantive is compared, the substance is not respected, but the
quality: as paenior is as much as paeno vafrior, more crafty or unfaithful
then a Carthaginian. Neronior, as much as Nerone Saeuior, more bloody and
cruel then Nero: so oculissimus. i. dilectissimus; as dear to one as his eyes.

Of a Pronoune.
Whence has a Pronoune its name?

Quod pro nomine ponatur. From being sometimes put in the room and place of a
noune, so Scaliger defines it, l. 6. de C. L. L. c. 27. Amongst the Lawyers ea,
is put for mulier, and ipsa for filiafamilias: the Scholars of Pythagoras being
asked a reason of their Assertions, answered, (...). He has said it, that is,
Pythagoras. Plaut. in Casina. sc. si sapitis. Ipsam pro hera dixit, Ego eo, quo
me Ipsa misit: so we in English say; the stoutest He. For the most
courageous, or one that bears his head highest.

Can one, and the same pronoune be called a primitive, a demonstratiue, and a
relative?

Yes: but not in one and the same respect, as for example: the pronoune Ille in
respect of its original is a primitive, because it is not derived of any
other, in respect of its demonstration, or pointing out of some Person, or
Thing a demonstratiue, in respect of its relation, a relative, because it
repeates, or rehearses some thing, or person, of which there was mention before
made.

How comes it to pass that nostri, and vestri, are used in the genitive case
plural, as well as nostrum, and vestrum.

Because nostri, and vestri, in the genitive singular, signify a multitude,
therefore they are used promiscuously with nostrum, and vestrum, in the plural
genitive.

We find in the English Rudiments. Quo, qua, quo, vel qui. Is Qui read in the
ablative case in the neuter gender?

I think there can scarce any example be found of that kind: but, Qui is
read in the ablative case of the masculine, and feminine gender. Quicum omnia
communicem. Nemo erat, quicum essem lubentius, Cicer. And Virg. 2. Aeneid.
Quicum partiri curas, id est, cum qua, speaking of a woman Acca, one of the
associates of Camilla: this is, as I suppose, an Archaisme, rather to be
observed then imitated.

Is that true which Lilly has; Martialis, Pronomini Ipse vocatiuum tribuere
videtur, cum ait, vt Martis reuocetur, etc. A te Juno petat ceston, and ipsa
Venus.

No: He was most grossly ouerseene in the construing of these verses: if ipsa
be understood in the vocative case, Martial will be made to write plain
nonsense: that the truth may appear, and none may by credulity suck in this
error, I will subioyne the whole Epigram with the translation thereof, it is to
be found, Epig. l. 6. ep. 13.

Vide doctissimi Farnabij Notas in istud Epigramma.
Quis te Phidiaco formatam Iulia coelo,
Vt quis Palladiae non putet artis opus.
Candida non tacita respondet imagine Lygdos;
Et placido fulget vinus in ore decor.
Ludit Acidalio sed non manus aspera nodo.
Quem rapuit collo parue Cupido tuo.
Vt Martis reuocetur amor, saeuique Tonantis.
A te Juno petat (...) dicitur. i. a pungendo. Cestus enim est baltheus veneris
(...) variegatus, and acupictus.
ceston and ipsa Venus.
Iulia, who e're thy statue saw, but thought
It was a maister-peece, by Phidias wrought?
Or artfull Pollaes? In thy beauteous face
Such lively cunning shines, such lovely grace,
That the white marble somewhat seems to say.
Thy smooth-sleek hand seems sportfully to play
With the pure Acedulian true-loues knot:
Which, pretty Cupid, from thy neck she has got.
Venus, to regayne Mars; and Juno, Jove,
May ask of thee the embroidered Belt of love.
Why is Cujas handled among the pronounes? is it because Cujus is there of
which it seems to be derived?

No: Cuias is no deriuatiue pronoune, but a primitive noune gentile, and is
referred to the fourth declension of pronounes, because of the affinity of
termination, and declination with the pronounes, nostras, vestras.

How is that true which is in Lilly, that Ego, and Nos only are of the first
Person: Tu, and Vos of the second, whenas Ipse is also both of the first and
second Person?

Ipse is not of the first person only, or of the second person only, as Ego
and Tu are, but indifferently as well of the third person as of the first, or
second; the meaning of Lilly is, that none of the pronounes, except Ego, and
Tu, are only of the first, and only of the second person.

Why may not Egomet, Tute, Isthic, Illic, be numbered among the demonstratiues,
as well as Idem among the relatiues?

I see no reason to the contrary, if it had pleased the Composer of the
Accidence, so to have ranked them; if composition excludes them, it excludes
Idem also.

Of a Verb.
No sentence or proposition can be a part of speech: how can a verb then be
a part of speech since it is a sentence. All verbes of the first or second
person, are sentences, as also all verbes of the third person, as often as a
certain person is understood; as pluit, ningit, grandinat, Deus scilicet, vel
natura, vel aliquid simile?

Such propositions as these, the Logicians call implicit, which are resolved
into explicit propositions, by supplying the nominative case, and resolving
the verb into a participle of the present tense with the verb sum, thus,
scribo,.i. ego sum scribens; pugnas, tu es pugnans; pluit, coelum est pluens,
etc. an explicit proposition cannot be a part of speech, but an implicit
may, forasmuch as it cannot be complete without a supplement.

What is a verb deponent?

Such a verb, as amongst ancient Authors was a verb Commune, and had both
active and passive signification, but now amongst purer writers, deposuit has
laid off that nature, and signifies only actiuely, having a passive
termination, as meditor, obliuiscor, aggredior, etc.

Is that true in the Accidence: such verbes as have no persons are called
impersonals?

No: Impersonals are not so called because they have no persons (for they have
as we see) very many of them, the voice of the third person both active and
passive, but because they have not any certain signification either of number,
or person, unless some noune, or pronoune be joined to them in an oblique
case, as oportet me, seems to be of the first person, and singular number.
Oportet nos, of the first person plural. Oportet te, of the second person
singular. Oportet vos, of the second person plural. So Lilly.

Are verbes Commune now in use?

Very few: we shall scarce find any verbes in pure Writers, that signify both
actiuely, and passiuely: there were such amongst the Ancients, which in
signification did answer the mean voice of the Greeks, as Linacer is of
opinion.

Does the Indicative Mood show a reason true or false, as the Accidence
defines it?

No: for when I say, Amo, I love: I make a simple affirmation by this word, not
any confirmation of ought by reason.

Is not there a plain contradiction in Lilly touching the potentiall Mood?

Yes: in his Etymology, touching the moods of a verb, he has these words:
Potentialis neque vllum aduerbium adiunctum habet, neque coniunctionem. In the
Syntaxis, of an aduerbe these: Dum pro dummodo alias potententiali, alias
subiunctiuo nectitur. In the Syntaxis of a conjunction, these: Vt causalis, seu
perfectiua coniunctio etc. nunc potentiali nunc subiunctiuo iungitur; an
evident contradiction.

Is that true which is in the Accidence: the subiunctiue mood has evermore
some conjunction joined with him, as, Cum amarem, When I loved?

No: in this speech there are two errors. First, the subiunctiue has sometimes
an aduerbe joined with him, as Lilly affirms in his Syntaxis of Aduerbes. Vbi
postquam etc. interdum indicatiuis, interdum subiunctiuis verbis apponuntur.
Again, Simulac etc. ind. and sub. adhaerent. Secondly, there is an error in
the example. For when Cum, signifies When, it is not a conjunction, but an
aduerbe of Time, so says Lilly. Vbi, postquam, and cum, temporis aduerbia etc.
Cum canerem reges etc. Virg.

To what purpose are the potentiall, and subiunctiue Moodes, since without
these there is a perfect formation of verbs made?

If you respect the naked manner of forming, and difference of termination,
they do not at all differ: but if you respect the signification (of which to
the right interpretation of Authors, there is great consideration to be had)
the use of these Moodes is very necessary.

If the Infinitive Mood have neither number nor person, nor nominative case
before it, to what purpose, is that first exception from verbum personale, etc.
placed in the first Concord, viz. Verba infiniti modi pro nominatiuo
accusatiuum ante se statuunt?

I think that that exception is altogether superfluous; for how can a verb
which has no person, nor number, make an exception from a verb which has
both number, and person: it is in effect, as if Lilly had said; from this rule
can none be excepted, but such as are not capable of exception.

Whence has the word Tense its original?

From the French word temps, which signifies Time, which is pronounced Tans,
and so Tense.

The common and received division of Time is in praesens, praeteritum, futurum;
how comes it to pass then that Grammar makes five Tenses or Times?

The Philosophers speak otherwise then the Grammarians: the Philosophers
searching more narrowly into the truth, and nature of things, divide all Time
into that which is past, present, and to come, because if we would speak
precisely, all Time either is now, or has been, or shall be hereafter: but
the Grammarians who do not so strictly, and exactly weigh the natures of
things, have made for more facility in teaching, five Tenses of latin verbes,
according to the propriety of the language. The Greeks have eight Tenses, not
according to the truth of the matter, but according to the use, and propriety
of their tongue.

What do you think of this passage in Lilly? Futurum, quo res in futuro
gerenda significatur. Hic promissivus modus a nonnullis vocatur.

It is very faulty. First, here is confusion of terms: for, modus is here put
for tempus. Secondly, the particle Hic has reference to futurum, and so there
is a solaecisme, or at least a solaecophanes; it may be thus corrected: Hoc
tempus a nonnullis vocatur promissivum.

If Deleo, and Impleo, be compound verbes, whose simples are out of use; how is
it that we find in As in praesenti, this: Leo, les, leui, indeque natum,
Deleo deleui, pleo, ples, pleui?

Lilly did not well in concealing or omitting the abrogation, and extermination
of these words out of the latin tongue; we may not use these out of
composition any more then specio, lacio, or cumbo.

Does Edormisco signify incohation, or beginning of action.

No: it is put for a verb incohatiue by Lilly, but it does not signify to
begin to sleep, but to sleep so long until the vapors arising from wine are
dispersed: so in Terence, in Adelp. Edormiscam hoc villi: like to this verb are
many others, which though they end in sco, yet do not signify beginning of
action, or passion; which is evident, because the Orators, Poets, and
Historians, set before some of them the verbs: Caepi, incipio, incepto; before
others the aduerbs. Paulatim, quotidie, magis: as for example.

Caepit erudescere morbus. Virg. i. Validior fieri. Seruius.

Aegrescitque medendo.i. inter medendum fit aegrius.

Incipiunt agitata tumescere. Virg.

Supercilia nonnunquam canescere incipiunt. Columel.

Cum incipit, oliua nigrescere. idem.

Vbi conualescere caeperunt. idem.

Cum maturescere frumenta inciperent. Caesar.

Apud exteras gentes enitescere inceptabat. Gell. with them same verbs are,
hiscere, lactescere, grandescere, clarescere, iuuenescere, found.

Tua iustitia florescat quotidie magis. Cic.

Quotidie mihi augescit (.i. augetur) magis de filio aegritudo. Ter.

Paulatim rubescens rosa delitescit, Plin. vide Goclen. Prob. l. 1. page 38. 39.

Is Dormito a frequentatiue verb?

It is by termination, and deriuation, but not by signification: dormito
signifies in latin what (...) does in greek, To take a nap, or to sleep dogs
sleep; Dormito desiderium potius somni, aut leuiculum somnum, quam frequentem
indicat, says Peter Ramus, l. 16. Schol. Gram. and in that of Horace,
Quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus: Quandoque, is a sign both of diminution and
frequency, and so takes away the signification of frequency from dormito.

Whence has Coningation its name?

A coniugando: because in every Conjugation after one, and the same manner of
varying of final terminations many verbes are joined, as it were under the
same iugum, or yoke.

Have all verbs of the first Conjugation a long before re and ris?

No: for Do, and some of its compounds: To these may be also added, venundare,
of venum and dare, as I suppose.
as, Pessundo, circundo, make dare. Circundare, Pessundare. Stockwood, and the
Poser of the Accidence, add secundo, secundare: but this is not a compound of
Do. Secundo, signifies to make prosperous, derived of secundus, prosperous,
favorable, and has a long.

If all verbs be of the first Conjugation, which have a long before re and ris,
then it seems, doceare, docearis; audiare, audiaris, be of the first
Conjugation?

The meaning of that is, not that all verbes that in any mood have a long
before re and ris, be of the first Conjugation, but such as have a long before
re in the infinitive mood of the active form, as amare, and before ris in the
second person of the present Tense of the indicative mood of the passive
form: as gratularis, are of the first Conjugation.

Why do you say of the active, and passive form, and not of the active and
passive voice?

Because there be many verbes neuter which are not active, and yet in
conjugation follow the form of the active verbes, and many verbes deponent,
which though they be not passive in signification, yet in co^iugation follow
the form of the passive verbs.

Upon As in Praesenti.
The verb Lauo, which Lilly says, is of the first Conjugation, makes laure in
the Infinite. the last syllable save one short; and strideo, caveo, ferveo,
making fervere, stridere, cavere, are found with e short before re in the
infinitive of the second Conjugation?

It Is true: but laure is not of lauo, lavas, but of lauo lauis, which was of
the third conjug. amongst the Ancients, and so used by Virgil in his Georgicks
and Aeneids, and feruere, and stridere are found with e short, but thus
conjugated, they are now grown out of use; we are not to imitate the old
Authors in these words.

Does spondeo geminate the first syllable in the praeteritum, and make
spospondi?

No: herein Lilly was deceived, and deceived the Poser of the Accidence, and
the Construer of Lillies rules, who transcribe it so: in the refined copies of
the most incorrupt Authors, spondeo is found to make the praeteritum spopondi,
not spospondi. Pansa aut morte aut victoria se satisfacturum Re^p. spopondit
Cic. Dependendum tibi est, quod mihi pro illo spopondisti. Idem.


Is crepo found of the third conjugation, as Lilly affirms?

No: the pure Writers, who are to be our Presidents, use it in the first
conjugation: Intestina tibi crepant. Plaut. Quis post vina grauem militiam, and
pauperiem crepat. Hor.

Is quinisco found in any good author?

No: the true verb is conquinisco, which is a simple verb, and so set down
by Nebrissensis, and Ramus, not a compound of con, and quinisco, as Lilly
imagined, any more then condio, or consulo, etc.

Is nexo, nexis, nexui, read in the third conjugation, as Lilly tells us?

No: it is only read in the first conjugation, nexo, nex as, nexare.

Is cambio campsi found in any pure author?

No: it is a barbarous word, not to be used by any that would write pure
latin; it is only found in the old Grammarian Priscian.

Does Praecurro make Precucurri in the preterium?

No: it can scarce be so found in any good author.

Does tracto always in composition change the first vowell into e?

No: for we read retracto: vulnera cruda retractat. Ovid. Pedamenta retractare.
Columel. So likewise Pertracto. Pertractare Philosophiam. Cic.

Does habeo always in composition change the first vowell into i, as Lilly
says?

No: for we read posthabeo: as, posthabeo famae pecuniam, in the Syntaxis.

Is exculpo a compound of ex and scalpo?

It seems rather to be compounded of ex and sculpo: for the simple word sculpo
is in use, as Ovid. Art Mira sculpsit ebur.

Is vulsum regularly formed of velli: according to that, Dat velli vulsum.

It seems rather to be formed of the other preteritum of vello viz. vulsi.

How is that rule of Lilly to be understood, Verba in or admittunt ex
posteriore supino praeteritum.

It is to be understood of such verbs whose actiues have the latter supine, of
the which the preterperfectense passive may be formed.

What then shall we say concerning verbes deponent, and commune, which end in
or, and have a preterperfect tense, which they cannot form of a latter supine:
since they have no verbs active?

Lilly does say nothing of this point. I am of opinion that verbs active are to
be fained, of whose latter supine these verbs would regularly form their
preterperfect tense, if such actiues were in use: as for example, suppose that
there were such a verb as laeto, laetas, laetaui, of the latter supine of this
verb laetatu, regularly shall be formed, laetatus sum, vel fui. So likewise of
the supine criminatu, of the fained verb crimino, nas: we may form the
preteritum, criminatus, sum.

What is she meaning of that verse in Grammar? Maereo sum maestus sed Phocae
nomen habetur.

That the neutropassiue verb moereo has maestus sum for its preteritum; but
the Grammarian Phocas did think maestus rather to be a noune: this verse might
very well be spared.

Of Gerunds.
Whence has a Gerund its name?

Quod rei gerendae, and administrandae exprimat significationem. Because it
expresses the signification of a thing to be done, or executed. Some would
have the name to be given a gerenda duplici significatione, nempe actiua and
passiua sub vna voce: but since there are so few Gerunds that signify
passiuely, and those which do, almost all grown out of use, I think that is
not the reason of the name: in this, and many other terms of art we are left
to divine of the reasons of the imposition of the names.

Is that generally true which we find in the English Rudiments. Gerunds have
both the active and passive signification: as, amandi of loving, or being
loved: amando, in loving, or in being loved: amandum, to love, or to be loved?

No: the greatest part of Gerunds are used actiuely, very few passiuely; and in
that kind of use, there seems to be an Archaisme.

Of the Supines.
Does the latter supine signify passiuely only, for the most part as is in
the Accidence?

No: it is always of a passive signification.

Of a Participle.
Since there are in truth but three tempora of Participles, praesens,
praeteritum, futurum, is it proper to say, Tempora participiorum sunt quatuor,
by subdiuiding the future into the participle in rus, of the active, and
neutrall signification; and the participle in dus, of the passive signification?

I think no: Lilly might as well have said, as I suppose, there be five
tempora, forasmuch as the participles of the future tense of a verb active,
and a verb neuter ending in rus, do differ in time as much among themselves,
as a participle of the future tense of a verb passive does from either of
them: if the active and passive signification do distinguish their times, he
might then have said in his division of Tenses, Tempora sunt sex, praesent,
imperfectum and futurum duplex, actiuae, and passiuae vocis: nay, he might
have said, Tempora sunt december quinque actiuae, quinque passiuae vocis: but of
this let the judicious pass sentence. I speak with submission.

If in that example of the Accidence, Legend is veteribus proficis, a
participle of the future in dus, have the signification of a participle of the
present tense: how is it that Lilly in his Syntaxis, says that in a like
example a Gerund is turned into a noune adjective: as, Cur adeo delectaris
criminibus inferendis?

Truth is but one, on which side truth weighs heavier, I leave to Grammarians
to determine.

Does a perfect verb neuter form only two participles regularly, one of the
present tense, and another of the future in rus?

Yes: for though we read vigilandus, carendus, participles in dus, and
triumphatus, regnatus: but some of these and the like may be ended in a manner
irregular, used only by the Poets, whom it is not safe in all things to
imitate.

But it seems that regularly there come of some neutrals three participles; as
of gaudeo, gaudens, gauisus, gauisurus: of audeo, audens, ausus, ausurus: fido,
fidens, fisus, fisurus, etc.

Those of which only two participles come, must be only neutrals; such are
not these: for these are neutro passiues, which since they differ from them in
the manner of conjugation, no marvel if they differ from them in forming their
participles.

Why are they called Neutro-passiues?

Because though they be neuters, yet they form a Praeteritum, after che manner
of verbs passive.

How do neutro-passiues, and passiue-neutrals differ?

Neutro-passiues, although they have the preterperfect tense of passiues, yet
they retain the signification of neuters; as, soleo, solitus sum, but passive
neutrals, though they end in o, yet they have a passive signification, and
govern the same case that passiues do, as vagulo, exulo.

But it seems there be some participles of the passive voice, which come of
verbs neuter; for we read, excursus, aratus, laboratus excurrendus arandus,
laborandus.

These are formed of impersonall neuters, which are only found in the third
person of the passive voice, but when Grammar says, that only two participles
are formed of neuters, it means personal neuters of the active form.

Are not verbs and participles of the active signification sometimes used
passiuely, and contra?

Yes; as for example, Voluens pro volutus, as Turneb. 30. Aduersar. 19. says:
Certe hinc Romanos olim voluentibus annis. Virg. 1. Aen. Sparsus pro spargens.
Prius haustus sparsus aquarum ore fore. Virg. 4. Geor. So Cerda* Velata pro
velans. Senec. in Herc. At. Aet. sc. Flete. Adesque sequi iussa sagittas Totum
pennis velata diem. Plaut. in M^l. Glorios. sc. satin'. Irae leniunt. i.
leniuntur. Virg. 2. Aeneid. Insinuat pro insinuatur, as Seruius conceiues. Tum
vero tremefacta nouis per pectora cunctis Insinuat pauor. idem. vertere pro
versa sunt. Et totae in solidam glaciem vertere lacunae. vide Robig. Dict.
Critic. l. 11. c. 7.

Of Aduerbs.
Are not minus and male aduerbs of denying?

Yes, though they be omitted by Lilly: Minus pro non in Varro. Non mirum si
caecutis minus, aurum enim non perstringit oculos. Si minus intelligitur, if
men understand not. Cic. So male. Petron. Quas struxit opes male sustinet. Male
sanus, not well in his wit. Male sobrius, not sober.

Do not two negative aduerbs deny more strongly sometimes in latin, as well
as in greek?

Yes: So, Virg. 2. Georg.

Non ego cuncta meis amplecti versibus opto,
Non mihi si linguae centum sint, oraque centum.
Et Aeneid. 6. Ne pueri, ne tanta animis assuescite bella. Tull. 7. Epist. 1.
Haec tibi ridicula videntur, non n. ades quae si videres, lacrymas non teneres,
non.

Do not particles of denying sometimes imply an affirmation, and contra?

Yes: as for example, Virg. 2. Geor. Et pro neque. Nec scabie, and falsa laedit
rubigine ferrum. Et pro Sed. Cic. Mutorum causas non grauate and gratuito
defendere. So Senec. Oration ostendit illum non esse syncerum, and habere
aliquid ficti. Aut. pro nec. Vir. 4. Aen. Sed nullis ille mouetur fletibus, aut
vocos vllus tractabilis audit. Neque pro and, Virg. 5. Ecl. Nulla neque amnem
Libauit quadrupes nec graminis attigit herbam. Iuuenal. Sat. 5. Omnia Graece.
Cum sit turpe magis nostris nescire latin: where in nescire the verb sciuut
is to be understood, which belongs to omnia Graece before. Mart. 5. Ep. 53.
Exprimere Aue Latinum, (...) non potes Graecum: where in non potes, potes,
which belongs to the former comma is to be understood: so Tac. Ann. 13 Deesse
nobis terra in quae viuimus, in qua moriamur non potest. Idem. Ann 12.
Agrippina filio dare imperium, tolerare imperitantem nequibat: out of nequibat,
quibat is to be supplied. Robig. Dict. Crit. l. 12. c. 12.

Lilly makes sit ita, sit sane aduerbs of granting, id est, hoc est, quasi
dicas, aduerbs of explaning: are they aduerbs in truth?

No: every aduerbe is a simple single word, these are sentences, they belong to
the Syntaxis, not Etymology.

Of Conjunctions.
Is not it a contradiction in adiecto, to say, a conjunction disjunctive?

No: for a conjunction disjunctive conioynes the words, by disioyning the
matter.

Does Lilly speak logically, when he says sunt dictiones que nunc aduerbia,
nunc coniunctiones, nunc praepositiones esse inueniuntur vt cum.

No: for there is no other word of that nature, except Come. He herein speaks
like that Grammarian, who made this rule in ol, masc. Suut. vt Sol. whereas it
should have run thus, in ol vnicum masculinum est, vt Sol.

Is que always an Encliticke?

No: we find it sometimes put before the word it couples, as that Epitaph of
Tibullus.

Hic iacet immiti consumptus morte Tibullus,
Messalam terra dum sequitur, que mari.
And in Virg. Ipse ego cana legam tenera lanugine mala. Castaneas, que nuces.
i. Castaneas and nuces. Castaneae, and nuces are distinguished, as says
Pliny, l. 15. c. 28. and so they are here too, as Scal. think. de C. LL. l.
12. c. 177. Ovid. l. 2. de Art, alluding to this verse, makes a distinction
betwixt them: Affert aut vras, aut quas Amacillis amabit,
Et nunc castaneas, nunc amat illa nuces.


Of a Preposition.
Did Lilly do well to handle the regimen of Prepositions in Etymology.

No: herein he confounds Etymology and Syntaxis.

Of an Interiection.
Why is an Interiection so called?

Quod interijciatur: because it is cast in as a sudden eiaculation, expressing
in an abrupt fashion, some passion of the mind.

Of SYNTAXIS.
WHence has Syntaxis its name?

From the Greek word (...), con, and (...) ordinatio: because therein is set
out the fit and regular coordination, and structure of simple words in clauses
and sentences.

Of the first Concord.
What do you think of the second exception from verbum personale, viz.
Impersonalia praecedentem, etc.

I think it might be spared as well as the first: either this place is
improper to treat of impersonals, or else there is a tautologie in repeating
the same rule afterward; nay, to speak truth, this exception is absurd: it is
in effect thus much; all verbes personal agree with their nom. cases in number
and person, except verbes impersonall, which are altogether incapable of a
nominative case before them, which is plain nonsense.

Are not nounes which are not collectiues sometimes construed as if they were
such?

Yes: as for example; Plaut. in Bacchid. Scen. Meamne. Et ego (Chrysalus) te,
and illum mactamus infortunio: the Pronoune ego here is comprehensiue, as if
Chrysalus being one, did oppose himself against two, and that he might match
them, he speaks of himself as of two. Scal. de Cause. L. L. l. 6. c. 30. Virg.
9. Aeneid. Vos o Calliope precor aspic^e canenti. Alcmena in Plaut. Amph. Sc.
Satin. speaking to Amphitruo alone says: Quis igitur nisi vos. The person of a
King represents many: thence that form, Nos Iacobus Dei gratia, etc. mandamus.

Is not sometimes the number of the verbs varied in the same comma, though
referred to the same thing?

Yes: so we read in Tully, ad At. l. 1. Ep. 2. Nunc fac vt sciam quo die te
visuri sumus.

Of the second Concord.
May not an adjective put after two substantives of diverse genders, or numbers
sometimes agree with the latter, as well as with the former?

Yes: the adjective may sometimes indifferently accord with either of the
substantives; for we find in Tully, Non omnis error stultitia est dicenda: and
in Liuy, Gens vniuersa veneti appellati.

Is not an adjective sometimes put alone (as it were a substantive) whose
substantive is to be understood and supplied?

Yes: and that very elegantly: so we read, tribuo tibi primas.i. primas
parts. Amplecti ambabus.i. ambabus manibus: Aspergere frigida.i. frigida aqua:
it is an immitation of the Greeks, who say (...).i. (...) ad rectam.i. lineam,
(...), ab vna.i. voce.

What if two adjectives concur together in the same sentence?

Then one of them puts on the nature of a substantive: Crudelem medicum
intemperans aeger faeit: here aeger is taken substantiuely.

If that the adjective is to agree with the substantive in case, gender, and
number, what think you of these examples which seem to overthrow that rule,
est quod speremus Deos bonis benefacturum. Aruspices dixerunt omnia ex
sententia processurum. Non putaui haec eam facturum?

Peter Ramus in his Grammatical Scholia's says, that in these, and in such
like examples, those words which seem to be Participles, are indeed verbs of
the infinitive mood and future tense of the active form, having esse
understood: in cuius sententiam pedibus eo.

Is that true latin in Plautus, where he calls Venus, Deum indignam? In Paen.
in Scen. Dij illum.


Yes: the Heathen did think all their gods were both Male and Female,
according to that of Orpheus.

(...).
Jupiter and mas est, and nescia foemina mortis.
So Venus, and other goddesses have the title Deus given to them: so Virg. l.
2. Aeneid. Descendo, ac ducente Deo flammam inter, and hosts Expedior. Macrob.
Sat. 3. c. 7. says, it is so to be read. Idem Aeneid. 2. Pollentemque Deum
Venerem. Seruius and Acterianus do approve of that reading. Heu fortuna quis
est crudelior in nos Te Deus. Hor. 2. Ser. 8. Lucret. l. 2. Terram Deum matrem
appellat. Sequitur superbos vltor a tergo Deus.i. Nemesis. Senec. Virg. Aeneid.
7. Alecto Deus appellatur. Nec dextrae erranti Deus abfuit. In like manner
Justinian for his effeminatenesse was called Vxorius: and Liuia for her
wisdom was styled, Stolatus Ulysses. Suet. vide Robig. Lex. Crit. l. 4. c. 17.

Are not two or three adjectives sometimes joined to one substantive?

Yes: as for example. Crispisulcans igneum fulmen. Cic. Ob egregiam insignem
fidem. Idem. Ad domesticae eximiae eius fiduciae acta veniamus. Val. Max.
Sanctissimus genealis torus. Idem. Pulcherrima praepes Laeua volauit auis.
Ennius apud Cic. de Divine.

Are not sometimes two adjectives coupled together, used for one?

Yes: as for example. Sarta-tecta praecepta. Plaut. Purus-putus asinus. Varro
apud Nonium. Novum-vetus vinum bibo. Varro. Nouo-veteri morbo medeor. Idem. So,
Deus optimus-maximus. Graio-Graeci. Ennius apud Festum. Ruta-caesa. apud Ies.

Of the third Concord.
If the Relative agree with the Antecedent, in Gender, Number, and Person; how
is it that we find in Terence. Vbi est ille scelus, qui me perdidit? Qui the
Relative is of the mascul. gender, and scelus the Antecedent of the neuter?

Scelus is here put for scelestus, as elsewhere Senium for Senex by a Metonymie
of the adjunct; so the sense is made good: or qui by the figure Hyponaea has
reference to scelestus, to be understood in scelus by the judicious Readers.

In that example; Est locus in carcere, quod Tullianum appellatur, and the
like; as, Been audiri, qui est recte factoru^ fructus omnes far volumus: and;
Hodie, quae est altera dies Pentecostes, venit ad me nuntius, where the
Relative put between two Substantives, agrees with the latter, is the
construction proper to the Latins?

No: it is an imitation of the greeks, who have the same construction. So
Isocrates, (...): and thus Tully. Ne appellaueris consilium, quae vis, ac
necessitas appellanda est.

What do you think of that example: Nostros vidisti flentis ocellos?

In it there is a solaecisme, or at least a solaecophanes, the Poet should have
said regularly, if his verse would have suffered him, either nostros flentium,
or meos flentis, to make up the construction: we must understand in nostros,
meos, in meos mei. vide Goclen. Prob. Gram. l. 3. p. 131.

Is Imperium, and dignitas quae petijsti; a fit example of that rule in the
English Syntaxis: many Antecedents singular having a conjunction copulative
between them, will have a relative plural, which relative shall agree with
the Antecedent of the most worthy Gender?

No: for here the relative agrees with the antecedent of the most unworthy
gender, viz. the Neuter. Again, if this be a true example, that exception
subjoyned of Things without life is superfluous, for it is an exception to it
self; for to speak truth, to that rule does this example appertain Imperium,
and Dignitas being things without life: of that rule many Antecedents, etc.
this or the like example should have been given. Rex, and Regina, quos tu
beatos praedicas, sunt mortales.

Is that example; Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum, properly rendered
in English?

No: it should not have been rendered; Happy is he etc. to beware: for cautum
is not here the first supine of caueo, neither can be (for it is not put after
a verb, signifying moving to a place, but an adjectiue) the verse should
therefore have been thus translated: Happy is he whom others harms make wary.

Of the construction of Noune Substantives.
Does not a Substantive sometimes govern two genitive cases, or more?

Yes: we read in Cicero. Iamne sentis bellua, quae sit hominum querela
frontis tuae? where querela gouernes hominum, and frontis. Sed quae naturae
principia sint societatis humanae repetendum altius videtur. idem. Procreatio
Dei rerum humanarum. Aristotelis Philosophorum Principis arcanorum naturae
theoremata.

Are not two substantives sometimes linked together by a line, which the
Gra^marians call Hyphen, used for one?

Yes: such words are found amongst the Lawyers; as, Placitum-consensum.
Vlpian. Munus-donum. Modest. Actio-petitio. Callistrat. Locatio-conductio.
Labeo. Obiurgat^-censor. Macrob.

Is not a noune in it self a compound, and so one, sometimes divided in
respect of construction?

Yes: as in this example. Neque ille magis iurisconsultus quam iustitiae fuit.
The word Iurisconsultus is one in it self, but to be divided in the rection of
iustitiae.

Are not adjectives of the masculine or feminine gender used sometimes
substantiuely, as well as adjectives of the neuter gender?

Yes: 1. Malc. as, die natalis sui. Marc. Humanus pro Homo. Cic. ad At. l. 3.
ep. 21. Ego autem tibi affirmo (possum falli vt humanus) a me non habere.
Phaethon, the epithet of the Sun used substantiuely in Aenei. 5. says
Cerdo. Auroram Phaethontis equi iam luce vehebant, in Aeneid. 1. Imperium Dido
Tyria regit vrbe profecta Germanum (.i. fratrem) fugiens.

2. Foem. Virg. 1. Aeneid. Implentur veteris Bacchi, pinguisque ferinae.i.
carnis ferinae, Senec. 1. de Benef. 5. Imperator aliquem torquibus, muroli, and
ciuica donat.i. corona. and Plin. l. 8. Nigrae lanarum nullum colorem bibunt.

3. Neutr. as, Strata viarum. Amara curarum. Singula capitum. Profunda
camporum. Praerupta collium. Montium ardua, opaca locorum, etc.

Are not sometimes substantives put in the place of adjectives?

Yes: so, Nihil pro Nullo apud Vlpianum. and Virg. Aeneid. 1.

Regales inter mensas, laticemque Lyaeum.i. Bacchicum.

Do not some substantives verbal govern the same case that their verbs do,
of which they are derived?

Yes: as for example; we read exul a patria, as well as exultat a patria;
Discessus ab vrbe, as well as discedere ab vrbe, We read obtemperare legibus,
and instituta est obtemperatio scriptis legibus: in Tully we read in every
classical Author, Capite diminui, praefici praetorio, and Julius Scaliger
has; Capite diminutio. Suetonius, Praefectus praetorio. We read domum eo,
redeo, and domum itio, reditio, in Caesar. Faueo authoritati and, fautor
authoritati. Nascor a muliere, and, natiuitas a muliere: Vide Rod. Goclen.
obseru. Linguae Lat. p. 126.
erudior a magistro; and, ab optimo magistro optima inuentutis eruditio.

What substantives govern an ablative case with the preposition Cum?

Such as signify society, conjunction, and friendship, as, Amicitia,
familiaritas, consuetudo cum aliquo. Ciceroni cum Attico magna intercessit
familiaritas.

Is not Opus read construed with an ablative case of the participle of the
preter tense?

Yes, and that very elegantly: as for example, Priusquam incipias consulto, and
vbi consuleris mature facto opus est, Salust. Opus est maturato, Liuie. Quod
parato opus est para, Terence. Opus est viso, and cauto, Plautus.

Of the construction of Adjectives.
May an adjective in the neuter gender put substantiuely, govern any other
adjective also, put substantiuely in the genitive case?

No: no adjectiue put as a substantive, can govern another adjectiue which is
declined with three articles, but only such a one as is varied by three
terminations, therefore we may say: Aliquid mali, aliquid absurdi, honesti,
boni, we cannot say, aliquid vtilis, aliquid impossibilis etc. neither can we
say, Nihil talis for Nihil tale.

Does Lilly speak properly, when he expresses certain nounes of number by
certa numeralia?

No; he speaks barbarously: for certus is never put for quidam in any good and
classical Writer.

What do you think of that rule, Comparatiua and superlatiua accepta
partitiue genitivum, vnde and genus sortiuntur, exigunt?

This rule is good: It had been well Lilly would have furnished us with some
examples of it; in these which follow, his defect shall be supplied. Ignis
omnium elementorum est efficacissimum, and violentissimum. Supremus,
extremusque omnium affectuum in foemina est zelotypia. Finis causarum omnium
nobilissima est. Mors vltimum, summum, grauissimum, and acerbissimum omnium
terribilium.

In these speeches, Magnam partem consulatus tui abfui. Cic. Illud tibi
assentior. Idem. Menedemi vicem miseret. Ter. Solicitus vicem Imperatoris. Liu.
Maestus suam vicem. Curt. Caetera bonus. Cic. Why are partem, Illud vicem,
caetera, the accusative case, and by what rule of Lilly?

Lilly has no rule to show the reason of this construction: it is in truth a
greek Atticisme: for the greeks put the accusative case after verbes, and
adjectives after that manner: sic, (...), vicem alicuius irasci, (...),
perdidisti nos quantum in te est. (...), omnibus sapiens.

When is an adjective construed with an accusative case, with a preposition?

When Aptitude, propensitie, respect, object, or final cause is signified, as,
Procliuis a labor ad libidinem.
Furtum ingeniosus ad omne.
Assuetus ad bellum. Rudis ad arma. Studio eloquentiae non aliud in ciuitate
nostra, vel ad vtilitatem fructuosius, vel ad dignitatem amplius, vel ad vrbis
famam pulchrius, vel ad totius imperij, atque omnium gentium notitiam
illustrius excogitari potest. Quint. Calcei habiles ad pedes. Cic. Aptus natus
ad singularem dicendi facultatem.

Is that example of adiectiua quae ad copiam, viz. at fessae referunt multa se
nocte minores Crura thymo plena.

No: the Composer of the English Rudiments, and Lilly understood not (as it
seems) Virgils Syntaxis, and therefore corrected the original suspecting it
to be faulty: and the Construer of the Syntaxis so transcribes it, and
translates it. But Virgil wrote not plena, but plenae: the verse is thus to be
construed: the lesser Bees do return home weary late at night ( plenae
crura.i. habentes crura plena thyme) Having their shankes full of thyme; in
which there is a Synechdoche, or figure, often used by that excellent Poet, as
Ecl. 1. Sepes Byb^aeis apibus florem depasta salicti.i. habens florem depastu^.
So likewise: Os humerosque Deo similis. ide^. So, Faciem mutatus and ora.i.
habens faciem mutatam; or it maybe there is an imitation of the Greeks who in
such speeches make an ellipsis of (...).


Do not adjectives of comparing or exceeding, govern an ablative case of the
word, which signifies the measure of exceeding, as well as verbes?

Yes: for we may as well say, Cicero praestantior est omnibus oratoribus
multis gradibus, as, Cicero praestat omnes oratores multis gradibus.

May not an adjective of the positive degree with magis, or minus, have an
ablutiue case after it, as well as one of the comparatiue?

Yes: so Terence in Eunucho. Hoc nemo fuit minus ineptus, nec magis seuerus
quisquam.i. quam hic. and Virg. O luce magis dilecta sorori.i. quam lux.

Of the construction of Pronounes.
Is not Meus, and Noster, sometimes used passiuely?

Yes: Plaut. in Pen. sc. Negotij Ecce odium meum.

Quid me vis? pro, odium mei; twice in the same Scene. Cicero pro Rosc. Amer.
Haec conficta arbitror a poetis esse vt effictos mores nostros in alienos
personis, expressamque imaginam nostram (.i. nostri) vitae quotidianae
videremus.

Neque minus est spartiates Agefilaus ille prohibendus, qui neque pictam neque
fictam imaginem suam (.i. sui) passus est. Idem.

Et digna speculo fiat imaego tua.i. tui. Mart. This is to be observed, not
imitated.

Are not proper and appellatiue nounes sometimes put in stead of pronounes?

Yes: Plautus in Paenul. scen, satis spectatum. puts syncerastum pro me, and
Tuus amicus, for, Ego.

Milph. Heus synceraste. Sync. Syncerastum qui vocat?

Mi. Tuus amicus.

Is not Noster sometimes put for Meus and contra?

Yes: as for example. Nostrum consilium iure laudandum est quod meos ciues
seruis armatis obijci noluerim. Cicer. where nostrum is put for meum. --
Stratique per herbam.

Hic meus est dixere dies. Senec. in Suasor. 2. where Meus is put for Noster.

Are not relative pronounes sometimes put for reciprocal, and contra?

Yes: as for example. Principio generi animantium omni est a natura tributum vt
se, vitam, corpusque tueatur, declinetque quae ei.i. Sibi nociturae videantur.
Cic.

Praeceptor amat discipulos ipsum (.i. se) excitantes.

Non petit vt illum (.i. se) miserum putetis. Quintil. Here relatiues are put
for reciprocals.

Plaut. in Capt. scen. Quo illum. Is est seruus ipse, neque praeter se (.i.
ipsum) vnquam ei seruus fuit.

Respice Laerten vt iam sua (.i. eius) lumina conda^.

Non ex oratione, sed suis ex moribus spectare debetis pro, eius. Cicer. here
reciprocals are put for relatiues.

How are those two rules in Linacer, and Lilly to be reconciled. Ipse ex
pronominibus solum trium personarum significationem repraesentat. And, Idem
etiam omnibus personis iungi potest: they seem to contradict each other.

Thus. Ipse only of all those pronounes, which truly and properly are
pronounes, or which are simple pronounes, does represent the signification of
three persons: but Idem is no simple pronoune but a compound, not a natural
and genuine pronoune, but addititious, as Lilly says: one of these
distinctions must be admitted or else a manifest contradiction cannot be
avoided.

If it be true that only ego, and nos, be of the first person only, as is
set down in the English Rudiments: and Idem, and Ipse, do represent the
signification of three persons, according to your distinction. How comes it to
pass that we find in Tully, is, in the first person, as, Is nullo in loco
praedonibus iam pares esse poteramus: and in Liuie, De pace agitur, agimusque
ij quorum and maxim interest pacem esse: and, Vidistis in vincula duci
vniuersi eum, qui a singulis vobis pericula depulerim.

Since the pronoune idem is used in three persons, which is compounded of is,
and the syllabical particle them I am of opinion that is, the simple pronoune
may be used so likewise, as appears by the precedent examples.

Since we may very easily err in the use of Pronounes reciprocal, what rules
have you to steare and direct us in the right use of them?

Diverse; for which you are beholden to Rodolphus Goclenius in his observations
of the Latin tongue, which for memory sake I will contract.

1. In a simple reciprocation.i. such as is made with one verb, a Pronoune of
the first or second person is never added to the verb, but always one of the
third: for we cannot say, Ego fui secum, but cum eo, nor, Tu nouisti suum
fratrem, but eius.

2. A reciprocal pronoune reflects the action of the verb upon it self as
the agent: as, mulier sibi nimium placet.i. sibi muliere.

3. When the possessour works upon the thing possessed, or the thing possessed
upon the possessor, the possessiue suus is used: saepe in magistrum scelera
redierunt sua. Senec. and, and sua riserunt secula Meomdem.

4. In a compound reciprocation.i. such as is made with many verbes, when the
action of the verb following is reflected upon the person of the verb before
going, it is expressed by sui, as Caesar rogat vt veniam ad se.i. ad Caesarem
rogantem. Rogat vt ignoscam sibi.i. sibi roganti.

5. When in the construction of two verbes, the action of the latter verb
passes upon the person of the former, as the possessor, suus is used. Rogat me
vt suum (.i. eius ipsius qui rogat) instituam filium.

6. The active construction may be changed into the passive by a reciprocal
pronoune: as we may say, Antonium deseruerunt sui collegae, and Aut. desertus
est a suis collegis. Amat patrem filius suis, and, Amatur pater a filio suo.

Of the construction of Verbes.
Is the construction of the infinitive mood of a verb substantive the same
after a verb personal and impersonall?

No: except an accusative case be expressed before the infinitive of a verb
substantive, which is governed of a verb personal, the word which follows
shall not be the accusative, but the nominative; as, we cannot say, Malo esse
diuitem, though me be understood, but malo esse dives, but when me is
expressed, we say, malo me esse diuitem: but if an infinitive be governed of a
verb impersonall, the word that follows the infinitive, may be the accusative
case, though the word coming before it be not expressed; for we may say,
Iuuat esse disertos, as well as Iuuat nos esse disertos.

In those examples, Adolescentis est maiores natu reuereri; and, Regum est
parcere subiectis, is est a verb personal or impersonall?

It is a verb impersonall, and therefore these examples are misplaced, they
belong to the first rule of impersonals, Interest, refert, and est, and there
Lilly has set down a parallel example: Prudentis est multa dissimulare.

What rule have you for this construction, Commendo te virtutis, vitupero
ignauiae, castigo negligentiae, miror prudentiae, etc.

In these and the like, there is a Graecisme, causa, or ergo, is to be
understood, as (...) often amongst the Greeks: as (...) i. (...), Beatum te
praedico propter fidem.

In that of Terence, Rerum suarum sa tagit; why does satagit govern a genetiue
case?

The genetiue case seems to depend upon the particle sat, in composition; and
so the verb being of it self a compound, and one; by reason of construction
is divided.

What verbes govern a dative case?

These, and all of the like or contrary signification: Commodo, compono, noreo,
do, comparo, reddo, polliceor, soluo, confudo, obtempero, dico impero, and
indignor, minor, ac irascor, adulor, etc.

What kind of dative do these commonly govern?

A dative of the person, not of the thing, unless the thing take upon it the
nature of a person; as, ponti indignatur Araxes.

What prepositions be those wherewith verbes compounded govern a dative case?

These in this hexamiter: Ad, prae, con, ob, and in, simul hae, post, ante,
sub, inter.

Does not habeo put for est govern a dative case, as well as est for habeo?

Yes: as for example, Est mihi ludibrio, habeo illum ludibrio. Habeo voluptat
literarum studia, literarum studia sunt (mihi) voluptati.

Does Praeuineo govern an accusative case, though it be compounded with prae,
as Lilly tells us.

No: it is a barbarous word, not found in any pure writer, or Lexicographer.

If all verbes transitiue govern an accusative case, how is it that we read
in Plautus, Consequor with a dative, as, Voluptati meror vt comes consequitur?

In this there is a grecisme, for the Greeks use (...) sequor, with a dative,
as (...): so they say, (...): and Plautus elsewhere, decere alicui: and Cicero
has the like grecisme, Comitari huic viae.

Do any verbes of asking govern an ablative case without a praeposition?

No: and therefore these words, cum praepositione should be added to that rule,
verba rogandi interdum mutant alterum, etc.

In that example, Est virtus placitis abstinuisse bonis: is bonis the dative
case, as Lilly informs us?

Linacer de Emend. struct. Lat. p, 267. l. 4. says it is the ablative case,
and I rather side with him.

In that example, Deforme existimabat quos dignitate praestaret, ab ijs
virtutibus superari: does either of those verbes govern an ablative case of
the measure of exceeding, according to the rule?

No: those verbes do govern an ablative case of the matter of excess, not of
the measure of exceeding, this or the like example would better fitthe rule,
Multis parasangis omnes oratores precurrit Cicero.

Of an Adjective governing three ablative cases.
Can any one adjective govern three ablative cases, according to three
several rules in Grammar?

Yes: as in this example, Oxonia est insignior Louanio literarum studijs multis
parasangis.

Of Verbes governing diverse of the same cases by several rules of Grammar.
Can you give an example of a verb governing three dative cases?

Yes: as for example, Neroni (.i. a Nerone) probis viris crimini vertitur
innocentia.

Can any one verb govern five ablative cases, according to the rules of
Grammar?

Yes: as for example; Ab artifice art fabrili summa diligentia politis pedibus
ex vlmeo ligno lectulos fieri iussit Titius.

Can a verb govern three ablative cases with three prepositions.

Yes: as for example; Accusatur de furto a vicino summo cum rigore.

Of the Construction of the Infinitive Mood.
If two verbes come together, shall the latter be always of the Infinitive
mood?

No: sometimes two verbes are joined together in the same tense and number by
an Hyphen. as, quemnam te esse dicam-feram. Varro apud Noniu^.
Reddas-restituas, amongst the Lawyers. Qui fecerit sculpserit Modestinus: so
Vtimini-foruimini, whence the substantive vsus fructus.

May not sometimes two verbes of the infinitive mood be joined together?

Yes: as for example, Ter. in And. Sc. Adhuc. Dare bibere: and dixit
Iureconsultus non oportere ius civil calumniari neque verba captare, sed qua
mente quid diceretur animaduertere conuenire. So Dico vti frui licere.

Is not the infinitive mood sometimes used as well for the present tense of
the Indicative, as for the preter tense, or preterimperfect tence?

Yes: as for example, Virg. Aeneid. 10. -- Multi seruare recursus,

Languentis pelagi, and breuibus se credere saltu. where seruare is put for
servant, credere for credunt. So Ovid. 4. Metam. -- Rutulis collucent ignibus
aedes falsaque saeuarum simulachra vlulare ferarum: where vlulare is put for
vtulant.

Salust. Rursus Imperator contra postulata Bocchi nuntios mittit, ille probare
partem, alia abnuere, eo modo ab vtraque missis, remissisque nuntijs tempus
procedere, and ex Metelli voluntate bellum intactum trahi: where probare,
abnuere, procedere, trahi, are put for probat, abnuit procedit, trahitur.

Are not verbes of the infinite mood, as also verbes finite, used sometimes as
nounes, and with the same construction.

Yes: as in these examples: First, Verbes finite are used as Nounes. Tull. pro
Mur. illud, licet consulere, perdidistis. Aue mihi dixit.i. salutem. Liu. l. 6.
faxo, ne iuuet vox ista veto.i. ne iuuet prohibitio. Plaut. in Paen. Sc.
Negotij. Si tacuisses, iam istuc Taceo non natum foret. Sapientia vsque ad
Plaudite viuendum, in Cat. May.

Secondly, verbes of the infinitive mood are used for nounes. Virg. in 9. Ille
suo moriens dat habere nepoti. Cic. Inhibere illud tuum quod valde mihi
arriserat, vehementer displicet. Pers. Sat. 1. Sed fas Tunc cum ad caniciem,
and nostrum illud viuere triste. Aspexi: where we may note also that the
preposition ad is praefixed before viuere. Ipsum illud peccare quoque te
verteris vnum est. Cic.

Of construction by a Periphrasis.
Do not pure latin Authors sometimes make a Periphrasis of a verb, govern
the same case which the verb it self would do?

Yes: as Ter. Id studiose dat operam..i. id curat. Id ne estis autores mihi?.i.
idne suadetis mihi. Idem. Caesar Senatui dicto audiens futurus i.
obtemperaturus. Cic. Fac me has res certiorem.i. edoce me has res. Idem. Quid
tibi hanc rem curatio est?.i. quid hanc rem curas. Plaut. Quid malum tibi
istanc tactio est?.i. quid tangis eam. Idem.

Of construction by Apposition.
May not the word which might be put in the same case with the word wherewith
it is joined by apposition be put in the dative case?

Yes: and that very elegantly, as Cui nunc cognomen Iulo. Virg. Est illi nomen
Capitoni. Cic.

Is it not necessary sometimes that in Apposition the same gender and number be
observed?

Yes: for we must say, Voluptas perpetuae comes summi boni, not perpetuus.
Manus vltrix, not vltor, virtus assertrix, not assertor. Inuentrices literarum
Athenae, not Inuentores.

What if the diverse gender of a noune substantive, whioh is called substantiuum
mobile.i. such a one as is varied in termination, and sex, as Magister, and
magistra, discipulus, discipula be to be joined by Apposition with a word of
the neuter gender, is it to be used in the masculine, or in the feminine gender?

In the masculine, as the more worthy; as Tempus Magister artium, and
discipulus rerum, not discipula, or magistra, but if the substantive to be
coupled be not substantiuum mobile, sometimes a noune of the feminine gender
may be added, as verbum nota animi, vitium labes animi. Sometimes of the
masculine, as vinum absynthites, vel aromatites.i. aromatibus conditum.

When may substantives coupled in the same case by Apposition be of diverse
numbers?

Either when one of the substantives wants the plural or singular number, as
Diuitiae gluten amicorum. Passer deliciae: or is a noune collectiue, as Angeli
agmen forte: or some one single thing either joined with others, or multiplied,
is signified, as Nata mea vices. Vxor mea gaudia. Pulmones instrumentum (not
instrumenta (respirationis: for there is but one lung in a living creature, but
the ancients said pulmones in the plural number, because that part of the body
which draws in, and lets forth the breath is cleft, as the hoof of an Ox.

Are substantives joined by Apposition always put in the same case?

No: the latter substantive which does explain or declare the former is
sometimes put in the ablative case, and the word explained in the genetiue or
dative; as, Viuis Patauij vrbe scientiarum laud celeberrima. Romae lupinari
communi habitas. Oxoniae Academia clarissima crematus est Cranmerus.
Lacedaemoni oppido insigni senibus honor maximus habebatur.

Of the construction of Gerunds and Supines.
Is that rule generally true, Gerunds and Supines govern the same case that
the verbes that they come of?

No: it is to be understood only of gerunds signifying actiuely, and the first
supines: for gerunds which signify passiuely, and the latter supines are
scarce to be found with any cases after them.

How may this, and the like English phrases be rendered in Latin, viz. I came
in dinner time.

Very elegantly by the gerund in dum, with the preposition inter; as, veni
inter prandendum.

In these forms of speech, accusatum oportuit factum oportet: volo datum; how
may it appear that accusatum, factum, datum, are participles, not supines?

Thus: because we find participles varied in all genders in this form of
speech, whereas supines want all genders, and flexion. Ter. in Heauton.
Interemptam oportuit, and in Andr. Nonne prius communicatum oportuit. Sic,
cupio hunc defensum, and hanc defensam. Here the verb esse is to be supplied.

What do you think of these supines, Do venum, do nuptum, which Lilly says
have latentem motum?

Nuptum signifies Nubit vxor, ducit vxorem vir.
passiuely: do nuptum, I give in marriage, or to be married. It is questinable
whether venum be a supine of veneo, or an aduerbe like to pessum; the analogy
seems to insinuate so much; as we say pessundare, and pessum dare; so we say
venundare, and venum dare, sed de hoc ampliandum est.

In those examples, Actum est, Itum est, Cessatum est, is the first supine put
absolutely with the verb est, as Lilly tells us?

No: herein he is foully deceived, he might as well say, placitum est, libitum
est, puditum est, etc. are Supines, which he affirms are Verbs impersonall of
the passive voice, in his rules of Etymology, touching Impersonals, and such
are these also.

Of Place.
Is that rule: Omne verbum admittit genitiuum proprij nominis loci in quo fit
actio, etc. true, concerning all proper names of places of the first, or second
declension, and singular number?

No: it extends only to proper names of Cities, and Towns, not to vast
Regions: for we may not say, Numidiae acriter pugnatum est, but in Numidia.

By what rule of Lillies Syntaxis, is terra-marique the ablative case, in that
of Cicero; Quantas ille res terra, mariquegesserat?

There is not any rule for that manner of construction, but it is of kin to
that of ruri, and rure.

Is domi never read with any other genitive case, except meae, tuae, etc. as
Lilly affirms?

Yes: it is read with other possessiues also: we may say, Domi suburbanae,
regiae, paterna, as well as Domi meae, etc.

Of verbes Impersonall.
In those clauses, vt videre est, vt legere est apud Aristotelem. Neque est te
fallere cuiquam, Virg. How comes it to pass that est is put for licet?

It is an imitation of the Greeks, who put (...) and (...) for (...), licet. so
Chrysostom. (...) (vel (...)) (...).

Of Participles.
Are all participles changed not nounes, when they cease to signify Time?

So Lilly teaches us in his Grammar.

Why then does he in his Syntaxis put down, that exosus, perosus, are
construed with an accusative case, when they signify actiuely; and a dative
when they signify passiuely; and Pertaesus with an accusative: Why are Natus,
prognatus, etc. said to be construed with an ablative case as participles, when
as none of these do signify Time any more then homo laudatus, or puer amandus?

It may be those two rules of exosus, perosus, etc. and natus, etc. are
exceptions from that general rule placed before them, viz. Participiorum voces
cum fiunt nomina, etc. Participles when they are made nounes require a genitive
case: and they are made nounes four ways: first, when they govern not the
same case that the verbes do that they come of. Secondly, when they are
compounded with prepositions that their verbs cannot be compounded with.
Thirdly, when they are compared. Fourthly, when they leave of to signify
difference of Time: in this respect exosus, perosus, etc. and natus, etc. it
may be are excepted from the precedent general rule.

It may be so: but this is only a conjecture to save Lillies credit.

Indeed I must needs confess that Lilly is not so distinct, punctual, and
exact as he should be, but we must make the best of him, till some other more
Grammarian shall compose us a better Grammar: and here I will add this also,
that that general of participials governing a genitive, is not to be
understood of any participials in Dus, or Tus, for they govern a dative case:
as, Heroes celebrandus omnibus poetis. Hoc est notum lippis and tonsoribus.

The construction of Aduerbs.
Does contra, being put without case, and so becoming an aduerbe only,
retain and not augment the signification which it had, being a preposition, as
other prepositions do, coram, post, clam, etc.

No: for it does not only signify opposition, as, si homo est ridere potest,
and contra, si non est homo ridere non potest, but reciprocation, conversion,
or alternation: as, si ridere potest est homo, and contra, si est homo potest
ridere, where contra is equivalent to vicissim, or vicissim retro: as also in
this of Terence: In eo oblecto me solum, and carum ille vt item contra me
habeat facio sedulo: and Virg. Aeneid. 1. Aeolus haec contra: where Aeolus in
his speech does not contradict, but assent to Juno.

May not an Aduerbe, as well as an Adjective put partitiuely, govern a
genitive case?

Yes: as for example. Manuum fortius se habet dextra. Omnium planetarum sol
splendet lucidissime.

Is not the aduerbe Parum sometimes added very elegantly to an adjective, and
sometimes to a substantive?

Yes: as Cic. ad At. Vide ne dum pudet te parum optimatem esse, parum
diligenter quod optimum est eligas, Quint. Inst. l. 5. Mollis, and parum vici
signa. Scal. in Exerc. Parum Philosophi, parum Physici. Minus, vel parum firma
fuit valetudine.

In those examples: Castra propius vrbem mouentur; and, Proxime Hispaniam sunt
Mauri, are, Propius, and Proxime, properly aduerbs, governing an accusative
case?

I think not: they rather seem to be prepositions compared governing an
accus. as the original word, or theme Prope does. Propius cannot be derived
of propior in this Syntaxis; for we find in Liuie, propior vero propius vero,
and propior is the comparatiue of propis, an absolute word, as prior of pris.
So Goclen. Problem. Gram. l. 3. p. 145.

May not an Aduerbe derived of an Adjective which governs an Accusative case
with a Preposition, govern the same case?

Yes: as for example. Poeta si apposite ad delectationem, Orator ad fidem
Philosophus ad vitam dicat, implesse munus suum videntur. Just. Lipsius.

In that clause of the fable of Esops Cock, granum hordei mallem omnibus
gemmis; why is gemmis the ablative case?

It is the ablative case by reason of the word magis, which lies secretly
couched in the word mallem, which may be resolved into magis vellem.

Are not sometimes nounes put for aduerbs, and contra?

Yes: first, Nounes put for Aduerbes. Nullus pro Non, by the figure called
Antemeria. Philotimus nullus venit. Cic. Quaerit ex proximo vicino number feriae
quaedam piscatorum essent, Vox hominem sonat.i. humaniter. Virg. Viuunt
Bacchanalia.i. Bacchanaliter. Iuu. vide Linac. de Emend. struct. Lat. l. 2. p.
94.
quod eos nullos videret. Idem. Etsi nullus diceris. Terent. At tu dolebis cum
rogaberis nulla. Catullus. This is an elegant kind of expression. Nemo pro
Non. Tac. 4. Ann. Ferrum, and caedes quonam modo occultaretur nemo reperiebat.

Multus pro multum. Multus in libris. In opere multus. Salust. Totus pro
totaliter. Totus displiceo mihi. Ter. Totus est alienus a Physicis. Cicer.
Plurimus pro plurimum. In toto plurimus orb legor.

Secondly, Aduerbs put for nounes. Satis vir, pro magnanimo. Senec. Plusquam
viri, pro virorum parts excedentibus. Parum fides, pro parua. Plaut.

In those examples. Multo aliter, paulo secus, long secus: are multo, paulo,
long, ablative cases?

Lilly did ill to surmise so; that rule is altogether superfluous; in like
manner he was deceived before, when in the rules of Adjectives, he affirmed,
that in that example, Quanto doctior es, tanto te geras submissius; quanto, and
tanto, were of the ablative case, whereas they are aduerbs.

May not the form, or manner of a thing, be put after an aduerbe in the
ablative case, as well as after an adjective?

Yes: as, agit fortiter verbis, factis ignaue.

Of Conjunctions.
In those Clauses of Plautus and Terence. Absque hoc esset, absque eo foret;
how come the verbes to be of the subiunctiue mood?

By reason of the particle si understood, which is to be supplied, to make
perfect construction.

After what verbes are those particles used, quod, vt, ne.

After these, and the like: for we say, Puto quod, Iubeo vt, Metuo ne.

Do ac, and atque, always come before in a clause?

Always, except in composition: as, simulac, simulatque, after the greek
manner, (...).

Does not a conjunction sometimes govern a case as a noune?

Yes: as Virg. Illius ergo Venimus: Amoris, Honoris, Virtutis ergo.

Of Prepositions.
Is not procul, when it is construed with Case, a Preposition?

Some learned men think so: it is read with and accusative or ablative case;
as in Curtius. Procul vrbem. in Liuie, Locus procul muros; and in the same
Authors: Procul muro. Procul mari. Procul discordibus armis. Virg.

Are not sometimes prepositions put before other prepositions?

Yes: as, Vsque sub obscurum noctis. Vsque ex Aethiopia. De Quinto fratre
nuntij nobis tristes venerant ex ante diem Nonarum Iuniarum vsque ad Pridie
Calend. September. The titles of chapters amongst the Ciuilians, are. De in ius
vocando. De in diem addictione: and, Gell. 1. 10. In de Analogia libro scriptum
est.

Is not a preposition sometimes put for a conjunction, and an aduerbe for a
preposition?

Yes: first, a preposition is put for a conjunction in Salust. Praeter rerum
rum capitalium condemnatis: praeter for praeterquam.

Secondly, an aduerbe for a preposition in Virg. Aen. 7. Tali intus templo
diuum, patriaque latinus sede sedens, vide Linac. de Emen^. struct. Lat. Ser.
l. 1. p. 109.

Is not a conjunction sometimes put in the place of a pronounce with a
preposition?

Yes: as, A me vero ita diligitur, vt tibi vni concedam praeterea nemini.i.
praeter te. Cic. Eundem ab hostibus metui, praeterea neminem i. praeter eum.
Idem.

Of an Interiection.
In this sentence; Egregium vero Philosophum qui inter solemn, and ignem quid
interesset parum curauit intelligere: why is Egregium Philosophum the
accusative case?

Because therein there is an ellipsis of the interiection O.

What interiections govern an accusative case, besides those expressed in
Lillies Syntaxe?

These: Eheu, hem, apage; as Eheu conditionem huius temporis. Cic. Hem. being
an Ironicall interiection; as, Hem astutias. Ter. O subtle devise Apage te.
Ter. Apage istiusmodi salutem. Plaut.

Are all things that are written by the ancient Authors to be exactly examined
and scanned according to rule?

No: for some had faults which of set purpose they loved and defended: Tantus
error est in omnibus studijs, maxim in eloquentia, cuius regula incerta est,
vt vitia quidam sua and intelligant, and ament: there is so great error in all
studies, especially in eloquence, the rule of which is uncertain, in so much
as some both know and affect their fai^ says Seneca: (...) 2. Contr. 20. (...)
(...). G^n^. ^ect. Virg (...) and ^e^dom ad ^. Georg. versum (...) O qui m^
gel^dis in ^allibus, Hemi.
Verbis licenter in carminibus vsus est Naso, in quibus non ignorauit vitia
sua, sed amauit, etc. Ovid was somewhat bold, and licentious in the use of some
words in his verses; wherein, he was not ignorant of the fault, but liked it,
and often would say that a Mole misbecame not a


