THE STATE OF THE godly both in this life, and in the life to come: Delivered
in a Sermon at Chudleigh in Devon: at the funerals of the right Worshipful,
the Lady Elizabeth Courtney, the 11. of November, 1605.

And published for the instruction, and consolation of the faithful.

By R. W. Minister.

Whereunto is annexed the christian life and godly death of the said
worshipful Lady Elizabeth Courtney.

Psalm: 112.9. He has distributed and given to the poor, his righteousness
remains for ever.

At London Printed for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his shop near
the Conduit in Fleetstreete. 1606.

To the worshipful, his good friend, Thomas Clifford, Esquire, grace, mercy
and peace from god the father, and from Christ Jesus our Lord.
SIR, you see the effect of importunity, and the efficacy of your favor toward
me; in that the sermon which was at first private, in respect of the Audients;
is now become public in pespect of the readers. Wherein it resembles the
Image, that is taken out of the painters shop, where few behold it, and placed
in the open market, where every one will censure it. I have delineated two
dwelling places of the godly, as my memory, notes and parenthesis of vacant
time permitted: the one fading, restles, and wretched in earth, the other
permane^t, quiet, and blessed in heaven. And I wish that my labor therein, may
be like the liuelyest picture and poem, which the more nearly, narrowly, and
often it is suruiewed, the more it feeds the eye and the mind of the behoulder
with delectatio^: as the judicious, or rather ce^sorious Poet says, both of the
one and the other Vt pictura, poesis, erit quae, si propius stes,
Horat. in Art.
Te capiet magis, and quaeda^ si longius abstes.
Haec amat obscuru^, volet haec subluce videri
Haec placuit se^el, haec decies repetita placebit
Neither can J conceal, that in diuulgating of this sermon, I was both
unwilling, and willing: unwilling, because of the slenderness thereof, and the
captiousnes of these critic times: in which that is usual which Salust said
to Caesar; Sal. ad Caesar. de ordinand. rep.
(ad repraehenda aliena facta, aut dicta, ardet omnibus animus) all are
earnestly bent to reprove other men's doings, or sayings: willing, because I
desired to decipher the sincerity of mine obsequiousness toward her, whose
memory I would my tenuity and obserua^cy were able to eternize: and because I
was loath to reiecte your pressing motion, whose more the^ common courtesies may
duly crave the utmost of my possibility. Her perspicuous worthiness, your
experimented kindness, mine own prope^sio^ to endeavor to do good by any means,
have more swaied with me, the^ that I could be hindered to edify the faithful,
and induced to withhold good from the owners thereof, by surmizing, that the
froward will condemn me, either of impudency or flattery. From flattery the
universal acclamation of multitudes, that both knew her, and heard of her,
will, (I know) acquit me; from the blame of voluntary and shameless intruding
my self into the sight of the world, your learned apology (I hope) shall purge
me. For malice had wanted one morsel to thrust into her insaturable gorge, had
not your forcible persuasions subdewed me, and cast me as a pray unto her
devouring teeth. Nevertheless, let one tax the prolixity, not weighing the
extraordinary occurrents: let another balance in the weights of worldly
eloquence, the course and unpolished style; desiring perhaps finer bread then
is made of wheat, and rather an eloquent, tha^ learned Physician to cure his
malady: let another reprove thinculcating of vulgar observations, and obuious
documents: forgetting, as well that Paul, that noble instructor of the gentiles,
(by daily reading of whose Epistles, the golden mouthed father said, that he
knew how to divide the word of truth aright) was not ashamed, to write the same
things again; as also that ^t becomes rather an Athenian, than a christian, to
hant after novelties: yet they that have their wits exercised, to discern good
from evil, sh^l perceive, that J have not erred from the faith; and that J
have not depraved the depositum, and talent of wholesome doctrine, committed to
the church by Christ, and recommended by the apostle to his scholar Timothy.
Tim. 6.20, ^incent Liri^. adu. propha^ ^uat. cap. 27.
J have kept (to borow the words of mel lifluous Vincentius Lirinensis, on the
foresaid exhortation of the apostle) that was committed unto me, not that I
have invented; that J received, not that I devised: that I learned, not that J
forged of mine own wit; that has been publicly taught, not privately
maintained. As I have received gold, so J have endeavored to render and return
gold: and not to give, either impudently, lead, or fraudulently, copper, and
the show of gold, in steed of sincere gold. And in returning it, J have been,
(non author, sed custos, non institutor, sed sectator, non ducens, sed sequens:
and cum dixerim noue, non dixi noua:) not an author, but a keeper: not a
teacher, but a scholar, not a leader, but a follower: and albeit J have
arraied somethings in attire of a new fashion, yet there is no difference in
the matter and substance. Wherefore not distrusting, but that as I have put this
sermon in writing at your entreaty, the concise sinews and epitome whereof was
else likely to have been utterly motheaten; so you will patronize it against
such malignantes, as either reprehend, that they will not amend, or else are
despisers of whatsoever their selves were not agents: with my prayer, that it
may benefit as many, as did bear undissembled love unto her, whose happy
remembrance has both wrung it out of my hands, and drawn it into the light
and that the faith which I am persuaded is in you, may dwell in you unto the
end, as it first dwelt in your worthy grandmother, and in your godly mother, I
commit you and yours to the gracious protection of the Almighty, whom I desire
to sanctify us through out, and to keep our whole spirit, and soul, and body,
blameles, unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Yours in the Lord Rob. VVolcomb.

Reuelat. Chap. 7. v. 13.14.15.16.17.
13. And one of the Elders spoke, saying unto me, what are these which are
araied in long white robes, and whence came they?

14. And I said to him, lord thou know: and he said to me; These are they
which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their long robes, and have
made their long robes white in the blood of the Lamb.

15. Therefore are they in the presence of the throne of God, and serve him day
and night in his temple: and he that sits on the throne will dwell among
them.

16. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the
Sun light on them, neither any heat.

17. For the Lamb, who is in the midst of the throne, shall govern them: and
shall lead them to the lively fountains of waters, and God shall wipe away all
tears from their eyes.

The state of the godly in this life, and in the life to come.
SVch and so great is the love of god toward his chose^ people, that he does
not only give them warning of dangers ensuing, but does oftentimes deliver them
from manifold calamities, where with others are overwhelmed. Genesis chap. 6.7.8.
Genesis 19.
So Noah had warning of the coming of the flood, and was delivered from the
violence thereof. So Lot had warning of the destruction of Sodom, and escaped
the fury of the fire and brimstone. So the Israelits had warning of the killing
of all the first born among the Egiptians: Exodus 12.
and by the blood of the paschal lamb were preserved from the vengeance of ye
destroier. So again the Israelites passed through the red sea, Exodu^ 14.
as through dry ground but the waters closed on their enemies the Egiptia^s. So
before ye captivity, the Jews yt mourned and sighed for the abominations which
were committed in Jerusalem, Ezech. 9.
had a mark set on their foreheades, and were exempted from the desolation;
and other which had not the mark, were not spared, but smitten without pity.
And as the lord in the seven trumpets had provided diverse miseries to be
inflicted upon men of all sorts, cap. 8. 7. etc.
so in this chapter there is a caution and prouiso for the godly: for before
the fowr angels by holding the 4. winds do hurt the earth, with hail and fire,
or that a burning mountain kill the creatures of the sea; or the fallen star
turns the living waters into mortal wormwood, or the son and moon be
smitten till the servants of God were sealed in their foreheads: John saw the
vision of those which were numbered and sealed: Jews, of all the tribes of
Israel, an hundred and forty and fowr thousand: and after a numberles number of
the gentiles, of all nations, ^. Mare. 13.51.
and kindreds, and people, and tongues; who stood before the throne of god, to
worship him and praise him, and were clothed in long white robes, that is,
were covered with the unspotted righteousness of Christ, and had palms in their
hands, in token of the victory obtained by Christ, against the flesh, the
world, and Satan. After this John heard the congratulation and thanksgiving of
those which were sealed, for that they were saved and preserved: for they cried
with a loud voice saying, Salvation comes from our God, v. 10.12.
that sits upon the throne, and from the Lamb. Unto which cry all the
angels applaude, and worship God, saying, Amen. Praise, and glory, and
wisdom, and thanks, and honor, and power, and might, be unto our god for
evermore. Amen. Now these words which I have read, contain the expounding of
the vision that John saw. Iunius in Ap^calyps.
In which exposition, three things are to be noted. 1 The question of the
Elder, to stir up John to deeper consideration, in the 13 verse. 2 John's answer
to the Elder, in the first part of the 14. verse. 3 The reply of the Elder, in
the rest of the 14 verse and unto the end of the 17 verse. In which reply the
Elder declares, those which were numbered and sealed to be the saints, whom he
describes, first by their acts, that is their sufferings, and work of faith in
Jesus Christ done in the former persecutions, and to be continued in the
future tentations, in the 14 verse. Secondly by their glory both present in the
15 v. and to come: partly in their full deliverance from all calamities and
annoyances, in the 16. verse, and partly in participation and fruition of all
good things, which the remembrance of woonted myseries shall never abolish or
diminishe: in the 17. v. And this is begun in this life, but accomplished
afterward.

In that the Elder does ask a question of John, ^nterpretatio^ ^f the text.
whether he knew, who those were, which were arrayed in long white robes, and
whence they came: he behaueth himself like a diligent teacher, who being
desirous to enstruct his scholar in that he knows not, he preuenteth him, by
enquiring, whither he know it, or not. Whereby the Elder signifies, how prompt
and ready they that are led by the spirit of God, and are endued with
knowledge and understanding, should be to inform the ignorant. And in that
John yields a modest answer to the Elder, acknowledging his ignorance; by
attributing knowledge to the Elder: for in that he says Lord thou know; he
says thus, Lord I know not: Lord thou know; lord teach me: he does
aduertize us, to be wise with sobriety; and not to be puffed up with an
ouerweening opinion of our learning, but to reckon it no shame and
disparagement, to be taught the certaynty of those good things which we never
learned, Marlor: and Sebast, Meyer in Apocal.
Whereas the Saints are said to come out of great tribulation, although the
Elder spoke this, chiefelye touching the former persecutions by the heathen
Empires, and may also be understood of the persecution which Antichrist
should raise against the Church: yet generally it may be understood, of the
universal troubles and afflictions of this life, in that all the children of
God, come from great affliction unto great rest, from mysery unto glory,
from prison unto a kingdom: from thraldom unto freedom: from death unto life.
The long robes of the saints which were washed, is the holiness,
righteousness, and innocence of Christ, wherewith the godly being clothed
they do walk boldly, and are found just and unblameable before the Lord. And
the making white of the long robes in the Lambs hlood, is when the godly do
walk in the faith of christ, and do suffer the cross patiently after his example.

But how can blood make white? The faithful are washed white with the Lambs
blood, in that they are purged in conscience from dead works to serve the
living GOD, Hebr. 9 13. Revel. 1.5 ^. Pet. 1.19.
by the blood of CHRIST, who thorough the eternal spirit offered himself
unto god, an unspotted sacrifice. And here falls to ground the Romish doctrine
of indulgences, Acts 10.3. 1 John. 1.7. ^ Cor. 5.21. ^ Cor. 1.15. Acts 20.28.
Hebr 10 14.
and dispensation of the superabounding merits of Saints, for if the faithful
are sufficiently purged and cleansed by the blood of the lamb, where is the
treasure of supererogation of Saints? Where it is said, that the godly are in
the presence of the throne of god this may be taken, not only for that blessed
and quiet worship, which the godly departed out of the body, yield to the lord
in heaven, without external and laborsome service: but also for their
worshipping of God, while they live in this mortal body: and while they in
this life are so devoted to the serving of god, Ephesians. 2:6. Col. 3:1. 2. Cor:
3:6.
and do so frame their whole life after his will, and do so seek to glorify
god, and to edify their neighbor, as if they were already placed in gods
heavenly temple, before the throne of God, and before his holy Angels. As for
this, that the godly serve god day and night in his temple: Psalm. 134.1. Leuit,
8.35. Luke 18:1. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Luke 2.37. Psalm 1:2: (...) Leu. 26:12: 2 Cor:
6:16: Reu: 3:20 1 John 1:3: Genesis 17.1:
the Angel alludes to the office of the old Levites, for otherwise there is no
night in heaven: or else by serving god day and night, may be meant, the
continual endeavoring of the godly to glorify god, even in all their actions.
And that god will dwell among them, or upon them, what does it signify else, but
that as they are gods people, so he will be their God: and as they will pass
their life in fear and reverence, as being always in the sight of god, so god
will have familiar conversation among them, and will be their protector and
exceeding great reward. To hunger and thirst no more; is to be satisfied with
all good and desirable things: for meat and drink are the chiefeste among the
desires and cares of this life: and to eat and drink, Ioh. 6.35: Luke 22.29:
Esai. 65.13: Ezech. 34.13:
is in scripture, to lead an happy and pleasant life. By the sun and heat,
that after this life shall fall no more upon the godly, must be conceived the
end and ceasing of the afflictions, wherewith the faithful are exercised in
this life. For as in hoate regions, the parching heat of the sun does much
grieve the inhabitants: and the ^re god shadowed his people by day with a
pillar of a cloud, Exodus 13.11:
from the feruente heat of the sun: so the scorching of affliction does
annoy and molest the godly, as long as they remain in this world: but after
the race of mortality is finished, the place of tribulation shall be found no
more. And here even the least drop of consolation, that flows from this one
place of scripture, is enough to quench the whole fire and flame of Purgatory.
For how may purgatory stand, if the faithful after this life shall no more be
accumbred with Sun, or any heat? Who is the Lamb in the mids of the throne;
but Jesus Christ, The Lamb of god that takes away the sin of the world? ^ohn.
1.36:
and who is the great shepherd and Bishop of souls, (...)
that does feed and govern the godly like sheep, but Christ? and what is the
leading of the faithful to the living waters; Ezech 34.3 John. 10.14 Acts
20.28. Psalm 23.1: John 4.10: and 7, 28. Isai. 55, 1. Ezech 36.26*
but that they after this life shall live joyfully, and blessedly, being freed
from all calamities? and what is it to wipe away all tears from the godly;
but that the fulness of joys shall swalow up all sorrow and cause of sadness? For
as the joy of the wicked is turned into sorrow so the sorrow of the godly is
turned into comfort. And the Angel says, James 4.9. Isai 65.18: Mat. 5.4 John
16 20.
that every tear shall be wipt away: to give us to understand that the tears
of the elect are diverse, as their tribulations are diverse. One laments because
he has done evil; another laments because he has not done good: one
lamentes, because he bears the hard rod of affliction, another lamentes
because he is assaulted by vices: one laments because he is absent and a
stranger from the kingdom of heaven: and for that the blindness of worldlings is
great: another laments, for yt gods word is contemned and despised: but ye
lord will end all tears, and will refresh his people with eternal co^solatio^. And
here is ouerturned ye erroneous doctrine of man's merit; for the only efficient
cause of the glory of the elect, both here and hereafter, is but one, namely
the lamb, the Messiah, the mediator, and savior Jesus Christ.

Although many things offer themselves in this text to our view, and are worthy
of due co^templation, yet I have selected only two which at this time shall be
unfolded, and made manifest unto you, as meetest for this present occasion and
assembly; The first is the state and condition of the faithful in this life.
The second is the state and condition of the faithful after this life. For the
first, ^he state of the ^odly in this ^^fe v, 14, 16, 17
to wit the state and condition of the godly in this life, in that it is here
said, that they came out of great tribulation, that they shall after this
life hunger no more, neither thirst any more, yt the sun shall not light on
the^, neither any heat and that God shall wipe away all tears from their
eyes; this shows, that while the godly are abiding in this life, they endure
tribulation, they hunger, and thirst they are annoyed with sun and heat, and
they live in the valley of misery, which compels to shed tears. And it can
be no other wise^, For our Lord and master Christ says, that if any will come
after him, and be his disciple, he must deny himself and take up his cross daily
and follow him If we will be ye true scollars of Christ, Luke 9, 23.
it is not enough, to co^fes or profes him to subdue and curb the vicious
affections of our natural inclination, but we must undergo ye cross, and
tribulation, neither is yt enough, once or twice to undergo it, but take up
our cross daily. For as one day follows another, so there is a succession
and plurality of tribulatio^s yt pursue the godly. If we purpose to build the
tower of true Christianity we must first cast on these costs, Luke: 14, 28*
and if we will fight battails of unfeigned profession we must make ready to
encounter diverse and dau^gerus adversaries. And therefore Paul and Barnabas
knowing, that affliction is a^ inseperable companion of godliness, did not only
publish the truth at Listra, Iconium, and Antiochia but confirmed the disciples
hearts, and exhorted the^ to continue in the faith and not to fall away and be
daunted through tribulations, affirming, yt we must through many afflictions
enter into the kingdom of God. This general lot of the godly Paul most
expressly declares inferring upon his own president, 2, Tim, 3, 12*
That all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, Tim 3.12.
shall suffer persecution. d For whom he loves, he chasteneth, and he
scourges every son that he receiuerh. If we endure chastning God offers
himself unto us, as unto sons? for what son is it, whom the father
chastneth not; And therefore the Apostle is bold to conclude, ^ebr 12 8.
that if we be without correction, whereof all are partakers, then are we
bastards, and not sons. Be hold Noah: behold Lot: behold Abraham, Izaac and
Iaakob: behold Joseph behold Moses: were not all these the beloved sons of
God? and yet were not al these pressed with tribulations? The time will be to
short to speak of Job, of David; of the Prophets, of the Apostles who where
the true and dear servants of God: and yet were tried in the furnace of
affliction. Christ himself was assaulted of Satan, had trappes laid in his
way by his enemies, was hated of sinful men, and did flee from their fury,
felt hunger, and werisomnes of body: was mocked, and scorned, and railed upon,
and despitefully entreated and spit upon, and crowned with thorns, and beaten
with whips, and at last led to the cross, and to execution, till he dyed, and
gave up the ghost: so that the only example of CHRIST himself, whose whole
life was nothing but a passion and tribulation, may suffice to teach us, That
the disciple is not above his Master, nor the seruante above his Lord: It is
enough for the disciple to be as his Master, and the servant as his Lord, If
they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, Matthew, 10.2
how much more them of his househould? f. For if we suppose: that we shall
feel no tribulations, we must not imagine, that we can be true Christians
As Soon as we begin to live godly in christ (says saint Augustine, Cum c^peri^
pie in Christo^ viuere, ingre^es torcular, p^parate ad pr^suram. Aug: Psalm. 57.
) we enter into the winepresse, and we ought to prepare our selves for wringing
and pressing, and we must take heed that we be not found so dry grapes, that
we yield out noe good licour when we are pressed.

An heathen Philosopher cold say, that the man is most vnhapy, unto whom no
adversity betideth; it is an argument, that he is contemned of god, as a weak
and sluggish person. A sword-player acounts it reproach to fight with a man of
no valor: for he knows that there is noe glory to vanquishe him that is
vanquished without danger. Even so works gods providence He sets upon
every one endued with most courage, ^ihil eo infoeli ^us, cui nihil e ^enit
aduersi: ^rgumentu^ est ^deo illum con^mni, vt im^ellem and ig^uum, ^en. in
lib. de ^ouid Dei.
and tries his power against him. He tried by the fire Mutius, by poverty
Fabritius, by banishment Rutilius, by torments Regulus, by poison Socrates, by
death Cato, Thus said an Ethnic of those that sought but glory among men and
had but vain glory for their reward, but how much more truly may it be said, yt
god tried Job by botches, and Tobit by blindness and Stephen by stones, and the
Baptist by bands and prisonment, and the martyrs by infinite tortures? For
whosoever desire to return into Paradise: must pass through the fire and
water of affliction; whether it be Peter the Apostle, to whom the keys of the
Kingdom of heaven were given; ^mnes qui ^d Paradisum ^dire defide^nt, oportet
^nsire per ig^em et a^uam ^e fuerit Pe^us etc. Aug. sermon ad ^ppium.
or whether it be Paul the Lords chosen vessel or whether it be John, to
whom heavenly mysteries were revealed They must needs all say, that without
tribulation and affliction, we cannot come to God,

Neither do the faithful alone suffer tribulation in this life, but misery
and affliction is commonly incident to all man kind as holy Job says, man that
is born of a woman, is of short continuance: and full of trouble. i H^ ^ayeth
not, Job. 14.1.
that man and this man are battered with trouble: but he uses the indefinite
word (man) that every one might remember his own lot. So that the son of
Sirach seems to comment on Job when he writes, that great travel is created
for all men, and an heavy yoke upon the sons of Adam from the day that they
go out of their mothers womb, till the day that they retourn to the mother of
all things. Thoughts and fear of the heart, and imagination of things waited
for, wrath and envy troble and unquietness, rigor and strife, fear of death, and
ye day and death: these are usual, from him that sits upon the glorious
throne, unto him that is beneath in the earth and ashes, from him yt is clothed
in blew silk and wears a crown even unto him that is clothed in simple
linne^. Ecclus 40.^ 2.3.4.5.
Every ma^s life is like a rock in the Sea, beaten upon of the floods on every
side: and like a tree on an high and open hill, blown on by the winds, from
every quarter: and like a burning candle, which may be put out, by sundry
means, but if yt be not putt out, yet in continuance it burns out it self:
and like a butt or mark unto which sorrow shootes, and danger shootes, and
misaduenture shootes and at last death, that most sure archer shootes, and
strikes it dead. What our substance is, namely dust and earth, and what our
estate is, namely painful, laborious, and combersome, is evident, by that
speech of god to Adam after his fall in the sweat of thy face (says god]
shall thou eat bread, til thou retourn to the earth: for out of it wast thou
taken, because thou art dust, Genesis 3.19
and to dust shall thou return. And therefore the Psalmist affirms our brittle
substance and our wreched life, to be motives, why God has compassion on them
that fear him, as a father has compassion on his children. For (says he) he
knows whereof we are made, he remembers that we are but dust. Psa.
103.13.14 1 Chro. 29.15.
This sweet singer of Israel calls himself and every man besides, but a
stranger and so iourner, like as all our fathers were, A stranger and
traveler has little or no contentation, til he come to the end of his journey,
either he complains of the rain, or of the wind, or of the heat of the
sun, or of his lodging, or of his unfitting diet, or of the yrksomnes of his
journey: so man has still occasion to complain of his troubles in this life,
and can never enjoy perfect security, while he remains here. And upon good
reason might the same prophet break forth, and say, Lord what is man, that
thou regardest him, or the son of man, that thou think upon him? He
stays not here, but declares the cause of his admiration: man (says he) is
like to vanity, Psalm 144:3*
his days are like a shaddowe that vanishes. As if he had said, though we
feed our body never so deliciously, though we cloth our flesh never so
sumptuously, though we provide for our life never so couetouslye, yet our days
tarry not, but depart as vanitye. Thou that flowest with wealth, and gloriest
in reputation; will thou know thy weight? thou art ligher then vanity, then
nothing: will thou know the length of thy days? they are a spanne: will thou
know how, and in what sort thou fadest? as a slender picture and image. For
when David had desired the lord that he might know his end and the measure of
his days, what it was and how long he had to live: he presently gives himself
this answer behold, thou have made my days as an handbredth and my age is as
nothing in respect of thee surely every man in his best state is altogether
vanity: doubtless man walks in a shadow. Psalm. 19.4.5.
And what confidence should we repose in this fickle life, sins the oracle and
voice of God commanded Isayah to cry that all flesh is grass, and all the
grace thereof is as as the flower of the field: the grass withreth the flower
fades, because the spirit of the lord blows upon it, Isai. 4.6.7.
surely the people is grass; One herb may be sweter then another, one herb
may be of more virtue then another, one flower may be of more endurance then
another yet at last all herbs wither, and all flowers fade so one man may
be wiser then an other; and richer then an other and learnedder then another,
and honorabler then another and stronger then an other: But the state and
condition of all flesh is, to be miserable and mortal. For what is our life?
(says blessed James: 2, Iam. 4.4.
It is even a vapor that apipeareth for a little time, and afterward vanishes
away. Do thou not mark, how hugie and and stately the vapors appear,
when they mount upward unto the heaven, and yet how soon they vanish: even in
the turning of the hand? Another such thing is this life, though it deck it
self with never so glorious pomp, yet it falls away as a bubble: to day a
man, tomorrowe none. Gregory Nazianzene tompares our life to a top which
children whirl, and drive to and froe with ye scourge, Sursum deorsum,
voluitur, reuoluitur,
Et cum videtur stare, consistit minus:
It is tossed up and down, forth and back and when it seems to stand
co^sta^tly, or to move least it whirleth most. Nazia^. carm ex translatione
billij. Genesis 11.2. Dan. 4.27.
it falls sudde^ly. And therefore (if any will follow his counsel) he may in three
words describe fully the life of man, Insomnium, fumusue, flosue herbae
breuis: It is a dream, a vapor, a flower. If any should be so vainglorius and
ambitious, as to build the tower of Babel with Nimrod or a magnifice^t palace
with Nebuchadnezzar, or a pillar to preserve a memorable fame with Absalom: 2.
Sam. 18.28.
yet the hungry teeth of time and continuance would devour the most specious
works, and will either consume them before us, or us before them If faith
could save from death, Abraham should not have dyed, if might could do it
Samson should not have dyed, if wisdom could do yt Salomo^ should not have
dyed if riches, dainty fare, and gorgeous arraye could do it. Dives should not
have dyed if zeal diligent discharge of calling could do it, Paul should not
have dyed: if sanctimonie and chastity could do it, Mary the holy and blessed
virgin should not have dyed at a word, if monarchies, and lordships cold
deliver from death, Cyrus, Alexander, and Caesar should not have died, And
therefore Horace tells his friend Torquatus, yt when his glass is run down, and
his race finished, Car. lib, 4. Ode, 7.
Non Torquate genus, non te facundia, non te Restituet pietas: It was not his
noble desce^t, it was not his pleasant and eloquent tongue, it was not his
virtuous life that could restore and recall his days. A Jesuit, our
countrima^ speaks of a company of religious men in Rome, which are commonly
called the fellowship of dead men, and they seldom or never ar seen abroad but
in rare and extraordinary processions, and where they go, they carry ye
pourtraiture of death made after a ghastly and greesly shape, and this written
by it, nemi ni parco. I spare and forbear none. Turnerus Deuonius. Heb, 9, 27.
I would himself and the rest of the massing Romanists did always behold that
picture: for if they remembered, that it is appointed for all men to die once; and
then comes the judgment: it were marvelous, if they did not begin to be
ashamed of their pride, their compassing of the sea and land, to make Romish
Proselytes, yt may be twofold more ye children of hell (if it were possible)
then them selves are. Mat. 23.15.
Thus you see that al me^ generally ar miserable and mortal both the godly and
ungodly.

But why ar the godly commonly more afflicted then others? for it is said of
the Elder to John. v, 14.
that they came out of great tribulation. This is not for ye god does forget
them, or for that god cannot or will not deliver the^ presently out of all
dangers, but for that god loves them more then other and draws them nearer and
nearer to himself by chastisement and correction, Consider the profitable
working, that tribulation and affliction has in the godly; and who will not
ascribe it to gods singular love, that they are afflicted sometimes more then
other, to receive thereby always more prof^it then other? First tribulation
stirs us up to repentance for sin, and is a sermon to amendment of life. For
the godly are afflicted for their sins; not thereby to satisfy gods justice;
but to confess their offenses, and to acknowledge their iniquities, and to be
purged ftom their faults, and by temporary correction to avoid the eternal
destruction of worldlings. 1 Cor: 11:32:
God gives the raynes to the wicked, that they may fall into perdition; and he
bestows upon them the blessings of this life, and the fleeting and short
joys thereof, because they are his creatures, to the end he may make them
inexcusable, and convict them of ingratitude: but he amends and reclaims his
children by the cross and tribulation. For as the Vrchin or Hedghog folded up
round together in his prickly skin, seems not possible to be opened without
killing and flaying it of: and yet if hot water be sprinkled on it, it opens it
self immediately: so some that are so hardened and wrapped up in the custom of
sinning, as it seems, that death only may end their ungodliness, yet when the
hot water of tribulation is powered upon them, they are softened and dissolved,
and made open to repentance. This hot water had such an effectual operation
in David when he cried, Save me o god for the waters are entered even to my
soul. Psalm 69:1:
Again tribulation tries our faith, as the fire tries gold: and as the fyning
pot tries silver, and as the hammer discernes the purity of the metal. For as
gold has a clear sound under the hammer, and spreades much before it crack,
but brass soundes harshly and breaks quickly: so the faithful endure the
hammering of tribulation and yield forth the sweet praises of ^hanksgiuing:
but the ungodly repine, and murmur, Pari motu exagitatu^ exhalat horribiliter
coenum; and suauiter fragrat vnguentum. Aug. de Ciuit. dei, lib. 1. cap. 8.
and bewray their unthankfulness, and crack when they are brought to
^ammering. Stir puddle, and it will smell ^othsomly: stir a sweet ointement, and
it ^ill smell fragrantly: even so affliction ^akes the godly to bless god, and
affliction makes the ungodly to blaspheme god. Besides this, tribulation breeds
patience and exercises patience, James 1.3:4:
that it may have her perfect working, and may be entire, and lack nothing.
Tribulation works humility in us, and knowledge of our selves, and a learning
of obedience, as Paul says of Christ: that though he were son, yet he
learned obedience, by the things which he suffered. Heb: 5.8
Tribulation causes us to long for heaven, and to loathe the world, and not to
love the things of the world, and not to repose confidence in the love of the
world: 1 John 2:15
for as the world hated Christ, so it hates the godly that believe in christ:
and because the godly are not of the world, therefore the world hates them.
Tribulation makes us the members, John. 13, 18 19
conformeable to christ our head, that we may fulfill the rest of the
afflictions of Christ in the flesh: Col. 1.29.
and that he that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified, may be all of one.
Tribulation makes for the honor, Heb, 2.10.
and praise and glory of god, in that god works deliverance out of affliction:
and though he kill, yet he makes alive: and though he bring down to the
grave, 1. Sam. 2:6:
yet he rayseth up; and though the godly are afflicted on every side, yet they
are not in distress; though they are in doubt, yet they despair not: though
they are persecuted, yet they are not forsaken: though they are cast down, yet
they perish not. 2. Cor, 4.8, 9
Lastly, tribulation is a testimony and demonstration of the judgment to
come, and of everlasting life; for the justice and truth of GOD require, that
at length the good should be comforted, and the wicked punished: but for that
this is not always done in this life, therefore it shall be performed when
the Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven with his mighty Angels. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7*
And the tribulation of the faithful should excite, and provoke the wicked, to
shake off their sins, that stick so fast unto him: For if the time be come,
that judgment must begin at the house of god what shall the end be of them
that obey not the Gospel of God? and if the righteous scarcely be saved,
where shall the ungodly and the sinner appeer? and if this be done in the green
tree, 1 Pe, 4:17, 18* Luke 23, 31
what shall be done in ye dry tree? for if christ, the green and flori^hing tree
of righteousness, and the godly that are branches of the same tree, did and
do suffer great tribulation; what should the unrepentant and wicked expect,
(that are dry, withered, and fruitles trees,) but consuming fire, and the
declaration of the just judgment of God?

Yea but does not the providence of god sleep, will some say; when the godly
are greatly afflicted? and how does god accomplish this promise, that he will
shrowde them, and cover them, and protect them, and pitch a tent about them,
and dwell among them? certainly he that keeps Israel does neither slumber nor
sleep: the lord is the keeper of his children, ^sal. 121.4.5.
and their shadow at their right hand: he ayds them by the power of his grace,
and he gives them that comforter, that shall abide with them for ever: ^oh: 14.
v. 16
he will not leave the^ as destitute Orphans, but he will come to them, and
assist them; ^. 18. ^.23.
he will lodge with them, and make continual abode with them, he increases
their faith, that they may never doubt of his love, but still depend upon him.
Can a woman forget her child, and not have compassion on the son of her
womb? though she should forget her sons, yet the Lord will not forgette his
children. Esai 49, 15
Many are the troubles of the righteous; true: Psalm. 34.20
but the Lord delivers them out of all. The godly are much pressed; true; but
they flourishe as the Palm tree; Psalm: 92.12
which the more it is pressed down, the more it sprouteth up. The rain falls,
and the floodes come, and the winds blow on the faithful; true: but their
house falls not, Mat. 7.24:
because it is builte on a rock? poiesei te^ekbasin
God suffers his children to be tempted; true: but he is faithful and will not
suffer them to be tempted above that they are able; 1. Cor. 10.1^
but will even with the tentation give the issue and way out, that they may be
able to bear it. Mat. 20:22
Christ calls affliction and tribulation, Baptism, for that as in Baptism, we
are dipped down into the water, but not drowned, or choked in the water; so
though we be washed with the water of tribulation, yet we are not
overwhelmed therein. And as Noah was preserved from the great danger of the
flood, when he and his familye were enclosed in the Arc, and the rest did
perish that were out of the Arc: 1. Pet. 3.20:
so whosoever in the church of God do adhere and cleave to Christ, though they
be laden with calamities, yet at length in due season they are delivered:
whereas others that are out of the church, are swalowed up by the flood of
sin, and of punishments that accompanye sin. How grievously was Job vexed
by the Sabeans, 1, 15.16.17 and 2.7. (...): 42.12, etc ^es. 5:11
by fire from heaven, by the Chaldaeans, by Satan, by his wife: yet how
gloriously was he at last delivered? And as round bodies, that are in all
parts equally circular may rest, and be settled on each part and side: so the
godly are constant in whatsoever estate: for the Lord puts his hand under them,
to make their resting place easy and commodious, as the Prophet says: ^m 37,
24
Though they fall, they shall not be cast off: for the Lord puts under his
hand When the stay and strength is taken from the ungodly, when they shall be
oppressed one of another, when woe shall be to the wicked, and evil shall be
with them, and the reward of their hands shall be given them: ^.10:
then, then, surely it shall be well with the just. For all things work
together for the best unto them that love God, ^. 8.28 ^c.
in tribulation and anguishe, in famyne and nakedness, in peril and sword,
they are more then conquerours through him that loved them. For we are
persuaded, that neither death nor life: nor Angels, nor principalities, nor
powers: nor things present, nor things to come: nor height, nor depth, nor
any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which
is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Wherefore, since god is ready to help in tribulation, and has promised to be
with us in trouble, and to deliver us, Psalm 91 ^
that we may glorify him, and has commanded us to call upon him in the day
of adversity: let us submit our selves unto god, and draw near unto God,
James 4.7:^ 10 and 5:13*
with zealous prayer, and he will draw near unto us: and lift us up. And
since affliction is the portion and lotte of all the godly, that falls out to
them, and attendes on them: when we see our Brethren endure tribulation, we
must not presentlye censure them, to be hated and utterly forsaken of GOD:
but rather recognize the signs of Gods favor toward them. For he that
says, Nihil aliu^ cit, qua^ at^ non conue^ aduersariu^ Basil in Ps^
that the godly ought not to suffer tribulation; says this; that a wrestler
should not have an adversary to encounter him: and if a wrestler strive not,
what garland or glory can he obtain? and since none of the faithful have an
immunity and privilege from affliction, but have them selves drunk at one or
other time of the cup of tribulation; for as noisome and pestilent beasts
(says Basil) seek after a pray, ^t animalia ^a, nos aeru^^etere atque ^dere
con^unt. Basil. ^sal. 45
and surcease not, til they have found it, so miseries continually hunt after
the godly, and find them at length: this must teach us, to show commiseration
on the afflicted, and not to turn our eye from our own flesh, because our
selves know the weighte of affliction; following the example of Christ our
Savior, who is an high Priest, which can sympathize and be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities, because in all things he was tempted in like sort,
yet without sin. Finally since tribulation must needs try the faith and
patience of the godly, ^1415.
that after they have bin tried, they may receive the recompense; let us not
murmur nor grumble against our heavenly Father, who afflictes us for our
profit. If the earthlye Fathers of our bodies, correct us, yet we reverence
them: for though Fathers put their sons out of their sight, and bind them
to husbandry, or employ them in an handycraft, or bestow them in merchandise,
or send them into the wars, yet the sons are well content, because it makes
for their prefermente and advantage, should not we much rather be in subjection
unto the father of spirits, Heb. 12:9:
that we might live? A General enioyns perilous service to none but most
valiant soldiers, and those that he loves best and whom he would advance;
for them he sends out to lie in ambush for the enemy; to demolish some fort,
or to invade the main army of the foe. Not one of those that are so sent
forth, says: the General has done me wrong, or wishes me not well;
unless perhaps he be a coward and faintehearted: but contrarilye, if he be
valorous, and woorthye of the name of a Soldier, he says thus; the General
thinks well of me, he has a good opinion of me; he favors me; and seeks
to honor me, So is the case between GOD and us. 1 Cor. 9.24
Out life in this world is a warfare, and we all runn in a race, let us
therefore strive and fight against all afflictions, that the providence of God
bringes upon us: ^ Tim. 25
that when we have striued as we ought to do, we may be crowned; that when
we have fought a good fight, and finished our course, and kept the faith, the
crown of righteousness may be laid up for us; that when we have rejoiced
in tribulations, ^ Tim. 4.7, 8
(knowing that tribulation brings forth patience, Rom 5, 3, 4, 5,
and patience experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed) at
last we may come out of tribulation, unto the glorious inheritance of the
Saints in light. And thus far of the state and condition of the faithful in
this life.

The state of ^he godly after this life.
Now let us come to the state and condition of the godly, after they are
departed out of this world. It is said here by the Angel, yt they hunger no
more, neither thirste any more, and that the sun shall not light on the^ any
more, neither any heat. For ye Lamb which is in the mids of the throne shall
feed and govern them, and shall lead them to the fountains of waters: v,,
16, 17,
and god shall wipe away al tears from their eyes. The titles and honorable
names that are given to the place, where the faithful are after death, do
thoroughly manifest the excellency of their estate. For it is called in holy
scripture sometimes a kingdom; sometimes the bosom of Abraham, sometimes
Paradise, sometimes a place of many mansions; sometimes rest, sometimes the
new Jerusalem sometimes a city, And al these titles do declare unto us the
surpassing comfort which the godly receive, when they are freed from this
wretched world. It is called a kingdom, where Christ says to his disciples,
fear not little flock, Luke. 12, 32.
for it is your fathers pleasure to give you the Kingdom. In which words our
Savior uses a most forcible argument to withdraw us from impiety and
carfulness for earthly things, and distrusting Gods providence, that we
shall want things requisite for this present life: for he that gives the
greater and better thing will not deny the lesser and inferior; sens the^ our
heavenly father has of his own grace and pleasure provided the kingdom of
heaven for us; ^n basileian
let us not doubt, but he will give all other things unto us. And albeit our
state in this world, be oftentimes base, and needy, and miserable: yet we
must refreshe our souls with the remembrance of that heavenly kingdom, in
which at length we shall reign with Christ: and gloriously triumph over
Satan, death, and bell through Christ, if unfeignedly we believe in christ. It
is called Abraham's bosom, where Christ says, that when the beggar Lazarus
dyed, he was carried of the Angels into Abraham's bosom. ^^ke. 16, 22.
He was carried of the Angels; for that as Angels, are all ministering
Spirits, ^eb 1, 14.
sent fourth to minister, for their sakes which shall be heirs of salvation,
and do safegarde the godly by the lords apointment from sundry dangers of
this mortal life: so it is their charge and part to convey into heaven the
souls of the righteous, when they are loosed from the fetters of the flesh.
And as infants do rest quietly in their mothers bosom, so heaven is a
receptacle and bosom for the faithful, in which they take their quiet rest
and ease, Calvin in Har.
after the sturres of this tumultuary life ar ended. And it is called Abraham's
bosom because as Abra^am was a most constant believer, Romans 4.11 Gal, 3, 7,
and a^oue hope believed under hope, and therefor is called the father of al ye
believers, so whosoever desire to be gathered into that ^osome after this life
they must in this life ^mitate and follow ye faith and godliness of faithful
Abraham. It is called Paradise, where ^ur Savior says to the penitent thief
upon the cross to day thou shall be with me in Paradise: Luke, 23.43. Gell
lib, 20, cap 20,
the Greeks use yt word Paradise for a place yt is hedged round, The glory of
God is described under the figures of blessed things: because we can not else
conceive it: as the punishments of the wicked are described by fire. Therefore
Christ calls the state of eternal life Paradise. Calvin in Har.
wherein ^or pleasure, either pla^ts and trees are set, ^rels beasts ar pastured
and commonly it ^s used for a garden replenished with va^iety of delights such
as was the garden of Eden in which Adam was placed. And as the 70. Interpreters
called the garden of Eden by that name, so Christ calls heaven Paradise, for
that as a Garden is ^raught with fair flowers and fragrant ^earbes and
delitious fruits and store of pleasures, so heaven is a place aboun^ing with
true blessedness, and the perfec^ion of every good thing which may be imagined,
loved or desired. Paul calls it Paradise, or the third heaven, into which he was
taken, 2. Cor. 12, 2, Beza and Piscat in eum locu^
and heard words which cannot be spoken, and which are not possible for man to
utter: Where (without insisting on the Empyreall heaven, of which Philosophers
trifle and make much disputation, Mat. 6, 26, Mat, 24, 29,
) we must mark that the scripture makes mention of three heavens, one in
which the birds fly, called also the aie^ another in which the stars and
spears of the heaven are settled, Acts 3.2, Phil. 3, 20. Col, 3,.. Matthew, 18,
10 Luke, 16.22. These, 4, 27,
and the third, called of Christ and Paul Paradise, in which christ lived, and
the holy Angels, and the blessed souls of those that depart out of this life
in the faith of Christ, to which christ ascended, and from which he shall come
to ye general judgment: yt the bodies of ye faithful may be taken up thither,
to remain with the lord for ever: It is called an house of many mansions, or
dwelling places: where our Savior says to his disciples, in my fathers house
of my dwellinge places. Chrysostom compares the actions of our life in this
world, John 14.2,
to the sportes and plays of little children, that build small sporting
houses, and address counterfaite banquetings to pass the time withal. Homil,
24, in Matthaeum
For many times they gather fishese. ^hels and clay, and when they have framed
therewith their imaginary cells, they glory in them after their manner as much ^s
they which have erected lofty galle^yes and stately dining chambers. But as
these conceived works perish and quickly fall, and men laugh when ^hey behold
children weeping for their fall ^o our buildings and complots in this life ^re
ruinous and tra^sitory, and if we were ^ome to the perfect age of men in
christ, ^e should perceive, that all these are chil^ish things, and we would
bestow all our ^ndeuour in seeking to attain to those ^xed and unchangeable
dwelling places a heaven. For as they that are made ^orthy to be once
possessors of those dwel^ng places, ever remain and abide in the^ (...) also
are they eternal, and not fading (...) earthly mansions and worldly
habita^ons, but they are that immortal inheri^^nce, and undefiled, and that
withreth not, ^^serued in heaven for us. 1, Pet. 1.4,
It is called rest ^^d quietness, for so the most hea^enly oracle cried to
John; Write the dead which die in the Lord from hence forth blessed: even so
says the spirit, for they rest from their labors, and their works follow
them. Revel. 14, 13.
And the way that leads to this blessed rest from all labors, is the way of
peace: in which old Symeon thristingly desired to departe^ when he had embraced
Christ Jesus in^ his arms and had seen the salvation of God yt he had so long
waited for. What rest have the godly in this world, Luke, 2, 28, 29
wh^^ they continually labor, and travel, and strive, and wrestle, for the
combat betwee^ the Spirit and the flesh cease not, while we dwell here in
these houses o^ claye. For though we delight in the law^ of God, concerning the
inner man, we see another law in our members, rebelling against the law of our
mind, and leading us captive into the law of sin, s^ that though we would
do good, yet we are so yoaked that evil is present with us, and though to will
be present with us, yet w^ find no means to perform that which is good, for
in us, that is in our flesh dwe^leth no good thing: and we cannot allo^ that
which we do; Romans 7.15,
for what we would that we do not, but what we hate, Romans 7.15 and^
that do we. What is there in the world, but a perpetual fight against satan
and sin and a daily conflict against darts and weapons? Cyprian de mortalit. 4
We have a daily and continual and troublesome contending with covetousness,
with incontinency, with anger, with ambition with worldly and fleshly cares and
snares. Our minds are so straightly be fiedged with an army of vices; as that
it is hard to resist and withstand all iniquity. When covetousness is
ouerthrown: lust rises up: when lust is subdued, ambition comes in place, when
ambition is chased, anger gauls the mind pride pufs up, drunkenness
tempts, envy breaks concord suspicion disioynes friendship. The godly mind thus
daily suffering, thus daily pressed, Illa nostra pa^ illa fida tranquillitas,
illa s^bilis, and firma et perpetua securiras.
thus dailye standing among the swords of Satan: how happy is she, when she
mounts to the rest of heaven, where our peace is, our sure tranquillity, our
stable, firm, and everlasting security. It is called the heavenly and new
Jerusalem, Gal, 4.26, Reu. 3.12.
to express and represent unto us the unspeakable and vnconceaueable joys
thereof. For although the old Jerusalem was a most beautiful place, even the
glory of the whole earth, being environed with strong walls, defended by the
invincible mount Sion, enriched with infinite treasure, decked with all
external bravery; yet it lost her glory; and her pomp perished, and it be came
an heap of stones, and it was forsaken of God, and made an hissing and
contemptible by-worde to every nation under heaven. But in this heavenly
Jerusalem the sacred trinity will abide for ever: and those foundations of the
wall garnished with precious stones, those gates which are pearls, and that
precious shining as ye Iaspar and Crystal, and those streets of pure gold,
as shining glass: and that brightness that needs no sun nor moon to shine in
it, and that pure river of water of life; and that tree of life, which gyues
fruit every month, Reu. 21. and. 22,
and whose leaves serve to heal the nations with; do utterly obscure, and
eclipse, and extinguishe the glorious dignity of the old Jerusalem Last of all
it is called that city which the faithful seek after, for we have here no
continuing city, but we seek one to come says the apostle. ^eb. 13, 14.
The Greeks, call a city their tongue. (...) be cause it consists of many
inhabiters How many the citizens of heaven are may be gathered by the former
vision; when John saw a great multitude sealed with the seal of the living
God, of all nations and kindreds, and people, and toungs, which no man could
number. Reu. 7, 9
For they which have made their long robes white in the blood of the lamb;
Heb: 12, 22.23.24,
do come unto mount Syon, and to the city of the living God the celestial
Jerusalem, and to the company of innumerable Angels, and to the assembly and
congregation of the first borne which are written in heaven, Cum quibus in
praesentia coniunctisumus vinculo charitatis ibi consortio aeterno coniungendi.
Aug Enchirid, cap, 56. Intelligit animas a corporibus separatas et in coelum
receptas, Pis^at, in schol. calvin in ep, ad, Heb. c. 12 Iun i^ paral.
and to God the Judge of all: and to the spirits of just and perfect men, and
to Jesus the mediator of the new testament, and to the blood of the
sprinkling, that speaks better things then that of Abel.

They that are with Christ, are most happy, for Christ is blessedness, and
felicity, and immortalitye it self: and are not the true believers then most
blessed, since they are with Christ after this life, where he is? unless we
will ^oubt of this, that god the father heard ye prayer of his beloved son,
^d Heb. Naz^^z^n Orat. de, ^or^^e Gorg^^ia. ^ohn, 17, 24,
thus praying for his chosen; Father, I will that they which thou have given
me, be with me even where I am, that they may behold that my glory, which
thou have given me? Here the brightness of G^dlinesse and true virtue it self
is many times dazeled and darkened; partly by envy, partly by poverty, partly
by slanders and the like crosses, but in heaven godliness shall glitter and
shine in her perfect brightness: Dan, 12, 3,
for there the wise shall shine, as the brightness of the firmamente, and they
that turn many to righteousness shall shine as the stars, for ever and
ever, and the just shall shine as the sun in the Kingdom of their father.
Mat, 13, 43,
Here we are continually subject to fear, and anguishe, and sorrow, and
death lies ever in ambush for us, in heaven death shall have no place. Isai,
25:8,
But the godly being delivered from the bondage of corruption shall participate
of the glorious liberty of the sons of god. Rom, 8.21,
Here it is delectable to behold faier palaces, more delectable to enter into
them, and to be entertained in them, most delectable to dwell in them always,
and to behold the countenance of the lord of them never changed toward us,
but still gracious and favorable: how delectable then is it, to behoulde the
radiant palace of heaven; and to be an inhabiter in it, and never to go out of
it, and continually to behold the gracious and omnipotent Majesty of God
therein? for though we are now the sons of God, yet it is not made manifest
what we shall be, opsometha a^^ to^ Kathos es^
and we know that when he shall be made manifest, we shall be like him; For we
shall see him as he is. Here we know in part, and we prophesy in part; 1. John
3.^^
we speak as children; we understand as children; we think as children, we see
through a glass darkly; but in heaven that which is in part shall be abolished;
childish things shall be put away; we shall see face to face, and know even as we
are known, we shall meet together (in the unity of faith, 1 Cor. 13.9 and ^
and that acknowledging of the son of God) unto a perfect man, and unto the
measure of the age of the fullness of Christ. Ephesians. 4.13
Here in this life we are regenerate and new borne by the holy spirit of
God; for otherwise none can see the kingdom of God, ^, 3, 3, 5, ^ar, 9, 24,
nor enter into it, but as long as we live here, we are regenerate but in
part and we are restored but in part to the image of God after which Adam was
at first created; after this life in heaven shall be the perfect renewing of
the image of God in us, and everlasting comfort, and abundance enjoying of all
good things which are required to the state of entyre felicity.

While we live here, eternal life is begone in us, in that our minds are
endewed with true and saving knowledge of god, and faith in Jesus Christ,
(for, this is eternal life to know god, and whom he has sent Jesus Christ,
and he yt hears the word of christ, and believes in him that sent him, has
everlasting life) and in that the life which we do live being engraffed into
christ by the spirit, ^^hn, 17, 3: ^^hn, 5, 24, ^^hn, 3, 16, 36 ^al, 2, 20,
^ol, 3, 3. ^^h, 4, 18, ^ Pet. 1.4, ^ol, 3.4.
is the life of god, and a participation of the divine nature: and further,
while we live here, we are assured of eternal life, that when Christ shall
appear: we shallbee also with him in glory, and that he which has begun
that good work in us, will also make it perfect, even until the day of Jesus
christ; Phil. 1, 6. 1. Cor. 1, 8, Thosse, 5, 23 Rom, 11, 29, Job, 10, 28, 2,
Tim, 1, 12, John, 14, 23, John, 14, 16, John, 17:3, Luke, 20, 36, John, 16, 22,
1, Cor, 15, 28 Reu, 21, 22, 2^ 1, Cor. 13, 10 Luke, 1.33; Dan. 7, 27.
and that the gifts and calling of God are without repe^ta^ce and
unchangeable, and that none can pluck Christ's sheep out of his hands, for
we know whom we have believed, and we are persuaded that he is able to
keep that which we have committed unto him but the perfecting of these
beginnings is reserved for the kingdom of heaven, where god shall dwell in his
elect eternally, where that comforter shall never forsake us; where shall be
perfect wysedom and knowledge of God where shall be angelike righteousness,
where shall be unspeakable joys in god, where shall be abounda^ce of all good
things for God, shall be all in all things where that which is now but begun,
shall be finished and absolute, and where there shall be noe interruption, and
end of joy and gladness for of that kingdom there shall be none end and an
everlasting dominion shall be to ye holy people of the most high. And hereupon
not without cause does ye prophet set his chiefest felicity in this, yt the Lord
is the portion of his inheritance and therefore he says: I set the lord always
before me, because he is on my right hand, therefore I shall not fall,
therefore my heart rejoiced, also my flesh shall rest in hope, thou will
show me the path of life, ^sal 16.5, 8, ^.11,
and the fullness of joys is in thy presence, and at thy right hand,
pleasures for evermore. As if he had said: thou will grante me, that having
run over the race of this fleeting and frail life, I shall enjoy that most
joyful, most pleasante, and eternal life in thine heavenly kingdom.
Augustine says, that in heaven shall be the everlasting Sabbath, which noe
Eueninge shall end. There we shall rest and we shall see; we shall see and
we shall love; we shall love, and we shall praise, Behoulde (says he) that
which is in the end is without end. Nam quis alius noster est finis, nisi
peruenire ad regnum cuius nullus est finis. For what other end is there
ordained for the Godly; but to attain to that Kingedome which has none end?
Sibyll says, Aug de Ciu, dei lib, 22, c, 30,
that it shall not be said in heaven. The night is come: or to morrow shall
come, or yesterday is paste, neither shall there be that day that is wearied
with cares, nor spring, nor summer nor Autumn nor winter.

(...),
(...):
There shall be noe marriage, nor death no selling nor buying, nor sun rising,
nor Sunsetting, for God shall make that long day which shall be endless.
Sibill, Orac^ lib, 7;
There shall b^e so many and such ioys, as al ye Arithmeticians of this world
are not able to number them (...) the Geometritians are not able to weigh them:
all the Grammarians, Logitians, Rhetoritians are not able to express them in
fit terms. For as the Apostle Saint Paul does witness, the things which God
has prepa^ed for them that love him, are such as eye has not seen, neither
ear has heard neither came into any man's heart. There shall be joy above us,
1, Cor, 2, 9,
for the vision which we shall see, there, likewise shall be joy under us
for the beawtie of the heavens and other corporal creatures, there shall be
joy within and about us, for the fellowship and company of Saints, and
Angeles. There Salomons wisdom shall be reputed but foolishness; Absoloms
beauty but deformity Azaels swiftness but slownesse: Sampso^s might but
weakness; whom. Aquin. ^e uer, Theol. ^h, 7. chap. 6,
Mathuselaes long life but frailty, the kingdom of Augustus Caesar but
beggary. The saints would not so earnestly have longed after heaven had they
not been assured of the surpassinge joys thereof. David being hindered by his
persecuters that he could not be present among gods people in the temple of
Jerusalem, he shows his fervent desire toward that place, in which he
might serve the Lord, saying: as the heart brayeth for the ryuers of water, so
pants my soul after thee O god: my soul thirsts for god, even for the
living god: when shall I com and appear before ye presence of god? And when he
was exiled and driven out of his country, Psalm. 42.1.2.
and could not come to the tabernacle of the Lord and the assembly of the
saints to praise god, how vehemently does he bewraye how he was affectioned
thitherwarde. O Lord of hoastes (says he) how amiable are thy tabernacles;
My soul longs, yea and faints for the Courts of the lord. Blessed are
they that dwell in thine house, they will ever praise thee. For a day in thy
courts is better the^ a thousand otherwher I had rather be a doorekeeper in
the house of my god, Psalm. 84.1.2.4.10.
then to dwell in the tabernacles of wickedness. If the Prophet did so long
and thirst, pante and faynte after the material and transitory temple of
Jerusalem on earth; how was he enflamed with a desire to come to the
spiritual and eternal temple of the Lord in heaven? When our Savior was
transfigured on the mountain, and his face did shine as the sunn, and his
clothes were as white as the light, and there appeared Moses and Elias talking
with him, Peter ravished with this celestial apparition, said to Jesus, Master
it is good for us to be here: if thou will, let us make here three
Tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias. Mat. 17.1.8
If the Apostle were so transported with a slender view and small taste of
heavenly felicity, as that he desired always to adhere and cleave unto it;
what would he have done, if he had been fully entered into his masters joy?
Hierom notes upon these words of Peter, that Christ is yt alone way to go to
the glory and joys of heaven; and that we must build and pitch a tabernacle
for him only in our hearts; and that we must hear and obey him only; as the
voice from heaven taught Peter, ^at, 17 5
and in Peter the rest of the Apostles, and all believers; and therefore he is
bold to say to Peter, erras Petre, sicut and alias euangelista testatur, ^e
eidos he ^gei ^uke 9, 33
nescis quid dicas: thou art deceived Peter; and as another Evangelist
witnesses, thou know not what thou say; seek not three Tabernacles,
^ieron. in com^ent in cap 17, ^^att:
when there is but one tabernacle of the Gospel, in which Moses and Elias, the
law and the prophets are comprised and briefly repeated. This joyful
inheritance of heaven made Paul to say, I count that the afflictions of this
present time are not worthy of the glory, which shall be showed unto us: and
again. our light affliction which is but for a moment, ^om 8.18
causes unto us a far more excellent and an eternal weight of glory: while we
look not on the things which are seen, but on the things which are not seen:
for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen
are eternal: Cor. 4.17.18
and again; Christ is to me both in life and in death advantage: and whither
to live in the flesh were profitable for me, and what to choose I know not: for
I am distressed between both; and (though to abide in the flesh is more
needful for the Church of christ,) J desire to be loosed, Phil. 1, 21, 22 23,
24.
and to be with christ, which is best of all. And therefore the militant
Church, and spouse of Christ always seeks Christ her beloved, in the night
and troubles of this life; and in the streets, and open places; and wartes, and
labors every where to apprehend all opportunities to embrace him and does
never suffer him to depart from her, till the day break, Can. 3, 1, 2, 3
and the shadows flee away that is, Nec cum in^ tus fuerit, ce^ bitur a quar^
do: non ped^ passibus, sed ^sideriis quaeri^tur Deus. Ec vtique non ext dit
desideriu^ fanctum foel^ inuentio, sed tendit. Nu^q^ consummati^ gaudu, d^fid^
consumptio (...) Oleum magi^ illi: nam ips^ flamma. B^ in Can ser. 8 Heb. 11:36.
till the darkesome and yrksom life be ended; and that glorious appearing of
Christ come, when ye Church shall be perfectly taken into the communion of
Christ, and shall gloriously enjoy all good things. For when the faithful
soul has found Christ, she cease not from seeking: God is not sought by
feet, but by affection; and the happy finding of him does not shake off, but
increase an holy desire. Is the consummation of joy, a consumption of desire?
No: it is rather as oil unto it, for this desire is a burning flame, says
Bernard, And what caused the saints and Martirs, whom the world was not
worthy of, to suffer mockings and scourgings, bo^ds and prisonment; to wander
up and down in sheep skins, and in goats skins, in wildernesses, ^idetur
legen^um esse epuras ^hesan, ^cremati sunt ^un. in parall.
and mountains, and caves, and dens of the earth; to endure to be stoned,
and hewn asunder, and burned, and slain with the sword; and yet in the mids
of tortures to say with the Christian poet, Tormenta, carcer, vngulae,
Stridensque flammis lamina,
^rudent: periste ^han. de Vince^t
Atque ipsa poenarum vltima
Mors, Christianis ludus est
Torments, and prison, and torturing cooles, and burning plates of metal,
and death it self, the last punishment of all; these are but a sport and
pastime to those that believe in Christ. What caused them so patientlye to
endure these tribulations and fyrie trials, but the full assurance of the
inualuable treasure of heaven? For then shall the righteous stand in great
boldness, before the face of such as have tormented them; and shall receive a
glorious kingdom, and a beawtifull crown of the Lords hand; but the ungodly
shall be scattered and overthrown with thunderbolts, and lightnings, and
floods.

^s. 5, 1, 16, 21,
Out of all this it appears, that the souls of the faithful after death are
in eternal joy and felicity. Neither is there any mean place to stay them in,
for their sleeping, as some dream: or for their purging as some fantasy: but
as the soul of Lazarus was presently carried by the Angels into Abraham's
bosom, as soon as it was vnfettered out of the bands of the flesh: Luke,
16.22.
and as the soul of the thief was with Christ in Paradise, within four
hours after he desired to be remembered of Christ: so our Savior says
generally of all the faithful, that he that hears his word, Luke 23, 43.
and believes him that sent him, has eeuerlasting life, and shall not come
into condemnation, Ioh: 5, 24.
but has passed from death to life? And that we might the sooner believe, that
there is no interim and space between ye death of the body and the eternal life
and joy of the soul, he confirms his speech with a double affirmation, or
rather oath, saying, verily, and verily, I say it ^s so. Reu. 14, 13, a parti:
in posterum: and vt vulgata translatio, amodo; i. statim
Also the voice taught John the Divine, that whosoever dye in the Lord, and ^n
the faith of Christ, they are blessed, and ^est from their labors, and receive
the ^eward of their works, and when? Heere^fter, presently and immediately
after they are called out of this mortal life. This stops the beastly and
blasphemous mouth of the Sadduces, ^cts 23, 8
and fully puts them to silence; who affirmed, that there is no resurrection,
nor Angel, nor spirit: and of Epicurus the belligod Philosopher, who was a
most detestable defender of pleasure, ^actant. divine. ^stit. l. 3, c. 17
and thought that Man was only borne to enjoy pleasure, and said that the
Soul dies after the death of the body: and of Pliny, who was not ashamed to
write, ^mnibus a su^em a die, eade^ ^uae ante primu^ ^ec magis a ^orte sensus
^llus, aut corpo^s, aut animae ^am ante na^lem. Plin. lib, ^. cap, 55.
that it fares with all men after the last day, as it did before the first day:
and that there is no more sense and feeling, either of body, or mind, after we
are dead, then there was before we were borne: and of Lucretius a far swine of
Epicures stie, who impudently opens his unclean mouth against heaven, and
says, Quod si immortalis nostra foret men's,
Non tam se moriens dissolui conquereretur,
Sed magis ire for as, neste^que relinquere vt a^gnis Gauder et:
If our soul did live for ever (says he) she would not in death complain of
her dissolution; but rather she would rejoice to depart out of the flesh, and
would be glad to leave the garment of the body, as the snake is joyful for the
uncasing from his oulde skin. But Lactantius does most acutelie and learnedly
confute him, saying; how can it be known that any does understand that he is
dissolved, or else set at liberty, sens the tung is dumb when a man dies? For
while he understands, and can speak, he is not yet dissolved: when he is
dissolved: he can neither understand, nor speak. So that complain of his
dissolution, either yet he ca^ not, or now he cannot. But (says) Lucretius
before he be dissolved he perceiues that he shall be dissolved. What should I
say: that we see many in death not to complain of their dissolutio^, (as
Lucretius saieth] but to testify, that they do go and depart and walk out
of the body, and either declaring this by gesture, or uttering it by words; if
they can speak so long? By which it is evident that there is no dissolution,
but a separation, which declars the remaining of the soul after death. Lactant,
divine, instit, l, 7, ^ 12.
For as a candle while it is in ye lantern, it enlightens the lantern, and if
it be taken out, although the lantern be left dark, yet the candle shines
more clearly then it did before: so while the soul is in the body it is the
light and governor thereof, and when it forsakes the body, although the body be
left dead and insensible, yet then the soul enioyes her proper vigor and
brightness. Damnable are all the assertions, that maintain the mortality of
the soul: for if she did perish with the body, and had no sense and feeling
after death: how can the godly after death be in Gods presence, and serve him
day and night in his temple, and have God dwelling among them, and be fedd,
and governed, and ledd to the lively fountains of waters, and have all tears
wiped from their eyes? as the Angel here affirms. Clear is that speech of
Moses for the eternitye of the soul, when he says, that the Lord god made
the man of the dust of the ground, ^en. 2.7
and breathed in his face breath of life. In which words the man of god puteth
a plain difference between the foul of man, and the soul that is in other
creatures: for the soul (or life) of beasts proceeded from the same substance
and matter whereof their bodies were made: but the soul of man is a spiritual
and divine thing, which because it proceeded from god, must needs remain for
ever. Manifest is the saying of God to Moses in the burning bushe: I am the God
of Abraham, the god of Isaac and the god of Iaacob. He says, Exodus, 3, 6,
I am not I was: to show that he is continually their God: and as this proves
the resurrection of the body against the Saduces (For if Abraham, Izhak: Matt,
22, 32: Quomod foelices, si ex part perituri, Tertu^ de resurrec: carnis.
and Iaacob be gods; they are altogether his, and they cannot be thoroughly
blessed if one part of them should perish and decay, so it fortifieth the
immortality of the Soul after death For if the faithful are always gods
people, and god is always their God, and Lord, they must needs live in soul,
even before the general resurrection, for god is not the god of the dead but of
the living. Evident is the eternity of the Soul out of that of patient Job;
who in his extreme affliction, expressed notwithstanding his co^fide^ce of
immortality, though god slay me (says he) with death of body, yet will I trust
in him, yt I shall inherit the light of everlasting glory. And he confidently
professes his belief touching life everlasting and ye resurrection, saying,
Job, 13, 15,
I am sure my redeemer lives, and though after my skin worms destroy this body,
yet shall J se god in my flesh whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall
behold and none other for me, though my veins are now consumed within me.
Job. 19.25,
Which words of his because of their infallible crueth and certainty; he
wishes that all men might know:, And that therefore they might be written,
Job, 19, 23,
yea written even in a book, and graven with an iron pen in lead, or in
stone for ever. When David says to God, thou will not leave my soul in
grave, neither will thou suffer thine holy on to see corruption: thou will
show me the path of life: Psalm, 16, 10.11
in thy presence is the fullness of joy, and at thy right hand there are
pleasures for evermore: He declares two benefits, of which both himself, and
all the Godly should be made partakers through christ: to wit the
resurrection of the flesh; and that most joyful, most pleasant and eternal
life. And though the ungodly ar enclosed in their own fat, and speak proudly
with their mouths, and think but of their portion in this life: having their
bellies filled with hid treasure: and leaving ye rest of their substance for
their children, yet he is undoubtedly persuaded, that after he was delivered
out of the great and infinite troubles of this world, he should behold in
heaven the comfortable face and countenance of god according to his promise;
and should perfectly be united unto God, and see him as he is. Psalm: 17.10, 14
What plainer then that of Solomon; who says, that when man dies, dust
returns to the earth, as it was, and the spirit then returns to god that
gave it? Eccles 12.7:
As though the royal Preacher should say, although the body and soul ar
conjoined and coupled together, yet they are of dislike nature: for the body
is gross, and may be seen and handled, and the body is made of the earth a
ponderous and corruptible eleme^t, and is as it were the vessel that contains
the soul: but the soul is subtle, and not to be seen, or handled, and the
soul has no earthy mixture in it: but being endewed with such skill, such
force, and such nimblenesse, she must needs have her beginning from heaven:
and although they are so neeerely conjoined in this world, that the destruction
of the on, may seem to be the disu^pation of the other; yet when death makes a
divorce and separation between them, Lucretius obitus quid assere ^et, e^ quod
dog ^ma defendere^ ^os versus posu^it: Cedit item ^etro de terra quod fuit ante
^n terras and quod missu^ est ^ex atheris ^ris Id rursum ^oeli rellatum
^templa, receptant. Lact, diu, inst, lib, 7, cap, 12.
then either of them return into their own nature: the body which was of the
earth is resolved into earth, and that which was from the heavenly spirit,
always endures and flourishes, because ye spirit of God is everlasting The
truth whereof is so powerful, it caused the foresaid Epicurean Lucretius, even
in despite of his hellish Profaneness, to confess it. What plainer to
confirm the eternal life of the soul, then where Isaiah bringes in other
potentates that were dead before deriding the insolency of the King of Babylon,
that though he said in heart, that he would ascend into heaven and exhalt
his throne above the stars of God, and ascend above the height of the clouds
and be like the most high, yet he was become weak by death as well as they:
and his pomp and the sound of the violes was brought down to the grave and
the worm was spreadd under him, and the worms did cover him? Isai, 14, 9.
For he would not attribute this scorninge to the dead, if there were the
same end both to man and beast. What plainer for to stop the mouths of
Atheists ye contradict ye immortality of the soul then ye saying of Christ our
Lord in ye Gospel: Fear you not the^ (says be) which kill the body: but are not
able to kill the soul but rather fear him, which is able to destroy both soul
and body in Hell If ye soul cannot be slain, Mat, 10, 28,
and if it may be punished in hell after this life, it is everlasting, and can
never die. And therefore excellently spoke ye Martyr, that said thus to ye
tormenter, thou blody tyrant thou art deceived if thou suppose to destroy me,
by renting my body which is subject to death: Erras cruente, meam, Te rer^
poenam sum re, quum membra morti obnoxia Dilancinata interficis? Est alter hic
intri^ secu^ violare quem nullus p^test, Liber, qui etus integer, Expers
doloru^ tristium. Prudent perist^ phan de vince^tio. Gen; 5, 24,
there is on within thou can not wrong; which is free, quiet entire, and not
to be payned with torturs this body which thou endeuourest to destroy with such
force and fury, is but a brittle, and earthen vessel which may be easily
broken into shiuers; but assaye now, to cut and punish him that is within, and
that regardes not thy rage, provoke him, and search him, thou shalt find him
invincible; vnco^querable, an underling to no calamities; and subjected to God
alone? Could Enoch walk with god after this life: if soul and body dye^ together
Could Saul desire the Pithones to raise up the prophet Samuel unto him, 1, Sam.
28, 11,
if the soul and body dyed together? Could David mourn so bitterly for his
rebellious soun Absalom, when he cried out; O my son Absalom, 2. Sam, 18, 33,
my son, my son Absalom, would God I had dyed for thee, O Absalom, my
son, my son. Would he have so bitterly lamented his death, if the soul and
body dyed together? For Augustine says. De doctrina Christi.
Non orbitatem filii doluit David, dum luget Absolonem filium, sed quia nouerat
in quas poenas tam impie adultera et parricidalis anima raperetur. David was
not so much grieved for the death and loss of a son when he bewailed his
son Absalom, but it was for that he knew how grievously that soul was
punished after death, which in this life was given to such impiety, adultery,
and heinous murder. Could, Elias, and El zeus, and Christ and the Apostles
raize up the dead; 1 Kings, 17, ^^, Kings, 4, and, 13, Mat. 9 Luke 9 John. 11,
Act. 9. and 20, Acts. 7.59.
if the soul and body died together? Could Stephen say at his stoning to
death Lord Jesus receive my spirit, If the foul and body died together?
Could Paul ravished with a desire to come to the kingdom of felicity and
therefore abhorring this wretched and calamitous life, cry out earnestly and
say: O wretched man that I am, Rom, 7, 24.
who shall deliver me from this body of death; if the soul and body died
together? But why labor I so much among Christians to prove the eternity of
the soul? who do firmly assent to the Symbol of ye Creed yt shows us life
eternal: specially since the most sound and profound Philosophers amongst the
Ethnicks, have in every age with one mouth, and one mind subscribed thereunto?
Of which let one Seneca speak for them all, Sen, lib, 10, suasoriar.
nothing decays but our body, which because of the weak frailty thereof, it
is obnoxious to death, subject to chances, exposed to proscriptions. But the
soul whose beginning is divine, is harmed neither by old age, nor death and
when she is loosed from her burdensome bands she speedily repaires to her
proper place, and to the stars that are of the same nature. It were shameful
therefore for Christians, not to houlde fast the blessed hope of immortality,
and not to cleave thereunto as to a sure anchor, since heathen men have so
evidently taught the eternity of the soul, by groping after it in the
darkness of error, only by the direction of the natural light and
infallible principles remaining in man's mind after Adams fall; and chiefly,
since the godly and faithful are at no rest in this mortal life, 1 Cor, 15,
19,
if in this life only they had hope in christ, they were of all men the most
miserable.

Wherefore, does Satan, and the flesh, and the world allure us, to withdraw
our shoulders from bearing the sweet and easy yoke of Christ, and our feet
from walking in the path of Gods laws; and to enjoy in this world the
pleasures of iniquity for a time? the sacred scripture does plentifully
teach us, that our souls live for ever; the godly in heaven; the ungodly in
torment: and therefore how ready ought we to be, to deny ungodliness, and
worldly lusts; and to live soberlie, and righteously, and godly in this
present world: knowing this, that one day we shall be called to an account,
how we have employed our talents and stewardship. Does the careless Christian
persuade us, to run with him in the same excess of riot, of dru^kennes, of
carnal security, of swearing, of incontinency, of hypocrisy, of malice, of
covetousness, of forgetting of God, of contempt of his word, and despising
his kindness and long suffering, not perceiving, yt his bountifulnes leads us to
repentance? Let us answer yt we seek eternal life and not eternal death, and
that we will flee sin, and live in the awe and worship of God, because the end
of the ungodly is to be destroyed and rooted out at the last but godliness
has the promise of the life present, 1 Timothy 4.8.
and of that is to come. And howsoever some wallow in their sensuality, and
freeze in the dregs of profaneness, yet let us that are a chosen generation,
and a royal priesthood, and an holy nation, and a peculiar people, show
forth the virtues of him that has called us out of darkness into his
marvelous light, and as strangers and pilgrims, let us abstain from fleshly
lusts, that fight against the spirit, and let us have our conversation
honest among all men, that by our good works which they shall see, they may
glorify God in the day of visitation. ^et, 2, 9 etc.
Does sickness, or sorrow, or poverty, or flaunders, or dangers, or any
affliction or tribulation pres us; so as being therewith surcharged, we are
likely to sink, and be dismayed? Let us encourage our selves with the
contemplation and meditation of heavenly ioies; and let us be steadfast,
immovable, aboundante always in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as we
know, that our labor is not in vain in the Lord. When terrible and ghastly
death would discourage us: let us remember that death is swallowed up into
victory through the death of Christ and therefore we may confidently say, Cor.
15.54
o death where is thy sting, o grave where is thy victory? and that death is
made unto us a door into eternal glory, and that when we depart hence, our
souls shall pass into heaven, as into the common city and dwelling place of
all believers; because we are no more strangers and forreiners, but citizens
with the saints aod of the household of god, and are builte upon the foundation
of the Apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner
stone. For we know, that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle be
destroyed, we have a building of God, Ephesians. 2.19, 2
that is, an house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens. 2. Cor.
5.1.
Our departure hence is a going out of prison, and an entrance into life that
knows no death. Our fathers are all gone before, and all their offspring shall
follow. What runner when he has begone his race, does not houlde on
cheerefullie till he attayn to the goal? What Mariner in the dark night and
tempestuous seas, refuses to rest in the quiet harborough? What pilgrim
wandering in a strange country, longs not to come to his own dwelling, wife,
friends, and children? And shall we be so loathe to go to heaven, and
Paradise, the house of Saints: to GOD our Father, Christ our redeemer and
Brother; the holy Ghost our comforter? As the sparkle of fire still mountes
upward, and the water fleetes downewarde, and every thing goes to his proper
and natural place of stay; so our souls which came from heaven, must
endeauoure and strive to go to the Father of lights; whom to behoulde is
life, and not to see is death. We travel through cold and heat, danger and
labor, hills and valleys, seas and lands for earthly and perishing riches:
and should a thousand deaths stop us, to see so many Angels, prophets,
patriarchs, martyrs, and Saints in Paradise? Cyprian says, Eius est mortem
timere, ^e mortalit.
qui ad Christum nolit ire: eius est ad christum nolle ire, qui se non credit
cum Christo incipere regnare. It is for him to fear death, who would not go
to Christ: it is for him to be unwilling to go to christ, who believes not,
that after death he shall begin to reign with christ. When our friends are
taken from us by death: let us not think that they are lost, and utterly
perished; but that they are gone before us into the place and palace of rest:
and therefore let us not mourn, as they do which are void of the hope of the
resurrection and immortal life: for as we believe that Jesus is dead, and
risen, even so they which sleep in Jesus are living in joy, and god will bring
them again at the last day with Jesus: and let us comfort our selves one
another with these words. When we see the godly in this world, 1 These. 4.14
1^
as it were forsaken now and then, and contemptible to the eyes of men; but the
ungodly oftentimes sprowting as the green Bay tree: let this supporte and
proppe us up, that one day Lazarus shall be comforted, and Dives tormented.
When we consider the inconstancy of worldly riches, and honor, and
favor, and promotion, and friendship in this life: let us learn hereby,
not to love the world, neither the things that are in the world; for the lust
of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, the pride of life, and all that is in this
world, passes away; but he that fulfilleth the will of God, 1 John 2.15
16.17.
abides for ever: and let us solace our selves, with the stable, permanent,
and unchangeable joys of heaven: for the state of the godly and ungodly
after death cannot be changed; there is a great gulf set between heaven
and hell, Luke 16, 26.
so that they that would go from bliss to punishmente, cannot; neither can
any come from tormente to bliss. Finally, when we are soliciced, either by
the suggestion of Satan, or the allurements of pleasure, or the persuasion of
Atheistes, or the weakness of the flesh, to imagine, that there is no life
after death, and that the soul vanishes away into nothing, when a man dies:
let us call to mind, that heaven and earth shall sooner pass, then the word
of the Lord shall fall to the ground; which teaches, that after bodylie
death, the souls of the faithful and righteous are in the hands of the Lord,
and enjoy eternal comfort: and (if we cannot remember all that has been
now delivered,) let us always carry the sum and quintessence of this one
place of Scripture imprinted and engraven firmly in our hearts, in which the
Angel declares unto blessed John, that all faithful souls, that in this life
have washed their long robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb, and
have only relied on the merits, death, and passion of Jesus Christ; they are
after this life in the presence of the throne of God; and serve him
continuallye in the temple of heaven; and dwell eternally with God, and God
with them: they hunger, and thirste no more: they are molested and accumbred
with the heat of the Sunn no more, and afflicted with tribulation no more: for
Jesus Christ the Lamb of God, which is in the midst of the Throne shall
feed them, and rule them, and lead them to the lively fountains of waters,
and GOD shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.

Thus much for the interpretation and explication of this text of holy
Scripture. And although I have already very much exceeded my usual manner, The
christian life and god^ death of the Lady Court ^ney.
in that I have so long and largely insisted on the things proposed, and
thereby tediousness (perhaps) may begin to creep upon you; yet I must a
little longer pray your attention, while I breeflye speak some thing of the
life and death of this right worshipful and devout gentlewoman, which is now
to be buried; and which has occasioned me at this time to unfold unto you this
portion of Gods word. The virtues and graces wherewith she was adorned, as
they merited great commendation; so I am sorry that they may not now be
blazed, by the eloquence of Aaron, or the tongue of Angels. ^al. Max. l, 8, ^1.
For as Alexander the great forbade any to painte him but Apelles, and to
carue him but Lysippus, least his excellency should be abased by unnoble
Artificers: so the worthiness of this religious Lady deservedly craves, to
be described of some one endued with singular guifte of speaking, who might
counteruaile her worthy works with aunswerable words. Howsoever it be, this
comfortes me, that I speak not before strangers unacquainted with her godly
qualities, that therefore would ask a more copious declaration of the things
they know not but before those, who having had very long experience and trial
of her godliness, either will supply the defecte of the Speaker through their
own manifould knowledge; or else by one word will conjecture what the whole
sentence means.

And for that the life of a true Christian consists in believing and living;
I will begin first with the sincerity of her faith. She was not like many
lukewarm Politicians, that either are Atheistes, of no religion at al; or else
Chameleon-like turn with the time and iump with opportunity, but she embraced
the ancient and apostolic faith, cleauinge to the sound doctrine delivered in
the word of God and abhorring the superstitious ceremonies of men's devises.

This faith was not hypocritical, but true: not temporary but permanent, not
idle, but working not dead but living, and springing forth with the abundance
of all good works, even as a good tree brings forth good fruit; and a
wholesome well yeeldes out wholesome water. Her earnest love of Gods word and
great measure of knowledge of Christ's gospel, of which she has always been
an affectionate, hearer, and a diligent performer, sufficiently declare what
these works of faith were. For she was not only painful in resorting to the
Church, to pray with ye congregation and to hear the word of God, as long as
strength of body permitted, but even since age and weakness debarred her of ye
custom, she has ordinarily and daily caused prayers to be used, and the
scriptures and pure expositors of them to be read at home; making the word
of God a Ianc-horne to direct her feet, and Manna to sustain her soul; so
passing her time (for many years) that her life might be deemed a meditation
of death, and a preparation for entrance into the life to come.

What should I speak of the christian governing of her househoulde; and of
her especial care, that those which were about her might be taught the laws
of the Lord, to walk as it becomes the professors of the gospel? What
should I speak of her patience, that being in sundry wise tossed and tried
with the crosses of this life, yet (like a rock beaten on by the swelling
floods) she stood constant; rendering thanks to God, as well for adversity,
as for prosperity; and taking every affliction in good part, as proceeding
from the love of GOD toward her? This patience was shaken by the captivity
of her husband, an honorable and worthy gentleman; who being Sheriff of
this county was taken prisoner, and in extreme peril to be cruelly handled
by the rebels in the Western Co^motion, in the reign of king Edward the 6.:
again, by the death of her foresaid husband, within few years after; again by
the change of true religion into forged superstition in the days of Queen
Mary, During all which time, she had the form of prayer used in her house,
which was authorized in the days of king Edward the 6.
which pinched her with exceeding grief; again by the death of al her sons,
gentlemen of great hope, again by the death of al her sons in law, men of
worshipful regard; again by the death of some of her nephews, and daughters,
gentlewomen lively treading in the virtuous steps of their godly mother; and
again by the death of some of her neeces; this patience (I say) was shaken,
but it stood firmly; as an Oak that is surely rooted weighes not the blastes
of wind. What should I speak of her humility and lowliness of mind; which
bewrayed it self in all her outward actions, and in her very apparel; in
that a Gentlewoman of her degree and rank, would so plainly attire her
self; observing the rule of S. Peter, who warns women not to go gorgeously
in their apparel, by brayding the hair, and trimming about with gold, but
to be clothed with the precious garmente of the inward man. This humility
was great, ^ Pet. 3.3.4
both toward God, and man: toward God, in that abounding with good works
which proceeded from a saving faith, yet she loathed to be commended for the
same, confessing that it was nothing she did: and that it was so far off,
that she trusted to be saved by her own merits, as that she renounced them,
and placed them among her evil deeds in that respect; and wholly relied,
wholly depended, wholly rested upon Christ Jesus, her only redeemer,
mediator, advocate, and Savior. And toward man this humility was
apparante; in that she disdained not the meanest, but with affability applied
her self to those that were of the lowest sort; and in that not only in her
life, she declined from pomp and vayn shows, but also straightly and
oftentimes charged, that her funerals should be solemnized without any
ceremonious pomp. But what should I speak of her promptness to assiste both
rich and poor with her counsel and advise? for she was endued with great
wisdom, rare memory, grave judgment, and sharp foresighte. What should I
speak of her temperance and sobriety of her love and liberality to scholars?
kindness to ministers of the word of God? and entertainment of all good
people, of her constancy in her widdowheade? For of four score and seven
years, (or very near thereaboutes) of her age, she spente fiftye and five in
the time of widdowehead of her unchangeable and steadfast zeal in the truth of
Christ Jesus. So that if John the elder had lived in this age, he might have
saluted her by ye name of Elect Lady, and might have rejoiced, 2, Ioh: 4.
yt he found her and her children, and her of spring walking in ye truth. Al
these things (for that they are so well known) I slightly point at with the
forefinger, leaving them to your secret considerations.

As for her remorse, compassion, and liberality toward the poor and needy
members of Christ body, not one preacher in ten hours, nor ten preachers
in one hour are able to express it as it does deserve. The Orphans and
fatherless children, that she has nourished, the desolate widows that she
has sustained, the afflicted strangers that she has relieved; the sick,
impotente and, maimed Soldiers that she has refreshed: the diseased persons
with sore eyes, and manifold hurtes, and diverse infirmities, that she has
eased, applying the salu^ waters and medicines with her own hands, give
plentiful testimony with full mouth of her exceeding charity. What week, nay
what day, nay almost what hour passed over, where in some poor, or other
did not taste of her bountifulness? ^uke, 19, 8,
She excelled Zacheus; who stood forth, and said behold Lord the half of my
goods I give to the poor. She was not inferior to Job, who turned not his eye
from the poor, Job, 31, 16, 17,
but clothed the naked with his garment fed the hungry with his meat, and
lodged the pilgrim in his house. She is to be linked in praise with Dorcas,
Acts. 9.39.
for if Peeter were here and she were (as Dorcas) to be raised again; how
infinite is the number of coats and garments that the poor would show
forth, or speak of, which they have received from her liberality? She is not
to be separated from the holy and charitable we^. Luke. 8, 2,
men which ministered to our Savior himself on earth, for as they did minister
to the head, so did she to the body and therefore Christ accountes that meat,
yt drinck, that clothing, Mat. 25.36.
that entertainemente, and that visitinge and comfort which is employed on the
silly poor, to be bestowed on himself. And as the Jews when that they
desired Christ to help the Centurions servant, they said, Luke, 7, 4, 5.
that he was worthy for whom our Savior Savior should do it. For he
loves our nation (say they) he has built us a sinagogue: so if odious
Ingratitude possess not the hearts of the poor, whom in manifold sort this
compassionate and charitable Lady has relieved, they will with one voice cry
out and say, that she was most worthy of longer life and of doubled days,
because she was a nurse to the needy an eye to the blind, a foot to the
lame, a mother to the Orphans, a staff to the afflicted, a comforter and
supporter to the distressed and miserable. I perceive I am entered into the
broad Ocean with displaied sails, and therefore least I be carried further
then I may quickly return, I will hasten to draw toward the shore.

Her life being beawtified with these induements and qualityes, and having
spent her days in grace and godliness, who may doubt: but that her death and
dissolution was correspondent to her former race? At sundry times when she was
visited with sickness, she was not desirous of longer life, neither would
she have others to put her in hope of recovery: but wholly longing to be
removed hence, and to dwell with God the Lord; first making a pithie and
Christian confession of her faith, in God the Father, the son and the holy
Ghost, she still desired with Symeon to depart in peace, with Paul to be
dissolved and to be with Christ, Luke 2.29.
accounting christ to be her advantage both in life and death, Phil. 1.21: Romans
14.8 Psalm, 84, 10.
and her self to be the Lords whither she lived or died, and with David
wishing to in habit most amiable inhabitations of heaven, and esteeming it
better to remain one day, in the house of God, then a thousand in the te^ts
of this vile world. And thus being of a good age, full of days fuller of good
works, having made her, robe white in the la^bs blud, and a long time being
prepared for her departure; when infirmity and last sickness attainted her always
settling and fixing her confidence in christ, praying devoutly to God, who has
promised to hear the petitions of them that faithfully call upon him; always
committing her spirit, into the hands of her creator, redeemer and comforter,
at last her sanctified and refined soul leaving the corruptible body departed
out of tribulation and this valley of misery into the bosom of faithefull
Abraham. Reu. 14, 13. and. 7, 9
For why should I not so say? sens they are blessed, that dye in the Lord, and
they rest from their labors: and, 2.10. and 4.4. and, 22, 1, 2. and. 7:16, 17
they are clothed with the long white robe of innocence, they are adorned with
the incorruptible crown of glory, that never withers: and 21.11
they eat of the fruit of the tree of life, and drink of the water of life,
they hunger and thirst no more they have all tears and remembrance of evils
wiped from them: Heb: 12 22,
they are Citizens of the celestial and new Jerusalem, whose walls are pure
goulde and the gates pearls, and whose inhabitants are the Patriarchs, and
holy Prophets, Apostles, Arc angels, Angels and Saints of all ages. One that
wrote of the life Wickham once Bishop of Winchester says of him.

Nec dubito, qui sit vixit, Christoph, Io^sonus in car de vita wiccami winton
Episcopi.
sic mortuus idem est
Quin sit apud superos nobilis vmbra Deos:
Cur dubite^? nam si coelestis clauditur Aula,
Heroi tanto, cui precor, illa patet?
I doubt not, (says he) but he that lived so, and died so, is among the
blessed spirits of heaven, why should I doubt, For if the palace of heaven be
shut against so worthy a man, to whom does it stand open? May not I
without flattery change the gender, and say of this religious and good Lady?
I doubt not but that she that lived and died so, is now among the blessed
souls in heaven: why should I doubt? for if the gate of heaven be shut to so
worthy a woman to whom shall it be opened?

And as a certain ill Orator that thought he had moved his auditors to
compassion in his epilogue and conclusion: when he was sitten down, and had
asked of Catulus, whether he thought he had moved them to compassion or not;
Cic. lib. 2. de Oratore.
Catulus answered, neminem esse puto tam durum, cui non oration tua miseranda
visa sit; I think none so hard of heart, as that he pitties not thy slender
and simple speech; So I think that all that have heard me speak of this
right worshipful gentlewoman, so slenderly and simply, are moved to
compassion and pity; because my discourse is so infinitely exceeded by her
memorable deeds, and that they will compare me to a rude and unskillful painter
that has pourtraied those things coursly and grosely, which should have been
painted with fair and fresh colors. But I hope, that my willingness shall make
satisfaction for my want; and that this common oil, which I have powered out of
my unpolished Alablaster box, to honor her burial with all, shall be accepted
in steed of precious spikenard.

This only remains; that the poorer sort desire god, to increase the number
of those, that may be like to this virtuous Lady; and that the wealthier sort
labor after her example, to deserve so well of the needy, that their departure
may be lamented, and their memory blessed; and that both rich and poor
imitate her in faith, zeal, patience, humility, unfeigned charity, and the
residue of her rare and notable virtues: to the glorifiing of Gods name, to the
edifiyng of the Lords people, and to our attainement of everlasting salvation,
through Jesus Christ our Lord: to whom with the father, and the holy ghost, be
given all honor, praise, and glory, now and evermore: Amen.

FINIS.

