THE SHEPHERDS Hunting: Being, CERTAIN EGLOGS written during the time of the
Authors Imprisonment in the Marshalsey.

BY GEORGE WITHER, Gentleman.

LONDON: Printed by THOMAS SNODHAM for George Norton, and are to be sold at the
sign of the red-Bull, near Temple-barre. 1615.

TO THOSE HONORED, NOBLE, AND RIGHT Virtuous Friends, my Visitants in the
Marshalsey: AND, TO ALL OTHER, MY UNKNOWN FAVOVRITES, who either piuately, or
publicly wished me well in my imprisonment.
NOble Friends: you whose virtues made me first in love with Virtue: and whose
worths, made me be thought worthy of your loves. I have now at last (you see)
by Gods assistance and your encouragement, run through the P^rgatory of
imprisonment: and by the worthy favor of a just PRINCE, stand free again,
without the lea^t touch of dejected baseness. Seeing therefore I was grown
beyond my Hope so fortunate, (after acknowledgement of my Creators love,
together with the vnequall'd Clemency of so gracious a Sovereign) I was
troubled to think by what means I might express my thankfulness to so many
well-deseruing friends: No way I found to my desire; neither yet ability to
perform when I found it. But at length considering with my self what you
were, (that is) such, who favor honesty for no second reason but because you
your selves are good; and aim at no other reward but the witness of a sound
conscience that you do well, I found that thankfulness would prove the
acceptablest present to suit with your dispositions; and that I imagined could
be no way better expressed then in manifesting your courtesies, and giving
consent to your reasonable demands. For the first, I confess (with thanks to
the disposer of all things, and a true gratef^ll heart toward you,) so many
were the unexpected visitations and unhoped kindnesses received both from some
among you of my Acquaintance, and many other unknown Well^illers of my Cause,
that I was persuaded to entertain a much better conceit of the Time then I
lately conceived, and assured my self that VERTVE had far more followers
then I supposed.

Somewhat it disturbed me to behold our ages Favorites, whilst they frowned
on my honest enterprises, to take unto their protections the egregiousts
fopperics: yet much more was my contentm^nt, in that I was respected by so many
of You, amongst whom there are some, who can and may as much dis-esteeme these,
as they neglect me: nor could I fear their malice or contempt, whilst I
enjoyed your favors, who (howsoever you are vnder-valued by fools for a time)
shall leave unto your post^ritie so noble a memory, that your names shall be
reverenced by Kings, when many of these who now flourish with a show of usurped
Greatness, shall either wear out of being, or dispoyled of all their patched
reputation, grow contemptible in the eyes of their beloved Mistress the World.
Your Love. is is that (enabling me with patience to endure what is already
past) has made me (also) careful better to prepare my self for all future
misaduentures, by bringing to my consideration, what the passion, of my just
discontentments had almost quite banished from my remembrance.

Further, to declare my thankfulness, in making app^rant my willing mind to
be commanded in any services of love, which you shall think fit (though I want
ability to perform great matters) yet I have according to some of your
requests been contented to give way to the printing of these Eglogues, which
thoug^ it to many seem a slight matter, yet being well considered of, may
prove a strong argument of my readiness to gi^e you content in a greater
matter: for they being (as you well kn^w) begotten with little care, and
preserved with less respect, gave sufficient e^idence that I meant (rather
then any way to deceive your trust) to give the world occasion of calling my
discretion in question, as I now assure my self This will: and the sooner,
because such expectations (I perceive) there are of I know not what Inventions,
as would have been frustrated though I had employed the utmost and very best
of my endeavors.

Notwithstanding, for your sakes, I have here adventured once again to make
trial of the w^rlds censures: and what has received being, from your Loves,
I here rededicated to your Worths, which if your noble dispositions will like
well of: Or if you will but reasonab^y respect what your selves drew me unto,
I shall be nothing displeased at others cauils, but resting my self contented
with your good opinions, scorn all the rabble of uncharitable detractors: For
none I know will malign it except those, who either particularly malice my
person, or profess th^mselues enemies to my former Books; who (saving those
that were incensed on others speeches) as diverse of you (according to your
protestations) have observed, are either open enemies of our Church; men
notoriously guilty of some particular Abuses therein t^xt, such malicious
Crittickes who have the repute of being indicious, by detracting from others;
or at best such Guls, as never approve any thing good, or learned, but either
that which their shallow apprehensions can apply to the soothing of their own
opinions, or what (indeed rather) they understand not.

Trust me, how ill soever it has been rewarded, my love to my Country is
inviolate: my thankfulness to you unfeigned, my endeavor to do every man
good; all my aim content with honesty: and this my pains (if it may be so
termed) more to avoid idleness, then for affectation of praise: an^ if
notwithstanding all their, I must yet, not onel^ rest my self content that my
innocence has esc^ ped with strict imprisonment (to the impayring (...) my
state, and hinderance of my fortunes) but al^ be constrained to see my
guiltless lines, suffer the despite of ill tongues: yet for my further enco^
ragement, let me entreat the continuance (...) your first respect, wherein I
shall find that com fort as will be sufficient to make me set light an^ so
much contemn all the malice of my adversaries that ready to burst with the
venom of their own^ hearts, they shall see

My Mind enamoured on fair Virtues light
Ascends the limits of their bleared sight,
And placed above their Envy, does contemn,
Nay, sit and laugh at their disdain and them.
But Noble Friends, I make question neither of yours, nor any honest man's
respect, and therefore will no further urge it, nor trouble your patience:
only this I Will say, that you may not think ^e too well conceited of my self;
though the Time ^ere to blame in ill requiting my honest endea^ours, which in
the eyes of the world deserved ^etter, ^et somewhat I am assured there was in
^ee worthy that punishment which when God shall ^iue me grace to see and
amend, I doubt not but ^o find that regard as will be fitting for so much
^erit as my labors may justly challenge. Mean while, the better to hold my
self in esteem with you, and amend the worlds opinion of Virtue, I will study
to amend my self, that I may be yet more worthy to be called

Your Friend, GEO. WYTHER.

The first Eglogue.
ARGUMENT.
WILLY leaves his ^locke a while,
Ui^ites (...) in exile;
Where though prison'^, he does find
He Is still free that is free in Mind:
And (...) trouble no defense
Is so ^irme as Innocence.
R^T. WILLY.
WI^y, thou now full tolly tun'st thy Reed^,
Making the Aimphs enamou^d on thy strains,
And whilst thy harmless ^locke vnscar^d feeds,
Have tho contentment, of Hills. Groves, and Plains:
Trust me, ^oy thou and thy Muse so speedes
In such an Age, where so much mischief reigns:
And to my Care it some redress will be,
Fortune has so much grace, to smile on thee.

WILLY. To smile on me? I nere yet knew her smile,
Unless 'twere when she purposed to deceive me;
Many a Train, and many a painted wile
She casts, in hope of Freedom to bereave me:
Yet now, because she sees I scorn her guile
To fawn on sooles, she for my Muse does leave me,
And here of late, her wonted spite does tend,
To work me care, by frowning on my friend.

ROGET. Why then I see her Copper-coyne's no starling,
'T will not be current still, for all the guilding,
A Knave, or ^oole must ever be her Darling:
For they have minds to all occasions yielding:
If we get any thing by all our parling
It seems an Apple, but it proves a weilding:
But let that pass; sweet Shepherd tell me this,
For what beloved friend thy sorrow is.

WILLY. Wrong me not Roget: do thou suffer here,
And ask me for what friend it is I grieve?
Can I suppose thy love to me is dear,
Or this thy joy for my content believe:
When thou think thy cares touch not me as near,
Or that I pin thy sorrows at my sleeue?
Roget, my faith in thee has had that trust,
I never thought to find thee so unjust.

ROGET. Why Willy? WILLY: Prithee do not ask me why,
Does it diminish any of thy care,
That I in freedom maken melody,
And think I cannot as well somewhat spare
From my delight, to moan thy miscrie?
It Is time our Loves should these suspects forbear:
Thou art that friend; which thou unnamed should know,
And not have drawn my love in question so.

ROGET. Forgive me, and I Will pardon thy mistake,
And so shall this thy gentle-anger cease,
(I never of thy love will question make)
Whilst that the number o^ our day^s increase,
Yet to my se^fe, I much might seem to take,
And something near unto presumption prease:
To think me worthy love from such a spirit,
But that I know thy kindness, past my merit.
Besid^s; me thought thou spak'st now of a friend,
That se^m'd more grieu^us discontents to bear,
Some things I find that do in show offend,
Which to my Patience little trouble are,
And they e're long I hope will have an end,
Or though they have not, much I do not care:
So this it was made me that question move,
And not suspect of honest Willies love.

WILLY. Alas, thou art exiled from thy ^locke,
And quite beyond the Deserts here confined,
Have nothing to converse with but a Rock,
Or at least Out-lawes in their Caves half pined,
And do'^t thou at thy own misfortune mock,
Making thy self to; to thy self unkind?
When heretofore we talk'^ we did embrace:
But now I scarce can come to see thy face.

ROGET. Yet all that, Willy, is not worth thy sorrow,
For I have Mirth, here thou would not believe,
From de^pest ca^es the highest joys I borrow:
If ought chance out this day, may m^ke me grieve,
I Will learn to mend, or scorn it by to morrow,
This barren place yields somewhat to relieve:
For I have found sufficient to content me,
And more true bliss, then ever freedom lent me.

WILLY. Are Prisons then grown places of delight?


ROGET. It Is as the conscience of the Prisoner is,
The very Grates are able to affright
The guilty Man, that knows his deeds amiss,
All outward Pleasures are exiled quite,
And it is nothing (of it self) but this:
Abhorred-loanenesse, darkness. sadness, pains,
Num'^-cold, sharp-hunger, scorching thirst and chains.

WILLY. And these are not^ing?


ROGET. -- -- Nothing yet to me,
Onel^ my friends restraint is all my pain,
And since I truly find my conscience free
From that my loanen^sse to, I reap some gain.

WILLY. But grant in this no coffeehouse be,
It does thy wished liberty restrain,
And to thy soul I think there is nothing nearer,
For I could never hear thee prize ought dearer.

ROGET. True, I did ever set it at a Rate,
Too dear for any Mortal's worth to buy,
It Is not our greatest Shepheard's whole estate,
Shall purchase from me, my least liberty,
But I am subject to the powers of Fate,
And to obey them is no slavery:
They may do much, but when they have done all,
Only my body they may bring in thrall.
And it is not that (my Willy) it is my mind,
My minde's more precious freedom I so weigh
A thousand ways they may my body bind,
In thous^d (...)* ^ut (...) m^ mind ^etray,
And ^ ^ce it is that I (...) (...),
And bear with (...) the my (...) away:
I Am (...) my self, and that I Would rat^er be,
Then to be Lord of all th^e Downs in see.

WILLY. No^ly (...) and I do joy to hear'^,
For it is the mind of Man indeed that is all,
There Is n^ught so hard but a ^rake (...) will bea^'t,
And (...) men co^t great (...) small,
The^'le look on ' Death and Torment, yet not fear't,
Because they (...) it is rising so to (...):
Ty^ants n av boast they to much power are borne,
Yet he has more that Tyranies can scorn.

ROGET. It Is right, but I no Tyranies endure,
Nor ^ au^ I suffered ought worth name of care.

WILLY. What e're thou wilt called, thou may, but I am sure,
Many more pine that much less payned are,
Thy look me thinks does say thy meaning's pure,
And by this past I find what thou do da^e:
But I could never yet the reason know,
Why thou ^rt lodged in this house of woe.

ROGET. Nor I by Pan, no^ never hope to do,
But (...) it pleases some; and I do guess
^tly a cause that moves them thereunto,
Which neither will avail me to express,
Nor thee to hear, and therefore let it go,
We must not say, they do so, that oppress:
Yet I shall never to sooth them or the times,
Iniure my sel^ by bearing others crimes.

WILLY. Then now thou may speak freely, there is none hears,
But he wh^m I do hope thou do not doubt.

ROGET. True; but if doors and walls have gott^ ears,
And Closet-whisperings may be spread about:
Do not blame him that in such causes fears
What in his Passion he may blunder out:
In such a place, and such strict times as these,
Where what we speak is took as others please.
But yet to morrow if thou come this way,
I Will tell thee all my story to the end,
It Is long, and now I fear thou can not stay,
Because thy Flock must watered be and pend,
And Night begins to muffle up the day,
Which to inform thee how alone I spend,
I Will only sing a sorry Prisoners Lay,
I f^m'd this Morn, which though it suits not fields,
Is such as fits me, and sad Thraldom yields,

WILLY. Well, I will set my Kit another string,
And play unto it whilst that thou do sing*

SONNET.
ROGET. NOw that my body dead-aliue,
Bereaved of comfort lies in thr all.
Do thou my soul begin to thrive,
And unto Honey, turn this Gall:
So shall we both through outward woe,
The way to inward comfort know.
For as that Food my Flesh I give,
Does ^eepe in me this Mortal breath:
So souls on Meditations live,
And shun thereby immortal 'Death:
Nor art thou ever nearer rest.
Then when thou find'st me most oppressed.
first think my soul; if I have Foes
That take a pleasure in my care,
And to procure these outward woes,
Have thus entrapt me unaware:
Thou should by much more ^arefull be,
Since greater Foes lay wait for thee.
Then when Mewed up in grates of steel,
Minding those joys mine cyes do miss,
Thou find'st no Torment tho^ do feel.
So (...) as Privation is*
Muse how the damned in s^ames that glow,
Pine in the loss of ^lisse they know.
Thou see there is given so great might
To some that are but clay (...) l,
Their very anger can affright.
Which if in any thou epsy
Thus think of Mortall's frowns stri^e sear,
How dreadful will Gods wrath appear?
By my late hopes that now are crossed,
Consider those that firmer be,
And make the freedom I have lo^t,
A means that may remember thee
Had Christ not thy Redeemer b^n,
What horrid (...) thou had been in
These iron chains the bolt's of steel.
Which other poor offenders grind,
The wants, and cares which they do feel^
May bring some greater thing to mind
For by their (...) thou shall do we^,
To think upon the pains of Hell.
Or when through me, thou (...) a Man
Condemned unto a mortal (...),
How sad he looks, how pale how wan,
Drawing with Fear his panting brea^h
Think i^ in that such grief thou see,
How sad will, Go ye cuised be.
Again, when he that feared to Dye
(Past hope) does see his Pardon brought,
Read but the joy that is in his eye,
And then (...) it to thy thought:
There t^inke betwixt my heart and thee,
How sweet will, come ye blessed, be
Thus if thou do, though closed ^ere,
My bondage I shall deem the less,
I neither shall have cause to fear,
Nor yet bewa^le my sad distress:
For whether li^e, or pine, or dye,
We shall have bl^sse (...).

WILLY. Trust me I see the Cage does some Birds good,
And if they do not suffer too much wrong,
Will teach them sweeter descants then the Wood:
Beleeue't, I like the subject of thy Song*
It shows thou art in no distempred mood,
But cause to hear the residue I long:
My Sheep to morrow I will nearer bring,
And spend the day to hear thee talk and sing.
Yet e're we part, Roget to me areed,
Of who^ thou learn'dst to make such Songs as these,
I never yet heard any Shepherds reed
Tune in mishap, a strain that more could please,
Surely thou do inuoke at this thy need.
Some power, that we neglect in other lays:
For here is a Name, and words, that but few swains
Have mentioned at their meting on the Plains.

ROGET. Indeed it is true; and they are sore to blame,
They do so much neglect it in their Songs,
For, thence proceeds such a worthy fame,
As is not subject unto Enuies wrongs:
That is the most to be respected name
Of our true Pan, whose worth sit^ on all tongues:
And the most ancient Shepherds use to praise
In sacred Anthemes sung on Holy Days.
He that first taught his Music such a s^raine,
Was that sweet Shepherd, who (until a King)
Kept She^pe upon the honey milkie Plain,
That is enritch't by Iordans watering;
He in his troubl^s ca^'d the bodies pains,
By measures raised to the s^ules rauishing:
And his sweet numbers only most divine,
Gave the first being to this Song of mine.

WILLY. Let his good spirit eu'r with thee dw^ll,
That I might hear such Mulicke every day.

ROGET. Thanks; but would now it pleased thee to play.
Yet sure'tis late thy Weather rings his Bell,
And Swains to fold, or homeward drive away.

WILLY. And yon goes Cuddy, therefore fare thou well:
I Will make his Sheep for me a liule s^ay,
And if thou think it fit I Will bring him to,
Next morning hither.

ROGET. Prithee Willy do.


FINIS.
The second Eglogue.
ARGUMENT.
CVDDY tells how all the Swains,
Pity ROGET on the Plains:
Who requested, does relate
The true cause of his estate,
Which bro^e o^f becau'e '^was long.
They begin a three-mans Song.
WILLY. CVDDY. ROG^T.
ROget, thy old friend Cuddy here and I,
Are come to visit thee in these thy bands,
Whilst both our Floc^es in an Enclosure by
Do pick the thin gra^se from the fallowed lands.
He tells me thy restraint of liberty
Each one throughout the Country understands:
And there is not a gentle-natur'd Lad,
On all these ' Downs but for thy sake is sad.

CVDDY. Not thy acquaintance and thy friends alone.
Pity thy close restraint, as friends should do:
But some that have but scene thee for thee moan:
Yea, many that did never see thee to.
Some deem^ thee in a fault, and most in none;
So diverse ways do diverse rumors go:
And at all meetings where our Shepherds be,
Now the maine Mewes that is extant is of thee*

ROGET. Why, this is somewhat yet: had I but kept
Sheep on the Mountaiues, till the day of doom,
My name should in obscurity have sl^pt,
In Brakes, in Briars* shrubbed Furze and Broom*
Into the worlds wide care it had not crept,
Nor in so many men's thoughts found a room:
But what cause of my s^ffe in^s doethey know?
Good Cuddy t^ll me how does rumor go.

CVDDY. Faith it is uncertain, some speak this, some that:
Some dare say naught, yet seem to think a cause,
And many a one prating he knows not what;
Comes out with Proverbs and old ancient sawes,
As if he thought thee guiltless, and yet not:
Then does he speak half sentences, then pawse:
That what the most would say, we may suppose,
But what to say the rumor is, none known.

ROGET. Nor care I greatly, for it skills not much,
What the unsteady common people deemes,
His conscience does not always feel least touch,
That blameless in the sight of others seems:
My cause is honest, and because it is such,
I hold it so, and not for Men's esteems:
If they spea^e justly well of me, I Am glad;
If (...), eu^ll, it never makes me sad.

WILLY. I like that mind, but Roget you are quite
Beside the matter that I long to hear:
Remember what you promised yester-night,
Youl'd put us off with other talk I fear;
Thou know that honest Cuddies heart's upright,
And none but he, except my self is near:
Come therefore, and betwixt us two relate
The true occasion of thy present state.

ROGET. My friends I will; You know I am a Swain,
That kept a poor Flock here upon this Plain,
Who though it seems, I could do nothing less,
Can make a Song, and woe a Shepherdess,
And not alone the fairest where I live,
Have heard me sing, and favors daign'd to give:
But though I say'^, the noblest Nymph of Them,
Has graced my Verse unto my greater same.
Yet being young, and not much see*ing praise,
I was not noted out for (...) (...),
N^r f^eding ^lockes, yea* nowne as others be:
For the delight that most (...) me
Was (...) Foxes, W^lues, and Beasts of Pray*
That spoi^e our Foulis, and bear our L^mbs a^ay:
F^r this as also for the love I bear
Unto m^ Country, (...) by all ^are
Of (...). or of (...), with desire
(...) to keep that state I had entire,
And like a true gro^ (...) man sought to speed
My selse (...) (...) of ra e and choysest (...),
Whose Names and Natures ere I further go,
(...) you are my friends I Will let you know.
My (...) esteemed D (...) that I did find,
Was by (...) of ^lde (...) kind;
A Bra^e, which if I do not aim amiss,
For all the world is ^ust i^e one o^ his;
She Is named Love, and scarce yet know^s her duty;
Her Damme s my L^d es pretty Beagle (...)
I bred her up my self with wondrous charge,
Until she grew to be exceeding large,
And waxt so wanton that I did abhor it,
And put her out amongst my Neighbors for it.
The next is Lust, a Hound that is kept abroad,
Among some of mine acquaintance, but a Toad
Is not more loathsome: it is a Curre will range
Extremely, and is ever ^ull of mange,
And cause it is infectious, she is not wunt
To come among the rest, but when they hunt.
Hate is the third, a Hound both despe and long.
His Sire is True, or else supposed wrong.
He Will have a snap at all that pass him by,
And yet pursues his game most eagerly.
With him goes Eni^e coupled, a lean Curre^
And she will hold out hunt we ^e're so far,
She pineth much, and seedeth little to,
Yet stands and snarleth at the ^est that do.
Then there is Revenge, a wondrous deepe-mouth'd dog,
So fleet, I Am feign to hunt him with a clog,
Yet many times he will much outstrip his bounds,
And hunts not closely with the other Hounds,
He Will venture on a Lion in his (...)
Cursed (...) was his damme, and wrong his Sire.
This Choler is a Brache, that is very old,
And spends her mouth too much to have it hold:
She Is very teasty, an unpleasing Curre,
That ^ites the very stones, if they but stir:
Or when that ought but her displeasure moves,
She Will bite and snap at any one she loves:
But my quicke-sented'st Dog is Jealousy,
The truest of this breede's in Italy:
The Damme of mine would hardly fill a Glove,
It was a Ladies little Dog, called Love:
The Sire a poor deformed Curre named Fear,
As shagged and as rough as is a Bear,
And yet the Whelpe turned aft^r neither kind,
For he is very large, and ne're-hand blind.
At the first sight he has a pretty culler,
But does not seem so when you view him fuller.
A vile suspicious beast, his looks are bad,
And I do fear in time he will grow mad.
To him I couple Avarice, still poor,
Yet she deuoures as much as twenty more:
A thousand Horse she in her paunch can put,
Yet whine as if she had an empty gut,
And hauiug gorged what might a land have found,
She'^e catch for more, and hide it in the ground.
Am^ition is a Hound as greedy full,
But he for all the daintiest bits does cull:
He scorns to lick up crummes beneath the Table,
(...) f^tch't from boa^ds and shelues if he be ab c,
Nav, he can climb if need be, and for that,
With him I hunt the Martine and the Cat.
And yet sometimes in mounting he is so quick,
He fet^hes falls, are like to break his neck.
Fear is well-mouth'd, but subject to (...),
A stranger cannot make him take a crust.
A little thing will soon his courage quail,
And 'twixt his legs he ever claps his tail.
With him Despair often coupled goes,
Which by his roaring mouth each hunts-man knows.
None has a better mind unto the game,
But he gives off, and always seems lame.
My blo^d-hound Cruelty. as swift as wind,
Hunts to the death, and never comes behind;
Who but she is strapt and musled to withal,
Would eat her sellowes, and the pray and all,
And yet she car^s not much for any food,
Unless it be the purest harmless blood.
All these are kept abroad at charge of menny,
They do not cost me in a year a penny.
But there is two coupling of a midling size,
That seldom pass the sight of my own eyes.
Hope, on whose head ^'ue led my life to pawn.
Compassion, that on every one will fawn.
This would when 'twas a Whelpe with Rabets play,
Or Lambs, and let them go unhurt away:
Nay, now she is of growth, she will now and then,
Catch you a Hare, and let her go again.
The two last, Joy and Sorrow, it is a wonder,
Can never agree, nor never ^ide fa^re ^sunder.
Ioye's ^uer wanton, and no order knows,
She Will run at Larkes, or stand and bark at Crowe^.
(...) goes by her, and ne'^e moves his eye,
Yet both do s^rue to help make up the cry:
Then comes behind all these t^ bear the base,
Two (...) more of a larger Race,
Such wide mouthed Trollops, that 'twould do you good
To hear their loud land Echoes tea^e the wood.
(...) Uanity, who by his gaud^ hide,
May far away from all the rest be spide,
Though huge, yet quick, for he is now here, now there,
Nay, look about you, and he is every w^ere,
And ever with the rest, and st ll in chase:
Right so, Inconstancy fills every place,
And yet so strange a sickle natured Hound,
Look^ for him, and he is no where to be found,
Wea^enesse is no fair dog unto the eye,
And yet he has his proper quality:
But there is Presumption when he heat has got,
He drownes the Thunder, and the Canon-shot:
And when at Start he his full roaring makes,
The earth does tremble, and the Heaven shakes.
These were my Dogs, ten couple just in all,
Whom by the name of Sa^yres I do call:
Mad Curres they be and I can never come night them,
But l'me in danger to be bitten by them.
Much pains I took, and spent days not a few,
To make them keep together, and hunt true:
Which yet I do suppose had never bin,
But that I had a Scourge to keep them in.
Now when that I this Kennell first had got,
Out of my own demeanes I hunted not,
Save on these Downs, or among yonder Rocks,
After those Beas^s that spoiled our Parish Flocks:
Nor during that time, was I ever wont,
With all my Kennell in one day to hunt:
Nor had done yet, but that this other year,
Some Beasts of Pray, that haunts the Deserts here
Did not alone for many nights together
Devour, sometime a Lamb, sometime a Weather,
And so disquiet many a poor man's Heard,
But that of loosing all they were afeard:
Yea, I among the rest did sare as bad,
Or rather worse for the best Hopes.
Ewes I had,
(Whose breed should be my means of (...) and gain)
Were in one Evening by these Monsters (...):
Which Mischief I resolved to repay,
Or else grow desperate, and hunt all away,
For in a fury (such as you shall see
Hunts-men in missing of their sport will be)
I vowed a Monster should not lurk about,
In all this Province, but I Would find him out,
And there-vpon without respect or care,
How lame, how full, or how unfit they were.
In have vnkennell'd all my roaring crew,
Who were as mad as if my mind they knew,
And e're they trayl'd a flight-shot, the fierce Curres
Had roused a Heart, and through Brakes and Furs.
Followed at gaze so close that Love and Fear
Got in together, so had surely there
Quite over thrown him, but that Hope thrust in
(...) both, and saved the pinching of his skin,
Whereby he escaped, till coursing overthwart,
(...) came in, and gripped him to the heart,
I hallowed in the resdue to the fail,
And for an entrance there I flesh't them all,
Which having done, I dipped my staff in blood,
And on^ard led my Thunder to the ^ood,
Where what they did, I Will tell you out anon,
My keeper calls me, and I must be gone.
Go if you please a while, attend your Flocks,
And when the Sun is over yonder Rocks,
Come to this Ca^e again where I will be,
If that my Guardian so much favor me.
But e're we part, let each one sing a strain,
And then go turn your Sheep into the Plain

WILIY. I am content.


CVDDY. As well content am I.


ROGET. Then Will, Begin, and we will the rest supply.


SONG.
WILLY. Shepherd would these Gates were open,
Thou might take with us thy fortune.

ROGET. No, I Will make this narrow scope,
Since my Fate does so importune
Means unto a wider hope.

CVDDY. Would thy Shepherdess were here.
Who beleu'd, loves thee so dearly.

ROGET. Not for both your Flocks I swear.
And the same they yield you yearly,
Would I so much wrong my Dear,
Yet to me, nor to this Place,
Would she now be long a stranger,
She would hold it no disgrace,
((...) she (...) not more my danger)
Where I am to shewber face.

WILLY. Shepherd, we would wish no harms,
But something that might content thee.

ROGET. Wish me then within her arms,
And that wish will never repent me,
If your wishes might prove charms.

WILLY. Be thy Prison her embrace,
Be thy air her sweetest breathing.

CVDDY. Be thy prospect her fair Face,
For each look a kiss bequeathing,
And appoint thy self the place.

ROGET. Nay pray, hold there, for I should scantly then;
Come meet you here this afternoon again:
But fare you well. since wishes have no power,
Let us depart, and keep the pointed hours.

FINIS.
The third Eglogue.
ARGUMENT.
ROGET set with his three friends,
Here his hunting story ends;
Kind ALEXIS with much ruth,
Wailes the banished Shepherds youth:
But he slighteth Fortunes stings,
And in spite of Thraldom sings.
ROGET. CVDDY. ALEXIS. WILLY.
SO now I see you are Shepherds of your word,
Thus were you wont to promise, and to do.

CVDDY. More then our promise is we can afford,
We come our selves, and bring another to:
Alexis whom thou know well, is no foe
Who loves thee much, and I do know that he
Would feign a hearer of thy Hunting be.

ROGLI. Alexis you are welcome, sor you know
You cannot be but welcome where I am,
You ever were a friend of mine in show:
And I have found you are indeed the same,
Upon my first restraint you hither came,
And proffered me more tokens of your love,
Then it were fit my small deserts should prove.

ALEXIS. It Is still your use to vnderprise your merit,
Be not so coy to take my proffered love;
It Will neither vnbeseeme your worth nor spirit,
To offer curt^sie does thy friend behoue,
And which are so, this is a place to prove:
Then once again I say, if cause there be,
First make a trial, if thou please, of me.

ROGET. Thanks good Alexis; sit down by me here,
I have a task, these Shepherds know, to do;
A Tale already told this Morn well near.
With which I very feign would forward go,
And am as willing thou should hear it to:
But thou can never understand this last,
Till I have also told thee what is past.

WILLY. Roget it shall not need, for I presumed,
Your loves to each were firm, and was so bold,
That so much on my self I have assumed,
To make him know what is already told:
If I have done amiss then you may scolde.
But in my telling I preuised this,
He knows not whose, nor to what end it is:

ROGET. Well now he may, for here my Tale goes on,
My eager Dogs and I to Wood are gone,
Where beating through the Couerts every Hound
A several Game had in a moment found:
I rated them* but they pursued their pray,
And as it fell (by hap) took all one way.
Then I began with quicker speed to sollow,
And ^az'd them on with a more cheerful hallow,
That soon we passed many weary miles,
Tracing the subtle game through all these wiles.
These doubled, they redoubled on the sent,
Still keeping in ^ull chase where ere they went,
Up Hills, down (...), through Bogges, and over
Stretching their (...) to the highest strains ( Plains,
That when some Thicket hid them from mine eye,
My care was ravished with their melody.
Nor crossed we only Ditches, Hedges, Furrows,
But Hamlets. things, Parishes, and Burrowes.
They followed where so eu'r the game did go
Through Kitchen, Parler, Hall, and Chamber too,
And as they passed the City and the Court,
My Prince looked out, and daign'd to view my sport,
Which then (although I suffer for it now)
(If some say true) he liking, did allow;
And so much (had I had but wi^ to stay)
I might my self (perhaps) have heard him say,
But I that time, as much as any daring,
More for my pleasure then my safety caring;
Seeing fresh game from every loope-hole rise,
Crossing by thousands still before their eyes.
After I rushed, and following close my Hounds
Some Beasts I found lie dead, some full of wounds
Among the Willows, scarce with strength to move
One I found here, another there, whom Love
Had gripped to death: and in the selfsame state,
Lav one devoured by Envy, one by Hate,
Lust had bit some, but I soon past beside them,
Their festered wounds so stuncke, none could ablde
Choler hurt diverse, but Revenge killed more,
Fear srighted all, behind him and before:
(...) drove on a huge and mighty heap,
Forcing some down from Roc^es and Hills to leap:
Some into water, some into the fire,
So on themselves he made them wreake his ire:
But I remember as I passed that way,
Where the great Kin^ and Prince of Shepherds lay,
About the walls were hid some once more known,
That my fell Curre Ambition had o'rethrowne.
Many I heard pursued by Pity cry,
And often I say my Bloud-Hound Cruelty,
Eating her passage even to the heart,
Whither once gotten, she is loath to part.
All pl^'d it well, and made so loud a plea,
It Was heard through Britan* and beyond the Sea;
Some rated them, some stormed, some liked the game,
Some thought me worthy praise, some worthy blame.
But I not fearing the one, misteeming the other,
Both, in shrill hallowes and loud ^ernings smother:
Yea, the strong me^ed and my long-breathed crew,
Seeing the (...) increasing in their view,
Grew the more frolic, and the courses length
Gave better breath, and added to their strength;
Which Jove perceiving, for Jove heard their cries
Rumbling amongst the Spheres concauities:
He marked their course and courages increase,
Saving, it were pity such a chase should cease;
And therewith swore their mouths should never wast
But hunt as long's mortality did last.
Soon did they feel the power of his great gift,
And I began to find their pace more swift:
I followed, and I rated, but in vain,
Strived to overtake, or take them up again;
They never stayed since, neither nights nor days,
But to and fro still run a thousand ways:
Yea often to this place where now I lie,
They Will wheel about to cheer me with their cry;
And one day in good time will vengeance take
On some offenders, for their Masters sake:
For know, my Friends, my freedom in this sort
For them I lose, and making my self sport.

WILLY. Why Roget, was there any harm in this?


ROGET. No Willy, and I hope yet none there is.


WILLY. How comes this then?


ROGET. Note and I Will tell thee how.
Thou know that Truth and Innocence now,
If placed with meandness, suffers more despite
Then Uillanies, accompan'ed with might:
But thus it fell, while that my Hound pursued
Their noisome pray, and every field lay strewn
With Monsters, hurt and slain among many a beast,
Some viler, and more subtle then the rest,
On whom the Bitch called Envy, hap't to light:
And as her won^ is, did so surely b^te,
That though she left behind small outward smarts,
The wounds were deep, and wrankled to their hearts.
Then joining to some other that of late
Were very eagerly pursued by Hate,
To fit their purpose having taken leisure,
Did thus conspire to work me a displeasure.
For imitation far supassing Apes,
They laid aside their Fox, and Wooluish shapes.
And shrouded in the skins of harmelesle she^pe
Into by-ways, and open-pathes did creep,
Where they (as hardly drawing breath) did ly,
Showing their wounds to every pas^r by;
To make them think that they were sheep so foi^'d
And by my dogs in their late hunting spoiled.
Beside some other that enuy'd my game,
And for their pastime kept such Monsters tame:
As you do know there is many for their pleasure,
Keep Foxes, Bears, and Wolves, as some great treasure:
Yea, many get their living by them to,
And so did store of these, I speak of do,
Who seeing that my Kennell had affrighted,
Or ^urt some Uermine wherein they delighted,
And finding their own power by much too weak
Their Malice on my Innocence to wreake,
Swollen with the deepest rancour of despite,
Some of our greatest Shepherds foldes by night
They closely entered; and there having stained
Their hands in (...), of me they plained,
Affirming, without shame or honesty,
I and my Dogs had done it purposely:
Whereat they stor^'d, and called me to a trial,
Where Inn^cence preuails not, nor denial,
But for that (...) here in this place I ly,
Where none so merry as my dogs and I.

CVDD^. Believe it, here is a Tale will su^en (...),
For (...) in another Age to tell.

WIIIY. And Roget shall be thought on with delight,
For this hereafter many a Winters night,
For of this sport another Age will ring:
Yea, Nymphs unborn now, of the same shall sing,
When not a beauty on our greenes shall play
That has not heard of Rogets hunting day.

ROG^T. It may be so, for it that gentle Sw^ine,
Who wonnes by Ta^y, on the western plain,
Would make the Song, such life his ver^e can give,
Then I do know my Nam^ might ever live.

ALEXIS. But tell me; are our Playnes and Nymphs forgot,
And can thou (...) in thy trouble be?

ROG^T. Can I Alexis savst thou? Can I not
That am resolved to scorn more m^sery?

AIEXIS. Oh, but thy youth's yet green, and young blood hot,
And liberty must n^eds be sweet to thee,
But now most s^eet whilst every bushy (...),
And Groan and (...), rings of the Nightingale.
Me thinks when thou remembrest those sweet iayes,
Which thou would lead thy Shepherdess to hear
E^ch evening forth among the Leau^ sprayes,
The thought of that should make thy freedom dear;
For now whilst euer^ Nymph on Holy-da^es
(...) with some (...) Lad, and makes cheer,
Thine sighs for thee, and mewed up from resort,
Will neither play her self, nor see their sport.
There Is Shepherds that were many a morning wont
Unto their Boys to leave the ^ender Heard,
And bear thee company when thou did hunt,
Cannot their songs thou have so gladly heard,
Northy m^st pleasure make thee think upon it,
But seems all vain, now that was once indear'd.
It cannot be, for I could make relation,
How for lesle cause thou have been deep in passion.

ROGET. Ti^ true: my tender heart was ever yet
Too cap^ble of such conoeits as these;
I never s^w that Object but from it,
The Passions of my Love, I could encre^se
Those things which move not other men a whi^,
I can, and do make use of, if I please:
When I am sad, to sadness I apply,
Each Bird, and Tree, and Flower that I pass by.
So when I will be merry, I as well
Something for mirth from every thing can draw,
From Misery, from Prisons, nay from Hell,
And as when to my mind, grief gives a flaw,
Best comforts d^e but make my woes more fell,
So when I Am bent to M^rth, from mischiefs pawe
(Though ceased upon me) I would something cull,
That spite of care should make my joys more full.
I feel those wants Alexis thou do name,
Which spite of ^outh's affections I sustain;
Or else for what is it I have gotten fame,
And am more known then many an elder Swain?
If such desires I had not learned to ^ame,
Since many pipe much better on this Plain:
But tune your Reeds, and I will in a Song
Express my Care, and how I take this wrong.
SONNET.
I That ere'st-while the worlds sweet Air did draw,
(Graced by the farrest ever Mortal saw;)
Now closely pent, with walls of Ruth less stone,
Consume my Days, and Nights, and all-alone.
When I was wont to sing of Shepherds loves,
My walks were Fields, and Downs, and Hills, and Groves,
But now (alas) so sirict is my hard doom,
Fields, Downs, Hills, Groves, and all is but one poor room.
Each Morn as soon as Daylight did appear,
With Natures Music Birds would charm mine ear;
Which now (in^ead) of their melodious strains,
Hear rattling shackles, gyues, and boults, and chains.
But though that all the world's delight forsake me,
I have a Mu^e and s^e (...) Music make me;
Whose a^y Notes inspight of (...) cages,
Shall give content to me, and afterages,
Nor do I pass for all this outward ill.
My heart's the ^ame, and vnde^ected still;
And which is more then some in freedom win;
I hau^ true rest, and peace, and joy within.
And then my Mind that s^ight of prison's free,
When er^e she pleases, any where can be;
She Is in an hour in France, Room, Turkey, Spain,
In Earth, in Hell, in Heaven, and here again.
Yet there is another comfort in my w^e,
My ca^se is spread, and all ^he world does know
My ^ault's no more but speaking Truth and Reason,
Nor Debt, nor Theft, nor Murder, ^ape, nor Treason.
Nor shall my Foes with all their Might and Power,
Wi^e out their s^ame, nor yet this Fame of our
Which when they ^inde they shall my Fate envy,
Till they grow lean, and sick, and mad, and dy^.
Then though my Body here in Prisonrot,
And my poor (...) seem a while forgot,
Yet when both Fame and Life have left those men,
My (...) (...) (...) (...) and live again.
So thus (...), I bear afflictions load,
But with mo^e true content then some abroad;
For whil^st (...) thoughts do feel my scourges sting*
In bands I Will leap^, and daunc^ and laugh, and sing.

ALEXIS. Why now I see thou dioup'st not with thy care,
Neither exclaim'st thou on thy hunting day,
But do with unchanged resolution bear,
The heavy burden of exile away,
All that did truly know thee did conceive,
Thy actions with thy spirit still agreed;
Their good conceit thou do no whit bereave,
But showest that thou art still thy self indeed.
If that thy mind to baseness now descends,
Thou Wilt iniure Virtue, and deceive thy friends.

WILLY. Alexi^, he will iniure Virtue much,
But more his friends, and most of all himself,
If on that common bar his mind but touch,
It wracks his same upon disgraces shelfe:
Yet Roget, if thou stere but on the course,
That in thy just adventure is begun;
No thwarting Tide, nor adverse blast shall force
Thy Bark without the Channels bounds to run,
Thou art the same thou were for ought I see,
When thou did freely on the Mountains hunt,
In nothing changed yet, unless it be
More merrily disposed then thou were wont,
Still keep thee thus, so other men shall know,
Virtue can give content in midst of woe.
And he though mightiness with frowns does threat,
To be yet Innocent is to be great.
Thrive and farewell.

ALEXIS. In this thy trouble flourish.


CVDDY. While those that wish thee ill, fret, pine, and perist^.


FINIS.
To his truly beloved loving Friend, Mr. WILLIAM BROWN, of the Inner Temple.
The fourth Eglogue.
ARGUMENT.
ROGET here on WILLY calls,
To sing out his Pastorals:
Warrants Fame shall orace his Rimes,
Spite of Envy and the Times;
And shows how in care he uses,
To take comfort from his Muses.
ROGET. WILLY.
PRethy WILLY tell me this,
What new accident there is,
That thou (once the blythest Lad)
Art become so wondrous sad?
And so careless of thy quill,
As if thou had lost thy skill.
Thou were wont to charm thy Flocks,
And among these rudest rocks
Have so cheered me with thy Song,
That I have forgot my wrong.
Something has thee surely crossed,
That thy old wont thou have lost,
Tell me, Have I ought mis-said
That has made thee illa-paid?
Has some Churl done thee a spite?
Do thou m^le a Lamb to night?
Frowns thy fairest Shepherds Less?
Or how comes this ill to pass?
Is there any discontent
Worse then this my banishment?

WILLY. Why, does that so evil seem
That thou nothing worse do deem?
Shepherd, there full many be,
That will change Contents with thee.
Those that choose their walks at will,
On the Valley or the Hill.
Or those pleasures boast of can
Groves or fields may yield to man:
Never come to know the rest
Wherewithal thy mind is blessed.
Many a one that often resorts
To make up the troop at sports,
And in company some while
Happens to strain sorth a smile:
Feels more want, more outward smart
And more inward grief of heart,
Then this place can bring to thee,
While thy mind remains free.
Thou condemn'st my want of mirth,
But what find'st thou in this earth,
Wherein ought may be believed,
Worth to make me joyed, or grieved?
And yet feel I (na^helesse)
Part of both I must confess,
Sometime I of Mirth do borrow,
Otherwhile as much of sorrow,
But my present state is such,
I Am nor Joyed, nor grieved much.

ROGET. Why has WILLY then so long
Thus forborn^ his wonted song?
Wherefore does he now let fall,
His well-tuned Pastoral?
And my cares that Music bar*
Which I more long after far,
Then the liberty I want.

WILLY. That were very much to grant.
But does this hold always lad,
Those that sing not must be sad?
Did thou ever that bird hear
Sing well, that sings all the year?
Tom the Piper does not play
Till he wears his Pipe away:
There Is a time to slack the string,
And a time to leave to sing.

ROGET. Yea, but no man now is still,
That can sing, or tune a quill.
Now to chant it, were but reason,
Song and Music are in season,
Now ^n this sweet ^olly tide,
Is the earth in all her pride.
The fair Lady of the May
Trimmed up in her best array
Has invited all the Swains,
With the Lasses of the Plains
To attend upon her sport
At the places of resort.
Corridon (with his bold Rout)
Has already been about
For the elder Shepherds dole,
And fetched in the Summer-Pole:
Whilst the rest have built a Bower,
To defend them from a shower,
Se^l'd so close with boughs all green,
Tytan cannot pry between.
Now the Darrie Wenches dream
Of their Stra^ berries and Cream:
And each does her self advance
To be taken in, to dance*
Every one that knows to sing,
Fits him for his Carolling:
So do those that hope for meede,
Either by the Pipe or Reed,
And though I am kept away,
I do hear (this very day)
Many learned Grooms do wend,
For the Garlands to contend.
Which a Nymph that hight Desert,
(Long a stranger in this part)
With her own fair hand has wrought
A rare work (they say) past thought,
As appears by the name,
For she calls them Wreathes of fame.
She has set in their due place
Every flower that may grace,
And among a thousand more,
Whereof some but serve for show)
She has woue in Daphnes tree,
That they may not blasted be.
Which with Time she edged about,
Least the work should rau^ll out.
And that it might wither never,
Intermixed it with Liue-euer.
These are to be shared among
Those that do excel for song:
Or their passions can rehearse,
In the smooth'st and sweetest verse.
Then for th^se among the rest,
That can play and pipe the best*
There Is a Kidling with the Damme,
A fat Weathe^, and a Lamb.
And for those that leapen far,
Wrestle, Run, and throw the Bar,
There Is appointed guerdons to,
He that best the first can do
Shall for his re^ard be paid,
With a Sheepe-hooke, fair in-laid
With fine bone, of a strange beast,
That men bring from out the west.
For the next, a Scrip of red,
Tassel'd with fine colored thread.
There Is prepared for their need,
That in running make most speed,
Or the cunning measures foot,
Cups of turned Maple-roote,
Whereupon the skillful man
Has i^grau'd the Loxes of Pan:
And the last has for his due
A fine Napking wrought with blew.
Then my Willy why art thou
Careless of thy merit now?
What do here with a wight
That is shut up from delight,
In a solitary den
As not fit to live with men?
Go my Willy get thee gone,
Leave me in exile alone.
Hye thee to that merry throng,
And amaze them with thy Song,
Thou art young, yet such a Lay
Never grat'd the month of May,
As (if they provoke thy skill)
Thou can fit unto thy Quill.
I with wonder heard thee sing,
At our last years Reuelling.
Then I with the rest was free,
When unknown I noted thee:
And perceived the ruder Swains,
Envy thy far sweeter strains.
Yea, I saw the Lasses cling
Round about thee in a Ring:
As if each one ^ealous were,
Any but her self should hear.
And I know they yet do long
For the res'due of thy song.
Haste thee then to sing it forth,
Take the benefit of worth.
And Desert will sure bequeath
Fames fair garland for thy wreath.
Hye thee Willy, hye away.

WILLY. Roget rather let me stay,
And be desolate with thee,
Then at those their Revels be,
Naught such is my skill I wis,
As in deed thou deem'st it is.
But what ere it be, I must
Be content, and shall I trust.
For a song I do not pass*
Mong'st my friends, but what (alas)
Should I have to do with them
That my Music do contemn?
Some there are, as well I wot,
That the same yet favor not:
Yet I cannot well auow,
They my Car^ols disallow.
But such malice I have spid,
It Is as much as if they did.

ROGET. Willy, what may those men be
Are so ill to malice thee?

WILLY. Some are worthy-well esteemed
Some without worth are so deemed*
Others of so base a spirit,
They have nor esteem, nor merit.

ROGET. What Is the wrong?


WILLY. A slight offense,
Wherewithal I can dispense;
But hereafter for their sake,
To my self I Will music make.

ROGET. What, because some Clown offends,
Will thou punish all thy friends?

WILLY. Honest Roget understand me,
Those that love me may command me*
But thou know I am but young,
And the Pastoral I sung,
Is by some supposed to be,
(By a strain) too high for me:
So they kindly let me gain,
Not my labor for my pain.
Trust me, I do wonder why
They should me my own deny.
Though I Am young, I scorn to fli^,
On the wings of borrowed wit.
I Will make my own feathers rear me,
Whither others cannot bear me.
Yet I Will keep my skill in store,
Till I Have seen some Winters mo^.

ROGET. But in earnest mean thou so?
Then thou art not wise, I trow.
Better shall advise thee Pan,
For thou do not rightly than:
That Is the ready ^ay to blot
All the credit thou have got.
Rather in thy Ages prime,
Get another start of Time:
And make those that so fond be,
(Spite of their own dullness) see
That the sacred Muses can
Make a child in years, a man.
It is known what thou can do,
For it is not long ago,
When that CVDDY, Thou, and I
Fach the others skill to try,
At Saint Dunstanes charmed Well,
(As some present there can tell)
Sang upon a sudden Theme,
Sitting by the Crimson stream.
Where, if thou did well or no,
Yet remains the song to show.
Much experience more I Have had
Of thy skill (thou happy Lad)
And would make the world to know it;
But that time will further show it:
Envy makes their tongues now run,
More then doubt of what is done,
For that needs must be thy own,
Or to be some others known:
But how then wilt suit unto
What thou shall hereafter do?
Or I wonder where is he,
Would with that song part to thee:
Nay, were there so mad a Swain,
Could such glory'sell for gain;
Phoebus would not have combined,
That gift with so base a mind.
Never did the Nine impart
The sweet secrets of their Art
Unto any that did scorn
We should see their sauors worn,
Therefore unto those that say,
Where they pleased to sing a Lay,
They could do it, and will not tho;
This I speak, for this I know:
None ere drunk the Thespian spring,
And knew how, but he did sing.
For that once infused in man,
Makes him shew't, do what he can,
Nay those that do only sip
Or but even their fingers dip
In that sacred Fount (poor Elues)
Of that brood will show themselves;
Yea, in hope to get them fame,
They will speak though to their shame,
Let those then at thee repine,
That by their wits measure thine,
Needs those Songs must be thine own,
And that one day will be known,
The same imputation to,
I my self do undergo:
But it will appear ere long,
I Am abused, and thou have wrong,
Who at twice ten have sung more,
Then some will do at fourscore.
Cheer thee (honest Willy) then,
And begin thy song again.

WILLY. Feign I would, but I do fear
When again my Lines they hear,
If they yield they are my Rimes,
They will feign some other Crimes,
And it is no safe ventring by,
Where we see Detraction ly.
For do what I can, I doubt,
She will pick some quarrel out,
And I ost have heard defended,
Little said, and soon amended.

ROGET. See thou not in cleerest days
Often thick fogges cloud Heavens rays?
And the vapors that do breath
From the earths gross womb ^e eath,
Seem they not with their black steames,
To pollute the Suns bright beams,
And vet vanish into air.
Leaving it (unblemished) fair?
So (my Willy) shall it be
With Detractions breath and thee.
It shall never rise so hie,
As to stain thy Poesy.
As that Sun does often exhale,
Vapors from each rotten Vale,
Poesy so sometime draines,
Gross conceits from muddy brains;
Mists of Envy, fogs of spite,
Twixt men's judgments and her light:
But so much her power may do,
That she can dissolve them too.
If thy verse do bravely tower,
As she makes wing, she gets power.
Yet the higher she does sore,
She Is affionted still the more:
Till she to the highest has past,
Then she rests with fame at last.
Let naught therefore thee affright,
But make forward in thy flight:
For if I could match thy Rhyme,
To the very stars l'de clime.
There begin again and fly
Till I reached Aeternity.
But (alas) my Muse is slow:
For thy pace she flagges too low:
Yes, the more's her hapless fate,
Her short wings were clipped of late.
And poor I, her fortune ruing,
Am my self put up a muing.
But if I my Cage can rid,
I Will fly where I never did.
And though for her sake l'me crossed,
Though my best hopes I have lost,
And knew she would make my trouble,
Ten times more then ten times double:
I would love and keep her to,
Spite of all the world could do.
For though banished from my flocks,
And confined within these rocks,
Here I waste away the light,
And consume the sullen Night,
She does for my comfort stay,
And keeps many cares away.
Though I miss the flowery Fields,
With those sweets the Springtide yields,
Though I may not see those Groves,
Where the Shepherds chaunt their Loves,
And the Lasses more excel,
Then the sweet-voyc'd Philomel,
Though of all those pleasures past,
Nothing now remains at last,
But Remembrance (poor relief)
That more makes, then mends my grief:
She Is my minds companion still,
Maugre Enuies evil will.
(Whence she should be driven to,
Were in mortals power to do.)
She does tell me where to borrow
Comfort in the midst of sorrow;
Makes the desolatest place
To her presence be a grace;
And the blackest discontents
Be her fairest ornaments.
In my former days of bliss,
Her divine skill taught me this,
That from every thing I saw,
I could some invention draw:
And raise pleasure to her height,
Through the meanest objects fight,
By the murmur of a spring,
Or the least boughs rusteling.
By a Dazie whose leaves spread
Shut when Tytan goes to bed,
Or a shady bush or tree,
She could more infuse in me,
Then all Natures beauties can,
In some other wiser man.
By her help I also now,
Make this churlish place allow
Somethings, that may sweeten gladness
In the very gall of sadness.
The dull loanesse, the black shade,
That these hanging vaults have made,
The strange Music of the waves,
Beating on these hollow Caves.
This black den which Rocks embosse,
Ouer-growne with eldest moss.
The rude portals that give light,
More to Terror then Delight.
This my Chamber of Neglect,
Wal'd about with Disrespect,
From all these, and this dull air,
A fit object for Despair,
She has taught me by her might
To draw comfort and delight.
Therefore thou best earthly bliss
I will cheris^ thee for this.
Poesy; thou sweet'st content
That ere Heaven to mortals lent.
Though they as a trifle leave thee
Whose dull thoughts can not conceive the
Though thou be to them a scorn
That to naught but earth are borne:
Let my life no longer be,
Then I am in love with thee.
Though our wise ones call it madness,
Let me never taste of gladness
If I l^ue not thy made sits
Above all their greatest ^ its.
And though some too seeming holy
Do account thy raptures folly:
Thou do teach me to contemn
What makes Knaves and Fools of them.
O high power that often does carry
Men above,

WILLY. Good Roget carry
I do fear thou will be gone
Quite above my reach anon,
The kind flames of Poesy
Have now borne thy thoughts so high,
That they up in Heaven be
And have quite forgotten me.
Call thy self to mind again
Are these Raptures for a Swain,
That attends on lowly sheep
And with simple herds does keep?

ROGET. Thank^s my Willy, I had run
Till that Time had log'd the Sun,
If thou had not made me stay;
But thy pardon here I pray.
Loved Apollo's sacred sire
Has raised up my spirits higher
Through the love of Poesy,
Then indeed they use to fly.
But as I said, I say still,
If that I had Will^'s skill
Envy nor Detractions tongue,
Should ere make me leave my song:
But I Would sing it every day
Till they pined themselves away.
Be thou then adui^'d in this
Which both ^ust and fitting is,
Finish what thou have begun
Or at least still forward run:
(...) and Thu^der ill he will bear
That a blast of wind does fear:
And if w^rds will thus afray thee,
Prithee how will deeds dismay thee?
Do not think so rathe a song
Can pass through the vulgar throng,
And escape without a touch,
Or that they can hurt it much:
Frosts we see d^e (...) that thing
Which is for^ard's in the Spring:
Yet at last for all such lets
Somewhat of the rest (...) gets:
And I Am sure that so ^aist thou,
Therefore my kind Willy now,
Since thy folding time (...) on
And I see thou mu^t be gone,
T^ee I earnestly b^seech
To rememb^r this m^ s^ech,
And some little couns^ll (...),
For thy poor friend Rogets sake:
And I more of this will (...),
If thou come next Holy Day.

FINIS.
To Master W. F. of the Middle Temple.
The fifth Eglogue.
ARGUMENT.
ROGET here ALEXIS moves,
To embrace the Muses loves;
*Bids him never careful seem,
Of another disesteeme*
Since to them it may suffize,
That themselves can iustl^ prize.
ROGET. ALEXIS.
ALEXIS if thy worth do not disdain
The humble friendship of a meaner (...)
Or some more needful business of the day
Urge th^e to be too hasty on thy way;
Come (g^ntle Shepherd) rest thee here by me,
Under the shadow of this broad-leau'd tree:
For though I seem a stranger, yet mine eye
Observes in thee the marks of courtesy:
And if my judgment err not, noted too
More then in those that ^ore would seem ^o do;
Such virtues thy rare modesty does hide
Which by their proper luster I ^spy'd;
And though long mask'^ in silence they have been
I have a wisdom through that silence seen:
Yea, I have learned knowledge from thy tongue,
And heard when thou have in concealment sung:
Which me the bolder and more willing made
Thus to inuit^ thee to this homely shade.
And though (it may be) thou could neu^r spy
Such worth in me, I might be known thereby,
In thee I do; for here ^ y neighboring sheep
Upon the border of these down^ I keep:
Where often thou at Pastorals and plays,
Have graced our Wakes on Summer Holy days:
And many a ^ime with thee at this cold spring
M^rl, to hear your learned shepherds sing,
Saa them disporting in the shady grouc^,
And in chaste Sonn^ts ^ooe their chaster loves:
When I endued with the meanest skill,
Among others have been urged to tune my quill,
Where cause but l^ttle cunning I had got)
Perhaps thou saw me, though thou knew'st me not

ALFXIS. Yes Roget, I do know thee and thy name,
Nor is my knowledge grounded all on fame,
Art not thou he, that but this other year.
S^ard'st all the Wolves and Foxes in the sheere?
And in a ma^ch at Football lately tried
(Having scarce twenty Satyrs on thy side)
Held'd pla^: and though assailed, kept'st thy stand
Against all the best-try'd Ruffi^ns in the land?
Did thou not then in dolesull Sonnets moan,
When the beloved of great Pan was gone;
And at the wedding of fair THEM and RHINE,
Sing of their glories to thy Valentine?
I know it, and I must confess that long
In one thing I did do thy nature wrong:
For till I marked the aim thy Satyrs had,
I thought them ouerbold and Roge^ mad;
But since I did mo^e nearly on thee look
I soon perceived that I had all mistook;
I saw that of a Cynicke thou made show
Where since I find that thou were nothing so,
And that of many thou much blame had got
When as thy Innocence deserved it not.
But this too good opinion thou have seemed
To have of me (not so to be esteemed)
Preuailes not ought to stay him who does fear
He rather should reproves then praises hear
It Is true, I found thee plain and honest to,
Which made me like, then love as now I do.
And Roget though a stranger this I say
Where I d^e love I am not coy to stay.

ROG^T. Thanks gentle S^aine that do so soon vn^olde
What I to thee a^ gladly wo^ld have told
And thus thy wonted courtesy expressed
In (...) entertaining this request:
Sure I should (...) my o^ne content
Or wrong thy love to stand on complemen^,
Who have acquaintance in one word begun
As well as I could in an age have done:
Or by an ou^rweaning slownesse mar^e
What thy more wisdom has brought on so far
Then sit thou down and Il'^ my mind declare
As free^, as if we familiars were:
And i^ thou will but daigne ^o give me ear
Some^hing thou may f^r thy more profit hear,

ALEXIS. Willingly Roget I thy wish obey.


ROG^T. Then know Alexis from that very day
When as I saw thee at that Shepherds Coat
Where each I think o^ other took first noate,
I mean that Pastor who by Tauies springs
Chaste Shephear^s louc^ in sweetest numbers sing^,
And with his Music (to his greater fame)
Has late made proud the fairest Nimph^ of Them.
E'ne then me thought I did espy in the^
Some vnperceiu'd and hidden worth to be,
Which in thy more apparent virtues shined
And among many I in thought deuin'd,
By something my conceit had understood
That thou were marked one of the Muses brood,
That made me love thee: And that love I bear
Begat a Pity, and that Pity Care:
(...) I had to s^e good parts concealed,
Care I had how to have tha^ good r^ueal'd,
Since '(...) a f^u't (...) no excuse
To possess much and yet put naught in vs^:
Heereon I vowed (if (...) (...) eue^ (...)
The first (...) that I would (...) to g^t
Should be but (...) is, that ^hou (...) show the skill,
Ho^ thou could ^une thy ve^ses to (...) (...):
And teach thy Muse in (...) (...) (...) long,
To she^ the Art thou (...) suppressed so long:
Which if my new acquaintance may ob^aine
Roget will ever honor this days gain.

(...). Alas! my small experienc^ scarce c^n tell
So much as where those (...) the Muses dwell,
Nor (though my (...) (...) (...) travels on)
Shall I ere reach to drink of Hellicon;
(...) (...) so (...) be to taste
What (...) (...) (...) ames but oue^-flow in waste,
An^ (...) Parnassus, where it low'st does lie,
I ^eare my skill would hardly flagge so hye.

ROGET. D spayre not Man, the Gods have (...) naught
So d^ere that may not be with labor bought,
Nor need (...) pain be great since Fate and Heaven
That (as a bl^ssing) at thy (...) have given.

ALEXIS. Why say they had?


RO^ET. Then use their gifts thou must,
Or be ungrateful, and so be unjust:
F^r if it cannot tru^y be denied,
Ingrati^ude men's benefits do hide;
Then more vng^atefull must he be by odds
Who does conceal the bounty o^ the G^ds.

ROGET. That Is true indeed, but Envy haunteth those
Who seeking fame their hidden skill disclose:
Where else they might (obscured) from her espying,
Escape the blasts and danger of envying:
Critickes will censure our best strains of Wit,
And pu^blinde Ignorance misconster it.
All which i^ bad, yet worse then this does follow,
Most hate the Muses, and contemn Apollo.

ALEXIS. So let them: why should we their hate esteem?
Is It not enough we of our selves can deem?
It Is more to their disgrace that we scorn them
Then unto us that they our Art contemn;
Can we have better pastime then to see
Their gross heads may so much deceived be,
As to allow those d^ings best where wholly
We (...) them to their face, and flout their folly:
Or to behold black Envy in her prim^,
Die selfe-consum'd whilst we vie lives with time:
And in despite of her, more fame attain
Th^n all her malice can wipe out again?

ROGET. Yea but if I applied me to those strains,
Wh^ should drive forth my flocks unto the plains.
Which whilst the Muses rest, and leisure crave,
Must ^atering, folding, and attendance have.
For if I leave with wonted care to cherish
Those tender herds: both I and they should perish

AL^XIS. Alexis now I see thou do mistake,
There is no meaning thou thy charge forsake;
Nor would I wish thee so thy self abuse
As to neglect thy calling for thy Muse:
But let these two so of each other borrow,
That they may scason mirth, and lessen sorrow.
Thy flock will help thy charges to desray,
Thy muse to pass the long and tedious day.
Or whilst thou ^un'st sweet measures to thy Reed
Thy sheep to listen will more near thee feed,
The wolves will shun them, birds ^boue thee sing,
And Lambkins dance about thee in a Ring;
Nay which is more: in this thy low estate
Thou in contentment shall with Monarkes mate:
For mighty Pan, and Ceres to us grants
Our fields and flocks shall help our outward wants.
The Muses teach us songs to put off cares,
Graced with as rare and sweet conceits as theirs:
And we can think our Lasses on the greenes
As fair, or fairer, then the fairest Queens;
Or what is more then most of them shall do,
We Will make their iuster sames last ionger to,
Having our Lines by greatest Princes graced
When both their name and memory's defaced.
Therefore Alexis though that some disdain
The heavenly music of the Rural plain,
What is it to us, if they (over seen) contemn
The dainties which were nere ordained for them?
And though that there be other some envy
The praises due to sacred Poesy,
Let them disdain and fret till they are weary,
We in our selves have that shall make us merry:
Which he that wants, and had the power to know it,
Would give his life that he might dye a Poet.

ALEXIS. A brave persuasion.


ROGET. Here thou see me pent
Within the jaws of strict imprisonment;
A forlorn Shepherd, void of all the means,
Whereon Man's common hope in danger leanes:
Weak in my self. Exposed to the Hate
Of those whose Enuyes are ins^tiate:
Shut from my Friends, banished from all delights,
Nay worse; excluded from the sacred Rites.
Here I do live (among out-lawes marked for death)
As one unfit to draw the common breath,
Where those who to be good did never know
Are barred from the means should make them so.
I suffer, cause I wished my Country well,
And what I more must bear I cannot tell.
I Am sure they give my body little scope,
And would allow my Mind as little Hope,
I wast my Means, which of it self is slender,
Consume my Time (perhaps my Fortunes hinder)
And many Crosses have, which those that can
Conceive no wrong that hurts another man
Will not take note of, though if half so much
Should light on them, or their own person touch,
Some that themselves (I fear) most worthy think
With all their helps would into baseness shrink,
But spite of Hate, and all that spite can do,
I ^an be patient yet, and merry to;
That s^nder Muse of mine, by which my Name,
Though scarce deserved has gaind a little fame,
Has made me unto such a Fortune borne,
That all misfortunes I know how to scorn;
Yea, midst these bands can slight the Great'st that be
As much as their disdain misteemes of me.
This Cave whose very presence some affrights
I have often made to Echo forth delights,
And hope to turn, is any Justice be,
Both Shame and Care on those that wished it me:
For while the world rank villainies affords.
I will not spare to paint them out in words;
Because I thus into these troubles run,
I knew what man could act, e're I begun;
And I Will fulfill what my Muse draws me to,
Maugre all Iayles, and Purgatories to.
For whil*st she (...) me honest (...) about*
(...) or she I know will (...) (...) ^ut:
And if by Fate (...) power of some,
Must in the worlds eve leave me overcome.
They shall find one (...) (...) ^o (...) I ^ow,
It cannot ^eele a (...) overthrow.
This Hope and trust that great power did in^use,
That first inspired into my breast ^ (...),
By whom I do, and ever will con^
All these ill h^, my foes desp^, and them.

ALEXIS. Thou have so well (young Roget) plavd thy part
I am almost in love with that sweet Art:
And if some power will but (...) my song*
Alexis will not be obscured long.

ROGET. Enough kind Pastor: But oh* yonder see
Two honest Shepherds walking h^ther be,
C^ty and Willy, that so dearly love,
Who are repayring unto yonder Grove:
Let Us follow them* for never brauer Swains
Made music to their f^ockes upon these plains.
They are more worthy, and can better tell
What ^are contents do with a Poet dwell.
Then whiles our sheep the short sweet grass do shear,
And till the long shade of the hills appear*
Wee'l^ hear them sing: for though the one be young,
Never was any that more sweetly sung.

FINIS.
A Postscript To the READERS.
IF you have read this, and received any content, I am glad (though it be not
so much as I could wish you,) if you think it idle, why then I see we are not
likely to fall out; for I am just of your minds: yet weigh it well before you
run too far in your censures, least this prove less barren of wit then you
of courtesy. It is very true (I know not by what chance) that I have of late
been so highly beholding to Opinion, that I wonder how I crept so much into
her favor, and (if I did think it worthy the fearing,) I should be afraid
that she having so undeservedly befriended me beyond my Hope or expectation,
will, upon as little cause, ere long, again pick some quarrel against me: and
it may be, means to make use of this, which I know must needs come far short
of their expectation, who by their earnest desire of it seemed to be
fore-possest with a far better conceit then I can believe it proves worthy
of. So much atleast I doubted, and therefore loath to deceive the world (though
it often beguile me) I kept it to my self, indeed not dreaming ever to see it
published: But now, by the overmuch persuasion of some friends, I have been
constrained to expose it to the general view. Which seeing I have done,
Somethings I desire thee to take notice of. First, that I am He who to
pleasure my friend, have framed my self a content out of that which would
otherwise discontent me. Secondly, that I have coueted more to effect what I
think truly honest in it self, then by a seeming show of Art, to catch the
vain blasts of uncertain Opinion. This that I have here written, was no
part of my study, but only a recreation in imprisonment: and a trifle, neither
in my conceit fitting, not by me intended to be made common; yet some, and it
should seem esteeming it worthy more respect then I did, took pains to copy
it out, unknown to me, and in my absence got it both Authorized and prepared
for the Press; so that if I had not hindered it, last Michaelmas-Tearme had
been troubled with it. I was much blamed by some Friends for withstanding it,
to whose request I should more easily have consented, but that I thought (as
indeed I yet do) I should thereby more disparage my self, then content them.
For I doubt I shall be supposed one of those, who out of their arrogant desire
of a little preposterous Fame, thrust into the world every unseasoned trifle
that drops out of their unsettled brains; whose baseness how much I hate,
those that know me can witness, for if I were so affected, I might perhaps
present the world with as many several Poems as I have seen years; and
justly make my self appear to be the Author of some things that others have
shamefully usurped and made use of as their own. But I will be content other
men should own some of those Issues of the Brain, for I would be loath to
confess all that might in that kind call me Father. Neither shall any more of
them, by my consent, in have again trouble the world, unless I know which
way to benefit it with less prejudice to my own estate. And therefore if
any of those less serious Poems which are already dispersed into my friends
hands, come amongst you, let not their publication be imputed to me, nor their
lightness be any disparagement to what has been since more seriously
written, seeing it is but such stuff as riper judgments have in their far
older years been much more guilty of.

I know an *indifferent Critticke may find many faults as well in the
sleightnesse of this present Subject, as in the erring from the true nature of
an Eglogue: moreover, it altogether concerns my self, which diverse may
dislike. But neither can be done on just cause: The first has been answered
already: the last might consider that I was there where my own estate was
chiefly to be looked unto, and all the comfort I could minister unto my self
little enough.

If any man deem it worthy his reading, I shall be glad: if he think his
pains ill bestowed, let him blame himself for meddling with that concerned him
not; I neither recommended it to him, neither cared whether he read it or no,
because I know those that were desirous of it, will esteem the same as much
as I expect they should.

But it is not unlikely, some will think I have in diverse places been more
wanton (as they take it) then befitteth a Satyrist; yet their severity I fear
not, because I am assured all that I ever yet did, was free from Obseaeuitie:
neither am I so Cynicall, but that I think a modest expression of such amorous
conceits as sure with Reason, will yet very well become my years; in which not
to have feeling of the power of Love, were as great an argument of much
stupiditie, as an ouer-sottish affection were of extreme folly. Lastly, if you
think it has not well answered the title of the Shepherds Hunting, go
quarrel with the Stationer, who bid himself Godfather, and imposed the name
according to his own liking, and if you, or he, find any other faults, pray
mend them.

Valete.
FINIS.

