THE SONGS OF The OLD Testament, Translated into English Measures, preserving
the Natural Phrase and genuine Sense of the holy Text: and with as little
circumlocution as in most prose TRANSLATIONS.

To every Song is added a new and easy TVNE, and a short Prologue also,
delivering the effect and Use thereof, for the profit of unlearned READERS.

By GEORGE WITHER.

Cum priuilegio and permissu Superiorum.

LONDON, Printed by T. S. 1621.

TO THE MOST Reverend Father in God, GEORGE, by the Divine Providence, Lord
Arch bishop of Canterbury, Primate, etc. and to the rest of the most Reverend
Archbishops.
To the Reverend Fathers also, the L. Bishops, and to all other the devout
Pastors and Superintendents, of the Churches of Great Britain, and Ireland.
GEORGE WITHER, their humble Servant, wishes all increase of Spiritual
graces: and to their Christian disposure, submits Himself and this Endeavor.
Most Reverend Fathers, etc.
THe many pious Instructions, and Christian Pledges, which I have at your
hands, and by your means received of our holy Mother the Church, have so often
informed me, in that Wherewithal a young man ought to cleanse his way; and so
much confirmed me in the comfortable study thereof: That (howsoever the vain
inclinations of youth tempted the contrary) I was ever conscionably fearful
of trifling away all my first age, in the pleasures of Sensuality. Yea, so
often have you rung in my ears that gracious and most serious Memorandum of
the holy Ghost; Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, etc. That (more
often then I should have been) I was thereby put in mind, both to contemplate
the works and mercies of the Almighty: and to endeavor also (as the
slenderness of my understanding, and the frailties of my years would give
leave) so to employ my self, that the little time I purposed to spend well,
might (if it were possible) produce something, which (being as well profitable
to others as to my self) would make a little recompense for those many days,
my youth and the temptations of the world, would force me idly to consume.

And I thank God; somewhat has been already effected, which (notwithstanding
my own personal unworthiness) the Church has vouchsafed with a motherly
approbation, both to receive at my hand, and by her reverend Authority to
deliver over also unto others: Whereby I have been encouraged, to proceed
according to those beginnings, and (as a testimony as w^ll of gratitude, as of
obedience) now to consecrate unto the use, of good men, and in the name of your
RRces this; the little gain of my one Talent. Being a Metricall Translation of
those sacred Canonical Songs dispersed in the Old Testament, and anciently
used to be sung by the Primitive Churches: My Thankfulness it witnesseh in
this; that I offer up the best fruit of my labors unto those, by whom I was
first taught how to be so employed: and my obedience is also testified, both in
thus submitting it unto your grave Censures, and in having thus, according to
your desires, employed my poor faculty in the service of the Church. For
neither by any vainglorious humor of my own, nor by the motion of any giddy
Seperatists, but by some of you, was I first called and encouraged to this
work. In the performance whereof, I have been ever mindful of that Religious
reverence, which was fit to be observed in so weighty an undertaking. And I
hope, I have so effected the same; as Gods Majesty may be praised in it, your
RRces, pleased with it, good Christians benefitted by it, and my own soul
receive comfort therein.

The liberty I have taken, and the manner of my proceeding in this Translation
has been little diff^rent from that, which (in my Preparation to the Psalter)
I professed to use in the Translation of the Psalms; and I doubt not, but the
greatest fault which shall be discovered therein, upon notice given, may be
asoone (almost) amended as found out.

That to the glory of God they may be sung either in public, or in private, as
your RRces shall see cause; I have endeavored to procure from some of our b^st
M^sitians, such Notes as (being easy, and proper to the matter) might the more
accommodate them, for the praise of God, according to the laudable custom of
singing now in use. Moreover; that such as are delighted with those Exercises,
may not make mere sensual Music, but express melody both ^cceptable to God
and profitable to themselves, by knowing the Use, and meaning of what they
sing. I have (according to the Truth, and agreeable to the doctrine of the
Ancient Fathers) prefixed a brief Prologue before every Song. Wherein I first
show the general meaning and scope of it, according to the litterall Sense:
then, how in the spiritual and most principal Sense, it has respect to the
Mysteries of our Christian Religion; and that each Song does appertain unto
us, upon some occasions, in this age of the Church, as properly as it did to
them, for whom they were first composed. Which in the Arguments themselves, is
so evidently and particularly declared, as I hope it will be well perceived, it
was not my own idle fantasy which directed me.

This your RRces do well know, and how the use of these Hymns has been
continued in the Primitive Churches; yea, and retained even to this day in many
Congregations, as not impertinent to us of the last Ages. And to me it seems
they never were (all at once) so much useful, as now in these times, if the
necessities of this Age be w^ll considered. For which Cause; being thus to your
hands presented, ready fitted for use, according to the kind of Music now
best approved of for subjects of this nature; And seeing also, they are both
desired, and may without any known inconvenience be generally admitted of: I
doubt not but you will be pleased to recommend the practice of them to all
those who are willingly disposed for such Exercises. For, though some scoffing
Ismaelites may deride this addition of Songs, to that ouer-many which (as they
think) the Church already has. Nevertheless; You, who by your experiences
find, that the humane nature in all things requires variety, to keep it from
loathing; and by your spiritual knowledges are assured, that God prouides for
his Church, neither more nor less of any thing then shall be requisite. Even
you also know; that these are not to be accounted a vain, or burdensome
addition to our Psalms: especially when the Apocriphall Inventions of m^n may
there have place.

And when these shall be compared with those Measur^s we have hitherto made use
of in our devotions, I doubt not (seeing the matter is of the same Authority)
but the manner of expressing it shall make this no less worthy of
entertainment then that; (and though I should say more worthy, I think it were
no arrogance.) For (if I mistake not) as naturally have I expressed the sense of
these Songs, and as plainly as most prose Translations have yet done. And, if
any indifferent man, who knows the Poesy and power of the English tongue may
be my Judge; I assure my self, he will censure the expression to be such, as
that it shall neither be obscure to the meanest capacities, nor contemptible to
the best Judgments: but becoming the purpose it was intended for. I have not
lept on a sudden into this employment; but in studies of this nature have now
consumed almost the years of an Apprentiship. And if it be well weighed:
First, how full of short sentences and sudden breakings off, such like
scriptures are: Secondly, how frequently these particles For, But, and such
like, which are graceful in the Original, will seem to obscure the
dependancy of sense in the English phrase, if they be not carefully needed:
Thirdly, how harsh the Music will be, if the Pauses be not usually reduced
unto the same place, which they have in the first Stanza of each Song:
Fourthly, how many other differences there must be between this kind of
Lyricall verse and what is smoothed only for the reading: Fifthly, how the
Translator is tied to make choice, not of what is easiest, but of that kind of
verse which may become best the nature of every Song: Sixthly, how he is bound
not only to the Sense, but to the very words (or words of the same power)
which another has used: Lastly, how beside all this strictness, he is even in
conscience also constrained, so to express things by circumlocution (when he
shall be forced to it) as that, although his phrase be of the same power, it
will not be warrantable unless it be so also done, that the manner of
speaking, peculiar to these writings, may be all the way perceived by those
understanding Readers who are acquainted therewith. I say, If all these
circumstances be well considered (and how difficult they make it, to close up
every Stanza with a Period, or some such point as the voice may a while
decently pause there) I am both persuaded a work of of this nature, would
neither be hastily adventured upon again by any other; nor my labor herein be
altogether disesteemed: who have bin mindful of all those, and many other
particulars, considerable in such a business.

And now; that it may be finished with more exactnes, then my own industry is
able to add unto it.

(If in any part of these Songs the genuine Sense be not yet well expressed,)
upon reason given, and the l^st notise vouchsafed from any of your RRces, after
the view of this; I shall be ready to amend it, according to your directions.
Or if the Tunes have not w^ll suited the nature of them; Those who have formerly
bestowed their pains (and many other also) will be liberal of their best Art,
more to apt them for the glory of God. For, although this Book has already
the allowance appointed by Authority, and so much the approbation of many other
good men, as that they desire it generally published (at least) for their
private devotions: Yet, knowing these undertakings can never be too perfect, I
have purposed this Impression for no other end, but to be distributed among
your RRces, and my other special friends. That if there be any oversight
committed, or ought necessary omitted in them; it might be reformed and
supplied in the next Edition, by warning and instruction from some of You.

But, I hope it shall not be found very defective; And in my Epistle to make
answer unto those many objections, which vulgar understandings will be apt to
frame against this undertaking; I think it also needless. Because you, to
whom (only) I at this time prefer it, are all sufficient enough without
information from me, to perceive how frivolous those doubts and cauils be,
which the weakness of such are apt to invent.

And if your RRces be herewith satisfied, I value not how the wits of our age
shall censure the Style I have used; for though many of them are well
acquainted with the raptures in Hero and Leander, the expressions in Venus and
Adonis, and with the elegancies becoming a wanton Sonnet; yet in these
Lyricks, in the natural strain of these Poems, in the power of these voices,
and in the proprieties befitting these spiritual things, their sensual
capacities, are as ignorant as mere Idiots: and had it the Poetical phrases
they fancy, I should hate it; or were it such as they might praise, I would
burn it.

That which I fear will be the greatest blemish to this labor; is, my own
indignity. For I must confess, I am the more unworthy to be employed in these
holy things: Seeing I am none of those, who are allowed to intermeddle with the
Mysteries of our Christian Sanctuary. Nevertheless, if what I have performed
be allowable in it self, and by your approbations once consecrated to a holy
Use, doubtless (if no man's Will stand for a Reason) it shall be no less
available, then if some eminent Father of the Church had labored therein. And
whenever it shall be again undertaken, this I am certain of; No man will go
about it with a heart more desirous to be rectified, or more fearful to
offend against the M^tie of these Scriptures.

And I trust no man will envy me the honor of this employment: For, though it
be no mean contentment to a Christian (whose soul is touched with the
understanding of these things) to be any way an instrument of Gods glory, yet
(if we tru^ly consider it) that which I have aspired unto thereby, makes me in
regard of You, or in respect but of the meanest of those who are admitted to
administer the blessed Sacraments, no more then a hewer of wood, or a drawer of
water, for the old Sacrifices, was in comparison of the Leuite, who offered on
the golden Alter.

God knows with what mind I have proceeded in this endeavor; and therefore
Reward and Acceptance from above the Sun I am certain of. But the course of
things below the Sun, I have so well considered, that should I reach the
perfection of what I went about, yet all my labor might be no to purpose. For
as the Preacher says, Eccl. 9.11. I have seen under the Sun, that the race
is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, nor yet bread to the wise,
nor riches to men of understanding, nor favor to men of knowledge; but time
and chance comes to them all.

If my pains shall be aiudged unnecessary, yet my comfort is, I have only
spent my own means about it, and not under the color or pretense of being
employed, fed my self fat on the patrimonies of the Church, without
effecting (or so much as intending) any thing to her advantage. And if it be
thought profitable; that profit shall be gained without hinderance to any other
man's preferment. For I never intend (though my necessities were more
importunate) to petition for so much as a lay-Prebend in recompense of my
labors. Only your benediction, your loves, and your holy Prayers, next unto
Gods glory, is my principal aim. And seeing neither the manner of my
education, nor the course of my life, nor the performance of this work (though
I will not justify my self) can yet appear to be such as may disparage the
Church to receive these endeauours at my hands: So much confidence have I in
your Fatherly dispositions toward all well affected persons, of what outward
condition soever they be, that I am verily persuaded you would not for a few
ouer-sights, slight all my pains; but rather to the encouragement of others
(for no affront in these studies can dishearten me) graciously vouchsafe in
some measure to accept what I here make humble proffer of unto your RRces.
Which if you please to do, I shall ever acknowledge my self obliged for your
Christian respect, and study such things, as (perhaps) will make me hereafter
more worthy of your esteem.

So, presuming that if I have delivered Reason, it shall be with your Wisdoms,
every whit as Authenticke as if I had begun, continued, and ended this Epistle
with the Proverbs, or ouer-worne Sentences of old Authors: I humbly wish
(according to the custom of my Country on this day) a happy NEVV-YEERE to all
your RRces, and to the whole Church, in her several af^^ires, a most
prosperous success.

January the 1. 1621.
A Table of the Songs.
Song. Page 1 The first Song of Moses. 1 2 The second Song of Moses. 6 3 The
Song of Deborah. etc. 15 4 The Song of Hannah. 24 5 Nehemiahs Prayer. 29 6 King
Lemuels Song. 34 7 The first Song of Esaias. 38 8 The second Song of Esaias. 42 9
The third Song of Esaias. 45 10 Hezekiahs Prayer. 50 11 Hezekiahs Thanksgiving.
53 12 The Prayer of Daniel. 59 13 The Prayer of Jonah. 6^ 14 The Prayer of
Habakkuk. 6^
THE First song of MOSES. Exodus 15.
The Argument and the Use.
THis Song (as appears in the history of Isreal's delivery out of Egypt) was
sung by Moses and the people, to the praise of God, for their wonderful
preservation; and the severity which he used against their enemies the
Aegiptians, in the red Sea. Wherein, they glorify the Lord for his Power, his
Knowledge in war, his Majesty, his incomparable Dietie, his Sanctity, his
Awfulnesse, his Fame, his merueilous Acts, and the eternity of his Kingdom.
Moreover, they here set forth the malicious violence of their adversaries,
before their destruction, the sudaine ruin of those that were destroyed: with
the terror, which this overthrow should strike into their suruiuing enemies.
And lastly, they do at once prophecy, and pray for, the possession of that
promised Land, in which the holy Temple should be builded.

This Song was made, and ordained by the holy Ghost, to be sung, as well by
every Christian Congregation, as by Moses, and the Jews. For, this
preservation of theirs, was a tipe of our deliverance from the bondage of our
Spiritual Adversaries. Pharaoh, which (in the original tongue) signifies
Vengeance, (being Mistically and anagogically considered) was a Tipe, both of
Antichrist, a temporal adversary of the Church; and of our enemy the Devil,
who pursues to overthrow us in our voyage toward heaven, which was also in a
third sense figured by the land of Promise. Pharaohs host, signifies all
kinds of persecutions, sins, and temptations. The Red Sea, which we pass
through, and wherein they are drowned, means our Baptism, 1 Cor. 10.2. By
Palestine, and Canaan, which were names of the promised Country, before the
Church was removed thither, (and which the Holy Ghost here says, shall grieve,
and faint, at the news of our regeneration) are those understood, who have
falsely and wrongfully usurped the privileges belonging to the faithful
congregation. By the Dukes of Edom, with the Princes of Moab, (who are said to
tremble at this delivery) all the several powers of the kingdom of
darkness are understood.

Now every good Christian, may (at any time) sing this Hymn to the praise of
his Redeemer and in memory of the Churches (with his own particular)
deliverance from the slavery of Sin and the Devil. Yea, and not unfitly
upon some temporal deliverances. But it will be indeed most properly used,
both in public and private, after the administration of Baptism: Seeing the
passage through the Red Sea, and the destruction of the Egyptians there, was a
type of that Sacrament, according to the Interpretation of St. Paul.

The Song.
Then sang Moses and the Children of Jsrael this Song unto the LORD, and spoke,
saying:
^ NOw to the Lord my song of praise shall be, Who has a most renowned triumph
woone: This is the Lord that makes me strong, For in the sea, the horse and
horseman he, Has both at once together ouer-throwne. He is my safety and my
song; My God for whom I will a house prepare, My Fathers God whom I on high
will rear. ^

Well knows the LORD to war what does pertain;
And for that reason is the LORD his name:
He, Pharo'hs Charr'ots, and his armed Train,
Amid the Sea ore'-whelming overcame.
He, in the Ruddy-sea has drowned,
His Captains that were most renownd:
The deeps a covering over them has thrown,
And to the bottom sunk they, like a stone.
LORD by thy power thy right hand's famous grow'n,
Thy right hand LORD, thy foe destroyed has;
Thou by thy glory have thy Foes ore-thrown;
And stuble-like, consum'st them in thy wrath.
Thou by thy nostrils angry blast,
The waters backward driven have
And (rolled on heaps,) the billows and the flood,
In middle of the Sea, congealed stood.
I will pursue them (thus the Foe did cry)
I will ore'take them and the spoil enjoy;
My pleasure on them, now fulfill will I;
With sword vnsheath'd my hand shall them destroy.
Then with thy breath thou did but blow;
And over them the Sea did flow:
Where they, the mighty waters sanke into,
As we may see a piece of lead will do.
LORD, who like thee among the gods is there?
In holiness, so glorious who may be?
Whose praises, so exceeding dreadful are?
Or who in doing wonders i^ like thee?
Thy right hand thou aloft did rear,
And in the earth they swallowed were:
Whilst thou, did by thy mercy, forward lead,
This people, whose redemption thou have paid.
Them, by thy strength, thou have been pleased to bear
Unto a holy dwelling place of thine:
The Nations at report thereof shall fear,
And they shall grieve, who dwell in Palestine.
On Ed^ms Dukes will horror fall;
Yea Moabs mighty Princes shall
With trembling shake, when they of this hear tell:
And they shall faint that do in Canaan dwell.
By that great power, which in thine Arm^ thou have,
Let fear and terror upon them be brought:
Stone-quiet make them till thy people pass;
LORD, till this people pas, which thou have bought.
Then, to thy hill, let them repair,
LORD plant them there, where thou art heir:
Even where thy place of dwelling is prepared,
That holy place, which thine own hands have reared
The LORD shall ever, and for ever reign,
No ending, shall his large dominion know;
For, when as Pharaoh down into the Maine
Did with his Charr'ots and his Horsemen go,
The LORD the waves did then recall,
And brought the sea upon them all;
Whilst, through the place where deepest waters lie,
The seed of Israel passed over dry.
THE Second Song of MOSES. Deuteronomy. 32.
The Argument and Use.
THis Song is found in the 32. chap. of Deuteronomy. and was written by the
commandment of God, to be kept in the Arc of Covenant, for a testimony
against the people of Israel, when they should forget Gods benefits, and rebel
against him: As it is there foretold, and as appears in the 31. Chap. of the
foresaid book. Now, the holy Prophet having after his Exordium, (wherein he
calls heaven and earth to witness) made a Narration of the Jews
perverseness; He prophecieth of three principal things in this Hymn. First,
of their future Idolatry with their punishment for it. Secondly, of their
hatred to Christ, with their final Abiection. And lastly, of the grace which
should be vouchsafed unto the Gentiles.

And in this triple-prophecie, there are also many particularities laid down,
as considerable. First, how perfect, how wise, how faithful, and how just God
is in his own nature. Secondly, how unreasonably perverse his people were.
Thirdly, how nevertheless, God was loving, and heaped upon them innumerable
benefits (some of which are here reckoned up.) Fourthly, how ingratefully, and
deuellishly they still requited him. Fifthly, how he punished them with grievous
plagues, but forbear a while their final overthrow, to await their repentance.
Sixthly, how respectlesse they should be of all this favor; and what horrible
inhumanities they should be guilty of. Seauenthly, how mindful the LORD
would be of their obstinacy; how suddenly he would ruin them; how safe they
should be, who professed the true God, when his enemies were visited; how
unable those should be to help them in whom they had trusted; how severe, and
irrecouerable the judgment should be; how certain, in regard the LORD had
sworn it; and how all this should turn to the advantage of his Elect.

The Use which we are to make of this Song; is to repeat it often, in
remembrance of Gods Justice and Mercy: and to put our selves in mind, by the
Jews example, how severely God will punish such as continue obstinate in their
sins. For, every man (if he would consider it) shall find that he in his
own particular, has received as much favor from his Redeemer, and as
unthankfully requited it. This Song ought also to stir us up to a better
consideration of our own estate: and as St. Paul counsels; If God has not
spared the natural branches, take we heed lest he spare not us. Romans 11.21.
Yea, when we shall read or sing this Hymn (which is left as well for our use,
as for the Jews) let us as St. Paul advises, in the forenamed Chapter,
Meditate the goodness and severity of God; on them which fell severity; but
toward us goodness, if we continue in his goodness, and that otherwise we
shall be cut off.

The Song.
And Moses spoke in the ears of all the Congregation of Jsrael; the words of
this Song, until they were ended, etc.
^ TO what I speak, an ear O hea-uens lend, And hear oh earth what words I
utter will, Like drops of rain, my speeches shall descend, And as the dew, my
doctrine shall distill, As does the rain that showreth small on tender
flowers, And as upon the grass do fall the greater showers, For I the LORD'S
great name will publish now. Unto our God the glory render you. ^

He is that Rock, whose Works perfection are;
For all his ways with Judgment guided be:
A God of truth, from all wrong-doing clear,
A truly just, and righteous-One is He.
Yet they with spots themselves defilde,
Unlike his Sons;
And are a race of crooked, wild,
And froward ones.
Unwise and foolish nation, do thou so
Thy self unto the LORD ungrateful show?
Thy Father, and Redeemer, is not he?
Has he not made, and now confirmed thee fast?
Oh call to mind the days that older be,
And weigh the years, of many Ages past,
Thy Father will, (if thou desire)
Inform thee well;
Thy elders, (when thou shall enquire,)
Can also tell
How, the most high did Adams Sons divide;
And shares for every Kindred did provide.
How, he the Nations Limits did prepare,
In number with the Sons of Israel,
The LORD had in his people then his share;
And Jacob, for his part allotted fell.
Them, in a desert rude, he found,
Possessed of none:
A place of terror, and a ground
Vast and unknown.
He taught them there, he led them far and nigh:
And kept them as the apple of his eye.
Even as an Eagle, to provoke her young,
About her neast does houer here and there;
Spread forth her wings, to train her birds along;
And sometime, on her back, her younglings bear:
Right so, the LORD conducted them,
Himself alone,
And for assistant, there with him
Strange God was none:
Them, on the High-lands of the earth he set,
Where they the plenties of the fields might eat.
For them he made the Rock with honey flow,
They sucked out oil from flints, and they did feed
On milk of sheep, on butter of the Cow,
Fat lambs and goats, and rams of Bashan breed;
Of wheat he gave them for their food,
The fullest feed,
And they did drink the purest blood
The grape did bleed.
But, here-withall; unthankful Israel,
Soon fat became, and spurned with his heel.
They waxed fat, and gross, and covered over;
And then their God and Maker did forsake:
Their Rock of health regarded was no more,
But with strange Gods him Jealous did they make:
Yea, they with what was most abhorred,
His wrath entis^;
To devils (not unto the LORD)
They sacrifice:
To gods unknown, that new invented were,
And such, as their forefathers did not fear.
They minded not the Rock, which them begat,
But have forgot the God that formed them has,
Which, when the LORD perceived, it made him hate
His sons and daughters, moving him to wrath.
I will, to mark their end, (says he)
Obscure my face;
For they, unfaithful Children be,
Of froward race:
My wrath, with what was not a God they moved;
And have mine anger, with their follies proved.
But, by a people, without being (yet)
Their Jealous wrath, will I provoke for this,
And by a foolish nation make them fret,
For in my wrath a fire enflamed is;
And to the depth of hell it shall
Devouring go,
Earth with her fruits and mountains all
Consuming to.
In heaps, I mischiefs will upon them throw,
And shoot mine arrows, till I have no more.
With hunger parched, and consumed with heat,
I will enforce them to a bitter end,
The teeth of beasts, upon them I will set,
And the envenomed dust-fed, Serpent send.
The sword without, and terror grimme
Within shall slay,
Young men, and maids, the babe and him
Whose hair is gray:
Yea, I had vowed to spread them here and there,
Until that men forget they ever were.
But this, the Foe compelled me to delay,
Lest that their Adversaries prouder grown,
Should when they saw it; thus presume to say:
This, not the LORD; but our high-hand has done^
For, they a people are in whom
No Counsel is:
And never will their dullness, come
To judge of this.
Oh! would their wisdom, this might comprehend;
And that they would consider of their end!
How should one make a thousand runneaway?
Or two men put ten thousand to the foil;
Except their Rock, had sold them for a pray;
And that the LORD, had closed them up the while?
For with our God their God compare
They never may,
And if our foes the judges were,
Thus would they say:
But, they have Vines of those that Sodom yields,
And such as grow within Gomorrha fields.
The Grapes are gall (that grow upon their vine)
Their Clusters, are extremely bitter all,
Yea, made of Dragons venom is their wine;
And of the cruel Aspes infectious gall.
And may I this forget to bear
In mind with me?
Or shall it not be sealed where
My treasures be?
Yes, mine is vengeance, and I will repay:
Their feet shall slide at the appointed day.
Their time of ruin, near at hand is come,
Those things, that must befall them, haste will make:
For sure, the LORD shall give his people doom,
And on his Servants will compassion take.
Yea, when he sees, their strength is all
Bereft and gone;
And they shut up in prison, shall
Be left alone:
Where are their Gods, become (then will he say)
Their Rock on whom they did affiance lay?
Who eat the fattest of their sacrifice?
Who, of their drink oblations, drank the wine?
Let those unto their succor now arise,
And under their protection them enshrine.
Oh! therefore now, consider this,
That I am He;
That I am He, and that there is
No God with me.
I kill, and make alive, I wound, I cure:
And there is none, can from my hand assure.
For, up to heaven I my hand do rear,
And (as I live for ever) this I say,
If once I whet my sword, that sparkles clear,
And shall my hand to acting vengeance lay;
I will not cease, till I my foes,
With vengeance quite,
Nor till I have repaid all those
That bear me spite.
And in the blood, which I shall make to flow,
I Will steep mine arrows, till they drunken grow.
My sword shall feed on flesh and blood of those,
That either shall be slain, or kept in thrall,
When I begin to quit me of my foes.
Then, with his people Joy you kindreds all;
For he their blood (that serve him) will
With blood pursue;
And all his foes repayeth still
With vengeance due.
But, to his land will mercy showing be,
And those that are his people pitties He.
THE Song of Deborah and Barak. Judges 5.
The Argument and Use.
IN the book of Judges, Chapter 4. you may read, that the overthrow given to
Sisera (by Deborah and Barak) occasioned this Song of deliverance; and
therefore, referring you thither to be informed concerning the particular
circumstances; I will here, show you the general scope of this Hymn, to be a
Thanksgiving, for a great overthrow, gotten on their enemies. Wherein many
things are remarkable. First, in their Introduction, attributing the glory to
God, (and inciting all Potentates of the world to consider it) they set forth
with what Majesty the LORD came to their deliverance. Secondly, the excellency
of the benefit received, is illustrated, by the great desolation they were
formerly in* the little means they had to protect themselves, and the happy
tranquillity which they should afterward enjoy. Thirdly, they show the cause of
their former distress, to have been Apostacy from God. Fourthly, they
memorize those, who were forward in that just war, and vpbraid such as drew
back in so good a cause. Fifthly, they declare what powerful enemies they had;
and what miraculous assistance God vouchsafed. Sixthly, a curse is denounced
against such as refuse to fight the LORDS battles; and She is blessed who was
the happy Instrument of their delivery. Lastly, here is a description of the
manner of Siserah's death, an Ironicall expression of the Adversaries vain
hope of prevailing, and a prophetical imprecation, that all Gods enemies may
so perish, to the advancement of his Church.

It is observed by the Ancients; that there is no Song mentioned in the Old or
New Testament, but it was composed upon some extraordinary benefit or
deliverance, which the Church received: and that in all the songs of the old
Testament (especially) there is (beside the plain literal sense) some Mystery
of the Christian Religion prophetically aimed at, covertly or openly, under the
passages thereof. And therefore, this Song is not only to be sung of us
Christians, to glorify God in memorizing his protecting our mother the Church,
among the Jewish Nation, in her Infancy: But, we are to use it also, as a
thanksgiving for every particular deliverance, which is vouchsafed to the
visible Church in these times. As in memorial of our miraculous preservation,
in the year 1588. when our Princely Deborah (the Queen of this kingdom) gave
an overthrow to the Spanish Sisera: For then, the powers of heaven apparently
fought against him (as it is said in this Song.) The Sea, more terrible then
their brook Kishon, swept most of them away: And even then (as the mother of
the Cananitish commander, is here scoffed at by Deborah, for her vain
expectation: So, the whore of Babylon (who was mother to that other Sisera) in
vain longed to behold him return a conqueror: till being ridiculously
confident of the spoil; she was by the true Church laughed to scorn for her
presumption. And then also; this prophetical imprecacation (which) we find in
the Epilogue of this Song) was partly fulfilled. Thine enemies oh LORD shall
perish; but they that love thee shall be as the Sun when he rises in his
might. For, as the first Sisera was shamefully ruined by a woman: so, God gave
that last Sisera (with his seeming invincible forces) into the hand of a woman,
whose honor (with his shame) was thereby spread through as great a part of the
world, as the Sun shines over at midday.

This Song (as J said before) would properly be sung also upon many other
deliverances which the Church has or may have. As for that of the
Powder Treason and such like. For were it not that J should be ouerlarge in my
Prologue to this Song, J could make it very probable, how the holy Ghost, was
so far from making this Hymn to fit the Jews after that victory only; as
that the names therein mentioned, do well enough express any that are, or
shall be Instruments against the peace of Gods Church, or for the protection
thereof.

The Song.
Then sang Deborah, and Barak the son of Abinoam on that day* saying:
^ SIng praises to the Lord That Isre'l to acquit, The people of their own
ac-cord Went forth unto the fight: You Kings give ear, you Princes hear, I to
the Lord will raise My voice aloud, and sing to God The Lord of Isr'ell praise.
^

LORD, when thou wentst from Seir,
When thou lef'st Edom field;
Earth shook, and heaven dropped there,
The Clouds did water yield,
LORD, at thy sight a trembling fright,
Upon the Mountains fell:
And at thy look, Mount Sinai shook,
LORD God of Jsrael.
Erewhile in Shamghar's days,
Old Anah's valiant son,
And late in Jaels time, the ways
Frequented were of none;
The passengers were wanderers
In crooked paths unknown;
And none durst dwell, through Jsrael
But in a walled town.
Until I Deborah 'rose.
I rose a mother here
In Jsr'el, when new Gods they chose
That filled their gates with war.
And they had there nor shield nor spear,
In their possession then;
To arm for fight, one Israelite,
Among forty thousand men.
My hearts affection, set
On Isreal's Leaders is;
Who with the willing people met,
Oh praise the LORD for this.
Sing all of ye, who used be,
To ride on Asses gray:
All you that yet in Middin si^,
Or travail by the way.
Where they their water drew,
Those places being clear
From noise of Archers; Let them show
The LORD's vprightnes there.
Through Jsrael all, the hamlets shall
His righteousness record:
And down unto the gates shall go,
The people of the LORD.
Rise Deborah, arise,
Rise, rise, and sing a song,
Abinoams son, oh Barak rise;
Thy Captives lead along.
By him made thrall, their Princes all,
To the Suruiuer be,
To triumph on the mighty one;
The LORD vouchsafed me.
A root from Ephraim,
Against Amaleck arose,
And of the people next to him,
The Beniamites were those.
From Machir, where good leaders are,
Came well experienced men:
And they came down from Zabulon
That handle well the pen.
With Deborah did go
The Lords of Isachar,
Even Isachar; and Barak to,
Was one among them there;
Who forth was sent, and down he went,
On foot the lower way.
In Ruben there, divisions were,
Great thoughts of heart had they.
The bleating flocks to hear
Oh wherefore did thou stay?
In Ruben there divisions were,
Great thoughts of heart had they.
And why did they of Gilead stay,
On Iordan's other side?
Or what was than, the reason Dan,
Did in his Tents abide?
Among his harbors nigh
The sea, there Asher lay;
But Zabulon, nor Nepthali.
Did keep themselves away:
These people are, who fearelesse dare
Their lives to death expose;
And would not yield the hilly-field,
Yet Kings did them oppose.
The Cananitish Kings,
At Tana'ch fought that day,
Close by Megiddoes water-springs;
Yet bore no prize away.
The Stars from out the heavens fought,
Against Sisera they strove:
They in their course, and some with force,
Away brocke Kishon drove;
Old Kishon, that was long
A famous Torrent known.
Oh thou my soul, oh thou the strong
Have bravely trodden down!
Their horses by their prauncing high,
Their broken hoofes did wound;
Those of the strong, that kicked and flung,
And fiercely beat the ground.
A curse on Meroz lay,
Cursed let her dwellers be;
The Angel of the LORD, does say,
Extremely curse it ye.
The cause of this accursing is,
They came not to the fight,
To help the LORD, to help the LORD,
Against the men of might.
But Iael, Hebers Spouse,
The Kenite, blessed be she,
More then all women more then those,
That use in Tents to be.
To him does she, give milk when he
Does but for water wish:
She butterfets, and forth it sets
Upon a Lordly dish.
Her left hand reached a Nail,
A workmans hammer straight
Her right hand takes, and therewithal,
She Sisera does smite.
His head she took, when she had struck
His pierced temples through;
He fell withal, and in the fall,
He at her feet did bow*
He at her feet did bow,
Whom falling life forsook;
And Sisera his mother now,
Does from her window look.
Thus cries she at the lattice grate,
Why stays his Charr'ot so,
Returning home? oh wherefore come,
His Charr'ot wheels so slow?
Therewith her Ladies wise,
To her an answer gave;
Yea, to her self, her self replies,
Sure sped, says she, they have.
And all this while, they part the spoil;
A damzell one or twaie
Each homeward bears, and Sisera shares,
A part colored pray.
A pray discolored trim,
And wrought with paintings rare:
Wrought through; and for the neck of him
That takes spoils to wear.
So LORD, still so, thy foes ore'throw,
But who in thee delight,
Oh let them be, Sunne-like, when he
Ascends in his might.
THE Song of HANNAH. 1 Samuel 2.
The Argument and Use.
HAnnah, the wife of Elkanah, being barren, and therefore vpbraided, and vexed
by Peninnah her Husbands other wife; prays unto the LORD for a Son. And,
having obtained him (as you may read in 1 Samuel and the second chapter) praises
God in this Song for being so gracious unto her. And therein diverse things are
obseruable. First, she rejoices in God her Savior, for strengthening her, and
giving her the upper hand of her Adversary. Secondly, she declares the
holiness, the singularity, and the vnequal'd power of God; at a reason, why
her enemy should be no more so arrogant. Thirdly, she proceeds to show, how
vain her adversaries presumption must needs be, by further demonstrating her
Redeemers knowledge, his strength with the certainty of his decrees: and by
declaring in some particulars, the works of his Mercy and Justice. Fourthly,
she foretells the confusion of sinners; the weakness of humane ^ssi^tance;
the destruction of those that resist God; and the glorious exaltation of him,
whose advancement the LORD has decreed.

The Song every good Christian may sing in a literal sense, with respect to
his own afflictions, and the goodness of God, whenever by reason of his
poverty, or any oppression, the uncharitable, proud, and malicious worldling,
shall insult over him: If so be he find, himself either outwardly delivered,
or inwardly comforted by the spirit of God. But the Hymn, does most properly
appertain to the whole Congregation; to be sung in the person of the Church.
And we shall much iniure the meaning of the holy-spirit, if we imagine that in
this Song of the holy Prophetess, there is no other cause of it considerable,
then the unkindness between her and Peninnah; and the Joy she received by the
birth of Samuel. We must then know that Annah (which signifies Grace, or
Gracious) was a type of the Church of Christ: and that Peninnah (which is
interpreted Forsaken, or Despised) was a figure of the Jewish Synagogue: Seeing
without this knowledge, we loose the principal consolations which the Song
affords us. For, when Annah had obtained her son of God, and entered into
consideration of those particulars which had befallen her; She did, by
contemplating them, not only foresee what other things should come to pass
concerning her Son; the Commonwealth of the Jews; and her own Family: but
being further enlightened, prophesied also of the Kingdom of Christ.

By contemplating how Peninnah had triumphed on her barrenness, she foresaw
h^w the Sinagogue of the Jews should boast her self against the Gentiles in
their first conversion. By her comfort in the birth of Samuel; she apprehended
the Churches Joy in the nativity of Christ. By her fruitfulness, and the
weakness of Peninnah; she was informed how the spiritual Offspring of the
Church should be multiplied, and the children of the Synagogue decrease. Yea,
raising her meditations above the first and second objects; she prophetically
personates the Spouse of Christ, and delivers a most excellent confession of
her Redeemer: Jn whom all these things are come to pass, as appeared at, and
since his manifestation. For, the blessed Virgin Mary in her Magnificat,
acknowledges many particular sayings of this Song, to be even then fulfilled.

Moreover, this Hymn, may be sung in our reformed Churches, to comfort us
against the pride and arrogancy of the Romish Strumpet. For, though she,
Peninnah-like, lately vaunted the multitude of her issue, and vpbraided the
true Church, as Mother, (only) of a few poor, and obscure Children: Thanks be
to God, she that had so many; is now grown feebler. And our holy Mother, has
had seven Children, (even many) that are advanced to be Kings* and to sit upon
the most eminent thrones of glory in the earth, according to this Prophecy.

The Song.
And Hannah prayed, and said.
^ NOw in the Lord my heart does pleasure take, My horn is in the Lord
advanced high, Unto my foes an answer will I make, Be-cause in thy salvation
joy had I. Like thee there is not any holy one, For other Lord without thee,
there is none. ^

Nor with our God may any God compare;
So proudly vaunt not then as heretofore;
But let your tongues hereafter now forbear;
From all presumptuous words for evermore.
For why the Lord's a God, that each thing knows
And all that is intended does dispose.
Their bow is broken now who were so stout;
Girt round with vigor, those who stumbled are:
The full, themselves for bread have hired out,
Which they have left to do, that hungry were*
The barren now, does seven children own;
And she that had so many, weak is grown.
The LORD does slay, and he reuiues the slain;
He to the grave does bring, and back he bears:
The LORD makes poor, and rich he makes again:
He throws down, and up on high he reares.
He from the dust, and from the dunghill brings
The beggar, and the poor, to sit with Kings.
He reares them, to inherit glories throne,
Because the LORD'S the earth's supporters be;
He has the world erected thereupon;
The footing of his Saints preserves He.
And dumb in darkness sinners shall remain;
For, in their strength, are all men strong in vain.
The LORD, will to destruction bring them all,
Even every one, that shall with him contend,
The LORD from heaven thunder on them shall,
And judge the world unto the farthest end.
He shall his King with strength enough supply,
And raise the power of his Anointed high.
THE Prayer of NEHEMIAH. Nehem. 1.5.
The Argument and Use.
NEhemiah, being in Babylon; and having received intelligence by one of his
brethren that came from Judea, of the miserable estate wherein Jerusalem, and
the house of God then stood. The Text says, he wept at the re^ation; fasted,
and made this prayer unto God, in behalf of the Israelites. In which Prayer,
(first acknowledging the Majesty, Justice, and mercy of God) he humbly
desires his importunate suit may have favorable audience: And the sooner to
obtain it, (he renouncing all worthiness in his own or his peoples merits)
confesses the heinousness both of his, and their offenses. Secondly, he
urges Gods promised mercies, upon repentance. Thirdly, he is earnest, in
regard they are his own elected people, for whom he prays; and thereupon
renewes again his petition: The effect whereof is, that God would be pleased
to prosper him in the affairs he had in hand, and grant him favor in the
Kings sight, whom (as by the sequel in the story it appeared) he then intended
to solicit; touching the re-edifying of the City and house of God.

This Prayer, may be (in a literal sense) said, or sung by the Church of God,
when in any affair of hers, she needs the favor of some temporal Prince.
Or by any member of hers (in her person) upon a public occasion. Yea, for his
particular necessity and in his own person also he may use it when he would
desire the goodwill of man, in such things as nearely concern him and his
family. And me thinks it should not only beget in us a great hope of
good-speed, when we come to God with those words whereunto he has given (...)
prosperous success, (as he did to these) but we may be the more confident also
in our prayers; when we use those forms of speech, which the holy-spirit has
invented. Moreover, this Prayer, leaving out the two last lines, will serve for
a confession of our sins, before any suit which we would present unto the
Majesty of God. Or, if we will but alter according to our several
necessities; it will serve for a Hymn in many other occasions. As for example,
if thou would use it before thou and thy family begin their labor, in
stead of the last Disticke sing thus: And be thou pleased (Oh LOLD) to bless
Our labors, with a good success.
If thou, with others have any journey in hand, change it thus: And LORD, all
dangers keep us from,
Both going forth, and coming home.
If thou be a commander and leading thy company to the battle; alter it thus:
And be thou pleased in the fight;
To make us victors, by thy might.
If it be in a time of great famine, turn it thus: And LORD, vouchsafe thou in
this need;
Our soul^s and bodi^s both to feed.
If thou be a Divine, or Schoolmaster, employed abo^t the instruction of
others, and would begin thy exercises with this Hymn, end it thus: And
grant that we LORD, in thy fear;
May to our profit, speak and hear.
And thus, you may due upon many other occasions, according as your
nec^ssities, and devotion shall move you. But lest the ignorant may think, the
Title of the Sons of Jsrael will be improperly applied to us Christians: Or,
lest they may imagine, that the mentioning of Gods threatening a dispersion,
with his promise of gathering his people again unto his house, will be
impertinent to us, or our occasions. For the first, let them read Saint Paul,
and he will tell them who are true Jews and Israelites. Romans 2.28. and
Romans 9.6.7.8. And as for the last supposition. They must know, that every
Child of God, may be (in a spiritual sense) said to be dispersed among the
heathen, whenever by his sins, he is driven from the presence of God, and
distracted by the several vanities of the world. And as often as he returns
by repentance, with hearty prayer, he is brought back from his wand^ings to be
more settled in the Church, which is the place God has chosen for his Name. And
so no part of this Hymn will seem impertinent to us.

The Song.
^ LOrd God of heaven, thou that art, The mighty God, and full of fear^, Who
never promise-breaker were, But ever showing mercy where, They do affection
bear to thee, And of thy laws obseruers be. ^

Give ear, and lift thine eyes I pray,
That heard thy servants suit may be,
Made in thy presence night and day;
For Isreal's seed, that serves thee:
For Isreal's seed; who (I confess)
Against thee grievously transgress.
I, and my fathers house did sin,
Against thy will have we misdone;
Our dealing has corrupted bin,
Law, or decree observed we none:
Not those Commands, which to keep fast
Thou charged thy servant Moses have.
Oh! yet remember I thee pray,
These words which thou did heretofore
Unto thy servant Moses say,
If ere (said thou) they vex me more,
I will disperse them here and there
Among the nations every where.
But if to me they shall convert,
To do those things my laws contain,
Though spread to heauen's extremest part^
I would collect them thence again.
And bring them there to make repose
Whereas to place my name I chose.
Now these thy people are of right,
The servants who to thee belong,
Whom thou have purchased by thy might
And by thine Arm, exceeding strong.
O let thine ear LORD I thee pray
Attentive be to what I say.
The prayer of thy servant hear,
Oh hear thy servants when they pray,
(Who have a will thy name to fear.)
Thy servant prosper thou to day:
And be thou pleased to grant that he
In this man's sight may favored be.
THE Song of King LEMVEL. Prou. 31.10.
The Argument and Use.
We find this Hymn annexed to the Prou^rbs of Solomon, and reckoned as part
of their 31. Chapter. which has this title. The words of King Lemuel, etc.
(who as some write was Solomon. The Song is Alphabetically in the original,
divided into St^nz^'s, answerable to the number, and order of the He^^ew
letters and comprehends an Admirable desc^ipt^on of a good (...). In which
are three principa^^ ^h^ngs considerable. First, what advantage her (...)
receiue^h by her: Secondly, what commend^^^ (...) she has ^n her self: and
thirdly, what profit they bring unto her also at the last. The chief benefits
her husband enioyes by her are these: First, he is free from distrust and
unquietness of mind: Secondly, he shall not need to live by unjust dealings:
Thirdly, he shall be enriched in his estate: and fourthly, to place of honor
and esteem in the commonwealth. That which is commendable in her, is
twofold: outward industry of the body; and inward virtue of the mind. Her
bodily industry, is set forth in diverse particular actions, tending to the
providing for, and disposing of her household affairs: in which, her
cheerfulness, her providence, her courage, and her vnweariednesse, is also
applauded. Her inward virtues are, continual love to her husband; liberality
and charity to the poor: the government of her tongue, and heedfulnesse of
those courses her household takes. The commodities she her self receives
hereby are these; her husband is confident in her; she shall have comfort in
her labors; her posterity shall bless her; her husband shall praise her above
other women; she shall be honored of the best whilst she lives; and shall have
joy after her death.

This is the Analisis, and in my opinion it is an excellent Marriage-Song, fit
always to be sung after the solemnizing of those rites. And (perhaps) if men
would often use it in their families, in stead of their wanton Sonnets, and
drunken Catches, the Music thereof would make less discord there; and
instruct some of their wives, to become greater blessings unto them, then
formerly they have been.

The Song.
^ WHo finds a woman good and wise, A Iemme more worth then pearls has got,
Her husbands heart on her relies, To live by spoils he needs not. ^

His comfort all his life is she,
But, evil none delights to do,
For wool and flax, her searches be,
And cheerful hands she puts thereto.
The Merchant-ship resembling right,
She from a far, her food does fet.
Er'e day she wakes, that set she might
Her maids a task; her household meat.
A field she vieweth, which she buys:
Her hand does plant a vineyard there.
Her Loins with courage up she ties,
Her Arms with vigor strengthened are.
If good her huswifery she feel,
By night, her Candle goes not out.
She puts her fingers to the wheel,
Her hand the spindle twirles about.
To such as poor, and needy are,
Her hand (yea both) extends she,
The winter, none of hers does fear,
For double clothed her household be.
She makes her Mantles wrought by hand,
And silk and purple clothing gets:
Among the Rulers of the land,
Known in the gate, her husband sits.
For sale, fine linnin weaueth she:
And girdles to the Merchant sends.
Her cloathings, strength and honor be:
And Joy, her latter-time attends.
She speaks with wisdom, when she talks,
The law of grace her tongue has learned.
She heeds the way her household walks:
And feeds not on bread vn-earn'd.
Her Children rise, and blessed her call,
Her husband thus applaudeth her,
Oh thou have far surpast them all;
Though many daughters thriuing are!
Deceitful favor, quickly wears,
And beauty suddenly decaies:
But if the LORD she truly fears,
That woman well deserves praise.
The fruit her handy-works obtain,
Without repining grant her that:
And give her what her labors gain,
To do her honor in the gate.
THE First Song of ESAIAS. Esaias 5.
The Argument and the Use.
THis Song, you shall find in the fifth of Esaias: and the Prophet here, under
the similitude of a Vineyard, excellently describes the estate of Judah and
Jerusalem; with what God had done for them. And therein complains against his
vineyard, because, after the pains bestowed in fencing and manuring thereof
(instead of the sweet fruit he expected) it nevertheless brought forth sower
grapes. Next, he summoneth their own consciences, (whom he had covertly
vpbraided) to be judges of his great love and their unprofitableness. Thirdly,
he foretells, how he intends to deal with his Vineyard. And lastly, he directly
declares whom he means by the Parable.

According to this prophetical Hymn, even so has it fallen out with the
Nation of the Jews, whether you understand it of them temporally, or
spiritually. And therefore we are to make a twofold use of this Ode. First, to
memorize thereby the mercy, justice, and foreknowledge of God. His Mercy, in
showing what he has done for his people. His justice, in declaring how severe
he is, even to his own vineyard if it continue unfruitful in good works,
answerable to his husbandry. His foreknowledge, in relating how those things
which we know are come to pass on the Jews, were long before revealed by him,
unto his Prophets. The second use, is by singing and meditating thereon, to
warn our selves to consider what benefits we have received at Gods hands, and
to stir us up to be fruitful in spiritual graces and thankesgiuings, lest
he take away his blessings, and leave us unguarded to be spoiled, and laid wast
by our Adversaries, as he did the Jews. For; by this Vineyard the holy Ghost
did not only mean Judah and Jerusalem, but every congregation of Christians
also, who bearing the face of a visible Church, have heretofore abused or shall
hereafter neglect the grace of God. As we may assure our selves by the
destruction of Antioch, Laodicea, Ephesus, and many other particular Churches,
who having (after God had a long time manured them (by the husbandry of his
Apostles, and other ministers) in stead of the sweet Clusters of pure doctrine
and good life, brought forth the sower grapes of heresies and uncleanness:
Were deprived of their defense, and had both the dewes of Gods spirit, and the
showers of his word, withheld from them, till they brought forth nothing but
thorns and briars, the fruits of their own natural corruption.

The Song.
^ A Song of him whom I love best, And of his vineyard sing I will. A vineyard
once my love possessed, Well seated on a fruitful hill, He kept i^ close immured
still, The earth from stones he did refine. An^ set it with the choi-sest vine.
^

He in the midst a Fort did rear,
A Wine Press therein also wrought:
But, when he looked i^ grapes should bear,
Those grapes were wild one, that it brought.
Jerusalem come speak thy thought,
And you of Judah, Judges be,
Betwixt my vineyard here and me:
Unto my Vineyard what could more
Performed be, then I have done?
Yet looking it should grapes have bore
Save wild ones, it afforded none.
But go to, (let that now alone)
I am resolved to show you to,
What with my Vineyard I will do*
The hedge I will remove from thence,
That what so will devour it may,
I will break down the walled fence,
And through it make a trodden way.
Yea, all of it, I waste will lay.
None shall to dig, or dress it care
But thorns, and briars it shall bear.
The Clouds I also will compel,
That there no rain descend for this:
For lo, the house o^ Israel
The LORD of Armies vineyard is;
And Judah is that plant of his;
That pleasant one, who forth has brought,
Oppression, when he judgment sought.
He Justice sought but found therein,
In stead thereof a crying sin.
THE Second Song of ESAIAS. Esaias 12.
The Argument and Use.
THe Prophet Esaias being extraordinarily enlightened with foresight of the
mysteries of our Redemption, and having in the eleauenth Chapter of this
Prophecy, foretold many things concerning the incarnation of Christ, and the
excellency of his Kingdom; does in his next Chapter, fore-shew the Church,
what Song she shall sing in that day. And it is this, which here follows.
Wherein are these particular actions of the Church obseruable. First, that she
does perceive, and to the praise of her Redeemer acknowledge, that although God
had formerly afflicted her for sins; yet now, he turns his wrath into
consolation. Secondly, that without fear she understands, (and confesses to
others) how God is assuredly become her strength and salvation. Thirdly, she
exhorts all to come and draw the spiritual waters of life from their own
Fountains. Lastly, upon consideration of Christ's extraordinary works and
miracles, she earnestly stirs up her self, and others joyfully to sing the
praises of him, her Lord and Savior.

This Song, every Child of God ought often to r^peate, to the honor of Jesus
Christ, for his gracious redemption of mankind. And seeing the holy Prophet
(foreknowing the good cause she should have to make use thereof) has
prophesied that this should be the Churches Hymn, after the manifestation of
our Savior in the flesh: Doubtless, it would be very properly used upon those
days, which we solemnize in memory of our Saviors Nativity, and Epiphany:
and upon all such other occasions as the Congregation may have, to give thanks
for that great work of our Redemption.

The Song.
^ LOrd I will sing to thee, For angry though thou wast, Yet thou with-drewst
thy wrath from me, And sent me comfort have. ^

Lo, God's my health; on whom,
I fearelesse* trust will ^ay,
For oh the LORD, the LORD's become
My strength, my Song, my stay.
And you, with Joy (for this)
Shall water fetch away,
Out of those wels, where safety is:
And thus, then shall you say.
Oh sing unto the LORD,
His Name and works proclaim*
Unto the people bear record,
That glorious is his Name.
Unto the LORD oh sing:
For, wonders he has done,
Yea, many a renowned thing,
Which through the earth is known.
Sing forth, aloud all ye,
That do in Sion dwell:
For lo, thy holy-One in thee,
Is great, oh Israel.
THE Third Song of ESAIAS. Esaias 26.
The Argument and Use.
THe Prophet Esaias, before the people of Israel were led into Captivity,
composed this Song thereby to comfort them; that they might with the more
patience bear out their affliction, and become confident in the promised
mercies of God. First, it informs them, that the protection of God being
(wheresoever they are) nothing less available then a defenced City,) they
ought for ever to trust in that firm peace, which they may have in him.
Secondly, this Song teaches them, to confess, that the pride of Sinners must
be punished, and how the true Church of Godwil constantly await his pleasure,
amid those judgments, and in their chastening, fly unto their Redeemer.
Thirdly, seeing the wicked are so euilly disposed, that they will neither
repent for favor nor punishment: their confusion is here prophesied, and the
peace of the godly promised: who are resolved not to forsake the service of
their Lord for any persecution. Fourthly, they sing the utter desolation of
Tyrants, and the increase of the Church: whose endurance is illustrated by the
pangs of a Childe-bearing woman. Fifthly, her deliverance from persecution, with
the resurrection of the dead, through Christ is foretold. And lastly, the
fai^hfull are exhorted to attend on the LORD their Savior, who will shortly
come to judgment: and take account for the blood of his ^aints.

This Song is made in the person of the whole Church. And the particular
members thereof may also sing the same, to comfort themselves, and to encourage
one another to be confident in all their chastisements and persecutions, upon
consideration of the shortness of the time, and the certainty of their
Redeemers coming. They may also when they please make use of it, thereby to
praise God for his judgments, for his favor to his people, and for the
confirmation of their own faiths in both those.

The Song.
^ A City now have we obtained, Where strong defenses are, And God salvation
has ordai'nd, For wa's and Bulwarks there. ^

The gates thereof wide open set;
Those righteous people who
The Truths obseruers are, may get
Admittance thereinto.
There, thou in peace wilt keep him sure,
(Whose thoughts well grounded be)
In peace, that ever shall endure,
Because he trusted thee.
For-euermore upon the LORD
Without distrust depend,
For in the LORD, the eternal LORD,
Is strength that has no end.
He makes the lofty City yield,
And her proud dwellers bow:
He lays it level with the field,
And with the dust below.
Their feet, who poor and needy are,
Their feet thereon shall tread:
Their way is right that righteous are
Whose path thou well do heed.
Upon thy Course of judgments we,
Oh LORD attending were,
And to record thy Name,and Thee,
Our souls desirous are.
On thee, my mind with strong desires
Is fixed in the night,
And after thee my heart enquires,
Before the morning light.
For, when thy righteous Judgments are
Upon the earth discerned
By those that do inhabit there,
Vprighnesse should be learned.
Yet sinners for no terror will,
Just dealing understand:
But they continue doing ill,
Even in the righteous land.
Unto the glory of the LORD,
They will not heedfull be:
Thy hand advanced on high, oh LORD,
They will not daigne to see.
But they shall see, and see with shame,
That do thy people spite:
Yea, from thy foes shall rise a flame,
That will devour them quite.
Then LORD, for us, thou will procure,
That we in peace may be:
Because that every work of our,
Is wrought for us, by thee.
And LORD our God, though we are brought,
To other Lords in thrall:
Of thee alone shall be our thought,
Upon thy name to call.
They are deceast and never shall,
A farther life obtain:
They die and shall not rise at all,
To tyrannize again.
For to that end thou visited,
And wide dispers't them have:
Until their fame was perished,
And utterly defac'st.
But LORD, encrea'st thy people are,
Encrea'st they are by thee:
And thou art glorified as far
As any lands there be.
For LORD, in their distresses, when
Thy chast'ning on them lay:
They unto thee did hasten then,
And without ceasing pray.
As she with Child is pained when as
Her throws of bearing be:
And cries in pangs; before thy face,
Oh LORD, so fared We.
We have conceived, been pained, and all
Was for a windy birth:
The world no safety yeeld's; nor fall,
The dwellers of the earth.
Thy dead shall live; they rise again
With my dead body shall:
Oh you, that in the dust remain,
Awake and sing you, all.
For as the dew does herbs renew,
That buried seemed before:
So earth shall through thy heavenly dew,
Her dead alive restore.
My people, to thy Chambers fare,
Shut close the door to thee;
And stay a while (a moment there)
Till past the fury be.
For lo, the LORD does now arise;
He comes from his place;
To punish their impieties,
Who do the world possess.
And now the earth no longer shall,
The bloods in her conceal:
But she, shall be compelled all
Her murders to reveal.
THE Prayer of HEZEKIAH. Esaias 37.15.
The Argument and the Use.
IT is recorded, in the 36. and 37. of Esaias, that Senacharib King of Asiria,
sent an army against Jerusalem; and that Rabshakah his principal commander,
not only threatened to take it, but blasphemed also against the power of God.
Which when Hezekiah received notice of: it is said, he repaired unto the house
of the LORD, and made this Prayer there. Wherein (having by the attributes
there given him, acknowledged how able God was to be avenged,) he desires the
LORD, both to hear him, and to consider the blasphemy of his adversary. Then,
to manifest the necessity of assistance: He urges the power of that foe, over
those that served not the true God. And as it seems, desires deliverance, not
so much in regard of his own safety, as that the blasphemer, (and all the
world) may know the difference between the power of the LORD, and the arrogant
braggs of Man.

This Prayer may be used by the Church, whenever her powerful and open
adversary the Turk, or any other Adversary, whom God has suffered to
prevail against false worshippers; shall thereupon grow proud, and threaten
Her, also: as if in despite of God he had formerly prevailed by his own
strength. And the name of Senacharib may be mistically applied to any such
enemy. Moreover, it may serve any of us Christians for a prayer, against those
secret blasphemies, which the Devil whispers unto our souls. Or, when by
temptations, he seeks to make us despair, and threatens to be our ruin,
maugre our Redeemer; laying before our eyes how many others he has destroyed,
who seemed to be in as good estate as we. For this is (indeed) the Enemy, who
has overthrown whole Countries and Nations: and he does at this day ruin
many thousands, with their gods, (even the means whereby they trusted to be
safe:) for strength, temporal power, riches, superstitious worships, the
wisdom of flesh and blood unsanctified; Moral virtues, worldly policy,
Idols, and such like, wherein many put their trust; are the works of men's
hands, and may he rightly termed, the gods which that mystical Asirian Prince,
and our adversary has power to destroy.

The Song.
And Hez^kiah prayed unto the LORD: saying.
^ O Lord of hoasts, and God of Isra-el, Thou who between the Cherubins do
dwell, Of all the world thou God alone art King, And heaven and earth unto
their form did bring. ^

Lord bow thine ear, to hear attentive be;
Lift up thine eyes, and daigne oh LORD to see
What words Senacharib has cast abroad:
And his proud message to the living God.
Truth LORD it is, that lands, and kingdoms all,
Have to the Kings of Ashur been a thrall:
Yea, they their Gods into the fire have thrown,
For Gods they were not, but of wood and stone:
Men's work they were, men therefore spoiled them have.
Then from his power, us LORD our God now save,
That all the kingdoms of the earth may see,
Thou art the LORD, and only thou art he.
Hezekiahs song of Thanksgiving. Esaias 38.10.
The Argument and Use.
WE find this Song in the 38. Chapter of Esaias, where is set before it this
Title. The writing of Hezekiah: King of Judah, when he had been sick and was
recovered of his sickness. By which, you may perceive the occasion of it: And
if you consider the Song it self, many particular circumstances are
remarkable; whereby the Author shows Gods mercy to have been exceeding great
unto him: First, in respect that he should else have been cut off in the best
of his Age (and perhaps, when his sins might have made him ripe, as well for
hell, as the grave.) Secondly, in regard he should never have seen again the
Temple of the Lord, to praise him there, with the rest of his people. Thirdly,
if he had been then taken away, His dwelling, that is, his posterity, had
been cut off (for at that time he had no children) and so he had not lost his
life only, but the hope of the Messiah, his Redeemer. Fourthly, his disease
was so violent and insufferable, that he thought not to have lived out one day.
Fifthly, God delivered him when he was not tormented in body only, but when he
suffered also extreme agonies of the Soul. Lastly, the greatness of Gods
mercy is here praised, in that when be delivered him from the terrors of death;
he forgave him also his sins, which were the cause of that sickness. Then
seeming to have entered into a serious consideration of all this. He confesses
who they are, that are most bound to celebrate Gods praises; and voweth this
Deliverance to everlasting memory.

By our private Meditations, we may use this for a Song of thanksgiving after
our deliverances from temporal sicknesses; which is one and the first sense
wherein Hezekiah used it. But in the second, and most principal sense, he sung
it in the person of the Mystical body; who was by Christ cured of the deadly
sickness of sin and death; for Hezekiah, which signifies helped or
strengthened of the LORD, was a type of the Church, healed by God; and Isaiah,
who brought the medicine that cured the disease, and is interpreted, The
salvation of the LORD, figured our Redeemer Jesus Christ. And indeed it is not
lik^ly that so good a Prince as Hezekiah, would have been so extremely
dejected, if he had apprehended nothing more fearful then his present
sickness, with the natural separation of the soul and body; or that it was
his never seeing again of Gods temporal house, that made him so passionate.
For, if that had been a matter worthy such grief, it should have been
always so, and then neither he nor any man could have departed this life
willingly. But there was a greater mystery in it; yea, if you well consider
that this Deliverance herein memorized, was confirmed by one of the greatest
miracles (to wit) the Sun going back ten degrees, I think you will then
believe that it had respect to some greater thing then the particular recovery
of Hezekiah. For that the Sun went really back (and did not appear only so
to do) is manifested in these places, 2 King. 20.12. 2 Chronicles. 32.31. Js. 39.1.
for thence J gather, that it was observed in Asiria, and that Messengers were
sent from thence to H^zekiah, to know the reason of that wonder: which if we
should affirm to be for a sign of Hez^kiahs recovery only; we must confess
the sign greater then that which it was sent to signify: whereas if we will
understand Hezekiah to be a type of the Church, and that God gave this for a
token to assure him that as he should be healed, so he would also send his
Son to heal the general infirmity of Mankind: we shall then make the thing
figured, proportionable to the figure. For the redemption of Man, being a work
much greater then the Suns retrogradation, it was well worthy of so admirable
a Type.

But I shall make this prologue ouer-large, or else J would so plainly declare
unto you, how Hezekiah was a Type of the Church, how in every circumstance of
his sickness he pattern'd out the infirmity of mankind, laboring under sin;
and how naturally that miracle of the Suns retrogradation represented the
sending of Christ to be our deliverer, that you should confess this Song was
made for us and the Church, to sing throughout all Ages, for a memorial of her
former unspeakable misery; and to set forth the praise of God, for that
vnequal'd benefit of her Redemption.

The Song.
^ WHen I supposed my days were at an end, Thus speaking to my self, I made
my moan: Now to the gates of Hell I must descend, And all the remnant of my
years be gone, The Lord (ah me) the Lord I cried Where now the living be, Nor
man that does on earth abide, Shall I for ever see. ^

As the removing of a Shepherds tent,
Or as a Weauer cuts his web away,
My dwelling so; yea, so my age was spent,
And so my sickness did my life decay;
Each day, ere night should end the same
My death expected I,
And every night ere morning came,
I did suppose to dye:
For he so Lyon-like my bones did break,
That I my life accounted scarce a day;
A noise I did like Cranes or Swallows make,
And at the Turtle I lamenting lay;
My fainting eyes I upward cast,
And thus my moan did make;
Oh, I extremely am oppressed,
For me, LORD undertake.
What shall I say? his word to me he gave,
And as he promised, he performed it;
For which, I will not whilst that life I have,
Those bitter passions of my soul forget:
But all that after me survive,
Yea all that live, shall know,
How thou my spirit did revive,
And health on me bestow.
Upon my peace, did bitter sorrows come,
But in the love which to my soul thou have,
The all-consuming grave thou keptst me from.
And my offenses all behind thee cast.
For neither can the grave, nor death,
Or praise or honor thee,
Nor are they hopeful of thy truth
That once entombed be.
Oh, he that lives; that lives as I do now,
Even he it is that shall thy praise declare;
Thy Truth the father to his seed shall show,
And how, oh LORD, thou me have dain'd to spare,
And in thy house (for this) will we,
(Oh LORD throughout our days)
On instruments that stringed be,
Sing songs unto thy praise.
THE Prayer of DANIEL. Dan. 9.4.
The Argument and Use.
THis Prayer is written in the ninth Chapter of Daniels Prophecy: and herein,
the Prophet very earnestly beseeches God to be merciful unto his people. The
principal points considerable are these. First, he confesses God to be
powerful, just, and merciful, and that nevertheless from the highest to the
lowest they had broken his laws, and rebelled against him; for which, they
worthily deserved confusion. Secondly, he aggrauateth their offenses by diverse
circumstances, acknowledging, that as it is the same they have deserved, so it
is the destruction they were forewarned of, that is come upon them. Thirdly,
having acknowledged thus much, he humbly entreates, that God would be
nevertheless merciful unto them: First, in regard he had heretofore gotten
glory by delivering them: Secondly, for that they were his own elected people:
Thirdly, seeing they were already become a reproach unto their neighbors:
Lastly, even for his own and the Messiahs sake. And all this he earnestly
entreats, (not for their own worthiness, but) for the tender mercies sake of
God.

This Song may be properly sung whenever any of those particular judgments
are powered out, which the Prophets have foretold should be inflicted on these
latter times; and it may be said or sung by the Church, or any member thereof
(in her person) during any other affliction befallen her: or if we please, even
upon our private occasions, provided we formerly well apply it by our
Meditations.

The Song.
^ LOrd God almighty, great and full of fear, Who always art from bre^ch of
promise free, And never failing to have mercy where They do observe thy laws
and honor thee. ^

We have transgrest; oh! we, have evil done.
We disobedient and rebellious were;
For, from thy precepts we astray are gone,
And from thy judgments we departed are.
We did thy servants prophesies withstand,
Who, to our Dukes, our Kings, and Fathers came,
And unto all the people of the land,
Proclaimed forth their message in thy name.
In thee oh LORD, all righteousness have thou,
But open shame to us does appertain;
As fares it with the men of Judah now,
And those that in Jerusalem remain.
And to all Israel, through those Countries all,
In which, they far or nigh dispersed be,
Because of that transgression, wherewithal
They have transgressed and offended thee.
To us, our Kings, our Dukes, and Fathers does
Disgrace pertain (oh LORD) for angring thee*
Yet, mercy (LORD our God) and pardon both
To thee belongs, though we rebellious be.
For, as for us, we sore have disobeyed
The Lord our God his voice, and would not hear
To keep his laws, which he before us laid,
By those his servants, which his Prophet^ were*
Yea, all that of the race of Israel be;
Against thy law extremely have misdone:
And that they might not ^isten unto thee,
They from thy voice, oh LORD are backward gone;
Which makes both Curse and Oath on them descend,
That in the Law of Moses written was;
The servant of that God whom we offend,
And now his speeches he has brought to pass.
On us, and on our Judges he does bring
That plague, wherewith he threatened us and them,
For under heaven was never such a thing
As now is acted on Jerusalem.
As Moses written Law does bear record,
Now all this mischief is upon us brought,
And yet we prayed not before the LORD,
That leaving sin, we might his Truth be taught.
For this respect, the LORD in wait has laid,
That he inflict on us this mischief might;
And seeing we his voice have disobay'd.
In all his works, the LORD our God's upright.
But now, oh LORD our God, who from the land
Of cruel Egypt brought thy people have;
And by the power of thine almighty hand,
Atchieu'd a name which to this day does last:
Though we have sinned, and committed ill;
Yet LORD by all that righteousness in thee,
From thy Jerusalem, thy holy hill,
Oh let thy wrath and anger turned be.
For by those wicked things which we have don,
And through our fathers sins; Jerusalem,
Yea, thine own people have the hatred won
And the reproach of all that neighbor them.
Now therefore to thy Seruant's suite incline,
His prayer hear our God, and let thy face,
Even for the LORDS dear sake, vouchsafe to shine
Upon thy, now forsaken, holy place.
Thine ears incline thou, oh my God, and hear;
Lift up thine eyes, and us oh look upon;
Us, who forsaken with thy City are,
The City, where thy name is called on.
For we upon our selves presume not thus,
Before thy presence our request to make,
For any righteousness that is in us,
But for thy great and tender Mercies sake.
LORD hear, forgive oh LORD, and weigh the same,
Oh LORD perform it, and no more defer,
For thine own sake, my God; for by thy name,
Thy City, and thy people called are.
THE Prayer of JONAH. Jonah 2.
The Argument and Use.
AS Jonah fled from the presence of the LORD, he was followed by a tempest,
whose fury would not be allayed, until the offender was cast into the Sea,
where God had mercy on him, and sent a Fish to preserve him; Which in humane
reason, seemed a more terrible danger, then that he was delivered from. But the
safety which at his first entrance, he found in so unsafe a place, made him
sensible of Gods favor, and begat in him a firm belief that he should be
totally delivered. And thereupon, (being yet in the Fishes belly) made this
Prayer, to praise God for delivering him in so great an extremity. (And he did
it as speaking of a thing already done, the better to show us the soundness of
his faith. The things remarkable are these: The place where he prayed, the
terrible and vnauiodable danger that compassed him; the despair he was nigh
falling into, the timely application of Gods mercy, the comfort it infused into
him, the occasions which draw men into these perils, the vow made upon this
deliverance, and lastly the reason of that vow.

Now, this burial of Jonas in the fishes belly, and his delivery from thence,
was a sign of the burial and resurrection of our blessed Savior, Mat. 12.40.
And therefore, we must not think he made this Prayer only in his own person:
but in the mystical body of Jesus Christ also. For, by contemplating the
circumstances of his danger and deliverance, (and having the spirit of
prophecy) he apprehended the mysteries of our Redemption. By the ship ready to
be sunk, through that tempest in which he was cast away, he conceived the
wrath of God against the world for sin; and that it would not be appeased
without satisfaction. By his own offense, he foresaw, h^w Christ having taken
our sin upon him, should (to bring peace unto the world) be delivered over
unto the rage of Pilate and the Jews. By his being received into the fishes
belly, and there preserved alive; he foresaw how Christ should be swallowed up
of the grave, and yet remain uncorrupted. And by the foresight he had of his
own coming safe to the shore again: he apprehended that joyful resurrection
of our Redeemer: whose mystical body (the Church) lay all that while, as it
were in the very Jaws of death and hell. These things Jonah apprehended
through the spirit of prophecy, (and by the objects aforesaid) composed this
Prayer, to set forth the mercies of God, and to express in what a fearful
estate mankind was, until Christ was risen again in victory. And therefore,
J think, as it will become us Christians often to sing it in memory thereof;
so especially upon that day which we celebrate in memorial of our Saviors
Resurrection.

The Song.
^ IN my distress I cried to thee oh Lord, And thou were pleased my complaint
to hear, Out from the bowels of the grau^ I roar'^, and to my voice thou did
incline thine ear, For I amid the Sea was cast, And to the bottom there thou
plunged me have. ^

The floods, about me rolling circles made,
Thy waves, and billows, ouer-flow'd me quite,
Wherewith (alas) unto my self I said,
I am for euer-more deprived thy sight.
Yet once again, advance shall I,
Unto thy holy Temple-ward mine eye.
Even to my soul, the waters closed me had,
Or'e-swallow'd by the deepes I there was pent,
About my head the weeds a wreath had made,
Unto the hills foundation down I went.
And so, that forth I could not get,
The earth an euer-lasting bar had set.
Then thou oh LORD, my God, oh thou were he.
That from corruption did my life defend,
For when my soul was like to faint in me,
Thou did oh LORD into my thoughts descend.
My prayer unto thee I sent,
And to thy holy Temple up it went.
Those who give trust to vain and foolish lies,
Despisers of their own good safety be:
But I will offer up a sacrifice
Of singing praises, with my voice to thee;
And will perform what vowed I have:
For it belongs to thee, oh LORD to save.
THE Song of HABAKKVK. Habak. 3.
The Argument and Use.
BEfore the following Song, is usually this TITLE. A Prayer of the PROPHET
Habakkuk upon Sigionoth, or (as most Translations have it) For the ignorances,
that is, for the comfort and better information of the people, who were
disheartened through their ignorance, in the judgments and mercies of God.
For, the Prophet in his first Chapter personated the weak members of the
Church, who were offended at the prosperity of the ungodly: And having there
brought them in, complaining, as if they feared all things would continually
succeed better with their wicked oppressors then with them (as it did for that
present) he in the next Chapter declared the LORDS answer to that ignorant
complaint of theirs: Showing that undoubtedly the pride, covetousness,
cruelty, drunkenness, and idolatry of (the Chaldeans) their tyrannizing
enemies should be punished. And afterward in this Song, (which is his third
Chapter) he first prays and prayseth God for that promised deliverance,
secondly, sets forth the glorious Majesty of the Deliverer, by excellent
Allegories and Allusions to the manner of those former deliverances, which he
had vouchsafed unto the People the Jews: And lastly, (foretelling the
miserable and horrible destruction of the Adversary) in his own, and in the
person of all the Elect, resolves (what ever happens) to rejoice with
confidence in the strength and favor of God.

In brief, this Song has four parts: In the first, the Savior is prayed
for, according to the promise of God. Jn the second, the Majesty of his coming
is described. Jn the third, his victory, with the ruin of Antichrist is
declared. And fourthly, the joy and confidence of the Church is foretold.

True it is, that by reason of the many deep Mysteries herein contained; this
Song is to many very obscure: Insomuch, that the latter Hebrew Rabbis,
accounted it one of the most difficult places of holy Scripture. And so shall
we Christians find it; yea, and little pertinent to us also, if we look
thereon with their blind eyes, who could see no farther then the letter. For
they either thought this Prophecy had no further relation then to the temporal
delivery of the Jews by destruction of the Chaldeans, many ages past: or else
imagined (as some a little infected with Iudaisme at this day teach) that it
had respect to a carnal and temporal restoring of that Nation, now in these
last ages of the World. Whereas, it has indeed a more principal aim. For
though it shall not be denied, that it had somewhat a respect to the Israelites
deliverance from the Babylonian servitude: yet, if they should be urged to show
us, how according to their mere litterall sense, he that diliuered them may be
said to come from Theman and Mount Paran: how that majesty expressed here may
be applied to him; what plagues and fire went before him; how he stood and
measured the earth; where mountains trembled and were removed; how the Sun and
Moon stood still, etc. I am persuaded it would trouble their best Expositor.
But if we will understand it to have principal respect (as in truth it has)
to the Churches deliverance from the spiritual Babylon, from the slavery of
the Devil, and the rage of Antichrist; by the first and second coming of our
Savior Jesus Christ: it will then be easy, through the help of Gods holy
Spirit, to show you that these Allegories and Aenigmaticall expressions, which
are so hard to the Jews, and some misbeleeuers, are plainly vnridled to us,
who believe Redemption by the Son of God.

This Song is to be sung historically, in memory of our deliverance by the
first coming of Jesus Christ, and prophetically for a comfortable remembrance
of a perfect delivery assured us at (...) coming. Both which commings, to
those who by the eyes of faith can apprehend the manner of them, will appear
no less glorious then they are here described by way of Allusion.

But least Chusan and Midian, being names of Nations, sometime temporal
enemies to the Jews, may seem impertinent to these times, you must know that
all the Names of Persons or Places used in the old Testament, were given for
the sake of those things which they typified more then for their own: and do^
therefore more properly express their natures. So, in this place; Chusan
signifying dark, black, or cloudy; and Midian which is interpreted of
condemnation, or of judgment, better agrees to those spiritual Adversaries
whom they prefigured; then to those people who were literally so called: For
none are so fitly termed people of Darkness, or Condemnation, as the members of
Antichrist.

The Song.
^ LOrd, thy answer did I hear, And I grew therewith afraid. When the times
at fullest are, Let thy work be then declared: When the times Lord full do
grow, Then in anger mercy show. ^

The Almighty God came down,
He came down from Theman-ward,
The eternal holy- One, Selah.
From mount Paran forth appeared.
Heaven covering with his rays,
And earth filling with his praise.
As the Sunns is, was his light,
From his hands there did appear
Beaming rays, that shined bright,
And his power is shrouded there.
Plagues before his face he sent,
At his feet hot coals there went.
Where he stood, he measure took
Of the earth, and viewed it well;
Nations vanished at his look,
Ancient hills to powder fell.
Mountains old cast lower were,
For his ways eternal are.
Cushan tents I saw diseased,
And the Midian Curtains quake,
Have the floods LORD thee displeased?
Did the floods thee angry make?
Was it else the sea that has;
Thus provoked thee to wrath?
For thou rod'st thy horses there,
And thy saving Charro'ts through:
Thou did make thy bow appear.
And as has been by a vow
To the tribes agreed unto;
Thou perform'dst thy promise so. Selah.
Thou did cleave the earth and make
Rifts, through which did rivers flow:
Mountains seeing thee did shake,
And away the floods did go.
From the deep a voice was heard,
And his hands on high he reared.
Both the Sun and Moon did stay,
And removed not in their spheres:
By thine arrows light went they,
By thy brightly-shining spears:
Thou in wrath the land did crush,
And in rage the Nations thresh.
For thy peoples safe relief,
With thy Christ for aid went thou,
Thou have also pierst the Chief,
Of the sinful household through.
And displaid them, till that bare,
From the foot to neck they were. Selah.
Thou, with weapons of their own,
Did their armies Leader strike:
For, against me they came down,
To disperse me whirle-winde-like.
And they Joy in nothing more,
Then unseen to spoil the poor.
Through the Sea, thou made a way,
And did ride thy horses where
Mighty heaps of waters lay.
I thereof report did hear:
And the voice my bowels shook,
Yea my lips a quiu'ring took.
Rottenness my bones possessed,
And a trembling ceazed me,
I that troublous day might rest.
For, when his approches be
Up unto the people made,
Then his troops will them invade.
Bloomelesse shall the fig tree be,
And the vine no fruit shall yield,
Fade shall (then) the olive tree;
Meat shall none be in the field:
Neither in the fold nor stall*
Flock, or heard, continue shall.
Yet the LORD my icy shall be,
And in him I will delight*
In my God that saves me;
God the LORD, who is my ought.
And so guides my feet, that I,
Hinde-like, walk my places high.
FINIS.

