SERMON Upon the xii. xiij. and xiiij. Verses of the xiiij. Chapter of Ezechiel.

Wherein are chiefly showed both the original and accidental causes of every
dearth and famine, and especially of this dearth in England now 1608. and 1609.
With the effects and Fruits of the same, as also the helps and remedies
thereof, if they may be speedily and effectually practiced.

Preached at STROWD in the County of Gloucester and published for the good of
the church Melitant.

Whereunto is added a like Meditation of the same Author, upon the 26. verse of
the 11. Chapter of Salomons Proverbs, which may be called the Poor man's plea.

By William WOODWALL, Minister and Preacher of the word. 1609

LONDON Printed by E. A. for Ed. White, and are to be sold at his shop near
the ltttle North door of S. Paul's Church at the Sign of the Gunne 1609

TO His Christian Brethren of the Clergy, Grace, Mercy, and Peace from God
our heavenly Father, by Jesus Christ.
For as much as every true Minister is the Lords watchman, and thereapon
bound by the band of obedience toward God, to blow the Trumpet, and warn the
people, when he sees the sword of the Lord come upon the land, that is, the
Plague of Pestilence, dearth, Famine, War, or any suchlike: and for that I have
not hitherto seen or heard of any warning given by any brother in public of
this sword of the lord laid upon this land, by dearth of Corn and other
commedities, although I esteemed my self the most unworthie of all others,
yet I could not withholde from the publishing of this little paper-worke,
hoping that it might be a motine unto those that are better able to take this
matter in hand, or at least a discharge unto my self of that Talent that God
has given me, the which name end enour if it please Almighty God to bless, I
shall account my travel well bastowed. Let that saying therefore of this prophet
Ezekiel written in the 33. Chapter ver. 7. and 8, be always before thee, and in
thy mind. So thou O son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house
Israel, Therefore thou shall hear the word at my mouth, and admonish them from
me, when I shall say unto the wicked, O wicked man, thou shall die the death,
if thou do not speak, nor admonish the wicked of his way, that wicked in an
shall dye for his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thy hands. By both
which doctrines or lessons of the Lord, we are taught how needful and
necessary a thing it is for the Minister of God to bestir himself both in
season and out of season, in the work and word of the Lord. A sorry watchman
would he be counted of his Captain, that being set to watch the City, would
sleep in the night and play in the day, and let the enemy come in which way he
would: so careless no doubt are many at this day amongst us, who being set to
watch over the house of the Lord, let the lords enemies come in and out, which
way they list. For could there such cruelty or covetousness abound as does, or
such dearth and fam in increase as is like to be, if the Trumpet of Gods word
were well sounded, and the people of this land duly admonished? no, no, it
could not be, but some hearts would be opened: for does not the Lord complain
that his people are destroyed for lack of knowledge? Hos. 4. 6. and could they
or would they commit such things as are daily don amongst us, if they were
rightly admonished of the same? Therefore look unto it my brethren, that ye be
not found negligent in the work of the Lord, I say, that ye be not hot nor
cold, but zealous for the Lords glory. Gine the Lord no rest day nor night,
but call upon him continually, call upon them likewise that are committed to
your charge, that every man may know his own disease, and break off sins by
repeat once, and do the work of the Lord faithfully, as it becomes good
disposers of those treasures committed unto your trust, not looking so much
unto those things that concern your own estate in this life, as unto the
things of the Lord Jesus, his flock, his lambs, his sheep, his People, his
Chruch, his king dome; which grace the Lord grant us for his Christ's sake. Amen.

Thine now and always in the fear of God. W. W.

A SERMON upon the 12. 13. and 14. Verses of the 14. Chapter of EZECHIEL.
THE TEXT. 12, The word of the Lord came unto me, saying:

13. Son of man, when the land sins against me by committing a trespass,
then will I stretch out my hand upon it, and will break the staff of the bread
thereof, and will send famine upon it.

14. Though these three men Noah, Daniel and Job were among them, they should
deliver but their own souls by their righteousness, says the Lord.


THe word of the Lord came unto me, saying: Out of this whole text, do arise
three principal or especial points right necessary of us to be considered,
both in regard of our own instruction and admonition, as also in respect of
the time present; it being a time of dearth and scarsitie, and hunger amongst
us, as that was a time of trouble amongst the Israelites, when the Prophet
Ezechiel vtttered these words unto them, so that this text or parcel of
Scripture, as Solomon says, Of the word spoken in his place or season: Whichis
like apples of gold with pictures of silver, meaning, that as the one is
pleasant to the eye to behold and look upon, so the other is or ought to be
as pleasant and delectable to the ear, heart, and mind of man to consider of,
and ponder upon, or like unto the emplaister or potio^, that is rightly
employed of the learned and skillful physician, and expert chirurgian, to the
party diseased or member affected. For as we say, to come in time is the
chiefest thing of al, so to speak in time, that is, aptly and to the purpose,
is a point very commendable and no less profitable. The principal points or
parts herein to be handled, are these: First, what is both the original and
accidental cause of dearth or famine, declared in the 13. verse, and first part
thereof. Secondly what be the effects and fruits thereof, laid down in the
latter part of that v. Thirdly what be the helps and remedies of every such
dearth, plague, or judgment of God, which are showed and set down in the 15.
v. But before I can conveniently come to entreat of these 3. I must give you a
taste of some other matters, such as by the way of a preparation unto the rest
are described by this prophet, in the 12. v. as namely what he means by
saying, The word of the lord came unto me, the manner how it came, from whom
and unto whom; for like as every Ambassador here on earth, which is sent from
one Prince or Potentate to another, upon any embassy or message, does upon his
or their first arrival unto the person to whom they are sent, make known
both who sent him, and wherefore, as well for the further credit of his
message, as for the better acceptance of himself; even so does this man of
God the prophet Ezechiel in this place (being called of God to deliver his word
unto the children of Israel) as it is to be seen more at large in the 1. 2. 3.
chapter of this prophecy; does in these words make known unto them, not only
what he was to say unto them, or what Embassage he was to deliver, but also who
had sent him, and whose Ambassador he was, as out of the words of this text
may be gathered. The word of the Lord came unto me, Because every word of this
text is very pathetical, I will entreat of them verbatim (as they say) as they
come in order. And first, whereas he entituleth his message by the title or name
of (the word of the Lord) it gives us to understand of some necessary points
to be considered of, as namely, and first of al, what the word of the Lord is,
and what he means thereby in this place: Secondly what the dignity oc
excellency thereof is: Thirdly what is the utility: and last of all the
necessity.

Concerning the first point what it is, being considered in the whole, it is
reverenced with many titles, as the Lambs book: the Library of the holy
Ghost: fountains of Israel, waters of life: the two edged sword, Vrim and
Thumim. So it being considered in part, is called the power of God unto
salvation, to every one that believes. But what the Prophet means in this
place by it, you must understand, Romans 1. 16.
that he means no other thing but only an holy Lesson, counsel, Doctrine or
admonition, or else an earnest and sharp commination and dreadefull
denunciation of Gods judgment (such as is contaiued in these words which I
have read unto you) inspired or taught of God himself, that is, by his holy
spirit, for their instruction, admonition, or amendment, to whom it was then
sent, as likewise unto us, and the church militant, to whom it should at any
time hereafter be preached. And this is both the meaning and signification of
it in this place. Now concerning the dignity or excellency thereof, although
there can be no greater a praise or commendation be given thereof, then that
which you have already heard. To. 1. 16. etc. Yet because the word it self is
pregnant in this point, it shall not be teadious unto me to give some taste
thereof. Worthy therefore is that to be called to mind that the Prophet DAVID
has left recorded in Ps. 19. ver. 7. 8. etc. saying: The law of the Lord is
perfect converting the soul; the testimony of the Lord is sure, and gives
wisdom unto the simple: the statutes of the Lord are right and rejoice the
heart: the Commandments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether, more
to be desired then gold, yea then much fine gold: sweeter then honye and the
honey comb, yea dearer unto me then thousands of gold and silver. All which is
spoken of the word of the Lord, either in general or particular, or in both,
that men might make good use thereof, and give good regard thereunto, when it
is sent or preached unto them. A common fault amongst many at this day, which
esteem of it no better then of a tale of Robinhood, or as this Prophet shows
of the people in his time, Chapter 33. ve. 31. 32. who esteemed thereof, none
otherwise then of a song of one that has a pleasant voice to sing well, for the
utility or profit thereof. The Apostle Saint PAVL will tell us, that the whole
Scripture is given by inspiration of God and is profitable to teach, to
convince, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of god may
be absolute and perfect unto all good works. 2. Tim. 3. ver. 16. 17. And Saint
JAMES will say that it is able to save our souls if it be received with
meekenes. 1. IAM. 1. 21. And for the necessity thereof, let that be remembered
which Solomon has left recorded; namely, that where the word of the Lord is
not preached, there the people perish, but he that keeps the law shall be
blessed, Pro. 29. 18. These things being thus laid down, do give us to
understand not only what it is that here the Prophet has to say, but also
who this Lord is, whose word is so powerful, precious and profitable: for
although he is here but barelye named Lord, without any further addition of
this Title or declaration of his Majesty; yet this his word here mentioned
(if we will search it well) will teach us and tell us, that it is even that
Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, that only has immortallitie, and dwells
in light that Reu. 17. 14 1. Timo. 6. 16 Ps. 50. 1.
none can attain unto, whom never man saw nor can see, unto whom be honor
and power everlasting. Amen. Even the God of Gods, the Lord who has spoken and
called the earth from the rising up of the Sun, unto the going down thereof.
The Lord of hoasts who builds his spears in the heaven, and has laid the
foundation of his Globe of Aug. 9. 6.
elements in the earth. He calls the waters of the Sea, and powers them out
upon the earth.

The Lord is his name (Came unto me) How, and after what manner this word or
message of the Lord came unto the prophet EZECHIEL, not only himself shows
most plainly, Chap. 1. verse 3. and 29. Whereas he testifies that the hand
of the Lord was upon him: that is, the spirit of Prophecy, and that he heard a
voice of one that spoke to him: But also the Author to the Hebrews, Chap. 1.
verse. 1. 2 teaches that the Almighty God at sundry times and in diverse
manners, spoke in old time to our fathers the Prophets, as in the first age to
the Patriarchs by himself personally; as to ABRAHAM, MOSES, etc. So afterward
to the Prophets ESAIAS, JEREMY, EZECHIEL and the rest, by dreams, visions, and
inspirations. But in the fullness of time (which the Apostle calls the last
days,) has he spoken to us by his Son, whom he has made heir of all
things, like as in these our days (which are the last days indeed) he does
speak unto us, the holy ministers of his word, as unto your selves by us, by
his holy and divine spirit, according as the Prophet JOEL fore-tolde. Cha. 2.
28. saying: And after those days I will pour out of my spirit upon all flesh,
and your Sons and your Daughters shall prophecy, and your old men shall
dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions. Agreeable, whereunto our
Savior in the gospel says, Mat. 23. 34. Behold I send unto you prophets and
wisemen, and Scribes etc. And again, it is not you that speak but the spirit
of your heavenly father that speaks in you. Mat. 10 20. From whence comes
this observation, that our most gracious God in all ages has had such a care
in building up his Church, that he has vouchsafed to speak unto the same, and
to send forth laborers into his vineyard from time to time, that like as in
the beginning and creation of all things, he said Let there be light, and there
was light, let there be a firmament, etc. I say, as in the creation of the
material frame and substance of this external and visible world, God made al
things by his word, (for he spoke the word and they were made) Ps. 148. 5. So
in the new regeneration and building up of the New Ireusalem, he sends forth
his word, that is, he speaks by his spirit in the hearts and minds of his
holy Ministers, that they should speak unto the congregation that which he
enioyneth them.

The second observation is, that in as much as, it is not simply we that speak
unto you, but the spirit of our heavenly father that speaks in us) whereupon
the Prophet says: The word of the Lord came unto me) that you yield such
attention to the word spoken by us, as unto the word of the eternal and living
God, as Christ himself teaches, saying: He that hears you hears me, etc.
Mat. 10. and that especially because we are unto you, as this prophet was unto
the people of ISRAEL, the Ambassadors or Legates of the Lord, as Saint PAVL
plainly proves, saying: Now then are we Embassiadors of the Lord, as though
God did beseech you through us, we pray you in his steed that you would be
reconciled unto God, for he that made him to be sin for us, which knew no
sin, that we might be the righteous of God through him. 2. Cor. 5. verse 20
21. And therefore to conclude of this point, I say, let him that has an ear
hear what the spirit speaks unto the congregation.

Thirdly, by this we may observe and learn how far forth the Almighty God
(whom the heaven of heavens cannot hold or contain) does conform himself,
to our weakness, vouchsafing to speak to us, and to talk with us familiarly,
according to our capacities, whose voice otherwise is so migh ty and so strong,
that it is compared to the thunderclaps which breaks the Cedars of Libanus,
renteth the Rocks, and makes the Mountains to cleave in sunder. This the
Israelites make plain, who when they had heard the Lord speak unto Moses, and
saw the thunder and the lightning, they desired that Moses might speak unto
them, affirming that if God spoke unto them they should dye, Exo. 20. 19. so
terrible is the voice of the immortal creator to the mortal creature. And yet
notwithstanding for our instruction, admonition, and amendment, he vouchsafes
to speak unto man, sometimes sencibly, and sometimes secretly even in his
ear, as our Savior shows, Mat. 10. 27. saying Whatsoever you shall hear in
the ear that is whatsoever I shall privately by my self, or secretly by my
spirit instill into your ears, hearts or minds (for thus does the word of the
Lord come unto us at this day) I mean the knowledge and intelligence of his
word, even when we are lying in our beds, walking on the way, looking on our
books, or otherwise sequestered from the affairs of this world, in reading,
preaching, meditating, or conferring, Then I say, are our hearts ascending up
to God, and his spirit discending down to us, as the Angels on Jacobs ladder,
for even as the natural man's delight is in those things wherein his corrupted
nature takes pleasure, And as the worldely minded man's thoughts, do run upon
his moneys and his markets, his buyings, buildings, bargains, brablings,
profits, pleasures, or any such like vanities:

Even so are the spiritual man's cogitations, totally and continually
exercised, and meditating in the law of the Lord, and in the mysteries of
godliness, as the Prophet David manifests, in the first ps. v. 3. where he
showing how the godly man bestows his talent, says That his delight is in
the law of the lord, and in that law does exercise himself both day and
night. Or if at any time he does stoop so low, as to associate or busy
himself with the affairs of this world, as to eat, drink, talk, walk,
laugh, buy, sell, or recreate himself with any the creatures (for that cause
subdued unto vanity, it is none otherwise, then as the Apostle S. Paul says,
1. Co. 7. 31. Using this world that is this pleasure, or that profit, as though
he used it not, for why? his heart is stablished in the Lord, and his principle
joy is in the holy ghost, I would say in the law of the Lord or word of God,
unto me, that is to me Ezechiel the strength of the Lord (for so my name does
signify)

As if he would say, though I be of my self a weak, poor, simple, and sinful
soul, yet by his grace I am such a one as it has pleased him to make choice
of for the ministry of his word (for such is his manner to choose) as S. Paul
shows, 1, Cor. 1. 27. 28. saiing, But God has chosen the foolish things of
this world to confound the things which are mighty, and unnoble things of
the World, and things which are despised has God chosen: you, and things that
are not, to bring to naught things that are. So I by the Lord, (though small in
the sight of man) am now called unto this holy function, to be the Lords
Ambassador: or thus, whereas by my natural Parents and birth, I was the child
of death, sin and corruption, (for I was defiled in the womb and ever since)
but now sanctified by the Spirit of sanctification, and begotten of the
immortal seed of Gods word, and enabled to the ministry thereof by my heavenly
father, both Name and Nature is changed, and by his grace I am that I am,
(saying:) If any demand whether this speech unto the prophet was sencible or
secret, it is not much material whether either; for that God uses to speak
both ways unto his Servants, as before is proved; but seems in this place
rather to be audible then intellectual, as appears in the first Chapter,
verse 29. where as he says, he heard a voice of one that spoke (Son of man)
as if he would say, Thou which art but earth and ashes, though I vouchsafe to
speak to thee in familiar manner, and to manifest my glory to thee, as in
chap. 1. verse 3. 4. 5. and 6. etc. Yet be not thou proud thereof, as some of
thy fellows before thee have been, (for knowledge puffs up) but rather go
and do thy message that I shall enioine thee: and be not as JONAS, who being
sent to Niniuie went to Tharsis: neither as ADAM, who being charged not to
taste of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, tasted of the forbidden
fruit: Neither as that man of God mentioned in the first book of Kings, Cap.
13. ver. 1. 2. etc. that came out of Judah, and prophesied aagainst the Alter
that Jeroboam had set up. Who being charged by the word of the Lord, not to
eat bread nor drink water, nor to turn again the same way that he came; who
though he denied the King, requesting him so to do, yet afterward yielded unto
the old Prophet, and was destroyed of a Lion for his labor. Whose example I
counsel thee Ezechiel to mark, that thou do not the like, least I destroy
thee before them, as I destroyed him before thee: for thou art of no better
substance nor strength the^ he was, or the rest before named; nor more able to
withstand or resist me then they were. Remember therefore that I tell thee
before hand, what thou art, and who. Even the Son of a finfull man; whether
thou have respect unto Adam thy first parent, or to bnzie thine immediate
parent (which signifies contempt) thou art but an earthen vessel full of
contempt, more ready to disobey then to obey my commandment, therefore take
heed. A Caveat to all the servants of God how great soever their guiftes be,
that they show not themselves careless of their calling, nor forgetful of
their masters business, as Christ himself aduertiseth, saying: Whosoever
shall put his hand to this plowe (meaning the ministry and preaching of the
word) and look back, that is, by any kind of negligence, or disobedience, is
not fit for the Kingdom of heaven.

This I take partly to be the reason of this Title (Son of man) attributed
unto the Prophet Ezechiel, and as a pulback, to the end he should not be too
much exalted with the multitude of visions and Reuelatio^s (such as were showed
unto him at his first calling) as in the first chapter are to be seen. Like as
Saint Paul records, how in the like case, There was given unto him the
messenger of Satan to buffet him, 2. Cor. 12. 7. From whence we learn, that
before a man can be apt for the kingdom of heaven, I mean capable of divine
mysteries, he must be thoroughly mortified and schooled in Gods school house,
that is, in the furnace of some affliction or great deiection; so as we see in
S. Paul, at his conversion, how he was cast down to the ground, and struck
blind for three days, etc. Act. 9. 4. etc. The like we read of Esaias, whose
mouth was touched with a fire coal taken from the Alter: that is, sanctified
and regenerated by Gods spirit, before his iniquity could be taken away, and
his sins purged, that he might be worthy to go on the Lords business: which is
or may be an advertisement unto all such as seek to enter into the ministry,
before they find or feel in themselves any sufficient gift to discharge the
same, As also an item to those of superior place, that they admit not any into
any pastoral place or cure, that are not qualified thereunto. All which is and
may be comprehended and included under this title of Son of man: which title I
also find atributed to Jesus Chr. as in Mat. 24. v. 30. and 37. 44. to declare
his humanity, as in this place to this prophet, to teach him his infirmity. It
follows, When the Land sins against me, By land, here you must understand
the people, for the land or earth sins not, how beit, it was once cursed for
sin. A figurative speech very usual in the Prophets and word of God, as we
read in Esaias, Chap. 11. v. 9. and 4, where it is said Repleta est terra
scientia domini, that is, The earth is filled with the knowledge of the Lord.
And again, He shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth: where he names
the earth, yet means the people: and rod, yet means the word. And so here,
whereas he says land, it being figurative, gives us to understand, that there
is more meant, then if he had simply said, the people: for it implies not
only that one sort or part of the people, as the higher powers only, or the
middle part should so sin against the Lord, but even all: as if he should
say, both king, and subject, priest and people, poor and rich, young and old,
all which are but earth dust and ashes, the works of my hands, as the vessels
of clay in the hands of the potter, The land q. d. The land that I have long
time tilled and sown with the best seed, the land that I have always loved:
or thus, the people that I have created in mine own Image, delivered from the
hands of their enemies, fed with the finest flower of wheat, preserved and kept
as the apple of mine eye, etc. yet see how grievously they have sinned against
me, and provoked me to wrath, in such wise that I am ready to break their
staff of bread, therefore (Against me) like as it is said, Mat. 12. 30. He
that is not with me, is against me, and provoke me to punish him: so contrary
is sin unto God, that he holds him to be his enemy (as it were) that
commits any sin.

And would not any of us be loath to have his Majesty, our sovereign (I mean
the king of England) to be his enemy? we see by common experience, if a man
purchase but the il will of a Justice of peace in his country, or of some other
superior person, how it is requited again one time or other. But to provoke
the Lord of Hoastes against him (who is a consuming fire) who can but look for
a requital at his hands, who says: and that of right: Revenge is mine, and I
will repay, and of whom it is also said, It is a fearful thing to fall into
the hands of the Lord, As we may see by example, how severe he has showed
himself even toward his most dear children, Adam, David, Paul and others:
for can any of the^ say but as they sinned against him, so he punished the^ for
it even to the eating of a piece of an Apple: as Saul would have sometime done
to Jonathan for tasting a little honey, and yet good Lord what sins are here
committed amongst us on every side against the Lord, not in the singular
number as the prophet notes saying (Atrespas) but in the plural number, even
to Milions and multitudes: it follows Then will I stretch out my hand upon it.
q. d. or declare and show forth my power, my Justice, my judgment, and my
wrath.

Two manner of ways may it be said that the Lord God Almighty does stretch
forth his hand, that is to say, eyither to save or to destroy, as in the 136.
Psalm, verse 12. where it is said, that he brought out Israel from amongst
them, (meaning the Egiptians) with a mighty hand and stretched out arm. So in
the Prophet Hose. 11. Chap: 3. verse. I led Ephraim also as one should bear him
in his arms: but they knew not that I healed them. As David again likewise
says. Ps. 77. verse 15. Thou have redeemed thy people with thine arm, even
the Sons of JACOB and JOSEPH.

As since that time, how has the Lord stretched out his arm for us, and for
our deliverance, Anno 1588. when the great inuafion was pretended by the
Spanish Navy. And again, since that 1605. when the Gunpowder treason was
prepared for to have made havoc of us all? The Lord lifted up his mighty and
stretched out arm for our defense and succor, Osanna his holy name have the
praise for it.

Now as for the defense and preservation of his people, the Lord stretches out
his arm, when they walk in his ways, and turn to him by repentance. So
likewise when he intends to correct or punish his people for their Rebellions
against him, he is said to stretch out his hand, as we read in Job. when
Satan said to God concerning Job. Stretch out thine hand, and touch all that
he has, etc. q. d. punish and plague him. etc. Likewise in Jeremy the 15.
Chap. verse 6. We read thus. Thou have forsaken me says the Lord and gone
backward (meaning the Jews) therefore will I stretch out my hand against thee,
and destroy thee, for I am weary of repenting. (Upon it) By these words we
learn, that whether they are taken literally or figuratively, that both the
earth it self, and the people which dwell on the earth, and are earthlye
minded, are in the hand of the Lord, and subject unto his correction, for as he
corrects the one by famine, dearth, Pestilence, war, etc. So he smites
the other and the fruits thereof with blasting, drought, Mildew, Caterpillars
and such like.

So that to whether of either he stretches out his hand, they must endure and
suffer it, which may teach us in due time to fly unto the lord for succor,
help and favor, especially when we see his hand stretched fourth both
toward the one and the other. For not only our staff of bread is broken,
whereby many of the poorer sort of people are plagued, but also the earth it
self is smitten, whereby in many places her fruits and increase have failed,
it cannot be denied. (And I will break the staff of bread thereof) q. d. I
will punish the people of that place with dearth and scarsitie of corn, and
with hunger and famine. These words are partly figurative as the former, and
therefore the more deeply to be considered. For many ways is the lord said to
break the staff of bread, acording as I find in his holy writ, as now I will
declare unto you, to the end that you may perfectlye understand the meaning of
these words, and the will of the Lord contained in them.

Three manner of ways do I find that these words may conveniently be taken:
as first, when the Lord does diminish or abate the fruits of the earth, as of
Wheat, Barley, Rye, etc. and so bring in a dearth and famine amongst the
people, as he foretells by Moses, saying, The Lord shall smite thee with a
consumption, and with the Fever, and with a burning Ague, and with fervent
heat, and with the sword, and with blasting and myldew, etc. This also he
fore-sheweh by Ezechiel to come upon the Jews in their Captivity, saying,
Thou shall also take unto thee Wheat, and Barley, and beans, and Lintell and
Millet and Vetches, and put them in a vessel, and make thee bread thereof,
according to the number of the days, that thou shall sleep upon thy side,
etc. And in the 16. verse of the same Chapter, he says; I will break the staff
of bread in Jerusalem, and they shall eat bread by weight, and drink water by
measure, and with astonishment: meaning through the rarity and scarsenes of
Corn, and this is the first way of breaking the Staff of bread. And after the
which way or manner, the Lord has broken our staff of bread in some measure in
this Land, by causing the earth to fail of her increase of some sort of
grain, as Wheat especially.

The second way or mean, whereby the staff of bread is broken, is, when
though there be Corn sufficient in the land, (as yet is) notwithstanding the
earth failing her increase, (through the charitable assistance of some other
Nations) yet the price thereof is so enhaunsed and raised up through the
covetousness and cruelty of the Corn-breeders, buyers and sellers, Conueyers and
Corn-mongers, that the poor are not able to compass it. And though they do
for a time hold out by selling and pawning all that they have, yet at the last
they can hold out no longer, but miserably die of the dearth and famine.

Of this kind of breaking the staff of bread, the Prophet AMOS makes
mention. Chap. 8 verse. 4. 5. saying: Hear this, O ye that swallowe up the
poor, and make the needy of the land to fail, saying: When will the new
Moon he gone, that we may sell Corn? and the Sahoath, that we may set forth
Wheat, and make the Ephah small, and the shekell great, and falsify the
weights by deceit? As we have many amongst us at this day, that spy out their
oportunities to raise their prices, as both at sowing time, full tide, and the
latter end of the year.

By this means it may be also truly said, that the lord has broaken our staff
of bread, for though here be corn and grain sufficient in the land (as I
have proved) yet the price is inhaunsed so high, that the poor cannot attain
to it: for how can they when their earnings amount not to above four or five
shillings a week for a man, he having seven or eight persons depending upon
him to be relieved with the same: as for example, I know many poor Ministers,
yea, and some of them sufficient preachers, who having but ten pounds a year
stipend to live on, who are charged as I have said, whose maintenance will not
suffice to find him and his bread only, after the rate and price that Corn
is now come unto, a pitiful case: consider O King, and let all such
hard-hearted Corne-sellers and consumers of their brethren, that either by
hardness of heart, covetousness, or cruelty, transportation or conueying
away of Corn from their native country and neighbors (now in time of dearth
and scarsitie especially) to Aliens, Pirates, or other nations, and see and
suffer their poor Brethren and Sisters at home to lie in the Streets, and at
their doors, and complain, and pine and perish.

Let the^ I say consider what the Lord of hosts says unto them, verily thus:
The Lord has sworn by the excellency of Jacob and said: surely I will not
forget any of their works. And again, shall not the land tremble for this,
and every one mourn therein? Amos. 8. verse. 4. 5. As if he should say to them
hereafter, as Abraham once said to Dives. Son remember that thou in thy life
time liuedst in pleasure, and Lazarus in pain, now he is comforted and thou
art tormented. The third and last way whereby the Lord is said to break the
Staff of bread, is when the Lord gives the fruits of the earth in abundance,
and ability sufficient to provide them, in so much that many eat and drink
thereof continually, and yet notwithstanding, they are always empty, hungry
and not satisfied. And al because God has not blessed it unto them, neither
they showed themselves thankful unto him therefore: for how many of this sort
of people may a man find at this day amongst us, that sit down and eat and
drink and fill themselves from day today, and rise up again, never thanking
the lord for his benefits. This point the prophet Ose touches, Chap. 4. 10.
saying, For they shall eat and not have enough, they shall commit adultery and
shall not increase, and all because they have left off to take heed unto the
Lord: as if he would say, to be thankful unto the Lord for his benefits.
Agreeable thereunto the Prophet Hagge. Chap. 1. 4. says also; Ye have sown
much and bring in little, ye eat but ye have not enough, ye drink but ye are
not filled, ye cloth you, but ye are not warm, ye earn much, but ye put it in a
bottomless bag: like unto those that have the dropsy, who are ever drinking,
and are ever dry; or as the covetous, who are always catching, and never
satisfied nor content, and all because the Lord does not bless it unto them,
not considering that the blessing of God, makes rich and brings no sorrows
with it, Pro. 10, 22. It is wonderful to consider (if many had grace so to do)
how much the blessing of God, avails in this case: For to speak upon mine
own experience herein; I have seen where the creatures of God have been
received without reverence, and giving of thanks; that as much has been
weekly dououred in bread only of two persons, as where they have been taken
with sobriety and thankfulness, has sufficed eight other persons, yea and those
eight in better liking and state, then the other two.

As we read of Daniel and his fellows, who feeding on pulse, and drinking
water, were in better liking then those that had the kings portion. I speak it
I say upon perfect knowledge and experience. Of which sort of people, the Poet
Iuuenall makes mention, to have been in his time, of whom he writes thus,
Nos numerus sumus, fruges consumere nati, meaning, that there were a number
borne (as it seemed) to no other end but only to eat, and drink and die. Of
whom the Apostle saint Paul makes mention, saying, For many walk of whom I
have told you often, and now tell you weeping, that they are: the enemies of
the cross of Christ, whose end is damnation, whose belly is their God, whose
glory is their shame, which mind earthly things, etc.

From whence it may appear, that when the Lord breaks the staff of bread,
blesses not the labor: where thanksgiving is not used, neither sobriety
practiced nor regarded, there is both hunger and famine continually.

Which may serve for an Item, to all Epicures, Atheists, and swaggerers, that
neither think on God receiving his benefits, nor thank him for them being
received.

But me thinks I hear it demanded, wherefore does the Lord use such dark
and figurative speeches in delivering his message unto his people? partly for
the deep sense and manifold uses thereof to be made, and partly as our saniour
says, Mat. 13. 13. To you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of
God, That is, to the prudent, studious, and lovers of wisdom: for as the
greatest treasures are commonly found in the deepest mines, and the sweetest
kirnell within the hardest shell: so the darker speech, the deeper sense, and
the harder words, the higher mystery: As may appear by that which here
ensues.

For like as a staff is a strength and stay unto an old, lame, and impotent
person in his gate, if it be whole and sound; or as a man that has a journey to
go, takes a staff in his hand, as well for defense (if any danger hap) as
also for other necessary uses; which if it be cracked or broken, stands in no
steed, but if it be whole, it avails much:

So bread is unto the body of man a necessary supply, to support him in the
affairs of this life, so long as he can have it: but if it hap to be scanted
or withheld from him, he cannot longindure: Both which may teach us these
good duties, First, daily and dilligently to ask it at the hands of God by
prayer, as also to return unto him due sacrifice, of praise and thanksgiving
therefore: In both which respects, no doubt but there are many very negligent
and remiss.

But howsoever, or whenever it is broken or diminished, we see by this, that
is here said, that our sins are the cause of it: but for what sin or
sins? there is the question: for some think it is for pride, and so it may
well seem, for was there ever such flaunting in fashions, or cost in colors?
such lasing and fasing, cuts or conceits, as are now adays used of many, who
never stint cutting of whole cloth into iags and rags, and all for a little
paltry pride, and filthy fashion, most contrary unto Christ his coat, which had
no seame? which although in mystery does teach an other thing; yet in plain
words should teach us to make our garments somewhat decent, modest, and
christian-like. Some again think that covetousness is the cause thereof,
as well it may be supposed: for was there ever such lease-monging, copy
catching or running for reuersions, as is now a days? for if a man have but a
life or two in his living (if it be any thing better then his yearly rent) he
shall be sure to have it taken over his head, if he bestirre not himself the
better: or if he have 20. or 30. years to come in his lease, except he make
the better haste, he is like to come too short of a further estate: yea though
the years current and vnexpired be not like to be ended before the world be
ended. Some again think whoredom to be the cause of this dearth, which
indeed so ouerfloweth the land as Noes flood did sometime the world.

Some impute it unto usury and extortion, for never was there such usury I
suppose, for here is use upon use, that is, use for the use, beside use for
the principal, notwithmanding that the Prophet David has said. Lord who shall
dwell in thy Tabernacle, or rest in thy holy hill? Even he that has not given
his money to usury, nor takes reward against the innocent. Ps. 15. 1. 5. And as
for extortion I say no more, but let all those that take fees in offices or for
office, take heed thereof.

Others think that drunkenness is the cause that our Staff of bread is broken;
some say swearing, for never was there more of either. Thus Quot homines tot
sententiae (as they say) so many men, so many minds. But if I might enterpose
my Judgment among the rest, concerning the very efficient, and operative cause
indeed of this breaking the Staff of bread amongst us; I would say with
Solomon, In quo quis peccat, in eo punietur, that is, wherein a man offends or
sins, therein or thereafter, he shall be punished. Sap. 11. 13. whereunto
Moses astipulateth, saying: Pro mensura peccati, erit plaga, that is, according
to the measure of the trespass, or hurt, the punishment shall be. Deu. 25. 2.
Now, if the equity both of divine and humane laws be such, that wherein a man
sins or trespasseth, therein or thereafter, he shall be punished; then although
the least of those sins before recited, have deserved to have our Staff of
bread broken: yet more properly to define thereof, I may say, that as the Lord
has three manner of ways broken our staff of bread, so there may be gathered
three special causes, more justly procuring the same then the rest.

Like as we read that the sins of Sodom and Gomore, were pride, fulness of
bread, that is, gluttony and drunkenness, abundance of idleness, and not
strengthening the hand of the poor; yet when we rightly consider of their
punishment, we shall find that as they burned in unlawful lust one toward an
other, so were they burned and consumed with fire and brimstone from heaven:
like as our late Arch-traytors, that intended to blow up others with
Gunne-pouder, were some of them stroke down with the same, and others so
scorched, that they carried it to their graves, So righteous is God in all his
ways, and holy in all his works.

Thus in like manner may we suppose, that of this threefold breaking our staff
of bread, there may be gathered three capital crimes, or principal causes
above the rest. As first, our great contempt of the heavenly Manna, and sweet
food of our souls; our disobedience to the word of God, I mean, so
plentifully and purely preached amongst us. And this does DAVID most plainly
prove in the ps. 81. verse 13. whereas he says: O that my people would have
hearkened unto me, That is, unto my word preached amongst them; and Israel had
walked in my ways! Mark the answer, verse 16. Then would I have fed them
with the fat of wheat, and with honey, out of the rock would I have sufficed
thee. As if he would have said, because ye have not hearkened to my word, nor
obeyed the same, I have scanted your bread and broken the staff thereof. But
here happily you will say, of what manner of persons is the word of God so
despised, as you speak of? First, of the Recusant Papists, that will not hear
it read nor preached, except it be ofa Mass priest, and that in the latin
tongue. Secondly, of the Precisian, that cares not to hear it read in the
church at all, nor preached, except it be of such a minister as does refuse
subscription. Yea but those are esteemed and taken for the most zealous
professors of al: They would indeed be so accounted, but I find by
experience, that they have done more harm in the Church, the^ ever the
Recusant papists did, that would not come to church at all For hereby the
ministry is reproached, the word despised, and the people so destracted, that
whereas before they were very attentive to the word read and preached, and duly
resorted to their several parishes; now they run some one way and some
another, as it were so many sheep without a Shepherd, not suffering wholesome
doctrine, but having their ears itching, do after their own lusts, get them
an heap of teachers, even as S. Paul long since prophesied, 2. Tim. 4. verse 3.

The third and last sort of them that contemn the word, are those, old and
cold protestants that do usually and daily come and sit before the minister and
hear but how? none otherwise then those Isralites of whom the Prophet
Ezechiel makes mention, saying, For they come to thee, as the people use to
come, and my people sit before thee, and hear thy words, but they will not do
them, for with their mouths they make iestes, and their heart goes after
their covetousness: and lo, thou art unto them as a jesting song of one that
has a pleasant voice, and can sing well, for they heard thy words, but they do
them not.

And thus is the word of God contemned in a manner of all, or at the least of
the greatest part of the people amongst us.

The second cause of this our staff of bread broken, is, (as I take it) the
corrupting or abusing of those good creatures of Wheat and Barlye, which God
so plentifully has heretofore powered down upon us, as for many years past
they have bin. But happily you will say, wherein or how have we abused the^?
Behold, and I will show you: First, of wheat, wherewith the Lord has made as a
sure promise to feed us with the finest Flower thereof: have not we turned it
from the right use thereof, in filling our bellyes, unto the fineing of our
necks, by cha^ging it from making of bread into making of starch? a most vile
and abominable abuse, when you shall have in some one little town in this Land
as much wheat weekly spent in making of Starch as in making of bread: and as
for the other grain of Barlie, who knows not how many ways it is, and has
bin misspent of many: some feeding their Hogs, some their Dogs and Horses
therewith, where as Christ himself was content to feed himself therewith,
and feasted many thousands. Others converting it into malt in such excessive
manner and measure, as passes to speak of, and then transporting it who
knows whether? that both the price is enhaunsed thereby as you see, and
dru^kennes daily maintained: for what is it to have an hundred bushels of Malt
brewed in one little Town every week in the year, where as twenty would
suffice? One of the sins of Sodom was (as you have heard) fullness of bread,
so I may say, that one of the chief sins of this land is fullness of drink,
and surely not the least, nor in the last place of those which have caused this
our Staff of bread to be broaken. For if a man do but note the abominable
quaffing and carowsing, with kneeling on their knees to their God Bacchus (I
suppose) as it is used in many places, in taking of their liquor, it would make
any Christian heart to ache to behold or hear thereof.

This I say, I take to be not only the cause or one of the causes why the
staff of our corporal food is broken; but also of our Spiritual in so many
places scanted, through the strength of many, who are strong to set up
drunkenness, as the Prophet Esaias writes. Capter. 5. who should be rather
dealing and distributing of that liquor, of the which if a man once taste or
drink of, he shall never more be a thirst, as our savior shows, Io. 4. 14.
This is it that the Prophet Amos meant, saying: Chapter. 8. 11. Behold, the
days come says the Lord, that I will bring a Famine in the land, not a Famine
of Bread, nor a thirst of water, but of hearing the word of the Lord. Which
famine even in these our days of dearth and scarsitie, has not been a little
threatened, and which thirst is te^ thousand times worse then the former. For
this is the famine of the soul, and the spiritual drought that the Prophet
Jeremy speaks of Chap. 50. ver. 38 saying: Siccit as super aquas. A drought
is upon his waters, and they shall be dried up. etc. For by how much the soul
is more precious then the body, by so much the more is the death or famine of
it to be lamented, then of the other.

But here it may be demanded whether that the same be the causes of the one
as the other? no, for as the things be different, so the causes are likewise
contrary, and yet being considered in a spiritual thought, we shall find
them very correspondent the one to the other. For as disobedience, corrupting,
and unthankfulness are the causes of the one, so rejecting and neglecting are
the causes of the other.

Even as the Israelites when they were cloyed with Manna, murmured, and had
Quails; so many amongst us at this day, being drunken with superfluity (but
not of Wine) have spewed up again that which was good at the first receiving,
and have longed for that which was worse, as the Israelites did for the
fleshpots of Egypt.

Now concerning the third cause which I have assigned to unthankfulness; for
as much as the Lord in a manner looks for nothing else at our hands, for all
the benefits that he has given us, appears by David. Psalm. 116. verse, 12.
17. where he says, What shall I give or render unto the Lord for all his
benefits toward me? The answer is, I will offer to thee a sacrifice of
praise, and will call upon the name of the Lord: as if he would say, I will
give him thanks, and praise his name. And again, Psame. 63. verse. 5. 6. As
long as I live I will magnify thee on this manner, and will lift up my hands
in thy name: my soul shall be satisfied even as it were with marrowe and
fatness, when my mouth prayseth thee with joyful lips. Yet our mouths
cannot so do, because they are otherwise filled with Oaths, Cursses,
Blasphemies, and other prophanes, or else utterly mute and silent, as I have
showed.

Thus much concerning the causes both origninall and accidental of Dearth, the
Metaphores, or phrase of speech, the sense and meaning thereof, and the
Mysteries and Doctrines therein contained. And so now I come to the effects and
fruits thereof. (And I will send Famine upon it) this Famine as you have heard
is to be taken two manner of ways; that is, either for the defect of
Spiritual or of Corporal food. Concerning the first, which I hold most
proper unto this place, the whole scriptures are pregnant, showing how God, not
only threatened, but also brought the same to pass in all ages, punishing
sometimes therewith some particular places and persons: sometimes whole
Nations, and sometimes the whole world, as we read in Ge. Ch: 12. 26. 41. and
47. How the Lord visited the South in the days of Abraham and Jacob: Egypt in
the days of Pharaoh, Samaria and Jerusalem and other Nations from time to time.

The prophets Esaias, Jeremy, and Ezechiel in one and the self same Chap, viz.
the 14. (as if they had spoken al three with one mouth, as they did by one
spirit) do show that the Lord will kill the root of Palestina, and not leave
the rebellions of Judah and Ierulem, unpunished with famine. How just and true
the Lord is in all his promises and propheseings, our own experience can best of
all bear witness, who have tasted the twigs of this rod three several times
within the space of twenty four years, wherein we have or might have heard
and seen the poor, miserablye crying, and dying through the extreamitie of
dearth and famine. Oh! but happilye you will say, I never heard or saw any
such. Ans. But I have, who am both auritus and oculatus testis: that is, both
an ear and an eye witness thereof.

Indeed I think that many of superior place have not seen so much: for as the
common saying is, Aquila non capit muscas, the Eagle takes no Flies, because
she soareth so hye. And so do many of the richer sort of this world, sildome
or never behold nor hear, or thoroughlye feel and understand the State of
the poor distressed: As Dives little felt what were Lazarus pains or hunger.
But in as much as the Lord has said he will send famine upon the land that
commits a trepasse against him, let that be one proof. Like as that woeful
fact of that Woman in Samaria, that sodde her Son one day, and complained to
the King that her Neighbor would not do the like for her next day.

But here it may be demanded unto what manner of persons this dearth of ours
is a Plague, or a famine? Ans. Not unto the rich I suppose, for they feel it
not, no more then Pharaoh did the dearth in Egypt, and therefore it may well be
called the poor man's plague, for so it is: But what? you will then say have not
the rich sinned as well as the poor? yes. And have not they procured this
plague as well as the poor? yes. Why then are not they punished as the rest? My
censure you shall see.

First I say with the Apostle Saint Peter, that judgment begins at the
house of God. Secondly like as Pharao felt not the stroke of dearth in Egypt,
nor his jolly courtiers about him, yet you see how afterward he and they were
all destroyed in the red sea. So when God has visited the poor (which are his
own house) he will come upon the mighty with greater judgments afterward:
for as Solomon says, the mighty shall be mightily tormented, Sap. 6. 6. And
David says: He will not verily clear the wicked. It follows. And I will
destroy both man and beast forth of it: Such is the jealousy and wrath of
Almighty God, that when sinners will not repent, he not only does punish
their sins to the third and fourth generation; but also extends the same,
as well unto the unreasonable creatures, such as the Beasts and Birds are, as
unto the insensible earth and fruits thereof, by making it either as hard as
iron under foot, or else the Heaven as brass over head. q. d. Both shall be
unfruitful and unseasonable; so that by their distemperature, the Beasts or
Cattle shall likewise be destroyed, As for example, what murrens of Cattle, and
rots of Sheep have we had in this Land, within the space of these few years
past? And as for the persons that dyed that way, who can tell the number or
names of them? And so I come to the third and last part of this Text, wherein
are set down the helps and remedies of this dearth now being, if they may be
effectually put in practice. It follows: Though these three men, Noe, Daniel
and Job were amongst them, they shall deliver but their own souls by their
Righteousness, says the Lord: But me thinks I hear some say, what helps or
remedies are to be found or gathered from these words? or what point of
doctrine or knowledge is here to be had concerning the same?

Answer. Surely all that ever the word of God teaches to be done in such a
case; and that is enough and sufficient, if we had eyes to see, or hearts to
understand. But in as much as many have eyes and see not, and hearts and
understand not, (for the natural man perceives not the things that pertain to
the spirit of God) for how can he, seeing that they are spiritually discerned?
Therefore have I thought good at this time to lay open more at large the sense,
Doctrine, and uses of this Scripture. But first let us consider what coherence
or reference, it may have with other places of like nature: for in Jeremy the
15. Chap. v. 1. it is said upon like occasion, Though Moses and Samuel stood
before me, yet mine affection could not be toward this people. The sense or
meaning of both which places is thus: that there is no entreatie with the Lord
for the wicked and unrepentant people of the world: But in no case any
prejudice unto the faithful flock of Jesus Christ. For, as we may see how
absolutely the Lord refuses to hear Moses and Samuel, praying for them, yet
it shuts not the door of repentance to the faithful, and penitent, as we
find in verse 15. and 19. where the Lord both promises unto Jeremy, that if
he would return unto him, and the people with him, they should be brought
again, and stand before the Lord.

And Jeremy for his own part (notwithstanding the former communication)
prays saying: O Lord, thou know, remember me, and visit, and revenge me
of my persecutors, take me not away in the continuance of thy wrath, etc. Even
as in this place it is said, though Noe, Daniel, and Job were amongst them,
etc. where again we learn, that as there is no place nor reason of
reconciliation, left unto the wicked, continuing in their wickedness, yet the
faithful and repentant (how few soever they be) have always free access unto
the throane of grace, so often as they shall return unto the Lord their God, which
makes much for the consolation of the godly, as on the contrary part, it may
increase the terror and trouble of the wicked, more and more: which doctrine
the Prophet David makes plain, ps. 32. 10. saying; Many sorrows shall come
to the wicked, but he that trusts in the Lord, mercy shall embrace him on
every side. A most evident example we have of this, in the destruction of Core,
Dathan and Abiram, with their company: and the deliverance of Moses and Aaron,
with their partakers, notwithstanding there was offering of Incense on both
sides, yea, and that at one and the self same time, yet the rebellious part
only perished and the obedient were preserved and delivered.

Again, when the plague was begun, and the wrath of the Lord gone forth,
for the murmuring of those that escaped the swallowing of Corah (as were read
in the same chapter, v. 14. so that there died 14. thousand and seven hundred
in a short time, and the Lord had said, that he would destroy even the whole
congregation; yet when Aaron at the command of Moses, had taken a Censer, and
put fire therein of the Altar, with Incense, and made the atonement, he
standing between the dead and the living, the plague ceased.

A singular document for us at this day, who standing in the like predicament
of punishment of (for as they were punished with the plague of pestiilence, for
their rebellions against the ministers of God, enen so we for our rebellions
against the word of God with dearth and Famine) and therefore had need to take
our Censers, that is, our hearts, and put fire therein, (as Solomon says in
the person of VVisdome) My Son give me thy heart,, and put therein the fire
and zeal, that we may be fervent in Prayer, and call upon the name of the
Lord earnestlye, as our high Priest Jesus Christ has taught by his own
example; who in his Agony, when the hand of the Lord was upon him, as we
read in S. Luke, chap. 22. verse. 44. prayed most instantly. This is the very
doctrine of this place, for what does the prophet else mean, when he says:
Though Noe, Daniel and Job, that were amongst the^? but this, that such me^ as
these were, who called upon the name of the lord in their troubles, as Daniel
preached his word faithfully as Noe, and practiced the same effectually in
their co^uersations, as Job did, shall deliver their own souls by their
righteousness, that is, such as repent them truly of their sins, and put
their trust in the Lord, even as Solomon likewise teaches saying: When there
shall be famine in the land: when there shall be pestilence, blasting, or
Mildew, Groshopper, or caterpiller, when the enemy shall beseidge them in the
city of the Land, or any plague, or any sickness. Then what prayer or
supplication soever shall be made of any man, or of al thy people Israel, when
every one shall know his own Plague, and his own disease, and shall stretch
forth his hands toward this house, meaning the Temple: Hear thou then in
heaven thy dwelling place, and be merciful and give every man according to his
ways, as thou do know his heart, for thou only know the hearts of the
Children of men. Thus does Solomon (like as Moses) teach, how in all our
troubles and distresses, we must take the censure of a troubled and sanctified
soul, and come to the Lord his Temple, wheresoever two or three shall be
gathered together in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and make our prayers
and supplications, knowing and acknowledging our plague, and our disease, that
is, our own fin, and shall stretch forth our hands toward the new Jerusalem:
that then God will hear in heaven his dwelling place, and be merciful, and
give every one according to his ways. Therefore shall every one that is Godly
says David, Psalm. 32. 6. make his prayer unto thee in time, when thou may
be found. And therefore are these Patriarchs and Prophets here named, Noe,
Daniel and Job, who all of them called upon the Lord in their necessities, and
were helped as we read in Genesis 7. Dan. 6. Job. 39. chapters. For here by
prayer-making or calling on the Lord, is meant the whole worship of God, a part
put for the whole, as likewise our Savior teaches in the Gospel saying: Come
unto me all ye that are weary and laden and I will ease you, where by coming
unto me, Christ teaches what he would have us to do, namely: First to
believe in him, to hear his word, to receive his Sacraments, to sanctify his
Saboaths and power forth our hearts before him, in all manner of prayer,
confession, thanksgiving, and supplication, as we learn in 1. Tim. 2. 1.
Therefore does the prophet here say; Though Noe, Daniel, and Job were amongst
them; signifying hereby, how small the number of true conuerts should be in
all ages. Likewise Noe before the Law, amongst the Patriarchs, as Daniel under
the Law amongst the Prophets, and Job without the Law amongst the Gentiles.

Again, like as Noe signifies rest, so there should be few at al times in the
Church that should be at rest or peace with God, through a true and liuelye
faith in Jesus Christ.

And as Daniel signifies judgment of the Lord, so there should be few that
understand aright his judgments. And as Job signifies sorrowful, so there
should be few truly sorrowful or penitent for their sins, as by perfect
experience we prove it in these days; for notwithstanding the Gospel has
long time shined amongst us; and the judgments of God have been plentifully
powered down upon us, both by sea and land, by Fire and water, Plague and
Pestilence, Dearth and Famine, etc. yet where is one Noe or preacher of
righteousness, that builds up the Arc (as God bad him) as he did? or where is
one Daniel that refuses the Kings portion, and provision; that is, any
pleasure or profit of this life, and contents himself with pulse and water,
giving himself to prayer and fasting, as Daniel did? or where is one Job to be
found so patient and penitent, that of whom it may be said, as it was of him
in all his afflictions, that in all this he sinned not, neither charged God
foolishly: for these be the very true helps and means to redress this dearth
and Famine, if it would please God to give us such grace.

The Lord be merciful unto us, and create in us new hearts, and right spirits,
that we may in due time break off our sins by repentance, and turn to the
Lord our God with all our hearts unfeignedly. Amen.

(Were amongst them) q. d. either to preach to them as Noe did to the old
world, or to pray for them, as Daniel did for the Israelites in Captivity, or
to give example of holy life, as Job did of all long suffering, patience, and
repentance, which are the very true means and remedies of these judgments of
God now inflicted upon us, as I have showed, and as the Prophet David proves
most plainelye in the 67. Psalm saying: Let the people praise thee O God,
yea, let all the people praise thee, Then shall the Earth bring forth her
increase, and God, even our own God shall give us his blessing.

Where under the word (Praise) are contained all the duties of our devotion
toward God, as Faith, Prayer, Preaching, Repentance, holy life, etc. But
happilye here some will say, have not we many Godly Preachers, devout
Orators, and divine livers amongst us at this day as ever were? as Daniel was
then living amongst the Jews, as likewise this prophet Ezechel, a man of God,
etc True it is, that both Daniel and Ezechiel were the^ living, and amongst the
Jews, as it is to be hoped that there are many of the Servants of God amongst
us at this day, both Prophets and Pastors, and yet by reason of the captivity
that they were in, and the peoples Idolatry which they had set up in their
hearts, (as this Prophet Ezechiel shows in the beginning of this 14. Chapter how
they had done, saying: Son of man, these me^ have set up their Idols in their
hearts, and put the stumbling block of their iniquities before their face,
should I being required answer them? I say, what by reason of the peoples
Idolatry, and their captivity and hard entreaty, they were neither regarded
nor believed. As many of the servants of God amongst us at this day are in like
manner dealt with: from whence may be gathered, that the people do not make
that use of Gods servants, whether absent or present amongst them, as they
ought to do: God grant this sin be not amongst us, but it is greatly to be
feared that it is, for where is one Zaccheus amongst the rich that stands
forth, and says in this needful time of comfort, Behold Lord, the half of
my goods I give to the poor, etc. or where is their one Lidies heart so
opened, that does cheerfully receive or charitably refresh the servants of God
as she did? I say, where is there one Man or one Woman so won by the word
that lays a part one link of his Golden chain, one lace of her velvet
fleeue, or a bateth one breadth of their broad ruffes, or sets a part one
dish of their dainty superfluities at every feast, toward the relief of so
many poor Lazares as abou^d round about us at this day? yea, what have I seen
to the contrary? namely thus: that where there has been a motion made on the
Saboath day in the Church by the minister to the whole congregation assembled
in the behalf of two poor, sick, naked, hungry, and impotent persons for
some relief; there has been gathered in the same day, in the afternoon,
four times as much for a Beareward and his bear, as has been given and
collected toward those two poor Christian persons, which argues the
coldness of charity in many hearts, and the deadnes of devotion amongst
those that should shine as Lamps in all manner of good works above others. So
that of the true zealous: devout and charitable converted Christian indeed, I
may say as Job speaks of the good interpreter; if there be one amongst a
thousand it is marvel: wherefore, in the way of a general Admonition, I say,
let him that thinks he stands, take heed least he fall, for but only Noe,
Daniell, and Job shall deliver their ownesoules by their righteousness, that is,
from the plague or punishment that I will bring upon them, from whence arises
a double question to be dissolved.

First, whether any man can deliver his own soul by his righteousness?
Secondly, whether there be any such righteousness in man, as that thereby he
should deliver his own soul, or the soul of another man from any present
plague or punishment, or from everlasting death, as some suppose? To the first
I answer, that no man can deliver his soul, nor the soul of another man from
death temporal, or eternal, which the Prophet David proves plainly saying:
Yet a man by no means can redeem his brother, he cannot give his ransom to
God, so precious is the rede^ptio^ of their souls and the continuance for
ever, that he may live still for ever, and not see the grave. Ps. 49. ver. 7. 8.
9. Secondly, to approve that there is no such righteousness in man, as thereby to
deliver his own Soul, the prophet David says plainelye, Psalm 143. 2. Enter
not in judgment with thy Servant O Lord, for no^ flesh is righteous in thy
sight. And the Prophet Esaias, Chap. 64. verse 6. says, But we have been all as
an unclean thing, and all our righteousness is as filthy cloutes. Saint Paul
also teaches, that not by the works of righteousness which we have wrought,
but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of the new birth, and
renewing of the holy Ghost. Tit. 3. 5. But then you will say, how does the
Prophet here say, that they should deliver but their own souls by their
righteousness? that is, as I have showed already; from some temporal plague
or punishment threatened or deserved. As we read of the King of Niniute and
his people, how they prevented their destruction by repentance which otherwise
should have ensued within fortye days. Of Hezekia, who calling upon the Lord
in the time of his sickness, and truly repenting, prolonged his days for 15:
years afterward, and so examples might be given of many others.

Again, it may be answered, that Soul in this place is taken for the life of
man, as Jonas delareth the like. Io. 4. 3. saying. And now O Lord, I beseech
thee to take away my life, for it is better for me to die then live. Where the
Latin word which is put for life is Anima, which signifies the soul, so that
the righteousness of any man, that is, his perfection, uprightness, or
holiness of life, is but to deliver him from some temporal Plague or
punishment, and not that neither, except he require and seek it at the hands
of God, in and by the righteousness, merits, and Mediation of Jesus Christ.

By whom as the Apostle says, Col. 4. 13: I am able to do all things by the
help of Christ, who strengthens me, and without whom we are able to do
nothing, as himself teaches. Ion. 15. verse. 5. saying: Sine me potest is
nihil. Without me ye can do nothing.

But does not this gain say the opinion of our adversaries the Papists, both
for Invocation and Saints, and for merit of works? let it be well considered
that follows, and ye shall see, The words that follow are these, (Says the
Lord) which words are added for a confirmation of the former Doctrine in mine
opinion, as if the holy Ghost had foreseen, (as no doubt but he did) how much
hereafter it would be impugned, as we see how it is come to pass at this
day, amongst our adversaries the Papists, who rely much upon the helps and
audience of persons departed this life; and also teach and hold both the
merit of the person, and of the work, affirming that there is such a dignity
in the person, that Infants dying immediatelye after Baptism, are worthy of
eternal life; because although they want good works, yet are not void of
this kind of merit. And for the merit of works, they say there is such a
dignity or excellency in the work, whereby it is made fit and enabled to
deserve everlasting life for the dooer. For works (as they hold) are
meritorious two ways. First by covenant, because God has made a promise of
reward to them. Secondly, by their own dignity, for Christ has merited that
they should merit, (as they say) both which points are sufficiently repelled
by this our Text, wherein the prophet says:

Though these three men, Noe, Daniel and Job, etc. which were as holy, worthy
and excellent as ever were any, yet they shall deliver but their own souls by
their own righteousness: By which falls to ground all merit of works, as
well of congruo and condigno, as of supererogation, and that because partlye as
our text says, They shall deliver but their own souls, as also because no
flesh is righteous in his sight: whereby, neither Infants, how young soever
they die, (who are defiled in the womb) and elders who live they never so
long, yet cannot boast of one days cleanenesse, nor justly say, my heart is
pure; and further, because all our dignity, excellency and righteousness is
non otherwise the^ a defiled cloth: finally, if any man would build up
invocation of Saints heeron, besides, the very express words of our Text, the
Apostle Saint Paul will tell us, that there is but one mediator between God
and man, even Jesus Christ, who gave himself a ransom for all men, to be a
testimony in due time, 1. Tim. 2. 5. 6. And so as God, which is the God of al
truth, has spoken and said, Though Noe, Daniel and Job were amongst them, yet
they shall deliver but their own souls by their righteousness: which may
teach us not to build our salvation upon any man's holiness, gifts, or
perfection, but rather every man to look unto God, and to the doctrine of his
holy word, which teaches first that the just shall live by faith: and secondly
that he will reward every man according to his works, that is, to them which
by continuance in well doing seek glory and honor, and immortallitie,
eternal life: but unto them that are contentious, and disobey the truth, and
obey unrighteousness, shall be indignation and wrath.

Therefore let no man so deuote himself unto other men, though they seem as
holy, just, and righteous as Noe, Dantel and Job, that in respect of the^, him
or them; they contemn all others. A common fault in these days. God for his
mercies sake give us eyes to see, and hearts to understand, the holy mysteries
of his sacred word, that we be not only hearers of the same, but doers also.
And for so much as by our sins, we have caused thy judgments of dearth and
famine (with the rest) to be powered upon us, give us O Lord a true touch and
feeling thereof inwardly in our hearts, that we dally no longer with our
selves in our sins, and abuse of thy good creatures, but rather consider with
our selves how far and how much we have thereby provoked thy wrath:
remembering also that for eating one piece of an Apple, thou expelledst Adam out
of Paradise; and for one lie thou destroyedst Ananias and Zaphira: And for
gathering of a few sticks on the Saboath day, thou causedst that Israelite to
be stoned. But our sins against thee committed have not been by one and by
one, but by Millions and Thousands, so that if we should take upon us to number
them, we know not where to begin, nor how to make an end. And yet thou
continuest holy, and sendest forth the light of thy word, and the found of thy
Trumpet to awake and raise us up, and to guide our feet into the way of peace.
O Lord make us wise unto the kingdom of heaven and that we may no longer rely
upon our own wits, works or wisdom, which is carnal, sensual, and devilish:
but teach us how to deliver our own souls by our righteousness, that thou
may deliver both our souls and bodies from all evil, both here in the
kingdom of grace, and there hereafter in the kingdom of glory: that we thy
Church militant may be like thy Church Tryumphant, and that by the merits and
mediation of Jesus Christ only, in whom are all thy promises, both yea and
Amen. Unto which Jesus Christ, with thee O father and the holy Ghost, our
comforter, three persons in one eternal and blessed deity be given all
praise, power, glory and benediction both now and for ever. Amen.

A proverb pronounced to all the cruel, covetous, and hard hearted
Corne-maisters, Cloath-maisters, and al other old Pinching pennyfathers at
this day amongst us, who esteem more of their unrighteous Mammon then of the
counsel of Christ our blessed Savior, who aduertiseth them to make them
friends thereof in due time, that they might be received into everlasting
tabernacles and yet will not.

FOr as much as it is said by Christ our Savior, in his holy Gospel, that it
is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man
to enter into the kingdom of GOD, And again, in the self same place, That it
is hard for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven. I marvel that
the rich men of these our days do no better look unto it, then many of them
do, especially such as having the substance of this world in such
superfluity and abundance as they have: for was it not upon great reason
that our Savior did so say, seeing that the desire of money is the root of all
evil, and they that will be rich fall into temptation and snares, and into
many foolish and noisome lusts, which drown me^ in perdition and destruction:
as we may easily see and perceive both by the manifold vanities they do
embrace and maintain, as also by the sundry wickednesses and corruptions they
do commit through the power and strength, I would say, the vain hope and
confidence they have in their wealth: some building Babel or Towers of
confusion, some heaping up Mydaes mountains, and cannot tell who shall inherit
or dispend them: Some as Dives in vanities of apparel, some in superfluity of
meats wines, drinks: etc some in hawking, hunting, Cock-fighting,
Beare-bayting, Dycing, dancing: and others in Tobacco taking, dispending their
revenues, or the greatest part thereof, (for what is it to see a young man of
twenty four years, healthy in body, sound in constitution, to dispend an
hundred marks per annum in Tobacco, when as his Father, Grandfather and whole
generation before him, happilye never in all their time spent one farthing that
way? What a vanity is it then for a man to spend so much that way, without the
which he may live well enough? Besides, if a man should rip up the treacheries
and treasons that have been from time to time complotted amongst the richer
sort, we shall find it most true that Solomon says. Pro. 10 16. The labor
of the righteous tends to life, but the revenues of the wicked to sin, As if
he would say more plainly, the wicked spend al their lands, rents, revenues
and livings, for the most part in evil and ungodly ways. 1. In one kind of
vanity or other, such as I have showed, which how true it falls out in these
days, who sees not? Amongst all which wickednesses, vanities, or sins,
there is not a greater in mine opinion, then this that is here mentioned in
this sentence following. Him that with draws the Corn the people will curse,
etc. For how be it that other vanities and corruptions do bring destruction to
the dooers thereof, and to some few of their posterity This reaches further
even to the whole multitude or number of the poor, which is so infinite, that
it cannot easily be numbered. And by how much the more any evil sparseth it
self abroad, or grows more general, by so much the more it is reprooueable,
and to be condemned.

Then high time it is for the great ones of this world, the great rich
Diueses I mean, that spend so many pounds and pence in mere vanities, in
effecting or bringing to pass so many great and greenous corruptions, (as many
of them do) to look and consider with themselves in time, what will be the
end of all this? verilye none other then what is expressed in this proverb and
sentence of Solomon here following. First, that they shall but gain the curse
of the people; Secondly of God: for the preventing and avoiding of both which,
I have thought good to give this admonition to all that have their eyes open, I
mean any spark of grace, that they might yet in time bethink themselves, and
turn to the Lord from their evil ways. Be counseled therefore Oye rich, and
receive the word of exhortation, make friends of your unrighteous Mammon, sell
that you have and give alms, For what auantageth it a man to win the whole
world, and to loose his own soul? Attend unto the voice of him that once
said Woe be unto you rich for you have your consolation. Wherefore learn to
suffer some affliction here in this life, that ye be not afflicted in the
world to come: We are taught in the word of God to bear one another burden,
bear ye therefore some part of this cross with your poor brethren that are
so hardlye pressed with pennurie, dearth and famine. Bethink with your selves
how many good duties ye have been called unto: how many good occasions have
been ministered, and how many by you omitted; of every of which ye shall be sure
one day to give an account. But yet me thinks I hear the voice of Christ,
saying in mine ear, It Is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of an
needle, then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven, Yea, but what
do the rich men plead for themselves in this case? namelye thus: that although
it be impossible with men, yet not impossible with God: well, I grant it, yet
I say, were it not better for a man to make his election sure and certain unto
him, then to stand upon possibilities? we commonly say, better is one bird in
hand then two in the bush; so I say, it were far better for men to make their
election sure by doing of good works, while space and grace is offered, then
with the five foolish virgins to run up and down from one to another, to buy
oil for their lamps, when none can be had for any money. Who knows not that
there is nothing impossible with God? Christ saved the these upon the gallows
repenting; that was one of his possibilities, to approve himself to be God,
but shall men therefore play the thieves all the days of their lives, and rob
God of his honor, as many do the poor of their goods, and say nothing is
impossible with God? is not this rather to tempt God then to serve him? to
resist the Lord then to obey him? he so daily calling upon them by the Doctrine
of his word to be liberal, to be merciful, to be loving, kind, and
naturally affected one toward another, and yet it cannot be obtained at our
hands, nor wrung out of the hearts of many, who are so won by the world, that
they will not leave off to treasure up vengeance for themselves against the day
of the wrath of the Lord, who will reward every man according unto his works:
which one found of the Lords Trumpet were sufficient to make a breach in our
obstinate souls (if it were well attended unto) and to cause us to abhor
sin as a Serpent, or at the least to conceive some fear in committing
thereof, and continuing therein so resolute as many do. God for his mercies
sake in Jesus Christ vouchsafe to lighten the eyes, and open the hearts of
those that are either so wilfullye blind or hardened in heart, that they will
not see nor understand those things which are so apparent before their faces,
that they may in good time be converted from their evil ways, to serve the
Lord in all holy obedience and newness of life. Amen.

Your well willer in the Lord. W. W.

A Meditation upon the 26. verse of the 11. Chap. of the Proverbs; which may
fitly be called, The poore-mans Plea.
Pro. 11. verse. 26. He that withdraws Corn, the people will curse him, but
blessing shall be upon his head that sells Corn.
LIke as for the incitation and stirring up of good men, unto virtue and
godliness, there are many privileges and promises set down in Gods word, for
their further encouragement and going forward therein, So again on the other
side, for the terror and reproof of the wicked, there are many sentences and
sayings recorded, to the end they might desist and leave off their wickedness,
and turn to the Lord their God. Amongst which, this is one that I have read
unto you, and yields most evident demonstration, as in the several parts
thereof (which are a curse and a blessing) may ealsiy be gathered. For in the
first part it is said: He that withdraws Corn, the people will curse him:
from whence we may first learn, that like as it is not unlawful to keep or
lay up Corn in time of plenty, against a time of scarsitie, and dearth, or
want (as Joseph did in Aegipt) so in time of scarfitie and dearth, when we may
conveniently spare it, and others do want it, then to with-holde the selling
of, or to keep it hutched up in our barnes, Ricks or Garners, in hope to raise
the price of it, and to enrich our selves by undoing or famishing of others,
is a very inhumane and unchristian part. And this is it, that the Holy Ghost
reports in this place, a common fault at this day, for as we are taught by
the Law and the Prophets, To do as we would be done unto, as we read in
Mat. 7. verse 12. Now say then that this were thy case, or mine, (as it is of
many thousands) that either of us did want food or raiment, would we be
content so to be dealt withal, as to give or pay double or treble the price
for either, as they were used to be sold at, or as in any equity or conscience
they are worth? for so are many compelled to do, or else they cannot have them.
And all because that many through covetousness and cruelty, and hardness of
heart are given so many ways to with-drawe their Corn from their Brethren as
they do. For not only do they hutch and hide it up in their Barnes, Rickes,
and Garners, not vouchsafing to store the Markets with it as they ought; But
also when they bring out any, it is in so scant and pinching a manner and
measure, and at so hie a price, that the poor who most do want it, are never
the near, being not able to compass it. Besides this, when they cannot sell
it at their own price, that they would have for it, they set it up, or send it
home again, and then transport it by water beyond Seas unto some other place
of Mart, where they may sell it at their pleasure. And by all these ways may
it be said that they with draw their Corn from the people: as first, when they
bring it not to the market, secondly when they sell it or hold it at too dear
a price, and thirdly when they transport it to other places: and therefore it
were good that all such with-drawers of Corn from the people, or from the
Market, did well consider of this, that the holy Ghost has here left recorded
for the opening of their hearts, if they be not past cure, as I fear me many
of them be; for he that does either miserably hutch it up in his Barn, as the
rich man mentioned in the 12. of S. Luke, that built his barnes bigger, or hold
the price so hie, that the poor cannot reach it, as many did in the days of
the prophet Amos, Chap. 8. 5. saying: When will the new Moon be gone, that we
may sell Corn, and the Saboath, that we may set forth wheat, and make the
Ephah small, and the shekel great, and falsify the weights by deceit? or
vnneighbourly transport it un to other nations or people (as many amongst us do
at this day) the which how dreadful and damnable a thing it is, we may learn
by these manifold Doctrines and divine duties, which Christ our Savior has
left recorded in his holyword, teaching us the contrary. As namely and first of
all, to be merciful, and therefore says, Be merciful as your heavenly father
is merciful: meaning thereby, that we should rather give Corn, and other
food franckly and freelye unto those that want it, then by any cruel and
covetous means, to withdraw it from them: as our Saniour plainly in an other
place says: Give to every man that asks, and from him that would borrow,
turn not thy face away.

This also was the meaning of Saint John, when he said, Whosoever has this
worlds goods and sees his brother want, and releeueth him not, how dwells
the love of God in him? Beside, our Solomon here, v. 25. says to the same
purpose, That the soul of the liberal waxes fat, and he that gives
plentifully shall pour forth. As if he would say, as we commonly say, he shall
have never the less at the years end: yet so diffident and distrustful are
many in this case, that they will rather say with the Prince, mentioned in 2.
Reg. 7. 2. who when Eliza prophesied of plenty, the day following, answered the
man of God thus: Though the Lord would make windows in heaven, could this come
to pass? so diffident I say are many now adoies, especially of these
withdrawers of Corn, that if a man speak to them in the word of the Lord,
that is, persuading or exhorting them to liberallitie toward the poor, or
unto destributing of their Corn to the needy, at a reasonable price, by any
the sentences or sayings of Christ, or manner of his miracles wrought unto that
end (as we may behold by the increase of the five barly-loaues, and two
fishes, and seven loaves, and a few fishes at an other time) they will answer,
as the prince before named, answered Eliza, Though the Lord would make windows
in heaven etc. For which cause let this be known again unto them, that he
which sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly. As by the example of Dives that
rich withdrawer of Corn and bread (for by Corn here, you may understand
bread, drink, cloth, coin, or any such like thing) that would not vouchsafe
poor Lazarus the crustes nor crummes of his trencher, when he lay at his gate,
begging for them: how righteously was he rewarded again, when he would have
had of Abraham but one drop of water to cool the heat of his tongue, being
tormented in hell fire, and could not have it? a special document or warning
to all with-drawers of Corn, Coin, Cloth, or comfort from their brethren, in
time of necessity and distress.

Other examples are left recorded in Gods word, to this end and purpose, viz.
to stir up the hard hearts of such pitiless persons, as having abundance of
Corn, Cloth, etc. in possession, will not, notwithstanding all that can be
said unto them, depart from one mite thereof to the perishing people of this
world. I will rehearse but only that so memorable a fact of Joseph, as it is
recorded in Genesis 45. 28. Unto whom when his brethren came for Corn in time of
scarsitie and dearth, he not only filled their sacks with Corn sufficient, but
also gave them their money back again, which they had brought with them. And
is this recorded in vain (troe ye) and not for our imitation, as well as for our
instruction? as Saint Paul teaches, saying To. 15. 4 Whatsoever things are
written before time (meaning in the word of God) are written for our learning,
that we through patience and comfort of the Scripture, might have hope. But
alas, no examples can move the minds of mortal men, to depart from this
transitory trash, though it were to the saving of their souls. Earthy men
earthly minds: if men would but lift up their hearts a little toward the Lord,
and behold the senseless earth with the flowers and fruits thereof, consider
the the Sun, Moon and Stars, how every one of these in their kind do
yield their sent, savor, taste, light, heat, and comfort to man; it might
something move them to show pity and compassion toward their poor
brethren, standing in need thereof.

Of the Pelican, (a poor Bird) it is reported, that when she has brought
forth her young ones, they die, the which when she perceives, she lamenteth
their death three days, and then for their recovery unto life again, what
does she? even stab her self in the breast with her beak, until the blood
drop out, which she letting fall upon her young ones, they do immediately
revive again, but she dies for it her self.

What a motive might this be to such unmerciful men, (as we have many
amongst us) that in the like case, beholding many of their Brethren and
Sisters, even (as it were) dead at their doors, or little better, will not
drop nor let fall one pennye out of their Purses, nor abate one shilling of
their prices, nor one bushel of their corn, toward the relief, comfort, or
reviving of so many hunger-starued souls as daily pine away and perish, and
all by reason that they so with-drawe their Corn from them so many ways as
they do? For restraint of whose cruel and covetous conceits, let it be
considered what the holy ghost has here left recorded, saying: Him that with
draws the Corn, the people will curse. But is this such a matter (will they
say) to have the curse of the people? what care I for the curse of a thousand
of them, when all their curses will not do me so much harm, as one of my
bushels of wheat or Barlie will do me good.

These and such like are the speeches of those whose hearts are glewed to their
gold, corn, and earthly commodities, in such wise as that they make them
their God, and so care not for the counsel of the Lord their God. But like as
it was once to that great with-drawer of corn mentioned, Luke 12. 18. whose
ground brought forth fruits plentiously, in so much that he said, What shall
I do, because I have not room where I may lay up my fruits? and he said,
this will I do, I will pull down my Barnes, (as many set up their ricks for
like purpose) and build greater, and therein will I gather my fruits, and my
goods. And I will say to my Soul, thou have much goods laid up in store for
many years, live at ease, eat, drink, and take thy pastime (or as we say)
be merry, and make good cheer, as many do at this day: but what was said to
him in the end? God said to him, O fool, this night will they fetch away thy
soul from thee: then whose shall those things be that thou have provided? So
it is with him that gathers riches to himself, and is not rich toward God,
and so it is with all these, none so merry with-drawers of corn, sellers, or
senders away thereof, they are now Iocond and merry, but the time will come,
when they shall mourn and lament.

And here it is worth the nothing, that the Text faith. They shall fetch away
thy Soul, whereby is meant the Devil and his Angels: for like as it is
recorded of Lazarus that pore beggar when he died, that he was carried by the
Angels into Abraham's bosom, but of the rich man there mentioned, the first
news that we hear of him after he was dead, he was in hell torments. Let
every one therefore that lives in his pleasures, or covetous desires (as this
rich man did, and as many other rich men do at this present) make good use
here of and take heed of withdrawing their Corn, Cloth, Coin, or any thing
else, from their poor brethren: for, say they live never so pleasantly or
happy, in the mean time the people do curse them, which although they care little
for; yet behold how great and grievous a thing it is to have the peoples curs
deservedly: for although it be said pro. 26. 2. The curse causeles comes
not, or shall not hurt: yet the curse that is caused deservedly, by cruelty,
oppression, covetousness, or by any other kind of rigorous dealing, or violent
means, shall not pass with out perril and pain. For why, the reason is
evident: the poor cry and the Lord hears them, ps. 10. 17. as if he would
say, he reuengeth them, as he did the Israelites against the Aegiptians, we
commonly say, a common Proverb, Vox populi, vox dei, that is, the voice of the
people is the voice of God, or that which the people do most agree upon or
speak is the voice of God, q. d. whom the multitude did curse, God himself
does curse. For as he is cursed of God that remooueth the land mark, that is
the Merestone or ridge of his neighbor, so as he that remooueth or withdraws
the Corn from the people: at the least we must take it for a grievous plague,
to be justly prosecuted or persecuted with the outcries of the people: for like
as a good name is mote ptetious then ointment, and to be preferred before gold or
silver: So to be justly reproached, maligned, or cursed of the people is a
thing very loathsome and worse then the loss of any worldly thing beside, as
it is well noted by the holy ghost in this place. The last of al Gods
judgments against sinners, and the greatest is, Ite maledicti, that is, go ye
cursed: that is Gods curse: from whence we may learn, how grievous a thing the
curse of man is. Even the greatest grieuance or injury that man can do to man,
as we may gather by the words of Jobs wife, who seeing her husband plagued, her
goods and children destroyed, bids him curse God and dye: As if she would have
said, spit out all thy venom or, seeing thou can do nothing else in the way
of revenge, curse God and die. Like unto that of Sampson, who when he plucked
down the pillar of the Temple, slew both himself and the Philistines also.
For what does a man or a woman intend, or mean, or desire, when they curse
their neighbor or adversary, but even the greatest mischief, plague, or
punishment that they can devise in the bitterness of their souls, to light upon
him or her whom they curse.

And therefore, it is recorded of the holy ghost in Jude, v. 9. as a caveat to
all christians, to take heed of cursing others, or causing others to curse
them. By the example of Michael the Archangell, who when he strove about the
body of Moses, would not blame him with cursed speaking, but only said The Lord
rebuke thee. But happily here some will demand how it falls out that the
dear Saints and servants of God do many times feel the stroke of this sting,
I mean the curse of the people? for answer whereunto, it is not so much to be
considered who are cursed (for all are subject to the tyranny of the tongue)
(as we see by Christ himself) as wherefore they are cursed: for if it be for
righteousness, or reproouing of sin, it comes not, but is a blessing rather,
as our Savior shows it saying, Mat. 5. 11. Blessed are ye, when men revile
you, and persecute you, and shall falsely say all manner of evil against
youfor my names sake, etc. for in this case, they are blessed of God himself:
but if it be for secret sins against God, or for open injuries, oppressions,
and trespasses against our neighbors; then let them take heed least (as they
say) God say Amen: for although it be here said, The people will curse him,
yet as it apeareth by David, 2. Sam. 16. v. 10. 11. God himself does permit
and suffer it, it being his just judgment against such persons as have sinned
against him. The which the Prophet David well considering, would not suffer
Shimei, when he cursed him to be smitten, but rather said, What if God has
bidden him, it may be that God will look upon mine affliction, and do me good
for his cursing.

This Moses makes manifest in the 27. of Deu. where he denounces even from
God himself, many sorts of people accursed, which would not walk in the ways
of the almighty, but transgress his commandments: as thus, Cursed is he
that curses father or mother: cursed is he that makes the blind to go out
of his way.

This does Saint James also confirm, saying, that such men as hourd up their
riches, garments, gold or silver, or withold the wages of the hireling even
til it rust or canker by them, or the moath does fret or eat it, having no
compassion on the poor that want it, are no better then accursed with the
rest, even of God him self, as appears by his words, Chap. 5. v. 1. 2. 3.
saying, Go to now ye rich men, weep and howl for the miseries that shall
come upon you: your riches are corrupt, your garments are moath-eaten, your
gold and silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against
you, and shall eat your flesh as it were with fire, ye have heaped up treasure
against the last days.

As if he would say, ye are accursed all and every one of you, like as they
that withdraw their Corn from the poor, and keep it in their Barnes,
Rickes, or Garners, until it be so mouldie or fustie, that the Rats and Mice
will scant eat it. Therefore let them take good heed, I mean al cruel and
covetous Cornbreeders, buyers, Cornemasters, corne-mongers, cloath-maisters,
and every other pinching pennyfather, who are such lovers of themselves, and
show so little pity toward others, not withstanding that they swim in their
Superfluities and abundance of all wordly treasures and pleasures, do not so
much as bring forth their corn, coin, nor cloth nor any thing else to relieve
them that want, and stand in destres.

But happily, it may here be said, are there not many good laws and orders
made for the releeuing and keeping of the poor in every Parish, and every
Parish has ouer-seeers, to provide them harbor and sustenance? yes it is so I
grant, and yet for all this, the poorly still and complain in vain,
without both house-roome and food. Though the King make his statute, and the
Justice send his precept, yet says Christ, The poor ye shall have always
with you, and so we have, as poor as ever were, and as I suppose never more:
and all by reason of such with-drawers of Corn, as be now a days many amongst
us; who notwithstanding the people do daily curse them, and the Lord does curse
them, and the devil be ready to fetch them; yet there is no compassion,
pity, nor redress. But what will all these with-drawers of Corn, and
with-holders of comfort from the poor do, when he shall come in place that
shall say unto them, when I was naked ye clothed me not, when I was hungry ye
fed me not, when I was harbourlesse ye housed me not, nor so much as
vouchasafed me a nights lodging in their Barnes, etc. Go ye cursed into hell
fire prepared for the Devil and his angels.

Now if God reward these with-drawers of Corn so heavily, that famish or starve
the bodies of their brethren and sisters, by withdrawing or keeping from them
their corporal food, what will he do to those that withdraw and withold
from them the spiritual food of their souls? and do not break to them the
bread of life, I mean that do not preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ; having
received a talent that way, or holding the place of such as should do it? An
Item to all Parsons, Vicars, Patrons, and Fermors of spiritual livings, which
live by the sweat of other men's souls; and yet notwithstanding so muzzell up
the mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn, that where the Parsonage is
many times worth two or three hundredth pounds by the year, the Ox I say that
treads out the Corn, that is, the Minister that breaks and brings the
food that perishes not, has not above ten pounds or twenty marks by the
year, and that but sorily paid too: If this be not a withdrawing of Corn and
all other necessaries, I can not tell what is.

O consider this, ye that swallowe up the poor, and make the needy of the land
to fail. These are such with-drawers as ye heard of even now, that hyre
laborers to reap down their fields and then will not pay them their wages. O
King consider: O King of Kings remember thy chosen flock, and send us some
relief, I mean thy chosen Israel from all our pain and grief. O consider
this both priest and people, for where the word of God is not preached, the
people perish, not in body but in soul, as the apostle St. Paul proves
plainly: saying How can they call on him in whom they have not believed: how
can they believe in him of whom they have not heard? how can they hear
without a preacher? how can they preach except they be sent? To. 10. 14. And
yet so mindful is he of his promise, that once said, I am with you to the end
of the world, that now and still he says unto his little flock Behold I send
unto you Prophets, and wise men, and Scribes, and what follows? thus, and of
them you shall kill and crucify, and some of the^ you shall scourge in your
Sinagogues (not with whips of cords, so much as with the whips of your
whipping) tongues, and of them you shall persecute from City to City. etc.
and who do all this now adays, but these with-drawers of Corn, which withdraw
not only from the market, but from the minister; not only from the poor, but
from the preacher, and from the church and all: may I not complain with the
Prophet Amos 7. 8. once again and say; Shall not the land tremble for this. and
eueryone mourn that dwell therein? and it shall rise up as a flood, and it shall
be cast out and drowned, as by the flood of Aegipt, that is, destroyed with one
judgment or other. It follows, But blessing shall be upon his head that sells
corn. Hitherto ye have heard of the curse that comes down on the heads of
the with-drawers either of Corn from the poor people or of mainteinance from
the minister. Now of the blessing that belongs to both or all of them, that
sell their Corn at a reasonable rate, and in due time, or break the bread of
life, or give competent mainteinance to the Minister. And first, whereas
Solomon seems to utter his speech in the singular number, as appears by
the words, Blessing, and, his head, yet it shall appear unto you, that they
include and comprehend, both a plurality of blessings, and a multiplicitie of
heads, or parts both of soul and body: for such is the wisdom of God, that
under the number of few words, yea and those most commonly dark and obscure
(to the natural man) are contained many mysteries, much doctrine, and great
knowledge: as we see in Christ his parrables, sweet sentences, and holy
sermons, uttered in the gospel: and all to this end, that like as we say a man
must crack the Nut before he can eat the kirnell, so he would have us to
study, pray, meditate and exercise our selves in the word of God before we can
come to the depth of knowledge and understanding of his truth. This our Savior
makes manifest, in Mat. 13. v. 11. and 13. saying, To you it is given to know
the mysteries or secrets of the kingdom of heaven, q. d. To you my desciples
that follow me, and hear my voice, and do seek for the kingdom of God, But
blessing shall be upon his head, or blessings, for God is not as man, who when he
has blessed one, can bless no more as Isaac blessed Jacob, and after had
scant a blessing for Esaw, But rather as Moses, who, when he had blessed one
tribe, blessed an other, and never left until he had blessed them all. Or as
Christ himself, who when he had pronounced the poor in spirit blessed; he
proceeded to the pure in heart, then to the meek, then to the mourners, hungry
and thirsty, merciful, peacemakers, and patient; and pronounced them all
blessed. Even so here, though he spoke in the singular number, saying. Blessing
shall be upon the head: yet, he means many blessings, or that he shall be many
ways blessed, according as he has promised unto Israel, saying, If thou shall
obey dilligently the voice of the Lord thy God, and observe and do all his
commandments which I have commanded thee this day, the Lord thy God, will set
thee up on high above all nations of the earth, and all these blessings shall
come upon thee: Blessed shall thou be in the City, and blessed in the field,
blessed shall thou he in the fruit of thy body, and of Deuteronomy. 28. 1. 3 etc.
thy ground, blessed in thy cattle, and in the increase of thy kine, and in
the flocks of thy sheep etc. and blessed shall thou be in all that thou
put thy hand unto.

Thus we see how many ways almighty God blesses all those that keep his
commandments: This the prophet David confirms, saying, Blessed is the man
that considers the poor and needy, the Lord shall deliver him in the time of
trouble. Yea, the Lord will help him and preserve him alive. He shall be blessed
upon earth, and thou will not deliver him unto the will of his enemies. The
Lord will strengthen him on the bed of his sorrow, and make his bed in his
sickness.

Now, as by this we learn, what blessings shall be on the head, heart, and soul
of such a man, as ministers comfort unto them that be in necessity. So on the
other part we may gather what curses shall come on such as with-drawe corn,
coin, or comfort from them by any manner of means. For like as it is said of
the merciful man, The Lord shall deliver him etc. the Lord shall bless him on
earth and not betake to the will of his enemies: so contrariwise shall it
befall the unmerciful, that have no bowels of pity nor compassion in them.
Letthe example of holy Job be our comfort in this case, who was a stasse unto
the lame, an eye unto the blind, and a father unto the fatherles, etc. All
which his kindenes how the Lord requited, and what end he made, who knows
not? Unto this pattern of pity, I might ad the examples of Abraham, Lot, the
Shunamite woman, Lidia, Cornelius and the rest, whose charity, hospitality,
kindenes, and comforting the needy members of Jesus christ, is yet much spoken
off and recorded in holy writ unto this end, and for the same shall be had in
an everlasting remembrance. Let us therefore heerewithal look up on the
Nauigators and Seafaring men of this world, who for the preservation of their
lives in time of tempest or danger on the Sea, do not stick to cast out their
Corn, or whatsoever commodity else they have ballast their Ships withal,
although it be to their great detriment and loss, rather then they will lose
their lives. And shall not Christian men sailing amidst the manifold tempests
of this world, and the temptations of this life, in the greatest danger of
their souls, vnballast their Barnes of that which lies behind the door in
the Chafe? I do not see with what words I may better reprove their hardness
of heart, then with that verse that the Poet Persius made upon the like
consideration, and exclaming after this manner: O curuae in terr as animae et
celestium inanes! that is, O crooked souls upon earth, and deuoide of heavenly
things. Again, if men would but consider with themselves, how willing and
forward they are many times in purging, casting forth and cutting off the
very substantial parts and humors of their bodies, being either infected with
some incurable disease, or otherwise corrupted through overmuch abundance and
all for the preservation and continuance of their temporal and momentarie
lives, it might happily moon them, to the dispensing and laying out of these
other inferior things, for the salvation of their souls. Aman would think that
so many examples of so many holy men and women, might allure and procure us to
change our minds, and to set our affections on heavenly things, or else that
so many cosifels of Christ himself would co^straine us to make us friends of
our unrighteous Mammon, or that rich and heavenly blessing which Christ shall
bestow on all those that have relieved his needy members, and comforted the
comfortles, when he shall say to them, Come ye blessed of my father and
possess the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world, For
when I was naked ye clothed me, when I was hungry ye fed me, when I was
harhourlesse ye housed me, when I was sick and diseased ye visited and
refreshed me with Corn, coin, cloth, and all other comforts. And if they
shall answer and say, when saw we thee naked and clothed thee, or hungry
and fed thee, or sick and visited thee. etc. Then shall he answer them
again, and say to them, In as much as ye have done it to one of these little
ones which have believed in me, ye have done it unto me, Come ye blessed, etc.

FINIS
To the indifferent Reader.
EVen as I had finished this travel, there came unto me certain persons of
the County and confines where I dwelled, with a written Paper in their hands,
signifying therein what pains and cost they had undertaken, and what troubles
they had endured in seeking to redesse, or at the least to restrain the
Transportation of Corn, and all other victuals, (fruit only except) from the
Towns of Bewdley, Tewxburie, and the Cities of Worcester and Gloucester, unto
Bristowe, etc. wherein also it appeared, that by the good means and care of
some of the higher powers; they had obtained Letters of commannd to the
Justices of Peace within the county of Gloucester, to appoint certain honest
and substantial men to be searchers of all such boats or vessels as should
pass on the river of Seauerne, from any of the foresaid places to another
place, by which good means it has pleased God somewhat to mittigate the daily
increasing price of corn and grain amongst us.

But for as much as it was given me, to understand at the same time, by those
parties that came to solicit this cause; that the most part of those persons
so appointed by the Justices to be searchers, were very wealthy men; that is to
say either great Cornemaisters, or cloathiers, and therefore for their own
parts, had no great cause to endure the pains, which was needeful in this
business to be taken; and the rest of the^ being of meaner condition and state
and therefore not so well able to bear the daily charges about this employment
(as being more desirous to have it better effected, then the rest) craved the
Assistance of the Parishes and Towne-shippes adjoining, by some beneuolent
collection, for the suppliing of their expenses, promising with all, a more
diligent and daily attendance upon the said search. The which their so honest,
needful, and necessary a Petition, I not only presentlye tendered to make
known; but also for the better continuance thereof, I thought good to give some
intelligence herein, that every good Christian, that either regards the
cry of the poor, or the love of his Neighbor, may put to his helping hand,
to so good and charitable an action. Wherefore now in as much as it has
pleased God by the Doctrine of his word to give us the true knowledge and
understanding of the very original cause of this present dearth, and both
opened and offered unto us the means to prevent and take away the same; Let us
not be slack to join both heart and hand, purse and prayer, mind and money
for the speedy redressing of this evil, so justly imposed and laid upon us,
for such causes as have been by us committed.

God grant that we be not receivers of the grace of God in vain, nor turn
his gace into Wantonness, least while we say peace, peace, the Lord of Hosts
come against us with his great Army, the sound of a Trumpet, voice of an
Arch-angell, consuming fire, and such like.

FINIS.

