FIDELIA. NEWLY CORRECTED and augmented, By GEORGE WITHERS of Lincolnes Inn
Gentleman.

LONDON Printed by E. G. for Thomas Walkley, and are to be sold at his shop at
the Eagle and Child in Britains Burse. 1619.

THE STATIONER to the Reader.
THis Epistle entitled Fidelia, was long since, imprinted to the use of the
Author, who by the entreaty of some of his acquaintance was content to bestow
it on such as had voluntarily requested it in way of an Adventure. But having
dispersed many, and remembering how far it would be from his disposition to
lay claim to proffered gratuities, he wholly repented himself of what indeed
he never well approved of, and how justly soever he might have challenged, more
then many would have lost, yet in steed of being beholding, is resolved, rather
to make those that have received any of his Books a little beholding to him, in
freely forgiving them their unvrged promises: And forasmuch as he perceiues
that it has delighted some, and is never likely to prejudice any, it has
pleased him that I should publish it to my own benefit, so long as I shall in
the imprinting thereof carefully respect his credit, which as I never intend to
fail of, on my part, so (hoping you that shall read it, will on your behalfes
censure it with as little ill meaning to him as he had malice toward you in the
composing thereof) I commit it to your discretions, and wish I could as well
present you with all he has bin Author of.

Yours, GEORGE NORTON.

An Elegiacall Epistle of Fidelia to her unconstant Friend.
THE ARGUMENT.
This Elegiacall Epistle, being a fragment of some greater Poem, discouers the
modest affections of a discreet and constant woman, shadowed under the name of
Fidelia; wherein you may perceive the height of their passions, so far as
they seem to agree with reason, and keep within such decent bounds as
beseems their sex, but further it meddles not. The occasion seems to
proceed from some mutability in her friend; whose objections she here
presupposing, confuteth, and in the person of him, justly vpbraideth all that
are subject to the like change, or fickleness in mind. Among the rest some
more weighty Arguments then are (perhaps) expected in such a subject, are
briefly, and yet somewhat seriously handled.

Often I heard tell, and now for truth I find,
Once out of sight, and quickly out of mind.
And that it has been rightly said of old,
Love that is soon'st hot, is ever soonest cold.
Or else my tears at this time had not stained
The spotless paper, nor my lines complained.
I had not now been forced to have sent
These for the Nuncio's of my discontent;
Or thus exchanged, so unhappily,
My songs of mirth, to write an Elegy.
But now I must; and since I must do so,
Let me but crave thou will not flout my woe:
Nor entertain my sorrows with a scoff,
But at least read them, er'e thou cast them off.
And though thy heart's too hard to have compassion,
If thou wilt not pity, do not blame my Passion.
For well thou know (alas that er'e 'twas known)
There was a time (although that time be gone)
I, that for this, scarce dare a beggar be,
Presumed for more to have commanded thee.
Yea the Day was (but see how things may change)
When thou and I have not been half so strange;
But often embraced with a gentle greeting,
And no worse words than Turtle. Dove, or Sweeting.
Yea had thy meaning, and those vows of thine,
Proved but as faithful, and as true as mine,
It still had been so: (for I do not feign)
I should rejoice it might be so again.
But since thy Love grows cold, and thou unkind,
Be not displeased I somewhat breath my mind,
I am in hope my words may prove a mirror,
Whereon thou looking, may behold thine error.
And yet the Heaven, and my sad heart does know,
How grieved I am, and with what feeling woe
My mind is tortured, to think that I
Should be the brand of thy disloyalty:
Or live, to be the author of a line,
That shall be tainted with a fault of thine;
(Since if that thou but slightly touched be,
Deep wounds of grief, and shame, it strikes in me)
And yet I must; ill hap compels me to
What I nere thought to have cause to do.
And therefore seeing that some angry Fate
Imposes on me, what I so much hate:
Or since it is so, that the Powers divine
Me miserable, to such cares assign;
Oh that Loves patron, or some sacred Muse
Amongst my Passions, would such Art infuse,
My well-fram'd words, and aerie sighs might prove,
The happy blasts to re-inflame thy love.
Or at least touch thee with thy fault so near,
That thou might see thou wrongd'st, who held thee dear:
Seeing, confess the same, and so abhor it;
Abhorring, pity, and repent thee for it.
But ( Dear) I hope that I may call thee so,
For thou art dear to me, although a foe;
Tell me, is it true that I do hear of thee,
And by thy absence now, so seems to be?
Can such abuse be in thy Court of Love,
False and inconstant now, thou He should prove?
He that so woeful, and so pensive sat,
Vowing his service at my feet of late?
Art thou that quondam lover, whose sad eye
I never saw yet, in my presence dry?
And from whose gentle-seeming tongue I know
So many pitty-moving words could flow?
Was It thou so soughtst my love, so seeking that
As if it had been all thou had aimed at;
Making me think thy Passion without stain,
And gently quite thee with my love again:
With this persuasion I so fairly placed it,
Nor Time, nor Envy should have er'e defaced it*
Is It so? have I done thus much? and art thou
So over-cloyed with my favors now?
Art wearied since with loving, and estranged
So far? Is thy affection so much changed,
That I of all my hopes must be deceaved,
And all good thoughts of thee, be quite bereaved?
Then I find true, which long before this day,
I feared my self, and heard some wiser say;
That there is naught on earth so sweet, that can
Long relish with the curious taste of Man.
Happy was I; yea well it was with me,
Before I came to be bewitch't by thee.
I joyed the sweet'st content that ever Maid
Possessed yet; and truly well-a-paid,
Made to my self alone, as pleasant mirth
As ever any Virgin did, on earth.
The melody I used was free, and such,
As that Bird makes, whom never hand did touch,
But vn-allur'd with Fowlers, whistling flies
Above the reach of humane treacheries.
And well I do remember, often then
Could I read over the policies of men,
Discover what uncertainties they were,
How they would sigh, look sad, protest, and swear,
Nay faigne to die, when they did never prove
The slendrest touch of a right worthy love:
But had chil'd hearts, whose dullness understood
No more of Passion, then they did of good.
All which I noted well, and in my mind
(A general humor amongst women-kinde)
This vow I made; (thinking to keep it than)
That never the fair tongue of any man,
Nor his complaint, though never so much grieved,
Should move my heart to liking whilst I lived.
But who can say what she shall live to do?
I have believed, and let in liking too,
And that so far, I cannot yet see how
I may so much as hope, to help it now;
Which makes me think, what e're we women say,
Another mind will come, another day:
And that men may to things vnhop't for clime,
Who watch but Opportunity and Time.
For it is well known, we were not made of clay,
Or such course, and ill-temper'd stuff as they,
For he that framed us of their flesh, did daigne
When 'twas at best, to new refine 't again.
Which makes us ever since the kinder Creatures,
Of far more flexible, and yielding Natures.
And as we often excel in outward parts,
So we have nobler, and more gentle hearts.
Which you well knowing, daily do devise
How to imprint on them your Cruelties.
But do I find my cause thus bad indeed?
Or else on things imaginary feed?
Am I the less that late so truly jolly,
Made my self merry often, at others folly?
Am I the Nymph that Cupids fancies blamed,
That was so cold, so hard to be inflamed?
Am I my self? or is my self that She
Who from this Thraldom, or such falsehoods free,
Late owned mine own heart, and full merry then,
Did fore-warne others to beware of Men,
And could not, having taught them what to do,
Now learn my self, to take heed of you too?
Fool that I am; I fear my guerdon's just,
In that I knew this, and presumed to trust.
And yet (alas) for ought that I could tell,
One spark of goodness in the world might dwell.
And then I thought, if such a thing might be,
Why might not that one spark remain in thee?
For thy fair ou-tside, and thy fairer tongue,
Promised much although thy years were young.
And Virtue, wheresoever she be now,
Seemed them to sit enthroned upon thy brow.
Yea sure it was; but whether 'twere or no,
Certain I am I was persuaded so,
Which made me loath to think that words of fashion
Could be so framed, so over-laid with Passion,
Or sighs so feeling feigned from any breast;
Nay say thou had been false in all the rest,
Yet from thine eye my heart such notice took,
Me thought guile could not feign so sad a look.
But now I Have tried, my bought experience knows,
They are often worst that make the fairest shows.
And howsoever men feign an outward grieving,
It Is neither worth respecting, nor believing,
For she that does one to her mercy take,
Warmes in her bosom but a frozen snake:
Which heated with her favors, gathers sense,
And stings her to the heart in recompense.
But tell me why, and for what secret spite
You in poor women's miseries delight:
For so it seems; else why do you labor for
That, which when it is obtained, you do ahhor?
Or to what end do you endure such pain
To win our love, and cast it off again?
Oh that we either your hard hearts could borrow,
Or else your strengths to help us bear our sorrow!
But we are cause of all this grief and shame,
And we have none but our own selves to blame:
For still we see your falsehoods for our learning,
Yet never can have power to take it for warning;
But as if borne to be deluded by you,
We know you trustlesse, and yet still we try you.
(Alas) what wrong was in my power to do thee?
Or what despite have I e're done unto thee?
That thou should choose Me, above all the rest,
To be thy scorn, and thus be made a jest.
Must men's ill natures such true villains prove them,
To make them only wrong those most that love them?
Could thou find none in Country, Town nor Court,
But only Me, to make thy Fool, thy sport?
Thou know I have no wanton courses run,
Nor seemed easy unto lewdness won.
And though I cannot boast me of much wit,
Thou saw no sign of fondness in me yet.
Nor did ill nature ever so ore sway me,
To flout at any that did woe or pray me.
But grant I had been guilty of abusage,
Of thee I Am sure I never deserved such usage.
But thou were grieved to behold my smilings,
When I was free from love, and thy beguilings.
Or to what purpose else, did thou bestow
Thy time, and study to delude me so?
Have thou good parts? and do thou bend them all
To bring those that never hated thee in thrall?
Pretheee take heed, although thou yet enioy'st them
They Will be took from thee, if thou so imploy'st them.
For though I wish not the least harm to thee,
I fear, the just Heavens will revenged be.
Oh! what of Me by this time had become,
If my desires with thine had hapt to rome,
Or I, unwisely had consented to
What (shameless) once thou did attempt to do?
I might have fallen, by those immodest tricks,
Had not some power been stronger then my Sex.
And if I should have so been drawn to folly,
I saw thee apt enough to be unholy.
Or if my weakness had been prone to sin,
I poorly by thy strength had succored bin.
You Men make us believe you do but try,
And that is your part (you say) ours to deny.
Yet I much fear, if we through frailty stray,
There Is few of you within your bounds will stay;
But, maugre all your seeming Virtue, be
As ready to forget your selves, as we.
I might have feared thy part of love not strong,
When thou did offer me so base a wrong.
And that I after loathed thee not, did prove
In me some extraordinary Love.
For sure had any other, but in thought,
Presumed unworthily what thou have sought,
Might it appear, I should do thus much for him,
With a scarce reconeiled hate abhor him.
My young experience never yet did know
Whether desire might range so far, or no,
To make true Lovers carelessly request,
What rash enjoying makes them most unblessed,
Or blindly, through frailty give consenting
To that, which done brings nothing but repenting.
But in my judgment it does rather prove
That thou art fired with lust, then warmed with love.
And if it be for proofemen so proceed,
It shows a doubt, else what do trials need?
And where is that man living ever knew
That false distrust, could be with love that is true?
Since the mere cause of that vnblam'd effect,
Such an opinion is, as hates suspect.
And yet I will thee, and thy love excuse,
If thou will neither me, nor mine abuse.
For I Will suppose thy passion made thee proffer
That unto me, thou to none else would offer.
And so, think thou; if I have thee denied,
Whom I more loved then all men else beside.
What hope have they, such favors to obtain,
That never half so much respect could gain?
Such was my love that I did value thee
Above all things below eternity.
Nothing on Earth unto my heart was nearer,
No joy so prized, nor no jewel dearer.
Nay: I do fear I did Idolatrize,
For which Heavens wrath inflicts these miseries,
And makes the things which it for blessings sent,
To be renewers of my discontent.
Where was there any of the Naiades,
The Dryades, or the Hamadryades?
Which of the British shires can yield again,
A mistress of the Spring, or Wood, or Plain?
Whose eye enjoyed more sweet contents then mine,
Till I received my overthrow by thine?
Where Is she did more delight in Springs and Rils?
Where Is she that walked more Groves, or Downs, or Hills?
Or could by such fair artlesse prospects, more
Add by conceit, to her contentments store
Then I; whilst thou were true, and with thy Grace^s
Did give a pleasing presence to those places?
But now What is; What was has overthrown,
My Rose-deckt allies, now with Rue are strowne;
And from those flowers that honied use to be,
I suck naught now but juice to poison me.
For even as she, whose gentle spirit can rise
To apprehend Loves noble mysteries,
Spying a precious Jewel richly set,
Shine in some corner of her Cabinet,
Takes delight at first to gaze upon
The pretty luster of the sparkling stone,
And pleased in mind, by that does seem to see
How virtue shines through base obscurity;
But prying nearer, seeing it does prove
Some relic of her dear deceased Love,
Which to her sad remembrance does lay open,
What she most sought, and sees most far from hope:
Fainting almost beneath her Passions weight,
And quite forgetful of her first conceit:
Looking upon it again, from thence she borrowes
Sad melancholy thoughts to feed her sorrows.
So I beholding Natures curious bowers,
Seel'd, strow'd, and trimmed up with leaves, herbs, and flowers.
Walk pleased on a while, and do devize
How on each object I may moralize,
But er'e I pace on many steps, I see
There stands a Hawthorne that was trimmed by thee:
Here thou did once slip off the virgin spraies,
To crown me with a wreath of living Bays.
On such a Bank, I see how thou did lie,
When viewing of a shady Mulbery,
The hard mishap thou did to me discuss
Of loving Thysbe, and young Piramus:
And oh (think I) how pleasing was it then,
Or would be yet, might he return again.
But if some neighboring Row do draw me to
Those Arbors, where the shadows seem to woo
The weary loue-sicke Passenger, to sit
And view the beauties Nature strowes on it:
How fair (think I) would this sweet place appear,
If he I love, were sporting with me here!
Nay, every several object that I see,
Does severally (me thinks) remember thee.
But the delight I used from it to gather,
I now exchange for cares, and seek them rather.
But those whose dull and gross affections can
Extend but only to desire a Man,
Cannot the depth of these rare Passions know:
For their imaginations flagge too low;
And cause their base Conceits do apprehend
Nothing but that whereto the flesh does tend;
In Loves embraces they nere reach unto
More of content than the brute Creatures do.
Neither can any judge of this, but such
Whose braver minds for braver thoughts do touch.
And having spirits of a nobler frame,
Feel the true heat of Loves unquenched flame.
They may conceive aright what smarting sting
To their Remembrances the place will bring,
Where they did once enjoy, and then do miss,
What to their souls most dear and precious is.
With me it is so; for those walks that once seemed
Pleasing, when I of thee was more esteemed,
To me appear most desolate and lonely,
And are the places now of torment only.
Where I the highest of contents did borrow,
There am I paid it home with treble sorrow.
Unto one place I do remember well,
We walked the eu'nings to hear Phylomell:
And that seems now to want the light it had:
The shadow of the Grou's more dull and sad*
As if it were a place but fit for Fowls
That screech ill*lucke; as melancholy Owls,
Or fatal Ravens, that seld' boding good,
Croke their black Auguries from some dark wood.
Then if from thence I half despairing go,
Another place begins another woe:
For thus unto my thought it seems to say,
Hither thou saw him riding once that way;
Thither to meet him thou did nimbly have thee,
Yon he alighted, and even there embraced thee:
Which whilst I sighing wish to do again,
Another object brings another pain;
For passing by that Green, which (could it speak)
Would tell it saw us run at Barly-breake;
There I beheld, what on a thin rin'd tree
Thou had engraven for the love of me;
When we two, all alone, in heat of day,
With chaste embraces drove swift hours away:
Then I remember too, unto my smart,
How loath we were, when time compelled, to part;
How cunningly thy Passions thou could feign,
In taking leave, and coming back again:
So often, until (as seeming to forget
We were departing) down again we set;
And freshly in that sweet discourse went on,
Which now I almost faint to think upon.
Viewing again those other Walks, and Groves
That have been witnesses of our chaste loves;
When I behold those Trees whose tender skin
Has that cut out, which still cuts me within.
Or come by chance, unto that pretty Rill
Where thou would sit, and teach the neighboring Hill
To answer in an Echo unto those
Rare Problems which thou often did propose.
When I come there (think I) if these could take
That use of words and speech which we partake,
They might unfold a thousand pleasures then
Which I shall never live to taste again:
And thereupon Remembrance does so rack
My thoughts, with representing what I lack,
That in my mind those Clerks do argue well,
Which hold Privation the great'st plague of hell.
For there is no torment gripes me half so bad,
As the Remembrance of those joys I had.
Oh have thou quite forgot, when sitting by
The banks of Them, beholding how the Fry
Played on the silver waves? There where I first
Granted to make my Fortune thus accursed;
There where thy too-too earnest suite compeld
My ouer-soone believing heart to yield
One favor first, which then another drew
To get another, till (alas) I rue
That day and hour, thinking I nere should need
(As now) to grieve for doing such a deed.
So freely I my courtesies bestowed
That whose I was unwarily I showed,
And to my heart such passage made for thee,
Thou can not to this day removed be,
And what breast could resist it, having seen
How true thy love had in appearance been.
For I shall never forget, when thou had there
Laid open every discontent and care,
Wherewith thou deeply seemd'st to me oppressed,
When thou (as much as any could protest)
Had vowed and sworn, and yet perceiu'dst no sign
Of pitty-mouing in this breast of mine:
Well Love (said thou) since neither sigh nor vow,
Nor any service may prevail me now:
Since neither the recital of my smart,
Nor those strong Passions that assail my heart,
Nor any thing may move thee to belief
Of these my sufferings, or to grant relief:
Since there is no comfort, nor desert, that may
Get me so much as Hope of what I pray;
Sweet Love farewell, farewell fair beauties light,
And every pleasing object of the sight:
My poor despairing heart here bids you,
And all Content, for evermore adue.
Then even as thou seemd'st ready to depart;
Reaching that hand, which after gave my heart,
(And thinking this sad Farewell did proceed,
From a sound breast, but truly moved indeed)
I stayed thy departing from me so,
Whilst I stood mute with sorrow, thou for show.
And the mean while as I beheld thy look,
My eye the impression of such Pity took,
That, with the strength of Passion overcome,
A deep fetched sigh my heart came breathing from:
Whereat thou (ever wisely using this
To take advantage when it offered is)
Renewd'st thy suit to me, who did afford
Consent, in silence first, and then in word.
So that for yielding thou may thank thy wit:
And yet when ever I remember it,
Trust me, I muse, and often, wondering, think
Thorough what craney, or what secret chinke
That Love unawares, so like a slye close Elfe,
Did to my heart insinuate it self.
Gallants I had, before thou came to woo,
Could as much love, and as well court me too;
And though they had not learned so the fashion,
Of acting such well-counterfeited Passion;
In wit, and person, they did equal thee,
And worthier seemed, unless thou wilt faithful be.
Yet still unmoved, unconquered I remained,
No, not one thought of love was entertained:
Nor could they brag of the least favor to them,
Save what mere courtesy enioyn'd to do them.
Hard was my heart: But would't had harder bin,
And then, perhaps, I had not let thee in,
Thou Tyrant, that art so imperious there,
And only take delight to Dominere.
But held I out such strong, such often assailing,
And ever kept the honor of prevailing?
Was this poor breast from loves allurings free,
Cruel to all, and gentle unto thee?
Did I unlock that strong affections door,
That never could be broken open before,
Only to thee? and at thy intercession
So freely give up all my hearts possession:
That to my self I left not one poor vein,
Nor power, nor will to put thee from't again?
Did I do this, and all on thy bare vow,
And will thou thus requite my kindness now?
Oh that thou either had not learned to feign,
Or I had power to cast thee off again!
How is it that thon art become so rude,
And ouer-blinded by Ingratitude?
Swearst thou so deeply that thou would persevere,
That I might thus be cast away for ever?
Well, then it is true that Lovers periuries,
Among some men, are thought no injuries:
And that she, only, has least cause of grief,
Who of your words has smalst, or, no belief.
Had I the wooer bin, or fondly won,
This had bin more tho, then thou could have don;
But neither being so, what Reason is
On thy side, that should make thee offer this?
I know, had I been false, or my faith faild,
Thou would at women's fickleness have raild:
And if in me it had an error bin,
In thee shall the same fault be thought no sin?
Rather I hold that which is bad in me,
Will be a greater blemish unto thee;
Because by Nature thou art made more strong,
And therefore abler to endure a wrong.
But it is our Fortune, you will have all the power,
Only the Care, and Burden must be our.
Nor can you be content a wrong to do,
Unless you lay the blame upon us too.
Oh that there were some gentle-minded Poet
That knew my heart, as well as now I know it;
And would endeare me to his love so much,
To give the world (though but) a slender rouch
Of that sad Passion which now clogs my heart,
And show my truth, and thee how false thou art:
That all might know, what is believed by no man,
There Is fickleness in men, and faith in woman.
Thou sawst I first let Pity in, then liking,
And lastly that which was thy only seeking;
And when I might have scornd that love of thine,
(As now ungently thou despisest mine,)
Among the inmost Angles of my breast:
To lodge it by my heart I thought it best:
Which thou have stolen too like a thankelesse Mate,
And left me nothing but a black selfe-hate.
What can thou say for this, to stand contending?
What color have thou left for thy offending?
That wit, perhaps, has some excuse in store,
Or an evasion to escape a sore.
But well I know, if thou excuse this treason,
It must be by some greater thing then reason.
Are any of those Virtues yet defaced,
On which thy first affection seemed placed?
Has any secret foe my true faith wronged,
To rob the bliss that to my heart belonged?
What then? shall I condemned be unheard,
Before thou know how I may be cleared?
Thou art acquainted with the times condition,
Know it is full of envy, and suspicion,
So that the war'est in thought, word, and action,
Shall be most injured by foul-mouthed detraction:
And therefore thou, methinks, should wisely pause
Before thou credit rumors without cause.
But I have gotten such a confidence
In thy opinion, of my innocence:
It is not that, I know, withholds thee now:
Sweet, tell me then; is it some sacred vow?
Have thou resolved, not to join thy hand
With any one in Hymen's holy band?
Thou should have done it then, when thou were free,
Before thou had bequeathed thy self to me.
What vow do deem more pleasing unto Heaven,
Then what is by unfeigned lovers given?
If any be, yet sure it frowneth at
Those that are made for contradicting that.
But if thou would live chastely all thy life,
That thou may do, though we be man and wife:
Or if thou long'st a Virgin-death to die,
Why, if it be thy pleasure, so do I.
Make me but thine, and I Will (contented) be
A Virgin still, yet live and lie with thee.
Then let not thy inuenting brain assay
To mock, and still delude me every way;
But call to mind, how thou have deeply sworn
Nor to neglect, nor leave me thus forlorn.
And if thou will not be to me as when
We first did love, do but come see me then;
Vouchsafe that I may sometime with thee walk,
Or sit and look on thee, or hear thee talk;
And I, that most content once aimed at,
Will think there is a world of bliss in that.
Do thou suppose that my Desires denies
With thy affections well to sympathize?
Or such perverseness have thou found in me,
May make our Natures disagreeing be?
Thou know when thou did wake I could not sleep
And if thou were but sad, that I should weep.
Yet even when the tears my cheek did stain
If thou did smile, why I could smile again:
I never did contrary thee in ought:
Nay, thou can tell, I often have spoke thy thought.
Waking; the selfsame course with thee I run,
And sleeping, oftentimes our dreams were one.
The Dyall needle, though it sense does want,
Still bends to the beloved Adamant,
Lift the one up, the other upward tends;
If this fall down, that presently descends:
Turn but about the stone, the steel turns too;
Then straight returns, if but the other do;
And if it stay, with trembling keeps one place,
As if it panting longed for an embrace.
So was it with me: for if thou merry were,
That mirth of thine, moved joy within my heart:
I sighed too, when thou did sigh, or frown;
When thou were sick, thou have perceived me swoone;
And being sad, have often, with forced delight,
Strived to give thee content, beyond my might.
When thou would talk, then have I talked with thee,
And silent been, when thou would silent be.
If thou abroad did go, with joy I went;
If home thou lou'dst, at home was my content:
Yea, what did to my Nature disagree,
I could make pleasing, cause it pleased thee.
But if it be either my weak Sex, or youth,
Makes thee misdoubt my vndistained truth,
Know this; as none till that unhappy hour,
When I was first made thine, had ever power
To move my heart, by vows, or tears expense,
No more, I swear, could any Creature since.
No looks but thine, though aimed with Passions Art,
Could pierce so deep to penetrate my heart.
No name but thine, was welcome to my ear,
No word did I so soon, so gladly hear:
Nor never could my eyes behold or see,
What I was since delighted in, but thee.
And sure thou would believe it to he so,
If I could tell, or words might make thee know,
How many a weary night my tumbled bed
Has known me sleeplesse: what salt tears I Have shed,
What scalding sighs, the marks of souls oppressed,
Have hourly breathed from my careful breast:
Nor would thou deem those waking sorrows feigned
If thou might see how sleeping I am pained.
For if sometimes I chance to take a slumber,
Unwelcome dreams my broken rest does cumber,
Which dreaming makes me start, starting with fears
Wakes; and so waking I renew my cares:
Until my eyes ore-tir'd with watch and weeping,
Drowned in their own floods, fall again to sleeping.
Oh! that thou could but think, when last we parted,
How much I, grieuing for thy absence, smarted.
My very soul fell sick, my heart to aching,
As if they had their last Farewels been taking;
Or feared by some secret Divination,
This thy revolt, and causeless alteration.
Did thou not feel how loath that hand of mine,
Was to let go the hold it had of thine?
And with what heavy, what unwilling look,
I leave of thee, and then of comfort took?
I know thou did; and though now thus thou do,
I am deceived, but then it grieved thee too.
Then, if I so with Loves fell passion vexed
For thy departure only was perplexed,
When I had left to strengthen me some trust,
And hope, that thou would never have proved unjust:
What was my torture then and hard endurance,
When of thy falsehood I received assurance.
Alas, my tongue, a while, with grief was dumb,
And a cold shuddering did my joints benumme,
Amazement seized my thought, and so prevailed,
I found me ill, but knew not what I ayled;
Nor can I yet tell, since my suffering then
Was more then could be shown by Poets pen;
Or well conceived by any other heart
Then that which in such care has borne a part.
Oh me; how loath was I to have believed
That to be true, for which so much I grieved?
How glady would I have persuaded bin
There had bin no such matter, no such sin.
I would have had my heart think that (I knew
To be the very truth) not to be true.
Why may not this, thought I, some vision be,
Some sleeping dream, or waking fantasy
Begotten by my ouer-blinded folly,
Or else engendered through my Melancholy?
But finding it so real (thought I) then
Must I be cast from all my hopes again?
What are become of all those fading blisses,
Which late my hope had, and now so much misses?
Where is that future fickle happiness
Which I so long expected to possess?
And thought I too; where are his dying Passions,
His honied words, his bitter lamentations?
To what end were his Sonnets, Epigrams,
His pretty Posies, witty Anagrams?
I could not think, all that might have been feigned,
Nor any faith, I thought so firm, bin stained:
Nay, I do sure and confidently know:
It is not possible it should be so:
If that rare Art and Passion was thine own,
Which in my presence thou have often shown.
But since thy change, my much presaging heart
Is half afrai'd, thou some impostor were:
Or that thou did but (Player-like addressed)
Act that which flowed from some more gentle breast.
Thy puffed invention, with worse matter swollen,
Those thy conceits from better wits has stolen:
Or else I know it could not be, that thou
Should be so ouer-cold as thou art now;
Since those, who have that feelingly their own,
Ever possess more worth concealed, then known.
And if Love ever any Mortals touch,
To make a brave impression, it is in such,
Who sworn loves Chaplains, will not violate
That, whereunto themselves they consecrate.
But oh you noble brood, on whom the world
The slighted burden of neglect has hurled,
(Because your thoughts for higher objects borne,
Their groueling humors and affections scorn)
You whom the Gods, to hear your strains, will follow,
Whilst you do court the sisters of Apollo.
You whom there is none that's worthy, can neglect,
Or any that unworthy is, affect:
Do not let those that seek to do you shame,
Bewitch us with those songs they cannot frame:
The noblest of our Sex, and fairest too,
Do ever love and honor such as you.
Then wrong us not so much to give your Passion
To those that have it but in imitation:
And in their dull breasts never feel the power
Of such deep thoughts as sweetly move in your.
As well as you, they us thereby abuse,
For (many times) when we our Lovers choose,
Where we think Nature that rich Iowell sets
Which shines in you, we light on counterfets.
But see, see whither coffeehouse bears me,
And to what uncouth strains my Passion reares me:
Yet pardon me, I here again repent,
If I have erred through that discontent.
Be what thou will, be counterfeit or right,
Be constant, serious, or be vain, or light,
My love remains inviolate the same,
Thou can be nothing that can quench this flame,
But it will burn as long as thou have breath
To keep it kindled (if not after death)
Never was there one more true, then I to thee
And though my faith must now despised be,
Vnpriz'd, unvalued at the lowest rate;
Yet this I Will tell thee, it is not all thy state,
Nor all that better-seeming worth of thine,
Can buy thee such another Love as mine:
Liking it may, but oh there is as much odds,
Twixt love and that, as between men and Gods:
And it is a purchase not procured with treasure,
As some fools think, nor to be gained at pleasure.
For were it so, and any could assure it,
What would not some men part with, to procure it?
But though thou weigh't not, as thou oughtst to do,
Thou know I love, and once did love me too.
Then where is the cause of this dislike in thee?
Survey thy self, I hope there is none in me.
Yet look on her from whom thou art estranged?
See; is my person, or my beauty changed?
Once thou did praise it, prithee view't again,
And mark if it be not still the same 'twas then:
No false Uermilion* dye my cheek distaines,
It Is the poor blood dispierst through pores and veins;
Which thou have often seen through my forehead flushing,
To show no dawby color hid my blushing:
Nor never shall: Virtue, I hope, will save me,
Contented with that beauty Nature gave me:
Or if it seem less, for that griefs ve^se has hid it,
Thou threw'st it on me, 'twas not I that did it,
And can again restore, what may repair
All that is decayed, and make me far more fair:
Which if thou do, I Will be more wary than
To keep't for thee unblemished, what I can;
And cause at best 'twill want much of perfection,
The rest shall be supplied with true affection.
But I do fear, it is some others riches,
Whose more abundance that thy mind bewitches,
So that base object, that too general aim,
Makes thee my lesser Fortune to disclaim.
Fie, can thou so degenerate in spirit,
As to prefer the means before the merit?
Although I cannot say it is in me,
Such worth sometimes with poverty may be
To equalize the match she takes upon her;
Tho the other vaunt of Birth, Wealth, Beauty, Honor:
And many a one that did for greatness wed,
Would gladly change it for a meaner bed.
Yet are my Fortunes known indifferent,
Not basely mean, but such as may content:
And though I yield the better to be thine,
I may be bold to say thus much, for mine;
That if thou could of them and me esteem,
Neither thy state, nor birth, would mis-beseeme:
Or if it did; how can I helped (alas!)
Thou, not alone, before knew'st what it was.
But I (although not fearing so to speed)
Did also disinable't more than need,
And yet thou woo'dst, and wooing did persevere,
As if thou had intended Love for ever:
Yea, thy account of wealth thou made so small,
Thou had not any question often at all;
But hating much that peasant-like condition,
Did seem displeased I held it in suspicion,
Whereby I think, if nothing else do thwart us,
It cannot be the want of that will part us.
Yea, I do rather doubt indeed, that this
The needless fear of friends displeasure is;
That is the bar that stops out my delight,
And all my hope and joy confounds quite.
But bears there any in thy heart such sway
To shut me thence, and wipe thy love away?
Can there be any friend that has the power,
To disvnite hearts so conioyn'd as our?
E're I would have so done by thee; I Would rather
Have parted with one deerer then my father.
For though the will of our Creator binds
Each child to learn and know his parents minds,
Yet sure I am, so just a Deity.
Commands nothing against Piety.
Nor does that band of duty give them leave,
To violate their faith, or to deceive.
And though that Parents have authority,
To rule their children in minority;
Yet they are never granted such power on them,
That will allow to tyrannize upon them,
Or use them under their command so ill,
To force them, without reason, to their will.
For who has read in all the sacred writ,
Of any one compelled to marriage (yet?)
Or father so unkind (thereto required)
Denied his Child the match that he desired,
So that be found the laws did not forbid it?
I think those gentler ages no men did it.
In those days therefore for them to have bin
Contracted without license, had been sin;
Since there was more good Nature among men,
And every one more truly loving then.
But now (although we stand obliged still
To labor for their liking, and good will)
There is no duty whereby they may tie us
From ought which without reason they deny us:
For I do think, it is not only meant,
Children should ask, but Parents should consent:
And that they err, their duty as much breaking,
For not consenting, as we not for speaking.
"It is no marvel many matches be
"Concluded now without their priuitie;
"Since they, through greedy Avarice misled,
"Their interest in that have forfeited.
For these respectlesse of all care, do marry
Hot youthful May to cold old January.
Those for some greedy end do basely tie
The sweetest fair to foul deformity.
Forcing a love from where 'twas placed late,
To re-ingraffe it where it turns to hate.
It seems no cause of hindrance in their eyes,
Though manners nor affections sympathize.
And two Religions by their rules of state,
They may in one made body tolerate,
As if they did desire that double stem,
Should fruitful bear but Nauters like to them.
Alas, how many numbers of both kinds
By that have ever discontented minds!
And live (though seeming unto others well)
In the next torments unto those of hell.
How many desprate grown by this their sin,
Have both undone themselves and all their kin?
Many a one we see it makes to fall
With the too-late repenting Prodigal.
Thousands, though else by nature gentler given,
To act the horridst murders often are driven.
And (which is worse) there is many a careless elfe,
(Unless heaven pity) kills and damnes himself.
Oh what hard heart, or what vnpittying eyes,
Could hold from tears to see those Tragedies,
Parents by their neglect in this, have hurld
Upon the stage of this respectlesse world?
It Is not one Man, one Family, one Kin,
No nor one Country that has ruined bin
By such their Folly, which the cause has proved,
That foreign often, and civil wars were moved
By such beginnings many a City lies
Now in the dust, whose Turrets brau'd the skies:
And diverse Monarkes by such fortunes crossed,
Have seen their Kingdoms fired, and spoiled and lost.
Yet all this while, thou see, I mention not
The ruin, shame, and chastity has got;
For it is a task too infinite to tell
How many thousands that would have done well,
Do by the means of this, suffer desires
To kindle in their hearts unlawful fires:
Nay, some in whose cold breast never flame had bin
Have only for mere vengeance fallen to sin.
My self have seen, and my heart bled to see it,
A witless Clown enjoy a match unmeet.
She was a Less that had a look to move
The heart of cold Diogenes to love:
Her eye was such, whose every glaunce did know
To kindle flames upon the hills of snow;
And by her powerful peircings could imprint,
Or sparkle fire into a heart of flint:
And yet, unless I much deceived be,
In very thought did hate immodestie:
And (had sh'enioyd the man she could have loved)
Might, to this day, have lived vnreprou'd:
But being forced, perforce, by seeming friends,
With her consent, she her contentment ends.
In that compelled, her self to him she gave,
Whose bed, she rather could have wished her grave;
And since, I hear, what I much fear is true,
That she has bidden shame and fame adue.
Such are the causes now that Parents quite
Are put beside much of their ancient right:
There fear of this, makes children to withold
From giving them those dues which else they would:
And these thou see are the too-fruitfull ils,
Which daily spring from their unbridled wills.
Yet they, forsooth, will have it understood,
That all their study, is their childrens good.
A seeming Love shall cover all they do:
When, if the matter were well lok't into,
Their careful reach is chiefly to fulfill
Their own foul, greedy, and insatiate will:
Who quite forgetting they were ever young,
Would have the children dote with them on dung.
Grant, betwixt two, there be true love, content,
Birth not mis-seeming, wealth sufficient,
Equality in years, an honest fame,
In every side the person without blame,
And they obedient too: What can you gather
Of Love, or of Affection, in that father,
That but a little to augment his treasure,
(Perhaps, no more but only for his pleasure:)
Shall force his child to one he does abhor,
From her he loves, and justly seeks for;
Compelling him, (for such misfortune grieved)
To die with care, that might with joy have lived?
This you may say is Love, and swear as well,
There Is pains in Heaven, and delights in Hell;
Or that the Devils fury and austerity,
Proceeds out of his care of our prosperity.
Would Parents (in this age) have us begin
To take by their eyes, our affections in?
Or do they think we bear them in our fist,
That we may still remove them as they list?
It is impossible it should be thus,
For we are ruled by Love, not Love by us:
And so our power so much never reaches to,
To know where we shall love, until we do.
And when it comes, hide it a while we may,
But it is not in our strengths to driue't away.
Either mine own eye should my chuser be,
Or I would never wear Hymen's Livery.
For who is he so near my heart does rest,
To know what it is, that mine approves best:
I have my self beheld those men, whose frame,
And outward personages had naught of blame,
They had (what might their good proportion grace)
The much more moving part, a comely face,
With many of those complements, which we,
In common men, of the best breeding, see.
They had discourse, and wit enough to carry
Themselves in fashion, at an Ordinary;
Gallants they were, loved company and sport,
Wore favors, and had Mistresses in Court:
And every way were such that now might seem
Worthy of note, respect, and such esteem;
Yet has my eye more cause of liking seen,
Where naught perhaps by some has noted been:
And I have there found more content, by far,
Where some of these perfections wanting are;
Yea so much, that their beauties were a blot
To them (me thought) because he had them not.
There some peculiar thing innated is,
That bears an uncontrolled sway in this;
And nothing but it self knows how to fit
The mind with that which best shall suit with it.
Then why should Parents thrust themselves into
What they want warrant for, and power to do?
How is it they are so forgetful grown,
Of those conditions, that were once their own?
Do they so dote amidst their wits perfection,
To think that age and youth has like affection!
(When they do see among those of equal years,
One hates what another most endeares.)
Or do they think their wisdoms can invent
A thing to give, that is greater than Content?
No, neither shall they wrap us in such blindness,
To make us think the spite they do, a kindness.
For as I would advise no child to stray
From the least duty that he ought to pay:
So would I also have him wisely know,
How much that duty is which he does owe:
That knowing what does unto both belong,
He may do them their right, himself no wrong.
For if my Parents him I loath should choose,
It Is lawful, yea my duty to refuse:
Else, how shall I lead so upright a life,
As is enjoined to the Man and Wife?
Since that we see some time there are repentings,
Even where there are the most, and best contentings.
What, though that by our Parents first we live,
Is not life, misery enough to give;
Which at their births the children does undo,
Unless they add some other mischief to?
Cause they gave being to this flesh of our,
Must we be therefore slaves unto their power?
We never desired it, for how could we tell,
Not being, but that not to be was well:
Nor know they whom they profit by it, seeing
Happy were some, if they had had no being.
Indeed, had they produced us without sin,
Had all our duty to have pleased them bin:
Of the next life, could they assure the state,
And both beget us and regenerate;
There were no reason then we should withstand
To undergo their tyranou'st command:
In hope that either for our hard endurance,
We should, at last, have comfort in assurance:
Or if in our endeavors we mis-sped,
At least feel nothing when we should be dead.
But what is the Reason for it that we shall be
Inthral'd so much unto Mortality?
Our souls on will of any Men to tie
Unto an everlasting misery.
So far, perhaps too, from the good of either,
We ruin them, our selves, and all together.
Children owe much, I must confess, it is true,
And a great debt is to the Parents due:
Yet if they have not so much power to crave
But in their own defense the lives they gave:
How much less then, should they become so cruel
As to take from them the high prised Jewel
Of liberty in choice, whereon depends
The maine contentment that the heaven here lends;
Worth life or wealth, nay far more worth then either,
Or twenty thousand lives put all together.
Then howsoever some, seuerer bent,
May deem of my opinion, or intent,
With that which follows thus conclude I do:
(And I have Reason for it, and Conscience too)
No Parent may his Child's just suite deny
On his bare will, without a reason why:
Nor he so used, be disobedient thought,
If vnapprou'd he take the match he sought.
So then if that thy faith vncrazed be,
Thy friends dislike shall be no stop to me:
For if their will be not of force to do it,
They shall have no cause else to drive them to it.
Let them bring all forth that they can allege,
We are both young, and of the fittest age,
If thou dissembledst not, both love, and both
To admit hinderance in our loves were loath.
It Is prejudicial unto none that lives,
And Gods, and humane Law our warrant gives.
Nor are we much unequal in degree,
Perhaps our Fortunes somewhat different be.
But say that little means, which is, were not,
The want of wealth may not dissolve this knot.
For though some such preposterous courses wend,
Prescribing to themselves no other end*
Marr'age was not ordained to enrich men by,
Unless it were in their posterity.
And he that does for other causes wed,
Never knows the true sweetes of a marriage bed:
Nor shall he by my will, for it is unfit
He should have bliss that never aimed at it.
Though that bewitching gold the Rabble blinds,
And is the object of the Vulgar minds:
Yet those me thinks that graced seem to be,
With so much good as does appear in thee,
Should scorn, their better* taught desires to tie
To that, which fools do get their honor by.
I can like of the wealth I (must confess)
Yet more I prize the man, though mony-Iesse.
I am not of their humor yet, that can
For Title, or Estate, affect a Man;
Or of myself, one body deigne to make
With him I loath, for his possessions sake.
Nor wish I ever to have that mind bred
In me, that is in those; who, when they wed,
Think it enough they do attain the grace
Of some new honor, to fare well, take place,
Wear costly clothes, in others sights agree,
Or happy in opinion seem to be.
I weigh not this: for were I sure before
Of Spencers wealth, or our rich Suttons store;
Had I therewith a man, whom Nature lent
Person enough to give the eye content:
If I no outward due, nor right did want,
Which the best husbands in appearance grant*
Nay, though alone we had no private iarres,
But merry lived from all domestic cares;
Unless I thought his Nature so incline,
That it might also sympathize with mine,
(And yield such correspondence with my mind,
Our souls might mutually contentment find,
By adding unto these which went before,
Some certain unexpressed pleasures more,
Such as exceed the straight and curbed dimensions*
Of common minds, and vulgar apprehensions)
I would not care for such a match, but tarry
In this estate I am, and never marry.
Such were the sweets I hoped to have possessed,
When Fortune should with thee have made me blessed.
My heart could hardly think of that content
To apprehend it without rauishment.
Each word of thine (me-thought) was to my ears
More pleasing then that music, which the Spheres
(They say) do make the Gods, when in their chime,
Their motions Diapason with the time.
In my conceit, the opening of thy eye,
Seemed to give light to every object by,
And shed a kind of life unto my show,
In every thing that was within it view.
More joy I Have felt to have thee but in place,
Then many do in the most close embrace
Of their beloved'st friend, which well does prove,
Not to thy body only tends my love.
But mounting a true height, grows so divine,
It makes my soul to fall in love with thine.
And sure now whatsoer'e thy body do,
Thy soul loves mine, and often they visit too.
For late I dreamed they went I know not whither,
Unless to Heaven, and there played together;
And to this day I nere could know or see,
'Twixt them or us the least Antipathy.
Then what should make thee keep thy person hence,
Or leave to love, or hold it in suspense?
If to offend thee I unawares was driven,
Is It such a fault as may not be forgiven?
Or if by frowns of Fate I have been check,
So that I seem not worth thy first respect,
Shall I be therefore blamed and vpbraided,
With what could not be helped, nor avoided?
It Is not my fault: yet cause my Fortunes do,
Will thou be so unkind to wrong me too?
Not unto Thine, but thee I set my heart,
So naught can wipe my love out while thou art:
Though thou were poorer both of house and meat,
Then he that knows not where to sleep or eat:
Though thou were sunk into obscurity,
Become an abject in the worlds proud eye,
Though by perverseness of thy Fortune crossed,
Thou were deformed, or some limb had lost,
That love which Admiration first begot,
Pity would strengthen, that it failed not:
Yea I should love thee still, and without blame,
As long as thou could keep thy mind the same;
Which is of Virtues so compact (I take it)
No mortal change shall have the power to shake it.
This may, and will (I know) seem strange to those
That cannot the Abyss of love disclose,
Nor must they think, whom but the outside moves,
Ever to apprehend such noble Loves,
Or more conjecture their unsounded measure,
Then can we mortals of immortal pleasure.
Then let not those dull vnconceiuing brains,
Who shall hereafter come to read these strains,
Suppose that no loves fire can be so great,
Because it gives not their cold Clime such heat.
Or think m'inuention could have reached here
Unto such thoughts, unless such love there were.
For then they shall but show their knowledge weak,
And iniure me, that feel of what I speak.
But now my lines grow tedious, like my wrong,
And as I thought that, thou think this too long.
Or some may deem, I thrust my self into
More then beseems modesty to do.
But of the difference I am not unwitting,
Betwixt a peevish coins, and things unfitting:
Nothing respect I, who pries ore my doing:
For here is no vain allurements, nor fond wooing,
To train some wanton stranger to my lure;
But with a thought that is honest, chaste, and pure,
I make my cause unto thy conscience known,
Suing for that which is by right my own.
In which complaint, if thou do hap to find
Any such word, as seems to be unkind:
Mistake me not, it but from Passion sprung,
And not from an intent to do thee wrong.
Or if among these doubts my sad thoughts breed,
Some (peradventure) may be more than need;
They are to let thee know, might we dispute,
There Is no objections but I could refute;
And spite of Envy such defenses make,
Thou should embrace that love thou do forsake.
Then do not (oh forgetful man) now deem,
That it is ought else then I have made it seem.
Or that I am unto this Passion moved,
Because I cannot elsewhere be beloved:
Or that it is thy state, whose greatness known,
Makes me become a suitor for my own:
Suppose not so; for know this day there be
Some that woo hard for what I offer thee:
And I have ever yet contented bin
With that estate I first was placed in.
Banish those thoughts, and turn thee to my heart,
Come once again, and be what once thou were.
Reviue me by those wonted joys repairing,
That am nigh dead with sorrows and despairing.
So shall the memory of this annoy,
But add more sweetness to my future joy;
Yea make me think thou meantst not to deny me,
But only were estranged thus, to try me.
And lastly, for that loves sake thou once bar'st me,
By that right hand thou gave, hat oath thou swar'st me,
By all the Passions, and (if any be)
For her dear sake that makes thee iniure me;
I here conjure thee; no; entreat and sue,
That if these lines do ouer-reach thy view,
Thou would afford me so much favor for them*
As to accept, or at least not abhor them.
So though thou wholly cloak not thy disdain,
I shall have somewhat the less cause to plain:
Or if thou needs must scoff at this, or me,
Do It by thy self, that none may witness be.
Not that I fear 'twill bring me any blame,
Only I Am loath the world should know my shame.
For all that shall this plaint with reason view,
Will judge me faithful, and thee most untrue.
But if Oblivion, that thy love bereft,
Has not so much good nature in thee left,
But that thou must, as most of you men do,
When you have conquered, tyranize it too:
Know this before, that it is praiseto no man,
To wrong so frail a Creature as a woman,
And to insult over one, so much made thine,
Will more be thy disparagement then mine.
But oh (I pray that it portend no harm,)
A chearing heat my chilled senses warmes:
Just now I flashing feel into my breast,
A sudden comfort, not to be expressed;
Which to my thinking, does again begin
To warm my heart, to let some hope come in;
It tells me, it is impossible that thou
Should live not to be mine; It whispers how
My former fears and doubts have been in vain,
And that thou mean yet to return again.
It says thy absence from some cause did grow,
Which, or I should not, or I could not know.
It tells me now, that all those proofs, whereby
I seemed assured of thy disloyalty,
May be but treacherous plots of some base foes,
That in thy absence sought our overthrows.
Which if it prove; as yet me thinks it may,
Oh! what a burden shall I cast away?
What cares shall I lay by? and to what height
Tower in my new ascension to delight?
Sure er'e the full of it I come to try,
I shall even surfeit in my joy, and dye.
But such a loss might well be called a thriving,
Since more is got by dying so, then living.
Come kill me then, my dear, if thou think fit*
With that which never killed woman yet:
Or write to me before, so shall thou give
Content more moderate that I may live:
And when I see my staff of trust unbroken,
I will vnspeake again what is mis-spoken.
What I have written in dispraise of Men,
I will recant, and praise as much again;
In recompense I Will add unto their Stories,
Encomiastick lines to ymp their glories.
And for those wrongs my love to thee has done*
Both I and it unto thy Pity run:
In whom, if the least guilt thou find to be,
For ever let thy arms imprison me.
Mean while I Will try if misery will spare
Me so much respite, to take truce with care.
And patiently await the doubtful doom,
Which I expect from thee should shortly come;
Much longing that I one way may be sped,
And not still linger 'twixt alive and dead.
For I can neither live yet as I should,
Because I least enjoy of that I would;
Nor quiet dye, because (indeed) I first
Would see some better days, or know the worst.
Then hasten Dear, if to my end it be,
It shall be welcome, cause it comes from thee.
If to renew my Comfort ought be sent,
Let me not loose a minute of Content.
The precious Time is short, and will away;
Let us enjoy each other while we may.
Cares thrive, Age creeps on, Men are but shades,
Joys lessen, Youth decays, and Beauty fades;
New turns come on, the old returns never
If we let our go past, it is past for ever.
Inter EQVITAND: PALINOD.
MY Genius say what Thoughts these paintngs move?
Thy Thoughts of Love.
What Flames are these that set my heart on fire?
Flames of Desire.
What are the Means that these two underprop?
Thy earnest Hope.
Then yet I Am happy in my sweet Friends choice.
For they in depth of Passion may rejoice,
Whose Thoughts and Flames and Means have such blessed scope.
They may at once both Love, Desire, and Hope.
But tell what Fruit at last my Love shall gain?
Hidden Disdain.
What will that Hope prove which yet Faith keeps fair?
Hopeless Despair.
What End will run my Passions out of breath?
Untimely Death.
Oh me! that Passion joined with Faith and Love.
Should with my Fortunes so ungracious prove,
That she will no fruit, nor Hope, nor End bequeath,
But cruellest Disdain, Despair, and Death.
Then what new Study shall I now apply?
Study to Dye.
How might I end my Care, and die content?
Care to Repent.
And what good thoughts may make my end more holy?
Think on thy Folly.
Well, so I will, and since my Fate may give
Nothing but discontents whilst here I live.
My Studies, Cares, and Thoughts I Will all apply
To weigh my Folly well, Repent, and Dye.
Sonnets.
HEnce away thou Siren leave me,
Pish vnclasp these wanton arms,
Sugared words can near deceive me,
Though thou prove a thousand charms.
Fie, fie, forbear no common snare
Can ever my affection chain,
Thy sugared baits of Love deceits
Are all bestowed on me in vain.
I have else where vowed a duty,
Turn away thy tempting eye;
Show not me thy painted beauty,
These impostures I defy:
My spirit lothes where gaudy clothes,
And feigned oaths, may love obtain,
I love her so whose looks swears no,
That all thy labor will be vain.
I am no slave to such as you be,
Nor shall that soft snowy Breast,
Rolling eye, nor lip of rubie
Ever rob me of my rest.
Go, go, display thy beauties ray
To some more son enamored Swain,
Thy forced wiles of sighs and smiles
Are all bestowed on me in vain.
Can he prize the tainted posies
That on others breast are worn,
Which may pluck the Virgin roses
From the never* touched thorn:
I can go rest on her sweet breast
That is the pride of Cinthia's train,
Then stay thy tongue, thy Mermaids song
Is, all bestowed on me in vain.
He is a fool that basely dallies,
Where each Pesant mates with him;
Shall I haunt the thronged valleys,
When there is noble Hills to clime:
No, no, though Clownes are scared with frowns,
I know the best can but disdain,
Then those I Will prove, so will thy love
Be all bestowed on me in vain.
Yet I would not daigne embraces
With the fairest Queens that be,
If another shared those graces,
Which they had bestowed on me.
I Will grant that one my love where none
Shall come to rob me of my gain,
The fickle heart makes tears and art,
And all bestowed on me in vain.
I do scorn to vow a duty
Where each lustful Lad may woo,
Give me her whose sunne-like beauty
Buzzards dare not sore unto:
She it is affords that bliss,
For which I would refuse no pain,
But such as you fond fools adieu,
You seek to captive me in vain.
She that is proud in the beginning,
And disdaines each looker on,
Is a Harpie in the winning,
But a Turtle being won:
What ere betide she will near divide
The favor she to one does daine,
But fondlings loves uncertain proves,
All all that trust in them are vain.
There foreknow when I enjoy one,
And for love employ my breath,
She I court shall be a coy one,
Though I purchased with my death.
The pleasures there few aim at dare,
But if perhaps a Lover plain,
She is not woone nor I undone,
By placing of my love in vain.
Leave me then thou Siren leave me,
Take away these charmed arms,
Craft thou see can near deceive me,
I am proof, against women's charms.
Often fools assay to lead astray
The heart that constant must remain,
But I the while do sit and smile,
To see them spend their love in vain.
SHall I wasting in despair
Die because a woman's fair;
Or my cheeks make pale with care,
'Cause another rosy are.
Be she fairer then the day,
Or the flowery meedes of May,
If she be not so to me,
What care I how fair she be.
Shall my foolish heart be pined,
'Cause I see a woman's ^^nde,
Or a well disposed nature,
Joined in a comely feature.
Be she kind or meeker than
Turtle Dove or Pelican,
If she be not so to me,
What care I how kind she be.
Shall a woman's virtues make
Me to perish for her sake;
Or her merits value known
Make me quite forget my own.
Be she with that goodness blessed
That may merit name of best,
If she seem not so to me,
What care I how good she be.
Cause her fortunes seems too high,
Should I play the fool and die;
He that bears a noble mind,
If not outward help he find,
Think what with them he would do,
That without them dares to woo.
And unless that mind I see,
What care I how great she be.
Great, or good, or kind, or fair,
I will nere the more despair;
If she love me then believe
I will die ere she shall grieve
If she slight me when I woo,
I can slight and bid her go,
If she be not fit for me,
What care I how others be.
FINIS.


LONDON, Printed by E. G. for Thomas Walkley, and are to be sold at the sign
of the Eagle and Child in Britains Burse. 1619.


