THE Forerunner of Bells Dovvnefall,

Wherein, is breisely answered his braggnig offer of disputation, and insolent
late challenge: the particularties of the confutation of his books, shortly by
gods grace to be published, are mentioned: with a breife answer, to his
crakinge and calumnious confutinge of Papists by Papists them selves: and
lastly a taste.

Given of his rare pretended sinceritye, with some few examples.

Ierem. 51. v. 44. I will visit Bell upon Babylon, and cast forth of his mouth,
that which he has swallowed up: and the gentiles shall no more flock unto him
and that because the wall of Babylon shall fall down,



ANNO M. D C. V.

THE FORE-RVNNER OF BELLS DOVVNEFAL.
The vain and foolish title of his book, with a note of a quadruple devise,
which he uses to win him self credit, and to endomage the Catholic cause.

CHAP. I.
THERE came lately to my hands, a certain book presented the last Easter
tea^me to the view of the world, by one Thomas Bell, long since a Minister,
after that a Priest, and for some years past, and at this present, Sicut erat
in principio: as it was in the begininge: a Minister again: in which state he
means constantly to continue, until the Lord by new revelation shall otherwise
dispose of his person. The title of his book looks big as though it had
eaten buls-beife, and according to the common saying, as the Deuile locked over
Lincoln, and is ready to quarrel with any Papist whatsoever: this it is. The
Downefal of Popery proposed by way of a new challenge, to al English
Jesuits, and Iesuited, or Italianized Papists: daringe them al jointly, and
every one of them severally, to make answer thereunto, if they can, or have
any truth on their side: knowinge for truth, that otherwise all the world will
cry with open mouths, Fie upon them, and their patched hotch-potch religion.
Fair and soft for dashing: what will this man be in the fight, that is so hot
and eager before he is yet entered the f^elde.
This name of his book by all probability, was given by the godfather, when he
was in the ruff of his roperye, and came hastily into the kitchen, from some
homely place, where a bad sent had entertained his smellinge instrument
(dangerous in these times of infection for an empty stomach) and not findinge
there any meat meet for his ministerships mouth, but only an odd hotch-potch,
fell into some cholerike pange, in which distemperature returninge to his
study, the title was begotten; for otherwise why him self, being a patched
minister, created of two recantations, should call our religion a patched
hotch-potch I cannot see, nor I think him self, having yet the eyes of two
ministres, and one Priest. Our church has not stood simperinge in a close
pot, or poor pipkin, no man can tell where, for I know not for how many hundred
years together, as their congregation has (which though falsely pretended, is
the best cloak they can find to cover the shame often her naked continuance)
but has always borne sail in the sight of the world, maugre the malice of
the deuile, and all the tempests of persecution, that the furies of hell could
raise: Neither is our religion patched together S. Epiphanius haeres. 75. and
S. Austen haeres. 53. Se S Hiero^. contra Vigilantium. Ciril. 6. co^tra Julian.
Cedrenus in Heraclio. S. Alcoranus Mahumet. cap. 15. and 16.
of many mamockes of old stinkinge heretical assertions, as their faith is,
where denienge of prayers for the dead, and the appointed fastes of the Church,
borrowed from Aerius: scorninge of relics, scoffinge at inuocations of
Saints, reiectinge voluntary poverty, and allowance of Preistes, taken from
Vigilantius, raylinge at the holy Cross, and sacred Images: received from
Julian the Apostata, and miscreant Mahumetanes: and diverse other such like
fragments, scraped together, be in their congregatione entertained for
heavenly articles: and so whether it may not truly be termed, a patched
hotch-poch religion, and godles galimamphorye of a new gospel, I leave to
indifferent judgment. Diverse other books in former times, has he also
diuulged, (for he had rather be ill occupied then idle) each of them, one so
like another, that any man may easily know them to be puppies of one litter,
and sundry puddles stewinge from one sincke. In all which the principal scope
he outwardly aymeth at, is the overthrow of Popery, as he speaks, and the
advancement of the truth: but whether any Pharaisaicall making broad his
phylacteries, and enlarging Matt. ^3. v. s
his fringes, the love of the first places at suppers, and the first chayres in
the Sinagoges, and salutations in the market place, and to be called of men
Rabbi, has also his share, and divide stakes, that is council to any, and a
mystery so secretlye carried, that it is without the compass of al humane
divination: for the happy effecting of these his designements, and to procure
credit with his readers, (for I think he has little with his hearers) like an
old soldiear and beaten Captain he uses many stratagems, but especially
four. The first is, to provoke, to challenge, to dare al learned men, to the
combat. for would any man in his wits, make such an offer, were he not most
assured of victory, and to triumph over the Romans, that have so often
triumphed over others? The second is, with great sorrow of soul to lament,
that he can get no answer to his books, and utterly to despair ever to see
any such thing effectually attempted: an evident demonstration, that they be
of rare erudition, and truth in his side. The third is an inuection (if we
list to believe him of his own, as Thraso said in Terence) Enuche.
and that is to overthrow papistry, by papistry it self, and to ruin our
says, by the principal professors and patrons of our religion. Mary god bless
us from this Bell, for never was there such a peale runge in our days, or in
the days of our forefathers. The fourth and last is, his saint-like
protestation of sincerity, upright dealinge, and ha^dlinge al things
according to equity and conscience. These be the main bulwarks of his
books, framed by this excellent engenite, both to defend them selves, and to
batter us: Al which not withstandinge, are nothing else but skearcrowes, and
painted paper walls, seem they never so terrible to simple souls: Spiders
webbes are strong enough to make bootye of flies and gnattes, weak nets to
catch swalowes and greater birds. And I will not deny, that he might with some
pretty credit, have tampered among little ones, who are soon scandalized, but
when which fantastical conceit he supposes, that he can contriue the ruin of
gods Church, or confound al learned Catholics whatsoever. Suitor vltra
crepidam the Cobbler is beyond his shoe, and he does walk (as the Prophet
says) in great and wonderful things above him self. His malice is great, but
his power nothing Psalm. 130. v. 2.
corespondent. He is a cursed cow, but with short horns: wherefore let him
strive against Catholic verity, struggle with God and Church, war against
heaven: repentance (god grant that not fruitles) will be the end of his
labors: and perpetual disgrace, (without divine amendinge grace) the just
reward of his works. If any ouerswaied with a false weeninge, think
otherwise, let him have a little patience, voutsafe the reading of this small
treatise, and he shall see his four forts (by one that acknowledges him self
inferior to thousands in Gods church) fiered about his ears: let us briefly
run them al over.

Bell seems wonderful desirous of disputation in words, and yet in deeds
refuses the same. With an indifferend offer of trial.

CHAP. II.
MVch ianglinge has the minister kept since his last reformation, and like a
Ffleet-streete hackster iustileth at Jesuits, showldreth Seminaries, braueth all the learned men of christendom; so desirous is he to manifest his manhood, to
exercise his talent, and to show the world some trick of his In the preface
special, and page 35. and 36. To the Seminary. Priests in wisbech castle,
etc. Page 57. and 65.
cuninge. This humor of his he discovers in his motives: The same vauntinge
vain hunteth him in his Surueye: In his huntinge of the Romish fox, though it
be but a petty pamphlet, yet is he once or twice harpinge on the same stringe:
And in his Counterblast, with in sole^t words and opprobrious terms, he
dares Jesuits, and Seminaries, to answer his books. And lastly in his late
Downefalle, he proclaymeth a new challenge, courageously castinge out his
daringe darts: and in the end of his preface; and every several chapter, as
though he had been apprentice to some ballad maker, the foot of the song
runs after this manner: Answer o Papists if you can, if ye cannot so do,
then repent for shame, and yield unto the truth: And at the heels of one of
them follows this fearful, and formidable adiuration. I challenge you, I
provoke you to page 80.
the combatte, I adjure you al jointly, and every one of you severally, for
the creditt of your cause, for the honor of your Pope, and the life of Popish
doctrine, which now lies bleedinge, and will shortly yield up the ghost, if
some sovereign remedy be not speedely provided for the same. The minister may
take care for his winding sheet, gods church is in no danger, the more she
bleedeth out such corrupt, and pestilent humors as he is, the better is her
estate. He must pardonvs, we rely more upon Christ's promise for her
perpetual continuance, then upon his lyinge lip, for her short yeeldinge up
the ghost. we make no dout but that he mightily enuieth her felicity, and
greedely thirsts after her destruction. But as little do we doubt, but that
she shall still live and endure, rumpantur vt ilia Codro, although he frett out
his bowelles with grief and envy. Desiderium peccatorum peribit, the desire
of Psalm. 111. v. 9.
sinners (such as he is) shall perish. Thus the minister braggeth and braueth
others to disputation, either by word or writing, and like a desperate
cowarde, fears not to fight with any, provided always that they be far
enough of, and him self out of al danger: and so he shows him self of as
resolute a courage, as the coliar of Croidon, who little fearinge the Mayor of
Londons authority, out with his purse, and like a liberal gentlman, gave him
that liuerie which would better have beseemed some body else: but yet not before
he was six miles out of town. If he take him self for such a silogistical
swashbuckler, that nothing but present death, to approache the sphere of his
disputant actiuitie, why did he never vouchsafe to visit Wisbiche, where he
might have won him self imortal fame, if he could by his learning and force
of arguments, either have transformed them from Papists to ministers (as by
special revelation he has changed him self) or else by his potent proofs, so
set them agrounde, that their favorable auditors should have condoled their
dismolle misfortune, seeing them so battered with Bell bullets, and put to so
disgratious confusion: was he doubtful of findinge them at home? it cannot be,
their business lay always within doors, and he might have been as sure of
them, as though they had been fast shut up in a Castle. was he unwilling to
take so long a journey? no just cause of any such suspicion, when he offers
about the like business, with a safe conduct to repare into any part In the
special preface of his Motives.
of Christendom. why did he not also whett his wits upon Master Wrighte his
countryman, who was long time prisoner in the Clinke, and for his learning
well known to the whole realm, having bin assaulted by the flower of our
Clergy chivalry: but as for this challenger, never could I hear that ever
he durst come nere him: by which the gentle reader may gather, that the
heavenly influe^ce of his coniuringe, works not any rare effect, but where
none is present to entertain him (for there he shameth, disgraceth, and
confounds al, be they never so learned, and none can be found that dare take
up the bucklers against him) and that upon the dunghille of his own parish,
he ietteth up and down like a cock of courage, with his big barbles, and
threatninge cox-come, crowinge most fearfully: marry where any occation is
offered of blows, or knockinge cheer, there he creeps pitifully, like a
poor pared capon, with a thin paier of gylles, that came lately from
Katherin cutter, or like a mungrille curr of the country, that with his tail
clapped betwixt his legs, and cringled back, sneaketh away as fast as he can
trudge, for fear of such a breakfaste as he list not to come at.

This is the magnanimous spirit of worthy Sir Thomas, or else why has he not
repaired to these places, where his longinge might have bin satisfied: or if he
desiered to manifest him self to the world, or to seek for the common good of
many, why did he not procure by that great grace and favor which his desartes
has purchased him in court, whereof In the epistles dedicatory of his Motives
and Survey.
him self to his comfort, makes mention, that he might in public audience,
have scufled with these ignorant Jesuits, and curried over the coats of these
silly Seminaries. And be it spoken in a good hour, if his longinge be not
gone, nor his disputinge heat cooled, there is no time yet past: for not long
since, an humble supplication was exhibited to his Majesty, vvherin with
dutiful respect, the favor of an indifferent disputation was sued for.
Mistress Suctliffe as the brute goes, being quicker of her fingers, and more
nimble of conceiptes, got the start of her husband, and so has had the glory
of the first answer, Sir Matthew her mate, like a kind com^ade, has
seconded her, and set forth an other: and so bootelesse to write any more: The
only course that Bell for his creditt can take, is to make earnest suite, that
he may have the honor of the disputation; now let him speak, or for ever
hold his peace. Is disputation with him now out of request, and his mind
changed, as it may well be, saying he has made greater mutations then that,
and had he rather show his valor in an indifferent conference: if so: then
will I offer him fair play, and that is, if he please to be the defendand of
his own books, with which he should be best acquainted, and in all reason
ought to defend, I vvil be the opponent, and take upon me notwithstanding all
his protestation of sincerity, to convince him of many coseninge tricks,
sundry notable lies, and diverse gross corruptions, Let him therefore prove
his friends, and procure that it may be obtained, with those equal co^dicions
which were granted to the Protestants in the presence of the French king.
And if any entreaty vvil farther so honest a suite, which to him, if his heart
and pen agree together, can not but be grateful, and embraced with all the
powers of his soul, then I request him of all courtesy, and for that common
good which may redound to many, earnestly desire him, that he vvil strain his
creditt (if it be not at the highest and in danger of breaking) that we may
meet in the listes and make experience quid possit vterque, what either of us
offensiuely and defensiuely can perform. If he stand upon his punctoes, and
disdaigne all humble kind of proceedinge, as nothing fittinge his brave
braggarie, nor his mountinge and ouerlookinge humor, thinkinge it small
reputation to combatt with abase peticioner: then to keep proportion to
answer his vain, and also not to give one inche of ground in the quarrel of
gods truth, for who is this uncircumcised Philistian, that has dared 2. Reg.
15. v. 16.
to rail upon the army of the living god? I challenge this challenginge
cowarde, dare and redare, this daringe dastard, that he wilfor the honor of his
cause, the creditt of his learning, and defense of his braginge and insolent
books, labor effectually, that we may in manner aforesaid grapple together.

If he refuse this condition, so reasonable, so just, so indifferent, no
remedy but I must come upon him, with a law case of nouerint vniuersi. Be it
known to all men, that the date of his learning is out, his great and
flowinge courage daunted, and drawn dry: proclaim him co^temptible, and
banckrout, having broken with his own dependants and creditors, and expose
him for a iestinge stock to all Christian people, from generation to
generation world without end.

Amen.
That Bells books have long since received their answer, with the particular
contents of the same, and though upon just occasion it has hitherto bin
suppressed, yet shortly by gods grace to be set forth.

CHAP. III.
VVHeras Bell has passed hitherto uncontrolled, and without answer, partly
for that by some of judgment not any was thought necessary (of such course
stuff be they made) partly for other just reasons, hereafter more at lardge
to be handled; the minister makes his comoditie thereof, and would have the
world to think, that not lack of good vvil, but want of skill, has made
Catholics so long silent: and all this to alienate men's minds from the faith
of their forefathers, as a religion that cannot stand in feilde against him,
and for that cause has bin utterly left destitue of all defense. And albeit he
had intelligence by a Catholic book (as him self confesses) set out in
then'de of the year 1602, that the confutation of his works was undertaken,
and to be published if it should be thought convenient (and one parricular
point in the same touched, which did not alitle vvringe his mastership on the
wales, though he set agood face on the matter, and for the ease of his
stomach, entertained the said book with the eloquent flovvers of Shameless
pamphlet, In his Counterblast page 45.
Sourrilous libel, and a rude lyinge hotch-pot of omnigitherum: reuelleth also
at the author, him self, tearminge him in the lenity of his spirit,
Swaggeringe divine, Shameless calumniator, sowle-mouthed swaggeringe divine,
impudent liar, and brazen face) yet by no page 44. page 49.
means will he believe, that there was ever any such thing intended
indeed: Just as the false Prophetts persuaded Ierem. 37. v. 18.
the Jews, that the king of Babylon would not come upon them, nor their
country: and therefore to have it given out that there is any such confutation,
he reputeth it but for adeuise, to dazell (as he says) the eyes of the simple
readers, page 45.
and of others, that shall hear thereof, that they may still be scduced with
popish legierdemaine, from time to time, and not behold the sun shininge at
noonetide, who all in the end must receive the just reward of their folly,
even the slapp of a fox tail.

Thus the minister is pleasant, recreateth him self and his readers with his
merry conceits, but if in conclusion the confutation do come forth, as by
gods grace it shall, with that convenient speed, which the time, and other
occurrents will permit, is he not then like those that leremie speaks of,
proved a false Prophett, and do not they that believe him (as I think there
be very few, let him prattle what he list) show them selves very silly
sheep, to follow such a bel-weather; and that they must in the end receive the
just reward of their folly, even the blessinge of an Ass tail. Again in the
very same place, Page 45.
dispairinge ever to see the effect of any such attempt, he lamenteth, his
distressed case, in this dolefll manner. No no my dearest they mean nothing
less. They will never while I live, publish any such confutation: their own
consciences condemn them, they know they are not able to perform it, I would
most gladly (I protest before god and the world) once see any such confutation
duringe my life. Surely he is much to blame to discomfort him self without all
cause. He may very well live to see it, and yet die sooner much then he would.
Let him not be dismayed, for I can assure him of mine own knowledge that our
consciences do not condemn us, neither do we know that we are not able to
perform as great a matter as that. To give the more creditt to my words, and
somewhat to revive his dead spiritts, I will here give him a note of the number
of the books, and their particular contents. They be in all Five, written
against his motives, and Surueye five years ago. The first book contains
many of his notable untruths, corruptions, and falsifications. The second
presents a gallant and desperate fraye, betwixt the reformed minister of
Bascall, and Thomas Bell preacher of the word: all the clubbes in London being
not able to part them. For such a grace he has in writing, that he falls
into gross contradictions, and what he says in one place, not feldome he
vnsaieth in another. The third handles a couple more of extra. ordinary, and
choice contradictions, worthy for their dignity, to have a special place by
them selves. In the first (which has diverse proofs) he condemns him self,
and his own congregation (the defense whereof he has undertaken) for the
maintayners of false, heretical, and blasphemous doctrine. A point worthy to
be considered of by his brethren, for he gives them most just cause, to
suspect him of playinge bootye, and that his heart is still an harbourer of
Popery, or at least not replenished with the lively liquour of the new
gospel: And though he labors to purge him self of that suspicion, In his
survey to the christian reader. Mat. 26 v. 73.
and swears devoutly, yet may they come upon him as those caterpillars did
upon S. Peter with a loquela tua te manifestum facit, thy speech does bewraye
thee. In the second (fortified also with diverse reasons) he acknowledges our
faith (which with might and maine he would seem to oppugn) to be the truth,
and that very religion which Jesus Christ god and man, brought from the bosom
of his father, and planted in the world: so that the Protestants have again
just cause to complain of him (as Balec did Number. 25.
of Balaam) for blessinge those whom they expected he should have cursed: and
worthelie to have him in jealousy as being fled to them with the same 2. Reg.
15. v. 34. e^ cap 17. v. 15.
mind, that Chusai Arachites did from David, to the camp and service of
Absalo^.

The fourth entreats of the weak grounds of his works, to wit, what
deceites he uses in reasoninge, with exsamples, for more perspicuitie and
light: what treacherous tricks also he practices, concerning Doctors and
Fathers, Counsels and Scripture: so that the reader shall have a perfect
Anatomy of the corrupt body of his books, with their manifold maladies and
diseases: and with all behold all his foundations and ground works
undermined, and his fortifications blown up.

The fifth and last, shall answer the recapitulation of his Survey or as he
partly speaks, the Perioch: in which he would show at what time, diverse
points of our religion came in. And although what hitherto has bin written,
concerns only his first two books, yet will I now take the pains, to veiw
over those also, which came out after: as that terrible tooth-lesse bitinge
beagell, called the huntinge of the Romish Fox: the natural ympe of his
motives and Survey, begotten by them in sin and iniquity: it resembles the
parents so lively, as though it had crept out of their mouths: his Goulden
Balance also, with the yoakefellowe. The Counterblast: and lastely his late
Downefal, and what in them I shall think meet according to the order
propounded, by rank in his due place. If ought else be added, for exsample a
more particular reply to the challenge of his Downfall, that must be counted
for a work of superarogation: what reason has he now to fear that he shall
die before he see his confusion. Tender boughs and young leaves as scripture
says, and experience teach, Mat. 24 v. 32.
are a token that summer is at hand, the particularities likewise before
mentioned, as buddes shootinge forth, are a sign of more plentiful blosomes
shortly to follow, if the cold eastern wind of poverty, does not hinder
the growinge, and keep back the spring. My principal hope is in our good
Lord, that as he has given me a mind to write, polishe, and set forth the
work, so he will asiste me, not only with health and liberty, but also
furnishe me with all those things, which for such an exploit be necessary. If
his divine wisdom, which reaches from end Sap. 8. v. 1.
even to end mightily, and disposes all things sweetly shall otherwise
ordanie, his name be blessed: human councels, must with all obedience yeald to
heavenly providence: only I would have the courteous reader to understand, and
Bell to know, that there shall be no fault in me, for performinge of what
soever is promised, more then which, neither can I in reason assure, nor any
with equity ever expect.

That Papists do not oppugue papists as Bell vainly vaunteth: with the
discovery of a double slight, which concerning this point he practices.

CHAP. IIII.
THe principal thing wherein Bell would be thought to out run his fellow
ministers (if any he has) and to vvin the bell from them al, is a certain
singular gift, and superexcellent dexterity, of confoundinge our religion, by
the professors of our faith, and setting one Papist together by the ears with
an other. This new invention of his in the epistle dedicatorie of his motives,
dedicated to the right Honorable lords of the Council, him self calls A rare
methodical discourse, such is the rare humility of the reformed order, and the
memory thereof is so grateful, that he is often twanglinge upon this stringe.
to omit other places in his late Downfall (though long since a foul downfall
brake the neck of his soul) he observes, That popish religion has always
been condemned of great learned papists, that lived page 18.
in the popes church. and in another place his margent tells us, that The
Papists grant as much as they desire: which I would page 7 ^.
willingly confess to be true, were not he in saying so a notable liar. How
then comes it to pass, will some say, that usually he alleges Catholic
authors against chatholicke doctrine? The question is quickly answered; it is
not their default, but his fraud, not his great learning, but little conscience
that is the cause thereof. The scriptures are daily for diverse mad purposes
wrested and wroung, clean a against the heat, and contrary to their true
sense and meaning, as all know, and yet no blame to be laid upon the sacred
text, but upon those crooked Apostles that deprave them, to their own and
others perdition. If the word of god may be perverted, men's writing have no
such privilege, but that they may meet with false fingers, such as Bells be;
and therefore I give him to understand that he abuses gods church, deceives
his ignorant reader, and iniureth Catholic authors, when he would make the
world believe, that our own Docters do wound our religion: They are clear
from the crime objected: all the suspicion which is grown, takes root from
his malice, and not from any desert of theirs, they carry not two faces under
one hoode, nor blow hoate and cold out of one mouth (as some do every way
as honest as Thomas Bell, and yet bad inoughe) as I intend more breiflie to let
the reader to understand. Two slightes he uses to dazell the eyes of
unlearned men, persuading them that the spiritual souldiars of the Catholic
church, have turned their weapons to their mutual destruction. The first and
that most gross, shameful, and common, is, to falsify, or by one way or
other to deprave such sentences as he produces: for proof whereof, I referr
the reader for a little trial to the next chapter, where he shall find some
fevv exsamples: more choice of such vvares, he shall find at the next mart,
where his foul fardle shall be laid open to the veivv of all. The second is,
Whereas Catholic vvriters have diversity of opinions, with unity of
religion, dissenting in small matters, as namely those, which we call
schoole-questio^s, but never disagreeing in any artickle of faith, no one ever
formally opposinge him self, against any thing defined in general council,
for no such president can he bring forth, yet he makes his tongue to walk,
and would have the world to think, that one Papist does massacre another,
and that we had variety in artickles of faith (as though the lunasie of the
Protestants had infected us:) Plentiful exsamples hereof we have in his book
of motives, I will briefly cite one: Many papists (quoth he) Chap. 8 artic.
12.
as Aquinas Richardus etc. do hold, that a simple Priest, by virtue of the
Popes dispensation, may lawfully and effectualy, minister their Sacrament of
Confirmation. We willingly grant it, as being the most received and common
opinion: what of all this? But this opinion (says he) is stoutly impugned by
other great papists, to wit, Bonauentura, Alphonsus, Durandus, Scotus Mayor,
etc. Be it so, what then? such dissension as this, is without any violation of
faith at all. O (says he) what gteater and more important dissension can be
then this? for Confirmation is a In the former place.
Sacrament with the Papists. If he knew not, and be content to learn I will
teach him. A far greater dissension it were, even in this very point of
Confirmation, if some hold it to be a Sacrament, and others did deny it: the
disagreeme^t was of the extraordinary minister of the Sacrament (which is no
such important matter as he would enforce) of the Sacrament it self they made
no question. do not we know that the Protestants them selves allow, and
prescribe the sign of the cross in Baptism, and that the Puritanes detest
it: that they in necessity permit lay people to baptize, and these think it
such a profanation of that sacred mystery, that they had rather suffer
infants to die without baptism (so great a zeal they have to pack them to
hell ward) Should I come upon him for this varitie, and cry out after this
manner: what greater and more important dissension can be then this, for
Baptism is a Sacrament with them: would he not condemn me for a notable
wrangler, saying they contend not whether Baptism be a Sacrament or no, but
obout other questions, to wit of a certain ceremony, and the extraordinary
minister, which they make no great account of. Let him then queitly take him
self by the sleeue, and see whether the measure will not serve (and much
better) to make for his ministershipp a livery of the same cloth. Were the
dissentions in the Protestants congregation, of no more fundamental points
then ours be, it should not daily be shaken with such terrible earthquakes,
and to the great disgrace of a new timbered gospel, for lack of good work
manshipp, be in danger of fallinge: but alas they are continually brawling
like beggars, and lie lugginge together by the ears, about the very sinnowes
and soul of their religion, in endless quarrels and contentions. Luther and
Zwinglins are proclaimed by M. Jewel, that Patriarchal In his Apology of the
Church of Englands.
challenger, for most excellent men sent of god to give light to the world.
and yet did Luther defend till death, the true, real, and substa^tiall
presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, giueinge his black blessinge to
all those that taught otherwise. Zwinglius for all that, having the spirit no
less then Luther, utterly denied the real presence, contemninge his curse,
and disdayninge to follow the light of his lantern: such svveete agreement
there was betwixt these two most excellent men sent of god. Can Bell deny
this to be true, or that this point of religion is material, as upon which
depends salvation or damnation: I know him to be a brave minded man, and
one that dare venture as far for the credit of the gospel as an other: Yet I
suppose he will never stand upon any terms, but queitly admit both the one
and the other for known truths: and then must I be so boulde as to demand,
how he can defend one of these heavenly prophets, from being an heretic and
damnable doctor; and so with the candle of false doctrine, to have shevven his
followers the way to everlasting darkness. The minister is quick sighted to
behold a mote in our eye, but he cannot see a beam in his own. May we not
justly say to him with our Savior, Hipocrite cast out Mat. 7. v. s.
first the beam out of thine own eye, and then shall thou see to cast out the
mote of thy brothers eye. To leave Germany and speak of the professors of our
own contrie: Do not the Protestants think the dignity, and superiority of
Bishopps and Archbishopps agreeable to gods word: and yet do the Puritanes in
the name of the lord (by their champion Martin Mar-prelat and his mutinous
make bates, that band under his colors) cry out (as Thomas Rogers says, and
it is no council to any) that their calling is unlawful, that they be
ministers of Antechrist, In his sermon printed by John Windet 1590. page 13.
worse then friars and monks, deuiles bishops, and diuelles incarnate.
netheir as I suppose will he say that this is a triflinge question, for fear
of scandalizinge little ones. Aerius of whom we spoke before, was condemned
of heresy for equallinge Preistes with Bishopps. Could Bell have the luck to
finger an Ouerseer ship (to use his own phrase, that he may the better know
my Survey Page 516. Goulden Balance page 31.
meaning) then were the matter cock sure, and a flatt heresy indeed to
maintain any such assertion: mary till then great vvisdome to proceed with
deliberation, to run with the hare, and hold with the hounde: flatter on
the one side, and faune on the other. Can he not read ridles, Dauns est non
Oedipus. By the next post he shall know more of my meaning, in the mean time
let him feed in his heart upon this by faith and be thankful.

Bell pretends great sinceritye like a true Apostle, and yet like a false
Apostata uses it not, with some few exsamples of his malicious and corrupt
manner of proceedinge,

CHAP. V.
Where deceit is intended, there the Protestacion of sincerity, upright
dealinge, and a tender conscience, as a necessary preparation must be
pretended. for this is the goulden bait to angle ignorant souls, and the
common cloak of coseninge companions. Iuglers tuck up their sleeves, open
their hands, and make show of the plainest dealinge in the world: False Mat.
7. v 15. 2. Cor. 11. v. 14. 3. Reg. ^1. v. 9. Ro^. 16. v. 18.
Prophetts put on sheep cloathinge, and the devil transformeth him self into
an Angel of light. Iesabell proclaimed afast, when she sought the blood of
innocent Naboth, and the Aposte assures us, that certain false teachers and
belly gods did by Sweet speeches and benedictions, seduce the hearts of
innocents. Bell as though he were made of no other elements then sincere
dealinge, and had not so much as the skill to foist in a lie, or to mangle and
mayme a sentence, speaks often of conscience, and honest proceedinge, and of
his own free motion and liberality, enters into a band of subscribinge, and
forfaiture of his creditt, if he can be convinced of the conrrarie. In the
epistle of his Downfall To all english Jesuits, Motives. 18.
seminary preistes, etc. thus he writes. In my first book published in the
year. 1593. I premised to yield if you could convince me, either to have
alleged any writer corruptly, or to have quoted any place guylefullie, or to
have charged any author falesly. Yea and in the same place he adds, thath he
will never require creditt at the readers hand, either in that book or any
other to be published hereafter, if any such thing can be proved against him.
Upon this foundation depends all the reputation of his works, and that little
creditt which he has gotten with his simple followers: for if he be such a
sincere writer, as he protests, and so consideratiue and respective in the
peninge of his books, that no suspicion of misreportinge, or corruption, can
be justly fastened upon him, then does it evidently follow, that we have
great dissentions, in matters of faith, and that our Doctors, be the bane of
Catholic doctrine, and then no marueil if he make challenge upon challenge,
and remain unanswered, when as not only our enemies, but also those that we
take for our friends, and rely upon, stand in open feilde against us, and
have as it were sworn our destruction. But if on the contrary plain evidence
shall convince, that he makes no scruple of lyinge, no conscience of
falsification, is not his hopocritical sanctity double iniquity, and Bell
proved the son of Belial, and is not the maine pillar that bears up al his
brave buildinge, and glorious turretts overthrown, and him self with his
applaudinge mates, in the midest of their pastime, crushed, and stricken dead as
the insultinge Philistians were by the servant of god Sampson? Judge. 16. v. 30.
whether this be so or no remains now briefly to be handled: to justify mine
accusation, I will runn over afew passages of his late challenge, because that
is of latest date, and therefore of al likelyhoode most grateful to the reader:
of whom I desire not any extraordinary favor, but that which none can deny
to be indifferent and reasonable: and that is, as upon my bare words I would
not have him to discredit Bell, and believe me, for that sauoured, either of
partiality, or of indiscreet kind of proceedinge: so nether upon his
affirmation, to condemn us, and to commend him, for that were also opposite to
all equity: but as they have long lent the plantife one ear, so now a little
to afforde the defendant the other; and seriously to to examine our
depositions, and take some panies to try the truth of our relations, and then
a gods name let them think as the very force of proofs and allegations shall
induce them, and freely speak what they think: and so have a crashe at his
challenginge Downfall.

I.
Page 40. Thus he comes over the 3. Part. tit. 1. cap. 11 prop^ finem.
Pope. Antonius (quoth he) a man of no small creditt (for he was an Archbishop
of the Popish stamp, and by the Pope reported for a Saint) has these words.
Reperiturtamen Martinus quintus dispensasse cum quodam qui contraxerat and
consummauerit matrimonium cum quadam eius germana. Neuerthelet it is known
that Pope Martin the fifth, did dispense with one who had contracted, and
consummated matrimony, with his own natural and fulsister, of the same
father, and same mother, fot so much the word (Germana, does import. Behold
here gentle reader, the excellency of holy Popery, and if thou desierest more
of such melody, thou may find it in my book of Motives, but this is here
a sufficient antepast for all our English Jesuits, and Iesuited popelinges.
none are so ignorant but they know that only god can give license, to marry a
man's own natural sister. This place he brings to prove (as his words goinge
before import, and these now cited insinuate as much) that te Pope takes upon
him that power, which is proper to god alone: and the matter as he handles it
seems so odious, that some no question condemn us highly upon his report,
and my self was since the cominge forth of his book, assaulted with this very
question, so markeable it is in eueri man's eye. But as it is nothing
prejudicial to the Catholic faith, were it true, so being most false, it
cannot but lance the ministers reputation, and goare the very intralles of his
best creditt. First therefore I say that it is nothing prejudicial to the
catholic faith were it true: For we defend not all the particular factes of
any, though Popes: we know that they may err, either by wrong informacion,
yea or of wilful malice. Their unjust actions (for which they must render
account to god) hurt them selves, and their own souls, catholic religion no
reason it is they should hurt though weaklinges may be scandalized. Glorious S.
Augustine having reckned up all the bishopps of Rome, from S. Peter to
Anastatius, thereby to co^founde Epist. 165. ad generosum.
the Donatist heretics, because as he says. In this order of succession,
there is none found a Donatist bishop, straight ways to stop the mouths of
any, that leapinge from faith to manners, might truly or falselie have objected
the bad life or fact of some Pope, he adds these words for a salve: If in
these times any traitor should have crept into that order of Bishopps, which is
derived from Peter him self even to Anastasius, who now sits in the same
chair, it should have bin no prejudice to the church, and innocent christians,
for whom our lord providing said whatsoever they shall say do ye, but do not
Mat. 23. v. 3.
those things which theye do, for they say, and do not. A certain Prelates
daughter in this realm, and well affected to the word, by the countenance and
assistance of her father, turned of her old husband a grasing, and betook her
self to a new, Is Bell content that this detestable fact should disgrace their
religion, or that upon this we infer, that Superintendent to have taken upon
him the power proper to god alone, or rather more (seeing god cannot give leave
to a woman to have two husbands, neither can any such president be showen, but
of brothers that married their sisters we have in Adams children) If not:
because he may truly say, that such exorbitant actions proceed not infallibly
or usually, from any such luciferian conceit, but rather from passion or
malice, which, do not seldom, pervert the judgment of men in authority, and
make them runn headlonge in to gross errors: then might he very well have
spared his wind, and odious declamation against Martin the fifth. I would not
here wish him to come to fiercely upon me, for that I touch the matter so
lightly, and threaten me the bastinado, for standeringe an Ouerseear of the
gospel, for if he be so lively and pert, let him not think, but that I will
stand upon my lawful defense, and be ready to entertain him, with Stafford
law, and by S. Chad, that good Bishopp of Lincoln, I hope to make my party
good.

Secondly I tell him, that his lips have lashed out to lustilie, and that he
has wickedly slaundred Pope Martin, and most perfidiously corrupted Antonius.
The very title of the chapter might have taught him, that he was in error: or
at least have given him a greater caveat better to consider the matter, for it
is De affinitate: of affinity: and therefore had the Pope given one license to
marry his own natural sister; he had dispensed in consanguinitie, and so
nothing fittinge the matter entreated of in that chapter. But what do I
speak of error: when as monstrons malice, and extremity of hatred against
the church, and Sea Apostolic, made him set a broach this shameless untruth,
for otherwise he would never have smothered the words followinge, the
witnesses of his false doctrine; nor ever have given a false gloss and
translation, to those which he does cite. The truth is this: Martin the fifth
dispensed not with one, to marry his own natural and full sister, of the same
father, and the same mother (as Belle ambleth in amplification, and troteth
alyinge pace with out all moderation) but only to continue still with her with
whom he had married, and with whom he had consummat matrimony,
notwithstanding he had before his marriage committed fornication with her
natural sister: So that S. Anthonius speaks not any one word of the man's
own natural sister, but of his wife, and her natural sister. For proof and
perspicuitiee of this point, let us allege the Docters whole sentence. It is
found (says he) that Pope Martin the fifth did 3. part. tit. 1. cap. 11. ss.
1.
dispense with a certain man who had contracted and consummated matrimony with
a certain natural ssster of her, with whom he had committed fornication; yet
with great difficulty, and because the matter was secret, and the man not fit
for Religion, or to remove into any other contrie, and so scandal would have
followed of the divorce if it had been made. Let any that is desierous of
truth, by this one place, take a scantlinge of Bells holy sincerity. Because
he found S. Antonius to speak of a dispensation granted to one after he had
married, and consummate matrimony with her, whose sister before his marriage he
had known carnally: and so a dispensation only in affinity, contracted by
unlawful copulation: (for which the Minister had he bin consulted would rather
have laughed at him for his simple scrupulositie, then thought it needful to
sue for any such favor or grace) which did nothing fit his purpose; and
therefore meaning to make it in spite of all honesty to serve his turn, he
has first corrupted the sentence by false translation, sainge with his
natural sister, in steed of these words with her natural sister, or the
natural sister of her: and although every one can not epsy his cunninge
conuayance, because he suppressed the other part of the sentente followinge,
yet is it apparent enough to any Gramarian: for were the latin as he turns
it, then should it not be, cum quadam eius germana, but, cum quadam sua
germana: But not only such as know latin, but even those also that have any
skill in pewter, might have espied the gross untruth, had he cited the whole
sentence as it is in Antonius before alloadged: and therefore to healpe out a
lie, he ventured upon corruption, and chopped away all those words which might
have marred the market of this Geneua merchant. For had one married his own
natural sister, as Bell not so confidently as impudently affirms: then
should it not have bin truly said, that he had committed fornication, but
incest, a sin distinct in nature, and far more odious in the sight of god:
nether could the matter have bin secret as Antonius says it was, nor yet the
separation scandalous, but rather offensive to have suffered them to continue
together in filthy pretensed matrimony. To conclude therefore he had not
dispensation in respect of his own natural sister, but to remain still in
matrimony with that woman, whose natural sister he had before marriage carnally
known. Having told so notorious a lie, and helped it out with foul
falsification, he could not contain him self but cry out in the seal of his
soul Behoulde here gentle reader the excellency of holy Popery, and if thou
desierest more of such melody, thou may find it in my book of Mottues.
But may not I with far more reason desire him to note the baseness of his
ministerial iniquity, that after such a shameful prancke of lyinge and
falsification, sets such a brave face on the matter as though he were
innocent and no way to be touched: And as for the melody he speaks of, to
give him his just deserts I cannot deny but that not only his Motives, but also
his other books, be full of such harmony, lyinge, and corruption, being the
ordinary music which this fidling minister scrapeth to those that dance after
his pipe. And whereas he calls this a sufficient antipast for all english
Jesuits and Iesuited popelinges (such is the modesty of this refined
ropelinge) we willingly grant it, to be very sufficient for all Catholics,
and his devoted dependants: for us, to take him for a whetstoue docter, and
pollinge preacher: for them to discarde him, as being the shame, disgrace, and
confusion of the new gospel, and a corrupt member of their congregation.

II.
Page 50. S. Austen (quoth he) proves at lardge in sundry places of his
works that voluntary motions of concupiscence are sin indeed, and truly
so called: In his first book of Retractations he has these words. That Aug.
lib. 1. Retract. cap. 13. page 13.
which in infantes is called original sin, when as yet they use not free
arbitrament of will, is not absurdly called voluntary, because beings
contracted of the evil will of the first man, it is become in sort
hereditarie: It is not therefore Aug. Retract. lib. 1. cap. 15. page 16.
false which I said, sin is an evil so voluntary, that it is no way sin,
if it be not voluntary. Whether Bell fathereth not a notable untruth upon S.
Austen, when he cites these words of his to prove that voluntary motions of
concupiscence be sin indeed, and truly so called, I report me to the words
by him alleged: for no such thing is in them to be found, nay either my
brains are not in good tune, or else S. Austen proves the clean contrary. It
is a constant doctrine with that holy father; that sin is voluntary
otherwise no sin, and for as much as some dout might be made of original
sin, because it seems wholly inuoluntarie; he affirms also that sin to
be voluntary and so concludes generally all sin to be so: Marry a man of
the ministers learning, may quickly overthrow us with our own Doctors, if
by that rare skill which he has in lyinge, when they say one thing, he can
without all blushinge maintain them to say the contrary. Let the reader
peruse the sentence and speak his mind freely.

III.
Page 69. Disputinge against the condign meritts of works he cites this
sentence of a Catholic writer Josephus Angles. Eodem etiam modo, etc. As In 2
lib. Sent. page 130.
other holy Doctors also consideringe after the same manner the natural value
only of good works, and perceiuinge that it is exceedinge far distant, from
the value and just estimation Lo the Friar grants that all the holi^ fathers
are a against the Papists.
of eternal life, said wisely: That our works are not meritorious nor worthy
of eternal life, yet for the covenant and promise made unto us, the good
works of man, with the help of grace, are worthy of eternal life, and equal
with it, which for all that, that promise of god which is frequent in
scripture, set aside, were altogether unworthy of so great a reward. In
these words although nothing be contained hurtful to Catholic doctrine:
Yet Bell by his Achymistical art of chaunginge truth in to falsehoode, can
gather out matter sufficient against us. But before I pass any farther, I
must note one thing breiflie, and that is, whereas Joseph is dedicatinge his
books to the Pope, speaks of kissinge his holiness feet, this minister not
only out of all season mencioneth it in this place, but is at it again and
again, as some wise folk there be, which if they get a word by the end, will
hardly let it go, but like a bell still iangle the same tune. Does not him
self confess that Survey page 487. Genebrardus in Chro^. Anni Christi 32. De
verbis Apostoli Sermo 18.
Justinian the Emperor nine hundred years ago kissed the Pope Constantiue
feet: and is it not well known, that Alexander the great, fell down at the
feet of laddas high Preiste of the Jews: and S. Austen reports how the
people in his time did the like before the feet of bishopps. all which
considered (to omit what adoration is given to temporal princes) I marvel
that it should seem so straung a thing to one of Bells readinge and
learning, that a religious bishop should submit him self to kiss the Popes
feet: Enough of this: Let us now see what he gathers out of Josephus words
against us. In the margent of his book this wholesome note is painted. Lo
this Friar grants that all the holy fathers are against the Papists. It
should have been long enough before a man of ordinary capacity, could ever
have observed any such point in Josephus discourse. But take heed whilst ye
live, when such a turn-coate as he is comes to toss and turn over a
sentence: for he can not only infer, that which is true, but with as great
facility gather that also which is false: Be it known to him, that he belieth
Josephus, for no such thing as he notes can be wroung, racked, or coniured
out of his words: Let them be viewed and pondered by the discreet reader, and
I leave it to his judgment whether he grants any such thing, or no. The
fathers says Bell, out of the testimony of Josephus confess that good works
according to their natural value, be not meritorious of eternal life. What
is this against us? Do not all Catholics grant as much, when they
acknowledge that they receive all their efficacy of workinge from gods grace:
which doctrine of ours he may learn out of the council of Trent, where it is
handled at lardge: False therefore it is that either the fathers be against us,
or that Angles grants any such thing.

IIII.
Page 115. Our petye Pygmie will needs be wrastlinge with Hercules club; that
is, Bell bicker with Bellarmine, impar congressus Achilli; The poor man might
do far better and vviser, to keep his teeth to be agents for his belly
which he loves well, then to endanger them upon so roughe a file. And what
a gods name is his quarrel against that learned prelate. Marry (quoth he)
These are his express words: But in the new Testament De verbo Dei lib. 3.
cap. 2. tom. 1.
because Christ had fulfilled the figures and the prophecies, althoug he many
do not under stand the sentences of the scriptures, yet do they understand
the mysteries of our redemption, even the common country fellows and the
very women. Thus writes our Jesuit, affirming that even women and the very
rustickes of the country, do understand the scriptures, so far forth as
pertains to the mysteries of their redemption. If the minister do no better
keep his hands from pickinge and stealinge, then he does his tongue from
evil speakinge, lyinge, and slaundringe, to use the phrase of their
cathechisme, he might far more justly be called in question, for the unlawful
use of his fingers, then he did the seruinge man at Thirske about suspicion of
Seminary affairs: For I give him to understand (though no great nevves) that
he belieth Bellarmin: He says not that women and rustickes do understand
the scriptures so far forth as pertains to the mysteries of their redemption.
Nay he says the contrary in the words by him alleged, Although many
(quoth he) understand not the sentences of the scriptures. In which number, I
think rustickes and women must be contained. If then they understand not the
sentences of the scriptures as Bellarmin affirms how do they understand the
scriptures so far forth as pertains to the mysteries of their redemption. Was
there ever known a more gallant gospeller, that dares thus to practice his
godles occupation though all the town look on. Yea but Bellarmin says that
contrie fellows and women understand, the mysteries of our redemption: what
then? is there no means to attain that knowledge, but but by readinge and
understanding of the scriptures? if so, vvoe be to them that can not read at
all, no small part of the christian world. who knovveth not that ignorant
people learn better the mysteries of their redemption, by the instruction of
their Pastors, diligence of parents, and help of good cathechismes, then by
fishinge for it by their own labor, out of the profound sea of sacred
scripture, where they may sooner for lack of skill be drowned in the depth of
errors, then by them selves find out the lively waters of true doctrine;
would to god to much experience in these unruly times, taught us not this to
be too true a lesson, The lamentable story of Hacket that quintissentiall
Puritan and a great bible beater, may vvarne all to be wise unto sobriety as.
S. Paul Romans 12. v. 5.
wishes; and also what ruin of souls, and danger to common weals, does
arise, by generally sufferinge, yea and animatinge all sorts of people, tag
and rag to learn the mysteries of their redemption out of the scripture, and
to examine the doctrine forsooth of Fathers, and counsels, by that rule and
touchstone, as John Calvin prescribes.

V.
Page 130. Many Papists (quoth he) are so blinded and besotted with unsavory
traditions, and superstitious illusions, that they deem it a greater sin to
eat fleash in Lent, then to commit adultery, murder, or perjury. Saying
most certain it is that these foul sins of adultery, murder, and
perjury, be forbidden by the law of god, no necessity occurringe or
circumstance what soever, giueinge any leave to commit any one of these sins:
and that the fast of Lent ordained only by a positive law of the Apostles, from
which many for age, sickness, and other causes, may be justly excused; and this
so well known, that no dout can be made thereof, what a creature is Bell, that
utters so notable an untruth, bringinge not so much as any colorable ground
to support it, but his bare word, and the empty blast of his own mouth.
Should I tell him that certain reformed Protestants, otherwise called willet)
under the letters of E. O. gave him but a little item by the way, notinge a
certain palpable contradiction in his Surueye: to wit that he says in one
place, that the bishops of Rome, until the Survey page 193.
days of S. Austen, and long after, were very godly men, and taught the same
doctrine that S. Peter had done before them, and yet in an other place
mainteineth, that Pope Siricius Survey page 228. and 230. Survey page 488.
was seduced by Satan, published wicked doctrine, and taught the flat doctrine
of the devils: and Pope Sozimus falsified the decrees of the Nicen council: so
to maintain the usurped primacie of the church of Rome. seeing both these Popes
lived in S. Augustins time. To deliver him self from this disgracious shakell
which much hinders his goinge, he fetches many cross capers, tumbleth like
a pig in a poke, but he is so hampered, that the more he strugleth the more
fast is he caught, the holes are so straight and him self so big that there is
is no creepinge out, well may he thruste his head forth, as his brother Eaton
the minister by Hounslowe, did upon the pillerie in London, for teachinge his
daughter a wrong lesson, but no possibility of escapinge appears. Many
sovereign solucions forsooth, and diverse plasters of I-sayes, are applied to
cure the wound, but all in vain, for it festereth more and more, without all
hope of amendment. Bad tinkers stop one heal, ad make an other. Bell is so
cuninge a work man, that he has both left the old leakinge still, and made
diverse new. I touch this point now breiflie, better opportunity hereafter will
be offered further to examine this matter, when god willinge all his bucklers of
defense, shall be beaten upon his own face. At this present I will give the
reader a short view, of the great dexterity he has in answeringe; and the
wonderful facility in lyinge and the great pleasure he seems to take in
that occupation, insistinge so much upon that, and amplifienge it at lardg, as
if he had either conscience in his soul or blood in his cheeks, he would
never for shame once have mentioned. I will cite all his words at full, that
no just cause of complaint be given: In his third chapter the title whereof is.
Of the notorious lies of E. O. thus he declaimeth. Pope Siricius (as Thomas
Bell affirms) was seduced by Satan, published wicked doctrine, and
Precisians, came daily to a winter morning lecture, where after other
preparatiue discourses, when the mot was given by the preacher, and the text of
Multiplicamini proclaimed, candles were put out, and that they frequented this
exercise, fare more dilligently then they observed the Lenten fast: and brought
nothing to justify my relation, how would he take me up for halting. Yea I am
verily persuaded, that albeit, I should say that such a thing happened in a
principal town in Barkshire, addinge also that the minister upon the
breakinge forth of the matter fearinge persecution for the testimony of a good
conscience, fled a way toward Oxford, and venturinge with his horse to take
the water, because he had haste in his way, and could not expect a boat, was
there drowned, that he would not make any great scruple notwithstanding these
particularities to give me the lie. Let him then with far more reason quietly
digest it him self. His odious terms of blinded, and besotted, unsavory
traditions, and superstitious illusions, must be pardoned: Some have such a
defect of nature, that they can not speak unless thy stammer: and Sir Thomas
such an imperfection of grace, that except he rail and lie he can write
nothing. S. Hierom calls the Lenton fast a tradition of the Apostles. Epist.
ad Marcellum adversus Mont^num.
though it pleases him to call it an unsavory tradition so little does it like
him, and to say truth, the old tradition commandinge so long abstinence from
fleashe, can not but be to the ministers mouth sower and unsavory: and the new
Geneua fashion that gives leave by the liberty of the gospel to eat fleash
at all times, is far more sauorie, tothsome, and pleasant.

VI.
THus much out of the Down fall: now for a packinge blow one bout more and so
an end. In this book of his which he published the last year 1603 (and
coupled it together with his Goulden balance) the good man seems to be much
netled, and the waters of his patience so troubled, and shaken, that they be
not yet queit and clear: for a certain Catholic author (in a book entitled
A Detection etc. written against Master Sutcliff, and Master taught the flat
doctrine of the devil: These are the express words of E. O. whom (as it
seems) the devil did even then posesse when he vitered them. For not one of
these words (TAVGT THE FLAT DOCTRINE OF THE But they are found.
DEVIL) can be found in my Survey, in the place which E. O. has quoted, but
these words which of purpose he did omit (prohibited marriage as an unlawful
thing) This therefore is a notorius, and a most malicious lie, It is a lie in
grame, and that a knocker (to use his own words else where) adorned with the
name of the devil, to give the more grace unto it; And that worthelie, because
the devil is the Architect and thief worckman in that art and occupation. Here
is a greueous complaint put up against E. O. for that he has slaundred the
minister, and uttered a notorious and most malicious lie, a lie in grain and
a knocker, adorned with the name of the devil, etc. and the lie consists in
this point, because E. O. chardgeth Bell as though he should say that Siricius
taught the flatt doctrine of the diuele, none of which words as he affirms
can be found in his Surueye in the place which E. O. has quoted: and this
inturie he reputeth for a fault of no small quality when he writes that the
deuile as it seems did even then posesse him when he uttered them. A grievous
crime doutles, that in his seeminge opinion deserved so sudden and severe a
punishment, or else he presumes much upon the diueles friendship, when he is
ready to conceive that for a trifelinge injury offered to his ministership he
took the matter so hotely, as to prosecute it in such terrible revenging
manner. But now nothwithstandinge all this bitter and fearful exclamation, what
if these words be found in his Surueye and in that very place which E. O.
has noted upon whom them does the notorious and malicious lie fall, whose
coat is died and marked with the lie in grain, whose credit does the
knockinge lie batter and beat, and whose tenement most like to give the
diuele intertainment? That the said Siricius was seduced by Satan, and
published wicked doctrine he denies not: why I beseech him is there any such
great difference betwixt these words which he grants and those other which
he does not grant, that he should mount up into such extrauagant terms, let
them be indifferently pondered, and they express the very same meaninge^ for
is it not truly verified of him that he does teach the flatt doctrine of the
diuele, of whom it is confessed that, he was seduced by Satan and published
wicked doctrine. Put them into an equal balance, and a dram of difference in
sense and true construction, will not be found, for Bell is no nere allied to
the rineged minister of Baschall then Satan is to the diuile. These are vain
shifts, idle vagaries, and a cuninge wheelinge from the matter, cries out Sir
Thomas: To the point, show the foresaid words, or else E. O. remains
co^uicted of notorious lyinge, and I in the back house ditch for taking his
part: seeing he is so short and so cutted, to take away all cauilles, and to
chamber the clapper of his runinge red rag. I tell him that for the words
wherewith Bell is chardged, two places of his Surueye are quoted: to wit page
228. and 230. and in the first quotation of 228. be those words found which he
admits, and in the next of 230. is that sentence registered which he denies
utterly ever to have spoken. for reuellinge at Siricius for calling, not
holy wedlock as he says (he must take an hear from his beard which had he
done so often as he has ouerreached, he had bin a balde minister long since)
but the filthy yoakinge and pretensed marriage of Preistes the pollution of
carnal concupiscence: he exclameth against him in this manner. I add hereunto
that this is the flatt doctrine of the diuele, and S. Paul is my very witness
herein. I report me now to his devoted dependants whether his wits were at
home, when he meddled, with such hot and dangerous edge tools, as have
pitifully hurt and scaled his own fingers, or what discretion, shame, or
modesty he had, to pursue his adversary with so full mouth and strong a cry
of words in which the diuele also had his part: so vainlie to vaunt of his
sincere proceedinge, so desperately to deny any of these words taught the
flatt doctrine of the diuele, to be in the place quoted: and confidently to
chardge his aduerfarie with a notorious lie: when he had more reason to have
commanded his tongue silence seeing it has found out his own confusion,
never to have preached of sincerity, when he plaide the cunny catchinge
companion: nor ever to have called an other in question for lyinge, him self
in that very place not only venturinge upon an untruth, but also in that very
same thing, which as a notorious lie he obiecteth to an other. As for S. Paul
where he would have his witness, he may talk is pleasure and say what he
list, but he may sooner spend all his pensions in Sub-penas, then ever bring
that blessed Apostle to depose in his side for the lawful marriage of vowed
Preistes and religious persons. The testimony of their own corrupt conscience
yea and of their concupiscence they may have: the authority of any Apostle, or
authentical ancient writer, they are never able to produce.

And thus much breiflie for a sample cut of as it were from the main web
intended. No difficulty had it been to have ranged more plentifully, after
the same manner both in these and other his books. But my purpose was only at
this time to give a taste not to furnishe a formal bankett: these few passages,
shall I hope for this present give the gentle reader desierous of truth,
sufficient content: being as it were the two messengers Chusy and Achimaas to
bring 1. Reg. ^8.
news of the overthrow of this glorious Absalon, who has as shamefully
apostared from his vocation, and waged war against his mother the church, as
ever did that graceles impe reuolte from his natural alleigaunce, and took
arms against his father the king: the main battle heavenly grace
asistinge me shall with convenient speed follow after. God that wills not
the death of a sinner, put into the hearts of all such Protestaunts as love
truth and detest falshoode: desire salvation with Christ and his Sanites, and
tremble at eternal damnation with. the diuele and his angels, carefully to
seek for the knowledge of the pure, ancient, and Aposto like faith, Zealously
when it is found to keep and embrace it, and constantly to live and dye in the
profession of the same. B. C.

FINIS.

