A GODLY AND LEARNED ANSWER, TO a lewd and unlearned Pamphlet: INTITVLED, A
few, plain and forcible Reasons for the Catholic Faith, against the Religion
of the Protestants. By RICHARD WOODCOKE Batchellor of Divinity.

2. COR. 4. 3. 4. If our Gospel hid, it is hid to them that are lost: In whom
the God of this world has blinded the minds, etc. printer's device of a pair
of compasses, associated with Nicholas Oaks (McKerrow 334) LABOR ET CONSTANTIA



LONDON, Printed by N. O. for John Bache and Nicholas Bourne, and are to be
sold at his shop under the Royal Exchange. 1608.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR ALEXANDER HAMPDEN KNIGHT, AND TO THE WHOLE
Worshipful and ancient Family of the HAMPDENS in Buckingham Shire.
RIght Worshipful, it is now almost a year and a half since there came to my
knowledge a Popish Pamphlet made and scattered abroad, as it seems, by some
popish seedesman, and I cannot tell whether some ligter in our quarters, which
yet I hold to be more then probable. This pamphlet he entitled, A few plain
and forcible Reasons for the Catholic Faith, against the Religion of the
Protetestants. These reasons coming into the hands of a young Papist and
Recusant, as I take it, whom this or some other deceitful workman had
poisoned with the venom of Popery: He attributed so much thereunto, that
being moved by a faithful and loving kinseman to renounce his popish
recusancie and to come to the Church and become a Protestant, he answered that
he was vndoubte^ly persuaded that he held the right, and therefore would
persist therein, and that because They were resolved and put out of doubt of
the truth of their Religion by these four Reasons. The aforesaid young Papist
delivered these 4 reasons to a Minister of his acqu^^tance, with purpose to
have them delivered to a godly Preacher, as a challenge (for so I interpret it)
by reason that he by his vigilant and industrious travel stood much in their
light, that they could not spread their popish heresy so farr^ and so freely
as they desired. This Pamphlet being thus come to his hands, God offering
opportunity of a Christian meeting of some few of us Fellow-ministers, he
brought forth unto us, and specially requested me (the Pamphlet being not very
long) a little that time to peruse it, which in some part I did. Being further
moved by him to take it in hand, and to frame and answer thereunto. I alleged
for a tust excuse, that there was in it nothing new, but that which had been
often objected and often answered: And therefore as this Crambe I held not
worth the answering, so if any unresolved were desirous to receive satisfaction
in the matter, they might plentefully find it, if they listed to peruse what
before time had been answered by many others. Howbeit not so satisfying him,
for that it seemed good (these 4 Reasons being so highly esteemed) to discover
the vanity of them, I was content to take them with me, as he requested; Yet
without any certain promise to deal with them, the rather because I had then
in hand some labor of writing in another argument, which being finished,
finding by perusing them, how full of vain ostentation they were how subtle by
a new fiction to pretend somewhat for Popery out of the Religion of
Protestants, how pernicious by striving to work the highest resolution in
Papists, how closely the matter was conueted to get authority and credit to
popish heresy by these Corner creeping reasons, which seemed already to be
made familiar to the vulgar sort. I thought it a point of charity plainly and
demonstratiuely so to lay open the vanity of them, as even the vulgar sort,
whose judgment was already captiuated, by these reasons, might be able to
discern the truth of my answer. Many things in the same arguments h^^e b^na
her^tofore copiously and learnedly written by sundry grave Divines, which yet
in one respect or other, being above the reach of common Christians, have
either not come to their hands, or exceeded the measure of their capacity. For
their sakes therefore have I chiefly traveled, not to speak much but to
speak plainly, and as near as I could the point of the ob^ection.

After I had finished my first Copy, I was constrained to write it the second
time, having no other meaning but to return my written answer to my godly
brother of whom I received the Copy of the 4. Reasons, so to communicate it,
if he thought there were any that might receive satisfaction by it. The young
Papist that delivered abroad the Reasons had before boasted, that because the
Reasons had rested some time, as he thought, in the hands of him, to whom they
first came v^answered, therefore he was sassured that they could not be
answered The truth is, that before I could obtain leisure to take them in
hand, or was indeed fully resolved so to do, there passed one quarter of a
year and more, and when I had finished the answer I made no haste, as to some
is known, to write the second copy. When at convenient times I had finished
it, I sent it to be delivered in writing: and I understand accordingly it was,
and came to sight as of some other, so of that very Papist, who was the
instrument to give abroad the Reasons, who as the manner of them is, having read
some three or four leaves, flung it up, and made a tush at it saing, He could
answer the book himself; And not unlike he could after their fashion, every
child and audacious woman amongst them presuming to speak Fathers and Doctors,
as if their ido^atrous Priests and familiars did speak in them. My godly
brother having just cause to suspect that the said popish Reasons were
dispersed, and considering that it was very hard for one written copy to ser^e
for all that were corrupted by them persuaded me to suffer ^y answer to
deprinted. I did, as he knows not hastily intertaine his motion, but wished
to have the advice of some other of gravity, godliness and learning, from whom
receiving encouragement, I yet made no have, being unwilling in such satietie
of books to increase the number, especially having nothing to say, but what
had been better said before. Now at last perceiving it to be desired and
expected of those whom worthily I respect that I should permit my answer, such
as it is, to be imprinted. I have yielded my poor service in this little
book, to the censure of the Church of God, to the instruction of the seduced,
if it so please God, and have exposed it to the uttermost calumniation of the
restless adversary, who like raging sea is always foaming up his own shame,
and casts up continually mire and dirt.

And because my ordinary ministry has now for some good time been bestowed
in that place, where your Worship is an ordinary hearer, considering also that
the occasion has sprung up within the division of your Magistracy. I have
presumed to offer unto you, and to publish in your name this small fruit of my
extraordinary labors, for remembering that worthy Griffith Hampden Esquire of
blessed memory, who first called me to this place, and likewise his son of
great hope William Hampden, by whom I received much comfort and encouragement
in my Ministry, whose blessed end was to me no smalzeale of Gods blessing
upon my poor labors, and now acknowledging Gods favor toward me, who having
taken away has supplied your Worship resolute in your self and in your worthy
service, for the truth of whom I have received more then common love: For which
in all thankfulness I render my self bound. I thought it my duty to dedicate
these my poor endeavors to your worshipful self and Name; Beseeching you to
accept this my slender gift as a testimony of that due respect which worthily I
bear toward you. I pray God long to continue the honor of your whole house,
both in your self present, and in all the the hopes posterity, and especially
to make the long continued honor, which in this life you have, eternal in the
kingdom of his Son. From great Hampden in Buck. 1608.

Your worships in all Christian duty bound and ready, RICMARD WOODCOKE.

AN ANSWER TO A LEVDE AND UNLEARNED PAMPHLET, SENT ABROAD IN WRITING BY SOME
POPISH CORNER-CREEPER: INTITVLED, A few, plain, and forcible reasons for the
Catholic faith, against the Religion of the Protestants.
The first Reason.
PAPIST.
THE Church of Christ continues for Matthew. 16. 18. 28, 20.
ever (as is plain in the Gospel confessed of all sides.)

But the Protestants congregation, Luke 1. 33.
has not continued for ever, and our Church has.

Therefore not their congregation but our Church is the true Church of Christ.

PROTESTANT.
FIrst, I answer to the whole syllogism, then to each part. The whole
syllogism is faulty and sophistical, because there are in it quatuor
termini. First, the Church of Christ, viz. Catholic and invisible: Secondly,
the Protestants congregation, viz. particular and visible: Thirdly, continues
for ever, viz. inuisibly: Fourthly, has not continued for ever, viz. visible.
Wherefore the propounding of one, viz. The Church Catholic and invisible, and
assuming of another, viz. Some particular and visible Church. Affirming of the
Catholic Church that it continues for ever invisible, denying of the
Protestants congregation that it has not continued for ever visible. You play
fast and loose, and like a Iugler deceive the eyes of the simple; For it is all
one as if you should thus reason:

The true Sun shines continually, Our Sun shines not continually:
Therefore our Sun is not the true Sun.
The Sun indeed shines continually, but not in all men's sight. And the true
Church continues for ever, but neither wholly nor always visible. Our sun
shines not continually, viz. to us or in our fight. The Protestant
congregations have not continued for ever, to wit, visible and apparent. Now as
he that concludes our sun not to be the true sun, because it shines not
always in our sight, proves himself no better then a Sophister; so he that
concludes the Protestant congregations to be no part of the true Church,
because they have not continued for ever visible, as now they are, shows
himself a deceitful worker, and can deceive none but the unlearned and
unstable, who for want of knowledge in the Scriptures have not their senses
exercised to discern between good and evil, between light and darkness,
between truth and falsehood.

Next to each part I answer, and first to the proposition. Where you say the
Church of Christ continues for ever; if you mean the Catholic Church, the
whole company of the faithful past, present, and to come in all places and
times, joined to the fellowship of innumerable Angels, and Heb. 12. 22. 23. 24.
to Jesus the Mediator as the head by the invisible communion of one spirit, I
grant you this Church continues for ever, howbeit known only to God, who
only knows 2. Tim. 2. 19.
who are his: and so the long continued visibilitie of your falsely called
Catholic Church, is not an argument to prove that the garish strumpet of Rome,
which has made all nations drunken with the cup of her fornications is the
true Revel. 17. 2.
Church, much less the Catholic Church; and therefore out of your own
proposition rightly understood, I conclude against you.

The Catholic Church is not visible, The Romish Church is visible: Therefore
the Romish Church is not the Catholic Church.
To your assumption, (The Protestants congregation has not continued for
ever.) If you mean the particularity of any congregation that now is called
Protestant, do you not then see that you fight with your own shadow? For we
know and confess that our particular congregations, as now they stand, have
not continued for ever, but have been gathered ordered and established, some
earlier, some later, as God gave the opportunity, and as by the light of the
Gospel they were able to dispell the Cimmerian darkness of Popery. But if by
the Protestant congregation, you mean (as you ought) the doctrine, faith and
worship of God now profesled and practiced in the Protestant congregations, we
say, your assumption is false, and for proof hereof appeal to the footsteps
of all the particular Churches recorded in the Scriptures, and to the
Apostolic doctrine which they received. If the now Protestant congregations do
continue in the Apostles doctrine, in fellowship, in breaking of Acts 2. 42.
bread and prayer, as the Churches of Jerusalem, Antioche, Galatia, Corinth,
etc. did, then the Protestant congregation in those things wherein consists
the true being of a Church, has continued for ever, and does and shall
continue, maugre all popish heresy and treason. And therefore thus we return
your Argument against you.

That church which cotinueth for ever is the true church of Christ. The
Protestant Church has continued for ever, does and shall continue for ever,
because the word of God, (which they hold inuiolably) abides for ever:

Therefore the Protestant Church is the true Church of Christ.

PAPIST.
That their congregation has not continued for ever is most plain: For where
as there has been since Christ 1600. years let themset down but two for
every hundredth years, and so in all but 32. and we will urge them no further.

PROTESTANT.
The mouths of Papists are always open like hell and the grave, they still
crave and are never the fuller. This old stale demand has been already
often answered. But would you have two congregations, or two only persons for
every hundredth year? Before the captivity of Gods Church under Popish
tyranny, let the godly Martyrs, Bishops, and Pastors, whom histories do
record, and whose writings are extant, testify the faith of those
congregations wherein they lived and served in the chiefest points of doctrine,
which we maintain against Papists. That famous Jewel of blessed memory has
to your everlasting shame maintained it, and if the God of this world had not
blinded 2. Cor. 4. 3. 4.
your eyes, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should not shine
unto you; Nay if the just God had not 2. These. 2. 10. 11.
sent you strong illusions to believe lies, because you would not believe the
truth, it could not be that you should thus grope at noone day, and still call
for proof in that which is so abundantly proved. After the Popes had once
fully gotten into the chair of Apostasy, the ashes of those witnesses of God,
whom for the testimony of Jesus Christ you have slain, as they are kept in
store for a witness against you on earth, so their spirits now in heaven do
cry against you as the blood of Abel against Cain. Since the discovery of that
Man of sin in these latter years, you have found our congregations through
Gods goodness much thicker in all nations then you would have suffered, if
your Nimrods arms had been as long as they are wont to be.

But what if we should only answer you, that the first of these 1600. is more
in trial of truth then all the rest, as that one day of the institution of
Matrimony between one man Math. 19. 4.
and one woman joined together by an inseperable knot, is more to prove the
integrity thereof, then all the years succeeding, wherein Polygamie and
Dinorce had prevailed? Would you renounce the trial of these incorrupted
times, and appeal to the latter, wherein sundry corruptions were apparently
crept in? What were this else but to shun the light, as the manner of
deceivers and evil doers is? What the religion of this hundredth was, nay what
it ought to be for ever, let the Apostolic writers witness, and it the
Religion of the Protestant congregations be the same with the religion taught,
believed and practiced in that hundredth, let all the latter times know, that
they are too young to control it, much more let Popish novelty retire into
the schools and cloisters where it was bred.

Lastly, all the times succeeding have embraced the Scriptures as the very word
of God, have retained the confession of faith called the Apostles Creed, as
agreeable to holy Scriptures, and only herein have sought for the Canon and
rule of truth. The Protestant congregations holding the same faith, and serving
God by the same rule, have therefore on their sides, the consent of all ages
from Moses to Christ, from Christ to his Apostles to this day, auouching the
faith and service of God, which they follow and practice, and are compassed
with a greater cloud of witnesses, then all the Popish Canonists, Summists,
Jesuits and Disputants shall ever be able to show. Hence I thus conclude.

The faith of the first hundredth recorded in the Scriptures and retained in the
ages following, holding firmly the Scriptures and the Apostles Creed is the
true faith, and they so believing and holding the true Church.

The faith of the Protestant congregations is the same:

Therefore the faith of the Protestant congregations is the true faith and they
the true faith and they the true Church.

PAPIST.
They say they have been (though innisible) and they know not where. This
answer cannot serve nor yield any content to a soul desirous of truth. For
what man careful of salvation would leave a Church always visible and known
(as ours has been) and follow a congregation, the beginning whereof is yet
fresh in memory, and was never heard of before for many ages together, as
themselves cannot deny.

PROTESTANT.
As your religion consists wholly of errors, so you must needs defend it by
lies, and that against your own knowledge, if at least you have informed your
self of the truth of that we say. Were not Christ and his Apostles visible?
were not the godly Bishops and Fathers of the Primitive Church visible? say we
not that our religion is the same that Christ and his Apostles taught, that the
true Church of God succeeding in all ages did profess and practice according
to the Scriptures, whereas on the other side wherein soever you differ from us,
you differ from the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, and have new forbished
erroneous and heretical opinions, and build upon men's imperfections and
frailties, and those neither agreeing with the Scriptures, nor with the
analogy of that faith which themselves maintained and taught? Why then shame
you not to affirm that we know not where the witnesses and teachers of our
religion have bin? for so your meaning must be. True it is that against the
long continued visibility of your inglorious Synagogue, whereby you bear the
ignorant in hand, that yours is the true Church: We answer truly, and prove it
by instance of the times of Elias and of our Savior Christ and his Apostles,
that the synagogue of Satan, is oftentimes and for long time more visible then
the Church of God and of Christ, and that the Church of Christ is like the
Moon, as In Psalm. 10.
Augustine Augustine compares it, which sometime gives no light at all. This
our answer may give content to every soul that is desirous of truth,
especially such as will take the pains to search the Scriptures, whether the
things we say be so or no.

As for that your bad asseueration, that your Church has been always
visible, and that the beginning of ours is yet in fresh memory: And was never
heard of before in many ages together as our selves (you say) cannot deuie, it
is even as true as the rest of your religion. Unfold us the antiquity of that
capital and fundamental point of your religion. Subesse Extran, com, de
mayor, and obed. cap. Vnam sanctam.
Romano pontifici, est de necessitate salutis. This is your principle of
principles, and yet as it is contrary to all records of Scripture, wherein
there are no footsteps of any such dependence, so is it controlled by the
clear testimony of all antiquity, by the primitive state and constitution of
the churches Council, Afric. cap. 92. 101. 105. Council. Niceu. Can. 6. Epist.
lib. 6. epist. 30. and li. 4. epist. 38.
in all the Christian world, and by the judicious sentence of Gregory the
first, a Bishop of Rome.

And can we not deny that the beginning of our congregation is yet in fresh
memory, etc. God open the eyes of the blind to see your cunning and
sophistical equivocation, which is now become the idiome and proper language
of popery. True it is indeed that the recovery of that liberty which by Gods
mercy our Churches now enjoy, since they came out of the spiritual Babylon,
which is the Romish Synagogue, may be fetched out of late memory. But is this
the question between us? Or rather whether the beginning of that religion
which gives the being to our churches, and whereby they are distinguished from
your Antichristian synagogue be yet in fresh memory? If Christ and his
Apostles with their doctrine and faith be but of yesterday, then so is ours:
But if theirs be from the beginning, our religion being the same, begins not
one day or hour later then theirs did.

Lastly be it that the pompous and vainglorie of your synagogue be elder then
this renewed face of our churches, will that prove any advantage for you? Was
not the Apostasy of Israel elder then the protestation of Elias against 1.
King. 18.
them, much more then the return of many out of Israel in the days of
Hezekiah? Was not the Pharisaicall synagogue 2. Chron. 30.
before the preaching of Christ, and before the church which he gathered by his
preaching? Boast not therefore of what standing your Antichristian tyranny is,
but tell us, if you can, of what truth your religion is. Truth we grant you is
most ancient, but error also is often very ancient, and is called by Angustine,
Vetustissima falsit as, most ancient falsehood, and Epist. 166.
when the truth after a long time of suppression, comes to the light again,
in the eyes of them that judge by the outward appearance, error seems elder
then the truth. Wherefore let us clime above these middle antiquities which may
be common both to truth and error, and let us come to the eldest and most
ancient times of the Church, and there behold the true and vndisguised face of
the auncientest and truest Church. Let us search the Scriptures, which only
contain the most infallible description of the true Church. If you shun this
light, say it is, because there is no truth in Ioh. 3. 19. 20. 21.
you, yea because your works are evil, and you fear to come to the light,
least it should be manifest that you walk in the truth.

PAPIST.
Secondly this is to make your cursed Synagogue of the Jews that crucified
the Some of God, and wickedlie cried out, His blood be upon us and our
children, for more glorious then Christ's Church for which he shed his blood,
and prayed so inst antlie to his father, for as they now be in many parts of
the world, so can they show where they have remained, and preached their
religion for all these 1600 years, and to say that Christ's Church is inferior
to the Jewish Synagogue, is so blasphemous, as Christian ears should not
endure to hear.

PROTESANT.
Did Christ shed his blood to make his Church glorious and eminent in worldly
prosperity, like to the strumpet of Rome, that sittes upon many waters, and
has rule over many Revel. 17. 1.
people, yea over Kings and princes? No, no, his kingdom is not of this world,
By many tribulations must the Ioh. 18. 36. Act. 14. 22. Romans 8. 17. Ioh. 16.
33. 2. Tim. 2. 12. Hebr. 12. 8.
Church of Christ enter into the kingdom of heaven. It must be comforted to
his suffering, that it may be comforted to his glory. If it suffer with him, it
shall reign with him. In the world it shall have trouble, but in him only
peace. All that are not pertakers of chastismens are bastards and not sons.

Again, did Christ by his instant prayer to his Father request that his Church
might tread on the necks of Emrours, ride on a stately s^eed, and Kings to
hold the stirrup, and going by on foot to lead the Popes horse by the bridle?
Or that they might ^^^eample patrimonies, large seigniories, general command
over king and key sar, yea power of life and death over every creature, and to
translate kingdoms, and to turn the world vpside-downe at their pleasure?
Where is this prayer contained? why had not Christ himself, nor any of his
Apostles the benefit of it? why was the primitive church so washed by horrible
persecutions? Christ never made any such prayer, he prayed that his Church
might be preserved not altogether from, but in John. 17. 15
temptations, not that the worldly powers might not annoy the bodies of his
Saints, but that their souls might be kept from evil, not that they might
have their heaven in this world, but that they might be with him where he is
and see his Verse. 24
glory.

Again, was Christ inferior to the Jews when they crucified him, or Stephen
when they stoned him to death, or James when Herod cut off his head, or Peter
when he bound him in prison? what says the scripture? For thy sake Acts. 7. 12
we are killed all the day long; and we are counted as sheep for the
slaughter. Nevertheless in all these things we are more then Psalm. 44. 23.
Romans 8. 36. 37
conquerors, through him that loved us. Surely by Romish Logic and and Romish
divinity, far more happy and glorious was the condition of Pilat, the
priests, and accursed Jews that cried, Crucify him, crucify him, then of
poor Christ. O you that are bewitched and enchanted by these Luke 23. 21.
Baby lonish charms, will you be led by such guides, who know not the
beginnings of Christian religion. If any will be my Disciple, let him take up
his cross and follow me, will you Math. 16. 24
think that such can guide you to heaven, whose God is the world, whose glory
is shame; which mind earthly things? With them no outward prosperity, no
Church; no earthly kingdom, no Church; no scarlet colored beast, Phil. 3. 19.
no triple crowned Pope, no hatted Cardinals, no mirred Bishops, no Church: But
see, the singular boldness of this popish proctor, joined with singular folly.
The cursed Jews can bring as far fetched antiquicy to prove their Synagoue to
be the true Church, as the Papists can for theirs. If such antiquity can make
you Papists, why may it not as well make you Jews? This forcible Reasoner
prescribes 1600 years for the Papacy, not a year or a day less does he
allow to the Jewish Synagogue, from whence I thus reason.

That which by Popish confession belongs as well to the cursed Jews as to the
Papists, that can never prove the Popish Synagogne to be the Catholic and
true Church.

Antiquity of 1600 years, belongs as much to the cursed Jews as to the
Papists, as this plain Reasoner confesses.

Therefore antiquity of 1600 years, can never prove the Popish Synagogue to
be the catholic and true Church.

PAPIST.
That our Church has continued all this while is as certain, for to omit
other Provinces and Kingdoms, where it has been openly known, and not to
speak how we can show the continual succession of Bisops in diverse places
of Christendom, as Rheimes, Padua, Leigh, and from the Apostles times to these
our days, we can here in our country prove the continuance of our religion
for these 1600 years, even from the time of Saint Gregory the great, Pope of
Rome, who sent hither Saint Austen that converted us Englishmen from Paganism
and Idolatry to the faith of Christ, as our own histories teach, and from
Saint Gregory we can ascend by the current stream of Popes, his predecessors
to Saint Peter and Christ himself. For that it was our Catholic religion
which was then brought in by Saint Austen, no doubt ca^ be made for our
chronicles say so much, and the ruins of so many ancient Abbeys lately
suppressed do abundantly testify the same, and none of reason or reading will
deny it, the thing is so evident and certain; That Saint Gregory likewise
coined not a new religion, but kept that which by continual succession
descended unto him from Saint Peter, is as sure and certain, for if he had,
all the Christian world would have exclained against him, and yet no such
complaint is to be found in any History, or writer, but all highly commend
him for his holiness and learning, and in our English calender he is enrolled
for a Saint, and the like we may say of all his predecessors: for none of them
was ever noted by any to have degenerated in any one article of faith from
the religion of their forefathers and the Apostles, and well known it is, that
32. of the first were glorious Martyrs, and shed their blood for the name of
Christ.

PROTESTANT.
That your popish Church has continued 1600 years, is so certain, as it is
that your later Popes have been and are like those 32 Martyrs, whose empty
number you bring forth to gain credit unto that degenerate rabble that have
succeeded them not in shedding their own blood for the truth of Christ as they
did, but in spilling much Christian blood, partly about strange and unjust
quarrels, partly by treasonable and rebellious commotions of their own
raising, partly by bloody and fiery persecucions. And therefore the succession
of your Popes to those Martyrs, is noe more credit to you, then succession to
Moses was to the Scribes and the Pharisees, or succession to Aaron was to Annas
and Caiaphas. As in place they succeed godly Bishops, so in doctrine they
succeed the Scribes and Pharisees and many Heretics, in irreligion and
prophanes they succeed Lucian and Porphyrie, in tyranny and cruelty Annas and
Cayphas, and the old persecuting Emperors of Rome, into Revel 13. 15.
whose dead image they have put life again. That which the Apostle Paul
foretold of the successors to the Bishops of Ephesus, that of themselves should
men arise, speaking per^erse Acts. 20. 30.
things to draw Disciples after them, has too long been verified of the
successors in place to those first holy Bishops of Rome. And were that true
which you say, that none of the predecessors to Gregory the first, were ever
noted by any to have degenerated in any one article of faith from the religion
of their forefathers, and the Apostles, which is not unknown to your selves to
be most false, for Alfonsus de Castro does frankly confess that of Liberius
the Pope, it is manifest he was an Arriav, and that Anastasious did favor the
Nestorians, Aduers. here is. lib. cap. 4.
he that has read histories doubts not) ye^ if the successors of Gregory
have bin justly detected some for Atheists, some Coniurers and Necromancers,
some for Impoysoners, some for villainous cruelty upon the bodies of the quick
and dead, some notorious for bastardy, besides other odious sins, generally
bribers, Symonists, Epicures, more like to Sardanapalus, or Heliogabolus, then
Peter or Paul, must their succession in place to them to whom all other things
they are most unlike, carry the Church of God on their sides, your own silence
passing by the mention of all the successors to Gregory the first, by the
space of a thousand years, implies a confession that of those there are some
at least degenerate from the religion of their forefathers and the Apostles,
which if with any face you could deny, you would have said as much in them
praise with less truth, as you have done of the former but untruly, But I
suppose you cannot be ignorant that your own Doctor Genebrarde has Chron.
lib. 4. verse. 10.
marked about a fifty Popes for the space almost of 150 years, from John the
8. to Leo. 9. as reuolters wholly from the virtue of their ancestors, and says
they were Apostatici, apostatici potius quam apostolici, Apostaticall rather
then Apostolical, yea he calls them monstrous, which also Platina
witnesses, with a witness of three special ones among the 50. Benedict 9.
Siluester 3. and Gregory. 6. whom he calls tria teterrima monstra, three
most hideous monsters, and what might be said of John the 8. otherwise Pope
Joan, John the 12. two other of the 50. of Gregory 7. Alexander 3. B^niface 8.
and John 23. To show how unlike they were to the Martyrs, their Predecessors in
place you cannot be ignorant, and therefore you did warily to make no noise of
these and the like, least their very names might stain their succession, and
repeal that glory which you thought to get by the fame of Gregory your
Calendar Saint touching whom, whether he coined any new religion or not, or
whether he kept that which by continual succession descended from Saint
Peter, how should we more certainly know, then by enquiring into that religion
which Saint Peter and Saint Paul taught, and that not following uncertain
tradition which has proved the Author of deceiuable fables, but the certain 2
Pet. 1. 1^. 19.
line of holy scripture, which leads us to Christ himself, who only knew the
mind of his father, and has in his written word revealed it to his Church?
For as Ciprian says, Si ad diuinae traditionis caput and originem reuertamur,
cessat Ad Pompei. contr. epist Steph
error humanus, If we return to the head and beginning of divine tradition,
(that is, the doctrine which God himself delivered) humane error is put down,
which that ancient Father by an excellent similitude sets out thus; Si
canalis quae, etc. If the conduit pipe which before did run in abundance do
suddenly fatle, do not men use to go to the fountain there to know the
reason why it fails. etc. Quod and nunc facere opportot Dei sacerdotes, etc.
which (says he) the Priests of God keeping Gods commandments must now do,
that if the truth have wauered or failed in auie thing, we may return to the
original of our Lord, and to the tradition of the Gospel, and of the Apostles,
that thence may arise the reason of our doing, from whence the order and
original did first spring. Which way to try the truth, so long as you do so
diligently shun, and take such pains to bring all religion to the touch of
man's uncertain authority, what do you else, but bewray a fearful and guilty
conscience, that dare not stand to the evidence of Gods word, but in a suite of
life and death, salvation and damnation, do willingly suffer the true Charters
of divine record to be lost, or at least raked up in the dust, and bring in old
men that can say nothing but by hearsay, nay rather young men now to tell what
they have heard off, sometime said by old men upon their only bare hearsay.
So might the Jews have taken the law from the Scribes and Pharisees mouths,
and have learned to love their friends and hate their enemies with Matthew. 6.
43. 2 Kings. 22. 8.
other Pharisaicall lessons, and let the law of Moses lie in the dust, as it
had done before, in the days of Helkias the Priest. But choose you whether you
will cease your wrangling about men's names or not, and be it known to you,
that we will search the scriptures, in which alone we believe to John. 5. 39.
have eternal life, and which only bear unto us infallible witness of Christ,
and of all true Religion necessary to salvation.

How beit were your succession any thing worth to the finding out of truth,
when or how shall it be agreed, whether Liuus or Clemens succeeded Peter,
whether Cletus and Anacletus be one man, or if they be two, which is the first,
or which must be put out of the succession, or whether Clemens be before them
or either of them: for these uncertainties are in the highest roundes of this
your ladder of succession. Tell us whether Pope Ioaue have not made a foul
crack in your succession? or what we shall make of your 30. Schisms, whereof
the twenty ninth continued the space of 50 years together, first with two
Popes at once, then with three, until the Council of Constance removed them
all three, and set up Martin 5. since your Church representative in the council
judged against them al three, may we not rightly judge that your succesion was
quite broken off, and none of these 3, nor they to whom they succeeded, during
that Schism were true successors of Peter? How ever it be, make your
succession as strong as you can, Except Cum successione Episcopatus With the
succession of the Chair they have received Veritatis charisma certu^, the
undoubted Iren, lib. 4. cap. 43.
gift of truth, we make no reckoning of it.

As for your Austen who (you say) converted us Englishmen, it is well known
that this Island had received the faith long before Austen was borne in the
days of King Lucius, and even at that time had true religion in better order
and in more sincerity then Austen himself, except there were any more sincerity
in his doctrine then in his superstitious and vaineglorious ceremonies, upon
which together with your cloisters and dens, God in his mercy has brought
the confusion of Babel, as appears this day, and shall do we trust more and
more.

PAPIST.
Out of this reason may one quickly learn, that all points of our religion
be most true, as praying to Saints, Purgatory, Pardons, the Real presence,
Confession of sins and though oach one know not how to defend them, nor
perceive upon what grounds they stand: for seeing we have now proved that our
Church is the true Church of Christ, consequently we are to believe, that which
it teaches, because she cannot err in matters of faith: for if she could,
then might we as well be damned being members of the true Church of Christ, as
members of the false, and not for a wicked life, but for a wrong belief, which
cannot be, and to free us from all such doubts, Saint Paul affirms that the
Church is the pillar and ground of truth. This ought to be a great comfort to
all 1 Timothy 3. 15.
unlearned Catholics, that cannot enter into the deep mysteries of Christian
religion.

PROTESTANT.
No doubt you must needs prove a forcible Reasoner that out of one sophistical
Syllogism, full of equivocation as has been showed, and from a reason
pretended of the continuance of the Church inuifible, reputation as you say,
for the space of 1600. years, which by your own confession will serve the
Jewish synagogue as well as your supposed Church, yet as if you had stricken
the matter dead, presume out of hand that all is proved. You have now proved
that your Church is the true Church of Christ. They that will be carried away
with such proofs, it skils not greatly of what Church they be. They surely
dote upon the Romish harlot and follow her for blind love, and not for reason.
But let us further examine how forcibly you build upon this sandy foundation.
If your Church be the true Church, then all must be believed that she teaches.
And therefore praying to Saints, Purgatory, Pardons, etc. For she cannot err
in matters of faith, were not the Churches of Galathia true Churches? Is not
the bringing in of Circumcision to be joined with faith in Christ, as necessary
to Gal. 1. 6.
salvation, an error in matter of faith? Did not the Galathians err in that
point, in so much that the Apostle reproues them, as those that had removed to
another Gospel? If the members of a true church ought to believe all that the
church teaches them, who could blame the Galathians in this point: yet Paul
spares not to call them foolish.

Again, were not the Apostles the true Church, yet did they err even after
Christ's resurrection, not only before the receiving of the holy Ghost, but
after also, and that in matter of faith, before the holy Ghost came down, they
Act. 1. 6.
dreamed of restoring the external kingdom of Israel, and that by Christ.
After they had received the holy Ghost, Act. 10. 14.
Peter judged some meats unclean, and was doubtful of going into the
uncircumcised and eating with them until he was better informed by an heavenly
vision. Neither was this error proper to him alone (and yet had he been Pastor
of Pastors, and the highest Bishop in the Church, from whose lips all truth
was to be received, how could the Church have been free from this error? for as
Gregory says, Epist. lib. 6. epist. 34.
Si vnus Episcopus vocatur vniuersalis, vniuersa Ecclesiacorruit, Si vnus
vniuersus cadit. That is, If one Bishop be called universal, the whole Church
is ruinated, if that one universal do fall,) but common to all the rest of the
Apostles, as appears both in that he was called to an account before the
Apostles Act. 11. 3.
and the Church, for entering in unto Cornelius, and alleging his warrant both
by vision and special oracle satisfied them, so as they now first came to
discern that God unto the Gentiles also had granted repentance unto life, and
Verse. 18.
therefore held their peace and glorified God, and also in that when some came
from James, he withdrew himself from Gal. 2. 12.
the Gentiles, which he would not have done, if the true Church had not as then
been unsettled in this point of faith. That which befell unto the Apostolic
church, may much more befall unto the church of Rome, as the like has done
unto many other churches, and therefore it follows not because the church of
Rome was once the true church, that either it cannot err, or must needs
continue the true church still. Such braggers as you, were those Rabbis that
conspired against Jeremy, presuming as you do, that the law should not perish
from the Priest, nor counsel from the wise nor Ier. 18. v. 18.
the word from the Prophets, that is, that the church could not err; but the
Lord by Ezechiel tells them that build upon that false principle, that when they
shall come to seek a vision of the Prophets, then they shall find that by the
just judgment of Ezekiel. 7. ver. 6
God, the law shall perish from the Priest, and council from the Ancient. Which
at this day they all find, who feed upon the lying vanities of Popish visions,
being deluded by the painted vizard of the Church, which you have put upon your
faces. Wherefore if you could prove your Church the true Church, which you can
never do, yet should you still come to short of proving that you stand so much
in need of, that your Church cannot err, and therefore, Praying to Saints,
Purgatory, Pardons, etc. must be believed, because your Church teaches them.
God grant that your seduced Clients, Iere. 2. 13.
may leave these broken pits that will hold no water, and have recourse to the
fountain of living waters, the holy scripture, thereby to try every spirit,
whether it be of God or no, and not blindly believe every spirit that says
John. 4. 1.
it is, of God.

Yea but say you, If the Church may err in faith, then might we as well be
damned being members of the true Church, as of the false, and that not for a
wicked life, but for a wrong faith, which cannot be. First you show of what
force all your proofs are, that you are feign so shamelesly to beg that
without any proof, which all men know to be most false: for is it so strange
to you that a member of a true visible church may be damned even for matter of
wrong belief? Are all the members of every true visible Churhc, true and proper
members, of the mystical body of Christ? Know you not that Saint Paul says to
Galathians? Behold I Paul say unto every men that is circumcised, Christ shall
profit you nothing, ye are abolished from Christ, whosoever are justified by
the law, ye are fallen from grace. And yet they to whom he spoke, were members
of a true visible Church. Therefore the members of a true visible Church may be
damned for a wrong belief.

Secondly, albiet the true visible Churches may err da^nably, as the church of
the Jews, in condemning Christ, the Arrians in denying his eternal Godhead,
yet the true Catholic Church, which is the body of Christ, cannot err
damnably, nor any true member thereof, and yet every member of the militant
Church may err, but not damnably, for every error is not damnable, no not in
matter of faith, some build upon the foundation Timber, hay, and stuble, 1 Cor.
3. 12. etc.
so long as they build upon the foundation, they themselves shall be saved, but
shall suffer loss of their work, by the fiery trial of Gods word. Confessing
therefore the infirmity and ignorance even of the true members of the true
Catholic Church in this flesh, which is such no one of them can have immunity
from error, yet it will not follow that any true member of the Catholic
Church can be damned, and yet he may believe amiss in some points of faith,
God open the eyes of the blind, that they may discern your dangerous and
damnable slight. You would have all your disciples hold themselves contented
only with the Coliars faith, and to believes. as the Church believes, although
they know not what the Church believes. To the intent you may bewitch them,
this is your sorcerie, you tell them the Church cannot err, meaning your
Romish church, and therefore they may securly believe whatsoever you bid the^,
and so doing shall undoubtedly be saved. A co^pendious Religion promising unto
men salvation. without taking any pains to know the truth of God, to search
the scriptures, to try the spirits, and to discern of the true faith. But
what says the scripture? He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, he
that believes not, shall be damned. And what must Mark. 16. 16.
they believe that shall be saved? That which the Apostles teach, and what must
the Apostles teach? All that Christ commanded. Then must every believer
discern the truth of his Matthew. 28. 20.
faith by the undoubted commandment of Christ, that he may have undoubted
comfort of his own salvation. Men will not take money for current before they
have tried it by touch and weight, and will any be so desperately foolish, as to
believe every spirit, and receive every doctrine not trying by the touch of
scriptures, and the weights of Gods sanctuary, whether it be of God or no?

Yea but S. Paul affirms that the Church is the pillar and ground of truth.
And this ought to be a great comfort to all vn^earned Catholics. It ought so
indeed, and to the learned too, that the Oracles of God are committed to his
Church, and there only the sheep of God may hear the voice of their
Shepherd. Howbeit the unlearned Catholics shall be much abused if they suppose
this Church to be the supposed Church of Rome, or think that truth is pinned
upon any John. 10. 27.
one churches sleeue, or is indefinitly committed to the whole Church, without
submission to the trial of scriptures. What is truth, the scriptures only
show, where that truth is preserved and taught, there is the true Church: For
the Church is the pillar and ground of truth. By the scriptures therefore all
true Catholics must learn to know the true church, and receive the truth of
the scriptures from the mouth and by the ministry of the church, but not upon
the bare and only cred it of the church: For to omit Theophilact who
interprets truth in this place, as opposite to Jewish shadows, which sense may
very well be followed, and so you have no show of help here. Chrysostom upon
the place gives this sense, Hoc est enim quod fidem continet ac
praedicationem^, quippe verit as Ecclesiae and columna and firma^entum est:
This is that which keeps faith and preaching, for truth is the pillar and
firmament of the Church. Where you see the church ministerially keeps faith,
and preaches the word, as the Pyramid in Paris did keep the memory of your
Iesuitical parricide, but in a another sense the truth by Chrysostoms judgment
is the pillar and firmament of the Church. And Dyonisius Carthusianus, Estque
columna and firmamentum verit atis, id est, verit atem Euangelicam fortiter
portat etc. The pillar and ground of truth (says he) that is, it does strongly
bear the truth of the gospel note, the truth of the Gospel, which the church
has received, not any truth inverted or taught by the church without or beside
the Gospel: Therefore out of this place we, thus conclude against you:

The Church of God is the pillar and ground of truth, that is, bears the
truth by the preaching of the Gospel before men. The Church of Rome is not the
pillar and ground of truth, for it bears not the truth before men by the
preaching of the Gospel, but her ^^ue superstitions Inventions, besides the
Gospel, and contrary to the Gospel, at prayer to Saints, Purgatory, Pardons,
Real presence, Eare-shrift etc. Therefore the Church of Rome is not the church
of God.
The second Reason.
PAPIST.
That is the true faith and religion of Christ, which the ancient and learned
Fathers tanght and maintained, in the floursshing time of the Primitive Church,
that is within the first 600 years next after Christ, and this is so true,
that our Adversaries themselves confess it. For M. Jewel, sometime of
Sarisbury, cried out in this manner, O Gregory, o Leo, o Augustine, o Ambrose,
etc, if we be deceived, you have deceived us. The Church of England In his
chaleng. Sermon at Paul's cross.
also continues their memory in every Calendar as it does of the blessed
Apostles, which favor no question, it would not afford them, if it judged them
Heretics or false teachers. And as no Protestant (I think) dare say, that
they be damned in hell for heretical or false doctrine: So, most sure I am,
that any of reason ought rather to rely his salvation upon them that lived so
near Christ, then upon such as live now, and be partial in their own cause.

PROTESTANT.
The flower of your reasons is now gone, and indeed a flower, for the bright
beams of truth, shining from the Sun of righteousness, in the firmament of
his word, has dimmed the grace and defaced the beauty of this your vain and
best reason.

The second reason coming to rescue the former, at unawares, thinking to smite
his enemy, wounded his fellow to the heart: For if the long continued pomp
of your supposed Church be proof enough that yours for sooth is the true
Church, and if the privilege of the true church which you challenge to yours
be, that it cannot err, and consequently we are to believe what your Church
teaches, what needed you then to have abated this last 1000 years and to
appeal to the flourishing time of the Primitive church within the first 600
years? Surely this is a plain confession against your selves, that your long
continued Church comes much short in dignity, credit and authority of those 600
years. Else why do you not rest contented with your own testimony, as being
the present Oracle of the church, but are feign to borrowe proof of the
Primitive Church, considering that if long continuance be the matter, though
your persons be younger and your age but of yesterday, yet by the addition of so
many years, your Church has a grauer head, and surely more wrinckles in her
face, then in those former times she had; If therefore the ancienter
testimonies do more strongly prove the truth, then is theremore certain trial
of truth to be fetched from the early beginnings of the church, then from the
long continued and doting age, (as plainly appears) of your Church. And
surely so did the Fathers within those 600 years, they proved their
doctrines, and maintained every truth, not by the face of long time, but by the
authority of the first times, wherein Christ and his Apostles, undoubtedly
taught the truth, and by undoubted records of divine inspiration, that is the
holy scriptures, commended the same to all posterity. Augustine. Epist. 19. ad
Hieron. Ego solis Scripturarum libris qui iam Canonici appellantur etc. I have
learned to yield only to those books of scripture, which are now called
Canonical, that fear and heuer, that I firmly believe no author of the^ in
writing to have committed any error, others I so read, that how holy or
learned soever they be, I do not therefore think a matter to be true, because
they so thought, but because they were able to persuade me, either by those
canonical authors, or by probable reason, that it swarneth not from truth. And
therefore ad Vincentium Donatist. Epist. 48. N^l^ contra diuina testimonia etc.
Have no will or desire out of the writings of Bishops togather cauils against
the divine testimonies, first because this kind of writings is distinguished
from the cannon, etc. But let us see your reason.

That is the true faith, which the ancient and learned Fathers taught in the
first 600 years. But they were of our religion and not of the Protestants:
Therefore ours is the true faith and not the Protestants.

First, is your Proposition universal or indefinite? If you say, The ancient
and learned Fathers taught the true faith in all points necessary to
salvation, we will not stick with you: but if you say that withal they taught
nothing swaruing from the true faith, neither can we yield it unto you, neither
do the Fathers themselves yield it one to another, neither does any one of them
presume to challenge so much to him self, neither will your selves (I am sure)
generally also affirm. You know the contrary of Tertullian, Cyprian and
Origene Augustine did not in all things accord with Jerome nor allow whatsoever
himself had written, and these things are not unknown to you, nor unconfessed
by you. Wherefore if you will have your proposition universally taken, it is
false, that whatsoever the Fathers taught, is the true faith. If indefinitly,
then will it fall out to be only particular of some things, (suppose the most
things) that the ancient learned Fathers taught, that they agreed with the true
faith. So that if you could prove that your Popish faith, consisting in the
points of your novelties unknown to Christ and his Apostles, and of your
Apostafie from the true faith, did in some points agree with some opinions of
the learned Fathers, yet would it not follow that yours is the true faith,
unless you could manifestly prove that the Fathers therein held the true
faith: For your Popish faith partly has an apish imitation of some outworne
rites of ancient times, as Unctions, Exorcismes, etc. partly carcheth hold of
some of their errors, as prayer for the dead, partly proceeds on boldly to
affirm of those things whereof they spoke doubtfully, as Purgatory, partly
peruerteth and abuses their words against their meanings, sometime taking that
literally which they meant tropically, as Sacrifice, Oblation, Priest, Altar,
etc. sometime wresting their words from that good sense which they bear by
proportion of their writings, to that bad and absurd sense, which since you
have violently drawn them to, as Merit, Poenitentiam agere, Confession,
Satisfaction, etc.

Contrariwise the Protestants religion is in substance the same which the
ancient learned Fathers taught, wherein the Protestants therefore follow them,
because they have followed the Scriptures, as has been often maintained,
proved and demonstrated to your stopped ears and hardened hearts.

Briefly, the Proposition universally understood is false. The Assumption
universally understood of all their faith and religion is false of your Popish
faith. Therefore the conclusion follows not.

But let us see how strongly, or rather straungely, you prove your Proposition.
First, you say it is so true that your adversaries confess it: for M. Jewel
sometime of Sarisburie, etc. That godly and learned Bishop was confident, that
you could not bring any one sufficient sentence out of any Father or Council,
for the space of 600. years after Christ, to prove any of those points named
in that challenge, not that he made Fathers or Councels the rule of his faith,
but rather affirms with Augustine, Sancta Scriptura nostrae doctrinae regulam
De bono viduit. cap. 1. The holy scripture pitcheth the rule of our doctrine.
Romans 1. 16.
figit; and if he had found either in Fathers or Councels any thing swaruing
from this rule, he would have forsaken them and cleaued to the Scriptures, as
he has told you in his learned Apology. We know that the Gospel of Jesus
Christ is the power of God unto salvation, and that therein consists eternal
life. And as Paul warns us, we do not hear, no Gal. 1. 8.
not an Angel of God, though he come from heaven, if he go about to pull us
from any part of this Doctrine.

Secondly, (you say) the Church of England continues their memory in the
Calendar as it does of the blessed Apostles, etc. What mean you so to
ouer-reach? does the Church of England put no difference between them and the
Apostles? for so much you would imply, and must, or else it comes too short of
your purpose. The Church of England preserves their memory as of godly and
painful men, that bestowed themselves to serve the Church of God, but yet it
does not lift them above the degree of men, and therefore does not exempt them
from erring, nor their writings from errors, which immunitie is proper to the
Scriptures inspired of God, and cannot be ascribed to any writings of men never
so godly or learned, so long as they are written only by a pri^at spirit.
Neither is every teacher that fails in some point of truth to be condemned as
a false teacher, much less as an heretic: and therefore it may be doubted and
denied, that all that the Fathers of those times have written is true, and yet
they not reputed either as heretics or false teachers.

Thirdly, you say, No Protestant (you think) dare say, that they are damned in
hell. No verily, and yet you, picking out those errors which unto them were
venial, because they built upon the foundation, which is Jesus Christ alone,
and making them principles of your faith and religion, and laying them indeed
as another foundation besides Christ, may be damned in so doing. except you
repent.

Fourthly, Most sure (you say) you are that any of reason ought rather to rely
his salvation upon them that lived so near Christ, theu upon such as live now,
and are partial in their own cause. Men of reason in matters of reason, may
rely upon men. But men of faith in matters of salvation, will rely only upon
Christ, the Author, finisher and foundation of our faith, the Heb. 12. 2, 1
Cor. 3. 11. Heb. 2 10. 1 Timothy 2. 5. Act. 7. 37. John. 14. 6.
Prince and Mediat or of our salvation, the only undoubted Prophet and teacher
of the true and undoubted way unto eternal life, in a word, the only way, the
only truth, the only life.

But see with what cunning you deal. Your simple sheep must rely their
salvation upon those Fathers; who those Fathers were, what they wrote, and how
they shall understand them you must be their interpreters. So in effect, they
must rely their salvation upon you, which is against your own rule. For you
live now and are justly to be supposed partial in your own cause.

Again, in this your comparison of persons, upon whom we ought rather to rely
our faith, mark how slily you shut out Christ and his word, and seek to cast
an imputation upon the Protestants, that they teach men to rely their faith
upon them, which is as far from them, as it is from you to teach your Disciples
to rely their faith upon Christ and his word. No, no, we counsel the
faithful, as Christ our Master does, to search the Scriptures, and with the
Apostle to John. 5. 39.
build their faith upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Ephesians, 2. 20.
whereof Jesus Christ is the head and corner stone.

Lastly, God open your eyes to acknowledge the strength of truth, which out of
your own mouth, bears witness against your self, you say that men ought
rather to rely their salvation upon them that lived so near Christ. Ought not
then all faithful men most of all to rely their salvation upon them that
lived nearest unto Christ? And who lived nearer him then the holy Apostles and
Evangelists? Or what writings came more immediately from him then theirs?
especially considering that these were chosen by him self, to be his witnesses
unto all the ends of the world, and Act. 1. 8. Ephesians. 4. 13
unto the end of the world by the writings inspired of God.

Wherefore that you may see how willing we are to accord with you in the
truth, we confess and grant that faithful men ought to rely their salvation
rather upon Psalm. 19. 4. Romans 10. 18.
those that saw the Lord Jesus Christ, and were his witnesses, and have
stretched out the line of their writings to the worlds end, the^ upon any, or
all that have been since whether they be Councels, Popes, Bishops or Doctors,
of what place, holiness or learning soever.

Thus forcibly have you proved your Proposition, that whatsoever the fathers of
the first 600. years wrote is thetrue faith: for that must be the extent of your
proposition or else it will not serve your turn, the best and strongest part
of your proof. which you have set in the last place, makes most against your
self, as has bin showed.

Now then let us come to your Assumption.

PAPIST.
But as certain it is, that they were of our religion, and not of the
Protestants, which is so evident, that no man which peruseth their works can
make any doubt thereof, and to give an instance, Saint Austen that lived 1200.
years ago, and was so wonderful for learning, that happily since the
Apostles time the world had never his like: one whom the Protestants also
soeme most to admire and like of, and this ancient, holy, and learned Father
believed and taught them, yea and the whole Church of his time, a^ we believe
and teach now. If any man make doubt hereof let him read his 22. book and 8.
chap. De ciuitate Dei, and he shall find as much as I affirm, concerning prayer
to Saints, reverence to Relikes, and Pilgrimage to holy places, three of the
most odious points, as they think, in all our religion.

PROTESTANT.
To prove that the Fathers of the first 600. were of your religion, and not of
the Protestants, you tell us that one of them (S. Augustine) was so. Does this
prove that all were so? Next how prove you that Saint Augustine was so? because
(as you pretend) he held some points of your religion, as Prayer to Saints,
reverence to Relikes, Pilgrimage to holy places, prayer for the dead. Do these
points comprehend al your religion? Again may it not be, that Augustine being
a man, erred in some points, and you make choice of those his errors, as most
suitable to your religion, and yet otherwise Augustine confirm the Protestants
religion by his testimony, as indeed he does,? Such force is in your forcible
reasons.

But let us see how you prove that Augustine was of your religion in the three
points above named, Prayer to Saints, reverence to relikes, and pilgrimage to
holy places? you refer him that doubts hereof to his 22. book and 8 chap.
De ciuitate Dei. Where, in your sense, we find not one of these and some not
at all. No one word in all that chapter of praying to Satuts, and least as you
do, any man should falsely so conceive, Augustine in the 10. chapter following,
where he speaks of the same matter still, gives this express caveat. Nos
martiribus nostris non templasicut Dijs etc. We build no temples to our
Martyrs, as unto Gods, but memories (or monuments) as unto dead men, whose
spirits live with God, neither do we there erect alters, upon which we may
sacrifice to the Martyrs, but we offer sacrifice to God only, the Martyrs
God, and ours, at the which sacrifice, as men of God, who in his confession
have overcome the world in their place and order they are named, yet are they
not prayed unto by the Priest that sacrifices. What could be more plainly
spoken against prayer to Saints, and who but a Papist would have alleged
Augustine for prayer to Saints, who has so expressly gainesaid it?

Reverent use of the Relikes of Martyrs, by honestly laying up their bones, and
continuing their memories, Augustine there acknowledges: but of Popish
reverence to Relikes, by kneeling, kissing or trust in them, Augustine has not
a syllable, nay he shows plainly in the last words of that chap that the
faith and trust of Christian was not in the Martyrs, but in Christ, for whom
the Martyrs, and namely Stephen, shed his blood. Of resorting to the memories
of Martyrs, Augustine there speaks, but in what sort? It pleased God for
confirmation of that faith, wherein the Martyrs died, at their memories to do
many miracles, where God lifted up the sign of his power, thither the
faithful resorted, what is this to your Popish Pilgrimage, to Relikes and
Shrines, whereof there is now no certainty whose they were, nor any miracles
wrought by the power of God. where they are, and if the true Relikes of true
Martyrs were there yet to suppose more holiness there, or more ready accepta^ce
with God, or access unto him there, then in other places, is contrary to the
express rule of our Savior Christ in the 4. of John. wherefore John. 4. 21.
23.
the cause of such resort now ceassing, and being indeed not needful (as
Augustine in the entrance of that chapter says, that before the world did
believe, Miracles were necessary, that the world might believe, but now
whosoever inquireth after strange wonders that he may believe, is himself a
strange wonder who when the world believes, himself believes not.) The cause
I say ceasing the effect cease, as when God left to send down Manna, the
people gave over looking after it, neither did the godly Israelites look any
longer to the brazen serpent, then while it was erected by Gods appointment for
them to look on that they might be healed: To conclude, for Prayer to Saints,
reuorence to Relikes, Popish Ios. 5. 12.
pilgrimage to holy places, in your sense, and as you practice them, Augustine.
in all that chapter has not one word. Let Numb. 21. 8 9.
us now see how happy you are in the rest that speed so ill in these.

PAPIST.
Again the cause is so clear that our Adversaries do confess it, as might be
showed in many questions, two or three will I speak of. Calvin cannot deny
but that blessed Monica, S. Augustines Inst. lib. 3. cap. 5. Sec. 10.
mother desired to have her soul prayed for, and that her son satisfied her
request accordingly. These be his words, Augustine in his book of Co^fessions
tells how that his mother Monica earnestly requested to be remembered at the
Altar, at such times as the mysteries were in celebrating: a doting request,
which her son did not examine according to the rule of Scripture: and a
little before in the same place thus: whereas my adversaries (quoth he) object
against me, that it was a received custom 1300. years past, to pray for the
dead. I likewise demand of them, what word of God, what revelation, what
example they had so to do, out of which words we see how he confesses, that
the Primitive Church believed as we do about Prayer for the dead, which is the
thing that here I intend to prove. And though malapertlie he contemns them
all, as though forsooth they wanted the word of God, yet what man of reason and
judgment can think that they lacked sufficient warrant for that their belief
and common practice whatsoever he says to the contrary.

PROTESTANT.
Your Adversaries do confess that Augustine did favor and allow some kind of
prayer for the dead, but your adversaries deny that Augustine allowed prayer
for the dead, as now the Popish Church does hold and teach it: For first
touching Purgatory, Augustine resolves not certainly whether there be any or
no, the sum of that he says, comes to no more De ciu. Dei. lib. 21. cap. 26.
then this. I reprove it not, because peradventure it is true, or if he do
resolve any thing it is quite against it, as there is no middle place for any,
that he may be any where but with the devil, De pen. merit. and remiss.
that is, not with Christ. Again, The first place the faith of Catholics by
divine authority believes to be the kingdom of heaven. The second hell. Of
any third we are utterly ignorant, nay, we cannot Hypognost. lib. 5
find it in the holy scriptures, your popish prayers for the dead, supposing
that there is a Purgatory, either Augustines prayer for the dead, was another
matter then your Popish prayer, to wit, a well wishing to them out of the
charity of the living, not amending the condition of the dead, but testifying
the hope that the living faithful have of that mercy which the dead in the
Lord find with him expressed by this wishing prayer, so he affirms in his
prayer for his mother Monica. And I believe that thou have already done that
which I ask of Conses. lib. 9. cap. 13.
thee, but o Lord, approve the voluntaries (or vvishes) of my mouth: or else
Augustine had no better resolution touching this prayer then he had touching
Purgatory, which is none at all, as appeared by the slender proof he makes
thereof, aledging only the book of Macchabees. not allowed of the ancients for
Canonical scripture and as not greatly trusting to that flying De cura prom^r.
cap.
to the authority of long continued custom, and he is so doubtful of the
matter, that he dare not take upon him to define of what nature the sins are
which by the prayers of the living are remitted to the dead, what those sins
are, says he which so hinder coming to the kingdom of heaven, that yet
through the merits of their holy friends they obtain pardon after death, it is
most hard to find, most dangerous to define. I surely even until this time,
although I have taken pains enough about it, yet could never De ciui. Dei.
lib. 21. cap. 27.
attain to search it out Secondly Augustine so prays for his mother Monica,
that yet he doubreth not that she in her life time obtained remission of all
her sins, by the blood of Christ, dispe^sed to her waiting daily at his Altar,
he therefore prays only that it may be unto her according to her faith, that
she may be preserved from the powers of darkness, and receive the 1 Pet. 1. 9.
end of her faith the salvation of her soul, that is, he prays for her
consu^mation in the kingdom of God, and of Christ. For Augustine himself
confesses. Therefore no new merits are purchased for the dead, when their
friends do any good for them, but these things are recompensed to their former
merits. De verb. Apost. Ser. 32
What is this to Popish prayer for the jail delivery of souls that are in the
pains of Purgatory, of who^ you fain that many are the sooner delivered by your
lip-labors, a devise of late times, to improve the Popes revenues, and to
enrich Cloisters and idle bellies.

Lastly, Augustine himself, being so unsettled in the matter of Prayer for the
dead, that he is feign to bring strange interpretations of the use of Prayer,
and other charities for the dead. For these being generally done for all the
dead, he says, that For those that are very good, they are thankesgiuings, for
those that are very evil, although they be no help to them, yet are they
comforts to the living, and yet after that he says, they avail to make their
pains lighter, and their damnation more tolerable, which if it be so, is some
help: for the middle sort they are propitiations, that is, supplicatorie
prayers for pardon of their sins, which yet speaking of his mother Monica, he
says, she had in her life time. And to salve the Confess. lib. 9. cap. 13. 2.
Cor. 5. 10.
Scripture which says, that every one shall receive according to that he has
done in his life, he is feign to say, that these in their life time deserved to
have benefit by the Churches prayers, which what it is else, but remission of
sins? Augustine, I say, being thus inwrapped in uncertainties, marvel you
that Calvin said it was anile votum, etc. an old woman's desire, which her
son did not examine by the rule of Scripture, but of a natural affection,
was desirous to approve unto others? Where resolution wanted in the matter
there could be no sufficient warrant, whatsoever you say to the contrary.

PAPIST.
About particular and auricular confession of sins, we have also the
authority of antiquity, as the same Calvin informs Inst. lib. 3. cap. 4.
sec. 7. Auricular confession ancient.
us. I marvel (quoth he) with what face they dare contend, that the
confession whereof they speak, was ordained by Gods law, the use whereof I
confess was passing ancient, but easily can I prove that in old time it was
free. Nay then, with what face dare he deny that to be ordained by Gods law?
For what man of reason can think that antiquity would have used it, had it
not descended from Christ and his Apostles, or what power could have brought it
into the Church, it being so contrary to our proud nature, had not the Son
of God himself planted that doctrine? But it was free in old time, says he.
What then? For do we not know that the Communion was so likewise in old time?
If then the Church of England may make a law, to bind men once in the year to
the Communion, may not the Catholic Church do the like for confession? Still
Calvin gives us the ancient Fathers, but reserueth the Scriptures for
himself, we take what be grants, but deny what he requires.

PROTESTANT.
Confession of some particular sins, specially such as lay heavy upon the
conscience (but not of every particular sin with every circumstance, and that
to every parish priest in secret, which is your popish eare-shrift) such
confession, I say, to a Priest by special order of the Churches appointed
thereunto, Calvin does confess, and well may, to be very ancient, and yet
maintain popish eare-thrift to be very young as receiving his first authority
from the Laterane council under Innocentius 3. in the year of our Lord 1215.
as Calvin in the same place tells you. But you ask with what face be dare
that it was ordained by Gods law? For (you say) what man of reason can think
that antiquity would have used it, had it not descended from Christ and his
Apostles? Tertullian whom you will not deny to be a man of reason, though he
show the antiquity of offerings for the De Coron, milit.
dead, yet confesses there is no Scripture for it. Therefore your forcible
reason has neither force nor grace, when you thus conclude. Antiquity used
confession of particular sins to a Priest: Therefore it was ordained by Gods
law. Besides does not M. Calvin prove unto you that antiquity held it not to
be of divine institution? for otherwise Nectarias Bishop of Constantinople,
would not have abrogated it for the abuse of it, neither would Chrysostom
after him, have given so much liberty from such confession as he does, as he is
alleged by M. Calvin in the next section to that you mention. See Inft. lib.
3. cap. 4. Sec. 8.
therefore with what face you challenge him in that wherein he brings so
sufficient proof. The proof by him there alleged, I set not down at large,
because, if you will, you may as easily find them set down by him, as you
could find this piece by you alleged.

But whether your corner-shrift be of that Antiquity that you pretend, if
Caluins proofs persuade you not, see what Beatus Rhenanus writes. Moreover
for no other cause have we here used the testimonies of many, then to this
end, that no man Arg^^, in Tertul. lib. de p^nitent.
should marvel that Tertullian has spoken nothing of this corner or secret
confession of sins committed, which at that time was utterly unknown. And in
another place, in his book De poenitentia, Admonit, de Tertul, dogmat.
he mentions only public confession: And again, Not only in Tertullian,
but even in those which lived many ages after, there is only mention of
public penance and confession. If it had descended from Christ and his
Apostles, it could not have been so early and so long out of use. Such is the
antiquity of your Eareshri^t.

Your next reason to derive it from Christ and his Apostles is, because it
being a thing so contrary to our proud nature, had not the Son of God himself
planted the doctrine, no power could have brought it into the Church. Is it not
contrary to the high estate of Kings that are in Gods steed upon earth, to
submit their scepters to the Pope of Rome, to lie down for him to tread on
their necks, to kiss his foot, and his Legates knee, to hold his stirrope,
to lead his horse by the bridle, and go on foot by him, to suffer him to pill
and poll their countries by his provisions, dismes, annates, and such other
exactions, and to sequ^ster out of their hands, spiritual causes and persons
and to draw them to the Court of Rome? The tyranny of the Pope of Rome has
brought these wonders to pass: will you thereof conclude, that the son of
God has planted these tyra^nies^ so may you conclude for 1 King. 18. 18.
Baals Priests; it is a thing so contrary to the tender nature of man, for men
to gash and lance their own flesh, that no power could have brought it into
use, if God himself had not planted it. So may you conclude, for those that
caused 2 King. 23. 10.
their sons and daughters to pass through the fire unto Mo^ech, that no power
could have brought them to it, it being so contrary to natural piety, if God
himself had not planted it. The scripture has told us what Antichrist shall
do. He shall make all both small and great, rich and poor free Apoc. 1^. 1^.
Apoc. 17. 3.
and bond, to receive his mark in their right hand or in their foreheads, and
the Kings of the earth shall give their power and authority to the beast. In a
word, superstition has carried idolaters to cruelty, against their own bodies
and flesh: foolish prodigality of their own substance base seruility in their
own persons, and extreme fury in their minds and senses, as the idolatries of
the Gentiles do abundantly prove.

Now to that which Calvin says, in old time it was free, when you cannot deny
it, which is sufficient to convince the tyranny of your Romish torturing
shrift, you say, Do we not know that the communion was so in old time? you may
know that the Church in old time did celebrate the Lords supper on every Lords
day, as for the people they did not require them all of necessity to receive
every day, yet appointed them to receive at least at the Nativity of our Lord,
at Easter and Pentecost, as appears in Council. Agathe^s. alleged De
Consecrat. did. 2. cap. seculares. Not thereby exempting them to receive no
oftener, but exhorting them to receive often; and yet providing that at least
they should receive at some times. What sopln strie is this, because at other
times of the year they were free to choose at what time besides the three named
they would communicate, so they did all communicate then, therefore the
communion was in old time free, as if the Church required no man at any time to
receive the communion? Thus wily you are to beguile your self, and those that
will be led by you. Christ left it not free for Christians to communicate or
not to communicate, neither did the Church of old time so observe it. Christ
left it free for men to confess in the ear of a Priest, or not to confess,
and the Church of old time so observed it. Will any man now say, that the
communion in old time was so free as auricular confession was? wherefore
although the Church of England treading in the steps of the ancient Church, may
make a law to bind men to the communion, three times in the year, yet may not
any Church make the like law, for your auricular confession unless they can
show as good warrant for the institution thereof, as they can for the
institution of the Lords supper. By the way, let be here observed that you thus
wrangling against Calvin to make a show as if Christ himself and his Apostles
had planted ^urioular confession, bring not one word of Scripture to prove it.

PAPIST.
Concerning also the sacrifice of the Altar, and the Real presence (no small
pointr) we have antiquitre on our side: For S^int Austen is therein so plain
in his Manuel, that one Thomas Rogers, an English man, who has translated that
book, is enforced to alter one whole Chapter, to make the holy Doctor against
his will, Chapter. 11. Printed by Peter Short. 15 97.
to agree with their doctrine. Another chapter there is (quoth he) though not
clean left out, yet applied from an ill to a good purpose, as the 11. chapter,
where that which was spoken of the sacrifice of the Altar, is applied unto our
sacrifice of thanksgiving, or of the Real and car^^lpresence of Christ, unto
his spiritual being at the communion. Thus we b^^e. S. Austen of our opinion, ^
our enemy co^feseth, and so consequently the rest of the Fathers: For no
reason ^^ ^one us to think that he did in so important a matter dissent from
all other of his time. Many more questions might he touched, wherein they
grant us venerable antiquity; but these few being very weighty, may suffice
for all such as he desirous of truth and salvation of their souls.

PROTESTANT.
What Master Rogers has done in translating Augustines Manuell, and namely
the eleventh chapter, I know not, because I have not his book, but sure I am,
he needed not alter or decline one word there written by Augustine, for fear
to give any countenance to Popish sacrifice or carnal presence. All that
Augustine has here in show to serve your turn, is that he calls the Lords
supper, Mirabile and caleste sacrificium, a wonderful and heavenly sacrifice.
But what means he by the term sacrifice? himself there interprets, namely
that Christ ordained it to be offered in commemorationem mortis and passionis,
for a remembrance, not for a repetition of his death and passion. Likewise in
other places he speaks to the same purpose, as cont. Faust. lib. 20. cap. 21.
Huius sacrificis caro and sanguis etc. The flesh and blood of this sacrifice
before the coming of Christ was promised by sacrifices of resemblance, in his
passion it was delivered or rendered by the truth it self, but after the
ascension of Christ, it is celebrated by the sacrament of remembrance, and
Epist. 23. he says, that Christ is offered up in the sacrament, for the
similitude between the sacrament and the thing whereof it is a sacrament, that
is, the offering of Christ, and generally of every sacrifice else where he
says, The visible sacrifice is asacrament, that is, an holy sign of the
invisible De Ciu. Dei. lib. 10 cap. 5.
sacrifice. And as he is aleaged, De Consecra. Did. 2. cap. Hoc est. The
offering of the flesh, which is done by the Priests hands, is called Christ's
passion, death, crucifying, not in truth of the thing, but in a signifying
mystoris. And the gloss upon that chapter in the word Calestis, Heauonlic,
that is, the heavenly sacrament which truly represents Christ's flesh, is
called Christ's body, but improperlie: wherefore it is called after the sort
thereof, but not in truth of the thing, but in a signifying mystery: So as the
meaning is, It is called the body of Christ, that is, it signifies. And in a
word, because you bite so hard upon the word Sacrifice, wheresoever you find
it, in Augustine or others, let Augustine himself interpret what force that
word has, and how it is to be taken, A true sacrifice (says he) is every
work which is done, that by a holy fellowship we may cleave fast to God, De
Ciu. Del. lib. 10. cap. 6.
to wit, referred to that end of good, by which we may truly be blessed.
Which in the end of that chapter he applies to the sacrament. This is the
sacrifice of Christians, we being many are one body in Christ, which also
the Church in the sacrament of the Altar known to the faithful does
frequentlie observe. Thus have you no help from Augustine, for your gross
opinion of carnal presence, and for your Popish sacrifice, and consequently by
your own forcible reason, from none of the rest of the Fathers, for no reason,
as you say, can move vsto think that he did in so important a matter dissent
from all others of his time. Now therefore out of the examination of those few
questions, let all such as be desirous of truth and salution of their souls,
discern what help you have from venerable antiquity for your Popish and
Romish Superstition.

PAPIST.
The third reason.
Sundry points of our Religion generally misl^ked by our adn^rsartes, before
all that true, according to their own principles, and consequently agreeable
to sacred Scripture, this though it seem strange, yet is i^ thus plainly
proved. In their communion book authorized by act of Parliament we find
prescribed how the sick person ought to make a special confession of his
sins to the In the visitation of the sick, special confession.
Priest, and it will not help them to say that they are not bound to
confess al their sins, but such only as do trouble their conscience. for what
if all that come to mind do trouble them, as we think all should, seeing all
according to their doctrine, be mortal and damnable. And besides gladly
would I know that text of Scripture, which commands the confession of some
sins and not of all let them name the place. Secondly. we find there also
prescribed, how after confession the Priest must absolve him in this manner, Our
Lord Jesus Christ, etc. and by his authority committed to Absolution from
sins.
me, I absolve thee from all thy sins, In the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost. What words for the Priests absolution can be
wished more plain, being the same in English which in Latin be used in the
Catholic Church.

PROTESTANT.
No doubt you were put to your shifts when out of Protestant principles, you
would take in hand to prove the truth of Popish religion, which either you do
to spend some time in idle talk to no purpose, or else you must needs
ascribe the credit of truth to Protestant principles: for thus your reason must
be framed.

Whatsoever agrees with the Protestant principles, is true: Sundry points of
Pop^sh religion agree with Protestant principles: Therefore sundr^e points of
Popish religion are true.

We thank you for yielding true witness to the Protestant religion, and yet we
thank you not much, for sure it was against your will, and was only upon some
hope to countenance Popery by the means. Again, see another reason of your
own making for the truth of Protestant religion. Sundry points of our
religion are true, according to the Protestant principles, and consequently
agreeable to sacred scripture Bring your own reason into form will it not be
this?

Whatsoever is true according to Protestant principles, is agreeable to sacred
scriptures;

Sundry points of Popery are true according to Protestant principles:

Therefore they are agreeable to sacred scriptures.

We thank you the second time, for confessing so clearly that the principles
of Protestant religion are agreeable to sacred scriptures. And in kindness
toward you for your double testimony so frankly affourded for the truth of
Protestant religion, we are bound to yield thus much unto you, that if any
point of Popery be true according to the principles of our religion, then
surely it is agreeable to sacred scriptures: For surely all the principles of
Protestant religion are agreeable to sacred scripture, as very ingeniously you
have confessed, and I hope will not revoke.

But indeed strange it were, as out of a faint heart you confess that any
point of Popery should be true according to Protestant principles, and
therefore doubtless you are out of hope to prove any point of Popery true by
that means.

Let us see then what be the points Our Communion book would have the sick
person visited to make a special confession of he feel his conscience
troubled with any weighty matter, and when he has so done, wills the
Priest to absolve him by the authori^e of Christ. What of all this? Is this
popish Eareshrift? the book says a special, not an auricular confession.
Secondly does the book set the sick man's conscience upon the rack to reveal
to the Priest all his sins by number with the time, place, and manner, as
without which he cannot be saved? you find no such matter there; only the
Church gives him advise for the ease of his conscience, to unburden himself
by confession of those sins, which at that time trouble his conscience.
Thirdly if no sin at that time trouble his conscience he is not willed to
make any confession; and if any sin has troubled his conscience in former
time, if by confessing the same to any faithful Christian brother, he have
received comfort to the peace of his conscience before the Priest come to
visit him, he is not ensnared with any scruple of conscience, that except he
confess it to the Priest he cannot be forgiven.

You object, First what if all his sins that come to mind trouble his
conscience, as you think all should, seeing according to our doctrine all be
mortal and damnable. I answer, what if they do not trouble his conscience?
then does our book require no confession at his hands, whereas all must of
necessity come to your Popish shrift, whether their consciences be troubled or
no. And by the way, all men may see what peace of conscience Popery breeds,
that leaves men under the torture of an accusing conscience for all the sins
they can remember, and that even in the hour of death. The holy Apostle Saint
Paul, 1. Tim. 1. 13. remembers that in former time he had been a blasphemer,
a persecutor, and oppressor, yet was not his conscience troubled at this time:
for he adds presently that he was received to mercy. It could not be that
he should apprehend and apply to himself the mercy of God, forgiving his
sins, and have his conscience in regard of those sins still troubled. It is
therefore untrue and shows want of faith that you say, you think all the
sins that come to mind should trouble a Christian man's conscience. And yet
it agrees well with your Popish spirit, which is the Spirit of bondage, and
not of adoption, of fear, and not of promise. We say indeed that death is the
Romans 8. 15. and 6, 23.
wages of all sin, and therefore all sin is mortal and damnable, but we say
that no sin shall be laid to the charge of Gods Romans 8. 33. 34.
chosen, whom none shall condemn, because God himself justifies them Christ
died, and rose again for them.

Secondly you object, that the same scripture which commands the confession
of some sins, commands as well the confession of all. It is very true that
the scripture commands to confess all sins, but to God. Of confession to
men there is no other commandment but general; Confess your sins one to
another, and pray one for another: Which James 5. 16.
gives as much authority to every brother, as to a Priest to hear confessions:
For of confession in the ear of a Priest, you can show no tittle in the
scripture. Howbeit as by the advice and counsel of holy Scripture, Christians
are taught to ease their oppressed consciences into the bosoms of their
faithful brethren, to the end they may be partakers of their comfort and
prayers, so we think it also a godly course and a ready mean to find comfort,
if the sheep of the flock do open their wounds to their pastor, who has
wisdom and faithfulness to power in wine and oil, that is, to minister unto
them the word of admonition and consolation; and this is the meaning of our
Communion book, but what is this to Popish Ear shrift?

Yea, but the book prescribes also how after confession the Priest must
absolve him, and the manner of words. You should have dealt faithfully, if you
had set down the whole truth. Our book appoints the Priest first to pray
unto our Lord Jesus Christ, that he would grant unto the sick person truly
repenting and believing in him, forgiveness of all his sins, as acknowledging
it to be the only right of the Lord Jesus Christ to forgive sins. Secondly,
presupposing the sick man truly to repent and to believe in Christ, it
appoints the Priest by the authority of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has left
power to his Church to absolve repentant sinners (which power is the^ executed
by the Priest) to absolve the sick from all sins. To absolve, I say, not to
forgive: For Christ only forgiueth, as our book there understands
forgiveness, and as it is understood in the Lords prayer, and as it is
understood in the Lords prayer, and is interpreted by the Prophet David,
Psalm, 32. 1. 2. By covering and not imputing sins. The Church by her
ministers absolueth, that is, declares to the repentant and believing by
authority of Christ's promise, Sent. lib. 4. Did. 18. Nec ideo and seq.
that their sins are forgiven. So says Peter Lombard, This truly we may
say and think, that only God remitteth and reteineth sins, and yet has
given power to his church to bind and loose; but he binds and loses after
one sort, and the church after another: For he binds by himself only, so
he forgiueth sin, because he both cleanses the soul from the inward blot,
and loses it from the debt of eternal death. But he has not granted so much
to the Priests, to whom he has only given power to bind and loose, that is,
to show that ^en are either bound or loosed. And Bonauenture in his disputes
upon it, expounding the words of Ambrose Sacerdos officium exhibet, ^ed nullius
potestatis iura exercet. That is, the Priest executes his office, but
exercises not the right of any power, writes thus. For Ambrose means to
say that sins are said to be remitted of the Priest, not in manner of a
doer, but in manner of a minister. Against both Ambrose Non per modum
efficientis, sed per modum ministrantis. Con^^l. ^rid. Sess. 4. cap. 6. can. 9.
and your Master of the sentences, your Tridentine council cries Anathema,
giving to the Priest in their sacramental absolution, not a bare ministry to
pronounce and declare, but a judicial act, whereby the sentence is pronounced
by him, as by the Judge. So making the comfort of him that is absolved, to
depend not only upon Christ's promise, but upon the person of the Priest
absoluing, which is far from the doctrine or meaning of our Church, either in
the Communion book or any where else. And therefore what affinity soever be
between your Latin words and our English, there is no affinity between that
comfortable absolution which our book appoineth Gods minister in the name of
Christ, to publish to the humble and repentant sinner, and your Popish and
Pharisaical absolution. Lastly, this order of confession and absolution, as
they are set down in the communion book, is indeed some part of the practice
of our relition, but no principle of our religion, and therefore you do much
abuse your Clients, when you make them believe that this and other orders, are
any of the principles of our religion.

PAPIST.
Thirdly, the book allows the sign of the Cross in Baptism, why then is
it not likewise lawful in other things? What word of The sign of the Cross.
Images.
God wills the one and forbids the other? and if the sign of the Cross
be good, why not also other images, especially of Christ crucified? That te^t
which they can bring to iustific the one, will also serve for the other: and
that which they shall allege to overthrow the image of the Crucifixe, will
give small rest to the sign of the Cross.

PROTESTANT.
It is false that you say, that the book allows the sign of the Cross in
Baptism. That sign by the ordinance of the book has nothing to do in
Baptism. It is only made a sign of confession after Baptism, which use our
Church having received as continued from antiquity in that manner without
interruption, considering how notably it served the faithful in old times to
manifest their confession of Christ crucified, thought meet still to retain.
But as for reviving any other use of it after so long disuse, our Church
thought, it might rather tend to superstition, then to edification; the rather
because your Popish confidence in such bodily exercises had greatly corrupted
the primitive simplicity of the vulgar use thereof among the first Christians.
There is no word of God that wills the use of it, nor any word of God, that
I know, that forbids the bare use of it. It grew out of a desire the
faithful had to testify before the enemies of Christ, their faith in Christ
crucified. In the use thereof it seems they felt further comfort, not having
confidence in the sign, but in Christ whom they confessed by that sign.
Neither was any of them ever heard to say, Aue cruxspes vnie^, Hatle o cross
our only hope. As touching the match of equality that you make between the
sign of the Cross and the Crucifixe, you may well think that the ancient
church being so long without the image of the crucifixe, namely above 600.
years, and yet so early using Sexta Synod. Can 82.
the sign of the Cross, did acknowledge no small difference between the one
and the other. A transient sign to signify in gesture, that which the word
signifies in speech, and that only for means of confession, differs much
from an image made to represent the Son of God, whose Godhead no colors, nor
proportion can express, whose Manhood is not the whole of his person, whose
nature, person and suffering is sufficiently, yea abundantly described in the
Scriptures for all men to see and hear, neither is it possible for any art to
make that visible in the image of the crucifixe, which is to be known,
believed and remembered of Christ and his sufferings, according to the
description of his word. To leave the Scriptures and follow a crucifixe, is to
go from the Sun in the firmament, to the sign of the sun painted in a
table: To add to the word the help of the crucifix, is to accuse the
infufficiencie of the word. The sign of the Cross had no such use in the
beginning, neither has now with us, and therefore differs largely from the
sign of the crucifixe: But it is worth the marking, how barely you bring into
comparison, first the use of the sign of the Cross among us, and the use
thereof in popery. Do we teach to trust in that sign? Do we pray to it? do we
worship it? do we bless with it? do we fence and arm our selves with it?
these are your Idolatries which you slily pass over, as if there were a like
use of the sign of the Cross with us and with you Papists. Secondly, the
sign of the Cross, and the image of the crucifixe, as if you did only make
the image of the crucifixe historically and not to worship it. When we commit
idolatry with the sign of the Cross, then compare our use thereof, with your
idolatries to the image of the crucisixe. Lastly, remember here also that
which I spoke of the former; The sign of the Cross is only an indifferent
external rite among us, It is neither principle, nor second, nor third, nor
fourth, nor any point of our Religion.

PAPIST.
Fourthly, in Baptism they use Godfathers and abrenuntiation: Why not also
other ceremonies, namely holy Oil and Exorcisme? Holy oil. Exorcisme.
Read the Scriptures, and as little there is for the first, as the last. Ask
the ancient Fathers, and as much is found for the last, as for the first.

PROTESTANT.
In the administration of the holy Sacraments, the nearer we come to the
institution of Christ, the more chaste and incorrupt we esteem the
administration of them to be and therefore have taken that liberty, which the
Church of God ever used, no further to follow the example of former times in
matter of ceremone, then we do evidently see to serve for edification. By which
rule no doubt sundry ceremonies of ancient time used, afterward grew out of
use, as namely in Baptism, the tasting of milk and honey, with certain other
ceremonies, either for come linesse or instruction taken up in the primitive
Church, which afterward were laid down again, as the times and growth of the
Church fawe most convenient.

As touching Godfathers and abrenuntiation; for that the one has a good use as
well to provide, that only the children of believing parents be brought to
Baptism, as also to commit the care of the infants education to men for
godliness and sound faith approved, and the other expresses the covenant on
the behalf of the infant baptized, wherewith he stands charged, the mention
whereof serves as well to call to the minds of others before baptized what
they owe to God by the covenant between God and them sealed in baptism, as
also to enter the obligation of the infants faith and obedience, whereunto as
soon as his years admit, he must know himself to be bound by the law of his
baptism: Therefore our Church of a care that all things may be done orderly and
to edification, and that the end of Baptism may be attained, has upon good
reason continued these two. When you shall be able to show unto us as serious
and profitable use of your Exorcisme and Oil, then may we enter into
consulation, whether in so lawful liberty to alter or refuse unnecessary
ccremonies, it were not much better to reason you have so superstitiously
profaned them (besides the slender use) to leave them only to you, then after
so long a farewell to give them new entertainment, specially Scripture saying
nothing for them, and the ancient Fathers although they testify of the use of
these, as also some others by you neglected, yet in matter of ceremony, allow
freedom to every Church in every time These also are no principles of our
Religion.

PAPIST.
Fifthly, the book allows the use of the Surplice in their Service and
Sacramonts: why then may not Copes, Vestiments and Copes. Vestiments.
such like be admitted also. For no more can they show for the one, then we
for the other.

PROTESTANT.
Multitude of needless ceremonies is always a burden, and therefore a
bondage, both in the yoke of observation, and also in the tail of
superstition, whereunto through blindness and carnal devotion men commonly
fall. And therefore our church though it retain the Surplice, as most remote
both in the original and perpetual use from your superstition, and that only
for comeliness, without putting any religion in it, yet both is and ought to
be sparing in affecting the multitude of your theatricall or stage-like
vestiments, which would rather disguise, then a dorne the Church of Christ. And
herein our church has followed the rule of Scripture, which albeit of love and
for peace it teaches to suffer some things not necessary; yet straightly
warns the church not to be intaugled again in the yoke of boudage. And so
there is Scripture against many, and those Gal. 5. 1.
before refused, more then against one, and that never out of use. And here
again, I may not forget still to put you in mind, that far it is from our
church to esteem the surplice, or any use thereof, as a principle, or any part
of our religion.

PAPIST.
Sixthly, in the Collect upon Michaelmas day, they confess that the Angels
defend and protect our life, how then can they deny Praying to Saints.
that they know our necessities and prayers? and so no reason can they allege
why we may not pray to them, as well as we do to our mortal brethren.

PROTESTANT.
Protect is not in the Collect, but only succor and defend. For we yield only
a ministry to the Angels, we hold them neither for patrons nor protectors.
Which honor we give only to the Son of God the head of Angels. Neither doubt
we but as far as their ministry extends toward us, so far they know our
necessities and prayers. But infinite knowledge which is proper to the Deity, we
ascribe not unto them. Neither is such limited knowledge in them any sufficient
ground to lead us to pray unto them. The Angel that was sent to inform John
the Evangelist in the visions revealed, notwithstanding the wonderful counsel
of God whereof he was then a minister and an interpreter, yet would not suffer
John to fall down to him, which is much less Apoc. 19. 10.
then to pray to him: For to whom we pray, to him very religiously and lawfully
we may fall down. Many revelations of things secret and remote were granted to
the Prophets in old time, and namely to Elisaeus, yet read we not that any man
did ever pray to them, though some in reverence to their ministry, and the
power of God administered by them, did fall down to them. And yet how finely,
or rather grossly you can assume without proof or show of proof, that we may
pray to our mortal brethren? have you either precept or example for it in all
the Scripture? Indeed we request and receive one from another the help of our
mutual prayers; call you this praying to our mortal brethren? thus can you
prove one paradoxe by another. These be your forcible and plain reasons for
your falsely named Catholic faith.

PAPIST.
Seventhly, in the Geneua Psalms, annexed to the Communion Limbus Patrum.
book, and usually sung in their churches, they confess that Christ's soul
descended to the Fathers that were in Limbo. For this article of the Creed, He
descended into hell, they turn into Meetor after this manner. His soul did
after this descend, Into the lower parts, To them that long in darkness were,
the true light of their hearts.

PROTESTANT.
First you corrupt the Meeter, changing for your purpose Spirit into Soul. The
meeter has Spirit, not Soul. Secondly, what the translator meant by Spirit,
and by the lower parts, it is not easy to define, unless himself had left
some gloss upon his own meeter, and considering that the law of meeter,
restrained him from liberty of plain speech, it were an injury to him, to
wrest his words contrary to his meaning: That by lower parts he meant your
Limbus, you have nothing to persuade you, but your own prejudice that caries
you so to understand it. It may be, that by Spirit, he meant the power of his
eternal Spirit, which in his suffering, and after his suffering wrought both
in heaven and upon earth, and under the earth, even upon the bodies of the dead
who were in the lower parts, and lay in darkness as generally the dead do,
Hilarie speaks to like effect: Monetur terra, capax enim mortus huius esse
non poterat etc. The earth Hilar. in Matthew. Can. 33. Potestas aeternae virtutis.
was moved, for it could not contain him that was dead. The rocks were cloven
for the piercing word of God, and the power of his eternal virtue, had broken
into all places, how strong and well fenced soever. And the graves were opened,
for the prisons of death were unlocked, And many bodies of the Saints that
slept, arose, for he inlightning the darkness, and shining into, the obscurity
of the lower places, for the present raising of the saints asleep, took away
the spoils of death it self. What is the power of his eternal virtue but his
eternal spirit. Whereby he brake into the holds of death, the darkness of
death, and the obscurity of the lower parts, and carried away the spoils of
death, and did inlighten with the brightness of his power, the whole region of
darkness, to the comfort of all that waited for his coming. All which Hilarie
says, were done not by his soul, but that nature which he calls Penetra^s
Dei virtue, and potestas aeternae vertutis, that is, his Deity. And the
scripture speaking of the faithful departed, although the soul and body by
dissolution be in diverse regions yet speaks of the whole person together. So
says the Apostle Peter, of David the patriake He is both dead and buried, and
his sepulcher remains with us. And the like in many Acts. 2. 29.
other places wherefore the Power of Christ piercing to the dead, was a comfort
to all the faithful departed. If this were his meaning, as by comparion of
the former place of Hilarie we may very well judge, what service I pray you,
can this meeter do to your Limbus? But whatsoever his mening were his private
interpretation is no principle of our religion, neither can you be ignorant,
that there be that hold some local descent of Christ, and yet be far from
holding your Limbus, so might the author of that meeter likewise do. Albeit we
hold that article for a principle of our religion, yet are not the sundry
expositions thereof, according as several men have conceived, so many
principles of our religion, you must therefore seek further for principles to
serve your turn.

PAPIST
Lastly, Martin Luther taught the Real preseuce and maintained Real presence.
it against the Zwinglians, as others of our Adversaries cannot deny, and yet
does the Apology of England penned by M. Jewel call him a most excellent man,
sent of God, to give light to the world. How then can it be contrary to the
scripture? for if it were so, then surely could he not be a man sent of God,
for the matter of the Sacrament is no small point, but such as themselves will
say that a wrong belief thereof brings damnation.

PROTESTANT.
Did Martin Luther teach Popish Real prefence? did he teach Transubstantiation
of the bread into the body of Christ? Did he teach carnal eating of Christ's
flesh? In the Act. 10.
Augustane confession wherein he was a chief part, thus they confess. Of the
supper of the Lord, they teach that the body and blood of Christ are truly
present and distributed to them that eat in the Lords supper. We say the same,
in the Articles agreed upon at Marpurg. October. 3. 1529. Whereunto Martin Luther
first subscribed, we all believe and think, that the Sacrament of the Altar is
the Sacrament of the true Histor, August. Confess. Spiritual eating
body and blood of Jesus Christ and that the spiritual eating of this body and
blood, is chiefly necessary for every Christian man. We say the same. In
certain articles setting the state of the controversy between Luther and
P^^cer, and the rest of the Cinglians (as they are called.) Although we say
that the body Artic. 2. In aliqua mole.
of Christ is really present, yet Luther says not that it is present locally,
to wit; in any bigness, circumscriptiuely, but after that manner whereby Christ's
person, or whole Christ, is present to his whole Church and to all creatures,
Luther says not that Christ's Sess. 3. cap. 1. Can. 1.
body is in the sacrament, Circu^scriptiue. But your Trent Council says, that
the body of Christ is contained in the sacrament of the Eucharist. Wherefore
although Luther had an opinion of a Real presence by himself, which he could
not tell how to express, nor would have any disputation about the manner, yet
in as much as he was far from allowing your Popish charm, whereby you work
your monstrous Transubstantiation, nor held any carnal eating, never allege
Martin Luthers Real presence, to give countenance to your carnal presence.

The Apology may well acknowledge him an excellent man, sent of God, to give
light to the world, and yet not allow of his error in any thing: neither will
we say that every wrong belief, even in matter of the sacrament, brings
damnation to a godly man, otherwise holding the foundation. And lastly, Martine
Luthers private opinion is no principle of our religion, as you very well know.

PAPIST.
These things being so, with what conscience can the Protestants justly
exclaim against us, for defending a special confession of our sins,
absolution of the Priest, the use of Images, and the picture of Christ
crucified, the holy ceremonies of oil and exorcisme, copes and holy
vestiments, that Angels know our prayers, and may be prayed unto, that Christ's
soul descended into hell for the delivery of the holy Fathers that died
before his sacred Passion, the Real presence of Christ in the sacrament, when
as all these points, either in express terms, or by necessary consequence,
be gathered out of the grounds of their own Religion.

PROTESTANT.
These things being so that no one of the points mentioned, is any principle of
our Religion, nor in any one of the points which we acknowledge, do we agree
with the Papists, and the last of the seven is none of ours, with what
conscience could a Papist go about to raise a reason for Popish idolatry, out
of the principles of our religion, and in the end neither build upon any
principle of our Religion, nor prove any agreement between Popish confession
and absolution, and that which the Church of England uses, between the sign
of the Cross, as it is used in the Church of England and Popish Images
between Godfathers and Abrenunciation, and popish oil, and exorcisme, as now
they are between the decency of the Surples, and the superstition of Popish
vestemints, between the doctrine of some Protestants touching the article of
descending into hell and Popish Limbus, no nor yet between Martin Luthers Real
presence, and Popish carnal presence, whereas no one of these Popish points can
either in express terms, or by any necessary co^seque^ce be gathered either
out of any principle orany practice, or ceremony in our religion, as has been
showed.

PAPIST.
The Fourth reason.
That is the true Church which has the scriptures on their side and expounds
them in that sense and meaning which was intended by the holy Ghost, and none
can deny, but all this is verified of the Catholic Church and not of the
Protestant, as a few plain arguments shall make manifest.

First therefore, no reason in the world can the Protestants aleage to prove
that the scriptures be theirs, or to justify their interpretation, which we
cannot bring also for us. For let them pretend conference of places, recourse
to the fountains of the Greeker Hebrew, or what else they will, all that we
can say for our selves, and with a^ great probability as they, and so in any
iudgmet not palpablypartial we nothing inferior. On the co^toary we to
maintain our exposition beside all other helps cite the consent of ancient
Fathers, the common practice of Gods Church, the decrees of general Councels,
none of which they will stand to, and therefore in all equity and reason we
passing much superior, can we then lack the true sense of scripture, that
have all these to back our interpretation, specially that of Gods Church in
general councels, or can the Protestants have it that be destitute of all
these, as their denial of them does evidently prove and convince.

PROTESTANT.
This forcible Reasoner seems now, as if he would come to us, and join issue
with us to be tried by the Scriptures, whether the Popish Church or our Church,
be the true Church. But surely if there be no more force in his reason, then
plainenes in his dealing this reason will be like his fellows, and so prove
neither forcible nor plain: For when the reckoning of his reason is cast up,
he calls back the trial of the true Church from the scriptures, to his
pretended Fathers and Councels, and again from them to Gods Church, that is
(in his meaning) the Popish Church, from whence all uses to be deuolued to the
Pope; And so in conclusion, the question being, whether the Popish Church be
the true Church, we must be tried by the Pope, who were much to blame if he
would not say that his own Church is the true Church, for even thieves will
say, that they are honest men. Your own Cannon law has provided that in all
matters of faith, all men yea even all Bishops must refer themselves to the
Pope. Quoties, etc. As often as any matter Cause. 24. q. 1
of faith is debated, I think that all our brethren and fellow Bishops, ought
to refer the matter to none but to Peter, that is, to the authority of his
name and honor. What is the authority of Peter's name and honor but the Pope?
and therefore the Gloss there sets down in the margent. It is the Popes
office to determine a question moved about faith. And Thomas Aquinas, It
belongs to faith to stick to the Popes determination Opuse. con. error.
Graec.
it matters of faith, yea and in those things also that belong to good manners.
If then in matter of faith or manners we cannot agree upon sense of scripture,
the Pope must strike the stroke, which he will be sure shall not hurt himself:
So very fitly agrees unto you, that which Athanasius speaks against Orat. 1.
con. Arria^.
the Arrians: They presume to determine of faith, and being themselves guilty
and obnoxious to indgment, like unto Caiaphas, they usurp the office of
indging. These are the men that will prove their Church to be the true Church,
by having the scriptures on their side, but they will be the interpretors of
scriptures by the mouth of their Pope. Well, go too, though under the bare
pretense of scriptures, you mean to bring in the Pope, yet let us see how you
prove that the popish Church, which you falsely call the Catholic Church, has
the scriptures on her side, and expounds them by the sense intended by the
holy Ghost.

Your first argument is only a vain brag,. Forsooth you can bring any reason
for your expositio^s that the Protestants can bring for theirs, as conference
of places, recourse to the fountains, and what else they will, and with as
great probability as they. Why then do you not use to follow that course in
trying out the true meaning of the scriptures? Why do you Trid. Council. Sess.
4. Dec. 2.
without all conference of places tie all men to such a sense only, as the
holy mother Church, that is, your Popish Church, holds to whom, you say, it
belongs to judge of Trid. Council. ibidem.
the true sense of scriptures, or whereupon all the Fathers consent in one,
which you know to be imposible to find? Why do you exclude the original
Bibles, and bind all men in expositions to your vulgar Latin as authentical,
and upon no pretense to be refused? Whatsoever you boast, your own consciences
tell you that conference of places, and recourse to the fountains, will do
your cause more harm then good. And here I wish the reader to observe how sly
lie you insinuate, that in conference of places, recourse to the fountains, or
any other help that we use, there is only probility, and therefore these means
will not serve, there is no rest till you come to that which you call Gods
Church in general councels, which in conclusion shall be all laid in the Popes
lap, of which pierlesse means to know the undoubted sense of scripture, it is
marvel that Augustine in his books, De Doctrina Christiana, ha^dling that
point at large, forgatto speak, specially if, as you pretend, this be the only
sure way, that worthy Father spent his time belike in those means that have
only a probability in them, as the Phrase of scripture, the circumstances of
places, comparison with other places, analogy of faith, etc. And never thought
of that which by your saying is worth all the rest. As you have only boasted
of conference of places, and recourse to the fountains, so do you also of the
consent of ancient Fathers, whereunto your selves will not be bound: For when
Cardinal Caietane (as Andradius Dcfens fid.. Trid. lib. 2.
reports) professes that sometimes he will inteprete the scriptures against
the straeme of the Doctors, and exhorts the readers to try his writings; not
by other men's prejudice but by context of scripture, some accused him for it,
as a fautor of the Lutherans, But Andradius defendes him, and gives his
reasons. First, because the Fathers in infinite places specially of the old
testamet, leaving the literal sense, which he confesses does only serve to
prove doctrine, run upon other senses: Here a man may freely depart from
their exposition and search for the literal sense. Secondly because the
Fathers very often seeking for the true sense of the scriptures, have given
senses very diverse and unlike one to another: which if it be true, when will
you find the consent of the Fathers, about the sense of Scripture: Therefore
Andraduis concludes that no man is bound to their expositions, but is at free
liberty, forsaking them all to try what he can do by Gods help, and to find
out another new sense unlike to the ancient Fathers expositions: Be not
offended with him, he does you more service then you are ware of: For now you
shall be at liberty to put upon the scripture what sense you will, though it be
against the stream of the Fathers Thus you follow the coonsent of the ancient
Fathers to whose sleeue, when it comes to the iumpe, you will not be pinned.
Andradius to serve your turn, can allege Augustines judgment. Epist. 3. ad
Fortunat. alleged, Did. 9. Can. Neque. Nobis enim licebit. etc. For it shall
be lawful for us, saving the honorable respect which is due to the holy
Fathers, to mislike and reject something in their writings, if peradventure we
find that they have otherwise judged, then the truth will bear, by Gods help
understood either of others or of our selves. Whereunto we will also add what
the same Augustine says, De vnitat. Eccles. cap. 10. Nemo mihi dicat, etc. Let
no man say to me. Or what said Donatus to me, or what says Parmenianus or
Pontius, or any of them. for xe may not consent, no not to Catholic Bishops,
if perhaps they be any where deceived, So that they have held any opinion
against the Canonical scriptures. May not these testimonies of Augustine as well
be alleged and held good on our part, as on yours. To conclude in this point
against your appeal to Scriptures, you usually object that Heretics allege
scriptures. It is true and Devils too, but corrupted, and Christ alleges them
against the Devil, and bids all men search them: But do not heretics also
allege the Fathers as boldly as you that call your selves Catholics? you
cannot be ignorant of the mouthie clamor of Dioscorus the Euty chian heretic
in the Council of Chalcedon. I have the testimony Council. Chalced. Act. 1.
of the ancient Fathers, Athanasius, Gregory and Cyril in many places, I am
cast out with the Fathers, I defend the Fathers opinions, I transgress not in
any thing, etc. If we may not build upon Scriptures, because heretics allege
them much less may we upon Fathers, which heretics also allege.

Your next mean is, The common practice of Gods Church. Indeed this rule will
serve your turn well. For, what mean you by Gods Church? Forsooth the Popish
church. So then, no interpretation of Scripture may be good, that crosses any
practice of the Popish church, so you shall be sure to keep all whole. You
should in wisdom have concealed this as a mystery among your selves. For what
is it else but a conspiracy, that whatsoever the Scripture says in words, it
must at no hand be understood to be against Popish practice. By this
tyranny, your Popes have gotten the start fall the world: in so much, that
though he run Did. ^0. Si Papa
to hell himself, and draw innumerable souls with him, yet no mortal man may
presume to reprove him, because he is to judge all, and none to judge him.
Follow him to hell you that will, we will follow our Lord Jesus as his word
leads us. For him we know to be the way, the truth, and the life. Thus
notably you prove, that you have the true sense of the Scriptures, and
therefore are the true Church. Yours is the true sense, because it is confirmed
by your own practice. And why so? Forsooth you say so. What is this else, but
ask my fellow if I be a thief. First, you set up a wicked practice, then you
pervert the Scriptures to maintain it, and afterward prove your
interpretation of Scriptures by your practice. Your practice is good. Why? the
Scripture, as you understand it, is for your practice. And why must the
Scripture be so understood? because your practice so requires. First, you get
both swords into your hands, then you prove it by Ecce due gladij, behold
here two swords. First Extrau. cont. de mayor. and obed. cap. Vnam sanctam.
you get above Emperors and Kings, then you prove it by Inprincipio, non in
principijs. in the beginning, not in the beginnings. Such is your practice and
such are your expositions.

Your last means is, the Decrees of general Councels. Can you bring us the
Decrees of general councels touching all Scriptures, what sense they do and
ought to bear. If not, then belike there is no known sense of any other
Scriptures, then such as general Councels have expounded, the rest are buried
in obscurity. But Augustine will not yield to that, who among other means to
find out the true interpretation of Scriptures, aduising diligently to search
for both De Doctr. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 9.
such precepts of good life and rules of faith, as are plainly set down in
the Scriptures, whereof the more a man finds, the more capable he is
understand the Scriptures, yields this reason of his advise. In his enim, etc.
For in those words which are evidently set down in the Scriptures, are found al
those things which contain faith and manners of life. Next do general Councels
all agree in one: in this also Augustine is a witness against you, writing
against the Donatistes, who pleaded Cyprians letters, Cyprians sentence,
Cyprians council. But Augustine prefers the holy Scripture above all the
writings of Bishops, yea above all general Councels, allowing the Scriptures
alone to have certainty, and undoubted truth in them, but all the writings of
Bishops, yea the determinations of Councels to be subject to the correction of
other Bishops after them, and likewise of other and later Councels, his words
touching the Councels are. Ipsa enim concilia, etc. For the very Councels De
baptis. cont. Douat. lib. 2. cap. 3.
which are held through every Region or Province, do without all doubt give
place to the authority of plenarie (or general) Councels, which are held from
out of all the Christian world, and the verieplenarie (or general) Councels,
the former oftentimes are amended by the later, when by any experiment of
things that is open which was kept close, and that is known which did lie hid.
What could have been more plainly spoken to bring into order, not only all
men's writings, but even general Councels also to be judged by the Scriptures,
and not to judge over the Scriptures. Wherefore were it true that you so
vainlie boast of, that you had the consent of ancient Fathers, and the Decrees
of general Councels for you, yet were these no sure foundation to build our
faith upon: Neither do we take it to be any disgrace unto us, that we refuse
to receive our faith and understanding in the mystery of godliness from men,
because we fear the curse which is against the man that trusts in man, and
makes flesh his arm: yea rather we account it an honor to us both before
God and man, Ierem. ^. ^.
that we together with the whole true church of God, are built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the head
corner stone: that we try every spirit by the Scriptures whether it be of God
or no: that we prove Ephesians. 2. 20. 1. Ioh. 4. 1. 1. These. 5. 21. Act. 17. 11.
Ioh. 5. 39. Esa. 8. 20.
all things, as the men of Beraea did by searching the Scriptures according to
the commandment of Christ, and hold that which is good: that we have
recourse to the law and to the testimony, and whosoever speak not according
to that word, we hold them to be in darkness, and to have no light in them.
From this hold you shall never drive us, and yet thanks be to God you have
hitherto been beaten at your own weapon, and for the principal points of
faith and religion, have been put to silence by a cloud of testimonies both
out of ancient Fathers and Councels, howsoever your brazen foreheads cannot
blush, nor your leaden hearts relent, but still you will cry Fathers, Fathers.
Councels, Councels.

PAPIST.
Secondly, to give more light and force to the former reason concerning the
authority of Fathers, I say that one or two, or a few of them may be
deceived, and therefore such particular opinions we admit not, and so refuse S.
Cyprian about rebaptization: so we make no doubt but the uniform and general
consent of them living in diverse and far distant places, and at diverse
times cannot but proceed from the Spirit of all truth that governs the
Church, and therefore S. Austine speaking of the Fathers that lived Contr.
Iuli. lib. 2. cap. 10.
before his time, has these excellent words: That which they found in the
Church, they held fast, that which they learned, they taught; that which they
received of their fathers, the same they delivered to their Children. S. Paul
likewise says, that Christ has Ephesians. 4. 11. 14.
given Pastors and Doctors that flourished in the primitive church, and the
Protestants cannot deuie, but that with their pens and labors they did defend
the faith against the Arians, Pelagians, Donatistes, and many more such
pestilent heretics.

PROTESTANT.
First, we have showed you before that by the judgment of Cardinal Caietane,
whom Andradius defends in it, it is lawful, yea and necessary sometimes in
interpretation of Scriptures, to leave the stream of the Fathers, and follow a
diverse interpretation from them all, which might at no hand be admitted, if
(as you presume) wherein they generally consent, they had been all guided by
the spirit of truth. Andradius does not only say so, but gives good reason for
it: The literal sense of Scripture (says he) does only yield arguments to
confirm points of religion: But the Fathers in infinite stays of the old
testament, chiefly do leave the literal sense and follow the tropologicall or
allegorical sense. In deciding of Doctrines, then which is to be done by the
litterall sense, what help shall we have from the consent of Fathers, who very
seldom give the litterall sense? Another reason he gives, that the Fathers,
in giving the sense of Scriptures, have given very diverse sense, and unlike
one to another. Where then shall we find that general and uniform consent
that you speak of?

Secondly, the spirit of all truth neither guides the whole church, nor any
member thereof, otherwise or by any other instinct, then by and from the holy
Scriptures, whereby every spirit is to be tried. So far then as the Fathers
either severally or jointly do accord with the manifest truth of Scriptures,
we follow them without doubting, whatsoever they deliver swaruing manifestly
from the Scriptures, we leave; what they have probably spoken, we receive as
probable; always reuerencing their antiquity, gifts and labors, but not
accounting their judgments the rule of our faith.

Thirdly, you much abuse S. Augustine, in drawing his words (which yet serve
not your turn) from his meaning Lib. 3. cap. 7.
manifestly set down in other places, Depeccat. merit. and remiss. having
before alleged against the Pelagians, Cyprian and Jerome, he adds this
caveat. I have not recited these things to any such end, as if we leaned to
the sentences of any disputers whatsoever they were, as to Canonical
authority, but that it may appear that from the beginning unto the present
time, wherein this novelty sprang up, this point of original sin has been
so constantly kept within the faith of the church, etc. Howbeit, the most
clear and full authority of this opinion, is eminent in the holy Canonical
books. Likewise ad Bonifac. cont. duas epist. Pelag. Lib. 4. cap. 8.
I think it pertains to our charge, not onclie to bring the holy Canonical
Scriptures witnesses against them, which already we have sufficiently done,
but also out of the books of holis men, who have handled them before us with
famous commendation and great glory, to bring some documetns (or evidences)
not for that the authority of any disputer is equalled by us to the
Canonical books, but to admonish such, who think that these fellows say
somewhat, after what sort the Catholic Bishops following the holy Scriptures,
have spoken of these points before the novel and vain words of those men. In
like manner using S. Augustines words, we say to you, We think it a part of our
charge, not only to bring as witnesses against you the Canonical Scriptures,
which always we do in the first place, but also to produce testimonies out of
the writings of holy Fathers, not that we mathch their authorie with the
Canonical Scriptures, but to let them see who think you say somewhat, the
before your novel and vain boasting, the Catholic Bishops and Fathers
following the Scriptures, have taught as we do. Which in all the fundamental
points of religion has been again and again proved unto you. In which
points only Augustine makes reckoning of the consent of Catholic writers.
Other points (says he) there are, about which even the learnedest and best
defenders of the Catholic rule, do not agree Cont. Iul. Pelag. lib. 1.
among themselves, always saving whole the frame of faith, and in some one
matter, some say better and more truly then others. But this about which we
now deal, belongs to the very foundations of faith, speaking of original
sin in children. When following Augustines example, you first allege
Scripture, and then annexe the consent of Fathers, as treading in the steps of
the Scriptures, we will honor the Fathers judgments for the Scriptures sake
which they follow. This is all which Augustine did, or requires others to do,
Neither do Augustines words by you alleged serve your turn. For what if the
Fathers did constantly hold the Doctrine of original sin spread over all
men, and having received it from their Fathers, so delivered it to their
posterity, Does it follow that Augustine believed it either only or
principally, because they did constantly teach it? You heard the contrary out
of Augustine, before that that point is clearly and fully to be proved by the
Canonical Scriptures, which even his own words in this very place do
testify, They all found it before any of them delivered it? Where did they
find it, but in the Scriptures? The consent of Fathers may help to understand
the Scriptures, but it is no rule to understand them by, but rather the
Scriptures are the rule to judge of those truths wherein the Fathers do
consent.

Lastly, Paul indeed says, that Christ gave unto his Church pastors and
teachers, that we should not be carried about with every vvind of doctrine, but
Paul says not that Pastors and Doctors may carry us about with what doctrines
they list, or that we have no liberty to try their doctrine, whether it be of
God or no. God the Father says of his Son Jesus Christ, This is my
well-beloued son, hear him. Yet our Savior Christ commands his Church to
search the Scriptures. Paul was called to be an Apostle not by man, but by
Jesus Christ, yet did the men of Beraea try his doctrine by the Scriptures,
and are therefore commended by the holy Ghost. Will you then be above our
Savior Christ and his holy Apostle Paul, to challenge unto your selves under
the name of Pastors and Doctors, an irregular authority to lead the Church of
God whither you list, and must they follow you blindfold till you fall into
the pit: For while you pretend to assume this prerogative for the Fathers, as
Pastors and Doctors, you mean by that slight, cunningly to convey it to your
selves, But if he that prophocieth must prophecy according to the proportion
Romans 12. 6. Gal. r. 8. 1. Tim. r. 13. Tit. 1. 9.
of faith, if we may not receive strange doctrine from an Apostle or Angel, if
Timothy be charged to keep the true pattern of wholesome words, if all
Bishops must hold fast the wholesome word according to doctrine, if we be
charged not to believe every 1. Ioh. 4. 1. 2. 3.
spirit, but to try them, because many false prophets are gone out into the
world, and for trial of them have our rules in the Scripture, it will not
discharge us in the day of judgment to say, that we followed as we were led by
Pastors and Doctors. It will be said unto us, that we had Moses and the
Prophets, Luke 16. 29. 1. Pet. ^. 19. Ioh. 5. 39.
that we had a most sure word of the Prophets, that we were commanded to search
the Scriptures, that we had warning long ago by the Prophet Jeremy, Hear not
the words of the Ierem. 23. 16. 22.
Prophets that prophecy unto you and teach you vanity: they speak the vision
of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord. If they had stood in
my counsel, and declared my words to my people, then they should have turned
them from their evil ways.

To conclude, we follow the Fathers and all other true Pastors and Doctors in
that which they truly teach us, not because we have heard it of them, but
because we are so taught in the Scriptures, as the men of Samaria believed not
for the woman's report, but because they had heard Christ himself. Ioh. 4. 41.
42.


PAPIST.
They object and say, that there is no reason to prefer the Fathers before
the Scriptures, and captiously they demand, whether it be better to follow the
openions of men, that might err and be deceived, or the sentence of God
himself that (...) neither deceine nor be deceived. But answer is soon
returned, that the question betwixt us and them, is not as they would make
simple people believe, whether the Scriptures or Fathers deserve more credit,
but that (which I wish al diligently to note) whether for the interpretation
and true sense of the scriptures, we should not rather believe the ancient,
holy and learned Fathers, then those that live in our days so far from the^
Apostles age, and neither for virtue or learning co^perable to the old Saints
of Gods Church. Let the question be propounded thus, and then none of
indifferent judgment will ever make question of the matter.

PROTESTANT.
As cunningly as you would shift off the true state of the question by
propounding it in our names imperfectly at the first, and then of your own
putting falsely, yet neither can you so hide your own shame, nor dazell the
eyes of the godly, by casting the mist of your own devise before them. The
question therefore is not as you say, Whether for the true sense of the
Scriptures, we should not rather believe the ancient Fathers, then those that
live in our days, neither only whether Scriptures or Fathers deserve more
credit, which is but a consequence following upon that which you affirm,
touching the interpretation of Scriptures, by the consent of Fathers, as an
infallible rule, but this is indeed the question between us and you. Whether
the Scriptures inspired of God, in all fundamental points both concerning
faith and manners be not so clear and plain, that they do sufficiently
interpret themselves, against which clear interpretation none other is to be
received from what authority so ever it come. We affirm, you deny. And by
denial make the interpretations of men of more credit then the interpretation
of scriptures. We have the word of God on our side, Ps. 19. 7. The testimony
of the Lord is true, and gives wisdom to the simple, 2. Tim. 3. 15. The
Scriptures are able to make wise unto salvation, Ioh. 5. 39. Search the
Scriptures, for in them you think to have eternal life, and they testify of
me. The men of Berea searched the Scriptures to try those things which Paul
spoke, which had been very vainly done, if the Scriptures had not bin a leere
light unto them to discern of all necessary doctrines. We have the godly
Father S. Augustine clear for us, in his Quaeaperte, etc. In those things
which are evidently set down in the Scriptures are al those points found which
co^teine faith and manners of life. This being the state of the question, let
all godly men see whether it be not a reproach to the Spirit of God to accuse
his word of such darkness and obscurity, that for the greatest part of the
Church of God is not able to understand it, no not in the principal matters of
faith and godliness? Could not the Spirit of God in the Scriptures, speak to
the understanding of the simple? you will say yes; but perhaps he would not.
Our Savior Christ gives thanks to his Father for revealing the doctrine of
the kingdom of heaven to Babes, and Matthew. 11. 25.
hiding it from the wise. The Apostle Paul says, If our Gospel he hid, it is
hid in them that perish, in whom the God of this world 2 Cor. 4. 3.
has blinded their eyes, that is, of the unbelievers, that the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ should not shine unto them. The sheep of Christ,
hear the voice of Christ, and know it from the voice of strangers, and
therefore will not follow strangers. How Ioh. 10. 4. 5. 27.
could the sheep of Christ, who now hear his voice only in the scriptures,
know his voice from the voice of strangers, if the scriptures were of purpose
written obscurelie? yea let all reasonable men consider, whether it be not a
sandy foundation to build our faith upon, forsaking the scriptures inspired of
God. to depend upon men's lips, especially the eternal word of God, having
branded all men with Psalm. 116. 11. Romans 3. 4. Psalm. 146. 3. Ier. 17. 5.
this mark, that all men are ^ers, and therefore expressly commanding not to
trust in any child of man, yea cursing every man that puts his trust in man.
Augustine answering to an objection of the Donatists, pretending to be written
against him by a chief man of the Catholics, besides that he charge that
epistle to be false and counterfaite, answers thus: Mulio minus etc. Much
less does the Catholic Church Cont. Crescon. lib. 3. cap. 80.
regard it, whose cause we plead against you, from which confidently resting
upon so many divine testimonies, no humane testimonies of any man, be they true
or false, can take away that truth which it inioyeth, forbear such things, I
am but one man, the Churches cause is ^n hand among us not mine, the Churches,
I say, which has learned of her redeemer to put her trust in no man. To
conclude, make not the simple people believe that we bring into comparison the
interpretations of this age, with the interpretations of the ancient Fathers,
which is a mere calumnious slander of yours. We compare not men's
interpretations with men's, but Gods with men's, God has so tempered the
Scriptures that things plainly spoken do interpret others not so plain, 2.
Cor. 3. 5.
That the faith of Gods children should not be in the wisdom of men, but in
the power of God. Let the cause and question be thus propounded, and then none
of the sheep of Christ will ever make question of the matter.

PAPIST.
Fourthly, concerning general Councels, I say that they cannot possiby err in
matters of faith; for then might we lawfully disobey them, and Christ wills
us to take him as an Heathen or a Publicane, that will not obey the Church,
then also should Hell gates prevail against it, contrary to our Saviors
promise. Then were Matthew. 18. 17. Matthew. 16. 18. 1. Tim. 3. 15.
it not also the pillar and ground of truth, as S. Paul affirms. We therefore
that embrace the definitions of general Councels, possess the true sense of
the Scriptures, and not the Protestants that refuse to stand to their judgment.

PROTESTANT.
If Augustine said true, as he is before alleged that the former general
Councels have bin corrected by the later, then surely in his judgment the
former must err, and one of them without doubt did err. But what say you to
the determination of the Council of Constance and Basile, which you deny not
to have been general, by whom the Pope is made De Baptis cont. Donat. lib. 2.
c. 3.
inferior to the Council? Did they err in it or not. Albertus Pighi^s spares
not to affirm, that they decreed plainly against nature, against the
manifest Scriptures, against all antiquity, and against the catholic faith of
Christ. So when general Councels determine not for your tooth, you will not
stick to charge them with error, and shifts enough you have to avoid them,
either they were not gathered by the Pope, or not subscribed by the Pope, or
things were violently carried in them, as your Melchior Canus obiecteth against
Lib. 5. cap. vlt.
diverse Councels, and specially against the sixth general Council in Trullo,
which in many points distasteth you: And when the account is cast up, it is the
Pope that cannot err, for those only determinations of Councels go for
current with you that are confirmed by the head, which is the Pope.

But let us see your strong reasons, whereby you prove that general Councels
cannot err. First, you say, Then might we disobey them. And Christ wills us
to take him as an heathen and a publican, that will not hear the Church. Let
us see your reason in form.

If general Councels may err, then may we disobey them:

But we may not disobey them. -- Therefore, etc.

How prove you that we may not disobey them? Thus.

If he that hears not the Church be, to be taken as an heathen or publican,
then may we not disobey general Councels.

But he that hears not the Church, is to be taken as an heathen or publican.

Therefore we may not disobey general Councels.

The Proposition of this second syllogism standing in greatest need of
proof, you leave it altogether unproven, and so after your manner, you beg
that always which is in question: For in the words of Scripture by you abused,
you should have proved, First, that the word, Hear, is to be extended to all
matters generally; Secondly, that by (the Church) are meant only general
Councels. Thirdly, that the Church is to be heard howsoever it judge, which
points except you prove, the consequence inferred in the Proposition will not
follow.

First therefore, the matter here referred to the Church, is not decision of
doctrines, but censure of scandals, as Chrysostom upon the place observes.
Now will it follow, He that obeys not the Churches censure in matter of
scandal given to his brother, is to be taken as an heathen or publican.
Therefore Councels may not be disobeyed, whatsoever they teach in matter of
faith and doctrine? Secondly, must we expect a general Council for redress of
every scandal committed against a brother, by him that will not be brought to
amendment by more private admonition? Did not the Church of Corinth censure the
scandal of the incestuous person? Had not the Church of 1. Cor. 5. 2. These 3.
14.
Thessalonica power to censure the inordinate walkers? And has not every
particular Church power to censure all scandals within themselves? By your
reason then we may not disobey particular Churches in their derisions of
Doctrine, neither can they err any more then general Councels, which your
selves will not yield, and the errors of the Church of Corinth do gain say.
To show the insufficiency of your proof, I will set by it this argument.

He that will not hear a particular Church censuring in matter of scandal,
is to be held as an heathen or publican.

Therefore we may not disobey a particular Church in matter of doctrine.

The first part you cannot deny, the consequent I know you will not yield:
such is the force of your forcible reason.

Thirdly, does not the place expressly limit the censure of the Church,
whereunto obedience must be given. First, it is supposed in the text, that a
brother has trespassed against a brother. Secondly, that it cannot be denied
but he has done so. Thirdly, that his fault is told him as alone, and with
two or three witnesses, so by the Church. Lastly, that the party offending
convict of the offense, and justly censured by the Church, obeys not. But if
either the brother had not trespassed, or had not been convicted, and so the
Church had unjustly censured him, or if the Church had corruptly imposed any
thing upon him, either to be believed, or to be done: was he then not hearing
to be taken as a publican or an heathen? Our Savior Christ says not so. For
this had been to give tyrannical power over men's souls and consciences into
the hands of the Church, which our Savior never did. Now if we should grant
you that hearing of the Church in this place, might be extended to matter of
Doctrine, if by like proportion you suppose, that the determination of the
Church is agreeable to the Scriptures, and that the Church by the Scriptures
approoueth their determination to the consciences of the faithful, as we then
grant you that we may not disobey so this will help your cause nothing at
all, who will not submit the sentence of general Councels to be tried by the
Scriptures, but makes it superior to the Scriptures, and consequently Lord
over men's consciences. which as the Apostle scrbiddeth to 1. Pet. 5. 1.
the elders of the Church in all several Churches, so does he also to the
elders assembled in agenerall Council. For in the Council of the Apostles at
Jerusalem by the mouth of James, both Peter and the rest, lay for the
foundation of their Act. 15. 15.
sentence, the words of Scripture; To thu agree the words of the Prophets.

Your second reason is, Then should also ^ell gates prevail against it,
contrary to our Saviors promise. Let us see this reason also in form.

Hell gates prevail against every one that may err, But hell gates prevail
not against the Church: Therefore the Church may not err.
First, you conclude not the question. Which is not whether the Church may
err, but whether general Councels may err. But neither are general Councels
so large as the only visible Church, being but special members assembled out
of the whole, whose error may not be imputed, no not to the whole visible
Church, neither is the visible Church the whole Church, no not the whole
militant Church; and therefore although the gates of hell cannot prevail
against the Church, yet they may prevail against general Councels.

Secondly, the Church may err, and yet hell gates not prevail against it. For
the Proposition of the former syllogism containing your reason, is not true.
The gates of hell do not prevail against every one that erreth. Peter erred
both in matter of fact, and in matter of faith. His errors in matter of fact
are known to be many, and not denied by you. His error in matter of faith, was
in judging it unlawful to eat of things common: yet did not the gates of hell
Act. 10, 14.
prevail against him.

Thirdly, the gates of hell not prevailing against the whole militant Church,
may yet prevail against the visible parts of this Church, and in some age or
ages; It follows not therefore, that if the gates of hell prevail against
the visible Churches of some age that therefore they do prevail against the
whole militant Church. Where be the famous Churches of Achain, of Galatia, of
Macedonia? nay, what a handful is the remnant of the Church now in a corner of
Europe, principally known by the name of the Church, to the large circuit of
the Church, both in the Apostles time, and after spread over the whole world?
Will you say, the gates of hell have prevailed against the Church, because they
have prevailed against some Churches, so many, so famous in some age or ages.
The Church of Christ may be more and less occumenicall, and yet the Church of
Christ still, against which the gates of hell, neither have, nor ever shall
prevail: and yet may prevail against the Churches of Achaia, Galatia,
Macedonia, and many others: yea, against the once famous Church of Rome, as
they have done, so that the faithful city may become an harlot. Wherefore
begin Isa. 1. 21.
once to be ashamed of this sophistry.

The gates of hell cannot prenaile against the Church of Christ.

Therefore not against a general Council, which is but some of the many
churches of one time, and is far from the largeness of the whole church of
Christ.

Your third reason is Then were it not also the pillar and ground of truth, as
S. Paul affirms. Let us also bring this reason into form.

The pillar and ground of truth cannot err. The Church is the pillar and
ground of truth: Therefore the Church cannot err.
First, what is this to general Councels, which are not that church which S.
Paul calls the pillar and ground of truth, but at the best only some part of
it? that church is the house of the living God, which extends it self more
largely both in regard of persons and times, then to the number assembled in
some general councels, in some times of the church. Whereby it comes to
pass, that (as before has been noted out of Augustine) general councels
have corrected provincial, and the later general councels have corrected the
former. Wherefore some general council or councels may err, and yet the
church remain still the pillar and ground of truth.

Secondly, the Church is called the pillar and ground of truth, (as has been
showed) because the Oracles of God are committed unto it, which the church
keeps faithfully to the worlds end. By which as by an undoubted mark the
true Church is known from the false: For the false church casts away and
corrupts the Scriptures, neither does uphold and bear up the truth by the
preaching of the Gospel, as is manifestly seen in the Apostaticall church of
Rome. Contrariwise the true church conserueth the records of Gods truth, and
preaches the doctrine of the holy Scripture, for the gathering of the Saints,
and the edifying Ephesians. 4. 12. Mal. 2. 7.
of it self. Howbeit as the Priest whose lips should preserve knowledge, and
at whose mouth they should inquire the law, may sometimes fail in the
knowledge and showing of the law: So the visible church may in some points of
truth hold erroneous opinions, and yet continue still the pillar and ground of
truth, to wit, of that truth which is necessary to salvation, in the true
knowledge and custody whereof the true Church shall never deceive nor be
deceived. The Apostles and Disciples of our Savior Christ at the time of his
ascension, were the only true visible church of Christ, who undoubtedly were
the pillar and ground of 1. Tim. 6. 3.
truth, holding fast the foundation which is Jesus Christ, and keeping the
wholesome word which is according to godliness, Act. 1. 6
yet did they err in the matter of restoring the kingdom to Israel.

Thirdly, as before has been showed out of Chrysostom, The truth is the
pillar and firmament of the Church. For as Augustine August. (...) 166.
faith to the Donatists, In the Scriptures we have learned Christ, In the
Scriptures we have learned the Church. Understanding therefore pillar, ground
or firmament, for the strength, stay or foundation, the truth is the strength,
stay and foundation of the church, which is built upon the foundation of the
Ephesians. 2. 20.
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the head corner stone. But
the church is the pillar and ground of truth, as Galath. 29.
Cephas, lamet and John were counted to be pillars, because by their preaching
the Gospel was greatly vpheld. Fundatores Ecclesiae erant and sustentatores,
They were founders of the Church and vpholders, as Haym^ notes out of
Augustine. So the Church lays the foundation of truth, and bears up the
truth by confessing and preaching. Inqua solu (as Primasius notes) nunc
veritas stat firmata, and que solatotum edificium sustinet veritatis, that is,
In which alone the truth now stands grounded, and which alone bears up
the whole building of truth. Not that the church is as Lady over the truth,
but as an handmaide to the truth. Therefore as Peter being a pillar, was yet
subject to error, so the church is not free from all error, although it be the
pillar and ground of truth. The Protestants therefore that embrace that truth,
which the true church teaches, according to the Scriptures have the true sense
of the Scriptures, and not the Papists that build upon variable and uncertain
definitions of men not examining them by the infallible and clear doctrine of
the Scriptures.

PAPIST
Fifthly, S. Peter says that no prophecy of Scripture is made by 2. Pet. 1. 20.
private interpretation. Private interpretation (...) have none, seeing we
interpret them according to that sense which consent of antiquity and the
authority of Gods Church delivers: and the Protestants have none but
private, seeing their doctrine is that every one must examine by the
touchstone of the Scriptures what others do teach, and so to admit or reject
it, as they find it agreeable or not, to the word of God: which if it be not
private interpretation, there can be none sound in the world. For what can be
more private, then for every private unlearned artificer to make himself
judge over all, and to sentence this man's doctrine as agreeable to Gods word,
and to reject the common opinion of many more. yea though of ancient Fathers
and general Councels, as contrary to sacred Scripture, and yet this is common
amongst our adversaries, as daily experience informs us.

PROTESTANT.
Private interpretation in this place of Peter, is opposed to the
interpretation of the spirit, as in the words plainly appears, and not one
man's interpretations to many men's, as you pretend. For all men's interpretation
if it be humane, coming of their own sense, and not taught by the Spirit is
(...) their own, which you call private. The gift of interpretation as other
spiritual gists, is of the spirit 1. Cor 13. 10. Luke. 24. 45.
of God, who opens the hearts of men to understand the scriptures. As he
opened the heart of Lydia: For otherwise as the Act. 1^. 14.
veil remaining upon the hearts of the Jews, they could not see into the end
of the law, but when the v^^le vv is taken away 2. Cor. 3. 16.
from their hearts, then by a right understanding of the Scriptures they were
conuerred unto Christ: So while the veil of carnal wisdom, which is
foolishness with God, is 1. Cor. 1 10. Romans 8. 7. 1. Cor. 2. 24.
upon the hearts of men, they cannot discern the wisdom of God revealed in
the Scriptures. For the Scripture and the true sense thereof is spiritually
discerned, and only the Ioh. 6. 45.
spiritual man discerns all things. By this spirit are all that believe
taught of God, and every man that has heard and learned of the Father,
comes unto Christ. This spirit by the Act. 8.
ministry of Philip led the Eunuch to the true sense of the Prophet Esaias.
Neither Philip nor any of the disciples could give him the spirit of
discerning. Neque enim (says Augustine) De Trinit. lib. 15. cap. 26.
aliquis discipuloruns e^as dedit spiritum Sanctum, For none of his disciples
gave the holy Ghost. Neither can all the Doctors, Fathers or Councels in the
world beget the true understanding of the Scripture in any one man's heart. It
is the work of the heavenly teacher, that is, the holy Ghost, which Augustine
ingeniously confesses, Sonus verborum nostrorum Tract. 3. in Joan. epist.
aures percutit, magister intus est. etc. The sound of our words beats the
ears, the minister is within. Think not that any man does learn any thing
of man. We may admonish by the noise of our voice, if there be not to teach
within, our noise is in vain Will you know it indeed brethren? Have ye not
all heard this Sermon. How many will depart hence untaught? For my part I have
spoken to all, but to whom that anointing speaks not within, whom the holy
Ghost teaches not within, they depart untaught. Teachings that are outward,
are some helps and admonitions. He has his chair in heaven that teaches the
hearts. Thus far Augustine. Neither do we send men to any other spirit then
that which teaches in the Scriptures; for even in hearing and reading of the
scriptures, the spirit creates in our hearts the true understanding of them, as
our Savior interpreting the Scriptures to his disciples, withal opened their
hearts to understand them, and on the Sabbath day opening Luke 24. 32. 44. 45.
the prophecy of Esaias, withal he opened their hearts, that they wondered at
the gracious words that proceeded out of his mouth. And Philip began at that
Scripture which the Eunuch Luke 4. 22. Act. 8.
was reading, and preached to him Jesus, when the holy Ghost opened his heart
to believe, and when Paul spoke Lydiaes heart was opened. This spirit which is
the spirit of Act. 16. 14.
wisdom, is also the spirit of adoption, and therefore as all the sons of
God to whom appertains the adoption, have received also the spirit of
adoption, and he that has not the spirit of Christ, is none of his, so all
that are wise unto Romans 8. 9. Ioh. 20. 31. Ephesians. 1. 17. 18.
salvation, all that do know, that Jesus is that Christ, the Son of God,
and by believing have life through his name, have likewise received the spirit
of wisdom and revelation to inlighten the eyes of their understanding; to
know the things that are given them of God, and what that hope is of his
calling, and what the riches of his glorious inheritance is in the Saints.

Neither is the whole Scripture so obscure as you would bear men in hand: I
have before showed you the confession of Augustine. In those words which are
evidently set down in De doctr. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 9. Epist. 3.
the Scriptures, are found all those things which contain faith and manners of
life. And in another place. Those things which the Scripture evidently
contains, as a familiar friend it speaks, without obscurity to the heart
of learned and unlearned: The spirit of God not only providing the Scriptures,
but also that the reader should meet with the true meaning of them De doctr.
Chr. lib. 3. cap. 27.
as Augustine says.

Yea but say you, when every one must examine by the touchstone of Scripture,
what other do teach, and so admit or reject it, as they find it agreeable or
not agreeable with the word of God, if this be not a private interpretation
there can be none found in the world. Fear you not thus to open your mouth
against heaven, and to call that interpretation which is grounded on the
Scriptures, a private interpretation? When our Savior referred the Jews to
seek witness of himself, by searching the scriptures, did he refer them to a
private interpretation? when the men of Beraea searched the Scriptures,
whether those things that Paul spoke were so or no. Did they follow a private
interpretation? By this which you call private interpretation Augustine
exhorts to search out the meaning of the Scriptures, that for the
illustrating of the more obscure De doctr. Chr. lib 2. cap. 97.
speeches, examples be taken from the more manifest, and some testimonies of
certain senses take away the doubt of the uncertain. In obscure places, where
the sense cannot be found by conference with other plainer places of scripture,
Augustine admits to give reason to the sense we bring, but says he. This
custom is dangerous, it is more safe to walk by the divine scriptures De
doctr. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 27.
which standing in translate words when we will search, either let such
sense be made of it as has no controversy, or of it have let it be determined
by the same Scripture, wheresoever the witnesses thereof can be found and
applied. Neither is this to make every private unlearned artificer judge over
the Scriptures, but to set all both learned and unlearned to school to the
Scriptures, from whence as Augustine says before alleged we have learned to
know Christ, and to know the church of Christ. But if we follow Popish
guides, we must learn to know the scriptures (for the sense of the scripture
is the scripture) yea and Christ himself, by the tradition of the Church, and
receive such a sense of scriptures, and such a Christ as Fathers and Councels
by their authority shall deliver unto us, not having left unto us any power to
try the spirits by the Scripture, the infallible touchstone of all spirits, by
which both Christ and his Apostles were content to John. 5. 39. Galat. ^. 8.
be tried. If this be not a private interpretation, there can be none found in
the world.

PAPIST.
To assure us this is Canonical scripture and which is not there is no other
way but to clean unto the authority of Gods Church. Therefore S. Austen
says, I would not believe the Gospel if the authority of Gods church did
not moan me: And the Protestants Contr. epist. fund. cap. 4.
cannot in this question ever give content either to themselves or other if
they take any other course: For where do they find in the whole Bible, that S.
James his Epistle (for example) is Canonical scripture? is it not well known
that Luther did reject it? But feign would I know, how they can according to
their principle, which is to believe nothing but scripture, prove this point
against Luther out of the scripture, most certain it is they cannot, and that
which we say of S. James his Epistle, may be said of any other part of the
Bible, if one be disposed to deny it: Seeing then that there is equal danger
of salvation in expounding the scriptures con^rarie to the true senseintended
by the holy Ghost, as there is in refusing that for Scripture which was ind^ed
by the holy Ghost, what man of reason can deny, but that if the church does
tell which is the scripture and which is not, that the same Church is
likewise to tell us which is the true sense of the scripture, and which is
not. We therefore that interpret them, as the church teach us, have the
scriptures indeed, and the Protestants that do otherwise, be destitute of the
true sense of the word of God.

PROTESTANT.
The sum of this Argument is this:

Whatsoever means we have to know the Canonitall Scriptures, the same we
have to know the true sense of them: For there is equali danger in wrong
expounding Scriptures, and refusing them.

But there is no means to know the Canonical Scriptures, but by ^^e
authority of the Church: For no man can prove against Luther, that Saint
James his Epistle is Canonical, but by the authority of the Church, and
Austen Jaith, I would not believe. etc.

Therefore there is no means to know the true sense of the scriptures but by
the anthority of the Church.

First then as before has bin noted, Augustine was much uerseene in his books
De Doctr. Christ. among so many means as he theresets down to search and find
out the true sense of Scriptures to forget the authority of the Church, which
you will now have to be the only means.

Secondly, in a sense it is true that the authority of Gods Church, is a means
to know both the Canonical Scripture, and the true sense thereof. The Church
of God does neither give being or authority to the Scriptures, nor sense to the
Scriptures, but being taught of God in both, gives witness of both, to her
own children and even to those that are without, and by the ministry and
means of her testimony, they to whom the Scriptures were before unknown,
begin to receive them, and they that have received them attain to the sense of
them, by that gift of interpretation which God has given to his Church, yet
does not Gods true Church set up her authority in men's consciences to bind
them without a better Teacher, and of greater authority to receive any thing at
her hands for Scripture, or to rest in her interpretation of Scriptures
without trial. As Philip having testified to Nathanael. We have found him of
whom Moses did write and the Prophnts, Jesus the son of Joseph, when
Nathanael made doubt because he was of Nazareth, does not enforce his own
authority, but bids him come and see, so the Church testifying of the Canonical
scriptures and of the true sense of them, bids all men come and see, Ioh. 1. 46.
that is out of the Scriptures inspired of God by the teaching of the spirit,
to know the majesty and authority of them, and after they have believed the
scriptures to be the vndoubtted word of God, in them to search the true meaning
of the^, as Augustine teaches both as he is before alleged, and in the very
book by you quoted, for showing how the Manichees, teach and how the Church
teaches, thus he writes, Whatthinke you we must judge or do, but to forsake
the^ who inuit Contr. epist. Fun. cap. 14.
us, to know things certain, and after command us to believe things
uncertain, (the very right description of the Popish church) And follow the^
who inuit us first to believe that which yet we are not able to look into,
that when we are waxen stronger in faith, we may attain to understand that
which we believe, now not men but God inwardly strengthening and enlightening
our mind. Whereby that former sentence of Augustine, so commonly alleged by
the Papists, receives plain interpretation: Ego non crederem etc. Every word
almost in the sentence, having a special signification to show that he only
acknowledges the churches testimony in the beginning of his conversion, to
have been the means to move him to think well of the scriptures. Ego. that
is, I being a Manichee, having not yet searched the scriptures, nor having
known the majesty of the Gospel. Non creder^m, that is, would not have given
any regard unto nor have been tractable to learn, as the whole book De
vtilit ate credends ad Honor a^u^ does show, and namely cap. 9. For (faith he)
true religion, unless those things De vtil. creden. ad ionorat. cap. 15.
be believed, which if a man behave himself well, and be worthy, he may
afterward attain to and understand, without some great command of
authority, can by no means be well entered into, For (as he says in the
same book) between man's foolishnes and the most sincere truth of God. Man's
wisdom is set as a middle thing, for a wise man is to follow God, a
foolissh man is to follovv a wise man: yet as Augustine there says, not to
put his trust in men, but only in the son of God, the sincere eternal and
unchangeable wisdom of God, whereunto only we ought to stick, who for our
sakes, namely to become our Teacher, vouch safed to take upon him man's nature.
Contr. Epist. Fundam. cap. 5.
This most sincere wisdom, Contr. Epist. Fundam. cap. 4. he settech in the
first rank (though having to deal with a Manichee, he says he will omit to
speak of it) as that which holds him without any doubting in the bosom of
the Catholic church, whereas in all his other motives he only means to
show that even only in the^ he has better hold then the Manichees have for
their heresy. For otherwise he prefers the undoubted proofs of scripture,
before the authority of the catholic Church. If peradventure (says he) you
can find any thing in the Gospel, very plain for Manichees Apostleship, you
shall weaken unto me the authority of the Catholics, and before; if so
manifest truth be shovved, that Cap. 4.
it cannot come into doubt, it ought to be preferred before all those things,
by which I am held in the Catholic church. 3. Catholice Ecclesiae, means he
the Catholic church of all times, or rather the Catholic church of the first
times, who having received the Scriptures by Apostolical testimony delivered
them to their posterity? At whose hand Augustine received them, not upon their
only testimony, but upon the records of the Catholic Church of the first
times, which the church in his time had to show for the Canonical and
undoubted Scriptures. What his meaning is in this behalf, let Augustine
himself declare.

Believe (says he) this book to be Matthewes, which from that time wherein
Matthew himself lived in the flesh, by course of Contr. Faustr^ Manich. lib.
28. cap. 2. Lib. 33. cap. 9
time not interrupted the Church, through certain succession of continuance
has brought along unto this time. And against the same heretic he uses a
very apt comparison to this purpose: there have many books come forth under
the name and title of secular authors, which were never theirs, as for example
many books under the name of Hippocrates that were not his. How are these
descried? Therefore are they refused (says Augustine) because either they did
not agree to those writings, which were manifestly known to be theirs, or were
not acknowledged in the time wherein they wrote, nor were commended to
posterity by themselves, or those that were most familiar with them: and
specially of Hippocrates his bastard books, when being compared to those which
were truly known to be Hippocrates his own, they were judged to be unlike,
and because they were not known to be truly his at the same time, when the
rest of his writings came to be known. So the ecclesiastical writings of men
are no otherwise known whose they were, but because in the times wherein
every one wrote them, he acquainted and published them to whom he could, and
from thence by a continued knowledge from one to another, and farther
confirmed, they cap. 9.
came to their posterity even to our times. In like manner he concludes of the
holy Scriptures, If you will follow the authority of the Scriptures, which
ought to be preferred before all other, follow that which from the times of the
very presence of Christ, by the dispensations of the Apostles, having been
kept throughout the whole world, came commended and famouslie known to our
times. By all which it is evident, that Augustine meant not to make the
Catholic Church of his time the author of his belief, touching the Canonical
Scriptures, but the Catholic Church of the first times, who came nearest to
the writing and delivery of the Scriptures from the hands of the Apostles, and
the Apostolic men that wrote them, for whose testimony and commendations
sake, the Church succeeding is also believed. What is this to the supposed
Catholic church of our days, by which you mean the Popes kingdom, when even
the true Catholic church of later times neither has nor chalengeth to her
self any credit in this matter, but as she can porduce the testimony of the
Catholic church in the first times?

Lastly, Augustine there says, Nisi me commoueret Ecclesiae authoritas. He
only ascribes to the Churches authority, that it is a motive, and the first
motive to induce an unbelieving man, to think well of the Scriptures, but he
rests not in this motive. Having thus begun, he proceeds after in searching
the Scripture to find by what spirit they were written, and by the authority
and teaching of that Spirit, as the undoubted word of God to embrace them, not
man now, but God himself inwardly strengthening and enlightening his ^inde,
as he is before alleged. What makes all this for the authority of the
Popish, falsely called Catholic church, to lead men's consciences into
captivity by her interpretations or determinations, either of the Canonical
Scriptures, or of their sense. Nay, what makes this for such authority as
under the Churches title you would claim, to deprive Christians of any better
assurance, either touching the Scriptures or their sense, then it received from
the authority of the Church, that is of men no less subject to errourthen
themselves?

But you would feign know, how the Protestants that believe nothing but
Scripture, can by Scripture prove against Luther, that S. James his Epistle is
Canonical Scripture? Even in like manner as we can prove S. Paul's Epistles,
and other Scriptures inspired of God to be Canonical Scripture. For think you
that that Spirit, by whose inspiration holy men of God wrote the Scriptures,
does not still breath in the same Scriptures, by means of which Spirit, the
word of God Hebr. 4. 12.
lives, and is mighty in operation, and by that special virtue differs
from humane writings, yea even those that are written of Scripture matters?
Either then you must divide the Spirit from the Scriptures, when Gods children
read it (which you cannot do without dishonor to the Scriptures) or you must
needs confess, that out of the Scriptures inspired of God, Gods children do
sufficiently prove unto their own consciences, and against all gaine-sayers,
that the whole Scripture and every part thereof is Canonical, that 1 Cor. 2. 4.
is a sovereign rule to guide the Church in all points both concerning faith
and manners. For, as the Apostles preaching, so his writing and all Scripture
inspired of God, has in it self plain evidence of the spirit and of power,
that our faith should not be in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God.
Thus out of S. Paul's Epistles, we can prove S. Paul's Epistles to be
Canonical. And out of S. James his Epistle, we can prove S. James his
Epistle to be Canonical, and generally the whole Scripture proves it self to
be Canonical, and from it self the Church receives receives witness of it
self. If you be ignorant of this, it is because you have not received of the
anointing of that Spirit, by whom the Scriptures were inspired. And now cease
any longer to disport your self with this carnal question, out of what
Scripture the Protestants can prove S. James his Epistle to be Canonical. The
sheep of Christ do know the shepherds voice, and they know it not by
report, but by it self they discern it. To conclude, because there is danger
in expounding the Scriptures contrary to the true sense intended by the holy
Ghost, albeit not equal danger, as in refusing the holy Scripture indicted by
the holy Ghost, as Augustine insinuates, Confess. lib. 12. cap. 23. 24. as in
the greater, that is the approbation of Canonical Scriptures, we dare not
remit all to men's voices, though they be the Church; so in that wherein errors
is less dangerous yet dangerous too, that is, in determining the true sense of
Scriptures, we dare not build our faith upon the wisdom of men, because as
has been alleged out of Augustne. we have learned of our Redeemer, in ^^llo
ho^ike spem pouere, to put no trust in any man, but only in the plain
evidence of the spirit that speaks in the Scriptures; which so long as we do
with faithful prayer, and humble submission to his teaching, according to the
promise, they shall be all taught of God, wear assured to be led into all
truth Isa. 54. 13. John. 6. 45.
necessary to salvation, which security the Papists that rest in men's authority
can never have.

PAPIST.
Seauenthly, wittingly and willingly they corrupt the text of holy Scripture
for example, to make the people believe that images are unlawful, in Tyndals
translation, where Idols be forbidden, usually the word Image is placed in
steed thereof, and therefore in S. John, we find it thus translated, Babes keep
your selves from images. 1. Ioh. ^ 21.
And for trial, we will, appeal to their later Bibles, printed by Christopher
Barker, for there we read thus, Little children keep your selves from Idols.

PROTESTANT.
Not to stand long in these points so sufficiently answered long ago, by
Doctor Fulke against Martine, and Doctor Whitaker against Reynolds, both of
worthy and blessed memory first it is so plain, that the Greek word (...),
does in the propriety of the word signify an image that Gregory Martine
neither can nor does deny it.

Secondly, as use has restrained the name Idol from the general
signification, to note only wicked images; and such as are abused to Gods
dishonor, so is it well known that both in vulgar and popular use, and also
in the general understanding of all godly Christians, that dote not upon
Popish idols, the name!mage either to represent God, or to worship God or Saint
withal, is become as odious as the name Idol, and nothing diverse from it.
And because the notorious idols of Popery are in their language called images,
and holy images (being indeed most accursed idols) not without good cause did
that religious Translator turn the Greek (...) into Iusages in English, that
English men might beware of Popish images, which are Idols. Neither is the
alteration of the term in a later translation; any correction of the former,
but a variation only, intending still still the term Idols to extend it self
to Popish images as well as heathenish, as you Papists and all men do well
enough perceive and know.

Thirdly, your own vulgar translation has, Filioli custodite vos a
simulachris, which what is it else in English, but Babes keep^ your selves from
images? For howsoever you shift about this word also, and would have the true
notation of it given by Lactantius, that it has his name, a similitudine, that
De Orig. erro. lib. 2. cap. 2.
is, of likeness, and is all one with imago, animage (for so Lactantius
manifestly confounds it) and will needs have it come only, a simulando, of
counterfe^ting or feming, yet this poor shift will do you little good. For
even this counterfeiting is not without likeness. whether the matter
counterfeited have a true being or a false. The strange picture whereof Horace
speaks, De art poetica, made with a woman's head, a horse neck, with other
parts borrowed of other creatures, and lastly a fishes tail, though it be no
likeness of any thing that has a being. yet is it a likeness, if of no more
then of the Painters fancy. Simulachrum therefore when you have said all you
can, is an image, and so much Doctor Fulke has proved unto you out of sundry
Authors. As lawfully Against Gre^ Mattia. cap. 1. sect. 5.
then might Tyndall translate from images as your vulgar a simulachris.

Lastly, your vulgar translation has in the second commandment, Exodus 20.
Similitudinem, Lakenesse of any ^^g. which in the Hebrew is Temunah. Arias
Montanus translateth the same word Imagmem, an image, Deuteronomy. 4. 6. and your own
vulgar in the same place, Non vidistus aliquam similitudinem in die qua locutus
est vobi^ Dominus in Oreb de medio ignis, ^^ forte decepts faciatis vobis
sculptam similitudinem, ^ut imaginem omnium Iumentorum, You savve no likeness
in the day wherein the Lord spoke unto you out of Oreb, out of the midst of
the fire, least you being deceived make unto you any graven likeness, or any
^mage of any beast, etc. And August, Quest, super Exodus translateth the second
Commandment thus. Non facies tibi idolum, neque vllum simulachrum quaecunque
in coelo sunt sursum, wherehy it appears first that si^ulachrum and imago,
differ not, and therefore the vulgar translating simulachris, we may translate
images. Secondly, that God in the second commandment commands to make no
image, and therefore again the Apostles dehortation being deduced out of the
second Commandment, Tyndall translated well and according to the ^Apostles
meaning, Babes or little children keep your selves from Images. Now then to
what streits you are driven, that you have no other^ way to maintain your
Imagerie and worshipping of Images, then by such nice distinctions of imago and
simulachrum; of Imago and idolum, between which the Scriptures put no
difference, if your authentical translation and Arias Montanus do rightly
translate, I appeal to your own consciences, if you have not sold them to
maintain idolatry, as Jeroboam did himself, and to the indifferent judgment
of all that are not partial.

PAPIST.
Likewise to bring the Shrines of Martyrs and holy relics in contempt, and to
make simple people believe, that it is an heathenish custom, they translate
thus in the said old Bible, Demetrius a silver smith that made silver shrines
for Diana, Malicious corruption, for in the text there is no mention of silver
shrines, but of silver temples, and to the fore said later Bible truly
translateth. See how they can accommodate their Bibles to the time: For when
Images and shrines were yet standing in England, or fresh in memory, they
fitted their translations accordingly.

PROTESTANT.
To this pidling quarrel little answer needs. The word in that place, is
rather to be understood of some coin, wherein the Image and temple of Diana
was stamped, then of any Temple or Shrine, yet did not the old Translator
without authority so translate: For therein he followed Homil. 42. in Act.
Chrysostom, who co^ceiueth that they may be (...) Little Shrines. But there
is no need to enforce this place against your idolatry to Shrines of Saints
and Relikes, the Scriptures do largely afford reasons and proofs against it,
your service you do unto the^, your annexing of power and grace unto them, your
trust you put in them, are so many, and so gross idolatries, that without
streyning any one place of Scripture the first and second commandment do
abundantly condemn them.

PAPIST.
As in these points the old translation is corrupt and the later better, so in
other things the later is false and the former true, for example, thus they
translate: Thou will not leave my soul in Act. 2. 27.
grave. Malicious corruption against the descending of Christ's soul into
hell: For it is contrarte to the original text and the former translation of
Tyndal.

PROTESTANT.
This cauilling objection has been often made by you Papists, and often
answered as all men know: and therefore it may seem a vain labor to travail
in satisfying them that will accept no satisfaction. Howbeit for their sakes
that peradventure have seen your objection but have taken no pains to
understand the answer, I will briefly set it down if at least they will
vouchsafe to hear it.

First, therefore you cannot be ignorant that the Hebrew word Sheol does in
that tongue properly signify the grave, as the learned interpreters of that
tongue do observe, and Doctor Fulke against Gregory Martine has maintained.
Pagnine gives that interpretation, first as the natural propriety of the
word, and accordingly translateth, Genesis 42. 38 Et descendere facutis meam
canitiem cum dolor ad sepulchrum, You will bring my gray head with sorrow to
the grave. And in this very place. Psalm. 16. 10. Quoniam non derelingues
ani^ans meam in sepulcher. Thou will not leave my soul in grave. And so
likewise in other places as Genesis 37. 35. Job. 17. 13. 1 King. 2. 9. etc. In all
which places Arias Montanus alters not his translation, and your Louanian
Censors have approved it. Is it malicious corruption in our translations and
not in yours?

Secondly, by the interpretation of Peter and Paul. Act. 2. 31 and 33. and 13.
35. 36. 37. The Prophet here spoke of Christ's resurrection, but as touching his
return from hell, neither in this place do they so interpret David's words, nor
in any other place rightly understood, make any mention of it. If the place
then be to be understood, of the resurrection, and that in both causes, Thou will not leave my soul in grave, nor suffer thine holy one to see corruption.
As Peter. Act. 2. 31. expressly says, the words (...) must needs be
understood of the place from whence he was raised which was the grave: Neither
make it any thing against this sense, that his soul was not in the grave: For
first the word (...) here carries the same sense that Nepheth does in the
Psalm. It is so clear that that word must be taken for a dead body
oftentimes, as Beza has observed, that as Doctor Fulke against Martine has
observed of five places, by Beza alleged, Leuit. 19. 28. and. 21. 1. and 11.
Number. 5. 2. and. 9. 10. where the word Nepheth, must needs have that sense,
your own vulgar has so translated it in all these places but the last, and
therefore this place being spoken of the resurrection, it may likewise be so
understood here, besides does not the scripture speaking of David say: His
sepulcher remains with us unto this day? Is not David's soul a part of David?
yet was not David's soul in his sepulcher, nor died, nor was buried, see you
not then, that the word Soul before, is put for the manhood as in the article
of our faith we say, Christ died and was buried, not that the whole manhood
was buried, but the one part which is yet deno^inated of the whole. And while
the body lies and corrupts in the grave, the soul in that behalf suffers
a privation, although it be not shut up with the body in the grave, and thus
David's soul was and is left in the grave in regard of the body which there
remains in corruption. Christ's soul in like sense was there while the body
lay in the grave, but was not left in the grave, because the body remained not
there to see corruption.

And indeed whosoever does rightly and religiously observe the opposition
between Christ and David, in these words, shall soon perceive what is here
meant both by (...) and (...). For of Christ, the Psalmist says, Thou shall
not leave my soul in (...). Of David, Peter says, He died and is buried, and
his Sepulcher remains with unto this day: But his soul remains neither in
hell, nor properly in the grave; in these things therefore there is no
opposition. But this place must be so understood that there may be opposition.
That which is of David's part is plain, he is to this day left buried, and in
his grave, that which is of Christ must be contrary, that his body was not
left in the grave, unless the sense of this place, and these words be so
taken, the Apostle does not sufficiently prove, that David spoke of the
resurrection of Christ. He rather spoke in your understanding of the delivery
of Christ's soul out of hell, which might have been (if it had pleased him in
soul to descend thither) albeit his body had still remained, and seen
corruption in the grave. Thus to maintain your erroneous fancies, you stick
not to overthrow a special argument, which the holy Ghost uses against the
Jews, to prove the resurrection of Christ out of that Psalm.

Thirdly, because you say it is a malicious corruption against the descending
of Christ into hell, what if it were translated, thou will not leave my soul
in hell, would it prove that Christ's soul was in hell? nothing less.
Augustine upon that place of the Psalm, Quoniam non derelinques animam meam in
inferno, makes this gloss, Because thou will neither give my soul to be
possessed of hell, and upon the next words, Neque dabis Sanctum tuum videre
corruptionem, neque sanctificarum corpus per quod and alij sanctificandi sunt,
corrumpi patieris. Thou will not (says Augustine) deliver my soul to be
possessed of hell, nor suffer my sanctified body, by which others also must be
sanctified, to be corrupted: Not to be left in hell, and not to be delivered
unto hell, with him is all one. It is true therefore, that God left not his
soul in hell, because he never delivered his soul to hell and so he never
came there in soul. The same Father writing upon the 85. Psalm, upon those
words, Eruisti animam meam ex inferno inferiori, conferreth them with the words
of this Psalm now in question, Quoniam no^ der^liquisti animam meam in
inferno, and gives this interpretation of both, He said, that God delivered
his soul from the lower hell, because he delivered him from such sins, by
which be might be brought to the torments of the lower hell. As (says he) a
man may say to a Phisician, who perceiving that he was like to fall into some
disease, prescribed him a diet for his health, thou have delivered me from a
disease, not wherein he was, but wherein he was like to be; and to him that
defends him, when he is like to be carried to prison, or in danger to be hanged
thou have delivered my soul from the prison or from the gallows, wherein the
party never was. So Christ taking our sins upon him whereunto hell fire was
due, and conflicting with the wrath of God, being supported by his Father, that
he should not be delivered ever into the power of hell, confidently rejoices
in God saying, I have set the Lord always before me, he is at my right hand,
therefore I shall not be moved, wherefore my heart is glad, my tongue
rejoices, my flesh also shall rest in hope, For thou will not leave my soul
in hell (if you will needs so translate) neither will thou suffer thine holy
one to see corruption, not meaning that he had been in hell, or was to be in
hell, but giving thanks to God who heard his prayer, and preserved him from
hell, as the Apostle says, Heb. 5. 7. He was heard in that which he feared.
So you see it may be translated as you would have it, and yet you get nothing
by it.

Lastly, upon the 85. Psalm aforesaid, Augustine makes two parts of infernum
or hell, the one upon earth, the other in the grave or region of death whither
the dead depart, from whence says he God would deliver our souls by sending
his son thither. Because of these two hells (says he) the son of God was
sent to deliver us every way, Ad hoc infernum missus est nascendo, ad illud
moriendo. To the hell on earth he was sent when he was borne, to the hell in
the grave, or in death when he died: to the which hell, says Augustine, Christ
came that we might no^ remain in hell. To the like effect he writes upon the
88. Psalm. If Christ went into no other hell then the faithful go, he never
went into hell of the damned, where the faithful never come. And therefore to
conclude, Augustine though he translate in inferno and ex inferno, means
only the grave, or at the largest, the Region of death whither the dead go.
Say not then that we translate grave against Christ's descending into hell: we
may with Augustine translate hell, and yet with him not mean the hell of the
damned, but the common hell of the dead.

PAPIST.
Likewise to avoid the descending of Christ into hell for the del^uerie of the
old Fathers, they translate thus, Christ has once suffered for sins, the
just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, and was put to death
concerning the flesh, but was quickened 1. Pet. 3. 18.
by the spirit, by which also he went and preached to the spirits that are in
prison. In which short sentence be three corruptions, to wit, By the spirit,
for In the spirit, By the which, for in the which, and Are in prison, for were
in prison. Corruptions I say they are, as I appeal for trial to their former
translation, and of purpose to deny that Christ in soul or spirit did descend
to the Fathers that were in Limbo, or as it is here said in prison, when S.
Peter wrote his Epistle, as by forcing in the word (Are) in steed of (Were)
they would have the Reader think, then were they not delivered by Christ's
descension as we teach, and S. Peter in this place.

PROTESTANT.
It is strange to see how you are blinded and oppressed with a spirit of
slumber, that you cannot discern how impossible it is to fit this place to
your Limbus.

First, if Abraham's bosom be this imagined limbus, neither may these
disobedient in the days of Noe, whom the Scripture calls the world of the
ungodly, 2. Pet 2. 5. be placed in Abraham's bosom, being for eating and
drinking, and all sensuality more like to the rich glutton then to Abraham:
neither may the old Fathers for whose deliverance Luke 21.
Christ descended, as you say, be branded with the note of disobedience, to
whom the holy Ghost bears witness, that they died in the faith, and had good
report for their faith. This Heb. 11. 13. 39.
place therefore speaking of Christ's coming in the Spirit, and preaching to
the Spirits that were disobedient in the days of Noe, cannot be applied to the
Fathers in Abraham's bosom, which also very unfitly may be termed a prison.

Secondly, if it be yielded that Christ went in soul to the place called
Abraham's bosom (as we deny not but he did, it being all one with that
Paradise, wherein Christ promised that the penitent thief should be with him
(yet if your Limbus be in the Region of hell and a border of hell, Christ could
not descend into it, when he went into Abraham's bosom; for between Hell and
Abraham's bosom there is a great Chaos, or as Augustine says, Quidam biatus
multum ea separans, Epist. 99. ad E^od.
a certain wide gap much separating them, a wide space of distance that none
can come out of the one Region into the other, and therefore Augustine
resolves, that Abraham's bosom, which is an habitation of a kind of secret
quietness or rest, is at no hand to be thought or believed to be any part
^^^^ll. In so much that if the Scripture had said, that Christ when he died
went into Abraham's bosom, Augustine meruaileth whether any man would have
been so bold, as out of such words to affirm, that Christ descended into
hell.

Thirdly, Augustine beating his head about that place, as Euodius offered it
unto him, namely to see how it might be applied to Christ's descending into
hell, finds so many difficulties in it, that he wishes Euodius rather to
consider whether the whole place belong nothing at all to hell, but rather to
those times, the pattern whereof Peter applied to the times present, to show
that those which now believe not the Gospel preached, are like those that
believed not, and perished in the days of Noe. Thus applying the place to the
example of those days, Non suspicemur (says Augustine) quod apud inferos ad
faciendos fideles atque liberandos Euangelium predicatum sit. Let us not
imagine that the Gospel was preached in hell, to make men faithful, and to
deliver them, as if any Church were there. To the other sense which Euodius
had taken hold of from others, Augustine says, The author of at seems to have
been drawn, because Peter said, he preached to the Spirits that were shut
up in prison, as if (says he) it might not be understood of their souls,
who then were shut up in the darkness of ignorance as in a prison, to who^ then
living, the building of the Ark by Noe, was after a sort a preaching before the
sloud, as at this day the daily building of Gods Church is a preaching to the
unbelievers before the day of judgment, and so those times are a pattern of
these. Thus having answered this objection he proceeds to answer another,
that might be made against this latter sense, namely that Christ in those times
was not come, and therefore could not then preach, Let this trouble no man
(says Augustine) Nondum enim venerat scilicet in carne, veruntamen ab initio
generis humani ipse vtique non in carne sed in spiritu veniebat: quod autem
dixi in spiritu veniebat, Et ipse quidem filius in substantia deitatis, quoniam
corpus non est, vtique Spiritus est. Christ (says Augustine) was not then
come, to wit, in the flesh, Howbeit from the beginning of mankind he came,
not indeed in the flesh, but in the spirit, and that which I said, he came in
the Spirit, is thus to be understood, that the son of man in the substance of
his godhead, because he is not a body, is without doubt a spirit. This (says
Augustine) the very words of Scripture in hand, do sufficiently manifest to
them that take diligent heed unto them, and then repeating the words of the
text, makes this paraphrase of his own, Christus mortificatus carne,
viuificatus autem spiritu, In quo spiritu adueniens praedicauit, and illis
spiritibus qui incredali fuerant al^quando in diebus Noe, quoniam priusquam
veniret in carne pro nobis moriturus, quod semel fecit, saepe antea veniebat in
spiritu, ad quos volebat visis eos admoneus sicut volebat, vtique in spiritu,
quo spiritu and viuificatus est: quum in passione esset carne mortificatus.
Quid est enim quod viuificatus est spiritu, nisi quod eadem caro qua sola
fuerat mortificatus viuificante spiritu resurrexit? Christ, says he, was
mortified in the flesh, and quickened in the spirit, in which spirit he came
and preached even to those spirits which had been sometime disobedient in the
days of Noe; for before he came in the flesh to die for us, which he did
once, he came many times before in the spirit to whom he would, warning
them by visions as he would, in the spirit doubtless, by the which spirit he
was also quickened, wherein his passion he was mortified in the flesh. For what
means if that he was quickened by the spirit, but that the same flesh wherein
alone Christ was mortified, rose again by the quick^ning spirit? This
exposition of Peter's words (says Augustine) if any man mislike or think not
sufficient, let him seek how he may understand them of bell, and if he can
solue the doubts which! have before mentioned, (to wit, against the point of
hell) let him show it me, which if be do, these words may be understood both
ways, but sure this exposition cannot be convinced of any falsehood. I have
been the larger in dilating the learned and holy judgment of Augustine in
this behalf, that all men, even the unlearned may see, how when the Fathers
make against you, you will not see it, nay rather (as your Rhemistes do) you
will enforce things spoken by them, as Annot. 1. in 1. Pet. 3. 19.
by Augustine in this Epistle, but not approved by them, as if they were
delivered out of their best judgment.

Fourthly (to come to your quarelling objections) the two first corruptions
wherewith you charge us, to wit, that we translate, By the spirit, for in the
spirit, and again, By the which, for In the which you may as well charge
Augustine withal as us, who has gone before us in so understanding,
translating, and expounding. For by the word Spirit, understanding the
Divinity of our Savior Christ, it cannot be said that his Divinity was
quickened, or he quickened in the Divinity, but by the Divinity his dead
body was quickened. And so Dionysius Carthusianus, a man not misliked by your
selves, understands and expounds the latter words, By which also. Vult
itaque (says he) princeps Apostolorum asserere quod Christus qui nostris
temporibus carne indutus veniens pradicauit hominibus ^ter salutis, ipse etiam
and ante diluuium eis qui tum increduls erant spiritu veniens praedicauit; Ipse
namque per spiritum sanctum erat in Noe, sicque beatissimus Petrus in verbis
istis apert^ssime innuit Christi diu^nitatem, and vtriusque nature vnam esse
personam in ipso. The Prince of the Apostles (says Dionysius) means to
affirm, that Christ who in our time came clothed with the flesh, and preached
unto men the way of salu^tion, himself also before the flood coming in
spirit, preached to them who then were unbelieving: For he himself by his
Spirit was in Noe, etc. And so S. Peter in those words does manifestly
implie the divinity of Christ, and that in him there is one person of two
natures. He me^tioneth indeed that other opinion of Lambus, but makes small
reckoning of it, as to belong any thing to this place. And here by occasion of
that which Dionysius has well observed, I will not let it pass vnpointed at,
how you damme up so notable a stream of the Scriptures, serving to prove the
Divinity, and the union of two natures in the one person of Christ, as this
place affoordeth, only to have some blind pretense for your imagination of
Limbus.

But besides for answer to your accusations, if you please to compare that
which S. Paul says, 1. Tim. 3. 16. Manifested in the flesh, justified in the
spirit you may find the opposition alike in both, between flesh and spirit,
that is, humanity and Deity. The words In spirit in the first place, Haymo
interprets, Perplenitudine^ Diuinitatis, Dionysius Carthusianus per
operatione^ Spiritus sancti. As Christ was justified, that is, declared
mightily to be the son of God (as Romans 1. 4.) by the spirit, that is, by his
divinity, So was he quickened or raised again from the dead, as Augustine
before expounded by the spirit, that is, his divinity.

The third corruption wherewith you charge our translation is, Are in prison,
for were in prison. If you understand Prison as Augustine does, though you
read Were in prison, what get you by it? if by prison the place of unbelievers
and disobedient persons after this life be meant, as the noting of their sin,
and of their punishment so coupled together do import, what is that but hell,
wherein they were not when Christ in Spirit, or By his Spirit preached unto
them, but now are, and therefore understanding Christ to have preached to them
in Noes time (as Augustine does) you cannot say they were then in prison when
Christ preached, but rather are now for their disobedience.

Lastly, it might be here noted, how you are feign to fetch about to fit this
place to your Limbus. For whereas Peter speaks of those that were in Noes
time disobedient, and says of them that they are in prison, you to draw it to
Limbus, which is a hard matter to match them with faithful Abraham, that are
noted by the name of disobedient, and the world of ungodly are feign to devise
that some of them repented in the very drowning, and so after some pains felt
in purgatory, were translated to Limbus (for so Dionysius Annot. 2. in 1 Pet
3. 20.
sets down the opinion of some, and your Rhemistes: closely insinuate as much)
such turning of devises, and coining of conceits you are put to, before you
can hansomly make any thing of this place to serve your turn. But when all
comes to all, though you teach that the Fathers were delivered out of Limbus by
Christ's descension. yet Peter teaches no such matter, as before has been
made plain unto you.

PAPIST.
Lastly, to prove that Priests may marry, they translate Saint Paul thus,
Have we not power to lead about a wife being a sister, 1. Cor. 9. 4.
putting in the word (wife) for (woman) most falsely as their elder translation
tells them. And if we may believe S. Paul himself, he was unmarried. For
so he says plainly in the same Epistle, 1. Cor. 7. 8.
and therefore what is this but plain corruption?

PROTESTANT.
First, what need we strain any Scripture to prove this point, when the
Apostle in plain words says, that a Bishop 1. Tim. 3. 2.
must be the husband of one wife?

Secondly, your translation rather straineth and misplaceth the words, putting
that first which is second. For in the Apostles words Sister is in the first
place, in your translation you have put it in the second place, to make as if
it were a limitation of the general word Woman only to Sisters, that is
believing women. Whereas indeed the Apostle having first said a sister need
not add a Woman, which is necessarily implied in the name Sister, and therefore
adds the word (...) for distinction, to put a difference of the Sister he
meant from all other Sisters. He therefore meant a Sister being a wife, the
fittest companion of their iourneies.

Thirdly, it agrees neither with the Apostles words, nor his purpose to
interpret his words as you use to do of such like women as followed our
Savior Christ, and ministered unto him and his, of their substance: For what
power or authority Luke 8. 3.
had the Apostles to lead about such women after them? but to lead about a
wife they had power. Besides, the purpose of the Apostle is to show that
himself and Barnabas had right to put the Church to more charge by leading
such a one about with them: but if he had meant such women as following them in
their iourneies, ministered unto them of their substance, to have such in their
company, had been an ease and no charge to the Church, the contrary whereof
the Apostle plainly expresses, in giving reason why he and Barnabas might
have done so, Who goes a warfare at any time of his own cost? etc. If we
have sown unto you Verse 33.
spiritual things, is it a great matter if we reap your carnal? The Church
therefore of their carnal substance, must have borne the charge of such a
sister lead about, and therefore no doubt Math. 8. 14.
the Apostle meant a wife, who going with her husband, there could be nothing
said against it, and for her husbands sake, the Church must also provide for
her. To which charge because the Apostle put them not when he might have done
it, he has therefore the more to say in his own defense.

Fourthly, the Scripture recording of Peter that he was married, and ancient
writers that other of the Apostles and Disciples were married, namely Ambrose in
2. Cor. 11. All the Apostles excepting John and Paul had vvines, and Eusebius
h^st. Eccles. lib. 30. cap. 30. out of Clemens Alexandrinus, of Peter, Philip,
and (as he says Paul) the Apostles words directly point at that liberty in
them, in the words as well as other Apostles and the brethren of the Lord and
Cephas. And very plainly out of the report that Eusebius makes out of
Clemens, every man may see that in those times the word (...) was taken for a
wife. Paul (says he) in a certain Epistle, makes mention of his wife, whom
he therefore did not lead about with him, that more easily and freely he
might perform his ministry. Howbeit, if Paul were unmarried, yet is it no
corruption so to translate his words, for as much as he had that liberty,
though he used it not.

Lastly, you know that the Scripture says, Marriage is honorable amongst all
men, and the bed undefiled. What more Heb. 13. 4.
clear and full allowance can there be, that Priests may lawfully marie,
except you will say, that priesthood depriueth them of the honor of Gods
ordinance, which he has sanctified to all men. Having general and special
warrant for Priests marriage, besides the place in question, what need we force
it? you rather have forced single life upon Gods Ministers against his manifest
word.

PAPIST.
If the^ they be learned malition fly corrupt the text, who will trust them
with the interpretation? as for unlearned Protestants, how can they gather a
true sense out of a corrupted sentence? can a straight line be drawn by a
crooked Rule?

PROTESTANT.
Nay rather if the Popish Rabbis have first set up many a crooked practice
both in doctrine and Gods worship, and then will have the line of
interpretotion drawn by the crooked rule of Popish practice secundum currentem
Ecclesiae sensum. Who will trust them to be interpreters of scriptures, who are
conspired to maintain whatsoever their Synagogue has corruptly practiced? For
how can a straight line be drawn by a crooked rule? or how can the unlearned
Papists have any means to try the true interpretation of scriptures, even in
matters necessary to salvation, who must of necessity sell their souls into
the hands of Popish Hucksters, to receive whatsoever sense of scriptures they
thrust upon them, and above all, must receive Popish practice as their Creed?
and as the practice changes, so must the sense of Scriptures change, and be
one to day, another to morrow, one this year, another the next, according to
Cusanus, his rule, Intellectus currit cumpraxi. The understanding of the
scriptures runs with the practice, which practice interprets the Nicol.
Cusan de author. eccles. and Conc. Sup. et cont. scriptu.
scripture at one time after one sort, at another time after another sort. This
is the constancy of Popish faith, whereof Papists boast so much.

PAPIST.
Out of the premises we may learn the cause why we have such unity in faith
to be, for that we acknowledge an infallible Judge, for the expounding of the
Scriptures, and though in other things we have dissension, as fell out
likewise betwixt Saint Paul and Barnabas, and no time has been free from such
scandals: yet we keep all one and the same Catholic faith through the world,
and the cause why the Protestants have such mortal dissension in matters of
faith without all hope of agreement, is for that they acknowledge 1 Ioh. 4. 1.
not any infallible and certain Judge for the interpretation of the
scriptures: For they will be tried by nothing but by the Scripture, and if we
press them that the scriptures may be falsely expounded, the^ they repair to
the spirit, and if we tell the^ of John, that we must not believe every spirit,
then for trial of the spirit, back again they post to the scripture, and so if
they be urged on forward, they run round from the scripture to the spirit,
and from the spirit to the scripture world without end. And so whilst their
spirits agree not togeither, we see them about many articles of faith, as
about the descending of Christ into hell, about the lawfulness of Archbishops,
and Bishops, like the camp of the Madianites, to have turned their weapons to
mutual destruction, and to lie lugging together Judges, 7.
by the ears, in endless brawles and contentions.

PROTESTANT.
If it were true that you boast of, that you have such unity of your Popish
faith, yet could you from such unity no better prove the truth of your
Religion, then from the consent of the Israelites, erecting the calfe in the
wilderness, or from the consent of the Jewish Synagogue, against our Savior
Christ, crying Crucific him, crucify him, or from the consent of all Israel in
the days of Achab and Iezabel, being confederate against Elias alone, you can
prove that the Calfe was the God that brought the people out of the land of
Egypt, or that Baal was the true God, or that our Savior Christ was a deceiuer
as the high Priests termed him: Of such unity, God has forewarned us to take
heed by the Prophet Esaias. Say ye not a confederacy to all them, to whom this
people says a confederacy, but rather to the law and to the testimony, Esa.
8. 12. verse. 20. ver. 9
against which though the people be gathered together in beapes, they shall be
broken in pieces, and though they take counsel together, yet it shall be
brought to naught, though they pronounce verse. 10
a decree, it shall not stand. The Kings of the earth stand up, and the rulers
take council together against the Lord, and against Psalm. 2. 2.
his Christ. Not only Tyrants without the Church, but even within the Site of
the church, those that springing out of the Church, usurp tyranny over the
Church, and against the Lord Christ do make their decrees with a common
consent, that if any man confess Christ, he shall be cast out of the
Synagogue, Ioh. 9. 22.
and having obtained power to sit in men's consciences, oppress them by
pretense of sacred authority to make rules of faith, as high Priests and
Pharisees, deal with their officers sent to apprehend Christ. Does any of the
rulers Ioh. 7. 48 ver. 49
or of the Pharisees (say they) believe in him? They make show (I grant) to
square their faith by the law, but with great craft they arrogate to themselves
that they only know the Law. This people (say they) which know not the law
are accursed. If any man teach or believe otherwise then pleases the^,
forsooth they know not the Law. These Rabbis challenge only to themselves
that they only have the form of knowledge and truth in the law that they must
be the guides of the blind, forsooth they only have eyes, all other are
blind. This is your Popish unity: these be your infallible Judges for the
expou^ding of the scriptures: you first devise a form of faith most
serviceable to your idle bellies, your Bishops Miters, your Cardinals hattes,
your Popes triple Crown, the^ you cospire upon a prescription to have in your
hands the only command of scriptures, and their sense and exposition, and for
preservation of this your tyranny, and to secure the hope of your conspiracy,
you reduce all to the Popes Breast and Chair, who is not without the Devils
wisdom, not to be divided against himself. And so how fallible soever your
Judge be, to be deceived himself, and to deceive others that he before them,
and they after him may tumble down into the bottomless pit of hell by hy
heaps, yet you are sure he will never fail you. Now surely this is a blessed
unity: for which you are so much beholding to your infallible Judge.

But is it true that you boast of that, by reason you acknowledge one
infallible Judge for the expounding of the scriptures, you keep all one, and
the same Catholic throughout the world? I will not spend time in ripping up
the infinite dissentions that are among your school Tribes, least you shist
off and say, that their dislentions were in other things, and not in matters of
faith. The true doctrine of original sin is a matter of Faith, not only in
those remote points. 1. That there is original sin. 2. That by propagation
it is spread over all mankind from Adam. 3. That the effects thereof are all
the calamities which continually wait upon man's life; (Which are the points
whereof as being certain Defen fid. Trid. lib. 50.
clear, the Church as Andradius says, has given her sentence. Quod vniuerso
mortalium generi naturae necessitate insidet and cum quo omnes illas
calamitates hausimus quibus hominum vit a continenter premitur. That by
necessity of nature it cleaves to all mankind, wherewithal we have drawn
all those calamities wherewith man's life is continually pressed) But chiefly in
discerning and defining what original sin is, and wherein it does consist. To
show you one Catholic faith in this point: I will not reckon up the sundry
opinions of original sin, whereof your selves as yet could never agree, I
will take the confession of the Council of Trent: For thus they say. Inter
Sess. 5. decret. 1.
pluri^a mala quibus ecclesia his nostris temporibus perturbatur, eriam de
peccato originali, eiusque remedio, non solum vetera, sedetiam noua dissidia
excitanit^i. Among many evils wherewith the Church of God in these our times is
troubled, the Devil has raised up not only old, but new dissentio^s about
original sin, and the remedy thereof. Was your Church destitute of such an
infallible Judge for the expounding of scriptures, until the late Council of
Trent? if it were, your infallible Judge is very young, yet you see for all
your infallible Judge both of old, and until, and in the times of that
Council, your Church was troubled with many dissentions, both about original
sin, and the remedy thereof, which I trow, you will not deny to be points
of the Catholic faith, Andradius after this Council confesses no less. Ita
peccati huius immanissioni natura Defens. fid. Trid. lib. 5.
latet, and atrocissimi Syderis omnia populantis ratio est innoluta, vt nulla
in re sit doctorum hominum mator varietas and co^certatio. i. The nature of
this most monstrous and heinous sin, that makes havoc of all, is so
intricate, that about no point there is greater variety and contention among
learned men. Whereunto he joins another question no less controuerted (as he
says) among your excellent wits, to wit, how original sin which he calls
Tetru^ and immane facinus, a foul and monstrous wickedness could cleave unto
little children, that scarcely lived to see the light, nor ever had any power
to will? but perhaps the Council of Trent made an end of these dissensions,
and so expounded the Scriptures, that now you have but one and the same
Catholic faith throughout all the world in this point. No verily, if
Andradius were privy to the Councels meaning: For he affirms, that the
controversy which the ancients had about the true definition thereof, has
not yet bin vllius Concilij authoritate sedata, appeased by the authority of
no Council, and therefore free for every man, to hold what opinion he likes best
of this controversy not sufficiently enlightened by the Church. Wherefore
except your Catholic faith in this point be quot capita tot se^sus, how many
heads so many opinions, so that your infinite dissent may be allowed for
consent, and your many and discording opinions, may go for one and the same
Catholic faith, in this great point of faith you have either no faith, or a
faith of many fashions variable according to the forge it comes out of. In this
fundamental principle, the discovery (I mean) of original sin, to be as
the Apostle calls it, the flesh wherein dwells no good Romans 7. 18. verse.
20.
thing, that sin that dwells in us, wherewith we are so yoaked, that it
is always present with us, a law in our members, rebelling against the law
of the mind, and leading us captive to the verse 21.
law of sin, that is in our members Which until it be known and verse 23.
discerned, even concupiscence condemned in the verse. 7.
law is not known to be sin, when it is known it makes us cry out and
bewail our misery, and to confess with David: verse. 24.
Behold I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me, it
conuinceth that all the frame of the thoughts of Psalm. 51. 5.
man's heart, is only evil continually, that in us, that is in our flesh
dwells no good thing it proves us to be dead in trespasses and sins, and
therefore to be the children of wrath. Whereby we are stripped of all conceit
of free will, of all presumption Genesis 6. 5.
of our own righteousness, and is the most universal schoolmaister to lead all
men unto Christ: In this so high a principle of faith (I say) your Church, and
his children having either no faith at all, or a faith of many colors, and
many Ephesians. 2. 1. 3.
shapes, notwithstanding your infallible judge, boast no longer of your one,
and the same Cutholike faith in all the world.

Your vain and foolish contumely which you cast upon the Protestants, that
for trial of the scriptures they repair to the spirit, and for trial of the
spirit, post back again to the scrip^^res, and sorunne round from the
Scriptures to the Spirit, and from the Spirit to the Scriptures world without
end, bewraies in you great ignorance of our doctrine: For we divide not the
Spirit from the Scriptures, nor the Scriptures from the Spirit, that we should
be feign to run or go from the one to the other: only in the Scriptures we
hear or learn of the Spirit, whatsoever we know in the Scriptures, we know it
by the teaching of Gods Spirit that speaks in them, whatsoever we learn of
the Spirit, we learn it by, and out of the Scriptures, when we repair to the
Sriptures, we repair to the Spirit, and when we go to enquire of the Spirit we
go to the Scriptures. If the God of this world had not blinded your eyes, that
the light of this truth cannot shine unto you, you would never have vpbraided
us with posting to and fro, and running round.

But because you tell us of roundes, I pray you see what roundes your selires
make in a matter of Faith of greatest consequence in all your Religion, you
give out this conclusion as an article. Subesse ro^^no Po^tifici omni creaturae
est Extr. com de Ma. ior, and. c. obed. ^nam. Sactam.
de necessitate salutis. To be subject to the Pope of Ro^^e is n^cessaerie to
salvation for every creature, we require you to prove it, you allege that the
Pope is the head of the universal Church, we yet ask for proof, you bring
us: Tues Peirus and super hane petra^ etc. Thou art Peter and upon this rock I
will build my Church, and tibi dabo claues to thee I will give the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, and pasce oues me as, feed my sheep, feed my lambs. We
tell you Peter is one stone in the building, but no rock, or if you will needs
have a rock, his confession, or Christ whom heconfessed, is the rock or
foundation whereon the Church is builded: we tell you the keys were given to
Peter not alone, but to the rest of the Apostles, and he with them commanded
to feed sheep and lambs: and further, whatsoever was given to Peter,
extends not to the Pope, who is not Peter, you say that Peter received those
honors for himself, and his successors, and that the Church is built upon him
and them, as a rock, and that he for himself and his successors received the
keys, and left them to the Pope of Rome, who now is Shepherd over sheep and
lambs, and all this you will prove by the scriptures, we r^^uire you to prove
that the Scriptures have this sense, you fetch your proof from the Fathers, we
bring the Fathers as clearly, yea more clearly for our interpretation, then
you can for Council. Nicen. Conat. Afric.
yours: you thrust on forward to the Councils, we bring you the authority of
Councels to make the Pope no more the^ a peer among other Patriarchs, yea to
cut him off from meddling out of his Dioces, now you post to Councels
confirmed by the head, that is the Pope, whom either with Conncels, or
without, you make your only infallible Judge Are you now where you began? do
you thus dance in a round and tell us of roundes? The Pope is head of the
universal Church. Who says so? the Scriptures? who shall interpret the
Scriptures? the Fathers. Fathers not agreeing who shall judge between them?
Councels: Councels agree not, who then shall strike the stroke? the Pope. And
so the Pope is head of the Church, because the Pope will be so. With these
rounds you have made giddie and brai nesicke innumerable poor souls. God in
his mercy stablish their hearts with grace, that their eyes may see the pit
before they fall into it.

Now I pray you what be those matters of Faith wherein the Protestants have
such mortal dissension, without any hope of agreement? they are many you say,
reckon them, that we see how many they be? The descending of Christ into hell,
and the lawfulnes of Archbishops and Bishops. Is the question about Archbishops
and Bishops a matter of faith? among Papists it may well be so, who hold the
Popes supremacy for the first and chief, yea in effect for all the articles of
their faith, but surely Protestants hold it only for a matter of order
appertaining to the external government of the Church, which is far from a
matter of faith, your many matters of faith then are come to but one, and that
such a one as in ancient times was no article of faith at all, in your Roman
Creed, no nor yet received in the East Churches, In. expos. Symboli.
as Ruffinus affirms, Sci^nau^ est quod in Ecclesiae Romana Symbolo non
habetur additum We, must know that it is not found added in the Creed of the
Roman Church, neither is the canse received among the East Churches. And being
received there Epist. 99.
was little certainty of the sense and meaning of it. Ruffinus takes it to be
all one, with Sepultus est, he was buried. Augustine De Genes ad Lit. lib. 12.
cap.
(as is before showed) denies that Abraham's bosom is any part of holl, and else
where confesses that never yet found that it is called hell, where the souls
of the righteous do rest. And so little light can be found of any such
conceit as Papists De Christi. anima lib. 4. cap. 5.
have of Christ's descending into hell, that Bellarmine says: Non est
necessaria presentia animae Christi etc. The presence of Christ's soul to
inlighten the Fathers with the divine vision of him, is not necessary, yet it
seemed to be of congruitio that it should be present while that was in doing.
He makes it not of necessity, but of congruity, and that but in seeming
neither, this is (as touching the sense) but a weak matter of faith to object
unto us, that we dissent about it: For we dissent not about the words of the
article, but receive it, we are also agreed that it must bear such a sense as
may stand with the scripture and the analogy of faith, then although we differ
about the proper sense of the words, yet differ we not about any matter of
Faith, as you do about original sin.

PAPIST.
Seeing therefore the Church of Christ continues visible for ^uer, as ours
has done and not theirs: we have the ancient Fathers for patrones of our
cause, they be destitute of all antiquity: we have the truth in many points
according to their own confessione, and they consequently falsehood: we have
the Scriptures and their true interpretation, they only the bare name, and
private erroneous exposition: I conclude, that whosoever will be saved, must
not hear them, but embrace our old Catholic and Apostolic faith.

PROTESTANT.
The persons of all the members of the Church of Christ, as men have been in
their times visible, are and shall be to the worlds end; they have been also
generally to some of their fellow members visiblie in their times, as members
of the body of Christ: howbeit, the visibility of Churches established, and in
their assemblies, worshipping God in the word Sacraments and prayer they have
often wanted, as in the Egyptian captivity, the days of Elias, the captivity
of Babylon, the dispersion caused by Saul's persecution, and under the
ouer-spreading tyranny of the Romish Antichrist, driving the woman that
brought forth the man-child into Revel. 12. 13. 14
the wilderness, into a p^^e prepared for her of God. During which captivity
of the Church in several times, either heathenish idolatry as in Egypt, or
Church idolatry, as the golden calves, and the service of Baal before and in
the days of Elias, or carnal worship as among the Jews in the dispersion
afore-saide, or mere Atheism as under Sanballat and Tobijah, or the mystery
of iniquity under the show of pseudochristianitie, as in the Apostasy of
Antichrist has borne the sway in the world as the only Religion. Such is the
visibility of your Romish apostafie, like the visibility of Ierob^ams calves of
Baals Church of the Scribes and Pharisees and in pretense to build with the
I^wes, that is the true Church of Christ semblant to Sanballat and Tobijah, or
at the be^^ to Eliashab their friend. In this visibility you have set forth
many goodly Pageants to dazell the eyes of all those in who^ ^he God of this
world has blinded their ei^s, that the light of the 2 Cor. 4. 3. 4.
glorious Gospel of Christ should not shine unto them: as the state of Popes
and Cardinals, the Babylonish magnificence of your temples, beset with
sumptuous idols, the stage play of your Mass, with your whole Antichristian
tyranny, which you have vaunted to the world, as the harlot her bedecked bed
Prou. 7. 15. 17.
with ornaments, carpets, and lays of Egypt, perfumed with Mirrhe, Aloes, and
Cinnamon, and like unto the picture of Apoc. 17. 3. 4. 5.
your Church, the mother of whoredoms and abominations, that sits upon a
scarlet colored beast, and is arrayed in purple and scarlet, and guided with
gold, and precious stones, and pearls, and has a cup of gold in her hand full
of abominations, and filthiness of her fornications. Of such visibility we
give you leave to boast, and rejoice that we have no part with you in your
glory, least we should also have part with you in your plagues.

And albeit, GOD has granted more visibility to our Churches, then you can
endure with patience to behold, yet make we not out of such visibility any
demonstration that our Church is the true Church.

That faith, that worship which by open confession and practice, was visible in
our Savior Christ, and his blessed Apostles, which in their holy writings
inspired of God, they have delivered to be seen, read, and understood to be
held and observed of all the true Church of God, is a demonstratiue and
infallible visibility, which wheresoever it is to be seen and discerned,
proves and conuinceth that they are the Church of Christ. This is the only
visibility whereby the true Church is to be discerned and known, which we have
often proved, and we hope is manifest to all men's consciences to be found in
our Church, and you shall never be able while the world stands to make any
sound proof, that your Church has any such visibilitie, but manifestly the
contrary.

What patronage the ancient Fathers lend unto your cause, has been before
showed where you alleged any thing out of them, and often has been further
in all the fundamental points, wherein you ^ dissent from us and from the
truth. You imitate some rites twice dead and buried since they used them: you
are confident to affirm some things whereof they doubted: you take up their
errors for principles of your faith: you abuse and pervert their words and
phrases to a contrary meaning, and in these only (as touching your Popish
religion) you follow the Fathers; but their indicious testimonies touching the
fundame^tall points of Doctrine, as original sin and the fruit thereof,
concupiscence, free will, instification, the use of good works, the Sacraments
and diverse other points you will not see, or else you pervert as the instable
do the Scriptures to their own destruction. 2. Pet. 3. 16.


Compare what they write in one place, with that which they write in another,
note the occasion, mark the end, discern the adversary they have to deal
with, consider the strain of their moved affections acknowledge their tropes
and figures of speech, you shall find the Fathers to yield you but small
help, and to be but slender patrones of your apostasy: on the contrary, you
shall perceive that as we have the eldest antiquity, for proof whereof we
cite the records of Scripture, so have we the body of all consequent antiquity
in all matters of faith, touching the Deity; the Trinity, providence,
touching Christ, his person, natures, offices, mediation, and our redemption by
him touching the holy Ghost, and his operation in the Church ^ouching the
Catholic Church, the communion of Saints, and all necessary parts thereof,
touching remission of sins, touching the resurrection and eternal life. In
other matters, if some where we vary from the Fathers, as they varied one from
another, and some of them from themselves, we have their leaves. I have before
showed you what difference. Cont. Julian. Pelag. lib 1.
Augustine makes between Fundamenta fides and Alia de quibus doctrissimi atque
optimi Catholicae regulae defensores, salua fidei compage non consonant,
between the Foundations of faith, and other points whereabout the learned
stayed best defenders of the Catholic rule do not agree yelw, ^hout
impeachment to the frame of faith.

To your vain pretense of our consent in any point of your Popish faith,
enough has been said before.

As for the Scriptures you have them indeene, and you keep them so close that
neither your selves will search them as you ought, nor suffer those that would.
You banish the Originals, and bind to a corrupt translation as Authon^^cal.
You suffer not the Scriptures to be vulgarly translated and read. Thus you have
the Scriptures as in a prison, but as you should have them to make them common
to all men by reading preaching, and teaching, you have them not.

The interpretation of Scriptures you have such, as may stand with your Popish
practice, which is the privy rule of your interpretation, and such as it
pleases the Pope to prescribe you. But true interpretation of Scripture
according to the plainer principles thereof, and the rule of faith (which
Augustine so much commends) you neither have nor will hade; nor suffer others
to have if you may let it: and so your interpretation is private, as either
being the Popes, or proceeding from your own faction addicted to your received
practice, but ours is the interpretation of the Spirit of God, testified by
himself in the Scriptures inspiried by him, as by the Scriptures and the rule
of faith we prove, and therefore blasphemously by you called private.

Seeing therefore the visibility of your Church is in those things which may be
seen partly among the heathen, partly in a false Church, which the longer it
continues, the worse. You have but some show of the Fathers on your side, when
indeed they are against you, and so have not the antiquity of truth but of
error, you neither have the Scriptures as you should have them for your selves
and others, nor their true sense and interpretation, but only of your own
making: your Popish faith, though it be old in it self, yet in respect of the
days of our Fathers, our Savior Christ, the Apostles, and Prophets, the days
thereof have been but few and evil, and therefore it is not the old Catholic
and Apostolic faith, whatsoever this false and forcelesse Reasoner has said.

PAPIST.
A short Addition.
Believe assuredly, and hold for certain, that no Heretic and Schismatike,
that unites not himself to the Catholic Church again, how great alms
so-euer he give, yea or shed his blood for Christ's name, can possibly be
saved. For many heretics by the cloak of Christ's cause, deceiving the
simple suffer much, but where no true faith is, there is no justice, because
the just lives by faith: so it is also of Schismatikes, because where charity
is not, no justice can be there, which of they had, they would never pluck in
pieces the body of Christ which is the Church.

A Sentence of S. Austin worthy to be noted, of such as think that men which
live virtuously, may go to heaven, though they believe not the Catholic
faith, nor be members of his true Church. For as most certain it is, that none
which believe not all the articles of the Catholic faith, can be saved, though
to the eyes of the world be live or die never so well; for without faith it is
(as Paul says) impossible to please God. And S. Athanasius tells us, that
whosoever will be saved, before all things it is necessary that he hold the
Catholic faith, which faith without every one shall keep whole and
inviolate, without doubt he shall perish for ever: so no less certain it is,
that although we believe never so well, yet if we live not according to that
faith, and so abstain from communicating with heretics in their service and
Sacraments, we cannot be saved. For he that shall deny Christ before men,
Christ also will deny him before his Father in heaven, as himself says. And
if we may without sin temporize and frame our conscience according to the
law, when shall we take up our Cross and follow Crist, as himself wills us?
And what meant the blessed Apostles and so many 1000. of Martyrs to shed
their blood for Christ, of an inward and secret faith might have brought them
to heaven, and they might outwardly have yielded to Princes laws, and keep
their conscience to themselves? This doctrine Christ's servants know not it is
devised only for the cold comfort of such as love this world too much, and
fear persecution. But let such think of this saying of our Savior, Fear ye
not them that kill the body, and are not able to kill the soul, but rather
fear him that can destroy both body and soul into hell: and let them imitate
noble Eleazarus, Mart. 2. 28.
who rather made choice of cruel death, then to dissemble in the cause of
religion, and do that with the scandal of others, which of it self was no
sin at all.

PROTESTANT.
Augustines Sentence De fide and Pet. Diac. cap. 39. is one^^ thus much:
Formissime tene and nullatenus dubites quemlibet hareticum, sieve schismaticum,
in nomine patris and filij, and spiritus sancti baptizatum, si ecclesiae
Catholicae non fuerit aggregatus quantascunque eleemosinas fecerit, and si pro
Christi nomine sanguinem fuderit, nullatenus posse saluari, that is, Firmly
believe, and by no means doubt that every heretic or schismatike, being
baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost,
how great alms soever he do, yea though he shed his blood for Christ's name,
yet if he be not gathered to the Catholic Church, by no means can be saved.
This sentence though not word for word, yet in effect you rehearse, but you ad
thereunto more words, whereof Augustine in that place has never a one, and yet
in the end conclude a sentence of S Austen, as if all that goes before were
his sentence in that chapter. It seems therefore that you read not Augustines
words your self, but borrowed them some where without discerning where
Augustines words ended. The rest is a truth, but not true that Augustine there
has such a sentence: what would you now infer out of this sentence of
Augustine? First that men though they live never so virtuously, yet if they
believe not the Catholic faith, nor be members of his true Church cannot be
saved. Secondly, that if men believe never so well, yet if they live not
according to the faith, and so abstain from communicating with heretics in
their service and sacraments they cannot be saved, and so proceed on to
condemn those that outwardly have yielded to Princes Laws, and keep their
consciences to themselves. All which, may with no gain to you be yielded, it
the chief terms be well understood, to wit, Catholic Church, Catholic
Faith, and Heretics or Schismatikes: For if the Popish Church be not the
Catholic Church, nor the Popish Faith, the Catholic Faith, nor they Heretics
or Schismatikes that stand in opposition to Popery, or do depart from Popish
communion, then what gain you by this whole addition? But it is a world to see
into what a maze you have led the poor sheep of your flock, that no sooner
they hear Catholic Church, or Catholic Faith, but by and by they think of
Popish Church, and Popish Faith, between which, there is no less difference,
then between light and darkness: And again, when they hear of Her^tikes they
presently think of Protestants, whereas indeed if they had eyes to discern of
heresy or an Heretic they would rather apply it to Papists: But I heartily
wish all blinded Papists advisedly to consider of the first conclusion which
you draw out of Augustines words: That although men live and die never so
virtuously, yet except they believe the Catholic faith, and be members of the
true church they cannot be saved. The name of good works is amiable to all
well minded men, and by pretense of great zeal for good works. your faction
has crept into the minds of many, that in great ignorance and simplicity had
a good meaning: Howbeit by good works you chiefly mean those works that
bring some gain unto your selves, otherwise tollerating and dispensing with
the breach of Gods commandments in any point, whereby your Popish kingdom
takes no harm, or is not hindered: Such therefore as have blindly followed you
out of an oppinion that you are the only patron of good works, I wish to
observe that by your own confession, though a man live or die never so well
yet he cannot be saved except he hold the Catholic Faith and be a member of
the true church, because without faith he cannot please God. Does it not then
behoue all men to advise with themselves well how they may know the Catholic
Faith, and the true Church: There were that said they were Jews and were the
Synagogue of Satan The Donatists claimed unto themselves Apoc. 39.
the title of Catholic Church, and Catholic Faith which other Heretics both
have done and may do as well as they. Let them not therefore think or believe
that the Popish Church and faith, is Catholic, because Papists say so, but let
them examine your Church and Faith, whether it be Catholic or no, which only
by the Scriptures they shall be able infallibly to discern. In the Scriptures
(says Augustine to the Donatistes) we have learned Christ, and in the
Scriptures Epist. 166.
we have learned the Church: These Scriptures we have common to us both, why do
we not in them retain in common both Christ and the Church? and in the end of
the same Epistle; Behold the scriptures are common to us both; Behold where we
have known Christ; Behold where we have known the Church. This learned and
godly Father, when both sides challenge to themselves that they are the
Catholic Church, that they have the faith of Christ, calls them to the trial
of scriptures as the surest means to know both Christ and the Church by. By
this rule if they shall be tried that make a spoil of many souls under the
color of Catholic Church, and Catholic Faith they shall be found to be
deceivers, and no better then the Synagogue of Satan.

Wherefore let the ignorant and seduced Papists, unto their zeal of good
works, labor to join a right judgment in matters of faith, from point to
point in all those Articles which Athanasius affirms to be so necessary,
that except a man believe them whole and inuiolate, he shall perish for ever.
The blind ordinary faith of Papists to believe as the Popish Church believes,
is not that Catholic faith which Athanasius says: Every one must believe
that will be saved. Since then by your own confession, where no true faith is,
there is no justice, it behooves all men to be well assured of the faith they
hold, not resting their faith in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God,
that is in the Gospel, which is, the power of God to salvation to every one
that believes, by which only faith, the just man shall live, and not by such
Romans 1. 16
a faith as is built upon the Popes power, to make what faith he list.

The Second thing you would infer of Augustines words is, that although we
believe never so well, yet if we live not according to faith, and so abstain
from communicating with Heretics in their service and sacraments we cannot be
saved. If the terms be rightly understood the doctrine is true and wholesome:
for men that believe must live according to faith, and all true believers must
abstain from communicating with Heretics, but understanding Faith for Popish
faith, and Heretics for those that are opposite to Popery, that is indeed
true believers, under these cloudy and mistie words you secretly infuse into
the minds of those that are seduced by you, the poison of disloialtie, treason
and rebellion, which is now the principal Article of your Popish faith, for
the, Popish faith is that it is of necessity of salvation that every soul be
subject to the Pope, that the Pope has power to accurse and d^pose Princes,
and absolve their subjects from all their allegiance that no man ought to obey
a prince excommunicate by the Pope, or deposed by him: These are the chief
articles of your popish Creed: Whosoever believes and obeieth these shall
undoubtedly be saved, how be it in the Popes heaven, that is in Gehenna, in
he^, fire, whither the Pope dra^eth innumerable souls Did. 40. si Papa.
with him to be tormented with everlasting fire. Your meaning then is to breed
a resolution in the hearts of all those whom you call Catholics in this land,
that although they be never so devout Papists, yet if they walk not according
to their Popish faith, that is, if they be not true to the Popes triple crown
if they practice not by all means to reduce his tyra^nie into this kingdom, if
they be not at all times traitors in heart and purpose, and as soon as
opportunity serves traitors in action, they cannot be saved. This is the
wholesome doctrine of Popery, as appears both by the Bull of P^us S. against
Q. Elizabeth of blessed and princely memory, and by Nicholas Sanders, who thus
writes. Huc igttur iam De visib. mouarc. lib. 2. cap. 4.
tandemres deducta est, etc. Now then the matter is brought to this point, that
an Heretical King must be removed from the kingdom which he holds over
Christians. And because the crime for which he is to be removed is committed
against faith, doubtless it belongs chiefly to the Bishops both to pronounce
the King himself an Heretic, or otherwise an Apostata, and also to declare
that his subjects are from thence forth free of yielding obedience unto him,
and that they ought to do their best that another may withal speed be supplied
in his roomth. Who sees not that utterly it abhors from the salvation of
men's souls to suffer him to reign over the faithful who is himself an
infidel? O miserable Popish faith which drives all subjects of protestant,
that is christian Princes either to be rebels and traitors as a matter
appertaining to the salvation of their souls, or else utterly to despair of
salvation, for that you add of communicating with those whom you call
Heretics, it is some part indeed of your Popish faith, that your adherents
ought to abstain from our service and sacraments, and most willingly you would
have all Papists so to do, because you make reckoning that the more desperate
they grow herein, the more near and apt they are to rebellion and traiterous
attempts, but yet rather then altogether to drive them from you, you will
moderate the rigor of your faith in this point, and permit them to serve the
times, always provided that you be sure of their hearts, and that they fail
you not when opportunity serves, as appeared in the faculty granted to Parsons
and Campia^: But mark what this forcible Reasoner says. Such doctrine (to wit
as this faculty contains) is devised only for the cold comfort of such as
love the world to much. Howsoever the Pope dispense with Church Papists, this
Ghostly Father and such like tell them, that such dispensations are but cold
comfort, and so slender reckoning they make of them, that they call them no
better then Temporizers and such as frame their consciences to the laws, and
finally such as love the world too much. If the Popish faith, were the true
Christian faith, no doubt this reprehension were just: It behooves therefore
all seduced Papists to try the Popish faith by the word of God, whether it be
the true faith or not, I speak not of those Catholic points of faith which
the popish Synagogue holds in common with the church of Christ, but of that
Apostasy which is risen up in the Church and under the color and name of the
Church to beguile the unstable and unbelieving.

Beware of false Prophets (says our Savior Christ) which Matthew 7 15. Operam
perfect. 10 Matthew. 7. hom. 19.
come unto you ^^ Sheep clothing, but inwardly they are reuening wolves.
Christians (says Chrysostom) are rightly called sheep, but the sheeps
garment is the show of christianity A wolf many times wears a sheeps
garment, that is, makes a cou^tersait show of religion in se^blance either of
those works that being rightly done are the works of sheep, or of the
practice of that religion, which is the religion of sheep. Counfait alms
(says Chrisostom) is a sheeps garment but not a sheeps work: Counterfeit
prayer is a sheeps garment, but no sheeps work Counterfeit fasting is a
sheep garment but no sheep work. So are all other shows of piety
wherewith ravening wolves cloth themselves. The Popish agents make great vaunts
of alms, prayer and fasting, by boasting of good things to insinuate them
selves into honest minds: This ostentation is nothing else but a sheep
garment. Again, in practice of religion they make a great show, and thereby
dazell the eyes of the ignorant, for (to use the words of Chrysostom) out of
their simplitie and zeal, but not according to knowledge, thus they say. How
can I say that he is no christian, whom I see to confess Christ, to have an
Altar, to offer the sacrifice of bread and wine, to read the holy scriptures,
to have all the order of priesthood. Whereunto Chrysostom makes this answer.
That even an Ape has the members of a man, and in all things like a man, shall
we therefore say that it is a man. So likewise Heresy has and imitateth all
the mysteries of the church, but Heretics are not the church, yea (says
Chrisostom) they show to be grounded christians, and they have their churches,
nay they govern churches, and yet openly anaucentiously subvert them, yea they
are so multiplied that christians seem rather to be wonderers or deceivers
then they, yet are they inwardly ravening Wolves, because they seek not to
save but to destroy Christians, as the nature of the Wolf is. Hitherto
Chrysostom has set forth the fair and deceivable shows that false Prophets
make both of their works and of their faith. wherein they would seem to be
sheep, but are indeed ravening Woolues. Now let us see what advise he gives to
beware of them, and to try them. By their fruits ye shall know them. The
fruit of a man (says Chrysostom) is the confession of his mouth, and the
work of his conversation. If therefore thousee a Christian man, consider by
and by whether his confession agree with the Scriptures; if it do, he is a
true Christian: but if it be not as Christ has commanded, he is a false
Christian. For so John writing in his Epistle of heretics, said not, If any
man come unto you not having the name of Christ, Say not unto him God speed,
but if any man bring not this doctrine. He reserred the trial of
Christianity, not to the name of Christ, but to the Confession, because not
only the name makes a Christian, but also the truth of Christ: for many walk
in the name of Christ, but few in his Truth. Then co^ing to the works of
conversation. Does a sheep (says he) at any time persecute the Wolf, or
rather the Woolfe the sheep. So Cain persecuted Abel, and not Abel Cain Ismael
Isaac, and not Isaac Ismael; Esau Jacob, and not Jacob Esau, the Jews Christ,
and not Christ the Jews, heretics Christians, and not Christians heretics.
Therefore by their fruits ye shall know them. For if a Woolfe be covered
with a sheep skin, how shall a man know him, but either by his voice or by
his deed? In which comparison, you may there see how Chrysostom proceeds
farther. A little after, he says, But what fruits do they bring forth, wounds,
troubles, and other mischiefs. As a thorn or a bramble, of what side soever
you view it, has prickles, so of what side soever you consider the servants
of the devil, they are full of iniquities. If he speak, he speaks
deceitfullie: if he hold his peace, he museth of evil. If he be angry, he is
mad, if he deal patiently, he vvaiteth for a time to hurt, and considers of
some opportunity when he may do mischief. If he do evil, he is not
ashamed, ^f he do well, he does it for vain glory because of men. Thus
far Chrysostom.

Briefly to make Application. The Popish Church is of great authority, even
for the very names sake of the Church with all seduced Papists. Their
ostentation of alms, prayer and fasting, makes a great show in their eyes
Their confession of Christ, their altars, their pretended sacrifice, their
baptism, their reading of Scriptures, and show of Fathers, their priestly
order do seem to be infallible signs of a true Church. Howbeit, as you have
seen, Chrysostom affirms that heretics have all these, yet are they no
more the true Church for these then an Ape is a man, for the resemblance he
has of the parts of man's body. Their multitude especially considering the
reach of long time, makes many suppose it impossible that they should be false
Churches. Yet Chrys^stome shows, that herein heretics are so far before
Christians, that Christians rather seem to be deceivers, or new vpstart and
vagrant persons. What then is to be done to discern them? Try them by their
fruits, that is the confession of their faith, and the works of their
conversation. And how shall we try the confession of their faith? by the
Scriptures (says Chrysostom) and by the commandment of Christ. But Papists
admit no trial of their faith, but by themselves they are the Church. The Pope
is the supreme Pastor: he that will not hear this Church and this Pastor, is
held Anathema as an heathen or Publican. What is this else but that which
Chrysostom says, they ruling the Church, do openly and licentiously
subvert the Church: for they prescribe their own practice for the rule of
faith, and take away all indifferent means of trial, and will be both makers
and judges of faith. This is the confession of their faith, that they are the
Church, and you must believe it, and therefore believe that all is true which
they say, and whatsoever interpretation of the scriptures they deliver, it is
the true sense of the scriptures, what heresy by this prescription may not be
maintained? yea what trial of spirits is left to the Church, if any one spirit
must be thus believed without submission to be tried by the Scriptures? Come to
their conversation. Are not their fruits vvo^nds, troubles, and manifold
mischiefs, deposing of Princes, inciting of subjects to rebellions,
procurement of foreign invasions, impoysonings and murders of Princes, and
all that stand in their light, threatenings of stabbings, and cutting of
throats, finally underminings of Parliaments, and conue^ances of powder to
blow up King, Queen Prince Nobles, Bishops. Judges, Commons, and that without
any distinction even in a moment? Can they charge Protestants who^ they call
heretics, with such savage, wooluish, ye devilish, h^llish, and stygian
practices? They draw unto them all the sons of Belial, whom they can intise
out of all protestant kingdoms and states, to make continual employment of
them, to work the subversion of their native Countries, to infect with
butcherly and Scith^an cruelty the minds of subjects, by desperate furies to
drive men to infamous and untimely temporal deaths, and to eternal damnation,
not caring what become of their bodies or souls so their turns be served. Can
the religion of Protestants be stained with such barbarous and bestiall
cruelty? They receive the Sacrament in way of obligation to commit murders, to
practice rebellions, to subvert kingdoms; yea, they promise before hand, and
grant great pardons to such as they procure to undertake such villainies. They
make Martyrs of those, who for barbarous treasons, rebellions, and murders,
have justly suffered such punishment as they deserved both by the law of God
and man. Are these the works of sheep or of woolues? By their fruits
therefore you shall know them: they are on every side full of sharp and
cruel prickles. If they speak they equivocate, if they be silent, there are
seven abominations in their hearts, as the sequel has ever proved; if they
be angry they are mad, nothing will serve but invasions, rebellions,
poysonings, powder treasons, and all manner fell and cruel practices: If they
be patient, they wait a time to hurt, and in the mean time they are preparing
some mischief, as manifold experience has proved, and the sun has often
seen: If they do evil, they are not ashamed, as the desperate obstinacy of
the late powder traitors showed. If they do any thing well, they do it for
vain glory to beseene of men, and to get a name to themselves. Is this the
Church whereof every man must be a member, or else he cannot be saved? is this
the Catholic faith? is this to live according to the faith? will any man be so
blinded, that for love or zeal to such a Synagogue, or for awe or fear of the
curse of such cursed workers, he will refuse to join with the Protestants in
their service and Sacraments? My dear brethren, put no trust in any child of
man, which by Augustines confession our Savior Christ forbids, Pin not your
salvation upon his sleeue, that may go to hell himself, I mean the Pope.
Beware of them that outwardly wear only sheep clothing, but inwardly are
very ravening Woolues, as you find by their fruits. Trust not them that will
be tried for their truth and honesty by none but themselves, suspect their
honesty that shut up the Scriptures from you, which our Savior Christ
commanded all men to search. Finally, inquire whether Christ or any Apostle, or
any holy Council or Father did ever put poison, sword, or powder into men's
hands, to murder the sacred persons of Kings, to ruinate whole Kingdoms, and
to promote the faith of Christ by poison, sword, and fire. If you find any
such president, hearken to this forcible reasoner, and all other Jesuits and
Seminaries, refuse our Churches, our service, and Sacraments. If not, disclaim
that religion, that faith, that service, that Sacrament that serves to combine
such conspiracies, that must get up and prosper by such monstrous and endless
cruelty. God of his mercy open your eyes, that the light of the glorious
Gospel of Christ Jesus may shine unto you, that you may be able to discern
the mystery of iniquity, which of long time has wrought in the Kingdom of
Antichrist, that you may know the synagogue of Satan, from the Church of
Christ, and at length come out from Babylon, and escape the wrath present and
to come, and finally be saved by the only faith of Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

