THE CVRE OF THE PLAGUE BY AN ANTIDOTE CALLED AURUM VITAE.

Being well approved to be an easy safe, and perfect cure thereof; as also of
contagious Agues, or Fevers beginning either Hot or Cold.

The description, order, and use whereof, together with the said Antidote, are
to be sold at the Shop of NICHOLAS BOURNE, Stationer, at the South Entrance of
the ROYAL EXCHANGE.

Invented and produced by John Woodall, Master in SURGERY.

Published by Authority.

LONDON: Printed by E. P. for Nicholas Bourne. 1640

To the Reader.
The Author sends greeting in the Lord.
Showing, that he having of late published some works in Surgery, amd amongst
the rest, a Treatise concerning the cure of the Plague, which works, although
they are allowed and well approved of by many right worthy personages, for the
matter in them contained, yet nevertheless the Author finds, he has by
improvidence failed of his desires in one of the main points he aimed at, in
the production of those works, which was in the putting forth of the Treatise
of the Plague in one and the same Volumne, with the rest of his Works, for
whereas his intent was, that treatise above the rest should have been common,
and open to every person, and also to have bin at an easy rate for the poorer
sort, in which case his best course had been to have printed it by it self,
so had it borne its own burden of price, but by reason that the other
treatises are bound up together with it, the book will cost ten shillings,
which the poorer sort cannot buy, and they commonly have the greatest need
thereof, especially in that dreadful Disease of the Plague; wherefore, partly
through solicitation of some Friends, and partly, for that the present time of
Infection requires help, he has thought fit to draw out of the said
Treatise, that one principal Medicine called Aurum Vitae, and to publish it by
it self, with an expression of the Virtues and uses thereof, for the present
occasion, and service of any person which shall think good to make use
thereof, or that shall for the future be disposed to be provided before hand,
against a time of need, of such a Medicine, as will not decay in seven years
and more.

VALE.
A DESCRIPTION OF THE CORDIAL ANTIDOTE CALLED AVRVM VITAE.
THis Antidote, at one only time given, takes away the Pestilentiall Fever,
and thereby cures the Plague, that the patient frequently becomes well the
very next day; especially if the Medicine be taken upon the first day of the
complaint; he or she observing of certain easy Rules hereafter prescribed,
concerning the order of administering thereof, and it is so easy and safe a
Medicine, that an Infant, although it suck upon the Mothers breasts, may
safely take it; yea, and may easily be induced to receive it into the Body: for
that it is small in quantity, and is without offense in taste or smell to any:
Also, it may safely be given to any Woman that is great with child, whereof
diverse trials have bin had with safety and comfort.

The Dose of Aurum Vitae.
The Dose or quantity sufficient thereof for a Man or Woman to take at any one
time, is but eight grains, and by that proportion, any discreet person may
gather what may be given to any younger person: viz. A child of two full years
old, may safely take two grains, and a child of four or five years old, may
take three grains, or four, and one about fourteen years may take six
grains, and one of eighteen, nineteen, or twenty years old, or more, may
safely take the full of eight grains.

And note that this medicine performs its operation only by sweat which is
the truest and safest way of the entrance upon that cure of the Plague (for the
most part) and also it does ^t without moving the body either upwards or
downward; and namely it causes no vomits nor stools: neither is it at all
nauseous or offensive to the stomach, neither any ways causing extraordinary
thirst, nor faintness to the patient, but on the contrary, the patient, when
his sweating is over, shall manifestly feel cheerfulness, as being much
refreshed thereby, with also an abatement of his pains, and his Fever will be
gone at the only once taking thereof, neither shall the patient need to
over-burthen himself with too many clothes to force him or her to sweat: for
the medicine of it self sufficiently performs that duty, only he may be
ordered to have somewhat more to cover him, than the ordinary coverings he
usually lies under, and the room ought likewise to be kept warm with a fire
therein, for that cold air in time of sweating, is obnoxious and dangerous.

And further, Of the continuance of its Virtue.
this Medicine may be kept seven whole years and longer, if occasion and need
be, it will not decay in that time, for it being truly prepared of gold, is
thereby permanent above other Medicines, and loses not its virtue as
vegetable medicines do: But as Gold, that excellent mineral, excels all
other metals, in price and virtue; even so the true prepared medicines
thereof, as far exceed al other mineral medicines in their virtues, in the
preserving and defending of men from Diseases, as also in curing their
inffrmities, when by Gods permission they seize upon the bodies of mankind.

And whereas other strong medicines commonly work two ways at once, namely by
sweat, and also by Vomit, whereby they fiercely distract the Patient, and
produce fearful accidents, as if death it self were at hand, by two violent
expulfions at one time, yea oftentimes by a third, viz. By purging downward:
Also this most safe, and sweating medicine, performs as much as it promises,
pleasantly, and without rigor or nautious offense, as well in the Plague, as
also in other contagious diseases, and namely in the small Pox, where Nature
also striveth to thrust out her venomous enemy, per poros cutis, or by the
sweat holes of the skin, and that course of curing, is of all other the safest,
in a contagious Disease at the first entrance, which then consists rather of
poisonous vapors vapors then of putrefaction of humors, in which regard the
aforesaid course is safe, for it is a fearful thing, yea, and a desperate one
(as I conceive) to purge in the beginning of a contagious disease.

To cure Agues or Fevers that are contagious.
This Medicine is also approved good to be given in the beginning of any
contagious Ague or fever, hot or cold, and for the most part, it cures the
patient at once giving, and it fails seldom.

Of the rule and order to be held in the taking of this Antidote for the cure
of the Plague.
FIrst the patient is to be demanded if he had any stool that day, or the day
before, and if yea, all is well for that point; if otherwise, and that you find
you have time to tarry so long (else not) let the patient have only a
suppository that may move him once, and when he has had one stool thereby,
proceed without any further delay to the administering of the Antidote; for
delays are dangerous in that fierce disease, and whether the patient at that
instant be found sweating, burning, quaking, raving, or in any other distemper
give it in, and the party that takes it, ^ought to be in his warm bed fitted
with sufficient coverings before he takes this Medicine in, then let him take
it, either mixed with some cordial thing, if he please, as a little
Mithridate, or give it mixed with the pap of an Apple, which will do as well,
and so it is easiest taken in by infants (as I suppose) for it needs no
addition at all to add virtue to it, only the addition chiefly serves to
carry or convay the medicine without wasting into the stomach, for that it is a
powder small in quantity, and subject to waste.

Also the party that is to take it, Necessaries to be provided before the
taking.
must have before hand an ordinary posset of Ale and milk to the quantity of a
quart very warm, which when he has taken his medicine, shortly after let him
drink a reasonable full draught of the said posset well warmed, and then lying
on the one side, which side the patient please, let him be warm covered, head,
face and all, leaving full breathing scope, and so in Gods name let him lie
still and sweat gently, if he can bear it for three or four hours were best,
and ever as he thirsts, let him freely take warm posset drink, which were
best to be given him in some cruet or spout-pot, if such were at hand, that he
take no air by raising himself up in drinking. And when he has performed his
due sweating, let him be wiped dry and shifted, and then give the patient some
warm broth* And further by diverse experiences the Author has found, that a
patient so healed (shifting his clothes) infecteth not an other, although he
go abroad the next day, for by that strong sweating the venom of the disease
is wholly evaporated and gone, so as the next day he may by Gods mercy safely go
abroad, but for the day of his sweating let him keep within, and give him food
competent in a sparing quantity, such as is of a light digestion, and deny him
not drink, so that it be somewhat warm at the fire only for that day.

Thus much for those which take the medicine within 24 hours of the first
complaint. Item unto such as the disease has taken greater hold of, namely
that before the receite of the aforesaid Antidote, the patient have outward
tumors, swellings or Soars, as Botches, Carbuncles, or blaines, not yet
broken nor ripe, if he take the medicine as aforesaid, and sweat well upon it,
the venom of the soars as is said, shall, through Gods Mercy, be so
evapourated by his sweating, that the swellings shall decline of themselves,
and not at all come forward, and if any after do break, as being formerly
supperated, or ripe before the medicine took place, they also shall, as
ordinary boyles, easily and quickly heal with every mean medicine.

And notwithstanding generally, once sweating heals the Patient, yet
nevertheless if occasion be, he may safely take a second Dosse, or
proportion, yea, and a third without danger; as diverse have done, so that he
may be the more confident of perfect health; nevertheless if he find his
desire by the first, let him not take a second, and if by a second, let him not
take a third, for sweating medicines, too often taken, are obnoxious to a
dijected week patient.

The Virtue of the precedent Antidote, in the cure of the small Pox.
THe Disease of the small Pox, has great affinity with that most fearful
Disease of the Plague, being also contagious and deadly often times, and the
cure thereof I have experienced to be by the same way, as the cure of the
Plague, only the cure of the small Pox succeeds best, if it be begun before that
they do manifest themselves, and namely, in the first day of the Fever, or
soon after, for that disease has ever a forerunning hot fever, or Ague, for a
messenger, wherefore it were not amiss for any that has young children,
especially in times that are contagious and infectious, to be prepared with
remedies at hand, to fit such an unwelcome guest, considering the medicine will
keep its Virtue for more then seven years.

Moreover, for the manner of the sweating in the small Pox, let it be very
wearily and gently, and with no more clothes then will keep the patients
sweating, and defend them from taking cold, and deny not them warm
posset-drinke in the time of their sweating.

Also, when any person is desirous to take the benefit of the aforesaid
medicine, having an Ague, or Fever, with paraxismes or fits, let him not take
the medicine in the time of the fit, but one full hour as is said, before the
fit, or rather more, but if the Fever be continual, as often in that fierce
disease of the Plague it is, give it at any time in manner aforesaid; for if he
take it, and his burning change into sweating, which the medicine usually
produces, the fear of Death in the Patient is half over.

And further of a truth, the Author can affirm that he has cured some by the
heretofore mentioned Antidote, that had the Pestities, or spots of the Plague,
vulgarly called Gods tokens, upon them, and they are yet living witnesses
thereof; for which, and all other his exceeding favors in that fearful
disease, the Almighty God alone be glorified: And so the Author briefly
eoncludeth with a Copy of a certificate concerning the Virtue of the before
mentioned Antidote, Aurum Vitae, referring the Reader for further attestation
to the Authors Book called the Surgions Mate, or Military and domestike
Surgerie.

The Copy of a Certificate, concerning the Virtue of the precedent Antidote;
called Aurum Vitae, from the Justices, Ministers, and other the Officers of the
Parish of S. Margaret Westminster, as it was by them presented to the Right
Honorable, Henry, Earl of Manchester, Lord Privy Seal, etc. which by his
Lordship was presented to the rest of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Counsel.
WE the Inhabitants of Saint Margarets in Westminster whose names are here
under written, do most humbly certify your Lordships, and that upon our own
knowledge, that in this time of visitation of the Plague, Fevers, Agues, and
other diseases, which have been very grievous and great afflictions unto us:
It pleased Almighty God by the hands of one John VVoodall Surgeon of the
East India Gompany, and of his Majesty's Hospital of Saint Bartholomewes in
London, a learned, judicial, and expert man, which said John VVoodall about
five weeks before Michaelmas last, delivered unto some of us, who were
Officers in this said Parish, an Antidote composed in Pills, which he had made
us, with directions how they should be administered to such as had the Plague,
Fevers, Agues, or any such violent diseases, that then remained among us;
which said Pills have been employed very carefully, according to his said
directions, and administered to threescore several persons, some of this new
Fever, some of the small Pox, some Agues, and some other diseases, but most,
to them that were visited with the Plague, which had risings, Soars,
Carbuncles, Blaines, and were certainly known to have that fearful disease,
all which persons recovered, and not one of all them that have taken the said
Pills, dyed, thanks be given to Almighty God: neither can we do less than
publish the great skill, judgment, and charity of the said John VVoodall, by
whose industry and care this Antidote has wrought so good effect, and did
bestow them freely, without one penny recompense for the same.

Westmincter the 6 of October. 1638. Pet. Heywood, Justice. Rob. White,
sub-Curate. Thomas Mar. Churchwardens. Richard Protter. Churchwardens.
William Hawkins. Copia vera Tho. Kirk.
Edward Martin.



And for Satisfaction of such Persons, as being in health, desire
preservatives, the Author observing, that although his Antidote, be granted to
be a cure for the diseased of the Plague yet nevertheles thereby it gives not
those that are well, satisfaction concerning their desires, which are rather
for the present, to be furnished with some good preservative Medicine, such as
by art, through Gods permission, may preserve them in health from that
dreadful disease, that it seize not upon them unawares; Wherefore to satisfy
such, he has prepared two preservative helps, the one being a powder to be
inwardly taken, fasting each morning, the quantity of eight grains, either in
Beer, Ale, or wine; Or to children, if it be mixed with butter, and spread upon
their bread, or given them in milk, or any way else that they will be induced
to take it in, it suffices; And that they fast two hours after it, they may
rely upon it, as on a good preservative, well approved of: And further, if any
man, woman, or child, should accidentally or willingly take treble the quantity
prescribed, they may safely do it without any danger at all: Yet by way of a
preservative as is said to prevent the coming of the disease, the Author
holds the aforesaid quantity of eight grains is sufficient.

The second preservative intended for correction of the Air, is to be carried
in a box, about the person of any, to make use of it at their wills, that they
may often smell thereto, and thence draw in a preservative Air to defend them
from the danger of noisome vapors, which commonly the Plague enters by, as
sent from the Almighty, who alone defends from, sends to, and of his
merciful providence cures the Plague; Unto whom be ascribed all honor, and
glory Amen,

These 2 last recited Medicines, are to be sold with the Antidote, ready
prepared for use, By Nicholas Bourne, as aforesaid.

