Witches Apprehended, Examined and Executed, for notable villainies by them
committed both by Land and Water.

With a strange and most true trial how to know whether a woman be a Witch or
not.



Printed at London or Edward Merchant, and are to be sold at his shop over
against the Cross in Paul's Churchyard. 1613.

The several and damnable practices of Mother Sutton, and Mary Sutton her
daughter of Milton Milles, in the County of Bedford: who were lately arraigned
convicted, and executed.
Pliny writes of some kind of Serpents that dare not approach the wild
Ashtree, nay the sight of it is so terrible to them, they fly from it, and
will not draw near the shadow thereof, but if they be walled round with fire,
they will rather run through to the confusion of themselves then endure it.
If it were so with us which profess our selves Christians, and should be
Christ's sons to imitate our Father, and Savior in his life, which he left
as a lesson to mankind his children to learn, we should then having reason,
(part of the inheritance of Angels) be more provident of our proper good then
Serpents are, who to avoid the persecution of their mind, will endure the
affliction of their body, and to shun the very shadow of the Ashtree, will
thrust themselves into torment of fire: So should men, who seeing sin like a
wild Ashtree grow in the world, and that to lurk under the shadow thereof is a
whippe to their conscience, when to feed on the sap is damnation to their
souls, in this only like Serpents avoid it for the relief of their mindrs,
though with the painful dissolution of their bodies: but such is the
deafness of our ears, that though heaven it self speak in thunder to
remember us a day shall come when we must give account for our wilful
transgressions, we not regard it, and such the hardness of our hearts, that
neither treasons, murders, witchcrafts, fires, floods, of all which the
impetuous course has been such in this age, that we have cause to look our
day of summons is to morrow, if not this hour, yet we are unprepared of our
account, and as if it were lawful that evils should grow, many from one, and
one from another, are as corn is fruitful from one seed to several ears.
So from one sin we multiply to diverse, not dreading vengeance till our
iniquities be numberless. As shall appear by this following discourse.

At a place called Milton some three miles from Bedford, was lately dwelling
one Mother Sutton, who being a widow, and of declining years, had her daughter
called Mary Sutton, (as it was thought by the neighbors thereabouts) resident
with her as a stay and comfort to her age, when she kept her, but as a
furtherer to her devilish practices, nay indeed to make her a scholar to the
Devil himself.

This widow Sutton having been dwelling a long time in the foresaid, town of
Milton, and not suspected as then to have been a practiser in this devilish
exercise of witchcraft, was by the townsmen (being held but poor) for her
better relief chosen to be the Hogheard, or Hog-keeper. In which service she
continued long, not without commendations for her dutiful care had therein.
And though many cattle oftentimes miscarried, and were taken with staggerings,
frensies, and other diseases to their confusions, and impouerishing of the
owners, yet she not till of late suspected to be a cause thereof, though since
it has evidently been proved against her.

Continuing thus almost for the space of twenty, or one and twenty years,
and in that time had brought her daughter to be as perfect in her devilish
charms as her self, there grew some difference between a Gentleman of
worship called Master Enger dwelling at Milton Milles, and this mother Sutton,
On whom she had vowed to take a strange and actual revenge for the discontent
she had conceived against him, which rancour of hers she thus prosecuted: His
horses that were left well in his stable over night, she caused them to be
found dead in the morning, some strangled, some having beaten out their
brains, others dead, and no cause perceived how. Besides this loss, which for
the strangeness bred some amazement in him, for that it happened not once, but
often, this also did second it: when his Swine were in the fields at their
troughes eating their meat, some of them would suddenly fall mad, and
violently fall to tearing out the guts, and bowels of their fellows: others by
ten and twenty in a company, as if they had been carried with one desire,
would leave their feeding, and run headlong into the Mill dammes, and drown
themselves. So that not by accidental means, but the hellish and most
damnable witchcrafts of this Mother Sutton, and her daughter, many these
harmless cattle and Oxen, made as needful reliefes to the necessity of
man, were thus perplexed, and an honest and worshipful Gentleman Master Enger,
from whom she had oftentimes both food and clothing, damnified by her means
to the value of two hundredth pounds in less then two years.

In the time of these aforesaid losses happened to Master Enger, one Henry
Sutton, the bastard son son of Mary Sutton (for it is to be noted, that
although she was never married, yet she had three bastards) coming to play
himself about the Mill damme, fell to throwing in of stones, dirt, and filth,
with other such unhappiness incident to children: Of which having been often
forewarned by an ancient servant of Master Engers, who was then about the
Milles, and finding the boy notwithstanding his admonishment rather to persevere
then to desist from his knauerie, he came to him, and giving him a little blow
or two on the ear, the boy went home crying, and the ancient fellow went back
to his labor.

This Henry Sutton coming home began to tell his mother how a man of Master
Engers (naming him) had beaten him. Whose venomous nature being soon
enkindled, though he had received no hurt, she vowed to take revenge, and thus
it followed.

This ancient servant with another of his masters men were on the morrow being
Market day at Bedford, appointed by their master to carry a Cart load of corn
for the furnishing of the Market. Being on their way at Milton Towns end they
espied a goodly fair black Sow grazing, who as they drove their Teame still
kept pace with the^ till they came within a mile of Bedford. Where on a sudden
they perceived her to turn twice or thrice about as readily as a Windmill
sail at work: And as suddenly their horses fell to starting and drawing some
one way, some another: At last the strongest prevailing, they drew away the
Cart, and corn, and left the Wheels, and Axeltree behind them. The horses
they ran away with their load, as if they had been mad, and the two
fellows after the horses, the horses being affrighted half out of their
strength, and the fellows as much mad to see them, down went one sack on
this side the Cart, and another on that: The horses they ran as if they would
have swelted themselves, and the fellows after them breathless, and sweating
to make the wild Iades stay. All which till the Devil and the Witch had
plaide their parts would not serve turn.

At last this Tragicke-Comedie drawing to an end, they made a stand, when the
servants bringing them back, and finding their Axeltree, pinnes, and all
things unbroken, took up their Corn, made fit their Cart again, and the
horses drew as formally as could be: And they went forthwards toward Bedford,
mistrusting nothing, though they saw the Sow following and grazing, as they did
before.

Being come to Bedford, and having unloaded the Cart, and made sale of the
Corn, the one sell to driving the Teame home again, leaving his ancienter
fellow behind him at Bedford who happening into company, fell a carowsing with
boon companions like himself, and in the height of their cups, they as
desirous to hear, as he to tell, he related unto them the manner and form how
his Cart and Wheels were diuoret' as he was coming to Town: some wondered,
all laughed: the company brake up, and this ancient servant took his horse
with purpose to overtake his fellow, who was gone before with the Cart: Who no
sooner was out of Bedford Towns end, but he might behold the same Sow (as
near as he could judge,) grazing again, as if the Devil and the Witch had
made her his footman to wait upon him. But the fellow not mistrusting any
thing, made his Nagge take a speedy amble, and so to overtake the Cart, while
the Sow side by side ran along by him. When he ouertaking his fellow, and had
scarce spoken to him, but the horses (as before) fell to their old contention
running one from another, only the horses were better furnished then before,
for where at first they left both Wheels and Axeltree behind them, they now
had the Axeltree to take their part, leaving the Wheels in the high way for
the servants to bring after. The horse in this manner coming home, drove all
the beholders into amazement, and the servants beginning to have mistrust of
the black Sow, they watched whither she went, whom they found to go into
Mother Suttons house, of which they told their master, and of all the accidents
aforesaid, who made slight of it to them whatsoever he conceived of it
himself: and saying he supposed they were drunk, they departed.

The same old servant of Master Engers within few days after going to plough,
fell into talk of Mother Sutton, and of Mary Sutton her daughter, of what
pranckes he had heard they had plaide thereabouts in the Country, as also
what accidents had befallen him and his fellow, as they had passed to and from
Bedford. In discoursing of which a Beetle came, and stroke the same fellow on
the breast: and he presently fell into a trance as he was guiding the Plough,
the extremity whereof was such, as his senses altogether distract, and his
body and mind utterly distempered, the beholders deemed him clean hopeless
of recovery, yea his other fellow upon this sudden sight was stricken into
such amazement, as he stood like a liuelesse trunk divided from his vital
spirits, as far unable to help him, as the other was needful to be helped by
him. Till at length being somewhat recovered, and awaked from that
astonishment, he made have homeward, and carried his master word of what had
happened.

Upon delivery of this news (for he was a man highly esteemed by him for his
honest and long service) there was much moan made for him in the house, and
Master Enger himself had not the least part of grief for his extremity, but
with all possible speed hasted into the field, and used help to have him
brought home. After which he neglected no means, nor spared any cost that
might ease his servant, or redeem him from the misery he was in, but all was
in vain: for hrs ecstasies were nothing lessened, but continued a long time in
as grievous perplexity as at first* yet though they suspected much, they had
no certain proof or knowledge of the cause: Their means were therefore the
shorter to cure the effect. But as a thief, when he enters into a house to
rob, first puts out the lights, according to that, Qui male agit, odit
lucem, He that does evil, hates light, so these Impes that live in the
gunshot of devilish assaults, go about to darken and disgrace the light of
such as are toward, and virtuous, and make the night the instrument to contriue
their wicked purposes. For these Witches having so long, and covertly continued
to do much mischief by their practices, were so hardened in their lewd and
vile proceeding, that the custom of their sin had quite taken away the sense
and feeling thereof, and they spared not to continue the perplexity of this
old servant both in body and mind, in such sort that his friends were as
desirous to see death rid him from his extremity, as a woman great with
child is ever musing upon the time of her delivery: For where distress is
deep, and the conscience clear, Mors expectatur absque formidine, exoptatur
cum dulcedine, excipitur cum deuotione. Death is looked for without fear,
desired with delight, and accepted with devotion. As the acts and enterprises
of these wicked persons are dark and devilish: so in the perseverance of this
fellows perplexity, he being in his distraction both of body and mind, yet
in bed and awake, espied Mary Sutton, (the daughter) in a Mooneshine night come
in at a window in her accustomed and personal habit, and shape, with her
knitting work in her hands, and sitting down at his beds feet, sometimes
working, and knitting with her needles, and sometimes gazing and staring him in
the face, as his grief was thereby redoubled and increased. Not long after she
drew nearer unto him, and sat by his bed side (yet all this while he had
neither power to stir or speak) and told him if he would consent she should
come to bed to him, he should be restored to his former health and
prosperity. Thus the Devil strives to enlarge his Kingdom, and upon the
neck of one wickedness to heap another: So that Periculum probat
transeuntium raritas, per^untium multitudo: In the dangerous Sea of this world,
the rareness of those that pass the same over safe, and the multitude of
others that perish in their passage, sufficiently prove the peril we live in:
In the Ocean Sea, of four ships not one miscaries. In the Sea of this world,
of many sowers, not one escapes his particular cross and calamity: yet in our
greatest weakness and debilitie, when the Devil is most busy to tempt us,
and seduce us from God, then is God strongest in the hearts of his children,
and most ready to be auxiliant, and helping to save and uphold them from
declining, and falling. Gods liberality appears more, then his rigor, for
whom he draws out the Devils throat by faith, he would have to trample him
down by virtue* least he should only have fled, not foiled his enemy.

This is made shown in his miraculous working with this fellow: for he that
before had neither power to move, or speak, had then presently by divine
assistance free power and liberty to give repulse to her assault, and denial
to her filthy and detested motion: and to vpbraide her of her abominable life
and behavior, having before had three bastards and never married. She upon
this (seeing her suite cold, and that Gods power was more predominant with him
then her devilish practice, vanished, and departed the same way she came.

She was no sooner gone, but as well as he could, he called for his master,
told him that now he could tell him the cause of this vexation: That Mother
Suttons daughter came in at the window, sat knitting and working by him, and
that if he would have consented to her filthiness, he should have been
freede from his misery, and related all that had happened.

His master was glad of this news, for that the means found out, the matter
and manner of his grief might be the easier helped, and redressed, yet was he
distrustful of the truth, and rather esteemed it an idleness of his brain,
then an accident of verity: Nevertheless he resolved to make proof thereof.

The next morrow he took company along with him, and went into the fields,
where he found her working, and tending her hogs. There Master Enger
speaking to her, she was a very good huswife, and that she followed her work
night and day: No sir, said she, My huswifery is very slender, neither am I so
good a follower of my work as you persuade me: with that, he told her that
she was, and that she had been working at his house the night before. She
would confess nothing, but stood in stiff denial upon her purgation:
Insomuch as the Gentleman by fair entreaties persuaded her to go home with
him, to satisfy his man, and to resolve some doubts that were had of her. She
utterly refused, and made answer she would not stir a foot, neither had
they authority to compel her to go without a Constable: Which Master Enger
perceiving, and seeing her obstinacy to be so great, fell into a greater
dislike, and distrust of her then he did before, and made no more a do, but
caused her to be set upon an horseback to be brought to his house. All the
company could hardly bring her away, but as fast as they set her up, in
despite of them she would swerve down, first on the one side, then the
other, till at last they were feign by maine force to join together, and hold
her violently down to the horseback, and so bring her to the place where this
perplexed person lay in his bed. Where being come, and brought by force to his
bedside, he (as directions had been given unto him) drew blood of her, and
presently began to amend, and be well again. But her assiduitie and
continual exercise in doing mischief, did so prevail with her to do this
fellow further hurt, that watching but advantage, and opportunity to touch his
neck again with her finger: It was no sooner done, and she departed, but he
fell into as great or far worse vexation then he had before.

The report of this was carried up and down all Bedford-shire, and this Marie
Suttons wicked and lewd courses being rumored as well abroad, as in Master
Engers house, at last it came into the mouth of Master Engers son, (being a
little boy of seven years old) who not long after espying old Mother Sutton
going to the Mill to grind corn, and remembering what speeches he had heard
past of her and her daughter followed the old woman, flinging stones at her,
and calling her Witch, which thee observing conceited a rancour, and deadly
hatred to this young child, and purposed not to suffer opportunity pass to
be revenged. As soon therefore as she had dispatched at the Mill, she hasted
homewards, and could not be quiet till she had grumbled to her daughter what
had happened, and how the child had served her; Then conferring how Master
Enger had used Mary Sutton the daughter, and how her little son had used the
Mother, they both resolved, and vowed revenge. This conference and consultation
of villainy was had, and concluded in the presence, and hearing of Henry
Sutton, (the Bastard of Mary Sutton) little thinking that his fortune should be
to give in euidene to break the neck of his own Mother and Grandmother.

To effect their devilish purpose to the young child of Master Enger, they
called up their two Spirits, whom she called Dicke and Jude: and having given
them suck at their two Teats which they had on their thighs (found out
afterward by inquiry, and search of women) they gave them charge to strike
the little boy, and to turn him to torment. Which was not long in performing,
but the child being distract, was put to such bitter and insupportable misery,
as by his life his torments were augmented, and by his death they were
abridged. For his tender and unripe age was so infeebled and made weak by that
devilish infliction of extremity, as in five days, not able longer to endure
them, death gave end to his perplexities.

The Gentleman did not so much grieve for the loss and hinderance he had in
his cattle, (which was much) nor for the miserable distress that his servant
had endured (which was more) as that the hopeful days of his young son were
so untimely cut off: (which touched his heart most of all.) Yet did his
discretion temper his passions with such patience, that he referred the
remembrance of his wrongs to that heavenly power, that permits not such
iniquity to pass unrevealed, or unrevenged.

As he was thus wrapped in a Sea of woes, there came a Gentleman a friend of his
forth of the North, that traveling toward London soiourned with him all
night. He perceiving Master Enger to be full of grief, was desirous to know
the cause thereof, and he was as unwilling by the discourse of his misfortunes
to renew his many sorrows, till at last his friends urgent importunacie
persuaded him not to pass it over with silence. Upon Master Engers relation of
what had happened: the Gentleman demanded if he had none in suspicion that
should do these wrongs unto him: Yes, (quoth Master Enger) and therewithal
he mamed this Mary Sutton and her mother, and told him the particulars of his
losses and miseries. His friend understanding this, advised him to take them,
or any one of them to his Mill damme, having first shut up the Mill gates that
the water might be at highest, and then binding their arms cross, stripping
them into their Smocks, and leaving their legs at liberty, throw them into
the water, yet least they should not be Witches, and that their lives might
not be in danger of drowning, let there be a roape tied about their middles, so
long that it may reach from one side of your damme to the other, where on each
side let one of your men stand, that if she chance to sink they may draw her
up and preserve her. Then if she swim, take her up, and cause some women to
search her, upon which, if they find any extraordinary marks about her, let
her the second time be bound, and have her right thumb bound to her left toe,
and her left thumb to her right toe, and your men with the same rope (if need
be) to preserve her, and be thrown into the water, when if she swim, you
may build upon it, that she is a Witch, I have seen it often tried in the
North country,

The morrow after Master Enger road into the fields where Mary Sutton (the
daughter) was, having some of his men to accompany him, where after some
questions made unto her, they assayed to bind her on horseback, when all his
men being presently stricken lame, Master Enger himself began to remember,
that once rating her about his man, he was on the sudden in the like
perplexity, and then taking courage, and desiring God to be his assistance,
with a cudgel which he had in his hand, he beat her till she was scarce able
to stir. At which his men presently recovered, bound her to their Masters
horse, and brought her home to his house, and shutting up his Mill gates did as
before the Gentleman had advised him: when being thrown in the first time she
sunk some two foot into the water with a fall, but rose again, and floated
upon the water like a planke. Then he commanded her to be taken out, and had
women ready that se^^^^^d her and found under her left thigh a kind of ^^at,
which after the Bastard son confessed her Spirits in several shapes as Cats,
Moales, etc. used to suck her.

Then was she the second time bound cross her thumbes and toes, according to
the former direction, and then she sunk not at all, but sitting upon the
water, turned round about like a wheel, or as that which commonly we call a
whirle poole. Notwithstanding Master Engers men standing on each side of the
damme with a roape tossing her up and down to make her sink, but could not.

And then being taken up, she as boldly as if she had been innocent asked them
if they could do any more to her: When Master Enger began to accuse her with
the death of his cattle, the languish of his man, who continued in sorrow both
of body and mind from Christmasse to Shronetide, as also the death of his
son: All which she constantly denied, and stood at defiance with him till
being carried toward a Justice, Master Enger told her it was bootlesse to
stand so obstinately upon denial of those matters, for her own son Henry
had revealed all, both as touching her s;elfe and her mother, and of the time
and manner of their plotting to torment his little boy: when she heard that,
her heart misgaue her, she confessed all, and acknowledged the Devil had now
left her to that shame that is reward to such as follow him. Upon which
confession, the mother also was apprehended, and both being committed to
Bedford Jail, many other matters were there produced against them, of long
continuance (for they had remained as before, about twenty years) in the
prosecute of these lewd and wicked practices. But for this matter of Master
Enger at the last Assizes, the evidence of the Bastard son, and the confessions
severally taken both of old Mother Sutton and her daughter Mary, found them
guilty in all former objections. So that arraigned at Bedford on Monday the
thirtieth of March last past, they had a just conviction, and on Tuesday the
next day after they were executed.

FINIS.

