A SATYR: DEDICATED TO HIS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY. BY GEORGE WITHER,
Gentleman.

Rebus in aduersis Crescit. LONDON: Printed for GEORGE NORTON, and are to be
sold at the sign of the red-Bull, near Temple-barre. 1614.

THE SATYR TO THE MERE COVRTIERS.
SIrs, I do know your minds, you look for fees,
For more respect then needs, for caps and knees:
But be content, I have not for you now,
Nor will I have at all to do with you.
For though I seem oppressed, and you suppos^
I must be feign to crouch to Virtues foes;
Yet know, your favors I do now slight more
In this distress^, then er'e I did before.
Here to my Liege a message I must tell,
If you will let me pass, yo^ shall do well;
If you de^i^ admittance, why then know,
I mean to have it where you will or no.
Your formal wisdoms which has never been
In ought yet (save in venting fashions) seen,
And deemes that man wa^ borne to no intent
But to be trained in Apish complement,
Does now (perhaps) suppose me indiscreet,
And such vn-vsed messages unmeet.
But what of that? Shall I go suit my matter
Unto your wits, that have but wit to flatter?
Shall I, of your opinions so much prize
To loose my will, to have you think me wise,
Who never yet to any liking had,
Unless he were a Knave, a Fool, or mad?
You Mushromes know, so much I weigh your powers
I neither value you, nor what is yours.
Nay, though my crosses had me quite out-worne,
Spirit enough Id'e find your spite to scorn:
Of which resolved, to further my aduenter,
Unto my KING, without your leaves I enter.
TO THE HONEST COVRTIERS.
But You, whose only worth does color give
To them, that they do worthy seem to live,
Kind Gentlemen; your aid I crave, to bring
A SATYR to the presence of his King:
A show of rudeness does my forehead Arm,
Yet you may trust me, I will do no harm:
He that has sent me, is a subject true,
And one whose love (I know) is much to you:
But now he lies bound to a narrow scope,
Almost beyond the Cape of all good hope,
Long has he sought to free himself, but fails:
And therefore seeing nothing else preuailes,
Me, to acquaint my Sovereign, here he sends,
As one despayring of all other friends.
I do presume that you will favor show me,
Now that a Messenger from him you know me:
For many thousands that his face nere knew
Blame his Accusers, and his Fortune rue:
And by the help which your good word may d^^.
He hopes for pity from his Sovereign to.
Then in his presence with your favors grace me,
And there is no Vice so great, shall dare outface me.
TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
A Satyr.
Quid tu, sipe^eo?
What once the POET said, I may avow,
It Is a hard thing not to write Satyrs now,
Since what we speak, abuse reigns so in all,
Spite of our hearts will be Satyricall.
Let it not therefore now be deem^d strange,
My vnsmooth'd lines their rudeness do not change,
Nor be distasteful to my graciou^ King,
Though in the Cage, my old harsh notes I sing,
And rudely make a Satyr here unfold
What others would in neater terms have told.
And why? my friends and means in Court are scant,
Knowledge of curious Phrase, and form, I want.
I cannot bear't to run my self in debt,
To hire the Groom, to bid the Page entreat
Some favored follower; to vouchsafe his word,
To get me a cold comfort from his Lord:
I cannot sooth, though it my life might save,
Each favorite, nor crouch to every Knave:
I cannot brook delays as some men do,
With scoffs, and scorns, and take it in kindness to.
For er'e I Would bind my self for some slight grace
To one that has no more worth then his place;
Orb^ ^base mean free my self from trouble,
I rather would e^^ure my penance double:
Cause to be forced to what my mind disdaines
Is worse to me then tortures, rackes, and chains:
And therefore unto thee I only fly,
To whom there needs no mean but Honesty:
To thee that love not Parasite nor Minio^
Should e're I speak, possess thee with opinion.
To thee that do what thou will undertake*
For love of Justice, not the persons sake.
To thee that kno'wst how vain all fair shows be,
That flow not from the hearts sincerity.
And can* though shadowed in the simplest veil,
Discern both Love and Truth, and where they fail:
To thee do I appeal, in whom heaven knows,
I next to God my confidence repose.
For can it be, thy grace should ever shine,
And not enlighten such a cause as mine?
Can my hopes (fixed in thee great KING) be dead?
Or thou those Satyrs hate thy Forests bred?
Where shall my second hopes he founded then,
If ever I have heart to hope again?
Can I suppose a favor may be got
In any place when thy Co^rt yeel^^ it not?
Or that I may obtain it in the land,
When I shall be denied it at thy hand?
And if I might, should I so fond on it be,
To take it of other^ when I miss't of thee?
Or if I did, can I have comfort by it,
When I shall t^inke my So^^raig^e did deny it?
No, were I sure, I to thy hate were borne,
The love of half the world beside I Would scorn.
But why should I thy favor here distrust,
That have a cause so known, and known so just?
Which not alone my inward comfort doubles,
But all supposed me wronged that hear my troubles.
Nay, though my fault were Real, I believe,
Thou art so Royal that thou would forgive.
For well I know thy sacred M^iestie,
Has ever been admired for Clemency.
And at thy gentlene^ the world has wondered,
For making Sunshine, where thou might have thundered.
Yea, thou in mercy life to them did give
That could not be content to see thee live.
And can I think that thou will make me, then,
The most unhappy of all other men?
Or le^ thy loyal subject, against reason,
Be punished more for Love, then some for Treason?
No, thou did never yet thy glory stain,
With an injustice to the meanest Swain.
It Is not thy will I Am wronged, nor do thou know
If I have suffered injuries or no.
For if I have not heard false Rumors fly,
Th'a^t graced me with the style of Honesty.
And if it were so (as the world thinks 'twas)
I cannot see how it should come to pass
That thou, from whose free tongue proceeds naught
Which is not correspondent with thy thought.
Those thoughts to, being framed in Reasons mould,
Should speak that once, which should not ever hold.
But passing it as an uncertainty,
I humbly beg thee, by that Majesty,
Whose sacred Glory strikes a louing-feare
Into the hearts of all, to whom it is dear:
To deigne me so much favor, without merit,
As read this plaint, of a distempred spirit:
And think, unless I saw some hideous storm
Too great to be indu^'d by such a worm,
I had not thus presumed unto a King,
With Aesops Fly* to seek an Eagles wing.
But know I Am he that entered once the list,
Against all the world to play the Satyrist:
It Was I, that made my measures rough, and rude,
Dance armed with whips, amid'st the multitude,
And unappalled with my charmed Scrowles,
Teaz'^ angry Monsters in their lurking holes:
I Have played with Wasps, and Hornets without fears,
Till they grew mad, and swarmd about my ears.
Iu'e done it, and me thinks it is such brave sport,
I may be stung, but n^re be sorry for it.
For all my grief is, that I was so sparing*
And had no more in it worth the name of daring.
He that will tax these Times, must be more bitter,
Tart lines of Vinegar, and Gall are fitter*
My fingers, and my spirits are benumbed,
My Ink runs forth too smooth, it is too much gum'd
Id'e have my Pen so paint it, where it traces,
Each accent should draw blood into their faces.
And make them, when their villainies ^re blaz^d.
Shudder, and startle, as men half amaz^d,
For fear my verse should make so loud a din,
Heaven hearing, might rain vengeance on their sin.
Oh no^ for such a straine^ would Art could teach it,
Though life my spirits I consumed to reach it.
Id'e learn my Muse so brave a course to fly,
Men should admire the power of Poesy.
And those that dared her greatness to resist,
Quake, even at naming of a Satyrist.
But when hi^ sco^rging numbers flowed with wonder,
Should cry God bless us, as they did at thunder.
Alas! my lines came from me too too dully,
They did not fill a Satyrs mouth up fully.
Hot blood, and youth, enraged with passion^ store,
Taught me to reach a strain nere touched before.
But it was coldly done, I thoroughly chid not:
And somewhat there is yet to do, I did not.
More soundly could my scourge have yerked many,
Which I omit not, cause I feared any.
For want of action, discontentments rage,
Base dis-respect of Virtue (in this age)
With other things, unto my self a wrong,
Made me so fearelesse, in my careless long:
That had not reason within compass won me,
I had told Truth enough to have vndo^e me:
(Nay, have already, if that her Divine
And vn^eene power, can do no more then mine.)
For though foreseeing wariness was good,
I framed my style, unto a milder mood,
And clogging her thigh-towring wing^ with mire,
Made her half earth, that was before all fire.
Then being (as you saw) disguised in show,
Clad like a Satyr, brought her forth to view:
Hoping, (her outside being mis-esteem'd)
She might have passed, but for what she seemed:
Yet some, whose Comments iumpe not with my mind
In that low phrase, a higher reach would find.
And out of their deep judgment seem to know,
What it is uncertain if I meant or no:
Aiming thereby, out of some private hate,
To work my shame, or overthrow my state.
For amongst many wrongs my foe does do me,
And diverse imputations, laid unto me,
Deceived in his aim, he does mis-conster
That which I have enstil'd a Man-like Monster,
To mean some private person in the state,
Whose worth, I think to wrong out of my hate;
Vpbraiding me I from my word do start,
Either for want of a good Ground, or Heart,
Cause from his expectation I do vary
In the denying of his Commentary,
Whereas it is known I meant Abuse the while,
Not thinking any one could be so vile,
To merit all those Epithites of shame.
How ever many do deserve much blame.
But say I grant that I had an intent
To have it so (as he interprets) meant,
And let my gracious Liege, suppose there were
One whom the State may have some cause to fear,
Or think there were a man (and great in Court)
That had more faults then I could well report,
Suppose I knew him, and had gone about
By some particular marks to paint him out,
That he best knowing his own faults might see,
He was the Man I would should noted be:
Imagine now such doings in this Age,
And that this man so pointed at should rage,
Call me in question, and by his much threatening,
By long imprisonment, and ill entreating,
Urge a Confession: were not a mad part
For me to tell him what lay in my heart?
Do not I know a great man's Power and Might,
I^ spite of Innocence, can smother Right.
Color his Villainies, to get esteem,
And make the Honest man the Villain seem?
And that the truth I told should in conclusion*
For want of Power, and Friends, be my confusion?
I know it, and the world does know it is true;
Yet^I protest, if such a man I knew,
That might my Country prejudice, or Thee,
Were he the greatest, or the proudest Hoe
That breathes this day: if so it might be found,
That any good to either might redound,
So far I Will be (though Fate against me run)
From starting off, from that I have begun,
I vn-appalled dare in such a case
Rip up his foulest Crimes before his face,
Though for my Labor I were sure to drop
Into the mouth of Ruin without hope.
But such strange farre-fetcht meanings they have sought,
As I was never privy to in thought:
And that unto particulars would tie
Which I intended universally.
Whereat some, with displeasure ouer-gone,
Those I scarce dreamed of, saw, or thought upon*
Maugre those caueats, on my Satyrs brow,
Their honest, and just passage disallow.
And on their heads so many censures rake,
That spite of me, themselves they will guilty make.
Nor is it enough to swage their discontent,
To say I am (or to be) Innocent.
For as, when once the Lion made decree*
No horned beast should nigh his presence be,
That, on whose forehead only did appear,
A bunch of flesh, or but some tuft of hair,
Was even as far in danger as the rest,
If he but said, it was a horned beast:
So, there be now, who think in that their power,
Is of much force, or greater far then our;
It is enough to prove a guilt in me*
Because (mistaking) they so think it to be.
Yet'tis my comfort, they are not so high*
But they must stoop to thee and equity.
And this I know, though pricked, they storm again
The world does deem them never the better men.
To stir in filth, makes not the stench the less,
Nor does Truth fear the frown of Mightiness.
Because those numbers she does deigne to grace,
Men may suppress a while, but never to deface.
I wonder, and it is wondered at by many,
My harmless lines should br^ed distaste in any:
So much, that whereas most good men approve,
My labor to be wo^thy thanks, and love;
I as a ^illaine, and my Countries foe,
Should be imprisoned, and so strictly to,
That not alone my liberty is barred,
But the resort of friends (which is more hard*).
And whilst each wanton, or loose Rimers pen,
With oily words, sleekes over the sins of men,
V^iling his wits to every Puppets beck,
Which e're I Will do, I Will joy to break my neck.
(I say) while such as they in every place
Can find protection, patronage and grace;
If any look on me, it is bu^ a skaunce,
Or if I get a favor, it is by chance.
I must protect my self: poor Truth and I,
Can have scarce one speak for our Honesty.
Then whereas they, can gold, and gifts attain,
Malicious Hate, and Envy is my gain.
And not alone have here my freedom lost,
Whereby my best hope's likely to be crossed:
But have been put to more charge in one day
Then all my Patrons bounties yet will pay.
What I have done was not for thirst of gain,
Or out of hope preferments to attain.
Since to contemn them, would more profit me,
Then all the glories in the world that be:
Yet they are helps to Virtue, used aright,
And when they wanting be, she wants her might.
For Eagles minds never f^t a Ravens fea^her,
To dare, and to be able, suit together.
But what is it I have done so worthy bla^e,
That some so eagerly pursue my fame?
Vouchsafe to view't with thine own eyes, and try
(Save want of Art) what fault thou can espy.
I have not sought to scandalize the State,
Nor sown sedition, nor made public bate.
I have not aimed at any good man's fame,
Nor taxt (directly) any one by name.
I am not he that am grown discontent
With the Religion, or the Government.
I meant no Ceremonies to protect,
Nor do^ I fa^our any new-sprung sect;
But to my Satyrs gave this only warrant,
To apprehend and punish Vice apparent.
Who aiming in particular at none,
In general vpbraided every one:
That each (vnshamed of himself) might view
That in himself, which no man dares to show.
And has this Age bred up neat Vice so tenderly
She cannot brook it to be touched so sl^nderly?
Will she not bide my gentle Satyrs bites?
Harm take her then, what makes she in their sights?
If with impatience she my Whip-cord feel,
How had she raged at my lash of Steel?
But am I called in question for her c^use,
Is It Vice that these afflictions on me draws?
And need I now thus to Apologize*
Only because I scourged villainies?
Must I be feign to give a reason why,
And how I dare, allow of Honesty?
Whilst that each fl^ering Parasite is bold
Thy Royal brow undaunted to behold:
And every Temporizer strike^ a string,
That Is music for the hearing of a King.
Shall not he reach out, to obtain as much,
Who dares more for thee then a hundred such?
Heaven grant her patience, my Muse takes't so badly,
I fear sheel'^ loose her wits, for she raues madly.
Yet let not my dread Sovereign too much blame her
Whose awful presenc^, now has made her tam^r.
For if there be no Fly but has her spleen,
Nor a poor Pismire, but will wreake her teene;
How shall I then, that have both spleen, and gall,
Being unjustly d^alt with, bear with all?
I yet with patience take what I have borne,
And all the worlds ensuing hate can scorn:
But 'twere in me as much stupidity,
Not to have feeling of an injury,
As it were weakness not to brook it well.
What others therefore think I cannot tell;
But he that is less then mad, is more then Man,
Who sees when he has done the best he can
To keep within the bounds of Innocence:
Sought to discharge his due to God and Prince:
That he, whilst villainies unreproved go,
Scoffing, to see him ouer-taken so,
Should have his good intendments misconce^^'d,
Be of his dearest liberty bereaved;
And which is worse; without reason why,
Be frowned on by Authorities grim eye.
By that great power my soul so much does fear,
She scorns the stearn'st frowns of a mortal Peer.
But that I Virtue love, for her own sake,
It were enough to make me undertake
To speak as much in praise of Vice again,
And practice some to plague these shames of me^,
I mean those my Ac^us^rs, who mistaking
My true conceit^, frame some of their own making*
But if I list, I need not buy so dee^e,
The just revenge I could bring on them here.
I could frame measures in this my just fury,
Should sooner find them guilty then a Jury:
Whose ^ords, like swords (tempred with Art) should pierce
And hang, and draw, and quarter them in verse.
Or I could rack them on the wings of Fame,
(And he is half hanged (they say) has an ill name,)
Yea Id'e go near to make these spightfull Elues,
Lyca^bes-like, be glad to hang themselves.
And though this Age will not abide to hear
Those faults reprou'd, whom custom has made dear.
Yet if I pleased, I could write their crimes,
And stone them up in walls for aftertimes:
For theyl'e be glad (perhaps) that shall ensue,
To see some story of their Fathers true.
Or should I smothered be in darkness still,
I might not use the freedom of a quill:
'T would raise up brauer spirits then my own,
To make my cause, and this their guilt more known.
Who by that subject should get Love, and Fame,
Unto my foes disgrace, and endless shame:
Those I do mean, whose Comments have mis-vs'd me,
And to those Peers I honor, have accused me:
Making against my Innocence their batteries,
And wronging them by their base fl^tteries:
But of revenge I am not yet so feign,
To put my self unto that needless pain:
Because I know a greater power there is,
That notes smaller injuries then this;
And being still as just as it is strong,
Apportions due revenge for every wrong.
But why (say some) should his too saucy Rimes,
Thus t^xe the wise and great ones of our times?
It su^es not with his years to be so bold,
Nor fits it us, by him to be contrould.
I must confess ('^is very true indeed)
Such should not of controuling stand in need*
But blame not me, I saw good Ver^ue poor,
Desert, amongst the most, thrust out of door,
Honesty hated, Courtesy banished,
Rich men excessive, Poor men famished:
Coldness in Zeal, in Laws much partiality;
Friendship, but Complement, and vain Formality.
Art I perceive contemned, while most advance
(To Offices of worth) Rich Ig^orance.
And those that should our Lights and Teachers be,
Live (if not worse) as wantonly as we.
Yea I saw Nature, from her course run back,
Disorders grow, Good orders go to wrack.
So to increase what all the rest began,
I to this current of confu^io^ ran.
And seeing Age left off the place of guiding,
Thus played the saucy wagge, and fell to chiding.
Wherein, how ever some (perhaps) may deem,
I am not so much faulty as I seem:
For when the Elders wronged Susannaes honor,
And none withstood the shame they laid upon her;
A Child rose up to stand in her defense,
And spite of wrong, confirmed her innocence:
To show those must not, that good undertake,
Strain curtsey, who shall do it, for manners sake.
Nor do I know, whether to me God gave,
A boldness more then many other have,
That I might show the world what shameful blot
Virtue by her lascivious Elders got.
Nor is it a wonder, as some do suppose,
My Youth so much corruption can disclose;
Since every day the Sun does light mine eyes,
I have experience of new villainies:
But it is rath^r to be wondered how,
I either can, or dare, be honest now.
And though again there be some others rage*
That I should dare (so much above mine age)
Thus censure each degree, both young and old,
I see not wherein I am ouer-bold.
For if I have been plain with Vice I care not,
There'^ naught that I know good, and can, and dare not*
Only this one thing does my mind deter,
Even a fear (through ignorance) to err.
But oh knew I, what thou would well approve,
Or might the small'st respect within thee move;
So in the sight of God it might be good,
And with the quiet of my conscience stood,
(As well I know thy true integrity,
Would command nothing against Piety,)
There Is naught so dangerous, or full of fear,
That for my Sovereigns sake I would not dare.
Which good belief would it did not possess thee;
Provided some just tri^ll might re-blesse me:
Yea, though a while I did endure the gall
Of thy displeasure, in this loathsome thrall.
For notwithstanding in this place I lie
^y the command of that Authority,
Of which I have so much respective care,
That in my own (and just) defense I fear
To use the free speech that I do intend,
Least Ignorance, or Rashness should offend.
Yet is my meaning and my thought a^free,
From wilful wronging of thy Laws or thee*
A^ he to whom thy Place or Person's dearest,
Or to himself that finds his conscience clearest.
If there be wrong, it is not my making it,
All the offense i^ some's mistaking it.
And is there any Justice borne of late,
Makes those faults mine, which others perpetrate?
What man could ever any Age yet find
That spent his Spirits in this thanklesse kind
Showing his meaning, to such words could tie it*
That none should either wrong* or mis-apply it?
Nay, your own Laws, which (as you do intend)
In plain'st and most effectual words are pend,
Cannot be framed so well to your intent,
But some there be will err from what you meant.
And yet (alas) must I be tied unto
What never any man before could do?
Must all I speak, or write, so well be done,
That none may pick more meanings thence then one?
Then all the world (I hope) will leave disunion.
And every man become of one opinion.
But if some may, what care so ere we tak^
Diverse constructions of our writings make
The charitable Reader should conceive
The best intentions mine, and others leave:
Chiefly in that, where I fore-hand protest,
My meaning ever was the honestest.
And if I say so, what is he may know
So much as to affirm it was not so?
Sit other men so near my thought to show it?
Or is my heart so open that all know it?
Sure if it were, they would no such things see,
As those whereof some have accused me.
But I am careless how't be understood,
Because the Heavens know my intent was good.
And if it be so, that my too free Rimes
Do much displease the world, and these bad times;
It Is not my fault, for had I been employed
In something else, all this had now been void.
Or if the world would but have granted me
Wealth, or Affairs, whereon to busy me,
I now unheard of, peradventure than,
Had been as mute as some rich Cleargie-man.
But they are much deceived that think my mind
Will e're be still, while it can doing find,
Or that unto the world so much it leanes,
As to be curtold for default of means.
No, though most be, all Spirits are not earth,
Nor suiting with the fortunes of their birth,
My body's subject unto many powers,
But my soule'^ free, as is the Emperors:
And though to curb her in, I often assay,
She Will break in it action spite of dirt and cl^y.
And is it not better then, to take this course,
Then f^ll to study mischiefs, and do worse?
I say she must have action, and she shall:
For if she will, how can I do withal?
And let those that or'e-busie think me* know,
He made me, that knew why he made me so.
And though there is some that say, my thoughts do fly
A pitch beyond my states sufficiency;
My humble mind, I give my Savior thank,
Aspires naught yet, above my fortunes rank.
But say it did, will it not befit a man,
To raise his thoughts as near Heaven as he can?
Mu^t the free Spirit ty'de and curbed be,
A^^o^ding to the bodies poverty?
Or can it ever be so subject to
Base Change, to rise and fall, as fortunes do?
Men borne to Noble means and vulgar minde^
Enjoy their wealth, and there is no Law that binds
Such to abate their substance, though their Pa^es
Want Brain, and they Worth, to possess their states*
So God to some, does only great minds give,
And little other means whereon to live.
What law, or conscience, then shall make the^ smother
Their Spirit, which is their life, more then other
T'abate their substance? since if 'twere confessed,
That a brave mind could ever be suppressed,
Were It reason any should himself deprive
Of what the whole world has not power to give?
Since wealth is common, and fools get it to,
When to give spirit's more then Kings can do?
I speak not this, because I think there be,
More then the ordinariest gifts in me;
But against those who think I do presume
On more then does befit me to assume,
Or would have all, whom Fortune bars from store,
Make themselves wretched, as she makes them poor.
And cause in outward things she is unkind,
Smother the matchless blessings of their mind:
Whereas (although her favors do forsake them)
Their minds are richer then the world can make the^.
Why should a good attempt disgraced seem,
Because the person is of mean esteem?
Virtue's a chaste Queen, and yet does not scor^e
To be embraced by him that is meanest borne.
She is the prop, that Majesty's support,
Yet one whom Slaves as well as Kings may Court.
She loves all that bear affection to her,
And yields to any that has heart to woo her.
So Vice, how high so e're she be in place,
Is that which Grooms may spit at, in d^sgrace.
She is a strumpet, and may be abhorred,
Yea spu^n'd at, in the bosom of a Lord.
Yet had I spoke her fair, I had b^ene free,
As many others of her Lovers be.
If her escapes I had not chanced to tell,
I might have be^ne a villain, and done well.
Gotten some special favor, and not sat
As now I do, shut up within a grate.
Or if I could have hap't on some loose strain*
That might have pleased the wanton readers vain:
Or but clawed Pride, I now had been vnblam'd:
(Or else at least there is some would not have shamed
To plead my cause:) but see my fatal curse,
Sure I was either mad, or somewhat worse:
For I saw Vices followers bravely kept,
In Silks they walk'^, on beds of Down they slept
Richly they fed, on d^inties evermore,
They had their pleasure, they had all things store,
(Whilst Virtue ^egg'd) yea favors had so many,
I knew they brook't not to be touched of any:
Yet could not I, like other men, be wise,
Nor learn for all this, how to temporize;
But must (with too much honesty made blind)
Vpbraid this loved darling of mankind;
Whereas I might have better thriu'd by fayning,
Or if I could not choose but be complaining,
More safe I might have railed on Virtue sure,
Because her lovers, and her friends are fewer,
I might have brought some other thing to pass,
Made Fiddlers Song^, or Ba^lets, like an Ass.
Or any thing almost indeed but this,
Yet since it is thus, Im'e glad it is ^o amiss;
Because If I am guilty of a crime,
It Is that, wherein the best of every time,
Has been found faulty (if they faulty be)
That do reprove Abuse and Villainy.
For what I Am tax't, I can examples show,
In such old Authors as this s^ate allow.
And I would feign once learn a reason why
They can have kinder usage here then I.
I muse men do not now in question call,
Seneca, Horace, Perseus, Iuvenall.
And such as they; Or why did not that Age
In which they lived, put them in a Cage?
If I should say that men were iuster then,
I should near hand, be made vnsay't again.
And therefore sure I think I were as good
Leave it to others to be understood;
Yet I as well may speak as deem amiss,
F^r such this Ages curious cunning is
I scarcely dare to let my heart think ought,
For there be those will seem to know my thought,
Who may outface me that I think awry,
When there is no witness but my Conscience by.
And then I likely am as ill to speed,
As if I spoke or did amiss indeed,
Yet l^ast those who (perhaps) may malice this
Interpret also these few lines amiss,
Let them that after thee shall read or hear,
From a rash censure of my thoughts forbear.
Let them not mold the sense that this contains
According to the forming of their brains,
Or think I dare, or can, here tax those Peers,
Whose Worths their Honors to my soul endeares,
(Those by whose loued-fear'd Authority)
I am restrained of my liberty:
For least there yet may be a man so ill,
To haunt my lines with his black Comment still,
(In hope my luck again may be so good,
To have my words once rightly understood)
This I protest, that I do not condemn
Ought as v^iust that has been done by them;
For though my honest h^^rt not guilty be,
Of the lea^t thought, that may disparage me,
Yet ^hen such men as I, shall have such foes,
Accuse me of such crimes, to such as those,
Till I had means my Innocence to show,
Their Justice could have done no less then so.
Nor have I such a proud-conceited wit,
Or selfe-opinion of my knowledge yet,
To think it ^ay not be that I have run
Upon some Errors in what I have done,
Worthy this punishment which I endure,
(I say I cannot so my self assure)
For it is no wonder if their Wisdoms can,
Discover Impe^fections in a man
So weak a^ I* (more then himself does see,
Since my sight, dull with insufficiency,
In men more grave and wiser fa^re then I,
Innumerable Errors does espy,
Which they with all their knowledge I Will be bold.
Cannot, or will not, in themselves behold)
But ere I will my self accuse my Song,
O^ keep a Tongue shall do my Heart that wrong
To say I willingly in what I pe^d
Did ought which might a Goods man's ^ight offend,
Or with my knowledge did insert one word,
That might disparage a true Honored Lord*
Let it be in my mouth a helpless sore,
And never speak to be believed more.
But man irresolute is, unconstant, weak,
And does his purpose often through frailty break*
Least therefore I by force hereafter may
Be brought from this mind, and these words unsay*
Here to the world I do proclaim before,
^ere my resolution be so poor,
It Is no^ the Right, but Might that makes me do it,
Yea naught but fearful baseness brings me to it,
Which i^ I still hate, as I now detest,
Never can come to ha^bour in my breast.
Thus my fault then (if they a fault imply)
Is not alone an ill unwillingly,
But also, might I know it, I intend,
Not only to acknowledge, but amend:
Hoping that thou will not be so severe,
To punish me above all other here.
But for m'intents sake, and my love to Truth,
Impute my Errors to the heat of Youth*
Or rather Ignorance, then to my W^ll,
Which sure I am was good, what e're be ^ll,
And like to him now, in whose place thou art,
What e're the resdue be, accept the Heart.
But I grow tedious, and my love abused
Disturbs my thoughts, and makes my lines confused:
Yet pardon me, and daigne a gracious ey^
On this my rude vnfill'd Apology.
Let not the bluntness of my phrase offend,
Weigh but the matter* and not how it is pend.
By these abrupt lines in my just defense,
Judge what I might say, for my innocence.
And think I more could speak, that here I spare,
Because my power ^uites not to what I dare.
My vnaff^ct^d style re^aynes (you see)
Her old Frize Cloak of yo^ng Rusticitie*
If others will vs^ nea^er tea^m^^, they may,
Ruder I am yet love as well as they.
And (though if I would smooth't I cannot do it)
My humble heart I bend beneath thy foot:
While here my Muse her discontent does sing
To thee her great Apollo, and my King:
Emploring thee by that high sacred Name,
By Justice, by those powers that I could name:
By whatsoever may move, entreat I thee,
To be what thou art unto all, to m^.
I fear it not, yet give me leave to pray,
I may have foes whose power does bear such sway,
If they but say I Am guilty of offense,
'Twere vain for me to plead my innocence.
But as the name of God thou bear, I trust
Thou imitat'st him to, in being just:
That when the right of truth thou come to scan,
Thou Wilt not respect the person of the man:
For if thou do, then is my hope undone,
The headlong way to ruin I must run.
For whil^t that they have all the helps which may
Procure their pleasure with my soon decay*
How is it like that I my peace can win me,
When all the aid I have, comes from with^^ me?
Therefore (good King) that make thy bounty shine
Sometime on those whose worths are small as mine;
Oh save me now from Enui^^ dangerous s^elfe,
Or make me able, and I Will save my self.
Let not the want of that make me a scorn,
To which there are more Fool^^ then Wisemen borne.
Let me not for my Meannesse be despi^'d,
Nor others greatness make their words more prized.
For whatsoever my outward Fate appears,
My Soul's as g^od, my Heart as great as their^.
My love unto my Country an^ to thee,
As much as his that more would seem to be.
And would this Age allow but means to show it,
Those that misdoubt^, should ^re long time know it.
Pity my youth then, and let me not lie
Wasting my time in fruitless misery.
Though I am mean, I may be borne unto
That service which another cannot do.
In vain the little Mouse the Lion spared not,
She did him pleasure when a greater dared not.
If ought that I have done, do thee displease,
Thy misconceiued wrath I will appease:
Or sacrifice my heart; but why should I
Suffer for God knows whom, I know not why?
If that my words through somes mist^ke offends,
Let them conceive them right, and make amends.
Or were I guilty of offense indeed,
One fault (they say) does but one pardon need.
Yet one I had, and now I want one more:
For once I stood accused for this before.
As I ^emember I so long agon,
S^ng Them, and Rhy^es Epithalamion.
When SHE that from thy Royal self deriue^,
Those gracious virtues that best Title gives.
She that makes Rhyne proud of her excellence,
And me often mind her here with reverence;
Daign'd in her great-good nature to incline
Her gentle ear to such a cause a^ mine;
And which is more, vouchsaf't her word to clear
Me from all dangers (if there any were)
So that I do not now entreat, or sue
For any great boon, or request that is new*
But only this, (though absent from the Land)
Her former favor still in force might stand:
And that her word (who present was so dear)
Might be as powerful, as when she was here.
Which if I find, and with thy favor may
Have leave to shake my loathed bands away,
(As I do hope I shall) and be set free
From all the troubles this has brought on me,
I Will make her Name give life unto a Song,
Whose neuer-dying note shall last as long
As there is either River, Grove, or Spring,
Or Down, for Sheep, or Shepherds Lad to sing.
Yea, I will teach my Muse to touch a strain,
That was nere reached to yet by any Swain.
For though that many deem my years vnri^e,
Yet I ^aue learned to tune an Oaten pipe,
Whereon I Will try what music I can make me,
(Until Bellona^with her Trumpe awake me.)
And since the world will not have Vice thus shown^,
By blazing Virtue I will make it known.
Th^n if the Court will not my lines approve,
I Will go unto some Mountain, or thick Grove:
There to my fellow Shepherds will I sing,
Tuni^g my Reed, unto some dancing Spring,
In such a note, that none should dare to trouble it,
Till the Hil^es ans^ere, and the Woods redouble it.
And peradventure I may then go nere
To speak of something thou wilt be pleasd'd to hear:
And that which those who now my tunes abhor,
Shall read, and like, and daigne to love me for.
But the mean while, oh pass not thi^ suite by,
Let thy free hand sign me my liberty:
And if my love may move thee more to do,
Good King consider this my trouble to.
Others have found thy favor in distre^se,
Whose love to thee and thine I think was less
And I might fitter for thy ser^ice live,
On what would not be much for thee to give.
And yet I ask it not for that I fear
The outward means of life should fa^^e me here*
For though I want to compa^se those good ^n^s
I aim at for my Country and my Friends.
In this poor state I can as well content me,
As if that I had Wealth and Honors lent me;
Nor for my own sake do I seek to shun
This thraldom, wherein now I seem undone:
For though I prize my Freedom more then Gold,
And use the means to free my self from hold,
Yet with a mind (I hope) vnchang^d and free,
Here can I live and play with misery:
Yea in despite of want and slavery,
Laugh at the world in all her bravery,
Here have I learned to make my greatest Wrong^
Matter of Mirth, and subjects but for Songs.
Here can I smile to see my self neglected,
And how the mean man's suit is disrespected,
Whilst those that are more rich, and better friended,
Can have twice greater faults thrice sooner ended.
All this, yea more, I see and suffer to,
Yet live content, midst discontents I do,
Which whilst I can, it is all one to me,
Whether in Prison or abroad it be:
For should I still lie here distressed and poor,
It shall not make me breath a sigh the more;
Since to my self it is indifferent
Where the small remnant of my days be spent,
But for Thy sake, my Countries, and my Friends,
For whom more then my self God this life lends,
I would not, could I help it, be a scorn,
But l^ue (if I might) free, as I was borne:
Or rather for good Bell-arete's sake,
Fa^^e Ver^^^ of whom most account I make,
If I can choose, I will not be deba^'d,
In this last action, least She be disgraced.
For 'twas the love of her that brought me to
What Spleen nor Envy could not make me do,
And if her servants be no more regarded,
If enemies of Vice be thus rewarded,
And I should also Virtues wrongs conceal,
As if none lived to whom she dared appeal:
Will they that do not yet her worth approve,
Be ever drawn to entertain her love,
When they ^^all see hi^ plagued as an Offender,
Who for the love he bears her, does commend her?
This may to others more offensi^e be,
Then prejudicial any way to me:
For who will his endeavors ever bend
To follow her, whom there is ^one will friend?
Some I do hope there be that nothing may
From love of Truth and Honesty dismay.
But who will ever seeing my hard Fortune,
The remedy of Times Abuse importune?
Who will again when they have smothered me,
Dart to oppose the face of Villainy?
Whereas he shall not only undertake
A Combat with a second Lernean Snake,
Whose euer-growing heads when as he crops,
Not only two Springs, for each one he lops,
But also he shall see in midst of danger^,
Those he thought friends turn foes, or at lea^^ stranger^.
More I could speak, but sure if this do ^aile me,
I never shall do ought that will a^a^^e me,
Nor c^re to speak again, unless it be
To him that knows how Heart and Words agre^,
No, nor to live when none dares undertake
To speak one word for honest Virtues sake.
But let his will be done, that best knows what
Will be my future good, and what will not.
Hap well or ill, my spotless meaning's fair,
And for thee, this shall ever be my prayer,
That thou may here enjoy a long-blest Raig^e,
And dying, be in Heaven Re-crown'd again.
SO now if thou have daign'd my Lines to hear,
There Is nothing can befall me that I fear:
For if thou have compassion on my trouble,
The Joy I shall receive will be made double;
And if I fall, it may some Glory be,
That none but JOVE himself did ruin me.
Your MAJESTY'S most loyal Subject, and yet Prisoner in the Marshals^y. GEO.
WYTHER.


