AN EXPOSITION OF THE Lords Prayer. DELIVERED IN two and twenty Lectures, At
the Church of Lies in SCOTLAND; By Mr WILLIAM WISCHART Parson of Restalrigg.

LONDON. Printed by M. FLESHER, for NICOLAS BOURNE at the South entrance of the
Royal Exchange. 1633.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable GEORGE Lord GOURDON, son and heir to the Lord
Marquis of Huntley, one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council in the
Kingdom of Scotland, and chief Captain of the Company of men at arms,
entertained there by the most Christian King.
MY LORD,
AS I love not those rheumatique pens which are always scribbling on the Press
(for in the multitude of words there must be much folly) no more do l approve
those adust complexions, from whom no entreaty can wrest any drop of
refreshment to the fleece of Gedion: for if the one shall be beaten for the
unnecessarie wasting of his masters goods, the other certainly shall be whipped
with many stripes for that he has hid his masters talent in the earth, and
not returned his own unto him with advantage. The consideration hereof has
made me (the least amongst the thousands of Levi) to adventure this small
piece to the public view and censure of the present time: a hazard (I
confess) much greater then I can well sustain: for Joseph cannot go to
Dothan, but he must be stripped and sold to a Medianite: Sampson cannot project
a wedlock at Timnagh, but he must be flouted by a Philistine: David cannot
congratulate Hanon, but his legates must be dismissed with beards half
shaved, and garments cut to their buttockes: yea the very Son of God shall
not cast out an unclean spirit, but Calumny shall say it was by Beelzebub the
Prince of devils. What wonder then if these few drops of ink leaping straight
from my pen to the public Theater of the world, be both greedily viewed,
and roundly censured? for amids the beams of so pregnant a light, and in the
throng of so many learned writings already spread abroad on this subject, to see
a silly David acoast the Philistine of Gath, may justly seem to deserve the
rebuke of Eliah (I know thy hautines, and the pride of thy heart.) But to this
supposed reproach let me answer with David, What have I done? is there not a
cause? or rather let me say with Jesus Christ, the true Son and heir of
David, If I have said evil, bear witness of it, but if I have spoken truth
why do ye smite me?

The God whom I serve in the Ministry of his Gospel does well know, my
conscience also bears me witness, that as in teaching these few sermons, I
did not affect popularity nor praise of men, but his honor who has honored
me with his service, and the good of that people over whom he put me in
charge, so now when they shall be published to the eyes of all, having before
been delivered, but to the ears of a few: I am neither ambitious of vulgar
applause (as being no Camelion to feed on such an air) nor do I much regard
the frivolous checks of all that go by, for Falsus honor juvat, and mendax
infamia terret,
Quem? nisi mendosum, and mendacem.


Therefore whilst I desire to do some service to the Church of God, and to
contribute my mite to his treasure, or my goats skin to the furniture of his
Tabernacle: I have presumed to present it to your honor my good Lord; not
only to beg Patronage from your greatness, but also that by it I may in some
measure render due honor unto you for your goodness, as one not of their
number, who ((...)) are ready to prate of every thing, but able to speak right
of nothing; No my Lord I know, and do fully acknowledge that as there are none
more truly learned, so there is none more sincerely affected to the truth of
God, and maintenance thereof. Let venomous detracting tongues wound as they
list, wisdom shall be justified of all her children: for you have made it
apparent to the world by your loss sustained at home and abroad, for the
testimony of the truth, that you have accounted the reproach of Jesus Christ to
be greater riches then all the perishing treasures of Egypt. And if there were
no more, yet the honorable project and happy success of that late expedition
imposed by your Prince, accepted and accomplished by your Lordship against the
locusts of Rome, raging in our Northern quarters; It has clearly instanced to
the world, that whilst some of deeper profession, (like Meroz) durst not come
to the help of the Lord against the mighties of the earth: you like another
Iael did put your left hand to the nail, and your right hand to the workmans
hammer: you have smitten Sisera, you have smitten him once, and he has not
risen again. Accept then, my good Lord, this poor handful of water, unworthy
I confess of such a Persian Potentate: yet accept in it, not what plenty
should offer, but what my penury can afford. The theme is holy, and may serve
for vesture to a Prince, if it had been wrought in Bezaleels loome, yet take it
howsoever as an evidence of the love and respect I owe you: pardon but the
weakness, and the work is rewarded, and my earnest desire and prayer to God
shall be for your Lordship, that your projects may continue holy, your actions
honorable, your house and estate prosperous, your death comfortable, and your
salvation sure in him who has loved us, and given himself for us, a sacrifice
without spot or blemish, our Lord Jesus Christ; in whom I am, and shall always
endeavor to remain

Your Lordships servant in the truth, W. WISCHART.

A Table of the Lectures in this book.
Lect. Page 1 Our Father which art 1 2 17 3 In Heaven: 29 4 Hallowed be thy
Name. 56 5 Thy Kingdom come. 84 6 110 7 Thy will 133 8 Be done, 157 9 In earth
as it is in heaven: 174 10 Give us this day our daily bread: 200 11 225 12 249
13 276 14 And forgive us our trespasses, 301 15 325 16 351 17 As we forgive
them that trespass against us: 376 18 And lead us not into temptation: 401 19
427 20 455 21 But deliver us from evil, 481 22 For thine is the Kingdom, the
power, and the glory, for ever and ever, Amen. 511

FINIS.
LECTVRES upon the Lords PRAYER.
LECT: 1.
MAT. 6. v. 9, 10, 11, 12. Our Father which art in heaven.
IT may perhaps seem strange, that in the midst of so clear and manifest a
light, and to the view of so learned and judicious a people, I should be bold
to represent a task of so homely and domestique a strain; for I know that
there is not one amongst you who has not all this Prayer by heart: yet
wisdom I know is justified of her children. Let the truth therefore beget my
Apology, and you shall find that my travels will not be intended in vain. To
speak the truth then, there be four things that move me to undergo this
Theme. 1. Time and the present opportunity. 2. Your necessities. 3. The
dignity of the Author. 4. The perfection of the work.


First, the time and present opportunity leads us to it; for we have been
busied these many days in manifesting to you the estate of your misery by
nature; the estate of grace to which you are exalted; the truth of God
confirming the Covenant of his Grace, by the seal thereof, his Sacrament. And
the recompense thereof in the duty we owe him for the manifestation of that his
rich grace unto us. In the first we have a lamentable spectacle of our own
weakness. In the second and third we have had a view of Gods undeserved love.
In the last we have had a taste given us of the bounden duty we owe to God,
for that his so rich and underserved a favor made manifest unto us. The
consideration of al these premises being jointly knit together, leads us to
the knees of our souls, by prayer to say, Da domine quod petis, and pete quod
vis.

Secondly, besides the consideration of the opportunity of the time: your
necessities do not a little persuade me to this course; for howsoever we live
in the midst of a clear and so uncontrouled a light, that no flesh can be
excused by reason of ignorance; yet I must be bold, as the Servant of God (not
daring to belie his truth) to say, that the condemnation of this age is, that
light has shined into it, and yet your darkness is palpable, and that you
have loved darkness better than light, because your works are evil.

Thirdly, the dignity of the Author of this Prayer, being duly considered, will
not a little breed your respect and regard thereof: For as it was said of John
the Baptist, that amongst the sons of women a greater than he did not arise;
so it shall be more truly said of the Author of this Prayer, Amongst the
sons of men there can be found none so great as he. Adam the first man was
great, made to the Image of God; Enoch was great and walked with God; Abraham
was great and walked before God; Solomon was great, and was called the son of
God; for it is written, I will be his father, and he shall be my son: but
amongst all these none was answerable to the second Adam, to the true heir of
David, to the true Solomon; yea to him, who speaking of himself was bold to
affirm, A greater then Solomon is here: for he is not only the Image of the
invisible God as Adam, nor walked he with God as Enoch, nor before God as
Abraham; but he was the eternal Son of the eternal God, in whom the
fullness of the Godhead did bodily dwell, that out of his fullness we might
receive grace and plenty, and grace for grace. If then the servant be not
above his Master, nor the Disciple above his Lord, who amongst the sons of men
shall be his parallel, who was God of himself, Son of the Father, Man of the
Holy Ghost, God and Man in one person: God, that he might satisfy; and Man,
that he might suffer for man, that man might be again exalted to the glorious
liberty of the sons of God.

Fourthly, shall we look to the perfection of the work it self? how can it
be but perfect, being the work of him who is not only perfect, but
perfection it self? It is reported by Plinius in his lib. 35. cap. 10 that
Apelles upon a time seeing a Tablature of Protogines, wherein for a
Masterpiece he had only drawn a line of such finenesse and subtilitie, that
in his opinion none could match it: Apelles taking the Pensell in hand, within
the bounds of the same very line, drew another more subtle than the first, that
Protogines at his return espying it, was forced to say, Nisi in Apellem non
potuit cadere tam absolutum opus: So may I justly say of the work and frame of
this so excellent a Prayer, that save from the hands of the Son of God, so
neat and accomplished a work could not have been produced; and that both in
respect of the brevity, of the plainness and perfection thereof. The brevity
is clear, for the words are few, and given unto us as an enchiridion; in form
it is plain, for in it there is no riddle, which any having the heyfer of the
Spirit may not unfold: And finally, it is perfect, for in it there lacks
nothing that can either redress our misery, or reveal the riches of Gods
mercy. Thus have I in these four considerations cleared unto you the reason of
my proposed intent.

In handling of this Theme the Prayer shall be divided into these three parts;
a Preface, some Petitions, and a Conclusion. This days task shall lead us to
consider the Preface in these words, Our father which art in heaven.

For the understanding of the words, first, their inference; secondly, their
tenor and matter. Their inference is one way reported by Matthew, another way
by Luke: Matthew makes it a part of his Sermon; Luke makes it an answer or
reference to a demand: whilst Matthew coucheth it in the bosom of his sermon,
he makes the preventing grace of God manifest; whilst Luke makes it a
reference to a desire, he shows us that the hungring and thirsting desire of
Gods Saints shall not go away unsatisfied. The consideration of the inference
being past, we come now to lay hold on the words of the Preface. I compare the
Preface to the Gate or entry of a building, and I think, not without reason:
for as it is amongst the sons of men, whilst they invite their fellows or
friends to their houses, I do verily think that without error they may
receive them by three several courtesies; they may meet them at the gate and
say, welcome friend; they may assure them of the state and condition of their
company: and lastly, if they have no such fare as they would, they may promise
their friend at least a good and hansome room. In all these three you shall
find that our God does prevent us, for he meets us at the door, and tells us,
that he is not only our friend, but what is more, our father: if we be
ceremonious and enquire concerning the company, he answers, there are none
within but those who are ours; and therefore it is written, Our father,
according to that of Christ Jesus, I go to my Father and to your Father, and
to my God and your God. And last of all, if we shall be loath to enter, he will
yet further satisfy us, by assuring us of the hansomnesse of the rooms; for
the house is not a house made with hands, but a house that is glorious and
eternal in the heavens, yea far above these visible heavens, the dwelling
place of God, yea, the Heaven of Heavens.

The first word of invitation is, Father. That we may the better know that God
is our father, we must do as those, who not daring to look upon the Sun in
his strength, do usually call for a vessel full of water, wherein they may
boldly behold his Image without dazeling of their eyes: so we cannot fully know
how God is our father, unless we look on our earthly fathers, and from them
draw some weak resemblance of the expression, so far as a finite creature
may express an infinite Creator. To understand this, amongst the sons of men
there be three sorts of fathers, natural, civil, and ecclesiastique. A
natural father is he of whom we have our natural being, from whose loins
we are powered out like milk, and of whose substance we are crowded together
like Cheese. The civil fathers are those Magistrates whom God has set in
place and preferment above us; and of those it is said, Honor thy father and
thy mother. The Ecclesiasticke fathers are the Ministers and Preachers of the
word, by whom (as being the Instruments of Gods work) the life of God is
begotten in our souls; and of this sort it is that the Apostle says, Though
you have many fathers, yet I have begotten you to be the sons of God by the
Gospel. Now, all of these ways God is our father: our natural father by
creation, our civil father by providence and sustentation, our spiritual and
ecclesiasticke father by adoption.

God from the beginning of time has been the father of mankind, but the
nearer it drew to the fullness of time, he became the nearer and the dearer
father unto us. He was Adams father, and was known to him by his name
Gnaliion, The most high, a comfort answerable to Adams fall: He was Abraham's
father, and known to him by his name El-shaddai, The all-sufficient; and this
was a corroborative against Abraham's doubting: He was Moses father, and known
to him by his name Jehovah, which signified a being; for in his time he begun
to give a being to his promises made to Abraham, Isaac, and Iaco^: under this
name he was known to the Judges, Kings, and Prophets of Israel; but when the
fullness of time came, God sent his own Son made of a woman, and made under
the law, and to him he is made known by the name of a Father, This is my
beloved Son; and in him our Father also; his by nature, ours by adoption: as
it is written, Because you are sons, God has sent the spirit of his Son in
your hearts, whereby you cry Abba, Father: And again, To as many as come to
him he gave this prerogative, to be called the sons of the living God.

The knowledge of this (that God is our father) teaches us four things;
affection, faith, obedience, and true understanding.

First, affection; for now I pray not to a severe Judge, nor to a cruel
Tyrant, nor to a merciless stranger, but by the contrary, to my kind and
gracious father, who knows my need before I ask, and prevents my suite by
his favor; for he meets me, kisseth me, clotheth me, and kills the fat
Calfe for me.

Secondly, faith; for what will a kind father refuse to his begging child? The
Prophet Isay tells us, 49.15. Although our father that begot us should forget
us, and our mother should not remember us as the fruit of her womb, yet I will
not forget thee, for I have graven thee on the palms of my hands, and thy
vows are always in my sight. Let us therefore go boldly to the Throne of
grace, we shall surely be heard in that which we fear: for as Ambrose
tells us, Dum ex malo servo factus sum filius, praedicare quid acceperim
fides est non arrogantia, non est superbia sed devotio.

Thirdly, obedience: For whilst he shows himself our merciful father, he
tyeth us to be dutiful children, else even then when we call him father, if
we do not intend a filial obedience, in stead of a father we provoke him to
become our Judge, as sitters in the chair of the scorner: for it is written,
If I be your father, where is my honor? and if I be your master, where is my
fear? for there is mercy with me only that I may be feared.

Fourthly, true understanding of two things. 1. To whom we should direct our
prayers. 2. In whose name.


To whom? not to Angels in heaven, nor to Saints departed, nor to any Image of
wood or stone whatsoever; but to him, who being the father of eternity, is
become our father in time: and whilst we do invoke him, it should not be by
the intercession of any Angel or Saint departed, or in the name or account of
our own merit, but only in the name of Jesus, and for his merits sake, who
(not knowing sin) was made sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him.

LECT. 2.
Our Father which art in heaven.
IN our last Sermon we looked on the person upon who^ we call, in that
reference, wherein we call him Father. We come now to see by what reason we
call him, Our.

That we may understand this the better, know this I pray you, that our
Redeemer Christ Jesus coming into the world, not for himself, nor for his
own sake, but for us and ours, who were by our sins estranged from him, he
has taken our burden upon him, that by his super-abundant satisfaction our
ransom might be fully satisfied; and by the blood of his Cross all things
might be reconciled again to the Father, even all things in heaven and in
earth. But because there is nothing done by God in time, which was not
preordained to be done before time, That Christ Jesus should be our head in
time, could never have been duly accomplished, unless before time he had
been preordained to be our head, and we the fellow members of his body: Now as
in the fullness of time he came in our flesh to be our head, so here by his
example he teaches us how to carry our selves as dutiful and decent members
of his body. The truth of this is clear out of all these Petitions which
Christ has registered to us in his Word; before he suffered in John 17. when
he suffered, when he rose again and ascended. In this he was our true high
Priest, carrying our names into the holy place, and there preparing a place for
us, that where he is, there we may be also. The Union therefore of the which he
was ordained to be the head before all time, made him careful in time to
recollect and gather together the lost and straying members of his
incorporatio^, and by his example teaches us not only to adhere to him by
faith as our head, but also by love to adhere to others as members of one body.

But thou will say to me, O man, where in does this Union consist, or how
shall I know if I have part in this Union?

For answer hereto, let me tell thee O man: What was before the world but
Union? what is in the world but Union? what shall be after the world but
Union? Before the world nothing but Union, one God in Essence, although
distinguished in Persons: in the world nothing but union, the heavens giving
light, the clouds giving rain, the fire giving heat, the winds giving breath
and refreshment: after the world what shall be but union? Gather my Saints
together from the four Corners of the world, that there may be but one
shepherd and one sheepfold, and that may be over all, and in all: yet because
this does not satisfy the question, let us see where in our union with Christ
does consist.

I answer, our union with him stands manifest in four things.

1. We have an union with him, which gives us love.

2. By his union we have Sympathy.

3. By his union we have influence.

4. By his union we have a share and fellowship in riches: I have said, that
by his union we have love, as the husband has with the wife; we have
sympathy, as the members have with the head; we have influence and sap, as
the Branches have from the root; finally and we have a share in riches three
ways, an union in his Essence, an union in his Office, and an union in his
virtues. In his essence, for he that was God became man, that man might become
the son of God. In his office, for in him we are made to the Father Kings,
Priests, and Prophets. In his virtues, for he of God was made to us wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.

But that the words may be a little more clear, let me tell you that the word
Our, looks with a threefold aspect; for our eyes are sometimes exercised per
visionem reflexam, sometimes per visionem collateralem, and sometimes per
visionem transcendentem: Our reflected look beholds our selves, and
therefore we say Ours, by application, for it is but a cold and miserable
comfort to say ours, when we have no private application, like Thomas. The
collateral look looks on our brethren, either a dextris, in the sons of
Gods love, dealing with them in faith, hope and charity; or a sinistris, in the
children of disobedience, pulling them out of the fire, or heaping coals of
fire on their heads. The transcendent look looks on God himself, who in
Christ Jesus is become our father, and we his sons.

Whilst we look to the words with a reflected contemplation, we are taught
humility; for we make great reckoning of our parentage, if it has pleased God
to distinguish us in any degree from beyond our brethren. Oh but how foolish is
our rejoicing, for there is nothing in nature that respects greatness but
man! not our bitth, not our sife, not our sickness, not our death, not our
grave; nothing in grace respects greatness but man; not the preaching of the
Word, for we all do hear; not our effectual calling, for there are the
things that are not preferred to the things that are; not our administration of
the Sacraments, for by water we are baptized, and by a sacramental bread we
are fed: nothing in glory, for if this be a true position, that we must reap
according to that which we have sown, then he who sows sparingly shall
reap sparingly, and he who sows in plenty, shall reap in joy.

2. Whilst we look on our brethren visione collaterali, if they be of the
household of faith, I mean the Church, and the members thereof, see that thou
rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with them that mourn, and remember
the^ that are in bonds, as if we our selves were afflicted in the body; but
especially and above al, to mourn for the divisions of Joseph. If they be
from without, brethren, I mean by nature, and not by grace; let us pity their
misery, with patience wait for their return, and in sincerity pray for their
co^version; for howsoever it be not as yet seen to the world, that God is
become their father in Christ Jesus, yet how soon it may be, we know not, for
the time is at hand, wherein all Israel must be Israel. Whilst we think
therefore that we stand, let us take heed that we fall not, and let us pray
for their restitution, for we know not when we our selves shall also be
tempted. 3 Lastly, whilst we look on the words with a transcendent speculation,
let us know aright from whom, and by whom, we have the liberty of this
prerogative, viz. in Christ Jesus And let us labor to become his fellow
brethren, that God may be our father in him: for having him we have all
things, and without him we have nothing: for all things are ours whilst we
are Christ's, for Christ is Gods. I have heard talking of fraternity: the
rejoicing of the begging Friars is vain, they are fratres mendicantes: the
rejoicing of the Jesuits is vain, they are Fratres societatis Jesus, an
arrogant fraternity: the rejoicing of the Chymeck, or judicial Astrologues is
vain, they are Fratres roseae-crucis, a foolish fraternity, for they evanish
in the vanity of their imaginations: No, no, there is no fraternity in the
world answerable to a Christian fraternity, wherein God does become our father,
for so we have hope against all the fears of the natural man, such as, want,
sickness, death, judgment, hell and Satan.

Which art in Heaven.
Having spoke of our familiarity, and assured welcome, that God is a father,
and of our interest in him, and by him to the world, to the Church, and to our
selves: Let us now see what dwelling places he has, Heaven. For understanding
hereof learn to know, that man may be described by many things, and God but by
a few. Forma, figura, tocus, stirps, nomen, patria and tempus, are incident to
the description of man, but not to the description of God: he has no form,
nor figure, for he is invisible; place cannot circu^scribe him, for he is
infinite; progeny he has not, for he is not begotten; nor time cannot measure
him, for he is eternal: only by two things is he known to us, by his name,
and by his habitation: by his name he is our father, by his habitation he is in
heaven. But let us remarke yet further I pray you: Our Redeemer pointing out
unto us his father in terms of familiarity and appropriation, before that he
tell us where his habitation is, he tells us his essence, and what he is,
(...), (...), (...), he was, he is, and he is to come; before time, in time,
after time: yesterday, to day, and for ever: he was to Abraham; before Abraham
was, I was: he is to Moses, I am that I am: he is to come, John in the
Revelation: Behold, I come quickly.

Use. Is he the self same without alteration or shadow of change? yea, and
that three manner of ways: Objectively, subjectively, and effectively.
Objectively in his word, for heaven and earth shall pass away, but one jot of
his word shall not fall to the ground. Subjectively, in his operation, making,
governing, and judging the world: Effectively, in his mercy, yesterday to the
fathers, to day to our selves, for ever to our children. Let this dissuade, and
persuade us: Dissuade us from the world, for all things in it, are changeable,
as time, honor, wealth, pleasure and beauty: persuade us to perfection, as our
father which is in heaven is perfect, standing steadfast in the faith, holding
fast what we have received, and continuing constant to the end, that we may
receive the crown in heaven.

LECTIO 3.
In Heaven.
HEre it may be enquired, and not amiss, how it is, that the presence of God
is tied to the heaven. Seeing he is every where, so filling all things that
he is comprehended of nothing: and so without all things that he is excluded
of nothing. For answer hereof, it is requisite that we know, that the
dispensation of the presence of God is manifold and diverse: There is a
general, there is a particular, there is a personal, and there is a local
presence of God. By his general presence he is present with all his
creatures: For in him we live, we move, and have our being. By his
particular presence, he is present with man, and because the sons of men are
of two sorts, therefore the dispensation of this presence is twofold: with the
child of disobedience, he is present by his providence, his power, and his
justice: by his providence maintaining his life, by his power ordering his
ways to their appointed ends, and by his justice binding him up in the secret
of his soul, with chains of darkness to the judgment of the great day: with
the child of his free love he is present, by his providence maintaining his
life, by his power keeping him that he dash not his foot against a stone, and
by his mercy keeping him through faith to eternal salvation. By his personal
presence, he is present with his Son, the Lord Jesus: by his local presence
he is said to be in heaven, not that the heaven of heavens is able to contain
him who is infinite, but that there chiefly he manifests his glorious
presence, and his glorious essence, to the Angels, who have kept their
original integrity, to the Souls of the Saints departed, and to all of us,
both in soul and body, in the day of our last and final refreshment: In a
word, God is said to be in heaven, as the soul is said to be in the head, or
heart of man. The soul we know animates the whole body, and by her presence in
every member thereof communicates life thereto, yet by way of preheminencie,
and excellency, it is said to be in the head, and in the heart of man. Because
in these two parts, and from these two parts she exercises her chiefest
fnnctions, and communicates, and deriveth her chiefest influence: So is it
with God, for howsoever by his infinite essence he be every where, and fills
all his creatures, yet by way of preheminencie and excellency, he is most
specially said to be in heaven, because there it is that the rays and glorious
beams of his Majesty are chiefly seen, and from thence it is, that he makes
the steps and impressions of his power known to the sons of men: It is true
indeed, we can no where cast our eyes on the creatures, but we do straight
perceive the characters of his wisdom, power, and Majesty: For will we look
on the natural course of the world, we see init four several sorts of
creatures: The first, bare, naked, and simple substances, without either life,
sense, or reason; of this sort are the Heavens, the Sun, the Moon, and the
Stars: The second sort have substance, and life, but not sense or reason,
such are the trees, plants, and herbs of the field; all which have a vegitative
life, but no sense, nor reason: The third sort have life and sense, but no
reason, such as the fowls of the air, the beasts of the field, and the fishes
of the sea. The fourth and last sort has all of these; substance, life, sense,
and reason, and that is man. Now every one of these several sorts of creatures
do exceed one another, and serve one for another use: for we see the first,
which are but mere substances, serve for the use of them who have life. These
who have life do serve for the use of them who have reason; and man who has
reason, he does serve, he should serve, and shall serve for the use of that
God, who dwells in the Heavens above.

Now, who can look on the beauty of these creatures, Who can consider the
reference, or who can contemplate aright their correspondence, but must
straight know, and confess, both that there is a God, and that he both made
himself visible and palpable in his creatures, and yet that the full streine
of his glory is in Heaven? for here we see but in part, we know but in part,
and all that we either can see, or know of him, is but imperfect: our
perfection is hidden up with him in the Heavens, and when we shall by his
power be brought thither, we then shall fully see him as we are seen, and
know him as we are known, and be changed into his image from glory to glory,
by the Spirit of the Lord.

Now brethren, having laid this for a foundation that is immovable; that
howsoever the Lord is every where, yet chiefly he is in heaven, the habitation
of his holiness; and that howsoever he be made visible in all his creatures,
yet the full and accomplished vision of his glory we shall not have, but in
the heavens: It rests, that from the consideration hereof, we learn to make
use of the same for our spiritual advantage.

The use that we make of this is threefold.

Use. First; it teaches us to whom we should pray.

Secondly, how we should pray.

And thirdly, how we should live when we have prayed.

First, to whom should we pray, but to God, and to him who is in heaven? There
are but two motives which direct man in the time of need to have his recourse
to another for help: The first is affection, the second is power: who but a
fool will in the time of need run for help to any man, who^ (he knows)
does not love him, for it is madness for a man to become a suitor where love
pleads not as a mediator: it is for this cause that Christ Jesus our Redeemer
has in the frontispice of this prayer given us the assurance of Gods love to
wards us, whilst he calls him Our Father, that from the assurance of his
fatherly love, we may draw near to the Throne of Grace with boldness, and
there pour out our supplications before him, with assurance to be heard in
that which we fear.

The other motive why men in the time of need have their recourse to another,
is the assurance of his power: For though he were never so well affected, if he
be not able, our petitions are all in vain; The Lord lives, let the people
tremble, he sits betwixt the Cherubins, let the Earth be moved, let the people
imagine vain things, and let the Kings of the earth assemble themselves
together, yet he that dwells in the Heavens shall laugh them to scorn, and
he that is powerful above all gods shall have them in derision. The knowledge
hereof is of great use, for the troubles of the righteous are many, and unless
that God was both willing and able to deliver them, they of all men in the
world should be the most miserable: But blessed be God through Jesus Christ
our Lord, he to whom we run for help, is both kind to acknowledge us for
his, and powerful to deliver us: It was the knowledge hereof that made Abraham
strong in the faith, he knew that he who had promised was able to perform:
It was this that wrought Nebuchadnezars co^version; it was this that was the
ground of the three Childrens constancy; it was this on the which John the
Baptist built his rebuke; from this St. Paul did beat down the vain glory of
the Gentile against the Jew; and finally, it was this upon which the same
Apostle built his persevera^ce, I know whom I have believed, and that he is
able to keep that which I have concreded unto him. Blessed is the man that in
the time of need can build himself, and the assurance of his deliverance on
these two foundations, the unchangeable love of God, and his unresistible
power! surely that man has built himself upon a rock, against which the
gates of hell cannot prevail: But woe be to him who draws near unto God,
and doubts in any of these points: surely, that man's glory shall be shaken,
and his best refuge shall prove but a broken reed, or a house built on the
sand, whose fall shall be both great and irrecoverable.

The second that we remarke from the words, is, How we should pray: And that
is with a distance, for God is in the heavens, and we are upon the earth: It is
fitting therefore that our words should be few: I have many times told you from
this place, that the children and sons of men do impede and hinder the
success of their prayers, so as when we ask we receive not, when we seek we
find not, and when we knock, it is not opened unto us: But the fault is not
with God, it is always with us, for sometimes we do err in the matter of
our prayers, preferring the things of this life, to those of the life to come:
sometimes in the manner of our prayer, begging pardon, when our crying sins
prevail: Sometimes in the time of prayer, whilst we call upon him in the time
of our calamity whom we forget in the day of our prosperity: But chiefly we
impede the success of our prayers, and hinder their due correspondence, when
our approaches are void of due consideration and distance. It is wonderful to
see what respect and distance is observed amongst the sons of me: when we enter
into the courts of Princes, we come no sooner within the Presence chamber, but
straight we are uncovered; and give we present, a petition, or supplication,
it is done with a bended knee, and reason too: for true Majesty requires true
distance: There is a distance observed betwixt the noble and ignoble, betwixt
the father and son, betwixt the master and servant, betwixt the rich and
poor, and betwixt the wise man and the fool: And shall there be no distance
kept betwixt God and man? God a mighty, strong, immortal, and eternal
Essence: Man a poor, miserable, weak, and corruptible creature.

O man would thou have thy prayer heard: come never in the presence of that
dreadful Majesty, but with fear and trembling, for he is in the Heaven, and
thou art but on earth, yea a worm of the earth: The Heavens are not pure
enough in his presence, and he has found no steadfastness in his very Angels:
How much more abominable art thou before him, whose Tabernacle is in the dust,
whose dwelling is destroyed before the moath and the worm, and who continually
drinks up iniquity like water? but, out upon the lourde and abominable
misregard of this time: It is long ere we can be awaked to come to this house
of prayer, our pinnes and dressings are so many: And when we come, oh! with
what unreverence do we present our selves before that dreadful Majesty: In
a moment without consideration we clappe down upon our knees, we mumble out
some weak fainthearted and miscaryed thoughts before him, and we are no sooner
set thus on work, when straight our eyes are gazing on our neighbors, and our
hearts carried captive with the vanities and cares of the time, so that in
effect we turn the house of prayer to a den of thieves. Alas my brethren, these
things ought not to be so, we do not learn this at our fellow Brethren,
Abraham, David, Gedion, and the Virgin Mary. We did not learn this at Christ
himself, for in the days of his flesh, he offered up strong cries and
supplications: we do not learn this at the holy Angels, who stand before
him: nor at those crowned Kings, who cast their Crowns at his feet: No, no,
all of these acknowledge their unworthiness, and pondering the same with his
incomparable glory, they lick the dust before him: But we out of the
senseless stupidity of our souls, have said, we are rich, and increased with
goods, and that we do stand in need of nothing, notwithstanding that we be
altogether poor and wretched, naked and blind. The Lord open our eyes to see
the true distance that is betwixt the heaven and the earth, and in the due
consideration thereof to carry our selves answerably: For when we shall be
truly better then we are, is it shall be our best to think least of our selves
and more of him, and to give him his due honor in our greatest abasement.

The third and last thing is: how we should live and carry our selves before
him when we have prayed: and this also is very worthy of our remark it is our
custom for the most part, in the sense of our sin to run to God and to cry
for mercy: But we can no sooner say, Lord forgive us our sins, when straight
with the dog we return to the vomit of our iniquities, and with the sow to
the puddle of our transgressions: and what else is this I pray you, but a
scorning of God, and in effect a begging of his leave to sin against him;
what a prayer is this? Does the school man pardon the ignorance of his
scholar, that he may afresh return and play the trowant? or does the Master
of a family wink at the deboarding of his servant, that he may of new play the
wagge? No sure, it is to another purpose, that they manifest their mercy: will thou O man be angry with thy contempt, and shall not he who chastises the
Nations, correct? No, no, deceive not thy self, he whom thou call thy
father, and whose habitation thou do confess to be in heaven, shall laugh
thy project to scorn: for he desires not thy sacrifices, nor thy burnt
offerings, he abhors thy solemn feasts, and thy new Moons: All that he
requires of thee is a newborn creature, for a broken and contrite heart the
Lord never despised. Would thou then have thy prayer to be heard? I pray
thee take heed to whom thou praiest: if thou invokest thy Father that is in
heaven, let thy conversation be with him also in heaven, and remember that
counsel given by the Apostle to the Colossians: If you be risen with Jesus
Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ sits at the right
hand of the Father.

But thou will say to me, O man, how shall I seek those things that are above,
since they are unsearchable? the eye has not seen them, the care has not
heard them, and the mind of man cannot understand them? I may answer with the
Apostle in that same place, Though thy hand be short that thou can not reach
to them, yet thy heart and the desires thereof are not so: Set thy affections
(says the Apostle) upon them. But for the more particular information, I will
teach thee how to attain unto them. If thou would seek thy Father that is
in heaven, and in seeking, find him, then be careful of three things:

Seek him where he may be found, seek him how he may be found, and seek
him whilst he may be found. It is a lamentable pity to see the toil and
travail of men in this time: for they weary themselves in searching and
seeking out the heavens, the air, the sea, the earth, and when they have found
them, the more that they know of them the greater fools they become: As it is
written Romans 1. O but that industrious search that has the promise of
satisfaction and true content is only to seek God and his Heavenly kingdom:
To the achievement whereof we must first seek him where he may be found,
and where is that I pray you? Gregory in his moralls lib. 16. cap. 15. tells
us, In Sinu matris Ecclesiae. Not in St. Dennis in France, not in St. Jacques or
Compostella in Spain, not in St. Patricks Purgatory in Ireland, nor at the
holy Grave in Jerusalem: No, no, if at any time he was found there made
manifest unto them, he has now withdrawue his presence to the Heavens. And
out upon their folly that weary themselves in seeking him by such sublunary
Pilgrimages: I may and will be bold justly to say what the Angels said to
Mary Magdalen: Why seek thou the living amongst the dead? But if thou
would seek him, seek him in his Church, in the ministry of his word, in
the participation of his Sacraments; and in the sweet Quire of the praises and
prayers of his Saints: And surely if thou find him not there in the smell of
his garments, thou shall never find him in the fullness of his glory: For it
shall be with all of us, as it was with the two Disciples going to Emaus,
whilst he talked with them, and opened unto them the Scriptures, their hearts
did burn within them by the way: It shall be so (I say) with thee O man: if
thou gettest not thy heart inflamed with a spark of his love in the way, when
thou hear his word, it is a fearful testimony, that thou shall not be
satisfied with the fullness of his joy in the life to come: For it is the sweet
smelling relish of those drops that we get in his word, that makes us to
follow after him, and with our heart to pant and pray till we see him in Sion
that is invisible.

2 As we must seek him where he may be found, so we must also seek him
whilst he may be found; For there is a time appointed for all things under the
Sun. A due time, wherein if we seek we shall find, and a preposterous time,
wherein although we knock, it shall not be opened unto us. This precious time
is to day, for to day we must hear his voice: This is the acceptable time,
this is the day of our visitation. Remember Esau, the Foolish virgius, and the
Spouse in the Canticles.

3. Lastly, let us seek him how he may be found: and as for this, know that
though he be sought of many, yet he is found but of a few, because that they
seek him not after this fashion: For he that would find God must seek four
manner of ways, says Augustine.

1. Cast and unice, for himself and his own sake, seeking nothing but in
him, and for him, knowing that the fashion of this world perishes

2. Vere and sine hypocrisi, truly and without dissimulation: For if we draw
near him with our mouths, when our hearts are far from him, he will cast
back the dust of our sacrifices upon our faces, and make open our nakedness
in the sight of our enemies.

3. Fervide and cum zelo. For the Kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and
the violent take it perforce, and if our prayers want audience, it is because
they want heart.

4. Perseveranter and continuo. For it had been better for us never to have
known the way of truth, then after that we have known it, that we should
look back with Lots Wife, or desire a return with Israel to the Fleshpots
of Egypt.

And now Brethren, I hope I have made the first part of this prayer clear unto
you in some condition: For in it I have showed you the love of the inviter,
God, who is become Our Father: I have showed you the communion and fellowship
of your society, they are all our own Brethren and Sisters, yea fellow members
with us, of that mystical body, whereof Jesus Christ is the Glorious head.

Thirdly, I have showed you the Glory of the habitation to which we are
invited, it is the heaven of heavens wherein he dwells that is all-sufficient.
What now rests, but as those parts have been severally touched, and in them,
you instructed: So now for conclusion, we bind them up again, and learn you
in a composed frame to say aright Our Father which art in Heaven. And to the
effect you may do so, and be heard in so doing, let me request you for Gods
sake to follow his counsel who has directed you thus to pray: Whenever thou
come before God to entreat him as thy Father which is in heaven, learn to
deny thy self, and to follow him: Deny thy self, for thou art altogether
unsufficient, and follow after him, for in him does all fullness dwell. Thou
art insufficient in a threefold respect.

1. In respect of Judgment to resolve aright.

2. In respect of wisdom, to manage aright

3. And in respect of power to bring to pass.

In respect of Judgment, for we are blind, and know not the things of God.

In respect of wisdom to manage, for with David and Israel, we are in
bringing up the Arc, and therefore many times our Vzzah perishes.

In regard of power, to bring to pass things that are spiritual, we can
neither will nor perform; For Paul may plant and Apollos water, but God gives
the increase. And as we must deny our selves, so we must also follow him,
because of his sufficiency, for he is all-sufficient, in his mercy, in his
wisdom, in his power, and in his truth.

In mercy, for where our sin abounded, his mercy has superabounded.

In wisdom, for he has so wisely reconciled his mercy to his Justice that
he is satisfied, and we saved.

In his power, for he dwells in the heavens, and does on the earth whatsoever
he wills.

In his truth, for heaven and earth shall pass away, but one jot of his word
falls not to the ground: If we seek him he will be found of us, but if we
forsake him, he will forsake us too.

LECT. 4.
Hallowed be thy name.
AFter the Preface, we come in order to look to the Petitions, which are six,
whereof three have a reference to God, and three unto man, and his humane
weakness: In handling of these Petitions, this shall God willing be the path
wherein we shall walk. We will first look to the order of the Petition, and
see in what distance it stands with the rest. And then we will look upon the
matter contained in the Petition, and see wherein it does concern us. The order
of this Petition is clear and easy, for if these three Petitions which
concern God be justly preferred to those which concern man, then of
necessity that Petition which does most truly point out Gods honor unto us
should first have place: and that is this. For it does most lively represent
unto us the care of Gods glory: To it therefore precedence is duly given. Now
that this may be a little more clear, I shall labor to give you the evidence
thereof, both from the commandment of God, and the practice of his Saints.
Shall we look to the commandment of God? it is more then manifest; for
amongst those ten Commandments which he gave to Israel, the first four which
concern himself, are prefixed to those other six which concern but us: And
amongst these four, that which does most eminently and evidently set forth his
Glory, has both preheminency and precedence of place. Answerable unto this, is
that direction of Christ's, Matthew 6.33. Seek first the Kingdom of God and
the righteousness thereof, and the things of this life shall be cast unto you.
As God by the authority of his word, does require this of us: So also at all
times it has been the practice of his Saints, in whom the Spirit of God has
dwelt powerfully, ever to prefer the Glory of God, to all things in this
life, yea to their own life it self. Look to the practice of Moses, Exodus
32. And of Paul that elect vessel of Mercy, Romans 9.3. Both of them in a
burning zeal to the honor of God, did wish themselves to be thrust out from
God, that in their overthrow, his honor might be the more manifested. Let me
yet add to this another consideration of the order: and we shall see that it
is not without reason that this Petition has the precedence. For in it I find
a wonderful strain of the wisdom of our Redeemer Christ Jesus. In the preface
and entry of this prayer, he has led us to direct our Petitions in the terms
of affection, in the terms of faith, and in the terms of fear: In the terms
of affection, whilst we call God a Father: In the terms of faith, whilst we
call him our Father, and by faith make him to be ours in Christ Jesus: And in
the terms of fear, whilst we acknowledge his power in heaven and in earth:
And then being to order our Petitions, either according to the riches of Gods
mercy, or to the depth of our misery: The first thing that we are desired to
crave of God is a heart, that can be desirous of his Glory: For it is
impossible that we should at any time walk in the obedience of the succeeding
Petitions, unless that our hearts be first inflamed with the zeal of Gods
glory: For if we consider aright, who is he that can ingeniously say, let thy
Kingdom come, or thy will be done on earth, unless he be first enamored with
the love of Gods glory? Or who is he that can content himself with his Daily
bread, or hunger and thirst for the Pardon of his sins, or strive and wrestle
against Temptation, who has not his heart inflamed with the sparks of the
Glory of God? surely amongst the sons of men there shall not be found one, no
not one. For we are here, In via, non in patria. Viatores, non co^prehensores.
And therefore it is impossible for us to desire the reparation of the lost
image of God in us, or to make a right use of the things of this natural life,
unless God illuminate our eyes, and inflame us with the love of his glory, who
dwells in glory, and has clothed himself with glory inaccessable, which no
flesh can conceive, and live. That the Jews should have had a chief care of
this glory, it was well demonstrated unto them in the motto of their High
Priests, that was on their frontlets: Sanctitas Iehovae.

The High Priest was glorious every way, in the lower hemne of his garment, he
had a fringe interlaced with bells, and pomegranats of gold: in his brestplate
he had the Vrim, and the Thummim: on his shoulders he had two Onix stones: but
on his forehead (as one consecrated to the service of God) he had engraven
Holiness to the Lord. Wherein he did both confess and petition: confess
that God was holy, and holiness it self: and petition him that he would make
him holy as he was who had called him: and as the Jewe was thus instructed, so
also are we who are Gentiles, not left without instruction. For I must say here
of this petition what Paul spoke of faith, hope, and charity, in preferring of
charity to the other two, he gives a reason: Those two shall evanish, but
charity shall convey us to the Kingdom of heaven. So fares it with this
petition: the rest shall all so evanish: Thy kingdom come shall cease, when it
comes to us by death: Thy will be done in earth shall cease, when we shall
rest from our labors, and our works shall follow us. Give us this day our
daily bread shall cease, when we shall eat of the bread of life. Forgive us
our sins shall cease, when we shall enter into our Masters joy. Lead us not
into temptation shall cease, when God shall tread death, sin, and satan
under our feet. Thus an end of all these petitions shall come, only this one
shall have no end at all: but shall be like to him, to whom it is here
ascribed: for he in himself is A and O, the first, and the last; so shall his
honor and glory be also like unto him: a new song he shall put into our
mouth, and a deep Hallelujah in the secret of our hearts, wherein the heavens
and the earth, and the hoasts thereof, shall only resound the praise, the
power and the glory of God, for whom, and by whom all things were made; to him
be glory for ever. Amen.

Now after the order let us come to the words of the Petition. It has three
things considerable in it. First, a subject; secondly, an attribute; thirdly,
and a word of copulation, tying the Attribute unto the Subject. The Subject is
Gods name: the Attribute is in the word Hallowed: The tie of copulation is Thy:
To speak somewhat more fully of this purpose, it shall not be amiss to follow
the order either of the civil, or common law: both of them refer the whole
body or bulk of of their law to these three: Ad Personas, Res, and Actiones,
Justin. lib. 1. Instit. titulo 2. in fine. Lancelot. institut. Iure Canon. lib.
1. Titus. 3. in fine. Pardon me a little to invert their order, and it shall
serve for the better illustration of our matter.

In handling of this petition, three things are to be considered: some things,
some actions, some persons in peculiar.

The thing proposed is Gods name.

The action concerning it, is, the fanctifying, or hallowing thereof.

The peculiar person, whose name should be sanctified, is Gods name, beyond all
other name, or things in heaven, in earth, or under the earth.

Let us now come to the Subject of this Petition: Gods name. For understanding
hereof, know; that names of things are the notes, and demonstrations of the
true being of them, and serve to represent unto our understanding the true
knowledge of the things themselves by the assistance of voice and air. This
made Aristotle in his book of interpretation to say, (...), This is clear by
the denomination of all the creatures of God: for as the folly of a fool is
known in nothing more, then in denominating of things amiss: so is the
wisdom of man known in nothing more, then in the true denomination of things,
presented before him: This being the sole, and absolute difference betwixt
them, that as a thing does give essence to the name, so the name gives a
declaration of the thing. Res est nominis ratio, nomen est rei signu^. But lest
in stead of playing the divine, I should seem to play the Philosopher, let me
show you that names are of three sorts. First, some give^ to the creatures by
man. Secondly, some given to man by God. Thirdly, some given and ascribed by
God to himself.

I say first, some names were given to Gods creatures by Adam: for it is
written, As Adam called every living creature, so was the name thereof: This
was a part of that image of God imprinted in Adam in the beginning, that as the
Parent, the Master, and Conqueror of all Gods creatures, he imposed names unto
them, yet was not this his sovereignty absolute, but subordinate: for though
the name was Adams, yet the workmanship was Gods: God made the creatures, Adam
only was the godfather unto them: and therefore we see, that Adam who gave a
name to every creature, yet did not assume a name to himself: he named the
creatures, but God named him, and called him Adam.

Secondly, I say, that as man gave names to the creatures, so God gives a name
to man: as is evident, not only in that which he gave to Adam, and Evah his
chief creatures, but also in those which he has sometimes given to men,
before they came from their mothers belly: as to Cyrus, Josiah, John the
Baptist, and to Jesus Christ: and in those names which he did change from a
natural to a spiritual signification: as Abram to Abraham, Sarai to Sarah,
Jacob to Israel, and Ieconiah to Coniah: showing us, that as our parent, our
Master, and our Conqueror, he both gives and changes names unto us at his
pleasure.

Thirdly, I say, God takes a name to himself: for since names are but the
signification of things that are, and of that which they are; none can give a
name to God, because none does know what he is: for he is infinite, and we
finite, he is incomprehensible, and all our judgment may be comprised within
a spanne, only he himself, who has his being of himself, and gives a
being to all things that are, can of himself, and by himself declare what
he is, and make his name known unto man: according to that which is written,
No man has seen the Father at any time, save the Son, who is in the bosom
of the Father; neither has any man known the Father save the Son, and he to
whom the Son reveals him. And now this being spoken in general concerning
names: it rests that we look in particular to the name of God. And if any
shall ask the meaning thereof, I answer, that three things are signified by
it: his essence, his works, and his word: for the name of God is two ways
taken in Scripture. First, essentially, secondly, with relation. Essentially,
it is taken for himself, as in the 20. Psalm. The name of the God of Jacob
defend thee, that is to say, the God of Jacob defend thee. And again, 10. To.
Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved: that is, whosoever
shall call on the Lord: relatively, the name of God in Scripture is three ways
taken; for his attributes, his works, and his words: For his attributes, of
justice, or of mercy; look to Pharaoh: I will get my self a name of him. The
second relation of it is to his word, and the truth thereof: and of this it is
said, that Jerusalem was the place which he had chosen for his name: for as
the Law was given from Sinai, so the grace of the Gospel went first out from
Jerusalem.

And lastly, his name is relative to his works: for so is it written: God is
known in Israel, and in Judah he has manifested his name.

Use. Now having in some measure delineated unto you, him that is invisible:
not as he is known of us, but as he manifests himself unto us in his
attributes, his word, and his works, let us stay a little, and draw from
thence some comfort to our own souls: which surely is here in great measure
to be found: for whilst we look on the manner of the revelation, how God
has made himself known to us by his name: who is he that cannot, nor will
not infinitely rejoice therein? For it is true indeed, that many times, and in
diverse manners, God made himself known to the world of old: yet all were but
clouds in respect of our light, all was darkness in respect of our day, and
all were but shadows in respect of that sweet Sunshine that has now appeared
unto us in Jesus Christ his Son; in whom he has made his name fully known,
and to whom in our flesh he has given a name far above every name that is
named: that at the name of Jesus made manifest in our flesh, every knee should
bow, both of things that are in heaven and in earth.

But thou will inquire of me (O man) Did not God make himself known by his
name to Adam, to Moses, to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and the Prophets: And by
these his names, point out to them the fullness of his grace in Jesus Christ?

I answer thee, It is true indeed but the difference of the revelatio^ is
great: for God in the manifesting of his name unto us, has now done it more
nearly, more clearly, more fully, and more familiarly.

First, more nearly: for what is nearer to us then our nature, which he did
assume, he became flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone, yea like unto us
in all things sin only excepted, that we might be made to God in him,
flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone in a spiritual regeneration.

Secondly, more clearly: for they saw but darkly, and under a veil, but we
have seen him in the prime, and strength of his light: for it is written, All
these things were but shadows of things to come, but the body was Christ
Jesus. Galat. 2.

Thirdly, more fully: for he has kept back no part of the counsel of the
Father from us, which was necessary to our salvation.

Fourthly, more familiarly: for what could be more familiar, then to have the
Son of God walking in our flesh amongst us thirty three years and an half?
And what greater familiarity, then to make both Jew and Gentile, who were
estranged from God, to be one in himself? Let us therefore boldly look upon
him in the revelation of his name: and learn in every thing in heaven or in
earth, on the which we set our eyes, to reverence this great and mighty name,
the Lord our God.

This being spoken concercerning the subject of the petition, the Attribute now
follows in order to be considered: and it is laid before us, in a word of
sanctification or hallowing: Hallowed be thy name.

For understanding hereof, we will first look what it is to hallow or
sanctify: Secondly, in whose power it lies to sanctify: Thirdly, how Gods
name is hallowed, or can be sanctified of us.

First, to hallow or to sanctify any thing is, to vindicate the same from any
absurd or profane use to its own holy and proper end: and therefore to hallow
Gods name, is to vindicate it from all abuse whatsoever, and to attribute to it
the due honor and glory thereof. But let this be made a little more clear.

Secondly, God sometimes halloweth: man sometimes halloweth: and God, and man
both do sometimes hallow. God hallowed man by creation making him to his image:
God halloweth man by regeneration in the day of his new birth: and God shall
totally and finally hallow man in the day of his total and final redemption:
so that whatsoever God halloweth it is positively hallowed: Man halloweth God,
not by making him blessed, for what can a finite creature add to the felicity
of the great and infinite Creator? Man therefore halloweth Gods name, but
declaratively, when he confesses to the honor and glory of God, that he
has nothing, but that which he has received: and when he gives praise unto
him for the same. So that the hallowing, and sanctification of God to man, in
respect of man's to him back again, is as the cause to the effect, or as Gods
election, knowledge, and love to us from eternity, causes our election,
knowledge, and love of God back again in time.

Finally, there be some things that God and man both halloweth: and these are
persons, times places: i. his Ministers, his Sabbaths, and his Churches: for
these God has hallowed, and consecrated to himself. Man halloweth them by
observing and keeping them holy without profanation, and sanctifying himself
in them, and by them.

To speak then in a word: Gods name is hallowed two ways: notionally, and
practically.

Notionally, when we acknowledge him aright, and in the thoughts of our heart
do yield unto him that due reverence which becomes the creatures to give to
the Creator.

Practically, when in the tenor of our lives we do rightly acknowledge the
truth of his word, the riches of his mercy, the equity of his justice, and the
majesty of his works.

Use. Now that we may make use of this Petition, let us call to mind a little
what has been said: that under the name of God was understood his essence,
his word, and his work: his essence we cannot hallow, for we can add nothing
to that which is infinite; neither can we declare it sufficiently; for here we
know but in a part, and see but in a part. Gods name is honored in his word;

First, when it is reverenced.

Secondly, when it is trusted.

Thirdly, when it is obeyed.

First, when it is reverenced, not as the word of man, but as the word of God:
for this cause the Apostle St Paul, at Corinth, preached not in the vain
enticing eloquence of humane wisdom, lest the cross of Christ should be of no
effect.

Secondly, when it is trusted: for want of this trust the old world was
drowned, and Moses debarred the land of Canaan: and mockers in the last time,
shall receive a judgment that lingers not.

Thirdly, when it is obeyed: and men walk worthy of the calling whereunto they
are called. The want of this made Eli his house desolate, and Shilo a
mockingstocke. The want of this made the sword to stay on the house of David:
and surely the want of this, shall one day bear witness against the children
of this generation.

One thing rests, to honor God in his works; and this sort of
sanctification is threefold, according to the threefold estate of his
creatures, for some of them we contemplate only, some of them we acquire
with toil and much travel, and some of them we use with freedom and true
liberty. We contemplate the Sun, the Moon, and the stars, all made for
the glory of God, and the praise of his name: we possess the earth, and the
seas with toil, difficulty, and pain: we use with liberty, and freedom, our
meat, our drink, and our apparel: In the first we honor God, if from the
excellency of the creature, we look up to the admirable glory of the
Creator. In the second we honor God, whilst we care for them not with a
thornie, but a sober care, (...), non (...). In the last, we honor God whilst
we sanctify their use by the word, by prayer, and by sobriety. But shall not
man honor God in the words of his mouth also? Yes surely, but because he who
honors God in his heart, does also honor him with his mouth, and e contra,
by the one we shall easily judge of the other. For this, it is that the wicked
man is reproved. Psalm 50. And that Christ commands Satan to be silent
(speaking out of a possessed man) for he knew that his name would be
dishonored, whilst it was named out of the mouth of the father of lies: let
our speech therefore be powdered with salt. Now only rests the word of
appropriation.

Thy, which is set as a band and tie knitting the Attribute of prime honor to
the subject of name; for it is said, Hallowed be thy name. For understanding
whereof, let us remember that the Pronoune thy is possessive, and points out
to us the chief and prime person, to whose name honor and glory do chiefly
and most duly belong. For though there be many names, or rather, many things
named: in heaven, in earth, and under the earth: yet is there not any name, to
which honor, and glory does of debt, and duty belong, but only to the name of
God, and that in three respects.

First, because by him is named all the family, that is either in heaven, or on
earth.

Secondly, because by his sufferings, and victorious triumphs over his
adversaries, he has obtained a name far above all other, not only that is
in this world, but also in that which is to come.

Thirdly, because there is no other name; by the which we can be saved, but by
the name of Jesus Christ the just. Now then, since by the Pronounce thine, is
understood the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, the whole
Trinity, whose actions ad extra, as they are undivided: so their honor quoad
nos, should be undivided also. For as their essence is one, and their majesty
coeternall, so should their glory be coequall: according to that which is
written: My honor is mine, and my glory I will not give to another. Let him
be ashamed that in any wise does ascribe that which is due to God, either to
Angel, or Saint departed: The distinctions of (...), (...), or (...) will be
no shelter of their error, we reverence their memory, we bless God in
behalf of them, and we wish from God the consummation of their glory: but to
believe in them, to call upon them, or to bow before their images, or to adore
their relicts, as we have no warrant for it, so let us abhor to do it: lest
it be enquired of us, Who has required these things at your hands, Esai 1.12.
They have already entered in their Masters joy: Requiescant in pace: Let us
labor to follow their example, and let us sigh for their consummation, as they
cry for our addition: for they cannot be perfect in full perfection without
us. Amen.

LECTIO 5.
Thy kingdom come.
IN handling of this Petition, I will observe the order proposed in the last:
first I will look on the reference of the words: both with the preceding and
subsequent petitions, and then on the matter comprised and contained in them.

The site and posture of this Petition is worthy of remarke: first, because of
the reference it has with the preceding petition: And secondly, because of
that reference it has with those petitions which succeed. The dependence it
has with the former Petitions is: That in the last petition, we craved that
Gods name might be hallowed: that is to say, that the Majesty and holiness
which is in himself, and is Himself, (for whatsoever is in God is God) that
Justice, Mercy, and power that is in his works: that truth, righteousness,
and equity which is in his word, may not only be known and manifested to man,
but also received, honored and obeyed by man, in such manner as is fit and due
to so great a Majesty, and so dread a name: So now in this Petition he
shows us the way how to do it: Namely, by submitting our selves (as members
of his Kingdom) to his supreme Sovereignty, for then chiefly and ever till
then is the name of God duly honored by man, when man by his due and lawful
obedience testifies himself to be a subject in his Kingdom, and a member of
his incorporation.

Again, as this is the reference it has with the precedent Petition: So has
it also a necessary dependence with that which immediately succeeds: For in
the words next following, we crave that Gods will may be done: But it is
certain no man can do Gods will, but he who is a member of his Kingdom: Nor
can any man keep the law of God but by his grace. John 3.24. Psalm 119.32.
For though our works should be accomplished from the beginning of the world,
yet are they all but abomination in the presence of God, till our persons be
first acceptable unto him in Christ Jesus. 1. Cor. 13.3. here then is the true
reason of this position, he that would either hallow or honor the name of God,
or desire to perform his will, must have a care, first to be devised, and made
a member of his Kingdom; for the name of God can never be truly honored, nor
his will truly obeyed, by any, but those who are true members of his Kingdom.

But it may be enquired, cannot a wicked man do the will of God?

I answer, that a wicked man may do the thing that is good, as Ioab may give
good counsel, Judas may remember the poor, A Hypoerite like Achab may be
humbled, A vicious man may cite and speak Scripture, but all is abomination,
for two causes.

First, their persons are not acceptable, they have no portion in David, nor
inheritance in Iesse.

Secondly, whatsoever they do, they do it not in that sincerity, nor right
intention toward the honor of God as does become, but what they do is in
hypocrisy to be seen of men, and to procure honor and glory to themselves, and
for this cause God casts back the dust of their sacrifices in their faces,
and manifests their wickedness both to men and Angels; Then O man if thou
do desire that the name of God may be hallowed and honored by thee: Or
desire that his will be done in thee, or by thee: Labor then I pray thee
that thou may be made a member of his Kingdom, for as many as are called by
the Spirit of God, are the sons of God, and if the Spirit of him that raised
JESUS from the dead does dwell in our mortal bodies, our mortal bodies shall
then also be raised by it: But if this incorporation shall be wanting: though
we should give our bodies to be burnt in the fire, yet shall it not avail us.
For as we live strangers from the life of God, strangers shall we likewise
die; and rising strangers to his Grace, we shall be thrust out as strangers
from his Glory, to the suffering of that worm that dies not, and of that fire
that never is extinguished.

Now let us come to the words, and consider what is contained in them.

I find in them three things; a Subject, an Attribute, and a Copulation.

The Subject is a Kingdom; the Attribute is a coming; and the word of
Copulation, Thy.

Kingdom.
For understanding of this we must know that there is a threefold Kingdom: Of
man, of Satan, and of God.

The Kingdom of man is that preheminency and sovereignty which God in his
wisdom has established amongst men, giving to some authority to command, and
to others a commandment to obey: and that for shunning of confusion and
disorder amongst the sons of men, and the children of nature. And to testify
that God is the God of Order, and not of confusion, he has in his wisdom set
a distinction amongst his creatures by way of sovereignty, three manner of
ways.

1. He has given a Kingdom and sovereignty to the celestial bodies.

2. He has given and established a Kingdom and sovereignty in man.

3. He has given a Kingdom and sovereignty to man.

The sovereignty and Kingdom given to the celestial bodies, is twofold: Of
influence, and of dominion. The sovereignty of influence, is acknowledged in
nature, and by all the children of nature: For not only do these celestial
bodies express their influence on the earth, the sea, and the fruits thereof:
But also on man, and the natural body of man. For man having his body composed
of the temperature of the four Elements; Fire, Air, Earth, and Water, it does
sensibly feel the influence of these celestial bodies in the mutation and
alteration of his health and constitution. And as God has given a sovereignty
of influence, so has he likewise given a sovereignty of dominion. For it is
written, Gen: 1.16. He made two Great lights: the Sun the greater light to
rule the day, and the Moon the lesser light to rule the night.

As he gave a Kingdom and sovereignty to the celestial bodies: So did he also
establish a sovereignty and Kingdom on man; For he gave unto him sovereignty
and dominion over the fishes of the Sea, the fowls of the Air, and over every
living thing that moves on the earth. Neither did he alone subjugate the
unreasonable creatures unto him: But what is more, he did (by his wisdom)
establish a sovereignty to man, amongst men and the sons of men. For amongst
them he has in his wisdom appointed some to be Masters, some to be servants,
some to be Parents, some to be children, some to be husbands, some to be
wives, some to be Judges, some to be people, some to be Ministers, some to be
hearers, some to be Princes, and some to be subjects. And in all of these,
what has he done but imprinted in man the Characters and vestiges of his own
primacy and authority: For as he is God over all, and in all blessed for ever:
So he has given unto man as the chief and sovereign of his creatures, a
chief and sovereign authority, not only over his fellow creatures, but also
over his fellow Brethren, that in man, as the little world, man might perceive
the sovereignty of God the creator and Sovereign of the whole world. Last of
all he has set and established a Kingdom and sovereignty in man, and that was
the Kingdom and sovereignty of the image of God in man. For as some celestial
bodies have a Kingdom over the inferior bodies; As man has authority over
the creatures and his fellow Brethren; So God has a Kingdom in man, wherein
the soul of man is that throne whereon he does sit. The conscience is Gods
immediate deputy, his assessors are the light of knowledge and understanding
writing out a law, his Sheriff or Justice of peace is the will, The common
people whom he rules, are the affections. Now in all of these being composed
and drawn up to an universal bulk and incorporation, the image of God stood
in man. For as man was created the immediate King of the world, So God did let
him see that he was his immediate King and Superior: And least that at any
time he should wax proud and evanish, he established a spiritual Kingdom in
man. Both that he might be subdued to him that made him, and that he might
learn to rule aright the Kingdom concreded unto him. This then is the Kingdom
of man, a Kingdom over his fellow creatures, a Kingdom over his fellow
Brethren, a Kingdom over his innated affections.

Satan also has a Kingdom: now will you enquire what that Kingdom is?

It must be answered, it is no true Kingdom, it is but a tyrannick usurpation,
like that of Jeroboam the son of Nebot who made Israel to sin, or like
that of the Bramble, who became King of the trees of the forest. That it is no
true Kingdom, it is clear out of these several instances: And the instances
of his usurpation are four. 1. His inauguration. 2. His Vassalls. 3. His
government. 4. His remuneration or reward.


His inauguration in the first place does clear this: For he is neither borne
to be a King, nor chosen to be King. Not borne a King, for he is but a
creature, and there is no true King but the Creator, who is the King of Kings
and the Lord of Lords. And as he is not a King by birth, so also he is not a
King by election, for none have chosen him to be King over them: Yea all that
he possesses he does possess by Tyranny. He said to Christ in the day of his
temptation, All these are mine. But he lied (for the earth is the Lords and the
fullness thereof) in it, Satan has not one foot breadth but what he either
robs or usurpes.

2. His Vassalls show also his illegitimation, for as it is in the Kingdom of
God, so is it also in the true and lawful Kingdoms of men. In Gods Kingdom,
as he gives a law, so they obey, and say, Thy Will be done in earth as it is
in heaven. He is the shepherd they are the flock: His sheep hear his voice
and they will not follow a stranger. In the Kingdom of Satan it is otherwise,
they are all children of disobedience, howsoever conspiring an evil, yet unto
every good work they are reprobate: Of whom the true Christian may say as
Jacob said of Simeon and Levi, They are brethren in evil, but in their secret
let not my soul come, and my glory be not thou joined with their Assembly.

3. In his government, how rules he I pray you? Not as a true sovereign, but
as a treacherous usurpator. He has no part in man, but that which he has
stolen. For he steals, First light out of the understanding; then true desire
out of the affections: and thereafter, full authority and commandment out of
the will. Where I pray you had he ever place since his fall but what he stole?
He stole away by a lie the heart of Eve from God, the heart of Cain from his
brother, the heart of Cham from his father, the heart of Esau from his
blessing, the heart of Jeroboam from his God, and the heart of Judas from the
Savior of the world. Yea now he is amongst us, and he is likewise stealing,
either our hearts from the word by sleep, or the seed of the word out of our
hearts, that it may not take root and bring forth increase to our peace.

4. His usurpation is known in his remuneration and reward. A true King
rewards answerably the service of a good subject: and when he finds his
coffers empty, he will coin occasions to gratify his faithful servant. God
acclaimes this to himself, as a part of his distributive justice. Who ever
amongst you kindled a fire upon my Altar in vain? And again, Try me if I
shall not bless thee. No, in this he has made all flesh unexcusable: For he
makes his sun to shine upon the good and upon the bad: and his rain to fall
upon the wicked as upon the righteous. Neither is this alone the goodness of
God, to be liberal in his dispensation, for he neither denies nor
upbraideth. But amongst the sons of men also, it has even in nature been
accounted foul and base to be ingrate. Alexander could say to Permenio, it is
not enough for Alexander to give; Pharaoh could say to Joseph, Only in the
Throne shall I be before thee: and Herod (though in an evil course) can say,
Ask of me to the half of my Kingdom I will not deny it: Only this base
slave Satan, who has nothing but what he has usurped and stolen: can both
trecherously entice the sin, and thereafter cruelly torment for sin: greedy
by his temptation, to make a proselite: and by his torture and ingratitude to
make a reprobate.

The Kingdom of man, and the kingdom of Satan being thus pointed out: it
rests only, that we look on the Kingdom of God, of the which it is said

Thy Kingdom come.
Of this we must enquire what it is, and then how manyfold it is. Gods
Kingdom is that spiritual rule and authority, which he has in man through
Christ: communicating to him his grace in this life; and keeping him by the
power of his spirit, through faith, to eternal glory.

This Kingdom is different from the former two: For as concerning the
Kingdoms of men, they were subordinate and under another authority: This is
suprem and (...) of himself and from himself. The Kingdom of Satan was
usurped, and trecherously ingrate: This is due, authoritative, and liberal.

This being known, for the nature of this Kingdom: we will now enquire a
little of the several kinds thereof. Know then that the Kingdom of God is
threefold.

1. He has a Kingdom of power.

2. A Kingdom of grace.

3. And a Kingdom of glory.

The first is an external, the second an internal, the third an eternal
Kingdom.

By the first he rules all his creatures: All the sons of men; and all the
devils in hell also. He rules the creatures, for his voice makes the
foundations of the earth to shake: The Cedars of Lebanon to tremble, and the
goats of a thousand mountains to calve: He rules the sons of men, either
doing in them his will, by his Spirit of grace, or doing upon them his will, by
the stroke of his justice. He rules the devils in hell also: For howsoever
they go about like roaring Lions seeking to devour us: Yet has he kept a
bridle in their lips, and a hook in their nostrells, so that they cannot do
what they would; for as their Master himself confesses concerning Job: Whom
can harm the man whom the Lord hedgeth about.

Use. But that we may make use of these things to our comfort: Let us look on
the Kingdom of God in the second signification, which is his Kingdom of grace.
Wherein we must understand that this internal Kingdom of God, whereby he
rules in the hearts of men, has an opposite Kingdom, rebelling against it,
to wit, the Kingdom of Satan, for the overthrow whereof, and the maintenance
of his own, God has established in this his militant Church and Kingdom,
these things.

1. A King, and some subordinate subjects.

2. Oaths of allegiance.

3. Laws for obedience.

4. Punishment for offenders.

5. And rewards for welldoers.

The King is God himself: A Trinity in unity, and unity in Trinity: The
Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost: God one in Essence, but distinguished in
Persons.

The Subjects of this Kingdom are all the Saints of God, from the first Adam
to the last man that shall stand upon the earth: The Fathers before the flood,
the Patriarchs after the flood: The Prophets under the law: The Apostles under
the Gospel: The Martyrs their successors: and we who are now in the end of
time, become their fellow Brethren, as the posterity of Jacob dwelling in the
tents of Shem. And finally, all that shall believe the Gospel of Jesus; for
now there is no more Jew nor Gentile, nor Grecian, nor Barbarian, nor bond, nor
free, but all are in Christ Jesus.

Our Oath of allegiance we have given in our baptism and communion with him at
his table.

In the first, a vowing to be his people as he is our God:

In the second, promising to grow up in him, and in the grace given us, until
he consummate his grace with his Glory.

The law of this Kingdom is that which is written partly in the tenor of the
law, and partly in the tenor of the Gospel. Neither so sharp as always to
have their censure written in the blood of the offender, like Draces laws: nor
yet so remiss, that partiality might make of them a spiders web: like those
of Solon; but so contemperate, that what justice required was satisfied: and
what mercy craved was freely yielded.

The reward of transgressors and of well-doers is not defective here also: For
as every man sows so shall he reap: He that sows to the flesh, shall of
the flesh reap corruption: But he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the
Spirit reap life and peace.

Now all of these do show her to be a Church, and a spiritual Kingdom: Yet
withal let us remember I pray you: that it is but a militant Church, and a
militant Kingdom that we have here. Against whom, the Prince of darkness,
and he that rules in the children of disobedience, rages fiercely and
fearfully, because his time is but short. And for his more sure triumph he
has confederated our nearest enemies, our flesh and the world against us. We
are weak as a little David: and they strong as the sons of Zeruiah, how can
we then resist, and be victorious? Blessed be God through Jesus Christ our
Lord: For there be more with us then they that be against us. If Satan be a
strong man, yet is our head and captain far stronger: is Satan a roaring
Lion, our captain is the great Lion of the Tribe of Judah? Is Satan a mighty
Pharaoh? yet our captain is the great Archangell of the covenant, who sees
our wrongs and oppressions: and who by a mighty hand, and outstretched right
arm shall work out our deliverance. For in the day of conflict and spiritual
contest, our captain leaves us not to our selves, and our own weakness: But
(which serves wonderfully for our comfort,) he is made and has become in our
flesh to us these four things.

1. He is (...) the moderator and marshall of our camp to us, not suffering
our temptations to exceed his appointed bounds.

2. He is (...) with us, our Second, offering himself to all our danger as
well as our selves.

3. He is (...) with us; he is thy compassionate surgeon, binding up thy
wounds, and pouring in them balm and oil for their refreshment.

4. He is our (...) He is our Conqueror, and in his strength makes us
conquerours also, as it is written, In all these things, we are more then
Conquerours. Let us therefore lift up our wearyed hands, and strengthen our
fainting knees, and in patience run the race that is set before us, for in
due time we shall reap our reward if we faint not: for when we have fought
our fight, when we have run our course, and kept fast that which we have
received, then shall we receive the end of our faith, the salvation of our
souls in the day of the Lord Jesus. Amen.

SECTIO 6.
Thy kingdom come.
IN this petition three things are chiefly to be remarked; the matter of the
Petition, the manner of it, and the particle of copulation which ties the
matter to the manner: the matter is a kingdom: the manner is our desire, we
desire it to come; the particle of copulation is, Thy, for it is no other
kingdom we desire, but Gods kingdom.

First then of the manner of our desire, Come, and then of the title of
appropriation, Thine.

If we shall return to the manner of our desire: we desire that Gods
kingdom may come: wherein for our better understanding, these four several
things are remarkable. First, from whence it comes.

Secondly, to whom it comes.

Thirdly, by what way, or in what manner it comes.

Fourthly, to what end it comes.

Shall we enquire from whence it comes? I answer, from heaven: to whom it
comes? I answer, to the elect: how it comes? I answer, it comes not by
observation, but by dispensation: and finally, shall we enquire to what end it
comes? I answer, it comes for the manifestation of Gods glory, and the
salvation of the penitent sinner: of each of these a word.

First, let us look from whence it comes; I have said it comes from
heaven: for the kingdom of God being either external, or internal, or
eternal, all of them come from heaven. His external kingdom comes from
heaven: for he was king before they were made: for look whatsoever they are
in themselves, that they are of him and by him. See Nebuchadnezer in his better
reformation; It comes not from the East, nor from the West, but from God, who
is the giver of every good gift: it comes neither from Athens, nor Jerusalem,
for then either Philosophers had been Monarchs, or the Scribes, and Pharisees
had been dominators over the world: but not the first: for when they seem to
be wise they proved fools, and God turned the understanding of the prudent man
to naught. No nor the second: for although they sat in Moses chair, yet they
locked up the key of knowledge: and neither entered themselves into the kingdom
of God, nor did suffer other men to enter.

If this Kingdom then be neither from the East, nor from the West, neither
from Athens, nor from Jerusalem: what rests, but it must be from heaven?

If his external kingdom be of this pitch, much more is his internal
kingdom: the communication of his grace to man, and the soul of man, for the
heart of manlyeth not within the compass or power of man: he only that made
the heart knows it, and has the keys thereof: when he opens no man
shuts: and when he shuteth there is no man can open again: For Paul may
plant, and Apollo may water, but only God gives the increase: and without him
our word is but a tinkling brass.

It rests then that we consider his eternal kingdom which is only from him,
by him, and for him: for from thence he has thrust some, before time: such
are the Apostate Angels: some in the tract and progress of time: such are the
disobedient, and incredulous: and some in the end of time: such are they whom
he knows not. What rests then, but, since all things are of him, from him,
through him, and for him, that unto him we should ascribe the only bonour of
our salvation: neither saying with the Pelagian, nor with the Somi-Pelagian,
that our salvation is either in all, or in part, of our selves; for of our
selves we are not able to think a good thought, but whatsoever we have, we
have received, and if it be so, why should we glory? etc.

2ly, I enquire to whom it comes; I answer, to the elect and to the elect
only; for many are called but few are chosen. And to speak plainly to you, In
all the dispensation of God, nothing is more fearfully remarkable then this: to
whom the kingdom of God comes. For as it was before time: so it is in the
fullness of time, and as it is in the course and fulness of time, so it shall be
in the end of time; Before time all were not chosen; but he loved Jacob, and
hated Esau: he appointed some to be vessels of honor, and some of dishonor;
he had mercy on whom he would have mercy, and whom he would he left to the
hardness of their own heart: In time, he calls who^ he will, the rest are
rejected.

When the old world was drowned, he saved Noah. When Sodom, and Gomorah was
burnt, he saved Lot: when all the world were Idolaters he called his servant
Abraham to the Land of Canaan: and when all the Jews were opposites to his
Son, he called the poor to be partakers of the Gospel. No, I must tell
you a mystery; As the choice of the heirs of Gods kingdom from eternity, was
not of all, but of some: so is not the dispensation of the calling in time, of
all, but of some few, for it will come in a land, but not in every city: it
will enter in a city, but not in every family: and it will enter in a family,
but not lay hand on every person of the family.

I say first, it will come to a land, but not to every city: for it came to
Judah, for there his name was known: but not to every city, for it did not
come to the Gargasens, they prefer their swine before Christ. It will come to a
city for it came to Jericho, and called none but Zacheus; it came to Philippi,
it chused none but Lidia and the Jailer. It will come to a family, but not to
every person of the family: to Rome, but not to Nere: to the family of
Narcissus, but not to his own heart. And as before time, the kingdom of God
was not ordained for all, but for some few: and as in time, it is not
effectual to all, but to some few: so after all time, it shall not be given
to all, but to some few: for according to the efficacy of the dispensation
thereof in time; such shall be the donation and fruition thereof after all
time, and in the end of time; for two shall be at the mill grinding; the one
shall be received, the other shall be refused: two shall be lying in one bed,
the one shall be received, the other refused: two shall be walking by the way,
the one shall be received, the other refused, although they ask they shall
not receive: although they seek, they shall not find: although they knock it
shall not be opened; for this shall be their answer, depart from me ye
workers of iniquity, verily I know ye not.

Use. Well then, is the provision of the kingdom of God, appointed but for
some few? is the dispensation thereof, effectual but in few? is the donation,
and fruition thereof bestowed but upon few? why should we not then serve the
Lord in fear, and rejoice before him in trembling: redeeming the time; because
the days are evil?

If the Lord should deal with us, as he did in the days of Gedeon, pour out
rain on the world, and let our fleece be dry: If he should deal with us as
he dealt with Pharaoh, make light to shine in Goshean, and leave our Egypt to
a palpable darkness: or as he dealt with Achab, make rain to fall upon all
the territories about, when Isarell was burnt up with heat: would we not take
it as a token of his anger against us? O fool and hypocrite, thou can
descerne the face of the sky, and the estate of the weather, but the estate of
thine own soul thou can not descerne: thou can mourn if thy field be not
as fruitful as thy neighbors: if thy ship return not as prosperous as thy
neighbors: if thy shop have not as many customers as thy neighbors: thou
can droope all the day long, and hang down thy head, as they that mourn
with out hope: and as Rachael weeping for her children, and refusing comfort.
But alas, there is a soul within thee, and it is more graceless then thy
neighbors: thou have an eye, and it is blinder then thy neighbors: an ear,
and it is deafer then thy neighbors: an heart, and it is harder then thy
neighbors; and yet thou can not mourn for this: What shall I say to thee?
to cut thee altogether off from hope of mercy, I will not; but this I will say,
unless thou redeem the time, and sorrow in time, thou shall sorrow
desperately, because thou did not sorrow sooner: and (like Israel led
captive) because thou did not mourn in Jerusalem, thou shall mourn in
Babel, and shall not be comforted.

The third question, concerning the coming of Gods Kingdom is, how, and in
what manner it comes.

And surely amongst all the rest, this is the chiefest question, and of
greatest difficulty. Yet that I may speak to your capacities, I will tell you,
Gods Kingdom comes to you, when his grace comes to you.

But you will say, how shall I descerne, or know the coming of his grace to
me?

To this I answer, the Kingdom of God comes not by humane observation, so as
any man can positively say: Lo here is Christ, or lo there he is not: Yet
whenever it comes, and wheresoever it comes, it is observable, and that
by these three things that are different. 1 The time. 2 The manner. 3. The
measure.

The time of the coming of Gods kingdom is not alike to all, but different:
for it came to some men before the Law: as to Adam, Enock, Noah, Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob.

It came to some men under the Law; as to Moses, Joshua, Caleb, David, Samuel,
and the Prophets.

It came to some men in the infancy of the Gospel: as to Matthew, Andrew,
Peter, James, John, Nichodemus, and the woman that came to the well of Samaria.

It comes to some men now in the strength of the Gospel; for many are called,
and few are chosen: And if our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that perish.
Neither is the general period of these times only remarkable: But will you
look to the wind when it blows?

Sometimes before the morning: as on Jacob, and John the Baptist before they
were born.

Sometimes in the dawning of the day: as on Samuel and the Evangelist Timothy.

Sometimes at the noontide of the day; as on Elisha the Prophet, and Paul the
Apostle.

And sometimes at the evening and setting of our Sun; as upon the thief on the
Cross.

Secondly, shall we look on the manner of his coming: It is also wonderful,
For sometimes he comes, and establishes his Kingdom in us by means,
sometimes without means. By means (although weak) to Elisha by Eliahs
mantle: to Peter by a look of Christ's eye: to the Apostles by prayer: and to
Mary by a salutation; Without means: when by his inward operation, beyond all
that we do either think or expect, he (as one having the keys of the house
of David) does open, and none can shut.

Thirdly, in respect of the measure; for to some he gives a weak faith, as
the grain of a mustardseed: to another he gives so strong a faith that the
gates of hell cannot prevail against it. To one he gives grace to believe;
to another grace to confess, to a third grace to suffer for his name sake; And
all these things works the self same spirit, distributing to every man
severally as he wills. 1. Cor. 12.11.

Now this diversity of the manner of the coming of Gods Kingdom, should teach
us a spiritual industry. You know the common proverb, take tide in time, for
tide and time will stay for no man: look the mariner, who has a ship going
to sea: as he is earnest to lanch out to the deep, yet cannot when he would,
but must stay till the tide make, and when it is made, it will not wait an hour
upon his leisure, for if he take it not in time, it will ebb, and he shall
not get out: Even so in our spiritual navigation to the Kingdom of God when
grace offers it self, it has a certain time, a certain measure, and a certain
mean: the which if we embrace, we make a good voyage: if wedespise, we lose our
journey. Then would you be a good merchant, when you see the wind of the
spirit blow, and the tide of grace make; for Gods sake delay not, hoyse your
sails, make straight your tackle, get you to reading, prayer, meditation, and
spiritual conference. It is hard to know (if thou blowest in time upon that
poor coal which God by his grace has kindled in thee) what a fire it shall
bring forth to the glory of his name, and the peace of thy own conscience. But
if thou blow not in time, Oh how dead a coal shall thy heart prove, to blow at
out of time: thou may blow whilst the bellows rent, but life thou shall not
get in it: for by thy negligence thou have lost the tide, and quenched the
operation of the spirit, which offered it self to thee for thy salvation.

Fourthly, the last thing remarkable in the coming of Gods Kingdom; is, to
what end it comes. I answer, it comes to work in thee a seavenfold work.

First, a work of illumination, that in his light thou may see thine own
darkness.

Secondly, a work of accusation, saying, as to Adam, Adam where art thou, have
thou eaten of the tree whereof I did forbid thee?

Thirdly, a work of conviction, Cursed be thou, for thou have not continued
to obey the things written in the Law.

Fourthly, a work of contrition, making thee to water thy couch with tears:
and to go out and weep bitterly.

Fifthly, a work of consolation; Go thy way home, thy sins are forgiven thee.

Sixthly, a work of adoption: whilst by his spirit he cries in thee, Abba,
father.

Seaventhly, and lastly, a work of confirmation, and perseverance; whilst he
keeps thee by the power of his spirit through faith to eternal salvation.
What do we here pray for? this: that Gods Kingdom may come; and why so?
because we can never go to it, except it do first come to us, for such as is
his eternal knowledge, his eternal love and his eternal election; such is
the dispensation of those his graces in time: and their remuneration in glory
after all time: what is then thy duty, Oh man? harken and I will tell thee:
Since God has made his Kingdom ready for thee, make thou thy self ready for
it. I say, he has made his kingdom ready, Omnia enim sunt parata.

All things are ready: Matt. 22. Paratae sunt nuptiae, the marriage is ready.
Parata est coena, his supper is ready. Paratum est cubiculum, his marriage
chamber is ready. Paratum est cubile, his bed is ready: Paratum est and regnum,
and his Kingdom is ready. Now are all things on his part ready, and thou art
not ready: Then woe be unto thee that ever thou wast borne: for Gods sake then
dress and trim thy self in time, and say, Paratum est cormeum, My heart is
ready. Psalm. 57.7. and learn with the spirit in the Revelation to say, The day
of the Lambs marriage is come, and his bride has made herself ready. Blessed
is the man who in that expectation can so say: surely he shall not want his
reward; and it shall be said to him: Come ye blessed of my Father, possess the
Kingdom prepared for yon. And when you are come in, it shall be cheerfully
said to you; eat and drink my friends, make merry my well beloved.

And now having spoken concerning the matter, and manner of the Petition; it
rests that we speak concerning the copulation of the one with the other:
Thy, This word is very well inserted here: for as none can truly say, Our
Father, but he who is borne of God, and is a fellow member of Christ's body: so
none can desire Gods Kingdom to come, but he who is a member thereof, and a
fellow heir annexed thereto by Christ Jesus* yet the words would be well
remarked; for Meum, and Tuum has made all the world ado. Man, whilst he
kept the Image of God might have justly said of all the world: it is meum,
but when he fell he could say nothing, but turning over the right to God, say,
it is tuum. man being begotten again to the hope of glory in Christ Jesus may
justly say, to, and of all the world, it is meum, jure adrem, but not jure in
re; for he owes all things, yet possesses nothing: Look to Christ, to his
Apostles, and to all his Saints, Hebr. 11. What shall we do then? but since
by mastery our Kingdom is taken from us, look for one to come: and sigh in
our selves, saying to God, Adveniat regnum tuum. Meum and tuum cost Abel, and
Naboth their lives: But God would not have it so in Christ's Kingdom: for there
is no Kingdom but his: and to him alone, we must justly say, Thy Kingdom
come.

Use. What right then has the Pope to enthrone or dethrone Kings, since he is
no universal King himself. Neither in the matter of power, for his breath is
not his own, nor in the matter of Grace, For he cannot renew, nor redeem his
brothers soul: it is a price too great for him to pay; nor in the matter of
glory, for he is the child of perdition: he is (...), and he goes (...).

Secondly, why strugle men for sovereignty, and can never be contented? since,
the earth is the Lords, and all Kingdoms are his, Let us seek the Kingdom of
God, and our necessities shall be cast to us.

Thirdly, and last of all, let us beware how we utter this prayer; for it
appertains not unto the wicked, but to the godly: not to the wicked, for if
God should take him at his word, his condemnation should come upon him at
unawares. Perversum est enim optare ut veniat, quem times ne veniat. Augustine,
Psalm. 97. and dicere, veniat regnum tuum, cum times ne exaudiaris. Aug. Psalm.
147. It is only the child of God, who (as the Heart brayeth for the wellsprings
of water) can truly thirst after God: and say, I desire to be dissolved. And
again, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Revel. 22.

LECT. 7.
Thy will.
AS in the former Petitions so in this also we will first look to the reason
why it is so placed, and next, to the matter of the Petition. The placing of it
is remarkable: both in respect of the Preface, as also of the preceding
Petitions. When we look to the Preface, this follows exceeding well upon
it. For there is propounded to us that Summum bonum and chief good, which the
Sons of men do aim at (God himself known by faith, communicated by love,
and expected by hope of consummation:) to the which we can never attain, but
by doing his will: For the Kingdom and inheritance of God is not given to
rebels nor disobedients: but to Sons and obeyers. For none shall enter into
the Kingdom of God, but they that know the will of their Master and do it.
And as it has this reference with the preface viz a reference of instruction:
So when you look upon it in the reference it carries with the preceding
Petitions: you shall find the reference and relation demonstrative. For as
God, in all things, and above all things, he has care of his own honor, and
the glory of his name. For it is written, My Glory I will not give to another.

Again, as he is the suprem sovereign of heaven and earth etc. Having therein
a Kingdom of power, of grace, and of glory: So here we have the evident
demonstration of our confidence and (...). For he subjoynes this as a
touchstone to try whether ourzeale to his honor, or our thirst for the
righteousness and approach of his kingdom, be true and sincere or not: And by
this: to see whether we do his will or not. Desiring us thereby (because of
the flattery wherewith we flatter our selves in the use of that common
proverb, Ad Deum omnes ire volunt, post Deum pauci) to try and examine our
selves, whether we be truly of that number or not, who can say Thy Kingdom
come; For it is not the hearers but the doers of the law shall be justified.

Use. Now from this, that God demonstratively teaches us how we shall know
whether we be members of his kingdom or not: I find that there is a lesson
requisite to every Christian to be learned to salvation, to wit, That he
should try and examine himself, in what measure of grace he stands. For many
times our hearts flatter us: and we cry peace to our selves, when God means us
no peace.

Yea many times we condemn our selves in the sense of our sins, when God
condemns us not, nor minds any thing but our excitation from security.
Least therefore that we should mistake, looking upon a flattering security as a
true peace: And least in the day of our visitation, we should mistake the
arrows of Ionathans advertisement, for the arrows of Saul's malice and
destruction: God has given us here a touchstone, to know both the nature of
our peace, as also of our correction, which is this, Look to Gods will, and
what thou have done concerning it. Whilst thy soul speaks peace to thee, and
says with the Publican, I thank God I am not a sinner as this man: content
not thy self with that naked and general verdict, for it may deceive thee as
it did him: For he went away unjustified. But draw rather home to the
conscience of thy obedience: and see how thy will has been subdued to Gods
will, and thy affections captivated to his obedience: and from thence draw home
(in a practical Syllogism) the true assurance of thy joy.

For as by faith in Jesus Christ we have peace with God, so on the other part,
nothing is more sure then that faith works by love, and that faith without
works is but a dead faith: and he that brags of it, may well have a name that
he is living, but in effect he is dead.

Again, on the other part, it is as requisite (for our comfort in the day of
our troubled conscience by sin) that we look to the care of our obedience
to Gods will: for as the Apostle Paul tells us: Of my self I know no evil,
yet by this I am not justified. And again, Of my self I know no good yet by
this I am not condemned. So it is with every Christian, as he has not so much
good in him, as by virtue of his merit may make him look to get heaven: So
has he not so much evil in him, as can sequestrate him from heaven, if he
have but a will and desire to do Gods will:

For the best of Gods Saints may be justified, but are not in this life
sanctified wholly. There is in them two men, the old and the new: the flesh and
the Spirit: and these are so contrary one to the other that we cannot do the
things which we would. Yet in the midst of this our defect, if we have a
delight in Gods law concerning the inner man: all is well, for by this we may
know, that he has begun, and will accomplish his work in us. Yea what is
more, since the first Adam fell, never man was able to do Gods will, Jesus
Christ being excepted.

Not Abraham, David, Solomon, nor Sampson, Only Jesus Christ the second Adam
has fully done it, and in his perfect obedience has covered our defects, and
imperfections. Two documents and evidents whereof we have in Scripture: One in
the Epistle to the Collossians cap. 1.19. Another in the fourtieth Ps. I desire
to do thy will, o God, says David. But in the tenth to the Hebrews, Lo here
I am, For in thy book it is written of me, I come to do thy will, O God.

To come now to the Petition it self, the parts thereof are two.

The first is simple, and positive.

The second is comparative or set down with a reference.

The simple and positive part is, Thy will be done.

The comparative part is, In Earth as it is in Heaven.

To return to the first part, In it three things are remarkable.

1. What is the Object we look to, and it is a Will.

2. Whose will it is we should have respect unto, and it is Gods, Thy.

3. What way should we be exercised after the knowledge of his will: And that
is, we should obey it: Thy will be done.

Will.
To speak of these things then as they lie in order.

Of the object of our Petition: Gods will. We must know that by the learned,
the will of God is diversely taken and considered. Sometimes it is
distinguished, in an antecedent and consequent will. So, Damaseen, lib. 2. cap.
46. Sometimes they distinguish it in the will of his good pleasure and the will
of his signification: So, Lumbardus and Scholastici. lib. 10. destinctione. 45.
Sometimes they distinguish it in an effectual, and ineffectuall Will. So,
Augustine in his Manual. 102. 103. But the Church in her latter times, looking
on the will of God, has found it taken three manner of ways.

1. For that faculty of power and willing which is in God: And this they call
(...).

2. For the act of his willing, and this they call (...) or (...).

3. For the thing which he wills: And this they call (...).

As for the first signification, whilst it is taken for the power of willing:
In that sense it is one with the essence of God.

For as God in himself and by himself understands, and knows, and is wise,
so also he wills. For whatsoever is in God is God: and that neither by way of
accident, or composition, but by way of essence and essentially.

As to the second, for the act of his willing: We must understand, that God
wills not as man wills: For man being but a finite and temporal creature,
wills but in time, and that in variety, alteration, and change: But God being
infinite and unchangeable, has willed from eternity that which is done in
time, or shall be done after all time: and nothing is or shall be done for
ever, but that which in eternity, he both willed and decreed. And in this
sense the will of God, is one with the essence of God also: For as he is
eternal and immutable, so is also his will.

As to the third and last signification, to wit, the thing which God wills.
For understanding hereof, know that the object of Gods will is threefold.

First, he wills himself and his own glory.

Secondly, he wills something concerning the end of his creatures, these are
called his decrees.

Thirdly, he wills something concerning the way to that end; and that is
either obedience or disobedience.

Now it may be enquired, what is meant here by the will of God.

I answer, not the first, not the second, but the third.

And that, in all the three acceptations thereof: both that which concerns
himself and his glory, in that which concerns the end of the cretures, and
in that which concerns the way to that end.

But if these be too deep for thee I will speak more plainly, and point out
to the will of God concerning us, for thy better understanding.

I must then tell you, in so far as it concerns man, it is of two sorts: or
rather considered by man in two diverse manners.

First, as it is hid and couched up in Gods own bosom.

And secondly, as it is revealed to us, either by his Viva voce, or by his
written word.

In the first sense it is called Gods secret will: In the second it is called
his manifest and revealed will.

Of the first, to wit, Gods hidden and secret will, it is that which Paul
says: O deepnesse, etc. Romans 11. How unsearchable are his judgments, and his
ways past finding out.

Of the second, it is said, Not he who cries Lord Lord shall enter into the
Kingdom of God: but he who knows the will of my Father and does it. And of
both conjunctly it is said by Moses: that, secret things belong to the Lord:
Things revealed to us and to our children, that we may do them. First then of
the first point.

It may be enquired, if in this Petition we do or should pray for his secret
will. I answer, No: for his secret will shall come to pass: For he dwells
in heaven, and according to the secret pleasure and counsel of his will, all
things in time and after time shall be moderated. Is it not lawful then in any
condition to meddle with the hidden and secret counsel of God? Yea surely,
providing it be with modesty (...).

1. For first we may enquire why it is so called.

2. What is our duty in respect of it.

3. And how far it can have any fellowship with the evil that is in the
world, and with the sinful actions of men.

Why is it so called?

I answer, for two causes:

First, because it is hidden from man, who cannot reach to it until God
reveal it. For no man knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the
Son reveals him.

Secondly, because when it is revealed, man cannot comprehend it, except he be
enabled from above. For the reasons of Gods secret ways exceeds humane
capacity: And the more that humane reason looks on it, the less it
understands. Why God loved Jacob and hated Esau: Why he rejected Saul for one
fault, and forgave David many: and why he condemned Judas for selling of him,
and spared Peter that did forswear him, Enquire the reason hereof at man, he
cannot give it you; yea God has revealed it: I will have mercy on whom I will
have mercy, and whom I will I harden. And now as man could not give this reason
until God revealed it: So now when God has revealed it, man cannot comprehend
it.

For nature would say, that it was injustice in God, of two men equally evil
by nature to choose the one and forsake the other. Thus Gods will is called
secret, first, because man knows it not, and secondly, because he cannot
comprehend it.

2. What is our duty in respect of this will?

I answer, it is our duty not to search into it too deeply: Nam nonest curiose
investiganda, sed religiose adoranda, whether God in his secret counsel has
ordained thee to be poor or rich, high or low, whether thou shall die of a
lent or a fervid Ague. Since it is Gods secret counsel, it is not fit thou
should enquire it. Stoop under the abstruse and hidden secrecy thereof. But
to enquire of it ere God reveal it, is but a torment before the time: and sure
I am it shall never be laid to thy charge in the day of Judgment how far
thou have searched into the secret counsel of God: But how far thou have
obeyed the revealed will of God.

Thirdly, concerning the secret will of God, it may be enquired: since there
is so much evil in the world: how far and in what sort, God by his secret
will concurreth, and has cooperation with the same, for men looking on the
evils that are in the world, and finding them so frequent and fearful: and
withal comparing them with the omnipotence of God, against whose will nothing
can be done: and not being able to solve this riddle: have either with the
Libertine cast over the cause of their iniquities upon God, and made God the
Author of sin: Or else fearing to speak blasphemously of God, they have with
the Manicheans invented two chief and prime causes of all things, one of good,
another of evil, both equally supreme, and absolute in their kind, which is
altogether false, for God is only the supreme and absolute good, but Satan is
not an absolute evil.

But for clearing of this question, a little understand and know, The evil is
twofold: An evil of sin, and an evil of punishment, and this is
Tertullians distinction, writing against Marcian, lib. 2. cap. 180. Concerning
the evil which we call the evil of punishment, there is no question, for it
is not a true evil in it self, it is but thought so of us, for the punishment
of sin, though it seems evil to the offender, yet it is no evil in it
self, for it is a good of justice. The question is only concerning the evil
of sin: and how far God communicates with it, not being the author thereof,
nor tainted himself therewith. This question is so much the more remarkable,
by how much Scripture seems to give way to it. For it was a sin in Pharaoh to
harden his heart: Yet Scripture says that God willed it, and that he did it.
It was a sin in Satan to be a lying spirit in the mouths of Achabs
Prophets: Yet Scripture shows us that God willed it. It was a sin in Satan
to vex Job unjustly: and yet Scripture shows that God willed it. And it is a
sin in man to stop his ear against the truth, and to believe a lie, and
yet Scripture shows that God wills it.

For solving of this doubt there is a very good answer given by our Divines to
this question: whilst they say, that we must distinguish the action of the
sinner, from the sin that is in the action: And they make God the author of
the action, but not of the viciosity and evil that is in the action. And this
they clear by the examples of the Sun, the Earth, and the word of God. This
I grant is good, but not sufficient. But would thou know O man how God
wills sin, and over-ruleth sin, and yet is free from sin? Then thou
must know that sin, and the way of sin, has a beginning, a progress, and
also an end: God has a will working on sin, and overruling sin, in all
these three respects.

For shall we look to sin in the beginning thereof: Gods will has been two
ways exercised.

First, by way of inhibition, in giving a law against it, forbidding sin in
the thoughts of the heart, in the words of the mouth, and in the actions of the
conversation.

By way of permission, leaving a lawless man to a lawless way: For it is a
righteous thing with God (when man knowing him to be God, will not glorify him
as God) to leave that man to himself to do the things that are not convenient

Secondly, shall we look to the progress of sin, God has a reference with
it also, and that either by impeaching and hindering it, or by overruling it. By
impeachment, he dried up Ieraboams hand; and hedged Isreal's way with Thorns.
Or by overruling it: as to Job, All that he has is in thy hand, only on
himself, see thou lay not thy hand. And the Jews sought to lay hands on
Christ, but they could not, for his hour was not yet come.

Thirdly, shall we look on it in the end: God has an overruling reference
with it also: For he either punishes it or pardons it: with the want of
grace in this life, or of glory in the life to come; or then pardons it,
fully, freely, and finally: Fully, all our sins: Freely, in respect of us:
Finally; in this life, and that also which is to come.

And all this without sin, or the least blemish of sin.

For in the beginning of sin he shows his wisdom:

In the progress, he shows his power:

In the end, he makes manifest both his Justice and his Mercy.

Use. In all of these let us learn to tremble, and stand in awe; and to take
heed to our ways.

For whilst we sin, though God has some sort of reference with our actions,
yet it is such as shall neither stain him, nor excuse us. For as in the
betraying and death of Jesus Christ, God had not only ordained it before time,
but also all the ways leading to it: yet did not this save Judas, or the Jews
from going to hell: For although the action was of God, and the moderation
thereof, both in the beginning, progress, and end thereof: yet the sin and
viciosity of the action was of Satan and man; Therefore have they both their
just reward: He by the seed of the woman has his head trodden down; They,
because of their sin, have gone to their place, where their worm dies not,
and their fire goes not out again. David was afraid at Perez Vzzah; We
should be much more at Baal Peratsim. 1. Chronicles 14.

LECTIO 8.
Be done.
HAving spoken in our last sermon concerning Gods secret will: It rests now
that we speak concerning his revealed will, which two, are not in theselves two
several, different, or contrary wills in God, but are two several, and
different manners of consideration of one and the self same thing in God: for
as the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, being one in essence, do not
differ in their essence, but in their existence: so do not the hidden, and
revealed will of God differ one from another really, but by diversity of our
consideration: for that very same will of God, which being hidden from us, is
called the secret will of God: and being manifested to us, is called the
revealed will of God.

In handling hereof these things are considerable.

First, what is his revealed will, or where it is to be found.

Secondly, what are the points of his will, which he reveals to us.

Thirdly, whether we may join our will to Gods will; and say, My will be
done, as thy will be done.

The first thing remarkable is; what Gods revealed will is: and I answer; It is
all that which he has revealed to us, and desires to be obeyed of us, either
in the Law, or in the Gospel. And in a word: whilst we desire of him that we
may do his will; we beg of him, that since he gave us first a law of nature,
enabled sufficiently to do what was required of us: Secondly, seeing he gave us
a law of works, as a touchstone, to make known to us the weakness of our
corrupt nature: Thirdly, and seeing he has given us the law of faith, or of
the gospel, repairing in us the loss of the law of nature: he would be
pleased to pity our first defection: to repair in us our second weakness, and
to accept of our weak endeavors under the gospel, as perfect in him who was
perfect in himself. And that he would sanctify us by his grace, to the
endeavor of that which as yet is imperfect: and accept at our hands of the
will as the deed.

In this Petition then, I see three things are set before our eyes. Our
natural integrity by creation: Our natural corruption in our apostacy: and
our dignity in our adoption. The first we confess; the second we do bewail:
the third we hunger and thirst for.

Use. These two then, the testimony of the law, and the word of faith received
in the gospel, do clearly teach us two things, first a refutation of the
Church of Rome, in the matter of man's merit: for they are bold to claim right
to the Kingdom of heaven, not only by the works of absolute satisfaction done
to the law, but also by relics of supererogation, left to others for their
support. But for refelling hereof, let me enquire of thee, O man, who art thus
bold, blasphemously to bark against heaven: Why do thou annihilate the
cross of Jesus Christ?

Thou can not go out at the door without a cross about thy neck: and yet
behold thou art the enemy of the Cross of Jesus: for it is written: If
righteousness come by law, Jesus Christ dyed in vain. And again, If life
come by works, then grace is no more grace; And if it be of grace, then
works are no more works.

Secondly, why do thou spend thy prayers, and supplications in vain? I may
say to thee, out of due consideration, what David spoke out of precipitation
and rashness, when he saw the wicked flourish, and the evil man prosper in
all his ways; he pleads thus with God (although amiss) Why have I purged
my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence for naught? So would I say
to thee; If thou have as much in thee, as may obey the desire of the Law, what
need thou to pray to God for it: or in the morning to say, Let thy will be
done by me, when thou have as much strength in thy self by nature as to do
that and more.

Thirdly, why annihilates thou the nature of a true merit? for to establish a
true merit, thou must give God something that is thy own, something that thou
owe not and something that is proportionable to the reward thou feekest. I
say, thou must give God something that is thy own: now sure thou have nothing,
but that which is given thee: for of thy self thou can neither will or
perform.

Secondly, thou must give him something that thou owe him not: But what is
that I pray thee, that comes not under the compass of his law, since in it
there is a yoke laid on the thoughts of thy heart, the words of thy mouth, and
all the actions of thy conversation.

Thirdly, I say thou must do something to God, that must be proportionable to
the reward that thou seek. Now what proportion I pray you, can be betwixt
that which is finite, temporal and corrupt, and that which is infinite,
eternal, and incorruptible. Woe be unto that man, that shall be thus
audaciously blasphemous, as to say, he has merited any thing but
condemnation: For that man appearing before God, and wanting his wedding
garment (the righteousness of Jesus) shall surely be stripped naked, and his
nakedness shall be seen of men, and Angels.

But thou will enquire, If man be not able to obey the Law, how can God in his
justice give him a Law, or correct him for the breach thereof? To the first I
answer thee out of natural reason, Although thou have rendered thy self
unable to obey, what injustice is it with God to exact thy obedience, for he
created thee able to obey whatsoever he required of thee? Is it not so amongst
the sons of men in civil actions? but what is more, God gives thee although
thou be unable, a law to square thy life by, for three causes: Vt scias quid
acceperis; ut videas quid amiseris; ut intelligas unde repetendum sit quod
amiseris; and as he requires the obedience of his law of thee for these 3
causes, so does he also correct the breach thereof, for 3 causes. 1. Ad
oste^tatione^ debitae miseriae. 2 ad emendationem labilis vitae. And 3. ad
exercitatione^ necessariae patientiae.

Use. Since in the tenor of the Law, and the Gospel, the revealed will of God
is shut up as in a treasury, or storehouse: Why is it that man delights in
ignorance? for from the knowledge of the will of God in these, there arises
light to the understanding, and sanctification to the affections. If it be so,
why then does the Church of Rome inhibit her followers the reading of the
Scriptures, and injoyne to them an implicit faith? Is this any thing else, but
to make the blind lead the blind, that both may fall? or is it any thing
else, but to shut up the key of knowledge, and neither enter themselves into
the kingdom of God, nor suffer others to enter? And finally, is this any thing
else, but to keep captive in chains of darkness the poor people, making them
by the tradition of men, to account the will of God of no effect. The Lord open
their eyes, to see the vanity of the way wherein they walk; and the Lord
establish our hearts in the obedience of the light revealed to us; lest this be
our condemnation, that light has shined, but we have continued contemners of
the light, because our works were evil.

The second thing offered to our consideration, is, what are the points of his
revealed will, and what are the duties which he requires to be done of us.
To this I answer, It were a tedious work to run over all the duties of a
Christian required of him in this word: yet for an instance, the word of God
requires of us. 1. The knowledge of Gods will. 2. Faith in his word. 3.
Obedience to the word believed. 4. Suffering for the testimony thereof, when
we shall be called to it 5. And finally, an hungring after our dissolution,
because we cannot get these things done. I say first, God requires of us to
know him, for thus it is written, This is life everlasting, to know thee to be
the only true God. And again, I have decreed to know nothing, but Jesus
Christ, and him crucified.

But thou will say, how shall I know God?

I answer, God is known by nature: for the natural man, although he know not
the true God, yet by natural knowledge he propounds something to himself
for a God. And this shall serve for a witness against him: for whilst by
nature he does the things of the Law, he becomes a law to himself.

By his works God also is known; For the invisible things of him, that is,
his eternal power, and Godhead are known in the works of his hands. Yet this
is not sufficient to salvation: For the more a man knows of the works, except
he be sanctified, the more he evanisheth in the vanity of his own
imaginations, and his foolish heart is the more replenished with darkness.

By his word he is known: for in the Law he shows what we ought to do,
And in the gospel what we should believe. For the Law was but a pedagogue to
Jesus Christ: and all the ceremonies, figures, and types thereof, were but
shadows of things to come; the body was Jesus Christ: and whosoever in his
difficulty has not recourse to the Law, and to the testimony; it is because
there is neither light nor life in him.

By grace God is known: for all the knowledge that man can have of God, either
from the Law, or from the Gospel, is in vain, unless our hearts be inclined
by the spirit of grace to obey, or believe: for it is written, As many as are
lead by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God, and heirs of glory.

By glory we shall know him fully: for here we know but in part: but there we
shall see as we are seen, and know as we are known, being exchanged to his
image, from glory to glory, by the spirit of the Lord.

The second thing that God in his word wills us to do, is to believe in him:
for there is a faith that believes God to be: there is a faith that believes
God to be true: and there is a faith that believes in God.

Every faith is not a saving faith, this only saves, when we believe in God,
and rest upon him, for the life of our bodies: saying, Give us this day our
daily bread: And for the life of our souls; saying, Forgive us our sins. So
that in faith there must be three things, Sensus, assensus, appropriatio,
sense, assent, and appropriation: Now it is the applying faith that saves, for
it is written, Thy faith has made thee whole.

The third thing God requires of us in his word; is a sanctified obedience of
that which we know and believe. For it is written, This is the will of God,
even your sanctification. Again, Be ye holy as I am holy, who has called you.
And again, Let your light so shine before men, etc. For it is not he who
cries Lord, Lord, that shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven, but he that
knows the will of my Father and does it.

It is the will of God that we suffer for him, for it is written, Let him that
would follow me deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me.

Brethren this is a lesson the hardest of all for man to learn, concerning God,
for man would learn to know God out of curiosity, that he might dispute and
reason concerning him. Man would believe both Gods word, and Gods work out of
necessity, when they cannot better do: Like Pharaoh and his Magicians
confessing the finger of God.

Man also, out of custom, and for civil shame, will some time obey God for
fear of punishment, more then for filial affection, but let these all be knit
together, they shall not so evidently demonstrate the life of the Christian, as
by his patience under the Cross. Look to Ely, to David, to Job, to the
Disciples, and Martyrs, who suffered not only the loss of their name, and the
spoil of their goods, but also rejoiced that they were counted worthy to
suffer for the testimony of Jesus: Look to Jesus Christ in his agony, Not my
will, etc.

Last of all, because these things, O man, cannot be gotten nor made so perfect
in thee as they should be: yet if thou can sigh for thy deliverance, and
groan under the burden of thy imperfection, it is an evident assurance, that
he who has begun that work of grace in thee, will in due time perfect it;
for these sighs are not from nature, but from the Spirit of grace, for of our
selves we know neither how to pray, nor what to pray, but the spirit helps
our infirmities, and makes request in us, with sighs which cannot be expressed.

But thou will say to me, I have sighed, and groaned, and yet I have had no
audience: I answer thee, there is no reason why thou should be so heard:
thy sin has dwelt long in thee, and thou art but chastised of late, and from
yesterday. Is it reason, that when thou cryest in the anguish of thy soul,
either for health or heaven, that thou should be immediately obeyed? No,
no, God called long at the door of thy heart, but thou would not hear him,
why then should he so suddenly hear thee? I tell thee it is not only
patience, but exercise in patience that does the turn.

Again, he has more then reason to refuse thee: for thou seek to him, not
so much for the desire of glory, as to be eased of thy smart, and therefore
he deals with thee, as with Jonah, that thou may say with Simeon, Lord,
let thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen my salvation.

LECT. 9.
In Earth, as it is in Heaven.
IN the handling of this Petition we have already spoken of two things, first
of the word Will, and secondly, be done: We must now come, and look to the
word Thy; and in it consider whose will must be done, For understanding
hereof, we must know, that will is only, truly, and properly attributed and
ascribed to three: to satan, to man, and to God: I speak of will, as it is a
faculty of the reasonable soul: and so do exclude from it, the unreasonable
creature: to whom appetite and desire may be assigned, but a will cannot truly
be ascribed. To return then. Satan is the first to whom will is ascribed in
Scripture, for to him are applied the words of the Prophet Isay. 14.13. I will
ascend into heaven, and I will exalt my self: above the stars of God; as
some expound. But by abuse of this his will, he has captived it, both
himself, and his will to evil, and in so doing has lost the true privilege
of his will: For howsoever he wills nothing, but that which is evil: yet he
gets not done, all the evil that he wills: for God has so thrust a
bridle in his lips, and a hook in his nostrels, that without the bounds, and
limits of his chain, he neither dare nor can go 2ly Man has a title of a will
ascribed to him: for as he is a reasonable creature, consisting of a soul and
a body: so also in his soul there are these three things.

An understanding, holding forth light to him: some affections delighting more
or less in their object according to the light which is premonstrated the^. And
a will, chosing or refusing freely, the object set before him: both according
to the light of his understanding, and the delight of his affections.

I have said, that man wills freely, for unless will had the liberty and
free scope thereof, it were no more a willing, but a nilling power: it were not
voluntas, but noluntas.

Now concerning this liberty, or freedom in man's will, the Church of Rome, and
we have had, and do still as yet, maintain a long and serious debate, yet not
concerning the freedom, and liberty of the will, but concerning the object,
which the will of man chooses or refuses. It is their error to allege, that
man in the state of corruption, can will good, and will it freely: But we on
the contrary, do aver, that man in the state of corruption can only will
evil, and that continually.

For clearing of this truth, and that we may bring the light of God out of
this darkness; We must first consider the several and different estates in
the which man has lived, does live, or shall live.

Secondly, we must consider, how far his will did freely extend it self to
good, or evil, in these several postures or conditions of estate. When I
look on the estate and condition of man, I find it threefold.

First, an estate of integrity.

Secondly an estate of corruption.

Thirdly, and an estate of reparation.

His estate of integrity, is that, in the which he was created to the image of
God, being perfectly righteous, and holy in soul, and body.

His estate of corruption, is that woeful estate of sin, and misery, in the
which he involved himself by his apostacy from God.

His estate of redintegration, is that happy estate to the which he is exalted
in Jesus Christ, whilst by the virtue of his death, and the power of his
resurrection, he is made partaker of the grace of God in this life, and shall
be also of his glory in the life to come.

Now these being the several estates, and conditions of man: the question is,
what is the true, only, or adequate object of the will of man, good or evil.

To this I answer: good is threefold: There is a natural good, a moral good,
and a spiritual good.

The natural good, is that which serves for the preservation of the natural
life: such are eating, and drinking, sleep, rest or refreshment.

The moral good, is that which preserves the moral life, or civil society of
men: such are, to be a Judge, to be a Magistrate, a Merchant, an Artisan, a
Trafiquer, etc.

The Spiritual good, is that which serves for the begetting, and preserving
of a spiritual life in man: Of this sort are the preaching of the word, the
administration of the Sacraments, prayer, meditation: etc.

Now, if it shall be enquired, which of these goods, the natural man, by the
power of nature can freely will.

I answer, that in the estate of integrity he willed them all: In the estate
of his corruption, he may will, and do the first two, but not the last: In the
estate of grace he wills the last, yet not freely, for God must first renew
his will before he can will any spiritual good: And when he has willed it,
it is not fully and absolutely willed, or done as it becomes him: for the law
of his body striveth against the law of his mind, and captivates him to death.
In the estate of glory, we shall only, and continually will that which is
good, and spiritually good: for there we shall be exchanged into his image,
etc.

Thus the truth stands clear; That the natural man, as a natural man, and
before he be renewed by grace, can and may will both natural good, and a
moral good: But, to will a spiritual good in that measure, as that it may be
acceptable to God, he neither can nor may: For howsoever he may preach,
distribute the Sacraments, give alms, pray, and meditate: yet are these not
acceptable, For the natural man knows not the things that are of God. 1.
Cor. 2. He is dead in his sins and trespasses. Ephesians. 2. He has not the
son of God, and therefore can have no life in him. 1. John. 5.12. He has
not the spirit of God in him, and therefore cannot be the child of God. Romans
8.14.

And finally, although his works were finished from the foundation of the
world, yet is he but a stranger from the life of God: For till his person be
first acceptable in Jesus Christ, his works shall never be approved.

Last of all, a Satan has a will, and: as man has a will, so God also has a
will: And to him chiefly and above all, yea most truly, and most properly is
the liberty of will ascribed. For he wills that which is good, and that most
freely, most solely, most absolutely, and most perfectly, because continually.
Gods will then, yea, and his revealed will being holy, righteous, and just in
it self, and of it self; is that only which we crave in this Petition.

But thou will perhaps ask me, may I not say, my will be done: No, no, for as
God is primumens, and primum agens, so is he also Liberrimumens, and Liberrimum
agens; He is the first essence, and the first agent, and he is the freest
essence, and freest agent that ever was. No creature in heaven or in earth,
has either a being, action, or will: but that which is duly and truly
subordinated to his Essence, action, or will.

Would thou then crave a reason why thou must not intermixe thy will with
Gods will. The reasons are these,

1. As thou art a natural man, there is great enmity betwixt thy will and Gods
will. The Apostle tells us this, Romans 8. The wisdom of the natural man is
enmity with God. He says not only, that it is an enemy to it, but enmity it
self Now we know that it is more to be enmity, then to be an enemy, for an
enemy may be reconciled, but enmity never.

2. It is not good that we say, my will be done: For if we get our will, we
would many times will the things which would tend to our destruction. Thus the
children of Israel willed and desired Quails in the wilderness: and they got
their will, but not their well: For when their meat was in their mouth it came
out at their nostrels.

3. If we got all our will; we should many times sin against God, willing
the things which he wills not, and nilling the things which he wills. Thus
did Israel will their return to Egypt against the will of God, leading them
to the land of their rest. And thus they would have a King, and got one in Gods
anger.

Thus I may say boldly, that man's will should not be sought but Gods, For man's
will differs more from the will of God, then the heaven differs from the
earth. For it is man's will to live in wealth and prosperity, but God wills it
not, knowing that want is better for us, For when wealth makes man's wit to
waver, and prosperity makes him to misknow God: want makes him wise, and
with the prodigal child reclaimeth him from his error.

Secondly, we would always live at random, and be free from the Cross: but
God wills it not, for he knows that without the yoke we are but wild
heifers: But when the Cross is on our back, it will teach us to keep his law.

Finally, we desire to live long and see many days, God wills it not: And
therefore cutteth off the thread of our life, sometimes in the morning,
sometimes in the noonetide, and sometimes in the evening of our days. And by
so doing preventeth the growth of sin in us. Sometimes shuts our eyes,
from seeing the evil that is to come, and sometimes draws us away from the
love of the world, that we may be invested with our Masters joy.

Thus by all these palpable documents, he clearly teaches thee, to submit
thy will to his: and both in wealth and in want to say: Not my will but thy
will be done.

And truly, till this time come, and till thougrow up to this measure of
grace: A Scholar thou may be in the School of grace: but a perfect man in
Christ Jesus thou art not: For he that would be his Disciple must deny
himself, and take up his Cross and follow him daily.

The total sum then, of this part of the Petition is this, O Lord since by
nature we are created to thy image, and since, in that estate of our integrity
we were sufficiently enabled to do thy will: But now, since by our fall we
are so debilitated and weakened, as that we can neither know thy will nor do
it; We run to thee in the secret and sincerity of our souls, And we beg
of thee that by the grace of thy spirit, thou would so reenable us, and
strengthen us again, that thy will may not only be done by us, but also upon
us: That is to say, that we may not only do that which thou command us in
thy word: but also patiently bear whatsoever cross or calamity thou shall be
pleased to exercise us with.

And so having ended the first part of the Petition, we come to the second.
The first part was material; the last is formal. Formatur, we craved that
Gods will might be done in us and upon us. For manner we crave that his will
may be done in earth as it is in Heaven.

To come then to the consideration hereof: Whilst our Redeemer prescribes unto
us, the matter of Gods obedience, he prescribes it in two subordinate periods
of consideration.

1. In the place thereof.

2. In the pattern thereof.

The place, he will have it done on earth: The pattern, As it is in heaven.

We will first look to the place of this obedience: And it is earth. By earth
many diverse men have meant many things diversely. Tertullian by earth said our
body was meant and by heaven, our Soul: Because our bodies are of the earth
and earthly, and our Souls a spiritual and celestial substance. And the
ordinary gloss, following Tertulltan, writing on this place: by the earth have
understood the flesh, and by the Heaven the spirit: So that they make the
meaning of the words to be, Let the flesh and the lusts thereof be subdued to
the Spirit, and the good motions of the same.

Cyprian by earth understands the unregenerate, and such as do not know God:
and by Heaven, just men to whom God is known, and by whom he is obeyed. And he
makes the meaning of the words to be: Let them that are not yet called be
brought within the compass of thy covenant, and the bosom of thy Church, that
as we believe, so they may believe also: and as thy will is done by us, so it
may be done by them.

Both of these opinions are not only tolerable but also laudable: For we are
bound by religion, not only to subdue the lusts of our flesh, and to live after
the Spirit, but also we are bound in charity, to beg of God, that all such
as appertain to his election, may be in due time called, justified, and
glorified: That so there may be but one shepherd, and one sheepfold, and God
may be over all, and in all, blessed for ever.

But if I may speak it without the prejudice of so great lights: Howsoever both
these Petitions be requisite for the Christian: yet do not I think that
either of them be here meant: But with Chrysostom I do think that this
Petition differs nothing, from that precept of the Apostles. Collos. 3.1. If
ye be risen with Jesus Christ, seek those things that are above. By earth
then I understand men that are on earth: and by heaven, the Angels of God, and
the Spirits of good and just men departed: So that the meaning of the petition
is: Since it has pleased thee O Father, who dwell in Heaven, to make thy
name known to us, and be called upon of us: And seeing thou have honored us by
the making us members of thy true Church, and thy Kingdom of grace here on
earth: O let thy Spirit of Grace dwell so powerfully and plentifully in us, that
as thy holy Angels and glorified Saints do thy will in heaven: So we that are
but weak and sinful men may captivate our wills to thy obedience here on earth.

Well then, by Earth we must understand not only earthly men, but also the
place, where, Even on earth, and while we live in it. But let us remarke the
word, for it is general. Our Savior teaching us the person, the time, and the
place of Gods obedience: says not, Thy will be done in the field; in the city,
in the sea, or in the dry land, but (...) that is to say (...) per universum
terrarum orbem, Through all the whole world: And as David says in his 97.
Psalm: Make thy way known on earth, and thy saving health to all Nations.

The persons then by whom he will have Gods will done, are men, who are of the
earth, and to the earth return again. And the place where, in the earth, and
whilst we live in it: For unless we do the will of God here, we shall not
enter into our Masters joy hereafter.

In the second room we must look to the pattern, and it is called heaven,
by the which, as I told you already, Augustine and Chrysostom do understand
the holy Angels of God, and the glorified Spirits of men: These are said to
be in heaven. But by these alone the word is not only understood: For as there
are more heavens then one, so are they more that do the will of God in heaven,
then those blessed Spirits alone. I say there are more heavens then one, and it
is clear: For it is said in the preface of this prayer. (...) in the plural
number: and it is known and manifest in nature: For this expansum, or void
wherein are the fowls, is called a heaven, and they, the fowls of the heaven.
Again, these seven subordinate spheres in the which the seven Planets do
reign are called heaven also. Again, that place wherein are the fixed
Stars, is called a heaven also. And finally, that place of felicity, which is
above all of these is called heaven, and the third heaven, and the heaven of
heavens, and the Paradise of God. Now as all of these are furnished with their
several host and inhabitants: So is the will of God done in all of these, by
their several host and inhabitants: For in the lower heavens, which we call
our firmament, the will of God is done by the fowls of the air, and by the
treasures of winds, rain, snow, hail, and the thunder. In the second heaven
the will of God is done by the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars. In the third
heaven also the will of God is done by the holy Angels, who have kept their
original integrity, and by the congregation of the first born, who rest from
their labors and have entered into their Masters joy.

The words then are clear. By earth, is meant man, made of earth, returning to
the earth, and living on the earth. By heaven, is meant all the host and
inhabitants of the whole heavens of God, whether they be the first, second, or
third heaven: But chiefly the third.

Now the resemblance and parallel of the obedience is remarkable As it is in
Heaven: For it may be enquired, how do the Angels and Saints departed obey
the will of God in heaven.

I answer, they obey it five manner of ways: Speedily, Cheerfully, Fully,
sincerely, constantly and perfectly. Speedily and without delay; cheerfully and
without murmuring; fully and without omission, sincerely without dissimulation,
consta^tly without wearying, and perfectly without halting.

Now, is it possible for man so to do Gods will?

No certainly: we cannot do it speedily, for like Lot we linger to go out of
Sodom: We cannot do it cheerfully, for like Israel we grudge, and murmur in
the way to our rest: We cannot do it fully, for the good that we would do,
we do not, etc. We do it not sincerely and without dissimulation, for
although we honor him with our mouths, our hearts are far from him: We do
it not constantly and without wearying, for to day we are fervent, and to
morrow we are lukewarm, neither hot nor cold: Neither do we it perfectly,
for we know but in a part, and see but in a part, and our perfection is laid up
for us, in the life to come.

But why do we then pray for it, since we cannot attain to it?

I answer, though we cannot attain to it, yet we should strive after it: For
there is a time coming wherein we shall obtain and attain to that perfection
we aim at: And that is our last moment, and day of our dissolution: Like
Israel compassing Jericho: And Sampson groaning under his blindness.

Use. Now the use of all this. When God made man, he made him conform to his
pattern, for he made him like to himself, and to his own Image. When God
commanded to build him a Tabernacle, he gave a pattern to it in the mount, and
never a pin was in the Tabernacle but what was commanded. So it is here, when
Christ Jesus desires us to do Gods will; he writes to us a copy, do it in
earth as it is done in heaven: Not that we are able to attain to it, but that
we must strive after it.

Let us look but to a natural Parent: He calls upon his young infant to
come, the child cannot go, but creeps to him: He calls on him by his name:
the child cannot speak, but he bableth: He bids him stand upright and
alone; but he straight falls: Yet the father does not measure his obedience by
the perfection, but by the endeavor. It is so with God, He calls upon us to
come to him: we cannot come unless we be drawn. He bids us stand
steadfast, but we fall, till he strengthen us. He bids us call upon him, but
we cannot till he first call upon us; and say (as to Mary) Mary, then straight
we answer him Rabony. Finally, he bids us do his will on earth as it is
in heaven, and be perfect as he is perfect: But we cannot, till he first give
us the thing that he craveth of us. What shall we then do, shall we languish
because we are weak, or retire because we are faint? No, let us creep, and
babble, and struggle: We are acceptable, not because of our practice, but
because of our endeavor: Not because of our action, but because of our
affection. Coll. 3.2.

LECT: 10.
Give us this day etc.
HAving spoken of the first three Petitions, which concern the honor and
glory of God: It rests now, that we look on those Petitions which concern
man, and his utility, either bodily or spiritually. It is bodily wants are
poured out here in this Petition, and the support and relief thereof
petitioned.

In handling hereof, we shall observe the very same order and Method, which we
observed in the former: For first we will look to the coherence of this
Petition: and next to the matter comprehended therein. The coherence is
remarkable: For the Petition looks with a twofold aspect: viz. a reference to
the former Petitions: and a relation to the ensuing. The reference it has to
the first three Petitions, is, that it serves for a touchstone, to try the
right and true title which we have to the things of this life: For we live in
a world wherein there is nothing which men do so much affect as plenty and
abundance: And there is no man so much abhorred and despised, as the poor man
and he that wants: Howsoever it be absolutely true, that the felicity of man
consists not in the possession of the earth, or earthly things (for the
Kingdom of God stands neither in Meat, Drink, nor Apparel, but in
Righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.) But would thou know O
man, whether thou have a true title and right to the things that thou
possessest, or not, and would thou know whether or not thou enjoyest and
brooks them with a good conscience: Then for thy resolution, look to the
first three Petitions, and see how far they have taken root in thy heart, and
how far thy heart has been set on their obedience: So far thou have
right, and true title to the things of this life, and no farther: For I will
assure thee unless Gods honor has been dear to thee, and dearer then thy
own: Unless Gods Kingdom has been dearer to thee then all the world
besides: Yea and all the world in thy account has been but loss to thee, in
respect of it: And finally unless Gods will have been so dear to thee, that
thou have denied thy self, and undergone the Cross patiently, captivating thy
will to Gods: I will tell thee thus much, an use of the creatures of God thou
may have had, but a true title or right to them thou never had: And to
speak it in one word, an usurper of Gods creatures thou may be, but a true
owner thou never wast. No I must tell thee more: There is never a bitt of bread
that goes down into thy belly, nor one drop of water that goes into thy
mouth, but shall one day accuse thee of the wrong and tyranny that thou have
done: unless thou can show by thy charter that thou art a member of Gods
Kingdom: And that for thy Reddendo thou have honored his name, and captivated
thy will to his obedience, For as all things are ours whilst we are Christ's:
So without Christ nothing in the world is ours: No, they are so far from
being ours, that they sigh and groan against us. Romans 8. And woe be to us, if
when they sigh against us, we cannot sigh for our selves. But this is not all,
For as this has a respect to the former Petitions, by way of trial, so does
it also carry a reference and relation to the subsequent, and that more
wonderful and observable then the former: For it may be enquired whence it
comes, that he who was the Son of God, and thought it no robbery to be made
equal with God himself: Again, whence it was, that he who laid down the
life of his body, that he might save the life of our souls: And finally,
whence it comes, that he who did forbid us to care what we should eat, or
what apparel we should put on: should in this measure be so careful of our
bodies, and the natural life thereof, that he should prefer a petition
concerning the body, before that which concerns the soul.

Is not the soul of much more worth then the body, and are not the things,
that concern the soul of far greater excellency, then those which concern
the body?

How is it then, that he who is the Prince of our salvation, should be thus
preposterous in his Alphabet as to recommend to us the care of our bodies
before the care of our souls: and the worth of a piece of bread, before the
worth of the remission of our sins?

To this I answer, Wisdom is justified of all her children: and therefore it
becomes us not to judge any thing before the time, for he is the wisdom of
the Father, who has thus taught us, and as there was no iniquity found in his
ways, so there was no guile found in his tongue.

He has then suffered us to prefixe the Petition which concerns our body,
before those that concern our soul: not for dignities, but for necessities
sake: For behold, as he made us, so he knows our frame, and of what mould
we are made: and for this cause he submits himself to our infirmities:
that by doing so he may gain us; for we have not such an High Priest, as
cannot be touched with the sense of our infirmities: but who was made like
unto us in all things, sin excepted.

Will any man then ask the reason of this order, I answer, God has done it
wisely for three causes.

First, to show us the infirmity of our flesh, or fleshly nature.

Secondly, to show us the riches of his mercy.

Thirdly, to show us the true refuge to the which we should run in the day
of our bodily wants.

I say, first, it is done to show us our natural infirmity, and the weakness
of flesh; who live by sense, and not by faith: For it is with man, (walking in
the way to heaven) as it is with little children, walking in their parents
families: we know this to be the defect, and weakness of our children: that
hardly, or seldom can they be brought to put on their apparel, or say their
prayers till first they get the promise of their breakfast: it is so with us in
the way to heaven; all the promises of God (concerning our felicity there)
which in themselves are so large, and infinite: that neither has the eye seen
them, or the ear heard them, or can the mind of man understand them: Yet all
of them, of what quality, or number soever they be: can never lead a man to
the earnest pursuit of those things that are eternal, unless he get a
palpable possession of those things that are temporal. But as David said, This
is our death.

I saysecondly, he has done it for a demonstration of the riches of his mercy
toward us, letting us see that he will pass by many of our infirmities, and
overlooke many of our weaknesses ere he want us; (So precious a thing in the
eyes of the Lord is the Soul of a man, that he will give much for it ere he
want it) look to the Father, look to the Son, to the Holy Ghost, look to
the elect angels, to the Saints departed, to the senseless creatures, and
look to satan himself, and all shall teach you, that nothing on earth is so
precious as the soul of man.

And if our souls, and the redemption of them, be a matter of so great
excellency; do you think that God will want it for a meal of meat? no, no,
far be it from us to think so: for will he that feeds the fowls of the
air, and clothes the lillies in the field, be forgetful of us? No surely, a
hair of our head shall not fall to the ground, but by his providence, and if
any shall fall, it is not for want of his favor, but for the weakness of our
faith.

I say thirdly, it is done to show us the true refuge, unto the which we should
all lean in the day of our want, whether bodily or spiritual: and that is
only to God: For will we look to the things of this earth in the day of our
bodily want: from whom shall we seek them but from God, for it is he that
hears the heaven, and makes the heaven to hear the earth, and the earth to
hear the come, and the come to hear Israel.

If he hear thee, all shall hear thee, but if he stop his ear, all shall
be deaf and dumb to thee: For the eyes of all things do wait, and depend on
him: While he opens his hand, they are filled with his blessing: But if he
over-cloud his countenance, they are sore afraid, and perish.

Now this being the reason of the coherence, I come to the Petition, wherein
six things are remarkable.

First, what we crave, Bread.

Secondly, of whom we crave it, of God; for we say, Give.

Thirdly, to whom we crave it: and it it not in the singular number to me, or
to thee but in the plural number, Unto Us.

Fourthly, what a bread it is that we crave, a Daily bread, not a dainty bread.

Fifthly, whose bread is it that we crave: not our neighbors bread, but our
own, Our.

And sixthly, for what time it is that we crave it, not for the morrow, but for
to day. Give us this day our daily bread.

Whilst I look on the thing that is petitioned, Bread: It is requisite that I
search, what is meant, and understood by it. The Ancients and Fathers of the
Church have thought diversely of it. Tertullian lib. de Orat. Cap. 6. will have
by this bread, Christ himself to be meant: and says that there is nothing
can have a more orderly progress, then that after we have sought the honor of
Gods name, the advancement of his Kingdom, and the obedience of his will: to
seek also the bread of life, by the which we may be enabled to do those
things. And this is Christ himself (says he) for of him it is written, I am
the bread of life. Ioh. 6. Athanasius lib. De humana natura suscepta. Tom. 1.
does by the word bread understand the Holy Ghost: and for proof thereof,
brings the words of this very Text (...), Our daily bread: for he says, God
has taught us in this present time, to seek that bread for our entertainment,
whose first fruits shall preserve our soul in life, to the life to come.

Augustine, writing of the sermon of Christ in the mountain. Tom. 4. lib. 2.
cap. 7. page 349. by bread does understand the bread of the Sacrament, or else
the bread of Gods word: by the which our souls are kept in life to the
obedience of his statutes.

But with reverence let me say, that Tertullians opinion (meaning by bread,
Christ) cannot stand with the due order of this prayer: for then it were
tautologick, for that was sought in the petition, Thy Kingdom come.

Again, Athanasius his interpretation cannot be received, whilst by bread he
means the holy Ghost: for of him we receive but the first fruits in this
life: But of this bread we many times receive both satiety and surfeit.

Last of all, I cannot subscribe to Augustine in this his opinion, nor to the
Rhemists his followers, who by bread here understand the bread of the
Sacrament, for if it were so, I see no reason wherefore they should debar the
laics from eating thereof, one licenciating the use thereof to the Priests,
whilst God calls it our bread, and our daily bread, and allows to us both
the use, and the daily use thereof.

It rests then, that the truth be cleared, and so it shall by taking the
words literally, and under the name of bread by understanding bakers bread, yet
not so strictly but that figuratively also, under it we may comprehend all
things requisite for the maintenance of this our natural life: such as are,
strength of body by nourishment, health by Physic, warmness by apparel,
sufficiency, and correspondencie to our labors: and finally, all the means
and helps that leads to these things: as Christian magistracy, peace in the
land, and seasonable weather, So that Ambrose looking on the large extent of
the word bread, says of this Petition; Haec postulatio maxima est little quae
petuntur. For since, as man cannot live without bread, so his bread cannot
quicken him except he have a stomach to digest, and when his stomach is able,
he cannot get it, unless the earth afford it: and the earth does not afford
it except it be labored: and it cannot be labored except there be peace
amongst men: and in the very time of peace, men's travels cannot be profitable,
unless God send both the first and the latter rain: Therefore says he, in
this one word of bread, many things are couched, yea all things that are
requisite for the entertainment of our life.

The meaning of the words being thus interpreted, let us make some use of them.
Their use is twofold.

Use. For the word serves first for rebuke, and secondly, for instruction. It
serves for rebuke to the Church of Rome, who by the imposition of their
extraordinary, and unnecessary fastings, hope to enter into the kingdom of
God: But to those I say, yet not I, but Jesus Christ for me: Fools and
hypocrites, you make clean the outer side of the cup and the platter, but
within all is foul, and full of ravening. Fool, do thou think that the
kingdom of God stands in meat, and drink, or in apparel? No, no, it
stands in righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. What cares God I
pray thee, for a bit of meat, that goes into thy belly, or for that rag of
clothes, that covers thy nakedness? When he is hungry will he tell thee? or
when he is thirsty, will he that thou should give him drink? or if he
were cold, or naked, would he beg the use of thy garment? No surely, those
things are not for him, but for us, and for our use: He made our bodies of the
earth, earthly: he has breathed the breath of life in our nostrils, that by
it we may live in the body: he has given us also the use of his creatures,
for the preservation of that spark, till he recall it.

What is it then should make man so bold to inhibit the use of that thing which
God has licenced, or what art thou, O man, that dare pollute that which God
has sanctified to thee? Well has the Apostle Paul fore-prophesied of thee;
that in so doing thou have a show of godliness, but in effect thou have denied
the power thereof: for these things may have a show of wisdom in a
will worship and neglect of the body, but in effect they are but the rudiments
of the world, and the ordinances, and traditions of men: for they hold not of
our head which is Christ Jesus.

I grant indeed it fares not with the soul, and the body, as it fares
betwixt an evil matched man, and his wife: the thing that the one wills, the
other wills not: and if any neighbor shall pacify the strife with reason,
he has gained a soul: It is even so with the matter of fasting: if, whilst
the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit fights against the
flesh, we can beat down our bodies, and bring them in subjection, it is more
then requisite: But if we shall think hypocritically, by so doing, to merit or
procure to our selves the Kingdom of heaven, we deceive our souls, and our
labor is in vain: for the kingdom of God stands neither in meat, drink,
or apparel; but in righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.

Use 2. And as it serves for rebuke of the Church of Rome, so does it also for
instruction to our reformed Church: and that in a twofold manner: for it
teaches a lesson to the rich man, and another also to the poor man.

It teaches the rich man to eschew covetousness, for if God give him bread,
he gives him all that he owes him: we cannot be content till our table be
richly decked, and our cup overflow: but alas these things ought not to be so;
for we came naked into the world, and naked we shall return again. If we get
therefore food, and raiment, it becomes us therewith to be contented. Nature is
not curious in herd yet, nor chargeable in her fare; she can say with the
Poet, Vivitur parvo been, all that she craveth, is but bread and water, a clout
to cover her nakedness, and a hole to hide her head in: when God sends more,
she can use it with sobriety, when God denies it, she can be thankful, and
say with Job, The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken, etc. And when she
sees the best cheer in the world set before her, she accounts it all but
bread.

The crummes of the rich man's table was bread, although refused to Lazarus: and
the rich man's sumptuous fare was but bread: Daniels pulse and water was bread:
and the Kings royal fare was but bread: the husks of the swine was bread to
the prodigal child, and his fathers feast was but bread.

Thus the true christian in all things is content: he can be abased, and
he can abound: he can be hungry, and he can be full, he can want, and he can
have. Philip. 4. And in the midst of his fullness, he is careful of nothing
so much, as that the Lord send not a leanness upon his soul.

Secondly, as it teaches the richman to measure the things of this life, not
by the ell of his desires which have no end, but by the ell of nature, which is
short and soon contented: so from this the poor man has a lesson of content.
When he looks to his neighbor and sees him better clothed, better fed,
better followed, and better favored then himself, truly nature would grudge
and murmr in a natural man: But if thou be a christian let me exhort thee
in the name of Jesus, whose name is called upon by thee: repress these fond
imaginations: Consider that God has taken nothing from thee, but what he gave
thee: And that in wisdom, he holds thee short of those things that he
himself may be thy portion. Blessed art thou if he be so to thee. It may be
for a time thou hunger and thirst, but thou shall be satisfied: and it may be
for a time that thou mourn and weep, but thou shall be comforted, The way to
procure thy content, it not to measure thy want with other men's wealth: No, no,
but look to the woe that their wealth has bred them, and consider how ease,
and fullness of bread has made their hearts fat, and has lulled them into the
lethargy of a giddie mind, whilst by means of thy want, God has preserved
his life in thy soul. Would thou then change estates? no, do not if thou be
wise: for they who possess those things, stand in slippery places, they
seldom or never leave their owners without a fall.

How many this day are in hell, who would go naked to be partakers of the
garment of righteousness: who would be still hungry to get a poor crumme of
the book of life: and dye a thousand deaths for thirst, to get one drop of
that water, that could cool the heat of that flame which they sustain: but
oh! they cannot obtain it: they have lost their time, and their judgment is
sealed.

While therefore thou have time, in time, redeem the time, for the days are
evil: and if thou get food and raiment, learn therewith to be content: and if
thou be greedy of any thing in the world, be greedy of grace: for if thou have
the grace of God, thou art richer then Cresus: because thou have Christ, who
when he was rich, became poor, that in his poverty thou might be made
rich.

LECT. 11.
Give us this day our daily bread.
THe second thing considerable in these words is the person of whom we ask
this, and it is of God; for whilst in the preface we say, Our Father, behold
here we say to him, Give.

In handling of this word a supplication, we have three things to consider;
First, to whom it is powered out; to God; Secondly, after what manner; by way of
begging. Thirdly, for what reason; because of his command, Ask and you shall
receive.

The first thing remarkable in this word of the Petition, is, of whom we crave
our bread: and I see, it is of God. Will any man enquire why it is, that for
every piece of bread we put in our mouth, we should go to God and ask it of
him: this may seem a little strange: for there are many, that have more bread
lying beside them then they can get eaten, and many (like the rich man in the
Gospel) have more in store then they can make use of.

This may well then become the poor man; who when he dineth in the morning
knows not where to suppe at night: or if he have gotten a morsel of green
herbs at night, knows not the next morning where to break his fast: I
think it were no fault in him to go to God, and to beg of him every bit and
morsel of bread that goes into his mouth: for a rich man dineth when he
pleases, but the poor man when he may.

Yet to answer, I say, it is requisite for the rich as well as for the poor,
when he sits at table, to say, Give me; and that for three causes.

First, for the honor of God.

Secondly, for instruction of the owner, in the right title of the creature.

Thirdly, for his instruction in the remembrance of them that want: and in the
use of the creature.

I say, first, that it is done for the clearing of the honor of God, both that
he opens his ear and his hand for our deliverance from our meanest
distresses.

It was said of old amongst the Heathen of their God: non vacat exiguis rebus
adesse Iovi: It is not so with our God, blessed be his name: The meanest
distress that his servants could ever stand in, they never sooner opened their
mouth to cry, but straight he bowed down his ear and heard them. They could
never sooner present their wants before him, then he opened his hands, and
filled them with his blessing. And if I should be particular: what is it that
God would not give him if he seek it of him. Man as a natural man, has a
natural life in him: which, as it is from God by inspiration, so it must be
entertained by God and his providence, till he recall it in his wisdom. He
gave it before we were: he recalleth it before we be aware: but he
entertaineth it by making us sensible of our wants, and supplicants to him for
our relief. Matt. 6.

As man is a natural man, and has the maintenance of his natural life of
God, so is he ordained by God to communicate, and propagate his peace on earth.
Which if he ask not of God, he will not give it him: and unless that God
give it him he shall not have it. Look to Abraham's servant, going for a wife
to Isaak. and to Sampson, seeking a wife amongst the Philistims. Besides this,
peace is requisite for the maintenance of man's life: and this he cannot have
except God give it. For as he is the Lord of hosts, and the leader of our
battles, so is he the God of our peace also. It is he who in the day of
battle, can hiss for a fly against Egypt; and for a Be against Ashur.
Esau. 7.18. So it is he that breaks the Bow, and the Spear in Judah, Psalm
40. and cries such a peace to his people, that a covenant is made betwixt them
and the stones of the field, neither is this all. For man, as the servant of
God, for his Gods sake, may be called to suffer. If in that day we call on
him, will he leave us? No, no; he has forbidden us to care for our
accusations, for his Spirit in us shall speak for us: and that with such
efficacy, and force of truth, that our adversaries shall not be able to resist
it. Matt. 10.19.

Seeing therefore, all our necessities are manifest before him, our tears in
his bottle, the hairs of our head in his hand, our supplications in his
bosom, and our days in his register: Why should we in our distress fear to
draw near to him: No, it is his honor that we draw near. For he has said,
Come to me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you. And
again, Whosoever comes to me him I cast not away: For the bruised Reed I will
not break, and the smoking Flax I will not quench.

As it serves for the honor of God, to see his children come, and seek a
piece of bread of him, so it instructs the children of God also, in the right
use of the creature. For it is written, Man what have thou that thou have not
received, and if thou have received it, why gloriest thou?

And to make this a little more clear: thou will find, that in the use of the
creature, thou had need to go to the Creator: and to say Give me (...): and
that for two causes. First, thou can not attain to it, unless he give thee
it: and next thou caust not have a blessing with it, unless he give it thee.

First, thou can not obtain it, unless he give it thee, For thou may rise
early at Morn, go late to bed at Night, and all the Day long eat the Bread
of Sorrow: But all is in vain, unless God give the increase. Look to all the
things that are in nature, and see what the natural man can do to them for
their conquest. I presuppose thou art going to the sea: can thou make the
wind blow right in thy sail: thou can not. For if God would give every man
his desire in the wind, such a confused whirlwinde was never seen in the
world: so as the whirlewinde that blew down Jobs house, should not be like
it. And therefore his winds sometimes sit in thy face, another time in thy
neighbors. And by so doing, and crossing all your desires, teaches you only
to depend on him. For it is he only that gives. What I speak to the seaman, I
speak to the husbandman, to the clown, to the courtier. Yea what I speak to
one I speak to all. It becomes us in the use of the creature, to do two
things. First to deny our selves, and then to run to God. First, deny thy
self for thou art weak in a twofold weakness: weak in judgment and weak
in power. In judgment, not only concerning the things of God, which the
natural man knows not, but also concerning the secrets of nature: which man
knew once by nature, but knows not now by reason of his fall. Ask the
Astrologue, the Soothsayer, the Necromancer, and all those vain searchers of
vanities, who do sow iniquity and reap vanity: And who asking counsel at
their stock, have nothing but their staff to answer them. Hosea 4.

As we are weak in judgment to understand, so are we weak in power how to
manage, not only the things that are of God: but also the things that are of
men.

That we cannot manage the things that are of God it is clear out of this
example: David and Israel did purpose to bring up God's Ark out of the house of
Abinadab, in a new cart. 1. Chronicles 15.13. But because they thought
themselves able enough to follow that business, without Gods direction: Look
to Perez Vzzah by the way: Look also to Israel fighting against Benjamin.

And as it is in things concerning God, so is it in things concerning us, for
howsoever we have understanding to know what they are, yet we want wisdom to
manage them aright: Look to Israel, who did sow much, and reaped little, who
did eat, and were not filled, who earned wages but could never get a purse to
keep them in. And in a word: except we get both judgment to discern of the
creature aright, and power to make a right use of it: We may say concerning
the first: our counsels are carried headlong: for we meet with darkness in
the day. And for the second, we may justly say with Peter, We have fished all
the night and yet have caught nothing.

In the last room whilst we are commanded, to go to God and to say to him,
Give: We are taught to know how to use the creatures aright, and that three
manner of ways. First, by travel, secondly, by prayer, thirdly by charity.

By travel because man must eat his bread in the sweat of his brow.

In his innocence he was ordained to delve in the garden of God. When he fell,
the earth was accursed for his sake: And let him travel as he likes, yet in
the sweat of his brow he shall eat his bread, and in the use of a lawful
calling, he has only reason to expect an answerable blessing.

I say secondly he must pray, for let him toil never so much, except he pray,
he shall not speed: For it is written; Nisi Jehovah, frustra: and these two are
surely knit together, labor and prayer.

For as sighing without expectation, and expectation without sighing: as prayer
in a tempest without toiling, and toil without prayer: and as in a Sermon,
information of the understanding, without working on the affections, and
travel on the affections, without information of the mind, is all in vain.
So also in things temporal, neither will our travel alone, nor our prayer
alone, serve our necessities: but travel and prayer conjoined together, make
up the work of our relief.

Thirdly it teaches us, how to commiserate others in their necessities. For
there are many, who like Nabal cannot yield to David: or like to the rich
glutton, cannot pity Lazarus, or like a Iezebel, feeding four hundred false
Prophets, and yet can suffer Eliah to starve. But in this O man, thou art
deceived: For thou can not get it, till thou say to God, Give. And when he
gives it thee, it is to this end amongst many, that thou may not refuse him
who says to thee, Give, nor that thou hide not thy eyes against thy own
flesh: For a cup of cold water shall not want a reward.

Add to these our own use in sobriety: neither pampering our bodies to
surfeit like the rich glutton: nor disrespecting them by nigardice: but using
them in sobriety: For the belly is for meat, and meat for the belly, but God
will destroy them both.

Use. Now having spoken a little concerning the person of whom we crave these
things, and the reasons thereof; make we some few uses thereupon, which are
four. First, it serves to confute the common opinion of Chance. Secondly, of
merit. Thirdly, it treades down our pride, And fourthly, it rebukes our
distrust and despair.

I say first it confuteth chance: For howsoever the greater part of the world
be ignorant of the ways of the most high, and attribute either their
prosperity, or adversity to chance or fortune, yet let the Christian know, that
this proceeds from the ignorance that is in them: For there is neither chance
nor fortune in the world: but that God, who by the word of his power made the
world, by the word of his providence governs it, and by the word of his good
pleasure shall ruin it: he dwells in the heavens: and does upon the earth
whatsoever he will: that man may know that he it is, who wounds and binds
up again: who kills and makes alive: and who having exalted brings down
again to the dust, and to the dung hill: and that beside him there is no God:
even besides him, who is the God of Jacob, and the holy One of Israel.

Secondly, it confutes merit: for who art thou, O man, that dare be bold to
brag of thy merit? can thou by thy merit, or the power thereof make one
hair of thy head white or black? can thou make the Sun to shine, or the
rain to fall upon the earth to give her increase? No; thou can not. How much
less art thou able to pay a ransom for thy own soul? No, no, alas, thou
can not. It may be thou say, that thou art rich and increased with goods
etc. but Lord open thy eyes to see thy poverty and nakedness: and with a
temptation, the Lord give the issue to bear it.

I say thirdly, that this word serves to tread down our pride: for of all the
creatures of the world, man is borne the weakest and the most wretched. Other
creatures fall no sooner from the belly of their damme, but they can go, eat,
and are covered. Man is borne weak, wretched, unable to walk, unable to eat,
and unable to cloth himself: And when he has gotten all that he can
possess under the Sun, what has he but what he borrows? He borrows
food from the earth, clothes from the beasts, riches out of the Mines of the
earth, wine and oil from the trees: And yet he is proud, as though all were
his own. But fool that thou art, why art thou so miscaryed: Naked thou came
into the world, and naked thou shall return again.

If thou have therefore food and raiment, wax not proud, for it is but a
borrowed spoil thou art proud of, and if God shall strippe thee naked of them,
thou shall know that all was but vanity, and that it is a foolish thing for
man, to rejoice in any thing but in this, that his name is written in the book
of life.

Last of all, it rebukes with a moderate grief, for the want of the things of
this life. We are to day strong, to morrow weak: to day beautiful, to morrow
deformed: to day honorable, to morrow despised, to day rich, and to morrow
poor: And in all these our estates no further changed, then our minds are. As
long as the Halcyan days of our ease and prosperity do last, we over-joy our
joys: and we say with David, Our estate shall never be moved: But if God
change our portion, our mind is straight changed: We are with David, sore
afraid. and as Paul tells us, We murmur as those who have no hope. But out
upon such a weakness, it is an evident testimony that we are altogether
carnal, and as yet in our sins. If our knowledge were better, our affections
should be bettered also: and if we should once make the Lord our portion, we
should be more glad to want the world then to have it: and to say with Job, The
Lord has given and the Lord has taken, etc. And with the Apostle, I count all
things but loss, in respect of the advantage I have in the Cross of Jesus.

Thus we have spoken something concerning the giver, and the person to whom we
say Give. The manner of the word is remarkable: For it is not a word of
prevention: It is not a word of retaliation, it is only a word of supplication
and begging.

That it is neither a word of preventio^ nor retaliation, I insta^ce from the
Lawyers, who say (and that very well) that there are two sorts of gifts:
Donationum alia est simplex and gratuita, alia co^ditionata ob causam futura^.
When we come to God, and say to him, Give, It tells us that we can neither
preve^t him by giving him any thing first or freely, nor yet, when he has
given us any thing, can we repay him with any reco^pe^ce. We cannot preve^t him
by giving him first, for that were against his eternity: for it is written, Who
has give^ him first, and it shall be reco^penced. Neither can we give him
freely, for that were against his alsufficiency: For when he is hungry he will
not tell us, etc. And the earth is the Lords, and the furniture thereof.
Again, we cannot give him by way of remuneratio^, or requital: Abra^ when he
came to sojourne in the land of Canaan, although all the land was his by
promise, yet did he possess nothing thereof but a place to bury his dead: and
that he bought from Ephron the Hittite for thirty pieces of silver, even the
cave of Maghpelae. David at the return of the Arc, received the floor of
Araunah the Jebusite: and yet by way of requital (I will surely buy it of thee
at a price.) The children of Egypt in the time of famine, received bread from
Joseph: but they paid well for it: when their money failed them, they excambed
their flocks, and when their flocks failed, they sold their land, and their
inheritance also.

But here is no such dealing betwixt God and us, he is the giver and we are
the beggars: He gives first, For he knew, chose, and loved us, before we
were. He gives abundantly, Wine to make the heart glad, and oil to make the
face to shine. He gives freely also, for we have nothing to give back
again, and he deals with us as Joseph dealt with his Brethren: when we open
our sacks, we find our moneys in the mouth of them restored again. He will
not make Merchandise with us: For his house is not a house of Merchandise, but
a house of prayer. And as Christ did in the last and great day of the feast:
and Isay in his prophecy: So does God to all of us this day: Hoe, All you that
thirst, come to the waters, and care not for money, come, buy bread without
money, and Wine and Milk without a price.

Well then is God so liberal, that notwithstanding we be beggars, yet he
scorneth not our petitions: but gives us first, and freely, fully, and
abundantly: Is there nothing that thou can give him, or that he will accept at
thy hands? Yes, three things, and those are,

First, thanks for what thou have received: For he requires this of thee,
that thou should take the cup of Salvation, and give praise to his Name. That
thou should call on him in the day of thy trouble, that he may deliver thee,
and thou may glorify him. And if thou do not so, thou art but a beast, that
drinks of the stream, without remembrance of the spring.

Secondly, come again also and seek more, for it is his delight. He is not
like man, or the Son of man, who fears to give, for fear of want, or
wearieth to give, for frequency of petitions: No, his storehouse is not
emptied. The eyes of all things look up to him, he opens his hand, and
fills them with his Blessing. Neither wearieth he with our frequent
petitions: but the homelyer we are, we are still the welcomer.

3. Remember also to give to the poor the thing that thou would give him:
For he that has pity on the poor, lends to the Lord: and he that gives
to any of these a cup of cold water shall not want a rich reward.

LECTIO 12.
Give us this day etc.
AFter the search and inquiry of the word, bread, and of the word, give, which
we have explained to you in our two last sermons: It rests now that we take
a view of the third word, Us, That we may truly know to whom, and to whose use
it is that we beg at the hands of God this bread.

In handling of this petition the words are very remarkable: whereas they are
several in their litterall sense: so are they also, in their moral and
spiritual use.

The first is a word of demonstration, and evidence: For it shows us whereof
we stand in need, that is, Bread.

The second is a word of faith, and shows us upon whom we should depend for
this Bread, and that is, Give.

The third word, Us, is a word of charity: begging Bread, and all necessary
support, not for our selves alone but also for the mutual members of the
mystical body of Jesus Christ.

The fourth word, Ours, is the word of a good Conscience.

The fifth word, Daily, is a word of contentment.

And the last words, For this day, is a word of confession.

We have spoken of the word of demonstration, and of the word of faith. Let us
now look to the word of charity, Us.

This I say is the Lecture of charity, and that I may clear it, hear me but
a little.

If any shall enquire, why I am commanded to say, give us, and not give me, I
answer, it is done for three causes.

1. For the reference it has with the Preface of this Prayer.

2. For the reference it has with Gods providence and will.

3. And for the reference we should have one to another, as mutual members of
the mystical body of Christ.

In the Preface and entry of this Prayer: When our Redeemer CHRIST JESUS
leads us to God to power out our wants before him, and to supplicate at his
hands the support of those wants: he will not suffer us to say, my Father,
but, Our Father.

The reason is, none can truly call him, my father, but Christ Jesus alone: He
is his father, and his only by nature. he is ours, only by adoption: and in
him, and through him. It was he, and he alone, who (being the image of the
invisible God, and the engraven form, and character of his person) could only
and absolutely say unto him, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me: and
say to us for our comfort, I go to my Father, and to your Father; and to my
God, and to your God: showing us, that by nature we are without hope, and
without God in the world: but that in him, we have a fellowship with God, and
are made partakers of the divine nature.

And now as in the preface he would not suffer us to go to God, unless we
were first incorporate, and made members of his mystical body: so here he
will not suffer us to beg any thing at his hands, whether temporal or
spiritual: but that wherein we must represent the necessities of our brethren,
as well as our own: and supplicate their relief as well as our own. In a
word, as in the preface, he taught us, how we should draw near to God, and
beg a blessing with Jacob, under the garment of Esau: So the use we should
make thereof, should be, a due remembrance of that Christian communion, and
fellowship we have one with another in him: rejoicing with them that rejoice,
and mourning with them that mourn: and remembering them that are in bonds, as
if we our selves were afflicted in the body.

Secondly, I say, that we are taught so to say, to make us submit our selves to
the providence of God.

For there are many in the world, upon whom God has bestowed both riches and
wealth in abundance: and they have no sooner received the^, but straight they
forget both God as the giver, and their brethren as fellow owners of their
portion.

And of this sort of men it is that the Prophet Hosea speaks, whilst he
reproves Israel and Judah for sacrificing to their own nets.

To the end therefore, that man may know that he has nothing but what God
gives him: and that God gives it to him to this end, that he should
communicate to the necessities of them that want: he will not suffer him to
say, Give me: but Give us.

Would you see the truth of this cleared in a natural, and domesticke example.
Look upon the Mariner when he goes to sea: his ship is fraughted by some
owners: he is ladened and her wares are full. The tide offers occasion, and
she is towed out to the road to wait upon the wind: she lies there a good
space, and finds no wind. Would you know what makes her want wind so long:
I can tell you: because she prays for nothing, but for her fair wind. If
her sails were filled, she cares not whose be empty, nor whose voyage be
crossed.

But tell me, O man, has God in his ever-ruling providence nothing to do,
but to serve thee, and thy appetite alone. No, no, he has more to serve then
thee: and therefore in his infinite wisdom, he sometimes sends thee a fair
and prosperous gale of wind: sometimes again he makes the wind to blow
contrary, that thou may learn in the sense of thy own weakness, to rest
content on his providence, and with a contempt and disdain of thy own
self-love, to rejoice as much at the good of thy brother, as if it were thy
own; and to greeve as much at his loss as if the loss redounded to thee,
equally with him.

Last of all, in this direction we have a square rule, limiting to us the use
of the creature: which is this: as in the begging of it we should be
faithful, so in the managing thereof we should be charitable.

It was the error of Naball to possess a well covered table to himself, but
to forget David, and his distress,

It was also the error of the rich man in the Gospel, to cry peace to
himself: and to the rich glutton, to forget the necessities of Lazarus.

But were these things tolerable, and approved of God?

No, nothing less, for we are all members of one body: and we should
communicate one to another necessities, and that in love.

I say, first we are all members of one body: for where have you seen at any
time the members of one body forgetful, or senseless of the indigence of
another: if a thorn do but prick us in the toe, all the body has a sympathy,
and fellow feeling with it: the tongue can complain, the eye can search for
it, and the hand can pluck it out again.

It is right so with us, in our spiritual incorporation. We are all parts of
the mystical body, whereof Christ is the glorions head.

Is it seeming then, that any one part shall suffer, and the other shall have
no sympathy or fellow-feeling?

No surely: for it is an evident testimony, that we are not of the body,
unless we have that fellow sense that is here required.

Look to the example of the political body, and to the example of the waters
running through the whole veins, and channels of the earth: And learn with
Augustine to say, that God, Per eum qui habet juvat egentem, per eum qui non
habet, probat habentem.

But, what is more, thou must not only give him for the relief of his
necessities, but also thou must give him a love and sincerity of affection, for
if thou should give all that thou have to the poor, unless thou have love, it
is all abomination in the presence of God, for our wealth of it self, it is
not a blessing, unless charity animate, quicken, and give it motion.

Use. Now out of all this which has been said, there arises to our
instruction two things remarkable, the first rebukes the miser; the second
rebukes the proud: I say first, we have here a lesson of rebuke to the miser,
the worldly worm, and the earthly wretch, and that for 3 causes; first for
that he is a murderer: secondly, for that he is a perverter of the ordinance
of God: and thirdly, for that he is a fool.

I say, first he is condemned here as a murderer: for while God has ordained
meat for the belly, and the belly for meat, he starves in his misery: and for
a miserable preservation of an handful of dust; he kills his body, which
should have an habitation to the holy Ghost.

I say, secondly, that the miser, and the wretch is a perverter of Gods
ordinance, for God has said, In the sweat of thy brows thou shall eat thy
bread: now the miser can toil and turmoile himself in sweat, and in blood
sometimes, to get a piece of bread, but when he has gotten it, he cannot for
the heart of him make use of it, nor take of it to serve his own necessities,

I say, thirdly, he is rebukeable as a fool, and why? because out of a
diffident care of his body he kills his soul; for whilst he distrusteth
the providence of God toward him manifested in the widow of Sarepthas
barrels, he hoardeth up treasures against the last day, which in the fullness
of time shall eat up his flesh, as it were a fire.

Secondly, it rebukes the proud: for if God but once distinguish us one from
another, with never so mean a portion of estate, it is a wonder to see how
far, he that has, dispiseth him that wants; as if either we had procured
that of our selves, which we have, or that they were not of our mould that
want.

But fool, why should thou be so miscarried? All the power that thou have
cannot make a white hair of thy head, black, nor a grain of seed that thou
castest in the ground to grow up again, nor thy clothes to keep thee warm,
or thy meat to feed thee, except God add a stasse to thy bread. Why should
thou be proud then, or why should thou misknow thy neighbor? know thou
not that a short time can make thee equal with the poorest beggar that goes
abroad? Job in one day was rich in posterity, ere Even he had not one to piss
against the wall; the Sun at his rising saw him rich in Asses, Oxen, and
Sheep, ere night he had none of them.

In the morning he was strong and vigorous, in his health; ere night, he
scraped his sores with a potchard.

In the morning he had a wife to lie in his bosom, ere the noone-tide in the
day, she is turned to a rock of offense (Curse God and dye.) God be
merciful to us, how uncertain, and transitory are the things of this life.

Why should we either be proud, and overjoy in them: or niggards, or sparers
of them, not lending to the necessities of the poor?

The Lord teach us humility, and commiseration, that our souls may be safe in
the day of our Lord Jesus.

Now in the fourth place we have set down to us a word of conscience, whilst
we call it, Our bread.

For in so doing we crave of God, that he would so accompany our travels with
his blessing that we walking and traveling in our calling for our
necessities, may have rather to be helpefull unto others, then burthenable to
any.

But here there would a doubt seem to arise, we have confessed already that
we are indigent, and have no power of our selves to procure any relief of our
necessities, unless it be given us from above, how is it then since we have
nothing but what we receive of God, that we should be bold to rejoice and call
it Our? I answer, it is no vain rejoicing to call that which God gives us,
Ours:

For the blessings of God communicated to us are ours in three respects, first,
as they are given to us in Christ. Secondly, as they are acquired by us in our
lawful calling. Thirdly, as they are sanctified to our use by the Word and
Prayer. I say first they are Ours, as we are in Christ; for if we be living
and true members of the mystical body of Jesus Christ, then all the things in
the world are ours, for it is written, All things are ours whilst we are
Christ's, for Christ is Gods, Get once a gripe of Christ by faith, and thou may
boldly call the world, and all that is in it thine. It is true indeed, many men
in the world have a better gripe of the world then the Christian. Look to the
Apostles: Yet none had so good a right to it, for though they wanted the use,
yet they had the only title; And though they possess nothing, yet had they
true title to all things.

Secondly, the creatures of God are ours, and we acquire them in our lawful
calling, not robbing, not spoiling, nor deceitfully, or trecherously living on
the sweat of another man's brow, and eating the bread of violence. Prove. 14.
Think thou, O man, or woman, that there is no more required of thee, but
that thou should rise in the morning, and having washed thy hands, sit down
to thy dinner, and from thy dinner, to thy supper; and from thy supper to thy
bed: No, no, this life is too easy to be honest: Thou must eat thy bread in
the sweat of thy brow. Art thou a Magistrate, go to the bench, exercise there
justice and judgment: defend the innocent, and relieve the widow, and
fatherless. Art thou a Mariner, get thee to the helm, and travel through the
deep: Art thou a Minister, get thee to thy book, read, meditate, and pray:
and look to whatsoever calling God has called thee to, that therein thou be
exercised, or else, cover thy table, as well as ever the rich glutto^ did: It
shall be turned to a snare, and thy prayer to sin, except thou can say, that
this bread is my bread, being won in a lawful calling, and procured by the
sweat of my brow.

Thirdly, it cannot be called thine, except thou have sanctified it by the word
and prayer. The children of Israel had a table prepared for them in the
wilderness, but for want of this grace of sanctification, it turned to their
ruin: for whilst the meat was in their mouth, it came out at their nostrels,
and they perished in the wilderness, having fat bodies, and lean souls. It
was not so in the days of our savior Christ Jesus in the days of his flesh:
he had five thousand people to feed with five loaves, and two fishes: but he
lifting up his eyes to his father, did not only procure satisfaction to the
eater, but also superabundance.

Thus then the creatures of God are justly called ours, when we get any right
to them in Jesus Christ. Secondly, when we eat them in the sweat of our brow.
And thirdly, when they are sanctified to our use, by the word, and by prayer.

Use. Hence we have these lessons to learn: first, Labor, O man, to be
ingrafted in Jesus Christ, for all things in heaven and earth are his, and
submitting themselves to him, acknowledge him their only Lord. It is he by
whom the Sun gives his radiation and light. It is he that covers the earth
with fertility, and plenty. It is he that commands the winds and they blow, he
speaks to them peace again, and they are hushed and still.

It is he, lastly, who says to raging waves of the sea, here shall ye come,
and go no further, and behold they obey him with fear.

Since reins of all things are in his hands, and the dispensation thereof in
his power, labor thou to get a gripe of him by faith, and nothing shall be
defective to thee; it may be that he can sometimes out thee short of these
things that he gave thee, house, wife, children, prosperity or health; what
matters it of all these, give him his will therein; and let it be seen to the
world, that thou art in him, by thy patience, and I will promise thee, in the
name of the living God, He shall either restore thy captivity seven fold, or
else he will give thee something better then all the world, even himself.

It is a pity to see so careful as the men of the world are to get the things
of this world, and so careless as they are to get him without whom they can
never have true title* nor right to the world, or to any thing in it: Can a
house stand without the foundation? can a tree grow without the root? or can
the body live, that is cut off from the head? no surely. Now if it be so in
nature, and in these natural unions, how much more must it be in the
spiritual? He is our head, our husband, our foundation, our root; having him
we have all things, without him we have nothing. For as there is no
condemnation to them that are in Jesus Christ: so there is neither hope of
grace in this, nor glory in the life to come, to any that are not incorporated
into him.

Secondly, as no man can call the creatures of God his, except he who is in
Christ Jesus: so in the second place, none can call the things of this life
his, except he acquire them in a lawful calling; and this should teach the
sons of men, to take heed how they acquire their goods. One wants, and lies
by the way, and robs the poor. Another wants, and seeks it of the
devil by an ill mean, like Saul. A third wants, and with words of deceit
he steals into the house of the widow, and fatherless, and devoureth them,
under pretense of protection, like Absolon. A fourth wants, and because he
is ashamed to beg, he must be a spark of contention: and like a Salamander
live on that fire of division. But enquire of these men, I pray you, if they
eat their own bread: I answer, their throats are wide, and their stomachs
ample: but to say, they eat their own bread I dare not; for their conscience
teaches them, that they grind the faces of the poor, and eat up the people,
as if they were bread.

And for this cause it is, that judgment comes upon the land, because such
men are not taken heed unto. If the belly god, if the wizards, and consulter
with satan, if the Salamander, and contentious man, should be forced to eat
their own bread, then peace should be within our walls, and prosperity within
our palaces. But because these, and such as these are tolerated, therefore it
is that this land shall tremble, and every one mourn that dwells therein.
Sackcloth shall be on all loins, and baldness on every head, and the end of
our visitation shall be a bitter day. One thing only rests, That we may eat
our own bread, we must be careful to have the same sanctified to our use, by
the means of the word of God, and of prayer; And this serves wonderfully to
rebuke the beastly ingratitude of men and women in this time: For in stead of
begging a blessing, when we sit down, or being thankful when we rise, we
swallow up the blessings of God in forgetfulness: Yea we sit down to eat
and to drink and rise up to play; and turn the grace of God to wantonness:
like beasts drinking of the stream without remembrance of the fountain.
Neither is this the private and domesticke error of this land; no this is that
public canker and gangren that has fully and fowly overspread the face of
this nation.

Let us lift up our eyes, and behold the regions about us: where is there peace
or plenty to Church or Commonwealth, but amongst us? Enquire of the higher or
lower Germany: enquire of Cilicia: enquire of the Palatinate, of France, and of
Spain it self. All of them have been smitten as a reed in the water; famine,
the sword and the plague have destroyed their inheritance, depopulated their
riches, overturned their glory, and laid their strength on heaps in the
streets, only we have been left as a sign, and wonder to the world, both
of peace and plenty: for our table has been prepared in the sight of our
enemies, and our cup has run over: but have we been thankful? no surely,
we have neither rightly acknowledged the day of our visitation, nor wisely
considered the things that concern our peace, but rather have continued in
sin, that grace may abound, Well, this Halcion time will not always rest;
remember Tirus and Sidon, Chorazin and Bethsada: and by them learn in time to
redeem the time, else out of time we shall sorrow desperately, because we
would not sorrow sooner.

LECT: 13.
Give us this day etc.
AFter the explanation of these four words which have already preceded in this
petition, to wit, first a word of faith, leading us to God, Give. Secondly, a
word of charity, Us. Thirdly, a word of necessity, Bread. Fowerthly, a word of
good conscience, Our. We must now come to consider the last two words (viz) a
word of content, and a word of limitation. A word of content, Daily. the word
of limitation, For this day.

The first thing considerable is the word of content, daily bread.

There is not one word in this Prayer, that has undergone more variety of
translations then this word. Tertullian reads it (...) quotidianum. But as he
took not the word Bread literally but spiritually for Jesus Christ who is the
true bread of life, so hereby the word quotidianum or (...) he understands not
the daily and frequent relief of our corporal necessities but of our
spiritual needs: For so he writes, petendo panem quotidianum, perpetuitatem
petimus in Christo, and individuitatem a corpore ejus. St. Augustine looking on
Tertullians opinion gives way to it, but not simpliciter; For he not only
allows his spiritual signification, but withal he adds the temporal.
Panis quotidianus ideo dicitur, quia nobis necessarius est, sive spiritualiter,
sive carnaliter, sive utroque intelligatur modo. Athanasius says, (...) hoc
est, (...) futurum. Give us our bread that is to come. Cujus primitias habemus
dum in communionem Corporis Christi admissi sumus. Hierome himself looking on
both the Evangelists Matthew and Luke, finds the original word (...) to be
one. But if he be the author of the vulgar translation; I see no reason why he
should have interpreted Matthew one way and Luke another. For he interprets
Matthew in the word (...) to signify Supersubstantialem, in the word of Luke
he interprets it quotidianum. But to leave the altercation, wherein these great
lights of the Church have engaged themselves; I would labor simply to embrace
the truth, and withthe Syriack translation to call it panem indigentiae, the
bread of our necessity and want. So that howsoever all of these interpretations
be tolerable; Tertullians taking it for Christ. Athanasius taking it for the
first fruits of the Spirit, and Augustine taking it for the Bread of the
Sacrament, and St. Hierome for the supersubstantiall Bread, yet this I find
safest in the midst of such a storm of interpretations, to follow the
Syriack translation; and by the word of Daily Bread, to understand the bread of
our daily necessity.

To this interpretation subscribes both Calvin and Beza. Calvin taking the word
for the bread of Gods providence, of the which we stand daily in need, and is
called the word that comes out of the mouth of God. And Beza taking the word
literally out of the Greek for that Bread which is able to add to our
substance. So that the true and native signification and sense of this petition
is this, Lord give us the supplement of our necessities both for matter and for
manner; For matter our bodies are earthly, and drawing near to the earth stand
in need of daily support, support us therefore daily with Bread. And for
manner; because little will content nature, suppose our desires be
extravagant, give us that which may refresh nature and maintain this our
natural life. For if we get food and raiment we ought therewith to be content.

Now this being the interpretation of the word, the uses arising therefrom are
worthy of our remarke also.

Use. The uses that are drawn from the consideration of the words are
twofold, viz. For rebuke and for instruction. It serves for rebuke to the
Church of Rome, whose scholars, I mean the Rhemists, following St. Hierome in
his interpretation, have interpreted the word, and hold fast for it, that the
word (...) does only signify supersubstantialis or supersubstantiall bread.
But I would enquire of them to what use this obsolete and obscure word should
be used amongst them. Are not the words of greatest familiarity, of greatest
force also? Yes surely: For God who had sundry times and in diverse manners,
made himself known unto the world of old by his Prophets and Patriarchs,
under types, shadows, figures, and tropes, he has now in the end of time made
himself manifest to the world in Jesus Christ his Son, who was the image of
the invisible God, and the engraven form and character of his person, and that
in such a plenty and purity of revelation, that none can be excused by reason
of ignorance, for, If our Gospel be hid it is hid to them that perish, in
whom the God of this world has blinded the eyes of their minds. So, seeing
then even there where people sat in darkness and in the shadow of death, if
God have made a true light to our eyes, why should they be terms of ambiguity
and phrases of darkness to obscure and eclipse the light and sunshine of Gods
truth, by keeping up from the people the word of God, and giving them the
service of God in a strange tongue. I know, wherefore this can serve, but for
one or two causes, either that they may show themselves heirs to the Scribes
and Pharisees, whose chaires they claim: For they locked up the key of
knowledge, they neither entered into the Kingdom of God themselves, neither
would they suffer others to enter: Even such are the followers of the Church of
Rome at this day; they sit, as they allege, in the chair of Moses, and Peter,
but with any of Moses traditions or of Peter his sanctions, they will not
trouble so much as their little finger, and fearing least any should enter into
the Kingdom of God, to their greater crimination too, like blind guides they
keep their people in blindness, and by the obscurity of words so eclipse and
obscure the truth, that unawares Millions of souls are by them led captive
unto destruction.

Use. Neither do they in this alone express themselves to build the
sepulchers of their fathers the Scribes and Pharisees; But what is more, they
really do express themselves to be the sons of their Father the devil, who
knowing assuredly that nothing in the world can be so forcible to extract a
blessing from the hands of God, as Prayer: Nor any thing so strong and
powerful to bind up the hands of God from correcting and judging us, as is
the frequent and familiar confabulation and Prayers of his Saints: He
therefore labors to withdraw men altogether from prayer, or else if he cannot
get their mouths stopped but that they must pray, then he will have them
praying in an unknown tongue, that their table may be turned to a snare, and
their prayers to sin. It is a wonder to see what folly is amongst them, they
will not go out of doors, without a cross about their necks, as if it were
an Antidote against whatsoever danger either spiritual or temporal: And yet
there is none shows himself a greater enemy of the Cross of Christ; For
howsoever in word they confess him, yet in their idolatrous practice they deny
him; and having a name that they are living, in effect they are dead. Yet this
is not all, such an overruling power and sovereignty has the Prince of
darkness got on them, that when their conscience is opened to see their sin,
and their affections lead them to God, to deprecate the remission of their
sin, he tongue-tyeth them that they cannot speak to God: And if they speak
at all, it is but a rapsody of idle words, numbered out upon their Beads, as if
God delighted in much babbling, or Satan could be conjured with tale and
number only of Pater nosters. But fool, that thou may know, that God is a
Spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and truth: If thy service be
spiritual and sincere though weak, yet it is welcome; For the bruised reed
he will not break, and the smoking flax be will not quench: But if thou
dally with him in a Tautalogie of unknown words, all is in vain; because he
will cast back the dust of thy sacrifice in thy face for praying to him with
thy tongue, when thy understanding is without fruit.

Again, as it serves for rebuke of the Church of Rome, so it serves also for
instruction to us of the true and pure Church; and that in these three respects;

First, in the matter of our true understanding.

Secondly, in the matter of our true content.

And thirdly, in the matter of our true desire.

I say, first, that in this word, we have a lesson given us to inform our
understanding: For whilst we go to God and seek of him Daily Bread, we
cannot but instruct our selves in the sense of our daily want. Who is he that
has a house and a daily rain drop in it, but will go to the Slater and make
him repair it? Who is he which has a ship which is leaking, but will go to
the carpenter and have it repaired both with timber and calfatting, Or he that
has a wounded body, who will not go to the Physician and daily dress his
wound, and bind it up again, till it be cured? It is even so with us in the
matter of our spiritual wants. We dwell here in Tabernacles and houses of
clay: This day there is a drop in the roof, to morrow a balke of our timber
is cracked, and the third day there is a crevis in the wall. To whom shall we
go but to the Master of the work? and that daily, that by our daily
necessities, we may daily have our recourse to him, and in our daily
approaches confess and acknowledge his daily providence. We are also
Mariners, and we are wounded men: Who shall make our ship teight? Who can
cure our wounds, but he who is the spiritual carpenter and Physician of our
Souls? In all our distresses let us have our recourse to him; For he will not
weary in doing us good, if we can come to him without wearying; For in due
time, we shall receive our reward, if we faint not.

Secondly, in this word we are taught how to bridle our affections: for the
desires of men are infinite, and have no end: they are like the horseleech,
that says always, Give, give, and like the grave that is never satisfied. Yet
behold, O man, it were good for thee, to set bounds to thy desires, for God in
his wisdom has put in this Petition a word of content, daily: That as the
globe of the earth is girded about with the Meridian line, so these earthly
hearts of ours may be girded about, and kept in frame with the compass of
content. It is with us in this last age, as with Israel in the wilderness: for
when they gathered their Manna, God commanded that they should gather but an
Omer, and either under or above, according to the number of their family. It is
even so with us, God will not give us a liberty to seek the things of this
earth, but with measure, and mediocrity, so much as may refresh, and maintain
nature with a reasonable content. But though this be the ordinance of God, O
how exorbitant are the desires of men? how wastfull is our excess in meat,
drink and apparel, and purchasing of lands? I say, we are wastfull in
excess of our meat, drink, and apparel: for there is more on one of our
tables at one time, then would satisfy all the poor of the city, if it were
well parted. We drink at once more cups of health, then Bacchus did in his
Orgyes. And one suit of apparel on our back is bought at a dearer rate, then
all the revenue of many of our heirs can amount to. Look again upon our
purchasing: God commands us to seek nothing but our daily bread, but behold,
we join house to house, land to land, and inheritance to inheritance: and
when we have done all that we can to make it large and ample, if there be
but one foot breadth of ground under our window, or within the smoke of our
chimney, that is not ours, O how sick are we of discontent with Achab, till
Naboths vineyard be added to our enclosures. And yet if we would consider how
soon we may be taken from it; how deboist an heir we shall leave it to: or
how little ground will content, and contain us when we dye: I hope we should
not be so earth hungry. But all our error is in this, we forget the word of
Gods ordinance; daily. And we dream of a word of eternity, Evermore: So the
folly of the one overshadowes the truth of the other in us; and we become
forgetful of the word of God: If thou get food and raiment, thou should be
therewith content.

Thirdly, it should captivate our will to the entertainment of a daily
familiarity with God: for this is sure, we have nothing, but what God gives us
daily, why should we not then run to him daily, and hourly to seek it?
Brethren, I cannot look without pity upon the estate of the weak Christian
in this point: for in it he is inferior to the poorest beggar that goes in
the street; the beggar, because he knows that he has nothing but what good
people gives him, he goes into the open ways where people have greatest
resort, and because his necessities are daily, and quotidian, therefore he is
not ashamed to be a daily and quotidian beggar, but in this we come short of
him, for we are all as indigent of grace as he of means, and yet he can
beg daily, we cannot: he can betake himself into the place of support: but
we will not: the place of our support is the Church: the strength of our
begging lies in prayer. The beggar wearyeth not to go into the high ways; we
weary to come to the Church: he wearyeth not to supplicate with all the terms
of necessity he can invent; we weary ere we can breath two or three words,
though but for fashion. But hear, O my hearers, these things should not be so;
for as our necessities are so much the more urgent, by how much they are
spiritual: so should our prayers be, both the more frequent and fervent, by
how much the Kingdom of Heaven is not obtained but by violence, and if at any
time our petitions be returned to us without success, it is because they want
heart. I have many times told from this place, that, that which Martha said to
Christ, concerning Lazarus, may be truly said to our souls, concerning prayer,
and the continuance thereof; she said, Lord, if thou had been here my
brother Lazarus had not dyed: so thou and I, and all of us may say, If prayer
had been here, this ill turn had not fallen in our hands: for prayer is not
the work of flesh and blood, but of the Holy Ghost; where it is, he is; and
where he is guide, we cannot so stumble, but of necessity we must rise
again. So much I have spoken concerning the word daily, which I called a word
of content: there rests now in all this Petition but a word, This day: This I
called a word of limitation: and by it I mean to limit and put an end to this
Sermon.

By the word then of, This day, I understand this present moment of time, in
which we live, called by David a year: The years of men are but threescore
and ten. Job calls it a month, I have had for my inheritance but the months
of vanity: and here it is called a day, because as yesterday is gone, and is no
more, so we shall be to morrow. We have nothing in time, or of time, which
we can truly call ours, but this day; and in it, but this moment: God then in
his wisdom, has not only set bounds to the quality of our desires, calling
them but daily, but also limiteth the time and continuance of them to this day:
but if any worldling shall grudge at his lease, as being too short, let him
know that the words are not mine, but Gods. For whatsoever endowments of grace,
he has given to the son of man, he has given it under the title and
precinct of this day, he said to the Son of man, (his own Son, the Lord
Christ Jesus) in his instalment: Thou art my beloved Son, this day have 'I
begotten thee. Psalm. 2. He said to his people Israel, (his sons by adoption)
The Lord has chosen thee this day to be a peculiar people unto him. Deuteronomy. 26.
He said to his servant the Prophet Isay in the time of his calling: This day
have I set thee up over Kingdoms, and over nations: Isay 1.10. Lastly, he
said to the thief on the Cross: This day thou shall be with me in paradise.
Neither is this the only and sole title, and precinct of his endowment, but
also the title and sole reciprocation he craves of us, and that both in the
matter of his obedience, and of our content and desires.

In the matter of our obedience, he will have it to day: To day if you will
hear his voice, harden not your hearts. And of our desires: Give us this day
our daily bread, and reason good it is that it should speak so; for by so
saying, first, he pares the covetous man's nails. Secondly, he binds up the
prodigalls hands, and cutteth down the Epicures vain hope. I say, First, by
this word he pares the covetous man's nails, for he will pare them himself,
he lets them grow that he may scrape, and scratch, and gather together,
without satisfaction of desire, without wearying in travel. He rises early in
the morning, and goes late to bed at night, and all the day long eats the
bread of sorrow: as if his belly was like his heart triangular, and incapable
of satisfaction: but fool that he is, what is this he does? knows he not,
that we are but here to day, and away to morrow: for All flesh is grass, Care
not therefore for the morrow, but let the morrow care for it self: for this
day has enough of its own grief. Et magno apparatu breve iter vitae non
instruitur, sed oneratur.

Secondly, God by this word binds up the prodigals hands, for it is the desire
of many men in the world to have God giving them, not one piece this day, and
another piece to morrow, as we stand in need of it; but we will have al our
portion together, as the prodigal child said, Father, give me my portion that
befalls me: and when he got it, you know what became of it. God therefore
being wiser then we, will not cast all our patrimony in our lap together, but
like a wise father, will give us our estate, but piece and piece, and will see
how we employ the little he lends us, that he may make us Lords over much,
and we may every day honor him in the suit and request of his supply.

Lastly, he cutteth the vain hope of the Epicure, who like an atheist makes
covenant with death, and an agreement with hell: and says with the whore in
the Revelation, I am a Queen, and shall see no mourning. To this man God cries
here as he cried to the rich man in the Gospel, saying, Fool, this night
they shall take thy soul from thee: so here he cries to the Epicure; This day
thou shall dye, and shall not see the morrow: by one days disease I will beat
that soul of thine out of her cittadell. Watch therefore, and pray, for ye
know not at what hour the thief will come. One day is too long to dwell in
the tents of Kedar, but in the presence of the Ancient of days, there is
fullness of joy, and at his right hand, there are pleasures for evermore.

LECTIO 14.
And forgive us our trespasses.
IN handling of this Petition we have two things to consider, the coherence or
dependence of this Petition with the former: and next the tenor and force of
the Petition it self

The coherence is evident, in the conjunctive particle and. For whilst in the
last petition, Our Redeemer Christ Jesus teaches us to beg of him things
meet for the maintenance of this our natural life, he packed up the Petition
in some few words of necessity: so here, knowing that man is too much addicted
to set his heart, and fix his affections upon the earth, and the things
thereof, in a snatch as it were, he recals us again to the consideration of
the soul, and teaches us to hunger, and thirst for righteousness, and the
life, and well being of the soul. For what shall it avail a man if he win
the whole world, and lose his own soul?

In a word, by the conjoyning and tying of this petition to the former, I can
resemble our Savior to nothing better, then to a wise and skillful Pylot, who
seeing his company sick, and weary with continual storms at sea, when he
knows he is near any land, lets his sick, and faint hearted company go
on shore to refresh themselves, to get the air of the land, to take in new
victuals and provision, to serve the necessity of their succeeding voyage: but
if he find them to begin to be enamored with love of the land, and the
pleasures thereof, straight ways he sends a boat on shore, and reclaimes
them from the surfeit of their pleasures, telling them, that if any amongst them
would be at home, at his own Country, he must come aboard again; for it is
not the dallying with the pleasures of a strange country, that will bring him
home to his own soil. It is even so with our Savior in these words: for in
the first three Petitions we were set to sea, and commanded to sail home to
heaven: for whilst man honors Gods name, advances Gods kingdom, and does
Gods will, what is he doing but sailing through a stormy sea, to a good
harbor, and a quiet haven of rest? now because, while men have lanched out to
the sea of the world, and are sailing homeward, many cross winds and
boisterous storms hinder them by the way: Christ like a discreet and
merciful pylot, and master of our ship, in the last Petition gives us this
day our daily bread, sets us on shore, and lets us play a while in the free
air, and refreshes us with the pleasures of nature, giving us leave to
satiate and satisfy our selves with such provision, as the necessity of this
our natural life required at our hands: but knowing very well the nature of
man, that when he gets leave to play with the world, he will take a large
inch to the ell: and that in stead of satisfying his necessity, he will
inebriate, and surfeit himself: therefore in this Petition, And forgive us our
trespasses, he shootes a boat after them, and calls them to come home, and to
come aboard again, for fear, that by playing too long with the world, and the
pleasures of the shoore, they lose the opportunity of their voyage homeward:
for as the wisdom of the world is foolishness with God, so the love of the
world is enmity with God: and whosoever is a friend of the worlds, is an enemy
of God. James 4. verse. 4. And this I take to be the reason of the coherence of
this Petition to the former.

Use. Let us now look upon this tie and particle of conjunction, that we may
learn something from it.

The uses, and observations which arise here-from are these.

First, it teaches how to use the things of this world. Man, since the fall of
the first Adam, has brought nothing into the world with him, but an
uncircumcised heart, and a body of sin dwelling in his flesh, and from thence
as from a bitter root of corruption flows nothing in all his conversation,
but fearful and rebellious transgressions, amongst the which this is one, and
the chief, that his heart is become earthly and muddy: in the beginning he
had a body earthly, and from the earth, but his soul was celestial, and from
above, not only in respect of essence, but also in respect of the faculties,
and the qualities of these faculties; now by his fall his soul is made like
his body, though not in essence, or faculties, for they are still spiritual,
yet in respect of the qualities of these faculties: for the understanding of
the natural man knows nothing, but the things of the earth: his affections
delight in nothing, but that which is earthly: and his will practices nothing
but that which is of the earth, and in the earth: but these things ought not to
be so; we are come from home, and are returning thither again. Does it
become a pilgrim whilst he is in the way, to be overtaken with the pleasures of
the way? no certainly: for if he be in love with the pleasures of the way,
he shall never attain to his journeyes end. Do you not remember what is
written in profane stories concerning Theseus, and Atalanta, a woman of
exceeding swiftness, who being overtaken with the love of the golden balls
which Theseus let fall by the way, lost the race, and the reward of it? But why
do I cite a profane story; look to the word of God, and the truth therein
contained, there you shall find, Judges 7. That the Lord chosing out an army
for Gedion to overthrow Midian: he first sent away the fearful and faint
hearted, which were two and twenty thousand: then he sent away those who fell
down on their knees, and drank water, which were nine thousand, and seven
hundred: so that there remained of all the host of Gedion, but three hundred to
overthrow their enemies; and these were such as stooped not down to inebriate
themselves with the waters of the river, but snatched at them only, with their
hand, refreshing only the tip of their tongues, and continuing their journey.
It should be so with us, in using the things of this life: we should use them
as though we used them not: he that rejoices should not be over-joyed in
his rejoicing, and he that is in grief should not be overgrieved in his
sorrow. He that has, should not be proud: he that wants should not dispare;
(...) and moderation should be shown, as men knowing that the fashion of this
world perishes. Let us therefore be like Jacob, Genesis 28.20. And like Christ's
disciples, Ioh. 6. Labor not for the meat that perishes. And like Israel.
Hos. 2.

Secondly, we have here a second lesson, which serves for our instruction,
and I pray you consider it. Man if he want, he murmures, he grudgeth, and
repines. It was the error of Israel in the want of water, to murmr against
Moses, in the want of bread, and of flesh: So that his heart was grieved.
Rachel in the want of children could murmr, and say to Jacob, Give me
children else I die. And Abraham himself in his barrenness could say to God,
Eliazar my servant shall be my heir So hard and endured are the hearts of
men, till God both make them see and feel the force of his care and providence
toward them: neither is the coffeehouse, and grudge of men clear in the
example of these Fathers, but also in our own daily and quotidian practice: the
poor man is no sooner fallen from his estate, then through distrust of the
providence of God, he must steal; the sick man is no sooner in the bed of his
disease, but he sends for a wisard to see if he can recover. The man that is
wronged, has no sooner received his affront, or word of reproach, but straight
his sword must be his judge and decider of his quarrel: and his own hand
must censure that, which he can neither digest, nor cast up again.

But tell me, O man, from whence proceeds this thy folly? want thou? is
there not a God in heaven, of whom it is said, The eyes of all things do look
up and trust in thee, O Lord. Art thou sick? is there not a God in Israel, in
whose hands are the issues of life and death? Art thou wronged? know thou
not that vengeance is the Lords, and he will repay: For it is a righteous thing
with the Lord, to render tribulation to them that trouble us, and peace unto us
in the day of rest. Why do we then in the day of our trouble wrong both our
selves, and our sufferings by our precipitations? Know thou from whence this
thy precipitation flows? because thou know not, I will tell thee. It
flows absolutely, from the want of the sight of thy sin. If thou knewst
wherefore thy goods were taken from thee, would thou murmr? No. If thou
knewst wherefore thy health was taken from thee, would thou grudge? No. if
thou knew from whence thy wrong came, would thou repine? No. All the
distemper comes from this, thou know not the cause of it. Thy sins that
are not forgiven thee, are the cause of all thy calamity. If thou had but
truly repented thee of thy sins, and by faith gotten the assurance of thy
pardon: I will assure thee thy captivity should have bin redeemed, and thy
righteousness should have shined as the Sun at the noontide of the day but as
long as thou have neither gotten thy sins pardoned thee, nor have pardoned
others their sins against thee, it is no wonder, though thou say to God, Give
me this day my daily bread, and get it not, for it is sure that the Lord
hears not, nor accepts of sinners, for as it is true, that the seed of the
righteous man was never seen to beg his bread for want: so on the other part
it is as true, The candle of the wicked shall be put out, and another man shall
take his charge. The evidence hereof is clear in Israel, in the days of the
Judges. Look to Sheba, and Iesabel.

Thirdly and lastly, as it rebukes us for the dirty and muddy quality of our
hearts, and instructs us in the true cause and occasion of our wants, so it
teaches us how to use the creatures aright, or rather how we should examine
our selves aright after the use of the creatures; when man sits down to use
the creatures of God, Three things are required of him: Premeditation,
sobriety, examination: Premeditation in acknowledging his unworthiness of
them, for in themselves they are the good creatures of God, as well as thou
art, yea, in some respect they are better then thou: for though thou were
created to a more glorious image; yet by their innocence they have kept a more
glorious station, for thou have sinned, and not they, and they subject to
vanity, not because of themselves, but because of him, who has subdued the^
under hope. Sit never down therefore, O man, to thy dinner without
preponderatio^. When thou see the creatures of God set before thee, know, and
remember, they lived once, as thou live now; and what reason had God, to
bring them from afar, and take their life from them, and to give thee liberty
to use them: but his mercy, and not thy merit; his favor, not thy deserving?
that the sense hereof may teach thee, that his grace is every way his grace,
though thy sin be out of measure sinful.

Add hereunto, that as prepremeditation is requisite before their use, so
sobriety in their use; for it becomes us not to sit down and glut with them,
as if we had nothing to do but to fill our bellies, and satisfy our desires:
No, no, meat is ordained for the belly, and the belly for meat, but God will
destroy them both. And he that hungers but for the food that perishes, may
satisfy himself for a while, but in the end he shall both hunger and thirst,
and shall not be satisfied at all. This was the advertisement that our Master
Christ Jesus gave to his Disciples; Take not care for your belly what you shall
eat, or for your back what you shall put on, for your heavenly Father knows
whereof ye stand in need before you ask, and he will not suffer you to want
the thing without the which you cannot serve him. Use then the things of this
life soberly for thou have more the^ thou broughtest into the world with thee,
thou have more then thou usest well, and thou have more then thou can take
out of the world. If thou get therefore food and raiment, learn therewith to
be content.

Thirdly, before thou rise from the table examine thy self, and see wherein
thou have made thy self unworthy of the succeeding use of his creatures, by
the abuse of those which thou have received: For I will assure thee, when man
is full, he waxes wanton: and the plenty of his table makes him oftentimes
fall into those sins, which the hungry heart falls not into. Is was not in
the time of Noah's sobriety, that his nakedness was discovered, but in the time
of his excess. It was not in the time of Lots sobriety, that he fell into
incest, but in his excess. It was not in the time of Ammons fasting, that he
fell before Absolon, but in the time of his feasting. When God therefore has
filled our bellies with good things, let us not rise without due examination of
our own hearts, to see wherein we have sinned. Let us with Job, sacrifice
every morning after our festivities: for it may be that the fullness of our
cups has made us blaspheme our God: as it was with Israel, they sat down to
eat and to drink, and rose up to play: and they felt the wrath of God upon
the^, in the fatnes of their bodies, and in the leanness of their souls

Since therefore God has coupled these things together, let no man put them
asunder, but let all flesh in trembling examine himself: and when he has
said, Give us this day our daily bread, let him withal add, And forgive us
our trespasses.

Now I fear I spend too much time in the description of the dependence, and
coherence of this petition with the former, and of the uses arising therefrom:
It rests now that we come to the Petition it self, In which, two things are
remarkable; a supplication, and a covenant or condition, by which the
supplication is sealed; first, the supplication is, Forgive us our trespasses;
the condition sealing the covenant is, As we forgive them that trespass
against us.

We must return to the supplication it self, in which, five things do
subordinately offer themselves to our consideration.

First, what we are by nature; sinners, and Gods debtors.

Secondly, what we ask concerning our natural estate in sin, and that is
pardon, and forgiveness.

Thirdly, from whom it is that we ask this pardon: and it is neither from
Angels in heaven, nor man on earth, but from God our Father in Jesus Christ,
whose habitation is in heaven, and who has given us in his Son the hope of
the same inheritance.

Fourthly, we have to consider the interest we have unto this sin, that we
crave to be pardoned, and it is Ours.

Fifthly and lastly, we must consider the extent of this our supplication, and
it reaches not only to our selves alone, but also to all our brethren, and
fellow members of the mystical body of Jesus Christ: and therefore we say
not, Forgive me, but, forgive us: and this I think is the true and lively
anatomy, and opening up of the first part of the Petition: the other we shall
weigh and examine when we come to it.

The first thing considerable here is our estate and condition by nature, which
is two ways expressed: first, in the essence thereof and next in the
denominatio^: the one privately couched in the bosom of the other, the other
public, manifesting the death of man's misery: the essence of his misery is,
that he is a sinner. The true title and indigitatio^ of that his estate in sin
is, that it makes him to be Gods debtor. But to return: our estate by nature
is not essentially set down here, but by way of denomination: for here Matthew
says, Forgive us our debts, while St Luke says in his 11. Chap. Forgive us
our sins.

Now to return to the consideration of this our natural estate; it is here
set down two ways: first, by denomination, and then by confession. It is
denominated a debt: it is confessed whilst we beg pardon for it.

The denomination is a debt: many titles and names of signification are given
to sin in Scripture. Sometimes it is called (...), sometimes (...), sometimes
(...), sometimes (...), sometimes (...), and sometimes (...), and here it is
called (...). All of these words important enough, to signify and express the
depth of that misery, into the which man by sin has fallen. Yet none does
more truly express his misery then this, that by sin he is become Gods
debtor: but thou will say, O man, How comes it to pass, that by sin man is
made Gods debtor, seeing God neither requires sin of man, nor is sin a
debt due to God? But to answer this, I would have thee to know, that there are
diverse sorts of debts which man owes: there is a natural debt which man
owes, there is a spiritual debt, and there is a civil debt which he owes.
The natural debt is that which he owes to death, and shall pay it will he
nill he: for we came all of us into the world, but upon this condition, that
we shall go out of it again, for dust we are, and to dust we must return:
for it is appointed for all men once to dye, and after death judgment shall
come. Our earth must return to earth, and our spirit to God that gave it.

Finally, this earthly house of our tabernacle must be dissolved, etc. And
this is called the first death, which is nothing else but a separation of the
soul from the body for a time, till God reunite them both in glory. The
Spiritual debt is that, which man owes to the God of nature, and it is
twofold, either the debt of obedience, or the debt of punishment. The debt of
obedience is the debt of righteousness, Romans 8.12. The debt of punishment is
called the second death, to the which man is bound for satisfaction of the
justice of God in case of not performing, and paying of the debt of
righteousness. The debt of righteousness is truly and properly called debt.
The debt of punishment is but figuratively and improperly so called: and that
for two causes, first in respect of the antecedent: and next, in respect of the
consequent. In respect of the antecedent, righteousness, which we should have
obeyed: and in respect of the consequent, punishment, which is due to him that
disobeies, as it is written, Tribulation, and anguish shall be, etc.

There remains a third debt that man owes, and it is mixed, for it is partly
religious, and partly civil. Religious, when according to the prescript of the
word of God, we give reverence to whom we owe reverence, fear to whom we owe
fear, and love to whom we owe love: civil, when we render to every man that
which we have borrowed, remembering that it is a blessing to owe nothing unto
any man, and the curse of the wicked, that he borrows and pays not again.
Psalm. 87.

LECT: 15.
And forgive us our debts.
IN the end of our last Sermon we looked on the words of the Petition it
self, wherein we found four things considerable.

First, what we are by nature, sinners, and debtors to God, whereof we have
spoken in our last Sermon. Now it remains, that we go forward to consider the
other three parts; and first of the pardon of our sin.

Forgive: In handling of which word I purpose not with Salmeron the Jesuit to
dispute concerning the propriety of the word, and to search whether it had
been better to have said, remitte, then as it is here, dimitte. I will only
according to the received and approved custom of the Church, speak of the
word, as it implies a pardon, and free remission of our sins, which are our
spiritual debts. For never did man speak in so natural a dialect as this is,
for all the other conditions displayed the condition and temper of his faith:
this the condition of his nature: these employed the good he hoped for: this
demonstrates the present misery, and body of death, under which he lies,
sigheth and groaneth, desiring to be eased: and to speak truly, what can be
more acceptable unto God, then the confession of sin, and the suit of pardon.
Did not our Redeemer, in the days of his flesh, call upon all them that were
weary and ladened, to come to him, that he might give them ease of their
burden, and rest to their souls? Whilst therefore, he shall see us
acknowledge our burden, and confess our debt, shall we not be welcome to him?
O know this, O man, for thy comfort, the shepherd never rejoiced more, in the
recovery of his lost sheep: nor the woman, of her lost penny: nor the father,
of his lost son, then God is well pleased, and glad of thy return to him,
ready to forgive thee thy debt, if in humility thou can but acknowledge it,
for it is written, Blessed is the man that confesses his sin, and forsakes
it; but he that hides his transgression shall not prosper. Well then, seeing
we have in the first word confessed our burden, and debt, let us now come to
the second, and consider our desire of pardon, and release.

Forgive: Debts are released and forgiven two manner of ways; either freely,
by pardoning the debtor; or else legally, by exacting the debt, and so
acquitting it.

Again, this legal release, and acquitting of debt, is two ways: first, when
the debt is paid by the true debtor. Secondly, when it is satisfied, not by the
true debtor, but by him who became suerty for him: and to this effect it is
that Justin. tells us, Inst. l. 3. tit. 30. Tollitur omnis obligatio
solutione ejus quod debetur, non tamen interest quis solvat, utrum is qui
debet, an vero alius pro eo. Now shall we look on man's sin as it makes him
Gods debtor, and enquire how it is forgiven. I answer, O man, thy sin is
forgiven thee, both ingenuously, and legally. Ingenuously, because freely, and
voluntarily. Legally, because thy debt is paid, though not by thy self, yet by
thy suerty Jesus Christ, who has done all, suffered all, and paid all, that it
be hooved thee to do, to suffer, and to pay, for the satisfaction of the
justice of God: he did it for thee, and thou have done it in him. But that
this may be the more clear, and the terms of our pardon may be the more
distinctly known, let us consider the debt of sin, as it is severally imposed
upon three several sorts of persons, to wit, the reprobate Angels, and men: on
the elect amongst the sons of men: and on the Son of God, for the lost sons
of men.

Now according to the diversity of the imputation of this debt, so is the
release and pardon thereof diversely and severally granted: the reprobate
Angels and Sons of men have the debt and burden of sin imputed to them:
but the pardon and release of sin, neither does nor ever shall appertain
unto them: for with them the Lord does, and shall deal in the severity of his
justice for ever, for they shall be cast in prison, where they cannot come out
till they have paid the uttermost farthing: And because they cannot pay, they
shall not be forgiven.

The elect sons of men, who are chosen vessels of mercy, and appertain to
the covenant of grace by virtue of their election, had the debt of their sins
imputed to them, when as they were borne dead in their sins and trespasses,
and were strangers by nature from the life of God, as well as the children of
wrath; but now, blessed be God through Jesus Christ our Lord, the release and
pardon of our sins: for that which was impossible to the law in so far as it
was weak, because of the flesh; God sending his own Son in the similitude of
sinful man, and that for sin, condemned sin in the flesh, that the
righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the
law but after the spirit.

Lastly, the Son of God had the debt and burden of of sin imposed upon
him; not of his own sin, for he that knew not sin was made sin for us.
And with him God has dealt with such rigor of his justice, that he came from
Bosra with red garments, he has trodden the wine press of the Father alone:
and in the anguish, and bitterness of his sorrow, cried out, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? If we shall look to the persons to whom this
release and pardon of sin is promised, and promulgated, we shall find it,
that it is only to the elect vessels of mercy, and to the children of Gods
free love: whereas to the reprobate men and Angels, there is neither promise,
nor hope of pardon left. For their judgment is sealed, and their condemnation
sleeps not.

Again, as to Jesus Christ the mediator of the new covenant, a free pardon he
obtained not: he paid the utmost farthing, that was requisite for the
satisfaction of the justice of God: only to man, and the elect amongst the
sons of men, has God voluntarily and freely forgiven the burden, and the
debt of sin. And I call this a voluntary and free forgiveness, for three
respects. In respect of God the Father: in respect of God the Son, and in
respect of God the Holy Ghost.

For I say, first, in respect of God the Father, for he who said, In the day
that thou shall eat, thou shall surely die: said also, the seed of the woman
shall tread down the head of the serpent. And again, God so loved the world,
that he sent his own Son to the death of the Cross, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish but have eternal life. It is free also in
respect of God the Son; for he as willingly and freely assented to the great
work of man's redemption (howsoever the way was sharp, and thorny) as the
Father was willing in his eternal wisdom to propose it. And therefore it is
written of him, that he laid his life down, and took it up again, he laid it
down, for none could take it from him, and he took it up again, for it was
impossible, that he could be holden of the sorrows of the grave.

Lastly, the pardon and remission of our sins, is free in respect of God the
Holy Ghost: for willingly and freely, without any merit on our part, he comes
down, and dwells in our souls, illuminates our understanding, rectifieth
our will sanctifies our affections, makes intercession for us, with sighs, and
groans that cannot be expressed, and keeps us by the power of his grace
through faith to eternal salvation; for it is written, Because we are sons,
God has sent the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, whereby we cry Abba,
Father. And again, because we of our selves know neither how to pray, nor
what to pray, the spirit helps our infirmities, and makes intercession for
us with sighs that cannot be expressed. And also it is written; That as he
has begotten us to a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the
death, to an inheritance which is immortal and undefiled, that withers not
away: but is reserved for us in the heavens: So also he keeps us by the power
of the Spirit through faith to eternal salvation.

Use. Now having thus cleared the meaning of the word, it rests that we make
use of it for our instructions: and the uses that arise from it are two: the
one serves for rebuke, the other for comfort: the rebuke falls on the Church
of Rome: the comfort shall return to us, and to every soul in whom the grace
of God dwells. The rebuke that arises to the Church of Rome is this: in
these words we are commanded to crave pardon for our debts, in the plural
number, and indefinitely, now we know this to be true, that those
Propositions which are indefinite, are universal in correspondence. Whilst
then we crave pardon and forgiveness of our debts, we universally beg
mercy, and pardon for all our sins, for both original and actual sins. For
our sins of infirmity, and our sins of presumption, for sinful omissions,
and commissions: for the sinful thoughts of our heart, and words of our mouth,
and actions of our conversation. Now in respect of all these we have need to
draw near unto God, and to say, Forgive; What mean those Doctors of the
Romish Church to teach, that there is a sort of sin, which in it self, and
of it self is venial; and that some only are mortal: but it is clear out
of the word of God, that there is not any sin which is not mortal: for every
sin is a breach of the law; and every sin and transgression shall receive a
just recompense of reward. He that sins without the law, shall perish
without the law: and he that sins under the law, shall be judged by the
law: and again, The wages of sin is death: I grant indeed if we look to
that excellent price that was given for our sins, no sins are mortal; for
such is the worth and excellency of that blood of Jesus, which speaks better
things then the blood of Abell, that whosoever shall have part in it, shall
stand without spot or blemish, before the presence of the glory of God, with
joy, and whosoever shall have but a drop of it to sprinkle on the posts of the
door of his soul, the destroying Angel shall not come near him, but though
his sins were as red as scarlet, yet by virtue of his blood they shall be as
white as snow; But on the other part, if thou shall look upon thy sin in its
own nature: and because of thy esteem, and account of it, it seem venial to
thee, will thou therefore say that it is venial in it self? O fool that thou
art, thou deceives thy own soul. The smallest coin, and the basest bullion
that bears the Kings stamp on it, is as current, as the richest and purest
gold that is seven times tried in the fire: and to counterfeit that coin is
as real treason, as he that either adulterates or falsifies the purest coin:
It is so with us in our debts to God: the meanest offense we can commit is as
culpable of judgment, as those that are of greater nature; for we must not
judge of our sins, according to the quantity, number, or quality, but chiefly
according to the person and Majesty against whom they are committed. Is not
he as great a thief that robs the cottage of the poor as he that robs the
Palace of the Prince? yes surely, and greater, for the Prin^e has wherewithal
to repair his loss, but the poor has not. Tell me, I pray you, is there
any sin in the world smaller then the point of a thorn? no surely, yet the
meanest thorn that was in the crown of Christ drew blood of him. The thorns
that were in that crown were thy sins: it was thy sins that drew blood of
him, and peirced his heart while there came blood and water out of it gushing:
and yet, vain man that thou art, thou will say they are venial; how can
thou call that venial, and of no weight, which was rated at so great a value,
as the sufferings of the Son of God, the least drop of whose blood was of
more worth, then all the worme-eaten children of men on the earth? Look never
therefore, O man, upon ^hy sin, in the judgment, and with the eyes of
nature: that is but a false prospective, and deceiving glass: look on it as
it lay on the back of Jesus; and as the weight thereof pressed the Son of
God down to the grave; and then if thou dare, come and call sin venial, I
hope thou will not: when it turned the moisture of David's body to the drought
of summer: when it made Ezechiah chatter like a swallow, and mourn like a
dove: when it made Job that he could not swallow his spitle: was there any
word of a venial nature in sin? no, no, no such thing. The Saints of God
have not known this dialect, nor spoken in this Idiom: it is but the voice of
him that is dead in sin, and trespasses: The Lord learn us to see our sins
aright, and then surely we shall confess that our sins are not venial, but
mortal.

Secondly, as this serves for the rebuke of our neighbor Church in Rome: so
it serves also for our comfort, and consolation, whom God has delivered from
the yoke of that bondage, and the night of that darkness: for tell me, O man,
what greater consolation can come to the soul of the Christian, burdened with
the weight of sin, then to say, thy sins are forgiven thee? but such is the
force of these words, Forgive us our debts; for as in the word of debt, he
shows the weight of our misery: so here in the words of forgiveness, he
shows us the riches of his mercy. Was it not I pray you, a great work, and a
work passing the capacity of man, when God created the world, he made all
things of nothing; when nature tells us, that of nothing nothing can be? was
it not a great work to call for light out of the midst of darkness: and by
the power of a naked word to make a glorious splendour of light shine out of the
midnight of darkness? Finally, was it not a great work to animate a piece of
clay, and by blowing on the dust of the earth, to make it a living soul? All
of these were great indeed as works of creation, but as it was said, behold, a
greater then Solomon is here: so is there here in the matter of our redemption,
a work greater then all these: for lo he made not all things of nothing; but
of that which is worse then nothing, sin; for sin is nothing but a
privation. He brought light out of darkness: but here a greater light out of a
greater darkness; for when we sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death,
he made a great light to arise unto us, for in his light he made us to see
light, he animated our clay, and breathed the breath of life in our nostrels,
being dead in sins and trespasses, he quickened and begot us to the hope of
immortality: finally, here is that work passing in excellence, and eminent
above all humane admiration, that we being his debtors for ten thousand
talents, and not having one farthing to pay him, he has freely forgiven us
all our debt, to the admiration both of man and Angels: when the Angels who
fell have not obtained a way of reconciliation, he has found out for poor
man a way of peace: insomuch that what man could not pay, he has freely,
fully, and finally released; requiring nothing of man, but that he should in
sincerity say, Forgive, and it shall be forgiven him. Now what more could he
do to thee, O man, or what less could he require of thee? What more could he
do to thee, then lay down his life for thee? and what less could he require
of thee, then that in true sorrow forthy sin, and in full assurance of his
mercy, thou should come unto him, and say, Forgive me, that so thou may be
forgiven. The word in it self is so full of comfort, I cannot as yet pass by
it. There is another place in Scripture that looks so like to this place like
Hippocrates two twins, they are borne together, they live together, and dye
together. The place is the 12. of Matthew: Come to me all ye that are weary
and laden, and I will ease you. There, as the Savior and Redeemer of the
world, and the true Physician of souls that are sick, he desires him that is
spiritually sick, to come to him, and he promises to ease him, and give him
rest, but upon a condition that he feel his sore, and acknowledge his
burden: Now it is remarkable that he first promises ease, and then rest:
first ease from the commanding power of sin, and next rest from the condemning
power of sin. It is even so here, that the spiritual Physician of our sick and
wearied souls leads us to be sensible of our soul, and that by sin we
are made Gods debtors, and liable to his judgments. In the next place, the
cure of this our disease is given: for we shall no sooner confess and
acknowledge our sins to him, but he shall forgive it. But you will say to
me, what is this that he forgives me? I answer, look to the place of
Scripture, immediately before cited, and see there what he promises to ease
thee of, as also all these things he here promises to forgive thee; he
promises there to ease thee of all thy burden of sin, of the law, of
affliction. Of sin, for the burden of it is as a talent of lead Zach. 5.6.
And David says, it is a burden too heavy for him to bear; Of the law, for it
is a yoke, which neither we nor our fathers, nor our forefathers were able to
bear. Act. 15. Of affliction, for it is a weighty cross; and he that follows
Jesus Christ must take it up, and follow him daily. Of sin, while he not
knowing sin was made sin for us. Of the Law, whilst he was made of a woman,
and made under the law. Of affliction: not by taking all afflictions from us,
but by sanctifying them unto us both in their nature, and their end. Their
nature, whilst he makes them testimonies of our adoption; their end, whilst
he by them keeps us to eternal life: for as the lion that killed the Prophet,
kept still his dead body: so afflictions may well kill the natural man, yet
they do keep the life of God in our souls. Now know then for your comfort
that what there he promised to ease us of, here he promises to forgive, and
to forgive is more then to ease; for a Physician will ease his patient for a
while of a hard binding, which afterward he will bind again. And a master
will ease his servant of the task of captivity, and slavery, but afterward
he will imprison him. And finally, a beast will be eased of his burden, for a
while, but afterward it will be imposed, and laid upon him: but such is the
great and rich depth of the mercy of our God; what he eases us of that he
forgiveth us: for while he gives pardon to man, and speaks peace to his
soul, he pardons not as man pardons, neither gives he peace, as man
gives peace: My peace I give you, my peace I leave with you, not as the world
gives peace, give I it unto you. The world and the children of men, when they
pardon, their pardons are faulty three ways: they are not total, but
partial: not free, but constrained: neither final, but for a time: not
total, for if they can forgive one fault, another is impardonable: not free
and voluntary, but forced and constrained, either by reason of the importunity
of friends, or hope in expectation of gain: not final, for though they
forgive for a time, yet their wrath and desire of revenge is renewed with any
occasion whatsoever. It is not so with our God, for what he eases of that he
forgiveth; when he forgiveth, he forgiveth ingenuously, that is; freely,
fully, finally; freely without any merit or occasion on our part: fully, for
he forgiveth both the sin, and the punishment thereof. And finally, for he
forgiveth us both in this life, and that which is to come. What has man then
wherein he can rejoice? nothing but in the mercy, and free favor of God; for
as St Bernard duly and truly acknowledges Meritum meum est miseratio Domin:
so may all the sons of Adam cry out and say, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto
us, and with the Apostle St Paul: O the deepnesse of the riches, both of the
wisdom and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his ways, and his
judgments past finding out?

LECTIO 16.
And forgive us our trespasses.
HAving already handled of the word debt, and the word forgive, that which
remains of the text offers it selse to our consideration: for though the
gleanings of Ephratus be better then the vintage of Abiezer, yet must the
gleanings have their own room also, and every one in their own order must be
considered; which in number are three, 1. for whom it is that we put up this
supplication of pardon, and the word is plural, not singular, Us. 2. The
reason why we pour out our supplications in this plural signification, and it
is because it is we, not I, that have sinned alone, nor thou only nor any
other alone, but all of us, and therefore in a communicative appropriation we
call them ours. Thirdly, it is to be considered, of whom, and from whose hands
it is that we are bold to beg this our release and pardon. If in any of these
particulars we can make any further point of instruction to result, by the
grace of God it shall be made known unto you. The first thing then we have to
speak of this day is the persons for whom, and in whose favor this petition
and supplication is formed, It is clear and evident out of the words
themselves, that the petition is not made for me alone, nor for thee alone,
nor for any man or woman in the world alone, but in common, thou for me, and I
thee, and every one of us for our selves and each of us for our neighbors as
for our selves: for as Omnis orainata charitas incipit a seipso; sic etiam
omnis regulata charitas terminatur in socio: we have reason then to look,
first on our selves with the eyes of pity, and from our selves with the eyes
of co^miseration on our neighbors; knowing them to be men of the like
infirmity, to which we our selves are subject. Remember brethren, that God in
his word has taught us two several sorts of communicative contemplation: the
one pointing at our selves from the consideration of our brethren; the other
pointing at our brethren from the consideration of our selves: the pity that
we owe to our selves from the consideration of our brethren, is recommended to
us in the fifth chapter of the Epistle to the Galathians: Brethren, if any man
be fallen amongst you of infirmity, restore such a one in the spirit of
meekness, considering your selves lest you also be tempted. The pity that we
owe to our brethren from consideration of our selves, is mentioned in many
parts of the law, wherein we are commanded, not to hide our eyes from the
necessities of any stranger, because we our selves were sometimes strangers in
the land of Israel: it is so here with us, God will have us to remember, and
pray for our necessities, not in our own name alone, but also in the name of
our brethren, and fellow members.

Use. In handling of the words the order is remarkable, and next to the order
the communion and fellowship that is couched up in the bosom of that order.

First, I will look upon the order, which is very remarkable, for he is
teaching his disciples to pray for the pardon and remission of sins, but he
will have them first to look on themselves, and their own necessities, and
from themselves not only to consider, but also to commiserate the necessities
of their brethren: this is the path, and the true strain, in the which God
walks; for our God is the God of order, and not of confusion. And for clearing
hereof, that order is first and originally established in God himself, and
then from him a shadow of that order which is in him is derived to his
creatures: I say first, order is positively and chiefly established in God
himself; for he who is one in essence, is distinguished in three persons, the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost; who being individually one in
themselves, by virtue of their individual essence, yet are distinguished by
order of personal existence; the Father being in respect of order
distinguished, and preferred to the Son: and the Father and the Son both to
the holy Ghost. Now from this chief and prime distinction of order which is
amongst the persons of the blessed Trinity, there is made manifest amongst the
creatures a shadow of this order also, and that in five several points of
contemplation. First, in the frame of the heavens and earth. Secondly, in the
civil societies of men on earth (viz.) Commonwealths. Thirdly, in the
spiritual societies of men, his Church. Fourthly, in the homebred, and
domesticke families of men. And last of all, in the private carriages of man in
his life and conversation. I say that God has established order in the frame
and combination of heaven and earth together: for there he has placed light
and darkness; that for the day, this for the night; there he has set the
Sun and the Moon, that by the heat of his influence to exhale, this by her
moisture to water and refresh; there has he placed the clouds, the bottels of
rain, wherewith in due season he waters Gedions fleece: there has he
placed the wardrobe, and storehouse of the tempests of snow, hail, and wind,
and all for the use of man, and those other sublunary creatures that live and
move on the face of the earth: that in the^ and all of the^ the footsteps of
the order of the God of order may be seen and acknowledged: next to this
celestial order, and subordination of the Spheres, and Celestial bodies,
behold he has fixed an order, and subordination also amongst the sons of
men, in their secular and civil conversation and commercement; for there he
has placed some to command, and some to obey, some to govern, and some to be
in subjection: their commandment and authority he calls (...), our obedience
and subordination, he calls (...), Romans 13. And in that same place he
threateneth, (...), him that opposes himself to that ordination. Thirdly, God
has ordained a just and beseeming order in his Church, in times, places,
persons, and proceedings. In times, a Sabbath is appointed for his service. In
places, he has appointed his Church to be the place, wherein his name shall
be called on. In persons, some must teach, some must observe and correct, and
some must collect and distribute alms. In the proceedings also of the Church,
there must be order, for admonition must go before censure, and smaller
censures before the greater, according to that which is written, Let all things
be done with order, and decency. 1. Cor. 14. (...). Fourthly, there is order
also in our several families, for there he placed the husband and the wife,
the parent and the children, the master and the servant: and all to this end,
that they who are in authority may command, and they who are subordinate may
obey. Finally, in every man's private carriage there is an order to be kept,
that we walk not inordinately, as busy bodies, every man talking and
prattling of his neighbors charge, with the neglect, and contemptible
forgetfulness of his own: these the Apostle 2 Thessalonians. 3 calls Busy bodies,
and (...). There are two things also which I had almost forgot, in which order
is to be found: look to the grave, yea and to hell it self: to the grave, for
we shall rise in our order. 1. Cor. 15. The dead in Christ shall rise first.
To hell, for there is a Beelzebub the prince of devils. Now if in all things it
has pleased God to establish an order, in the heavens, in the elementary
spheres, in common wealths, and civil societies of men, in the Church, and
communion of his Saints, in our private families, in our private charges and
conversasions, in our graves, and in hell it self; O how careful should man
be to submit himself to order in this life, not only in things temporal, but
also in things spiritual; remembering in all our supplications which we
present to God: First, the duty we owe to God himself: Secondly, the duty we
owe to our own souls: Thirdly, the duty we owe to our fellow-brethren, as
mutual members with us in the mystical body of Jesus Christ: and what better
order can be given and followed for the rule of thy life, then first, in all
things, and above all things to look unto God; from him to reflect thy
contemplation upon thy own soul (as the seat of his Image) and from thy own
soul to cast a ray, and beam of commiseration on thy brother, and his
necessities, knowing assuredly, that though in the matter of reckoning,
rationis reddendi, every man must bear his own burden, yet in the matter of
compassion, Infirmitatis tolerandae, every one of us is borne and bound to
bear one another burden, and to commiserate not only their temporal, but
also their spiritual necessities, as well as our own; for he that wants the
sympathy, and fellow-feeling of a member of the body, declares himself not to
be of the body.

But thou will say unto me, shall a man pray for that which he believes, do we
not acknowledge and confess in our belief the forgiveness of our sins, why
do we then pray for that which we do believe?

I answer, I do not doubt, but according to the Articles of our Creed, God
has pardoned and forgiven me my sins, and my fellow brethren their sins:
yet will I pray daily, and hourly for their further pardon, whereby I may
feel engraven in my heart the assurance of that pardon; for as every
particular sin weakeneth the particular assurance of our pardon, so is it
well done on our part, by renewed, and reiterated supplications to renew and
reiterate our confidence, and assurance of mercy: not that I think in any case
the eternal and immutable pardon of God, given us from eternity in the blood
of Jesus, can ever be fully, or finally lost or inverted: no, no, the gifts
and callings of God are without change or alteration: but because the
frequencie of our sins do weaken our confidence and hope of pardon,
therefore it is requisite that by the reiteration of our prayers, we may
strengthen and renew our hope and confidence of remission: and that as often as
our sins are reiterated and renewed.

But it may be yet enquired, why the word should be plural, Us, and not Me:
It is written in the Scripture: There is a sin for which thou should not
pray: and again, Many are called, but few are chosen. Now brethren, if there
be some sins, and some sinners, for whom we should not pray: how is it that
we are commanded here to pray for all men as well as for our selves?

To this I answer, I may, and should pray for the greatest sinners in the
world: the reason is, because the purpose of God, concerning the salvation or
condemnation of man, though one in it self, yet is two ways to be considered
of us: first, as hidden, and kept close in the bosom of the Father. Secondly;
as revealed and manifested by his word: whilst the salvation and reprobation of
man is only known to God, we are bound to pray for them, and the pardon of
their sins: but if at any time God in his word make their rejection manifest,
then, and then only is it time for us to shut up our mouths, and not to pray
for them. This truth shall be cleared by examples: whilst Samuel was ignorant
of the purpose of God, concerning Saul, he ceased not continually to pray for
him: but how soon God once made his secret purpose of rejection known to
Samuel, he stopped his mouth, and prayed no more for him. Whilst David knew
not the will of God, concerning his child begotten with Bathsheba, he fasted,
prayed, and would not be comforted: but how soon God made his secret will
manifest, by the death of the child, he mourns no more, but rises straight,
refreshes himself, and eats bread. Finally, this was the ground of all that
partiality, which by many is condemned in Rebecca, concerning her son Esau:
she was acquainted with the secret purpose of God concerning him: I have loved
Jacob, and hated Esau. And again, The elder shall serve the younger. Thus, so
long as God makes not his secret purpose known, concerning man, we are bound
to pray for all men: but so soon as God makes known his will concerning man's
last end, where God cease to love, we should cease to pray. It is the part
therefore of a good Christian to pray for all men: to love them that hate us: to
bless the^ that curse us, and to pray for them that persecute us, that we not
being overcome of evil, but overcoming evil with goodness, may be perfect, as
our Father in heaven is perfect. Now this being spoken concerning the persons
for whom we offer up this our supplication, we must come and consider the
reason wherefore we must pray so, and the reason is, because our sins are ours.
[Our.]

Take heed, I pray you to this (my brethren) The reason why we crave pardon of
our sins is: because sins are ours, and besides these, nothing else in the
world is ours. I have said that sin is truly ours; This shall serve for the
doctrinall part: And that nothing in the world is ours besides sin, this
shall serve for the moral part. First then sin is truly ours, in three
respects: first, in respect of patrimony: secondly, in respect of practice:
thirdly, in respect of purchase. In respect of patrimony; The sins of our
first parents Adam and Eve, are ours. In respect of practice, our actual
sins are ours. In respect of purchase, the sins of our neighbors are made
ours. The sins of our first parents are ours: for they not only sinned for
themselves, but for us also, they before us, we in them, and after them. Do
we not impute the bitterness of the stream to the fountain, and the
rottennes of the branch to the root? yes surely, so is it with us, he was the
root, we are the branches; he the fountain, we the streams: and to express
this more clearly, let me ask you that are acquainted with the art of numbers,
if that any figure in the first place does signify any more but it self
only, yet by the addition of a cipher, 1.2.3. or 4 multiplyeth the
signification from ten to hundreds, from hundreds to thousands, and from
thousands to millions. It is even so with us, Adam and Eve sinned, and being
considered in their own place sinned alone and for themselves, but being
considered with our addition, as being in their loins, we as ciphers have
multiplied their burden, they as figures have made us significative: they then
have not sinned alone, but we also in them, and with the^: and their sins are
not theirs alone, but ours also by copartnership. Secondly, sin is ours by
practice, for as our first parents sinned, and by their sin made sin ours
originally: so we also by walking in the footsteps of our fathers, and sinning
after their examples, have made that which was ours by descent from our
fathers, to be ours actually: for as by one man sin entered into the world,
and by sin death, so death has universally run over all men, in respect
that in one man all men have sinned; yea further, because we have actually
built up the sepulchers of our fathers, therefore tribulation and anguish is
upon the soul of every man that does evil, to the Jew first and also to the
Grecian. Lastly, I say sin is ours by purchase, by drawing on us the guilt and
punishment of ours neighbors sin. And now thou shall enquire of me how a
man can be guilty of his neighbors sin.

I answer, it may be done five manner of ways. 1. By connivence. 2. By
negligence. 3. By assent. 4. By example. 5. By provocation. By connivence,
winking at other men's faults, when we should reprove them; to this effect it
is written, Levit. 19. Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbors sin, lest
thou bear sin for him. By negligence; in not correcting such for sin, as are
under our authority. This was the sin of Eli in sparing his sons: and this
is the threatening of Ezechiah in case of silence at the sins of his people.
Ezec. 3. By assent: Thus Aaron was guilty of Idolatry, when he assented to make
the golden calfe. By example; thus Jeroboam is marked that he made Israel to
sin: And David, that he made the name of God to be ill spoken of amongst
the Gentiles. Last of all, by provocation: this was the sin of Lots daughters
to their incestuous father: and Baalams sin to Israel, with the daughters of
Moab. This then being the doctrinall part showing how sins are ours: the
moral part succeeds: in which we must clear this, That nothing is so really
ours, as sin. That we may the better understand this we must know that there
is no creature on earth, so naked and indigent as man: for naked he was borne,
and naked shall he return again: and he has no peculiar or proper thing in
the world, that he can justly call his, but sin and infirmity. To prove this
let us take a survey of all the things in the world: Is wealth ours? No, for
riches are painfully gotten, carefully kept, and woefully lost: and yet when we
have most ado with them; like an eagle she takes her wings, and flies away so
swiftly, as she cannot be recovered: and though they bide with us till the end
of our days, yet then they take their leave, and we reserve nothing, saving a
wounded conscience for the abuse of them. Is beauty ours? No, surely, let but a
days sickness take thee by thy hand, and lo thou shall find nothing but age
and wrinkles, and the lineaments of death, and the characters of deformity
which shall make thee afraid of thy self. Is honor thine? no surely, it
vanishes as the morning cloud, and as the smoke of a chimney, and is liker to
nothing then our Sun dyalls which point out the hours, so long as the Sun
shines, but if a cloud shall intervene, serve for nothing, but are a dim
statue. Is strength thine? No, let God but write one line of toleration, and
put it in the hand of thine, and straight like Beltazzer, thy knees shall beat
one against another: And with Job thou shall scrape thy sores with a potsherd
on the dunghill. Finally, is that breath that we draw into our nostrels ours?
no surely, it is but sucked up, and borrowed from the next air: If God lend
thee power, thou can both exhale and evaporate it, but if he say not Amen, it
shall choke thee in the passage. Or is this body that thou bear about thee
thine? No surely, it is of the dust, and to the dust it shall return again.
Pitiful and wretched man that thou art, what is thine? nothing but sin, and a
wounded conscience for sin: and these are ours by patrimony, by practice, and
by purchase, of the which we can never be freed till we put off, and change our
patrimony, practice, and purchase Our patrimony, by showing our selves heirs,
not to the first Adam, but to the second. Our practice, by walking no more
after the flesh, but after the spirit; for if we walk after the flesh we
shall dye, but if we walk after the spirit we shall live. Our purchase,
whilst we crucify our selves to the world, and the world to us, that the life
of Jesus may be made manifest in our mortal bodies; and whilst we forget the
things that are behind us, etc. and account all things as dirt and dung to us
in respect of the advantage that we have in the cross of Jesus Christ.

The last thing remarkable in the words, is the person at whose hands we sue
for this release, and pardon of sin, which is neither man nor angel, nor
Saint departed, but God alone: for all these, with the wise virgins, have ado
with their own lamps: except this only, to wit, God, for it is against him
only that we sin, and it is he only who can forgive sin: and if pardon
of sin be in the Church, it is only a conditional declaration, no absolute
condonation.

LECT: 17.
As we for give our debtors.
NExt to the consideration of that part of this Petition, which is
supplicatory, we come to that which is restipulatory. The first part was
supplicatory in begging pardon of our sins against God: this carries the
restipulation of the covenant: and promises in our names the pardon and
forgiveness of our brethren whenever they sin against us. The covenant of
it self, and in it self,, is hard, and so much the harder by how much it has
both the fairer provocations for obedience, and the fouler stumblings in
disobedience. It has the fairer provocations to obedience: for in all the
covena^ts that God has made with man, there is none like to this. God has
made three covenants with man: a natural, a Legal, and an Evangelicall. The
natural covenant was made with man in the day of creation. The legal in the
day of his temporal redemption: and the Evangelicall in the fullness of time
when the Son of God being made man, and not knowing sin, was made sin for
our sakes, and expiated our sins by his sufferings. The tenor of the first
covenant was natural and just. Natural because he made man in nature perfect,
and just, because he required nothing of man, but that to the obedience
whereof he had given him natural ability. The second covenant was in some
condition preternaturall, and just: preternaturall, in so far that nature
could not obey it: yet just, because he once strengthened nature to obey it.
The third covenant was supernatural and gracious. Supernatural, in requiring
things that nature could not give: yet supernaturally gracious, in finding out
a remedy for the defect of nature, making the Son of God to become man, and
him that knew not sin, to be made sin for us, that we in him might be
made partakers of the riches of the mercy of God. Now remember I pray you, what
I have said: I said that this covenant was so much the harder, by how much the
provocations were gracious, and the disobediences foul. To have sinned against
the covenant of nature was foul indeed, because nature was made perfect, and
able to do what was required of the natural man. To sin against the
covenant of works, (which I called preternaturall) was foul also: for
howsoever nature was then corrupt and weak, yet their deliverance from the
bondage of Egypt prefigurating to them the hope of a better deliverance, and
therefore rendered the smell of their disobedience the more odious and
abominable, by how much in it they had not only the pardon of their natural
uncleanness, but also the hope of a better inheritance sealed up unto them.
But above all, the breach of this covenant made with us in the blood of Jesus
under the Gospel, is so much the more foul, and abominable, by how much the
seal of the covenant was gracious and easy. For the condition of the first
covenant was strict, because natural. The condition of the second was
fearful, because supernatural for the time. But the condition of the last
covenant was easy, be cause gracious: and our rebellion so much the more
foul, because it was easy: and to the corrupt nature of man, so much the more
hard, by how much it was facilitated by the obedience of another, for it is
written, the spirit that dwells in us lusts after envy. And again, I do
not the good that I would, but the evil that I would not: and yet the Law in
it self is pure and holy, righteous, and just: Well then, it has pleased God
in his wisdom to adjoyn these words (As we for give, etc.) To the former, to
be a seal of his righteousness, and withal to be a testimony of our
uncleanness, and prevarication: A seal of his righteousness, in that he
has freely forgiven us our sins. A seal of our uncleanness, and
prevarication, in that we cannot forgive one another.

Now the words being thus taken up in their dependence, it is requisite that
we look upon them in their several stations, and from thence gather their
several uses for our instruction.

If we shall narrowly look upon them, four things offer themselves to our
consideration. First, a condition imposed to man, serving for the seal of the
covenant, As. Secondly, to whom this condition is both proposed and imposed,
we. Thirdly, the duty annexed to the condition, Forgive. Fourthly, the persons
to whom we are obliged in this duty: to our debtors or them that finne against
us. To return to the first of these, the condition, As, the words are diversely
read in diverse Evangelists. Matthew says, Forgive us our debts, as we forgive
our debtors. Luke in his 11. Chapter says, Forgive us our sins, for we even
forgive them that sin against us. And according to the diversity of the
readings, so has there also diversity of interpretations of the words arisen.
Some looking too strictly upon the particle of similitude here used, As, have
been led a little to doubt of the free pardon and remission of their sins:
For if God shall forgive man no otherwise then man forgiveth his neighbor,
then for the most part, our sins shall neither be fully, freely nor finally
forgiven: for as I have shown you in our last Sermon, man's pardon is but
partial, constrained, and for a time: and the rest laid up against the day of
revenge, and his more full retaliation. On the other part, the reading of this
prayer, as St Luke has recorded it to us, by way of causality, in the word,
For, has led many to presumption, thinking that if they can pardon their
neighbors their sins, then God is bound to pardon them theirs, and so they
would enforce by way of merit their pardon at Gods hands. But that the words
may be cleared, and the wisdom of God in them freed from both these
impostures, know that the word used by Matthew, is not set down by way of
parity, but by way of seal. And the word used by Luke, is not set down by way
of causality, but by way of commiseration. I say, that the word used by St
Matthew, as, is not a word of parity, and reciprocation, but of seal: so that
the purpose and meaning of God in it, is not to tie man to that strict and
precise rigor of his conformity, which either the severity of his Law, or the
sincerity of his nature requires, but in mercy he leads man to be
confident, and assured of the remission of his sins at Gods hands, by the
seal of his own heart: for by this, as by an indeleble character, shall man
seal to himself the assurance of Gods mercy, if he himself can be
merciful: For it is written, Condemnation merciless shall be to the man that
will not show mercy: but mercy rejoices against judgment. Again, on the
other part, whilst St Luke forbeareth the word As, for fear of wounding the
weak conscience, and uses the word, For, it is not to make the word causall,
but co^miserative: for he sets not down that word, as a cause or meritorious
occasion procuring, and adjuring God to be merciful unto us, but the word is
a word of commiseration, and pity, drawing the argument from the less to the
more, and importuning God only with the remembrance of our weakness: as if
he should have said, If we who are evil, can forgive in any condition, O thou
who art rich in mercy, forgive us fully, freely, and finally.

I have looked thus upon the word in the native, and genuine signification
thereof, freeing both the wounded conscience from the terror of severity, and
withal putting a bridle in the lips of the presumptuous man, lest at any time
he should run out: It rests now that we make use of the word in the true
signification thereof.

Use. The use we make is this: I see heaven is so good a thing, that all men
would be at it; and mercy so sweet, that every man would have a part and
portion in it: Yet, O behold the vanity of man, whilst we all aim at the end,
we are forgetful of the way: and whilst we gape after the felicity of the
covenant, we forget the condition. Will you enquire the cause? It is this; the
covenants of God are peaceful, and the promises of his rewards are rich and
plentiful, but the way to their fruition is thorny and hard. He covenanted
with Adam the dominion over his creatures, and the fruition of all the garden;
but when the Impostor came, he made the condition hard, and in so doing, he
shut them up from the knowledge of good and evil. He covenanteth with Abraham
the possession of the land of Canaan; but the condition was hard, Offer to me
thy first borne of the free woman, Isaac. He covenants with Gedion the
deliverance of his people from the tyranny of Midian, but the condition was
hard, Cut down thy fathers grove, etc. neither are these terms hard, as being
the voice of the Law, but what is more, they have been of the very like, and
equal severity under the Gospel: For will you consider to whom it is that
Christ Jesus promises comfort, it is to them that mourn. To whom promises he
the kingdom of God, but to them that are poor in spirit. To whom
satisfaction? only to those who hunger and thirst after righteousness. And
finally, to whom does he promise ease and relaxation from their sins? only
to those who are weary and laden; and to such as take up their cross and
follow him daily. O then what a folly is this amongst the sons of men, to
snatch at the grace of the covenant, with the mis-prise of the condition: yet
behold, for reformation of our weakness in this point, it has pleased our
Redeemer to annexe the condition to the covenant; showing us, that unless we
be careful of the restipulation, we cannot be able to crave the benefit of
the first bargian: for as it is generally holden amongst men, that our one
handed contract cannot stand, so is it also with God, and us. He never broke
his part of the covenant he made, nor forfeited at any time his part of the
obligation: the forfeiture is only ours: for though he keep, we break: and
though he covenant mutually, yet we scorn the restipulation: but alas, we
do pitifully deceive our selves, it shall not be so with us: as it was said
to Simon Magus, in the case of his bribery, when he thought to purchase the
grace of God by money, Peter answered him, Thou have no part nor portion with
us in this inheritance, because thy heart is not upright in the sight of God;
but thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, Act.
8.21. So shall it be said to us in the time we deprecate our iniquities: thou
have no part nor portion, O man, in the work of mercy, because thou will not
be merciful: and I will not forgive thee (shall God say) because thou will
not forgive thy brother.

From the particle of simimilitude, we come now to the persons to whom this
similary practice of pardon is imposed: and the word is plural and indefinite:
plural, We: indefinite, tending and extending it self to all sexes, sorts
and conditions of men whatsoever. When I read and ponder these words, I cannot
but call to mind some other places and passages of Scripture, in the which the
like peremptory dealing is expressed to us. I remember, Jacob on a time
wrestling with the Angel of the covenant, the great Angel seeing that he
could not prevail, said to Jacob, Let me go I pray thee, but Jacob answered,
I will not let thee go till thou bless me. Likewise, Ioshuah being desired
to go up with Israel to the land of promise, answered, I will not go on
forward, except thou go with me. And as it has been the wisdom and care
of the children of God to wrestle with him for the attaining of his blessing,
so it has been always the care of God to wrestle with his Saints in the day
that he would bless them, to propound unto them a condition of difficulty, by
the obedience whereof he might draw them from themselves to an absolute
reposing and relying upon his mercy. This is his practice also here, wherein
howsoever he be a God rich in mercy, slow to anger, and of great kindness,
forgiving transgression, iniquity, and sin, yet when he dispences his
pardon, and disposes his love mercifully toward us, that he may seal the
assurance thereof to us, he will wrestle with us a little while, in
controlling the humor of our corrupt nature, that when he lets us see our
corruptions subdued to him, we may by way of argumentation from the less to
the more, assure our selves of the riches of his favor toward us: So that the
meaning of the word is this: Man, would thou have favor? surely I think
thou would: begin thou then first, thou made the first fault, make the
first amends, for it is reason so to be. What art thou in respect of me? or
what is thy pardon in respect of mine? What art thou, I say, in respect of me?
Dust and ashes, and to dust and ashes shall thou return again. But lo, I am
a great and incorruptible God, before whom the heavens are not pure, and in
whose presence the Angels do cover their faces, as incapable of my glory. And
as there is a difference betwixt thee a finite and corruptible creature, and
me an infinite and incorruptible Creator, so is there also as large an extent
of difference betwixt thy ways and my ways. What is thy mercy in respect of
mine? but a moat in respect of a mountain, a spark in respect of a fire, a
drop in respect of the Ocean, and nothing in respect of that which is more then
all things. So that if thou would have me, who am infinite, invisible,
eternal, and incorruptible, opening to thee the rich treasures of my
incomprehensible, and unsearchable mercies, it first must be thy care who art
a finite, corruptible, and worme-eaten creature, to extend the bowels of thy
compassion, and to be merciful to thy fellow brethren else how shall I
forgive thee thy thousand Talents, if thou forgive not the hundredth pence owing
to thee. Matthew. 18 well then, the proposition is plural and indefinite,
comprehending all sexes and conditions of men.

Use. Since it is that the commandment is so strict in severity, and so large
in extent, whence comes it that we obey not? When Naaman in disobedience to the
Prophet went home, and his leprosy cleaving to him, he was readvised by his
servants, and following their counsels, obtained a sweet and desired purgation
from his disease. When Balaam the false prophet had twice smitten his Ass
unjustly, at the third time his rebuke made him wise. When the Centurion
invited Christ to heal his daughter, in protestation of his unworthiness, he
confessed, that when he said to this servant, go, he goes, and to this
come, and he comes: Now I say, since all these have found obedience, how is
it that our Redeemer Christ Jesus commanding us to forgive our brethren can
never find obedience? O what a rebellious thing is man, and how deaf are the
passions and purturbations of his heart. Whilst Jesus Christ walked in our
flesh, he spoke to the winds and they were still, to the seas and they were
calm, and to the devils themselves, and they were dispossessed. When he was
upon the cross he cried with a loud voice, when he gave up the ghost, and
lo the Sun was darkened, the Moon refused to show her light, the rocks were
rent asunder, the graves opened, the dead arose, and the vale of the Temple was
rent from the top to the bottom: when he rose the third day, the earth shook
and trembled, the stone was removed from the door of the grave, and the Angels
of God came and ministered to him: when he ascended on high, he led (according
to his promise) captivity captive, he gave gifts to men and sent the Comforter
to the world, to convince the world of sin, of righteousness, and of
judgment; and yet behold, notwithstanding all this royal power, and
super-eminent Majesty, by the which he was acknowledged to be the Son of
God in the estate of his humility; Now when he is exalted to the Throne of his
glory, and sits at the right hand of the Majesty of God the Father, behold he
calls, and we will not come; he stretches out his arms, and we refuse to
be embraced; he commands, and we disobey; he requires, that as we would
be forgiven, we should forgive, and we refuse the grace of the covenant,
because of the condition. But what shall I say to thee, O man? I will say with
St Augustine by, way of interrogation, Sub imperio Christi mare audit, and tu
surdus es? Have the winds and seas obeyed him, and art thou deaf to his
commandments? It had been better for thee that thou had never been borne:
for if under the Law of Moses, he that sinned, under the mouth of two or three
witnesses suffered death; of how much a greater judgment shall we be found
worthy, if we despise him that speaks from heaven, and neglect so great a
salvation? It were better for us brethren to run another course, and to do as
the disciples did in the 8. of Matthew the 20. when the storm of the sea waxed
violent in such measure that the ship was almost covered with waves, the
disciples ran to Christ and awoke him, saying, Master, help us, for we
perish. The danger for the time was theirs, they were in peril of drowning:
but the spiritual morality is ours: We are all in the world a turbulent and
tempestuous sea, Christ has severed us from the world by his ship his Church:
while we are in the world, though not of the world, we shall not want storms
and tempests ready to overflow us: Christ Jesus is our skipper, and sits at the
helm, so long as he a wakes, and watches over us by his providence, we are
safe and secure: but if he fall asleep, and seem but to wink at our
perturbations and eminent passions, we perish except we awake him. Whenever
thou find therefore the tempest of thy natural, and corrupt passions, as of
avarice, lust, or revenge arise within thee, as thy tempest arises, so let
always the steeres-man arise, or else the storm will grow so proud, that none
can hear what thou say. Mercy was the last legacy that thy Savior
bequeathed to thee upon the cross: Father, forgive them, they know not what
they do. And what, O man, will thou not labor to be perfect, as thy Father
who is in heaven is perfect? It is not with thy conscience as with the day: A red evening prognosticateth a fair day; but if the evening of thy life be
red, or dyed with discolored blood, the morning of thy next life when thou
shall rise to judgment, shall look pale, and lowre upon thee: nor shall any
sound, but of judgment, and horror awake thee: arise thou that lay down a
stranger to mercy, and subjugate thy self as a slave to judgment: for as thou
have hated peace, so shall it be far from thee: and as thou have loved a
curse, it shall draw near unto thee; like water it shall be poured out on thy
head; and like oil it shall drink up the moisture of thy bones.

LECTIO 18.
And lead us not into temptation.
IN handling of this Petition, two things are chiefly remarkable, the
introduction, and the Petition it self. The introduction is in the word, And:
The petition has two parts, the first contains a deprecation, the second a
supplication: the deprecation is in these words, (And lead us not, etc.) the
Supplication in these words, But deliver us, etc. In the handling of these, I
will first look on the word or particle of introduction, which is conjunctive,
And: by this particle this Petition is tied to both these precedent Petitions,
which concerns man and his necessities whether bodily or spiritual. And
first it is remarkable, that by this particle, the Petition is tied to that,
wherein we represented to God our bodily necessities: for whilst we said,
Give us this day our daily bread, we confess three things to God: the first
was that we had our life on him: for in him, and in him alone we live, we
move, and have our being. The second was, that we had the means of him, and
him alone, by which that life was maintained in us: for unless he of his
mercy should send a blessing on our travels, all should be in vain: For we
may eat, and not be satisfied; we may cover our makednesse, and not be warm;
we may sow much and reap little, we may earne wages, and put them in a
bottomless bag, except he open his hand and fill us with his blessing, for
then, and no otherwise are we satisfied. And thirdly, whilst we begged of God
the means of our satisfaction, so also we begged them of him in a moderate
manner and measure: not to give us over-little, lest we should for want
steal, and Gods name should be dishonored by our practice: Nor yet
overmuch, lest by reason of our plenty we should wax wanton, forget the
rock from whence we were hewn, and so in our presumptions, perish, and say,
Who is the Lord? Now having begged these things in that Petition, this Petition
is duly conjoined unto it by this particle of conjunction, And: for since it
is certain, that man is a weak and frail creature, in the day of his want
ready to run an ill course; and in the day of his prosperity ready to grow
proud, and mis-know God, there can nothing be better said, then, Lead us not
into temptation, that is to say, since Satan is ready at all times, in all
places, and by all occasions to tempt us to sin: Lord watch thou over us by
thy grace, and good spirit, that in the day of our want, we sin not against
thee by despair, and in the day of our wealth and abundance, we sin not
against thee by presumption, but learn in whatsoever state we be, therewith
to be content, for naked we came into the world, and naked we shall return
again. Again, by the same co^junctive particle, And, this Petition is duly
tied to that wherein we begged of God the remission and pardon of our sins,
and that for three several causes or respects: first, to teach us to avoid
security; Secondly, to teach us the truth of Gods covenant: and thirdly, to
teach us to submit our selves to the condition of the covenant. It teaches us
to beware of security, for after the remission of sin, temptation follows:
and he is a great fool, who having once gotten the victory over sin, cries
to himself a perpetual, and permanent peace: yes furely, for the estate of
the servant is not above his master. Whilst Satan dealt with our head Christ
Jesus, in tempting him, though he mightily declared himself to be the Son
of God, by resisting and repelling his temptations, yet in the end it is said,
that Satan left him but for a season: If then this has been the lot and
portion of the head, what shall become of us that are members? If he dealt so
with the green tree, what shall become of us who are withered branches? And
finally, if this has been the portion of him who was the cedar of Lebanon,
what shall become of us, who are poor bushes of Isop at the foot of the wall?
No, no, O man, deceive not thy self, and after the foil of a sin, over
which it may please God in his mercy to give thee victory and peace of
conscience in the blood of Jesus, do thou think that Satan can be so
cowardly, that after one foil, he dare no more to assault thee? No, be sure
of this, so long as the strong man keeps the hold, all things are in peace:
but if with Jacob thou shall labor to return to the land of thy nativity,
Laban shall pursue thee, and unless the God of thy fathers, make his fall upon
him, he will not only kill thee, but also the mother upon the young ones. For
though for a while he seem to leave his habitation, yet if thou do not watch
over the house of thy soul, he shall return, and bring with him, seven
other spirits worse then himself, and the last estate of thy soul shall be
worse then the first. Secondly, it serves to teach us the truth of Gods
covenant, under which we have not only cause of joy and spiritual rejoicing,
but also reason to serve the Lord in fear, and walk before him in trembling.
For the covenant of mercy that God makes with man in the blood of Christ, has
two parts, the first carries a promise of the remission of our sins: the
second a promise that he will write his law in our hearts. Now this is that
new covenant which God promises to make with us under the Gospel, of which
the Apostle Paul, writing to the Hebrews, tells us, that the tenor thereof is
not formed according to the tenor of a carnal commandment, but according to
the power and law of an endless life. For to what use I pray you, shall the
remission of our bygone sins serve us, if when we are once washed and
cleansed, we shall straight with the dog return to our vomit; or with the
sow, to the puddle of our transgressions again? It is well added by the
wisdom of God for man's instruction to say, no sooner, Forgive us our sins,
then straight way to subjoyne, And lead us not into temptation: for by this
means we get the covenant of God made sure and perfect to us, whilst he
first seals in us the oblituration of the old hand writing of sin that was
against us, and in the next room writes his law in our hearts, and
captivateth our affections to his obedience.

Lastly, by the addition of this Petition to the immediately former, we were
taught to serve the Lord in fear: for if this be our misery, that our enemies
are watchful and malicious, omitting no occasion of snares, and temptations
that can entrap; and if this be our infirmity and weakness, that of our
selves we cannot stand one moment in the grace received: why should we not
serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice before him in all trembling? For as this
is the comforr of comforts for a Christian to hear this said to him, Son,
be of good comfort, thy sins be forgiven thee; So let this be the square
by which he rules and squareth his future obedience: Sin no more, lest a
worse thing befall thee.

Thus having cleared to you the dependence of this Petition with that, Give us
this day our daily bread: and with that also, Forgive us our sins: It rests
now that we consider the words of the Petition it self, and first those which
are deprecatory, and then those that are supplicatory: First, Lead us not into
temptation: and then, But deliver us from evil.

Lead us not into temptation: For the better understanding of the words, we
must remember that they are metaphorical, and propounded unto us by way of a
figurative translation; for in them God teaches his Church to put up her
supplications to God: Now we must understand, that although the Church be but
one in her self, as her God, head, and husband is one, yet is she always
proposed to us under the shadow of two several considerations. For sometimes
she is considered as in heaven, and sometimes as she is on earth: that part
of the Church which is in heaven, is in patria, in her country: That part which
is on earth, is but in via, upon the way: when we enter into heaven, we are
comprehenseres: whilst we are on earth, we are but viatores: they that are in
heaven are called the triumphant Church; they that are on earth, the militant.
Now by both of these it is clear, that the Church here on earth has much
ado: for will you look upon her as a pilgrim; she has enough to do with all
her wits to keep the right way; for though the way be patent enough, yet
because it is thorny, we had need of a guide to lead us in it, that when we
fall and stumble, he may lift us up again: For this Jacob confessed, Few and
evil have been the days of my pilgrimage. Again, will we look upon the
Church here on earth, as upon an army, for so Job confessed, Job 7. Man's life
is a warfare on earth: There we have need of a head and a leader too: for
unless there be Captains over hundreds and over thousands, it is impossible
that we can either fight in order, or report a due victory: and there shall
nothing be heard in our camp but confusion, and the voice of him that is
overcome; so that howsoever the metaphor stands, it is clear, that we are
by nature weak and frail creatures, subject to many wanderings, and many
assaults, under and against the which we can neither stand, nor prevail,
unless our Leader and Captain be with us, and in his power make us
victorious. The metaphor therefore serving equally to present unto us, both our
pilgrimage, and our warfare: I would rather lay hold on the last, and show you
what are the references of our spiritual warfare, in which we stand: seeing
the matter is so clearly displayed, and pointed out to us elsewhere: for in the
Epistle to the Ephesians, the Apostle tells us, that we must not only fight
against flesh and blood, but also against principalities and powers, and
spiritual wickedness, and the Prince of darkness, and the god that rules
powerfully in in the children of disobedience. That we may therefore hold
still the allegory of our warfare, and from thence attain to the scope and
meaning of these words, let us now look upon them both, and see how the one
keeps correspondence with che other. In a carnal and bodily warfare, we
know that three things are chiefly remarkable: 1. The fight. 2. The enemies. 3.
The Captains charge. All of these we shall find here set down unto us in
these few words, as in a map, our spiritual warfare: for never did any
General on earth decipher better the several periods of a pitched battle,
then our Redeemer Christ Jesus does here wisely both set us in order of
battle, and providently tell us both how to fight, and how to retire. And that
this may be clear, look to the words, in which he foundeth to us our
alarm, and commands us fight: for as it is in the earthly combat, so is it
in the spiritual: in it we have five things considerable. 1. The fight it
self, temptation. 2. The enemies, and these are all those who have a part in
this temptation. 3. The soldiers, and these are we, who are the children and
servants of God. 4. The Captain, God our Father, who is in heaven. 5. And last
of all, what is his charge: he must be our leader: All of these packed up
from their several places, make up to us this maine charge, Lead us not into
temptation. We will return now to the first thing considerable in the words,
and that is our fight, proposed to us in the word, Temptation: For the better
understanding whereof, we must know that as there is Multiplex pugnandi genus,
so there is Multiplex tentandigenus: For, Aliter pugnatur in schola, aliter in
praetio: we fight one way in the fencing school, another way in the field.
Whilst we are in the fencing school our master fights against us, his
strokes are soft, and for our instruction. But when we come to the field, our
enemy fights against us, his strokes are furious and desperate, and his end
is to destroy us. We have need then to watch over our selves and guard our
selves well, lest by our negligence and security we fall and cannot rise
again. Yet to make the word more clear, we must labor to distinguish
tempters in their several sorts, and from thence know what temptation is
truly, and what is the nature thereof. For understanding of which, we must
know that there are three sorts of tempters: God, man, satan: God tempts
man: man tempts man: man tempts God: satan tempts man also. God tempts
man, and his temptations are but trials of man: not that it is requisite for
God to try what is in man; for he knows already what is in man's heart, his
mouth, works and ways. But when God tries and tempts a man, it is to make
man known to himself, and to those with whom he lives in the world. Thus he
tried and tempted Abraham's faith, Jobs patience, David's love, Peter's
perseverance, and Paul's sincerity. Abraham's faith, in offering up of Isaaek:
Jobs patience, by his multiplied afflictions: David's love, in Absolous
persecution: Peter's perseverance, by a damsel, and Paul's sincerity, by a
buffer of Satan. Now as God tempts man, not for that he is ignorant of what
is in man, but that he may make him know himself, and that his graces in man
may be known to the world, and as the Apostle writing to the Corinthia^s
tells us (...), that they who are approved may be known: so also in the
second place, man tempts God: and as God tempts man, and is free of sin,
so man when he tempts God is never void of it: for whilst man tempts and
tries God, it is a faithless and distrustful trial he makes of Gods
power. So Israel tempted God sinfully in the wilderness, whilst by ten
several temptations they forced God to make known unto them his omnipotency,
and all-sufficient power. Can God prepare a table to us in the wilderness? or
can he give flesh to the thousands of Israel to eat? Thirdly, man tempts
man, and that diversely; for there is a temptation, and a trial, whereby man
tempts man, approved of in Scripture: and there is a temptation whereby man
tempts man, condemned and dis-allowed in Scripture. Of the first sort of
temptations and trials are those which man uses for clearing of
controversies: As Solomon tried the harlot by her unnaturalness to the child
which she claimed. Or then for trying or examining the knowledge and grace of
God in man, so ministers are bound in duty to try their flocks, masters their
servants, and parents their children in the progress and growth of
Christianity. Lastly, Satan is a tempter, and that a chief and maine one: For
as all his temptations are to evil, so are they all sinful; and that in two
respects, both in respect of himself, and in respect of man; for whilst he
tempts man to sin, he not only sins against man, but also against
himself: against man, by drawing him to sin against God: Against himself,
by adding to his judgment, for by how much he draws many to condemnation, by
so much the more shall his judgment be multiplied, and his conde^natio^
aggrevated. Now out of the knowledge of these several sorts of te^pters, and
temptations, it is easy to know in the general what temptation is, which is
either probationis, or deceptionis: It is either a trial, or a deceit: Gods
temptations are but trials of the graces of his Saints. Man's temptations for
the most part, and Satan's altogether, are deceits, and snares laid before us,
to entrap, and ensnare us in sin and in evil. Thus then our exercise being
in this life nothing else but a warfare, in which we must fight against the
temptations of the devil, whose associates are the world, and the flesh, we
have more then need to run to God, and say, Lead us not into temptation.

But thou will enquire of me, O man, if by this Petition we mean any other
temptation, then that which is from Satan alone: or if here we deprecate any
other? I answer, we do by this Petition simply and absolutely pray against
the temptations of the devil, the world, and the flesh, in so far as by them
we are led to sin against God: we do also pray against the temptations of
man, in so far as by them man labors to entrap, and ensnare us in the way
of Gods disobedience: but as for the temptations of God, we do not absolutely
pray against them, for by them we are often times strengthened in the way of
grace, and made stronger and more perfect in the hidden man of our heart: For
whilst God tempts and tries us, it is either in respect of himself, or of
our selves, or of others, or in respect of Satan the devil. In respect of
himself, when he tempts and tries us he bettereth not his knowledge of us,
for he knows us better then we our selves: he knows our frame, and our
fashion, for his hands has fashioned us below in the earth, and the thoughts
of our hearts are not hid from him: but his care in our trials is, from them
to extract his own glory. We know brethren, by experience, that Cynamon, and
the rarest spices, howsoever they be always fragrant, and odoriferous, yet do
they never smell so sweetly, as when they are bruized in the mortar of the
Apothecary: It is even so with us, we are always pleasant and acceptable to
our God through Jesus Christ our Lord; but never so pleasant, as when we are
in the mortar of affliction, and under the rod of his correction: for there he
is with us to keep us, that our bush consume not, that our clothes scorch
not, and that his strength may be made perfect in our weakness. 1. Cor. 12.
Secondly, he tries us also in respect of our selves, that we may know what is
in us, that if we stand, we may give God the glory, and if we fall, we may
know our own weakness. St Paul was a chosen vessel of mercy, and yet but a
man, and to the end that he might not be puffed up, there was an Angel of
Satan sent to buffet him. Peter was a chosen vessel of mercy also, yet that
he might know himself, God left him to himself, and he fell foully. Sampson
and David were both men approved of God, yet that they might be known to
themselves, they were left of God for a while, and by their fall learned to
know, that without the continual assistance of Gods grace, they were but
exuviae hominum, the out sides of men, for woe befell them when God departed
from them. Thirdly, in respect of others, God tempts us also, and that for
their instruction, and our imitation. For as it is with the teacher of a lion,
who takes a dog and whips him before him, that by the whining and howling of
the dog, the lion may learn to reverence and fear the rod: So does God with
his Saints: he corrects, tempts, and tries one, that all the rest may
stand in awe and fear. Why was it, I pray you, that he turned Lots wife into
a pillar of salt, but that he might by her example teach us, Vt nos ejus
couderet exemplo? Why left he Noah, Lot, David, Solomon, and Samvson to have
frailties, but that by their example, he might teach us to tread out the
footsteps of their salvation in fear and trembling: and that whilst we think
we stand, we may take heed that we fall not. Lastly, God tempts us in
respect of the Devil, and that for two causes: First, to satisfy his
importunity. Secondly, to stop his mouth, and rub shame on his face. To
satisfy his importunity: for he goes about continually like a roaring lion,
seeking how he may devour us. Thus he dealt with Peter seeking to winnow him
like wheat. Thus with Job: Does Job serve God for nothing? No, like that
unjust Judge in the Gospel, who for importunity gave ear to the widow: So
Satan is always importunate, and many times thereby speedeth and prevails
Sometime again, God suffers Satan to run loose at his Saints to rub shame
on his face: that by their pereverance and grace, or recovery from their falls
by repentance he may stop Satan's mouth, and say of all his Saints, what he
said once of Job: Have thou not considered my servant Job, who yet continues
in his uprightness though thou have moved me to correct him without a cause?
And as he said to the Apostle St Paul, My grace is sufficient for thee. Now in
all these respects, we have reason to say, Lead us not into temptation: yet
simply and absolutely, in respect of none but Satan.

LECT: 19.
And lead us not, etc.
IN our last sermon delivered on these words, it was told you that this
Petition had two parts: the first deprecatory or a praying against temptation.
The second supplicatory: wherein we begged of God grace, that we be not overcome
of them. Concerning the first, we showed you, that four things were chiefly
considerable. First, the fight, in our temptation: Secondly, our adversaries
against whom we have to fight. Thirdly, our fellow soldiers. Fourthly, our
head and leader. Of the first of these I spoke in our last Sermon: It rests
now that we come to speak of the second thing considerable in these words: to
wit, who are our enemies, and adversaries, against whom God leads us out to
fight. Now if any shall ask against whom it is that the Christian is sent to
battle; The Apostle answers for us, telling us, that we fight not against
flesh and blood, but against principalities and powers, etc. Ephesians. 5. In a
word, he does there insinuate unto us that our enemies are the world, the
flesh, and the devil. I will not at this time entreat of these three
adversaries of man's salvation, for time will not suffer me to paint them out
to the life: yea I know how many large volumes have been published already on
this subject, by worthy and learned men: only by the by as it were, and in so
far, as the words here shall offer us occasion, I will point at them: and
from their weak considerations speak some words of comfort and instruction to
your souls. It is certain that the chief and arch enemy of man's salvation is
Satan the devil, who: has been a liar to man, and a murderer of man from
the beginning. But because he is a spirit and therefore invisible that man
cannot know him whilst he fights with him, he suborneth two soldiers against
man: the world from without man: the flesh, the lusts thereof within man: that
man having fightings within, and terrors without, may fall and never rise
again. But that I may make you senfible of these his assaults and temptations,
know that whilst I speak of the world, I do not understand this great and
majesticke frame of the world composed of these four elements, fire, air,
earth, and water: for by these man is not tempted, all, and every one of these
Satan has employed to punish man for sin: but by none of these has he at
any time tempted man for sin: But by the world I understand the children of
disobedience, and wicked ones that are in the world: and that not simply or
absolutely, as they are flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bones, but
conditionally, and as they are either clothed with prosperity and wealth, or
else as they are stripped naked in the day of their want and misery. And that
the wicked of the world are called of God, the world, it is clear out of that
prayer of our Savior Christ, whilst he says, I pray not for the world, but
for those whom thou have given me out of the world. Now these as they stand
either invested or clothed with prosperity, or stripped naked with calamity,
and want, do prove a stumbling block and snare, or temptation to the children
of God. For in the day of their prosperity, by their carnal joy wherewith they
are overjoyed in their pleasures: by their carnal security, whereby they cry
peace to themselves, when God minds them no peace: and by their proud
trampling upon the weak, and despising of them that want; what do they but
invite us to run with them in the excess of their riot, and by their
temporal felicities labor to draw away (if it were possible) the very elect
of God, from the search and purchase of that felicity which is immortal and
undefiled? Again, in the day of their adversity, what do they but cry to us
with Jobs wife, Curse God and die. With Iehoram, I will wait no longer on the
Lords leisure. And with Israel in the wilderness, Would God we had dyed by
the flesh pots of Egypt. But brethren, with these things let us not be moved,
let neither the prosperity of the wicked draw thee to a carnal rejoicing or
love of the world; for the prosperity of the wicked is but like cracking of
thorns under a pot: nor let the calamity of the godly (who suffer justly for
their sins) dravv thee to apostacy and backsliding from the faith: for it
is better to suffer affliction with the children of God, then to enjoy the
perishing pleasures of sin for a season. Heb. 11. And it is more honorable
for us to embrace the Cross of Jesus Christ, then all the treasures of a
corrupt and perishing Egypt. Again, Satan in the second place, hireth our
flesh to fight against us; and here by the word flesh, I do not understand this
body of ours alone, which is composed of flesh and blood, but also that
natural corruption which we have drawn from the loins of our first parents,
who have infected us both soul and body, and dwelling in us fights
desperately, and maliciously against us: This corruption the Scripture
expresses by many names and titles: as The old man: The old Adam: The natural
man: The law of our members: and The lusts of the flesh, which fight against
the soul. Thus we see, that the flesh is also our enemy, and so much the more
odious, by how much it is traitorous. For of it we may say what David said in
Psalm. 41. My familiar friend whom I trusted, and he that lay in my bosom,
and did eat bread with me, has lifted up his heel against me. To this
Judas who betrayeth us, we may justly say, It were good for thee thou had
never bin borne. To this Dalilah, we may say, If thou had not plowed with my
heyfer, thou could not have read my riddle. To this wife of Job, we may say,
Thou speak like a foolish woman. And lastly, to this unadvised counselor
we may justly say, Get thee behind me Satan, for thou know not the
things that are of God, but the things that are of man. Now would thou know,
O man, why thou should so encounter thy flesh: I answer, because it is thy
deadly enemy, and that in three respects: In respect of malice, of power, and
policy. In respect of malice, for it is written, In me, that is, in my flesh,
there dwelieth no good. Romans 7.18. Now that wherein there is no good, must of
necessity be exceedingly malicious, and fully replenished with evil. Tucaro
(says a Father) cunctis virtutibus denudata es, and ideo diceris caro a
carendo, quia cares omni bono. And would you have a true anatomy of the flesh?
look to St Paul, Romans 3. Her eyes are full of adultery, her throat an open
sepulcher, her mouth the mouth of deceit, the poison of aspes is under her
lips, her feet are swift to shed blood, destruction and calamity are in her
ways, and the way of the Lord she has not known. Secondly, the flesh is a
powerful enemy, both in respect of the unregenerate, and also in respect of
the regenerate. In the unregenerate it is a mighty King: in the regenerate it
is a cruel tyrant. In the unregenerate, I say, it is a mighty king: for as a
King in his kingdom swayes the scepter, enacteth laws, forces obedience, and
subdueth rebels: So is it in the unregenerate man; sin bears dominion,
gives a law to the members, and leads all the affections captive to
disobedience. And from this it is that the Apostle exhorts us not to suffer
sin to reign in our mortal bodies. And as the flesh is a King in the
unregenerate, so in the regenerate it is a cruel tyrant: for howsoever by the
grace of God in Jesus Christ, we are set free from the law of Sin, and of
death, yet so long as we dwell in the body, it dwells in us, and both
tormenteth us with the torture of a wounded conscience, for sin past, and
with continual molestation to sin in time to come. So that the best of Gods
Saints have deeply sighed and groaned under the yoke and bondage thereof. David
could say, I dwell too long in the valley of Meseck, and in tents of Kedar. And
the Apostle Saint Paul could say, O miserable man that I am, who shall deliver
me from this body of death? Finally, the flesh is an enemy exceedingly
politic, for howsoever the power of the flesh be great, yet the policy
thereof is greater: because it is not a public enemy, but a homebred, and
domestique traitor, therefore by the subtle slight, and cunning undermining
thereof, many times we fall, and are overthrown: From hence it is that the
Prophet Jeremy forewarneth us of the policy thereof, whilst he says, The
heart of man is desperately wicked, and deceitful above all things, none can
know it but the Lord that made it.

Would thou know and try this? O man, go home to thy heart and see how it
deals with thee. The world is a great temptation, and a great tempter. Satan
also has many temptations, and is an arch tempter: but what can the
temptations of the world do to thee? or what can all the temptations of the
devil do against thee, except thy own heart, and thy own flesh deceive and
betray thee? for as Satan said to Christ, Cast thy self down, etc. and as
John said to Iesabel, Who is there on our side? etc. so does Satan say to man,
whilst by the flesh he tempts him; except we cast our selves down, except
the flesh be on his side within us, neither prosperity, nor adversity, famine,
nor nakedness, life nor death, can ever prejudice us. But if in these baits
he can hire our own flesh against us, we are easily overcome: and like
another Aza, hyring a Benhadad against us, Israel gets the foil, and the
best treasures of Gods house are but a prey to him.

Use. Thus having deciphered our inbred enemy, it becomes us carefully to
watch over it: for the spirit may well be ready, but the flesh is weak. Let
us therefore deal with this our domestical adversary, as the citizens of a
besieged city do with their inbred traitors: if any city were besieged with
foreign forces, and they knew that they harbored a traitor within their
bosom, they would give no rest to their eyelids, nor slumber to their eyes
till they should apprehend, disarme, condemn, and put him to death: So is it
with us, our citadell the soul is besieged by a fierce and for reign enemy;
we have a traitor lurking in our bosom, our own flesh: Let us therefore with
all speed rise up against it, disarme it by fasting and prayer, let us beat it
down, and bring it in subjection, and let us mortify the lusts thereof by the
spirit, and we shall be sure that God shall shortly tread it under foot, and
give us the victory: for it is written, The elder shall serve the younger. The
last enemy we have to fight against is the Devil, a chief and arch enemy: for
he goes about continually seeking how he may devour us. No time can free us
from his temptation, the morning, the noonetide of the day, or the midnight of
darkness. No place, not the throne of judgment, nor the street of our trade, nor
the cabinet where we rest. No person also is free from him: he spared not the
first Adam, nor did he spare the second Adam: How are the sons of the first
Adam according to the flesh, and the sons of the second Adam according to the
spirit, free from his assaults? No surely, we may not, nor cannot be free from
them.

But would thou know, O man, the manner of his fight: Know that the
temptations of Satan have three gradations, even the same which every
voluntary action of man, whether good or bad, has in it. For in the soul of
man there are 3 faculties, one sensitive, another appetitive, the third
locomotive. And the actions of these three faculties are accordingly three,
sense, appetite, motion. For first, a man sees or hears an object presented to
his eyes or ears; the sense represents the object to our appetite or
delight: the delight or will, either imbraceth or refuses the object, and this
we call the motion. Now as it is in every action, so is it in the temptations
of Satan, for first he bewitcheth the sense: secondly, he inflameth the
appetite: and thirdly, he procures the action. Would we have this made more
clear? I will. Look on David, when he fell in adultery, how played Satan the
soldier with him? He first fascined or bewitched his sense: for it is
written, He saw a woman washing her self, and the woman was beautiful:
Secondly, inflamed his delight, for it is written, He sent messengers, and
enquired after the woman, and she came in unto him. Thirdly, by both of these,
and from both of these he procures and propagateth the action, for it is
written, And he lay with her. Again, if this one example suffices not,
behold another. When the woman saw that the fruit was pleasant to the eyes, and
a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit, and did eat.
Behold here also a third: It is confessed by Achan: when he saw amongst the
spoils a goodly Babilonish garment, and a wedge of gold of fifty shickles,
then I coveted them and took them. These three then, sense, desire, and
motion, as they are in every action, so they are in every temptation: For
Satan in his temptations first besieges our senses, and seeing they are the
gates of the soul, these being opened, he winds himself into our delight
and appetite, and being there, shall we think that he who has taken pains
to gather so many sticks together, will not take pains to blow a fire to
warm himself? No, no, he is an angel of darkness, but there he
transformeth himself into an angel of light: there he speaks evil of Good,
and good of evil, and there he puts bitter for sweet, and sweet for
sour. Last of all, when by the abuse of our senses he has captivated our
affections, think thou that he will leave that fire which he has blown so
much, until it burn? No, no, I tell thee he will not leave it, till it burst
forth in a flame, and till thou burn in the midst of it. Will the husbandman,
when he casts his seed in the ground, fall too and plow up the ground
again, without hope of harvest? No surely, in patience he will wait for it,
and first let it come to a blade, then to a stalk, then to an ear, then to be
ripened, and last of all he cutteth it down and brings it into his barn. I
will assure thee, it is so with Satan: for though he be not a husbandman,
yet he is an envious man, and whilst the husbandman sleeps he sows tares
amongst the wheat. And though he seem to mis-know it, yet is not he careless
of it, but by all means he waters it with the stolen waters of pleasure,
until he bring it to harvest and maturity. He can say to the young man,
Rejoice O young man in thy youth and let thy heart cheer thee in thy young
days. He can say to the covetous man, Pull down thy barnes and make them
more large, and then cry a peace to thy soul. He can say to the furious man,
Smite him at once, that thou may not smite him the second time. And What thou
do do quickly. And in a word, whatsoever seed of iniquity, or bitter root of
corruption he sows or planteth in our hearts, this is his policy, he first
bewitcheth the sense, then enflameth the appetite or desire: and last of all,
he brings sin to accomplishment.

Use. In respect hereof, it becomes us carefully to watch over our senses, as
the gates and doors of our souls. Secondly, to keep a guard about our
affections, that though our senses be infected, yet our hearts be not affected.
Psalm. 139. And last of all, we should be earnest and careful to mortify both
of these, least their infection prevayling, sin in thee come to a maturity, and
thou reap as thou have sown: for he that sows to the flesh shall of the
flesh reap corruption, and he that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit
reap life and glory, and honor, and life and immortality. Thus whilst we
seek to be free from temptations, we seek to be freed from the temptations
of the devil, the world, and the flesh. And if God at any time shall suffer us
to fall into these temptations, we then beg of him, that we may not be
overcome of them. Non enim petimus ut non tentemur, sed ut a tentatione non
vincamur.

Now follows the third thing remarkable in the words, and that is, who are
the soldiers that must fight the battle. To this I answer, all those that are
subject to temptation: the whole have no need of the physician, but the sick:
if any man therefore think himself free from the dint of temptation, forbear
to say, Lead us not into temptation: but if none can exempt himself, then what
I say to one I say to all, Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation.
But that I may speak more clearly. The soldiers of this Christian warfare,
are all those who are members of the mystical body of Jesus. To what end else
has he clothed them with his livory; put his badge on them, given them their
earnest, and covered them under his banner? he has clothed us with his
livory, whilst he has imputed to us his righteousness; he has put his badge
on us, whilst he has baptized us in his name: he has given us earnest,
whilst he has given us the first fruits of the Spirit to dwell in us, and he
has convocated us under his banner, whilst he calls to be within the pale
and precinct of his Church. But this is not all: thou will enquire yet who are
those to whom he has concredited these endowments. I answer, the Saints
militant and tryumphant. By the Saints militant, I understand men and women on
earth. By the Saints tryumphant, I understand those who fought the fight,
finished their course, and now are entered into their masters joy. But here two
questions may arise: the first is this: Have none been tempted but the sons
and daughters of men? I answer, none: for howsoever it be true, that Jesus
Christ was the Son of God, yet as the son of man he was also tempted with
us, and that for these four causes. First, Ad cautelam. 2. In auxilium. 3. Ad
exemplum 4. In fiduciam. The son of God was tempted in our flesh, for our
caution and for warning sake, that looking on him, no man might think himself
set free from temptation: for if he has not spared the Cedar of Lybanon, how
shall he spare us poor Isop bushes? Secondly, he was tempted for our
assistance and aid, for what shall it avail a man to know that his enemy
approaches against him, unless he be able to resist him: therefore Christ
came, and in our flesh was tempted also, that he might deliver us in all our
temptations, both from the fear of death, and from him who had the power of
death, the devil. Thirdly, he was tempted for our example, for as he said of
himself: learn of me, for I am mecke and lowly: and as the Evangelist St John
says of his washing of his disciples feet: I have given you an example, that
you should do one to another as I have done to you. So also has he suffered
our temptations, and was tempted like unto us, that he might leave us an
example to follow his foot steps. 1. Pet. 2.21. Fourthly, he was tempted for
our comfort and assurance of victory, for it is written, Heb. 4.15. We have
not such an High Priest as cannot be touched with our infirmities, but he was
tempted in all things like unto us, yet without sin. Let us therefore come
boldly to the throne of grace, and we shall find grace, to help us in the
time of need. The second question is this, Who are those amongst the sons and
daughters of men, who can truly say that they are tempted? to this I answer: If
temptation be a fight, those only are truly said to be tempted, who do bravely
and courageously resist and fight against their adversary. It is not the
sluggard that lies down to sleep: nor the coward that runs away: nor the
feeble hearted that yields that can truly be called the souldies of God, but
they only who hold fast what they have received: who stand fast within the
liberty wherewith they are made free; and who continue constant unto the end,
that as the good soldiers of Jesus Christ shall receive the crown. Seeing
then amongst the sons of men, there are some who are in the gall of
bitterness, who are taken captive of Satan at his will, who are given over to
their vile affections, and to the power of error (...), Sure I am, these are
not worthy of the title of this fight, nor to have their names billeted for the
soldiers of Jesus: only they then in whom though sin dwell, yet does not
reign, are the true soldiers of Jesus: who can with Abraham refuse to be
enriched from Sodom: and with Moses refuse to leave a howfe behind him, are
worthy: and shall be clothed in white, and receive a white stone, and in it a
new name which no man knows but he that possesses it.

Use. Now what shall I say concerning man, the Christian soldier, and the
necessity of his resistance? Alas there is so much in man enemy to man, and so
little left in him, that is able to resist or fight for him, much less to
triumph, and conquer or subdue his enemy to him, I think; I can only entreat
man to look continually on his captain. And yet because he must either fight
or else never triumph, there are two things of which I would advertise him.
First let him not thrust himself into temptation, unless, as David said,
There be a cause; And that with Jesus he be led with the spirit. For our
adversaries are many, malicious, powerful, and politic: And like the sons of
Zerviah, too mighty for us, unless that he who commands us to fight, fight
in us and for us, we cannot be victorious. Secondly, when he is called to
battle, let him not be a coward, for he has more then good company, his God
for a Captain watching over him: his Redeemer his elder brother fighting for
him: the holy Ghost his comforter fighting in him: his fellow brethren standing
on his one hand, and all the Angels of heaven on the other: and who would not
fight with so good company? No, no my brethren, let us lift up our faint
hearts, and strengthen our weak knees: though the conflict be hard, the
conquest is honorable: for God will shortly tread Satan under our feet,
through Jesus Christ out Lord. Amen.

LECTIO 20.
Lead us not into temptation, etc.
ACcording to the tenor of of our first proposed method we have already spoken
unto you of the first three things that were remarkable in this Petition, to
wit, of our calling, temptation; of our enemies, the world, the devil, and the
flesh; And thirdly of our fellow soldiers, Jesus. Christ in the days of his
flesh: our fellow brethren now Saints in heaven, and our fellow brethren here
militant on earth; It rests now that we consider and ponder aright the
fourth and last thing remarkable in them: to wit, who is our Leader, and it is
God, for to him, and to him alone it is that we put up supplication, and say,
Lead us not into temptation.

Now in handling of this point, three things are chiefly remarkable: First, who
it is that is our Leader, and why it is that he is so called. Secondly, how it
is that he leads us into temptation. And thirdly, whilst he leads us into
temptation, whether he be guilty of sin or no? The first thing observable
is, Who is our leader; I answer, God, and that very God, who being one in
essence, is three in persons, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: God
the Father is our leader, and therefore he is called the Lord of Hosts. God
the Son is our leader, and therefore took upon him our flesh, that in it,
he being first a soldier, might thereafter become our leader. Finally, God
the holy Ghost is now by deputation become our leader, and therefore it is
written, That as many as are led by the Spirit, are the Sons of God. God the
Father is our leader, and for that cause is styled the Lord of Hosts: Dominus
exercituum, this is his name for ever, and this is his memorial unto all ages
Of all the titles that God has in scripture, there is not one so often used by
God himself as this: For shall we look but upon two Prophets, Isayah and
Jeremiah, and in them alone this title is attributed to God above an hundred
and thirty times. It is not a title then likely to be looked upon, but with
deep and due consideration: let us then look upon it. Our leader God is
called the Lord of hosts in these respects: first in respect of the general
frame of all his creatures, who being viewed and considered in a mass
together, are nothing else but a pitched field, and a battle set in array,
fighting for the honor of God, and the obedience that is due unto him: For in
the heaven of heavens, there is an host of blessed Angels covering their faces
and bowing their knees before his Throne, singing a deep Halleluiah, and
casting their crowns down at his feet: And this company is called an host:
for Luke 2. whilst they appeared to the sheepheards at the birth of Christ, it
is written of them: There was a multitude of Angels, and an heavenly host,
praising God, and saying, Glory be to God on high, and to men on earth peace
and goodwill. Let us from that place look a little lower, and behold the
starry firmament, that is above our heads, and there we shall find that he
is the Lord of hosts also, for there the Sun, moon and Stars are his
soldiers, they fight for him, and against his enemies: as it is clear out of
the history of Ioshuah, and Judges: and of these the Prophet Isayah says,
45.12. speaking of God, I, even I, have stretched out the heavens, and their
host I have commanded: but let us come a little lower, and look to the cattle
that walk, and the creeping things that move on the face of the earth, and all
of these are both the host and army of God, fighting for his obedience, and
treading under foot those that rise up against him: as is clear from the dust
and ashes of Egypt fighting against Pharo. Again, if we shall withdraw our
eyes from the unreasonable creature to man, who is endued with reason, What I
pray you are all the battles, armies, conflicts, and skirmishes of nation
against nation, of kingdom against kingdom, of country against country, of
people against people, but the armies and battles of the Lord, the rods of his
indignation, and the staff of his wrath, punishing the land, because of the
sins of them that dwell therein: and man by the sword of man for his
iniquity: for the sword of a stranger, is the revenger of the quarrel of Gods
covenant. Thirdly, will we look on these our native, and domesticke armies of
flesh, that are in these our mortal bodies, I mean the ague, the web in the
eye, the pain in the tooth, the consumption of the lungs, the shortness of
the breath, the stone in the reins, the tympany of the belly, and the gout in
the feet, what are all these, but the armies of God, and host of the Almighty,
fighting in man, against man, because man has fought against God, who was his
leader? Last of all, he is Lord of hosts also in a spiritual sense: for he is
our Captain and leader in our spiritual warfare, against the devil, the
world, and the lusts of our own flesh: For it is by him, and by his grace
alone; that we have either courage to encounter, strength to stand fast, or
patience to persevere unto the end. And as in this he is our leader and
Captain, so does he also hold the reins of our enemies chariots: it was he
that made the wheels of Pharoes chariots to fall off. It was he that threw the
stone at the forehead of Goliath: It was he that smote the Philistines with
the jawbone of an Ass. It was he that thrust the dart through Achabs
brigandine: and it was he alone that put a bridle in the lips of Zenacharih,
and a hook in his nostrels: and finally it is he, and he alone, who for our
sakes by death has destroyed him who has the power of death, that is, the
devil; and has put into our mouth that tryumphant song of victory, O death
where is thy sting, O grave where is thy victory? Blessed be God the Father
through Jesus Christ our Lord, in all these things we are more then Conquerers,
because our leader has loved us with a love unspeakable in Jesus Christ. In
this manner then is God the Father our leader, yet not he alone: as he is the
Father, this his authority he has given and derived from him to his Son, our
Redeemer, according as it is written, All power is given me both in heaven and
in earth. And that we may know more perfectly how our Redeemer Jesus is become
our leader, look I pray you on the several parts and periods of his
Commandment, and authority given unto him in our flesh, and for our sake: for
it was either preordained before time, prosecuted in time, or shall be
perfected after all time, when time shall be no more. Before time, he was
preordained to be our leader: for it is not only written, that in him it has
pleased the Father before the foundatio^s of the world were laid, to choose us
to be heirs of glory: But also it was told by the Apostle St Peter, that of
all his sufferings, nothing did befall him, but that which was preordained to
befall him by the secret counsel and eternal purpose of God. He was also
sent in time to be our leader, and that in many several points of
accomplishment: for first he is promised, secondly prefigured, thirdly that
the prefiguration might be made relative to the promise, the promise is
reiterated; fourthly, lest man should have fainted under the expectation of the
promise, he is sent in the fullness of time. First, he was promised to be
our leader, and Captain, in Paradise, I will put an emnity betwixt thy seed,
and the seed of the woman, he shall bruise thy head, but thou shall bruise his
heel. Secondly; as he was promised, so he was as also prefigured to be our
Captain. And though by many prefigurations, yet by none more lively, then by
those of Phares and Zares: Ishmael and Isaac: Jacob and Esau: Of all which, it
may be truly said, The elder shall serve the younger. Thirdly, as he was
prefigured, so also was the prefiguration strengthened by a new promise, for to
this effect was it said. The branch of David, the stem of less, the son of
a virgin, and the Emanuel of God, promised under the Law by the Prophets.
Fourthly, lest the fainting hearts of men should have perished under the weight
of their expectation, in the fullness of time he was sent in our flesh, first
to play the part of a soldier in himself, and then to become a leader, and
Captain to us. That in the days of his flesh he was a soldier, it is
clear; for it is written, He offered up strong cries and supplications, and
was heard in that which he feared. That in his ascentio^ he became our
Captain; it is sure also: for it is written, He led captivity captive, and
gave gifts unto men. Finally, that in the end of time, he shall be our
Captain and leader, it is manifest also, in that which is written, When he
had su^dued all things under his feet, then he shall give up the kingdom to
his Father, that the Father may be all in all. Thus both the Father and the
Son are our leaders. Now as this relation is founded in the person of the
Father, and from him derived unto the Son, So also from them both by way of
Economy, it is derived unto the Holy Ghost: for it is written, Romans 8. So many
as are lead by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God. And again, It is
expedient that I go from you to the Father, for unless I go to the Father,
the Comforter shall not come to you. But when I shall send the Comforter from
the Father unto you, he shall lead you in all truth, and comfort you in all
your adversities. But that his authority, and government may be the better
felt of us, learn I pray you to know, that the alligory of his government is
fitting to command man's obedience, either as he is a pilgrim, or as he is a
soldier: for whether he lead us as pilgrims, in an unknown way, or as weak
soldiers in our hard conflict, his operations to us, and in us are threefold.
For he leads us Monendo, movendo, and removende: that is to say, he
forewarneth us, he incourageth us, and he removes something from us. If we
look on our selves as pilgrims, and so he first forewarneth us of the
difficulties of the way: for it is written, Strait and narrow is the way, that
leads unto life, and few there be that enter in thereat. Again, Through
manifold tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of God. And as he
forewarneth us, so also he leads us by moving us, for he not only calls
upon us, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease
you: But also when we fall, he lifts us up again, and whom he loves he
loves to the end, and whom he once takes by the hand, none can take them out
again. Finally he removes the impediments of our journey out of the way, for
howsoever he suffer us to be tempted for a while, yet with the temptation he
gives us the issue, that we may bear it. Again, if we look on our selves
as soldiers, in (...) Christian warfare, he uses the same operations in us.
He first forewarneth us of our danger: whosoever would live godlily must suffer
persecution for the testimony of Jesus. He incourageth us also to the fight.
In the world ye shall have trouble, but in me ye shall have peace: Be ye
therefore of good comfort, for I have overcome the world. Finally, he removes
our adversaries from us: for howsoever for our trial and exercise, he suffer
us to be hardly assaulted for a while, yet in the end he treads Satan
under foot, and crowns our souls, not only with victory, but also with
salvation.

Use. Now then seeing God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost are our
leaders, both in our pilgrimage, and spiritual conflict, it should both humble
and comfort us: humble us in that we cannot walk without a guide; Noah was
stronger then we, but when he forgot his guide, he fell. Sampson was stronger
then we, but when he forsook his guide, he fell. Solomon was wiser then we
but when he forsook his guide, he fell. David was holier then we, but
forsaking his guide, he fell. Peter was more steadfast then we, and yet
forsaking his guide, he fell, Israel was a people elected and chosen beyond
and before us, but because they forgot the guide of their youth, therefore they
were left to themselves, to do the things that were not convenient, and
received such recompense of their error, as was meet.

It becomes all of us therefore, whilst we think that we stand, to take
heed that we fall not. And to say to God, as the Eunuch said to Philip, How
can I understand without a guide? Send out therefore, O Lord, the light of thy
truth, and let thy good spirit lead us into the land of thy righteousness.
Again, as this should humble us, so should it also comfort us in the day of
our spiritual conflict. For as the marches of Israel were ordered in the
wilderness, so should our marches be ordered here on earth. When they were to
march by day, the Lord went before them, in the pillar of a cloud, and by night
in a pillar of fire. When they marched, it was said, Arise, O God, and let
thine enemier be confounded. And when they rested, it was said, Return, O Lord
to the thousands of Israel. Their walk was long, their journey was wearisome,
but this comforted them, that they had a good leader. It is even so withus: we
are brought blessed be God, from the bondage of an oppressing Pharo, and a
turmoiling Egypt, where our way is thorny, and our adversaries are many, and
surely, unless our eyes were toward our leader, there should be no more
spirit left in us. But this is our comfort in which we should always joy, and
continually rejoice, that our God the Lord of Hosts is our leader. That our
Redeemer Christ Jesus has been our fellow soldier, and is now our Captain;
And that the holy Ghost the Comforter is our General, and goes out and in
before us, and fights in us, and for us. Why should not we then submit our
selves to this Regiment? The world is led by another spirit: for the spirit
that dwells in us, lusts after envy. But blessed is the man who is led by
God, and his good Spirit: for whosoever are led by the Spirit of God, are the
Sons of God, and if we be sons, then also shall we be heirs, and fellow
heirs with Jesus Christ, and made partakers of his glory. But now my brethren
pardon me, for I have spent a great deal of time in teaching you who is your
leader.

The second question is, how he can lead us into temptation. The answer hereof
arises from the word by which our government and leading is represented to us.
For it is thus in the original (...): where if we shall look aright on the
word we shall find it composed of two several particles of compositition,
and an original verb subjoyned to them. The particles of composition are
(...) and (...): the verb is (...), which signifies to lead: but the
particles of composition added, and prefixed to it alters the signification
thereof very much. The first particle (...) signifies to, the second (...)
signifies in. So that whilst this manuduction and government in the day of
spiritual combat of a Christian is attributed to God, it imports three
things unto us from the word it self. First a leading into temptation.
Secondly, a leading in temptation. Thirdly, upon the which from the necessity
of his goodness, must follow a leading out again, according to that which is
written, He suffers us not to be tempted above our power, but with the
temptation, he gives us the issue, that we may be able to bear it. The
first part of this conduct is safe: the second is gracious: the third is
glorious; without the assured support and presence of God, these three are like
the waters of Marah, turned bitter: or like the potage of the children of the
Prophets, There is death in the pot. For if man or Satan lead to temptation,
it is doubtful; if they shall lead into temptation it is dangerous: and if
they cannot lead out of temptation, it is desperate. Opposing therefore the
weakness of man to the strength of God, and the malice of Satan to the love
of God, it cannot but be well said by man to God, Lead us not into temptation,
not deprecating any part of the composition, but his desertion in the verb. To
clear this; know that to lead a man into temptation is safe: for this cause St
James says, My brothren, count it for exceeding joy, when you fall into
diverse temptations: for this is only to present anobject of temptation to
man, or to lead man to encounter with an object of temptation. Against this we
do not al ways pray, for it is safe and good for us so to be exercised at
sometimes, it makes us watch over our senses to make a covenant with our eyes,
and with David to pray, Lord turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity. To
lead a man into temptation is gracious: for as meat is to the hungry, or drink
to the thirsty, or light to the prisoner; so is help and support to the
co^batant. What other comfort I pray you had David in his conflict with Goliath
then this, that God was with him in his temptation? I come not against thee in
mine own name, but in the name of the Lord of Hosts, who delivered into my
hand the Bear, and the Lion, he will also deliver thee this day into my hand.
But O take heed my hearts, howsoever to be led to temptation may be safe, to be
led in temptation be gracious, yet except God lead us out again, it cannot any
way be glorious for us: for if he lead us not out again he leaves us in
it, and woe be to us when he so forsakes us, and leaves us to our selves:
for in so doing we shall surely forsake him and perish. So that this is sure,
whilst we say, Lead us not into temptation, we do not beg of God, that he
would not suffer the objects of temptation to be presented before us, but this
only, that whilst we are in the conflict, he would not leave us alone, but
rather that he would say to us, as Jacob said to his son God, a troop shall
fight against him, but he shall overcome them at the last?

But thou will say to me, O man, How, or by what means can, or does God lead
a man to temptation?

I answer, by four means First, by a procured desertio^.

Secondly, by a continual subduction.

Thirdly, by a righteous tradition.

Fourthly, by a necessary induration.

By a deserved desertion; for whilst we quench, and grieve the Spirit of God
by our sins, it is a righteous thing with the Lord to draw his grace from us,
that by our falls, we may learn to intertaine his grace by which we stand.

Secondly, by a continued subduction, which howsoeit be but one, and the self
same desertion, yet is different in degree, and more fearful because of the
continuance. Thus he dealt with the Gentiles. Romans 1.

Thirdly, by a righteous tradition, when men have abused his long suffering
patience, he gives them over to the efficacy of error, and to the malice of
Satan to be led by him at his will: so he dealt with Saul. 2. Sam. 24.4.

And last of all by an uncurable induration, for Satan having gotten entry in
a sinner, thus walking in the way of error, he makes his heart daily harder
and harder, till out of the hardness of his heart that cannot repent, he
heap up wrath to himself against the day of wrath. But thou will yet enquire,
why does God lead some men into temptation, and out again, and others he
leads not only in Temptation, but also leaves them in it? To this I answer,
Tu homo a me petis causam, and ego quoque homo sum: sed audiamus ambo Apostolum
dicentem, O home, tu quis es? melior est fidelis ignorantia, quam temeraria
scientia. Quaere merito, non invenies nisi poenam. O altitudo! Petrus negat,
latro credit. O altitudo! tu disputa, ego credam: tu ratiocinare, ego mirabor:
sed cave, ne dum doctores quaeras, presumptores invenias. August. de verb.
Apost. Sermon. 20. So then the answer is full. Even so, O Father, because it has
so pleased thee: For he has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he
will he hardens.

LECTIO 21.
But deliver us from evil.
We have already spoken of the first part of this Petition, which was
deprecatory: we come now to speak of the second part, which is supplicatory,
and contained in these words, But deliver, etc. For explication whereof there
are four things considerable.

1. Our captivity.

2. Who, and how are they captives.

3. The deliverance or release.

4. The deliverer or redeemer.

Our captivity is evil. The captives are imported in the word us: the release
in the word deliver: the deliverer must be understood God the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost.

Before we enter into the delineation of the first, to wit, our captivity, it
is requisite that we look a little on the tie by which these words are knit
to the former. And for clearing hereof we must know, that as it is in the
matter of physic or military art, so it is in the spiritual diseafes, or
conflicts of the soul. True physic has two parts, the one is (...), the
other (...); the first preserves our health by good diet, and so preventeth
our diseases before they come: the other by medicine expels and purges away
diseases after they be come: It is so in the diseases of the soul. The
preventing grace of God leads us not into temptation. The fellow-working, or
second grace, delivers us from evil. Again, as it is in the discipline of
war here on earth, so it must be with the soul. In a battle and conflict
on earth, our General and Leader must first be careful that we fall not
before our enemy. And secondly, if we fall, and be taken captive, it is his
part to be careful to pay our ransom; and deliver us from the captivity and
tyranny of our enemy. It is so with us also in the spiritual fight, and
conflicts of the soul: Our leader should not only be careful, that we get
not the foil, but also if we be put to the rowte, and taken captives of our
enemies, it becomes him to be careful to redeem and ransom us out of the
hands of all those to whom we were prisoners and captives I hope now by these
two similitudes you understand the conjunction and tie that is betwixt this
part of the Petition and the former. For if we shall look upon our selves, as
being sick and diseased in soul: two things are requisite for our health and
cure. First, our physician should prescribe us a diet, whereby our disease may
be prevented. This is done and prescribed in the words, Lead us not into
temptation. The other thing which the Doctor of our souls owes us, is
medicine, potions, plasters and purgations to cure us of the sickness we are
fallen in: and this he promises to do unto us whilst he delivers us from all
evil. Again, will thou look on thy self as a soldier in the field of
Jesus, fighting against the spirituill enemies of thy soul, thy leader Christ
Jesus promises thee two things. First, that though thou stumble before the
enemy, yet thou shall not fall: This he promises in these words, Leadus not
etc. Secondly, he promises, that if at any time thou fall and get the foil,
and be taken captive, and prisoner, yet he will not let thee dye in prison, no,
he will redeem thee, and ere any of thine enemies, sin, death, or
condemnation triumph over thee, he will lay his own life down for thee, and
his heart blood as a ransom for thy deliverance: and this he promises in
these words, But deliver us from evil.

Use. Now from this, in a word it is evident, that man by nature is a woeful
and dolorous creature, sick and diseased, dead in sins and trespasses, and
so much the more heavily sick, and desperately diseased, that he militateth
against his physician, yet the reason is, he feels not the soar, and like
one transported in the fury of his passion, he cannot tell where his pain
holds him. But here is the riches of the mercy of our God, and physician: he
preventeth us with his cure, and not only that, but also prescribes helps
against our recidivations and relapses. This the woman of Samaria felt, when
she knew not the grace of God, nor who it was spoke to her, by seeking a
drink of pure water, he prevented her, and gave her a drink of the well of
the water of life. Thus he prevented the man at the poole of Bethesda. Thus he
prevented us all in the loins of our first parent, Adam, where art thou. And
again when our father was an Amorite, and out mother an Hetyte: when our hair
was not cut, nor our nails pared; when we were wallowing in our blood, and
were neither washed with water, nor softened with oil, he came by, and
preventing us with his love, said to us, live, and made us live, and only
because of his word, commanding us to live, and therefore we lived. Seeing
then whilst we are sick and diseased in soul, he preventeth us with his
unexpected cure: seeing also whilst we are taken prisoners, he preventeth us
with our undeserved ransom; what are we that we should either proudly
reject, or faithlesly distrust the Ocean of his goodness? There be some I
know, that hearing of this preventing grace, will proudly lay this conclusion,
that they will continue still in sin that grace may abound. But know not
thou, O vain man, that the long suffering patience of God should lead thee to
repentance: and that if thou tread the blood of the covenant under thy feet,
that blood which speaks better things then the blood of Abel to the
righteous, shall speak judgeme^t to thee, even a judgment intolerable and
incurable. Know again, thou that art weak in faith; that that sickness and
disease cannot befall thy soul, that should make thee distrust the Physician,
whose love has prevented thee with an unexpected cure. Whilst he was in our
flesh, he quickened three sorts of dead: the Centurians daughter; the widows
son; and Lazarus three days dead: and all to make thee strong in faith. Why
wrongest thou him? first in his justice, by sinning against him; and next in
his mercy by distrusting his goodness? No, no, believe him under hope, and
aganst hope, and thou shall find that thy expectation shall not want his
reward: for he that said to thee, Call upon me in the day of thy trouble, and
I will deliver thee, shall surely deliver thee: And thy ransom shall not be
wanting to thee, if thy faith be not wanting to thy self.

Now having spoken thus much concerning the tie of this part of the Petition
with the former, it follows now that we look on the words, and these four
things considerable in them. I was telling you before in my last Sermon, that
we are soldiers fighting under the banner of Jesus, who being the leader and
General of our army, here tells us, that the fight is desperate: for if we
dye not, and perish in the conflict, yet the best soldier that ever carried
arms, (except Jesus Christ) has been taken captive: this figuratively he
calls evil, and he teaches us to pray against the same, whilst he says,
But deliver us from evil. That we may understand this evil the better, we
must look on the opposite thereof, which is good: Know therefore that there is
a twofold good, one personal, another real. The personal good is he who is
the fountain and welspring of all goodness, both in himself, and also in the
creature. This is God, who is not only good, but goodness it self; nothing
beside him can truly be called good. And for this cause Christ said, There is
none good but one, that is God. Matt. 19. The real good is that which is
communicated from the fountain to the streams, from the root to the branches,
from the head to the members. This is also twofold, natural, or moral. The
natural good is that which God has communicated to all his creatures by
virtue of their creation: For God beheld the things which he had made, and
behold they were all very good. This goodness being considered in the
creature, is called Vestigium deitatis, the character of the deity, for by
virtue hereof it is, that whatsoever perfection we find in the creature, we
call it good, because in this, and by this, it expresses the Creator, who in
himself is absolutely good, in so far as a finite creature can express an
infinite and incorruptible Creator. The moral good is that which God has
communicated to man, in making him a reasonable soul, a good so much the more
excellent then that of nature, by how much man is more eminent then the beast,
and reason more excellent then life or sense. Well then, the creature is
naturally good: Man is both naturally and morally good. But we must know a
little further; that the moral good concredited to man is twofold; it is
either Bonum obedientiae, or benum praemij: the good of obedience, or the good
of reward. The good of obedience carrying a reference to the commandment of
God, is more then Vestigium deitatis; for surely it is Ipsa imago Dei, his true
and lively character: for by the obedience which we give to the Commandments
of God, we show our selves to be the sons of God, and that by the grace of
his spirit we are begotten again, to be conformed to his image. The other,
to wit, the good of reward, is the free donation of grace to us in this life;
or of glory in the life to come. To both which we may add the good use of all
the good creatures of God: for godliness is great gain, having allotted to
it, not only the promises of this life, but also of that which is to come. Now
that I may be found in my text, seeing I have showed you how many sorts of
good and goodness there is, let us look now by way of opposition, and know
the nature of evil, for this is common in the Schools, Quot modis unum
oppositorum, tot modis dicitur and alterum. Evil then, is either personal or
real: the personal evil must be opposite to the personal good. God was, and
is the absolute and personal good: Satan must then be the great (though not
the absolute) evil. The absolute evil I will not call him, for he was good
by creation, and as he remains yet in his nature and essence a creature, he
remains still good: but the prime and chief evil of the world he is both
in respect of himself and man. The real evil cannot be given in true terms
of opposition, opposed to the real good: for that was either natural or
moral: Now to say, that there is any creature naturally evil, we cannot, for
they are by nature created good, only the ill which is in the creature is
moral, for the being or essence of the creature is good, whatsoever is
vicious or peccant in the creature is bad, because of the bad quality thereof.
In man then, as in a reasonable creature there are two evils: one of
disobedience, another of punishment, opposed to the good of obedience and
reward. The evil of disobedience we call malum culpae; the evil of punishment
Malum poenae. The first is simply and absolutely evil, because it is repugnant
to the will of God, and contrary to his law. The last is not so, but
conditionally evil, to wit, in respect of us, because it seems so to our
taste: for howsoever the evil of punishment seems evil to man, yet it is not
so in respect of God, in whose presence, and by whose providence this malum
poenae is bonum justiciae, the evil of punishment is the good of his justice.
But thou will enquire, O man, seeing there be so many sorts of evil, what
evil is it that we pray against here? I answer, we pray only against the
evil of sin: For the clearing whereof know, that there is a fourefold
combination, and mutual reciprocatio^ betwixt good and evil. First, the good
of good. Secondly, the ill of good. Thirdly, the good of ill. fourthly, the ill
of ill.

The good of good, is that benefit which man reapeth of all the creatures of
God; health, wealth, peace, liberty, instruction of the soul by the ministry
of the word.

The ill of good, is that detriment and harm which the wicked of the world
reap out of the benefits and blessings of God: for whilst he makes his Sun
to shine upon them, his rain to fall on them, his creatures to feed them, and
his word to be preached to them, though these things be good of themselves,
yet the wicked get no good, but evil by them: for by these bodily and
temporal favors, they are made inexcusable, and by his spiritual mercies
their condemnation is aggravated.

The good of evil, is that good, which the Lord as a wise Physician extracteth
out of the evils of this life which befall them: for as the physician makes
of a viper, a sovereign remedy, and as Sampsons dead lion afforded him a honey
comb: so the Lord out of the worst and baddest estate that can befall his
servants, he works their good. Their bodily hunger teaches them a spiritual
hunger, their bodily thirst, to thirst after righteousness; their poverty
teaches them to be rich in grace; their nakedness to be clothed with
salvation: and all their crosses and corrections whatsoever, seals to them
their adoption, increases their patience, and assures them that their souls
shall be safe in the day of the Lord Jesus.

Last of all, the evil of evil, is that damage and harm which the wicked
sustain by suffering the evil of this life: for by the evil of sin their
hearts are hardened, the custom of sin taking away the conscience of sin:
and by the evil of punishment their condemnation is sealed to them; for
whatsoever they suffer in this life, is but an earnest penny of their after
suffering, and a sure forerunner of that worm which dies not, and of that
fire which goes not out again. So that whilst we say, Deliver ui from evil,
our meaning is, deliver us, O Lord, from Satan, the author of sin, from
sin it self, the first borne of Satan: and from condemnation the stipend
and wages of sin. And as for the outward rods, compose them so to us, that
they may not harden our hearts in sin, nor seal to us our condemnation. And
to this interpretation of evil antiquity gives assent: for St Chrysostom
writing upon Matthew. 13.19. where Christ calls the devil The evil one, says,
Malum hic diabolum vocat, docens nos cum eo praelium habere nullo unquam
tempore dirimendum: cum tamen non sit natura. St Ambrose expounds it both of
the devil, and of sin: Libera nos a malo, dum hoc petimus, petit unusquisque,
ut a malo, hoc est, a diabolo and peccato liberetur. Finally, St August. is of
the same opinion, whilst he tells us Christus non liberabit nos a barbaris,
sed a diabolo, and peccato, and peccati stipendio.

Now having spoken at length to you concerning our captivity to Satan, sin,
and condemnation: It is requisite that we look on the captives, and these are
we: for we say, deliver us. For the better understanding whereof, we must
know, that captives are of two sorts, either Captivi nati, or else Captivi
facti: captives are either borne so, or made so. The native or borne captives,
were the children of such parents as being captives themselves, were
mancipated, and sold for servants and slaves to others. These by the Law of God
were the possession and true inheritance of their master. Levit. 25.45. The
captives that were made so, are of two sorts: for they were either made so by
others, or by themselves. By others, whilst being taken in battle, and
preserved from death, they were sold as servants and bondmen to others.
Captives made by themselves were such, as without any outward violence imposed
on them, did for relief of their poverty and necessity, sell themselves as
slaves and servants to others: Now these are but bodily captives. Answerable to
these, there are three sorts of spiritual captives, and of the captivity of
the soul. The first are captives by birth, and so borne from their mothers
womb: such are all men by nature and natural corruption: for we are all of
us borne dead in our sins and trespasses, etc. And what David said, of
himself, all of us may say of our selves In iniquity was I shapen, and in sin
has my mother brought me forth. Now in the second place, captivity begets
captivity, as one deep calls on another. Our original captivity, under
which we were born; has lead us violently captive unto actual sin, and
rebellions: For having brought nothing into the world with us, but an
uncircumcised heart, from thence in all our life time springs nothing but
abominable corruptions. Last of all, there be some men, who to both their
natural and violent captivity have added a voluntary captivity, making
themselves captives to sin and Satan, with a greedy appetite and up lifted
hand, and these are the children of disobedience, from the first sort of
captivity it has pleased God to redeem us in our baptism by the lavacre of
regeneration, and washing of the new birth. From the second captivity though
we cannot be fully delivered so long as we are in this life, we having
received but the first fruits of the spirit, yet notwithstanding, Jesus Christ
our Redeemer has delivered us by his death, the power of his resurrection, and
fellowship, of his afflictions; for it is written, We have not received the
Spirit of bondage to fear again, but the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry
Abba, father. And again, Therefore we are no more servants but sons. From
the last sort of captivity there is no redemption at all: for if Satan the
devil has right enough to a man by nature: man shall add to that captivity a
greater, by selling himself like Achab, to commit iniquity. There is no more
sacrifice reserved for that man's sin, but a fearful expectation of
judgment, and of that fire which shall devour the wicked. Now my brethren of
this which has been said concerning our captivity, I would gladly that in a
word or two you should make some use.

Use. There are many captives in the world whom we cannot get delivered,
notwithstanding we will labor to extend some of our supply to them. For first
we can, upon the first hearing, compassionate their captivity, and bear a
part, and have some sympathy with them in their distress. Secondly, we can
sometimes go further then this: for we can go and knock at the prison door;
and call for them, and go in and visit them, and comfort them with our best
consolations. We can go somewhat further yet, and besides our comfort, we can
help them with some of our means: we can buy bread to their hunger, and
drink to their thirst, and clothes to their nakedness. And last of all, we
can engage our selves for their deliverance and by our engagements set them
free. Are not these good offices of charity and true strains of mercy? Yes
surely they are so. Art not thou then much beholding to Christ, whosoever thou
art, that art set free from the bondage of sin: for he has done al these to
thee whilst thou were in daaknesse, and bondage under sin and Satan. He did
first pity and compassionate thee, when thou had no pity on thy self; and
even then, when thou were a stranger and enemy to him, he spread his skirts
over thee, and covered thy nakedness. Secondly, he has visited thee, as he
came down to visit Israel in her affliction: not in judgment as Sodom, but in
mercy, and in a plentiful compassion: and therefore Zachary blesses him, for
that he visited, and then redeemed his people. Thirdly, he became beneficial
to us, not only giving us wine to make the heart glad, and oil to make the
face to shine, but also in comforting our souls* He has given us his flesh
for meat, his blood for drink, his righteousness for our ^ing, his word for
our instruction, and his Spirit for our guide* Fourthly, and last of all, he
has taken our debt upon him, and paying it for us, has set us free: and this
he did in the fullness of time: for when that fullness came, God sent his own
Son made of woman, and made under the law, that delivered us that were under
the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. For Gods sake therefore
seeing whilst we were Captives, he has done so much for our deliverance,
forget not the captivity of thy soul, thy self, and first, when thou hear
it told thee in the word of God, pity it. Secondly, at all occasions offered,
(not snatched) knock at thy door, and go in and visit it. Thirdly when thou
have seen it, cry with Israel to Rehoboam to make thy yoke lighter: and in the
end, though thou cannot procure by thy self an absolute deliverance, yet come
to him that poured out his heart blood for thee, run and cry for thy
deliverance, and dissolution, sigh and groan for it, and in due time if thou
faint not, thou shall be heard in that which thou fear. These things being
thus cleared to you, the third thing that we are to remarke in the words, is
our deliverance or release in this word Deliver; now that we may know this
deliverance the better, it shall not be amiss to distinguish deliverance into
three several sorts. First, there is a deliverance a toto. Secondly, a tanto.
Thirdly, a tali. Our deliverance a toto, is a perfect deliverance both from
temptation to sin, practice of sin, and punishment for sin. A tante, is
not perfect but partial, from so much of temptation, practice, or punishment
as God thinks meet and expedient. A tali, is that whereby we crave
exemption and protection from sins of grievous qualities: Such as we call
presumptuous, enormious, heinous, and crying sins: And from such kind of
punishments as are not the testimonies of Gods love, but rather the effects of
his wrath and indignation. Now seeing deliverance in effect and properly is an
actual release from evil, what sort of deliverance do we crave here, is it
that we call a toto? No, no, we cannot expect a total and perfect
deliverance in this life: for so long as this life lasts, we can neither be
totally free from sin, nor from punishment: notwithstanding, because of this
same possibility; we are bound to cry for our perfect deliverance by death.
Secondly, as for that deliverance which is a tanto, that is to say, from so
much as will make us slaves to sin or punishment, for this we cry in these
words: and this deliverance we are commanded to desire: and by this desire we
are distinguished from the reprobate, for whilst we are led captive to Satan
at his will, sin rules not (though dwells) in our mortal bodies. And for
the punishment, the Lord has promised not to tempt us above our power, but so
far only as we may be able to bear it. Thirdly, as for the deliverance a
tali, that is to say, from blasphemous, presumptuous, and crying sins, which
are the effects of the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience, from
these and such as these, we cry, and must cry coutinually, Lord deliver us from
evil.

Use. Know further that whilst we beg of God a deliverance from evil, we
do not pray against all evil of sin and punishment, but so much of punishment
as will or may overwhelme us; and such sins as are reigning and crying in us,
shall one day cry against us to our perpetual confusion.

One thing remains, to wit, who is our deliverer; and that is neither man nor
Angel, but he who is both God and man by nature, and the great Arch-angell of
the Covenant by office. In whom three things are considerable: His right and
title to do it. His wonderful power in doing of it. And lastly, the exceeding
benefit arising from it.

LECT. 22.
For thine is the kingdom, etc.
When I did first undertake the explication of this prayer, I told you, they
did resemble a house or edifice. For as in the Courts and Palaces of Princes,
there are first Courts and Porches serving for entrance into the royal
presence. Secondly, there are rooms and places of rest. Lastly, posternes and
passages of retiring, serving both for pleasure, and necessity: so is it in
this building and spiritual edifice of prayer: For in it there are three
distinct and several stations: A preface serving for the porch. Six several
Petitions, serving for rooms of court. And finally a conclusion serving for a
posterne or tarras, from whence we may in a view behold the glory and beauty
of the whole palace. Of the Preface and of the Petitions we have spoken
already according to the measure of grace given us from above. It rests now
only that in this Sermon we take a view of the conclusion, and from it draw up
the full and final seal of all the prayer. And from both, their edification.
When I look on the words, I find in them three things remarkable. First,
their inference. Secondly, their tenor and scope: and thirdly, their seal. The
inference is in the word for: the tenor is Thine is the kingdom, power, and
glory for ever. The seal in the word Amen.

Let us return then to their inference in the word For. Here it is evident,
that this conclusion or last part of the prayer, is knit and tied to the former
Petitions with a causall particle, for.

For the better understanding whereof, let us know, that against the necessity
and use of this prayer prescribed unto us, an objection might be moved by the
weakness and infirmity of man: For let us look on the best of the children of
God, when he censureth and examineth his own soul: and paralleleth his
practice with the desire of these petitions, and we shall find that he shall
come far short of that which is required of him: For when we look on the
three first Petitions which concern God, the honor of his name, the
advancement of his kingdom, and the obedience of his will, who is able to give
that due obedience thereunto, which is required of him? Not one, for God
himself has thus complained against man, The Lord looked down from heaven,
and beheld the actions of men, to see if there were any that would seek after
him, and do good, and he could find none, no not one. Against this it is that
the Prophets complained in the name of God, and for his sake: Who has believed
our report, and to whom is the arm of God revedled? Finally, it is against
disobedience and rebellion that the Saints of God have so deeoply sighed and
groaned for their deliverance. David could say, Alas I have dwelt toe long in
the valley of Mesech, and tents of Kedar. And the Apostle Paul could say,
Miserable man that I am, who shall d^ver me from this body of death. Again,
if from these we shall withdraw our eyes, to consider that Petition wherein
we crave for our selves the release of our temporal casamities: How many have
called upon the Lord, and have not been heard according to their cry? How many
in sickness have called for help, how many in poverty have called for
support, and how many in exile have called for deliverance, and yet have not
obtained it? Look to David himself, and to his expostulation. Psalm. 22. I
have called unto thee by day, but thou heardest not, and I poured out my plants
before thee in the night season, and yet. I have no audience. Last of all, how
many of the Sons, and Saints of God, having fallen into temptation and snares
of the devil, have cried unto God for ease, release, and deliverance to their
wounded conscience, and have not obtained it? Let David witness in his 51.
Psalm. Whilst he cries, Restore me O Lord to the joy of thy salvation, and
take not thy free spirit from me. And let the Apostle Paul also bear
witness, whilst being buffeted by the angel of satan, he cried thrice unto
the Lord, that the spirit of temptation might depart from him, and yet behold
he received no answer but this My grace is sufficyent for thee. Now I say, if
in all these, man may pray and not be heard accordingly, if under the body and
burden of both temporal and spiritual calamities he sigh and groan, and
yet cannot be heard in that which he fears, wherefore, and to what end I pray
you is it, that man should plead in these words of Petition? or why should they
be tied to this form and platform of prayer?

To this it is, that our Master and Savior Jesus Christ gives an answer in
this word For, etc. for in so saying, he strengthens and stays the weak
hearts, and feeble knees of his servants against all fear and infidelity
whatsoever, by leading them to the consideration of the might, power, and glory
of him to whom we pray. So that his meaning is, whilst he says For, etc.
poor and weak creature that thou art, would thou draw near to God? faint
not, though at the first thou obtain not the victory; possess thy soul in
patience, hold fast that which thou have received, continue constant in prayer,
for he is a great and mighty God whom thou supplicatest, and he is both
willing and able to keep that which thou have co^credited unto him, though he
wink at spiritual or temporal desertions for a while, yet be sure he will
come at last, and salvation under his wings, and a mighty deliverance under,
his right hand. For never King on earth had either such power to vindicate, or
affection to pity or commiserate his subjects as God has to the deliverance
of his Saints. For he is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and his and his
only are all kingdoms, all power, and glory for ever.

Now this being the meaning of the illative particle, For, it rests that we
make use of it.

Use. I see man is a weak creature, weak in all things, for he is weak in
knowledge, in obedience, and in suffering, But especially weak in faith. I
say, he is weak in knowledge, for he knows not the things of God, neither
can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned: weak in obedience,
for the good that he would do, that he does not, and the evil that he would
not do, that he is led captive to do. In suffering, for the bread and water of
affliction are hard for him to digest: and who is he who will gladly deny
himself, and take up his cross and follow Jesus. But we are chiefly and
above all, weak in faith, for even then, when God has made us in his light to
see light, and when he has in some measure captivated our affections unto his
obedience, when he has sanctified our cross, and given us some measure of
patience under it; and finally, when he has led us by the hand, unto the
throne of grace, and there by the power of his spirit, has taught us to pour
out our desires before him with sighs which cannot be expressed, unless in an
instant, and at the first cry we be heard in that which we fear, and get
out petitions answered, with a suitable correspondence: O how weary are we, how
faint, and how doubt we of the love and mercy of our God toward us! yet here
is the love of God made manifest, that though our sin be out of measure
sinful, yet his grace is a rich grace, and he multiplyeth unto us grace upon
grace, insomuch that he will not only call upon us to come unto him in the
day of our trouble, that he may deliver us: but when we cannot come, he will
draw us, and when we are come, he will teach us both how, and what to pray:
and finally, when we begin to doubt, and fall to despair, he underpropeth
our weak faith by the arguments of his love, his power, and his glory. It is
our part therefore when we addres our selves to God by prayer, to make these his
peculiar instructions, not only the significations of our desires and
trenchmen, our hearts best wishes, but also by their confident, and faithful
evaporations to make them arguments to our selves of our audience: for as the
prayer of faith avails much if it be ferve^t: so the faint-hearted and
lewk-warme desires of men reap nothing at Gods hands, unless perhaps it make
him cast back the dust of their facrifices into their faces, and turn their
prayer into sin. And thus much. I have spoken for the word of inference here
used, For.

We must come now and look on the tenor of the words, wherein our Savior and
Redeemer comfort and stays our weak faith, and strengthen eith us in our
prayers, both from doubting and despair. The arguments he draws out for our
encouragement are two: The first is drawn from that anthority, and supreme
sovereignty which he has not only over man, but also over heaven, earth, and
hell, and all the hosts and inhabitants thereof. The second is drawn from the
true titles, dignity, or attributes of that kingdom, and these are three. A
powerful, a glorious, and an eternal and everlasting kingdom. But let us
return to the first argument, of faith and encouragement to confidence in our
prayer, which is taken from Gods kingdom: For by this means he makes a
direct reciproeation betwixt this conclusion, and the second Petition of this
prayer: and withal a direct opposition betwixt this conclusion, and the last
Petition. In the second Petition he taught us to seek the advancement of his
kingdom, in these words, Let thy kingdom come. In these words he lets us
see that he will seek nothing of us by way of obedience, but that which he
will enable us to do. Therefore he ascribes to himself a supreme sovereignty
over all the world, and a kingdom more eminent then all those which are
amongst the sons of men: to teach us, that as kings do not impose laws upon
their subjects to be snares unto them, of rebellion and disobedience, but
rather statutes easy for observance, just in their exaction, and safe in their
obedience: so God who is our Supreme and dread Sovereign, as he requires the
obedience of his statutes, to testify our homage and loyalty to him, so also
as a mighty and just king, he will both enable us to do that which he
requires of us, and protect us in the doing thereof, against all our enemies
whatsoever. Again, as it carries a direct reference and reciprocation with
the second Petition: so does it also import a direct opposition to the last
Petition, for therein we acknowledged that we had many enemies, the devil,
the world, and our own flesh, as Kings and Tyrants not only dwelling in us,
but also tyrannizing over us, and leading us captive unto sin: and what
comfort could we have in this our conflict, or what hope of victory should
there be left to David, against the sons of Zerviah, unless our leader were
a King, more mighty then these: A monarch more powerful to save, then they to
destroy? Surely none at all: But knowing that there are more with us then
against us, and knowing that the lion of the tribe of Judah is stronger then
the strong man which keeps us in captivity, what need we to be afraid? if an
earthly king will not suffer a wrong done unto his subject to be unrepaired,
do we think that King of Kings, our Lord, and our God, will suffer Satan to
keep us always in captivity? No surely: he may well suffer us like David for a
while to tarry at Jericho, until our beards and garments be renewed, but at
last he will smite our enemies hippe and thigh, and wound them with a wound in
their loins, that they shall not be able to rise again. This then is the
cause why he styles himself, not only a King, but the King, by way of
excellency and eminency above all Kings whatsoever. You may remember whilst we
spoke of the kingdom of God in the second petition of this prayer, we told
you, that Satan had a kingdom: man had a kingdom: and God had a kingdom.
Satan's kingdom was no true kingdom, for it was and is no other thing then a
mere usurpation, and an enforced tyranny over the hearts of men, which only
of due appertain unto the Lord. Man's kingdom is only a kingdom by
toleration and dispensation from God: but Gods kingdom only is the true
kingdom both in name and nature, for all things are of him, and through him,
and for him, that in all things he may have the pre-eminence. Justly therefore
may our Savior teach us, and we learn to say unto God, Thine is the kingdom:
For Satan's kingdom Carcer est, non regnum, says St Augustine. Man's kingdom
is but subordinate, for it is written, Per me reges regnant, by me kings
reign: only God is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, higher then the
highest a among the sons of men: and to him only of due appertains the
kingdom, the power, and the glory for ever.

Use. The consideration hereof should comfort us exceedingly in the midst of
our greatest calamities, and distress: For we are not the subjects of that
king, who is careless of our captivity and tribulation: No, but we have him
for our head and sovereign who knows our necessities from a far, and is
touched with a sense of our sufferings: and finally, which is more material
for our consolation, he is the King of Kings, the supreme and dread sovereign
of all creatures, not only willing but also powerful and able superabundantly
to help us: As it is written to the Ephesians. To him that is able to work
exceeding abundantly in us, above all that we can ask or think. And Sr Jude
testifies the same, To him that is able to keep you that you fall not, etc.
What need we then be afraid of the pestilence that flies by day, or of the
sword that roareth abroad in the night season? If we dwell in the tabernacle
of the most high, and abide under the shadow of his wings, no evil shall come
near us: for he has a hook for the nostrels, and a bridle for the lips of
the^ that rise against us. They may come out one way against us, but they shall
fly seven ways before us: for he is a mighty King that leads us: and who
has wrastled with him at any time, and been victorious? Let us not fear then
what man can do unto us. Men are Kings, but none can say that he is the King,
except God alone. It is true indeed Kings are called Gods: and as S. Basil
tells us, a King is (...), a visible God: but God is (...) an invisible King.
Yet that is true of all these Kings, which David tells us, I have said ye are
Gods, and the sons of the most high, yet ye shall die like men. And ye
Princes shall perish as well as others. It is neither their state, glory,
pomp, nor authority that can redeem their souls from the grave. Nam
Principes, Imperatores, and Reges (says S. Gregory) imo Imperia, Principatus
and regna paulatim senescunt, aegrotant, concidunt. What need we then be afraid
of man, or of the sons of men, whose breath is but in their nostrells? they
can but kill the body: But let us fear the Lord in our heart: for when he
has killed the body, he can cast both soul and body into hell fire; where
their worm shall not die, and their fire shall not go out again. Now having
spoken this concerning the kingdom of God, we must come now to these titles
and attributes by which he describes this kingdom: And from consideration
whereof, he labors to give us arguments and assurance of audience at the
hands of God. The titles are three, Power, Glory, and Eternity. First then he
says, that Gods kingdom is a kingdom of power.

We must know that the power of God is taken many several ways in Scripture.

First, for the essential property of God, which being in himself is
himself, and of him, and from him, communicated to the creature, gives unto
it an essence, being, power, and force of action, to do whatsoever he does:
and this essential property is common to the Father, with the Son, and the
holy Ghost.

Secondly, it is taken for Jesus Christ, the second person of the Trinity. 1
Cor. 1.24. To them that are called, as well of the Jews as of the Gentiles,
we preach Jesus Christ, the power and wisdom of God.

Thirdly, it signifies the Gospel of Jesus, and the word of the Evangell.
Romans 1.16. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of
God to salvation to every believing soul. But here by the word power, is
understood, that all-sufficient omnipotency, which being in God is God, and by
him makes all things to be which are. And as all power is in him Tanquam in
capite, so is all power from him tanquam a font. This our Savior acknowledged
when he told Pilate, Thou could have no power over me, unless it were
given thee from above. Unto this the Apostle Paul subscribeth Romans 13.1. There
is no power but of God, and the powers that are ordained of God. Now this title
of Gods power, Christ brings in here as an attribute, by which he may
underproppe our weakness. And his meaning is, O man, why doubtest thou, and
why art thou fearful to come to God, and pray to him? How many evidences have
thou of his power manifested to thee for thy protection? Is it not by him, and
by his power, that thou live, movest, and have thy being? was it not by him,
and by the word of his power, that all things were made of nothing? Is it not
by him, and by the might of his power, that all things are preserved in that
state, order and frame in which they now are? Was it not by him, and the might
of his power, that fire came down to destroy Sodom. That the seadrowned
Pharo, the earth swallowed up Corah, Dathan, and Abirom? That Ieroboams hand
was dried up, that the merciless fire had mercy on the children, and the
hungry lions fed not on Daniel? That the winds and seas are stilled and
calmed, and finally that the very devils of hell are curbed, that they cannot
go beyond the chain of his power and good pleasure? These things are all
evidences of his power. But his power is yet not known in things that are
spiritual. Look to our eternal election, our temporal redemption, our
effectual calling, the resurrection of our bodies, and upon the glory bestowed
both upon soul and body, and from thence let us never doubt of his power. He
of himself is able to do all things, and by his power we are able to do all
things: and he has manifested his power toward us, that by it we may be
instructed, by it comforted, and by it corrected. In a word, it serves for our
instruction, correction, and consolation. For our instruction in the path of
charity; for our correction in the way of our presumption, and for our
consolation in the day of our trouble.

First, for our instruction in the path of charity: For we do no sooner see
our neighbor fall, but straight way we are precise and prejudicate censurers,
not remembering our selves lest we also be tempted; Nor yet remembering the
power of God who is able to ingraffe those again. Romans 14.4.

Secondly, it serves for our correction in the way of our presumption: for we
think, if man can befriend us we are safe and sure; but as fools we vanish,
for the Egyptians are but men, not gods, and their horses are but flesh, not
spirit. When Ephraim saw his wound, and Judah felt his soar, they ran to
Jacob, and Ashur, but their wound was not healed; for there is no help but in
the Lord: And whosoever shall seek help beside him, may ask counsel at his
stock, but his staff shall answer him; for the Lord shall meet him as a
lion, and as a lions whelpe shall tear him in pieces, and none shall deliver
him.

Last of all, it serves for our comfort in the day of trouble. Man, bear thou
the cross that God has laid upon thee, for thy hairs be numbered, thy tears
be put in his bottle, be thou assured that the Lord will deliver thee in the
day of trouble, when thou art encompassed with the waters of affliction. The
second attribute of his kingdom is glory, which has many several
significations in Scripture.

First it is taken for the majesty of God, which whilst man does celebrate, it
is said, they show forth his glory. Thus did the sheepheards hear that sweet
Haliluiah sang by the Angels, Glory be to God on high. And David, Psalm. 8.
The heavens declare the glory of God.

Secondly, by the glory of God in the time of the Law, was meant the Ark of God, 1. Sam. 4. The glory is departed.

Thirdly, it signifies the visible testimony of Gods presence in a cloud.
Exodus 16.8.

Fourthly, it is taken for the light of the Gospel. 2. Cor. 4.4.

Fifthly, by the glory of God, is understood the image of God, according to
which man was created. Romans 3.23. All flesh have sinned, and are deprived of
the glory of God.

Use. First, be careful of the glory of God, that his name be not ill spoken
of, because of thy bad conversation.

Secondly, suffer for him. For all the sufferings of this life are not worthy
of the glory that shall be revealed in us.

Thirdly, sigh and groan for Christ's appearing, for it is the day of the
revelation of thy glory.

For ever and ever, Amen.
THis is life everlasting, to know thee to be the only true God, and whom
thou have sent thy Son, the Lord Jesus: This is the absolute excellency of
man's knowledge. But to attain hereunto the way is hard, for No man has known
the Father at any time save the Son, and he to whom the Son has revealed
him. And till the Son has revealed him in his being, by delineating to them
the back-parts of the Father, for, No man can see God and live. It is true
indeed if we shall compare our knowledge of God, who live under the Gospel,
with those who went before us under the Law, we cannot but confess that our
light in regard of theirs is before the light of the Sun compared to the
morning star, for it is written, They saw but from a far, and under a
veil, but we behold his glory with open face. And yet notwithstanding this
our illumination we are imperfect, and our perfection may be full in respect
of parts, yet is not in respect of degrees: For our help therefore whilst we
dwell in the valley of Meseck, and tents of Kedar, he is pleased to manifest
unto us, though not absolutely what he is, that is to say, his nature, yet who
he is, that is to say, what are his attributes; for by this he teaches us to
know both who he is in himself, and how he carries himself to us. Now thus
we may know him in his ways and dispensations toward us. He has revealed
himself three manner of ways, Per viam negationis, per viam causationis, per
viam eminentiae. By way of negation, by way of causation, and by way of
excellency.

By way of negation or denial, he makes himself known to us while he
denies the imperfections of the creatures to appertain unto him as creator:
and therefore it is said of him that he is immortal, invisible, immutable,
that he cannot lie, that he cannot repent.

By way of causation, while he makes himself to be known to be the cause of
all things that are, for it is written, By him were made all things, and
without him was made nothing that was made. And again, In him we live, we
move and have our being. And again, (...).

By way of excellency, while as we looking on the excellency of the creature,
are lead to consider the supereminent excellency of the creator, in his
wisdom, power, strength, or permanency. Hence it is that by way of eminent
excellency above the creature, he has made, amongst many his other
attributes, himself known to us by his eternity, an attribute so absolutely
proper to him, that it cannot properly be attributed to any creature beside
him: It is true indeed, the decrees of God are truly called eternal in their
act, but not if we consider them in their execution; for howsoever they were
decreed from all eternity, yet they are finite in respect of time, for in time
they receive their accomplishment. The souls of men are truly called eternal,
yet not properly, for howsoever they be eternal essences enduring for ever,
yet had they a beginning in time, for till God breathed in ma^s nostrels, man
was not a living soul: The Sacrament of Circumcision was called the eternal
covenant, Exodus 17. yet it is but catachrestically termed so, for properly it
was not so, it had a beginning in the days of Abraham. Nothing then can be
properly called eternal but God himself, in respect of his eternal essence
and the blood of the Son of God, in respect of the eternal value thereof.
God, in respect of his eternal essence, and trinity of persons, is from
everlasting to everlasting, for this is his name I am that I am. The value also
of the blood of the Son of God is eternal, though not in respect of the
incarnation, yet in respect of the operation thereof, for by the blood of that
immaculate lamb, slain before the foundations of the world, in time we have
received peace and atonement (...): and after all time, a (...), conformity
unto his image, and establishment in the grace wherein we stand. But thou will
enquire if God only be truly and properly eternal, how is eternity according
to his kingdom, and that his kingdom is for ever and ever. The answer is
easy, whatsoever is in God is God, and his attributes are like unto himself,
for as he is in himself eternal, so is his kingdom, his power, and glory.
The consideration of these things serves us for a manifold use.

First, our God is eternal, and so is his love to wards us, Who shall separate
us from the love of God? shall tribulation or anguish, famine, or nakedness?
etc. No, in all these things we are more then conquerers.

Secondly, the virtue of the death of Jesus is eternal, Who shall lay any
thing then, to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that justifies who shall
condemn? It is Jesus Christ who has died for us, and now in the heavens makes
intercession for us, at the right hand of the Majesty.

Thirdly, God is eternal, and his kingdom is for ever, what need we then to
fear what man can do unto us, they can but kill the body, but, Let us fear
him who can cast both soul and body in hell fire, where the worm dies not,
and the fire goes not out.

Fourthly, our God is eternal, and his kingdom for ever and ever: Why should
we then seek the things of this life that perish? No no, it becomes us not to
set our eyes on things that are seen, and are temporal, but on those things
that are not seenand are eternal.

Finally, since our God is eternal and his kingdom endures for ever, why
should we weary or murmur under the rod of our visitation, for all the
afflictions of this present time are not worthy of the glory to be revealed,
for our afflictions are but light, and endure for a moment, but it is an
eternal weight of glory, passing in excellency, that is laid up for us, who
are kept by the power of his Son through faith to eternal salvation.

Amen.
THis is the last gasp, and breath of this prayer: many such ejaculations have
the servats of God breathed in the last period of their extremities: Jacob
said, O Lord, I have waited for thy salvation. Old Father Simeon could say, Now
let thy servant depart in peace. The righteous say in the 8. to the Romans,
That they having received the first fruits of the spirit, do sigh in
themselves, waiting for the adoption and redemption of their mortal bodies;
and the souls of the Saints under the Altar in the Revelation can say, O Lord,
how long? Our Savior Christ Jesus in place of all these things teaches us to
say Amen. And for understanding hereof, let us first learn what it is, or how
it must be said: As to the first, Amen is a word taken in Scripture three
manner of ways, nominally, adverbially, and verbally. Nominally, it signifies
to us Jesus Christ the second person of the Trinity, for it is thus written.
Revel. 3.14. These things says Amen, the faithful and the true witness.
Neither this alone, but what is more, it gives a reality to what he has
spoken or promised, for it is written, his promises are not yea and nay, but
yea and Amen.

Adverbially, it is a word of earnest asseveration, for so uses our Savior,
Verily, verily, I say unto you: whose primitive is Amen, Amen, dico vobis.

Verbally, and so it is equivalent to so be it; whether it be in the matter of
thank esgiving, of praise, or of prayer: In the matter of thanksgiving. 1. Cor.
14.16. That Amen may be said. In the matter of praise. Psalm. 41.13. Blessed be
the Lord from everlasting to everlasting, Amen and Amen. In the matter of
prayer, and then it has a double use, for then it is vel signaculum consensus
nostri vel votum desiderly nostri. To all of the former Petitions it is not
only signaculum consonsus nostri, but also votum desiderij nostri, for in these
we do not only acknowledge, that our Father dwells in heaven, that his name
must be hallowed, that his kingdom must come, that his will must be done in
earth as it is in heaven, but withal it is votum desiderij nostri, our earnest
desire: Give us this day our daily bread: Forgive us our sins: Lead us not
into temptation, and deliver us from all evil: And in all of these we are
taught not only to assent but also to desire, to assent and acknowledge the
glory, power, and sovereignty of his dread essence, to desire and beg from
his all sufficiency the support of our infirmity, that his strength may be
known in our weakness, and his power may be made manifest in our infirmity.

Thus then, knowing that all things are of him, and by him, and for him, what
rests but that in respect of his allsufficiencie, and eternal kingdom, power,
and glory, we should draw near unto him, and beg of him, that he who is
only able may keep us that we fall not, and that he would present us without
spot or blemish before the presence of his glory with joy, who is God only
wise, immortal, and invisible, in whose presence is the fullness of all joy,
and at whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore: Amen.

God of his infinite mercy and goodness make us all careful of his glory
whilst we are in this life, that in the day of Christ's appearance we may be
made partakers of that eternal glory which is laid up for us in the heavens,
and purchased to us by his blessed merits. Amen.

FINIS.

