A GLASS FOR THE GODLY. CONTAINING MANY COMFORTABLE TREATISES to persuade men
from the love of this world, to the love of the world to come; and exhorting
them with cherefulnes to pass through the crosses and afflictions of this
life. Full of spiritual comfort for all such as hope to be saved by Jesus
Christ.

THE FIRST PART.

By R: W: Minister of Gods Word.

Amend your lives therefore, and turn, that your sins may be put away when
the time of Refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. Acts 3.19. AT
LONDON, Printed by T: P: for Arthur Johnson, dwelling at the sign of the White
Horse in Paul's Churchyard. An: Dom: 1612.

The Treatises contained in the first part.
THE seeking of Heaven. A whip for loyterers. Hypocrisy unmasked. How to
vanquish Satan. Practice must accompany profession. The curbing of
covetousness. Know this, that God will bring thee to Judgment.
TO The right Worshipful Sir Edward Seymour Baronet, all increase of solid
happiness on Earth, and eternal felicity in Heaven.
SIR,
NOting seriously the great security of the age in which we live; how men are
addicted to profit and pleasure; and how they either cursorily, or else not at
all, do contemplate and practice that which concerns the life to come: I was
animated, to propose these my unpolished labors to the view of Christian
Readers. He that searches and sees the hearts and reins, knows that the
original motive exciting me to put pen to paper, was a desire to bestow some
Spiritual gift on the Church of God, for the confirmation of the godly, the
consolation of the afflicted, the awaking of those whom sin (like a
poysonesome and drouzie Aspe) has lulled asleep in obdurate and dangerous
carelessness. I have endeauored, according to the small portion of grace given
unto me, to charm the deaf Adder; and by blowing of the Trumpet, to prepare
the Lords Soldiers, which must fight his battles under Christ's banner against
iniquity; to the end they may be circumspect, and not prevented, or
circumuented by their spiritual foes, that watch and walk continually,
seeking whom they may devour. Many before me have ran a fair course in
this race; and have thrust their sharp sickle into this harvest; in whose
steps I gladly acknowledge my self to have trodden; and I freely and
voluntarily confess, that my penury has gleaned some bundles of ears that
lay scattered in their copious fields. To him that shall object, my drawing of
water out of the fountains of others, and my resounding (as an Echo) of their
voices; I reply, that as Aeschilus the Poet, was accustomed to say, that his
Tragedies were but small dishes of great Homers Suppers; so my slender repast
may be called, the fragments and relics of the delicate dishes of Learned,
Christian, and Godly Authors. And to them that shall twi^, that here is scarce
ought written, that has not been published before; what shall I retorte also?
But that, either the form is transformed; or the language altered; or (at
least) the usage of the latter Prophets and Evangelists imitated; who have
repeated much, and oftentimes verbatim tra^scribed out of those that wrought
before them, as their purpose and occasion required. Is not this evident in
Deuteronomie, the Cronicles, and the Gospels? Is Paul ashamed to write the same
things to the Phillippians? Nay, does he not esteem it a sure and behoouefull
matter for them? Is not the general Epistle of Jude the brother of James, a
compendious abridgement and recapitulation of the latter Epistle of Saint
Peter? Therefore an intent, to prove our doctrine consonant to ancient and
approved writers, (as Oecumenius, Theophilact, and other, as well old as Modern
have done,) is not to be misliked nor reproved. But do I frame an Apology
in this respect? and not rather infer with an eminent, sound, and profound
Divine, that he that helps himself with the precedent works of others, cannot
justly be blamed; since the holy Apostle affirms that all things are ours; and
are ordained for helps and furtherances to bring us to CHRIST JESUS. What
success will accompany my enterprise, I leave to him, who, though Paul Plant,
and Apollo water, yet only gives the increase. If I have brought but the
least stone, or stick, that may serve for the promoting of Gods Edifice; If I
have presented but one thread, that may be used in the garnishing of Christ
Sanctuary; If I have reclaimed but one sinner from the path of perdition, unto
the way of Paradise; so that any shall hereafter say unfeignedly, my Soul has
been bettered by this Book; this is the mark I aimed at; and praised be God,
from whom all good and perfect gifts descend. Some readers are still desirous
of Novelties, not regarding to perform what they have formerly learned: like
guests, that disdain the meat that is set before them, ever longing after
change and variety of dishes. Some Readers respect not what they read, so they
be reading: Like thirsty travelers, that drink of every fountain, not
considering whether the water be wholesome, or hurtful. Some Readers procure
diverse Books, and boast of the store and multitude of the^, though they
apprehe^d the doctrine but in small measure: Like those that furbish many
weapons, and keep them in their houses; but are commonly inexpert, either to
defend, or offend, when they are drawn to trial. Some readers use Books, more
for show and ostentation, then for study of Godliness, and reformation of
manners: Like Children, that burn lamps and candles in the night, but either
watch not, or else use no exercise, whence profit and commodity may redound.
At a word, some readers reprehend what they perceive not, or deprave what they
understand; misliking matter or method, or phrase, or all these: Like the
captious beholders of a garden, that reject herbs and flowers, whose virtue
and operation they are jgnorant of; and blame the contriuing and plotting of
that which they have often seen. In this variable disposition of readers, it
is not possible to satisfy the appetite and expectation of all: my confusion
craves order; my harshnes desires a sponge; my shallownes longs for weight and
depth; and therefore I am urged to entreat the skillful, to pardon the
defects; the curious, to wink at the escapes; the unlearned, to suspend their
censure; the resolved, to beware of proposterous and intemperate zeal; the
lukewarm, and them that are frozen in their dregs, to suffer the words of
exhortation; finally, I entreat all, unto whose hands these vnadorned Treatises
shall come, to embrace my good meaning in the arms of Christian love and
courtesy; and to remember the blessed Apostles Maxim, that a man is accepted
according to that he has, and not according to that he has not, if there be
first a willing mind. Finally, least my preface resemble a swollen head,
disproportionable to the dwarfelike body following; or become another Myndus,
that had ample gates, it self being a very little City; and therefore the
Cynick floutingly advised the Citizens to shut the gates, least the whole
City should go out at them: above all other, I submissely implore your
favor, for the acceptance and patronizing of my slender travel; beseechching
you not to be displeased, that I have been emboldned, to dedicate this simple
work unto you. I was provoked by your zeal to pure and undefiled religion, by
your impartial regard of Justice, by your fervent affection to benefit your
Country, and by your love to Learning and the learned; (which virtues, as they
are infused into you by the Author of all sincere virtue, so they seem in you
to be hereditarie, and derived and transfused from your gracious Progenitors;)
by these things I was provoked, to yield this testimony of your deserts, as a
consenting harmony and general applause of the multitude. And thus praying
the Lord, to multiply and continue his mercies upon you and yours; I humble
commend this declaration of my reverent and due conceit of your worthiness unto
your self, and your self unto the Almighty.

Your Worships in all dutifulnes to be commanded ROB: WOLCOMBE.

THE SEEKING OF HEAVEN.
Matt. 6.33. But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and
all these things shall be ministered unto you.


I It is the duty of a sincere teacher of the will and word of God, Ier. 1.10.
2. Cor 10.4.
first to pluck up iniquity, and to root out ungodliness, and to destroy
sin, and to throw down the strong holds of Satan; and then to build
piety, and to plant the fear of the Lord. For as we see, that thorns must be
first pulled up, before good seed can be dispearsed with gain and profit: so
none can apply their minds to virtue, before they lay aside the contrary and
repugnant vices.

Ier. 4.3. Isai. 1.16. Psalm. 34.15.
Therefore the Prophets exhorting sinners to repentance, have said, that we must
plough up our fallow ground, and not sow upon thorns; and we must cease to
do evil, and learn to do well; and we must decline from evil, and do that
which is good. The same order is observed by Christ, the true publisher of Gods
pleasure. For when he had sufficiently dehorted from anxietie and careful
pensiuenes touching earthly things, as meat, drink, and raiment: namely,
because it hinders the service of God, and draws us to the service of M^^^mo,
that is, of worldly wealth; and because it is foolish and superfluous; for God
will give food and raiment to his children; for he that has given life, which
is the greater, will give food and raiment, which is the lesser; he that
feeds the fowls of the heaven, that neither sow, nor reap, will he not
feed his servants, that both sow and reap? he that clothes the lillies,
that labor not, nor spin, will he not cloth his children, that do both
these? and when he had showed, both that this carefulnes is troublesome and
profits nothing; for who by carking can add one cubite to his stature? and
that this anxietie pertaines to the Gentiles and Ethnicks, which are ignorant
of God, and strangers from Christian religion; and therefore ought to be far
from us, that are Christians and do acknowledge God to be our merciful God
and father: When Christ had by these reasons dissuaded from pensive carefulnes,
now in these words he exhortes to godliness, virtue, and righteousness, saying;
But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these
things shall be ministered unto you. In which words there are contained two
things; the first is an exhortation, in these words, But seek ye f^rst the
kingdom of God, and his righteousness: the second is a reason of the
exhortation, in these words, And all these things shall be ministered unto you.

We are exhorted, to seek principally and before all other things, the
kingdom of God, and Gods righteousness. And what is the kingdom of God? It is
the kingdom of grace in this life, when Gods holy spirit swaies and rules in
our hearts, and does so transform and alter us, that of enemies of God, we
are reconciled unto him. For we are by nature strangers from God, and the
commonwealth of Israel, and replenished with all uncleanness and iniquity: Ioh.
3.5. Matt. 3.11.
and the spirit of God and his grace is water to purify our pollution; and
fire to burn away our dross and rust; and oil to supple and soften our
hardness; and the seed of godliness, 1. Io. 2.20. 1. Io. 3.9 Luke 11.20.
from which our souls grow up into fair and goodly trees, in whose branches,
virtues and good works make their nests and dwelling places; and the finger of
God, that engraues in our hearts the will and commandment of God, and
obedience unto the same. Luk 1.32.
In this kingdom of grace, Christ Jesus is the King and high Lord, appointed
by his father, to rule and govern it. In this kingdom of grace, the Subjects
are the faithful, whom Christ has redeemed with his death, and set ^ree from
the tyranny of Satan. In this kingdom of grace, the laws are the word of
God, wherein all things are commanded, that belong both to the humble service
and obedience of that supreme King, and to the concord of the Subjects and
citizens. In this kingdom of grace, all things are spiritual, namely the King
himself, his glory, power, Subjects, laws, reward, and punishment of Rebels.
And therefore Christ says to Pilate, Ioh. 18.36.
my kingdom is not of this world. For Christ requires no such thing of his
Subjects, as earthly kings are wont to ask; but contrarily, he does
continually enrich them with his own gifts and spiritual riches; he makes all
his Subjects partakers of his kingly dignity, which earthly Kings cannot do;
he does not only command as other Kings do, but also gives us his own
spirit, which puts power into us, whereby we are made able, to yield our humble
and dutiful obedience to his commandments. Finally, all other kingdoms are
subject to alteration and change, but this kingdom of grace is invincible, and
shall endure until the last coming of Christ. This is the kingdom that our
Savior bids us to seek first and chiefly; and therefore let us all pray, that
we may be Subjects thereof. For grace is the balm, to cure the sores and
sicknesses of our souls; grace is the directer of our thoughts, speeches, and
works in the awe of God, as the rudder rules the ship; grace is the garment and
robe that couers and clothes our natural defects and imperfections; grace is
the celestial influence, that makes our minds to spring forth into godly
actions, as the rain that drops from heaven breeds fertility in the earth;
grace is the sweetner of our works, which are otherwise bitter and unsavory,
as they issue from our corrupt wels, as Eli^haes salt cured the bitter and
venomous water of the city Jericho. 1. King, 2.


And what can be more fitly said of grace, then that Saint Austin has said?
Tract. in Johan. 41.
As the Physician hates the infirmity of the Patient, and works by curing,
that the infirmity is expelled, and the Patient cased: so God works in us, by
his grace, vt peccatum consumatur, homo liberetur; that sin is consumed, and
we set at liberty; to the end we may freely serve the Lord in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life.

Or else the Kingdom of God in this place, may be taken for the kingdom of
glory; which is the scope and last end of all the godly, and unto which we
are directed and led by the kingdom of grace. For as among the Romans, Honor
had a temple, and Virtue had a temple, but these temples were so built and
situate, that none could come into the temple of Honor, but he must first
pass through the temple of Virtue: so there is a kingdom of grace in this
life, and there is a kingdom of glory in the life to come; but these two
Kingdoms have such coherence and society between themselves, that none can
enter into the kingdom of glory, except he walk through the kingdom of
grace; nor none may be a subject in the latter, except he have been a subject
in the former. In the kingdom of glory there shall be perfect knowledge; here
we know but in part, and see darkely through a glass. 1. Cor. 13 9.
In the kingdom of glory shall be eternal life, peace, quietness, joy, and
concord; here our life is as a Flower; our peace is soon broken; our quietness
troubled; our joy molested; our concord dissolved. In the kingdom of glory
is no death, sorrow, wearines, infirmity, hunger, thirste, poverty,
slavery; Reu. 21.27.
For no imperfection or uncleanness enter into the new Jerusalem; here the
waves of affliction and tribulation tumble one upon the others neck, as long
as we carry about us this body of death. Briefly, if we live here in
prosperity, yet we live subject to mortality and sickness; yet we see but a
vain and wicked world; yet we behold but mortal men, and dwell but with
sinful men, and converse but with inconstant men: but in the kingdom of
glory, our bodies shall be immortal; the Majesty of God shall be the object
of our eyes; Hebr. 12.22.
the company of innumerable Angels, and the assembly and congregation of the
first borne, which are written in heaven, and the spirits of just and perfect
men, shall be those with whom we shall continually abide and dwell. What is the
earth, and earthly glory, compared with the glittering Palace of heaven; but
an earthen and dirtie cottage of a beggar, in respect of a gay and gilded
mansion of a Prince? They that are translated out of the wretchedness of this
world, into the blessedness of that other world, are like those that are
exalted out of Dungeons and fetters, into a Royal throne of dignity.

It is much to say this; but when S. John Chrysostom had said it, Hom. 6. ad
Heb.
he adds presently, Sed neque sic integre pertingere potui ad illius regni
similitudinem; that by this speech he could not fully express the likeness of
that glorious Kingdom. For in the advancement from worldly misery to worldly
felicity, there arises a pleasure and great delight; but after a few days
the mind begins to be satiate with the joy and gladness, and though it remain
in delectation, yet the delectation begins to fade, for that it is usual and
common: but in those good things, which eye has not seen, nor ear has
heard, nor man's heart can comprehend, there is no decrease, end, or change,
but there is an augmentation of joy, replenished, with all desirable good
things. For as the death of the wicked may be termed evil, worse, and worst;
evil, because it ends their earthly joy; Bernard in paruis sermonib. ser. 41.
worse, because it sends to torments; worst, because there is no end of those
anguishes: so the death of the godly may be called good, better, and best;
good, because it finisheth their miseries; better, because it puts into
possession of happiness; best, because there is no alteration, nor fear of
alteration in that happiness. In a word, as much as the soul excels the body,
so much the joys of heaven surmount all the pleasantest, and carest, and
choicest delites of this fading life. And this is that kingdom, that Christ
commands us to seek before all other things: and who will not be desirous to
attain unto it?

The Righteousness of God, which Christ bids us to follow, is that Righteousness
and holiness, which God in his word commands and allows. And these words (The
righteousness of God,) are an exposition and declaration of the former, namely,
the K ngdome of God. For then God does reign in us, and then we are subjects
of Gods kingdom, when he by his holy spirit works sanctification, and an
earnest desire of godliness in our hearts, to live godly, and holily, and
soberly in this present world. Therefore, if we will be inheritors of Gods
kingdom, and find the joys thereof, we must (as obedient children) not
fashion our selves unto the former lusts of our ignorance; 1. Pet. 1. v 4
15.^6.17.^8.19.
but as he which has called us is holy, so we must be holy in all manner of
conversation; because it is written, Be ye^ holy, for I am holy. And since
we call him Father, which without respect of persons judges according to every
man's work, we must pass the time of our abiding here in fear: knowing that
we were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold; but with the
precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled, and without spot. And is it
not reason, that we should study to please the Lord in holiness, Ioh. ^.16.
and righteousness, and newnes of life? Since God has so loved us, that he gave
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish,
but have everlasting life? When thou art worn out with age, or live in
poverty, or art tossed and turmoyled with affliction, and adversity, what
would thou not suffer, to be made young and lusty, rich, and wealthy,
settled and quiet? Christ has promised, and will perform more then all these.
Pr^^. 25.14. Iud. 11.12.
Antiochus was called Dolon, because he was wont to say, that he would give,
and he would reward, and he would pay; and yet gave, and rewarded, and paid
nothing; being like the vapor and wind, that has no Rain, Hebr. 13.18.
and the cloud without water: but Jesus Christ is no willinger to promise then
able to perform; and he is the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever. For
youth does not so much exceed Age, riches beggerie, peace, quietness; Nay,
truth does scarce so much exceed a dream, and the body a shadow, and a
precious jewel a clod of clay; as all the bravery and pleasant delights of
this world shall be truly, and indeed exceeded by the glory and joy of
heaven. If any would liken the glory of heaven to the brightness of the Sun;
yet he should say nothing after a sort, nor any way express the greatness
thereof. For why? What fellowship has Light with darkness? what communion has
calamity with tranquillity? what part has the endless life, with the fickle
and momentanie life? Therefore when thou live in obscurity, if thou would
be ready, to give even all thy state and substance, and to do thy utmost
endeavor, that thou might be brought into the presence of an earthly
Potentate, and live in his presence, and sit at his table, and enjoy his
company and favor; will thou refuse to seek the righteousness of God, and to
walk in the good works that God has appointed for us, that thou may be
made partaker of the company of Angels, and Saints, and unspeakable joys of
heaven? Propter haec, Hom. 35. de diverse.
quae Pecuniae, quae Corpora non sunt impendenda? Imo quot Animas exponere
dignum fuerit?

That we may enjoy those joys, what money should we not expend? what strength
of body should we not impair? Nay, how many lives, (if we had many lives,)
should we not neglect and leese? as says Saint John Chrysostom. Wherefore let
this exhortation of our Savior Christ be never forgotten, when he says; But
seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness.

Now the reason why we should seek first Gods kingdom, and his righteousness,
is, for that then all other things shall be ministered unto us, and shall be
given unto us, as a surpassage and advantage. If we find the kingdom of God,
and his righteousness, though we have few, or none of these transitory things,
yet it surpasses all the treasure of India, and gold of Peru: but if we abound
with earthly blessings, and yet want the inestimable jewel of Gods grace,
while we live here; and shall not be citizens and inhabitants of Gods eternal
and glorious kingdom of heaven; what are we, but hungry in the midst of our
dainties? and thirsty in the midst of our fountains? and naked in the
midst of our garments? and poor and miserable in the midst of our
abundance and imagined felicity? for our true and principal felicity is in
heaven; of which these earthly blessings and commodities are the additions,
pledges, and tokens. Christ therefore says, But seek ye first the kingdom of
God, and his righteousness, and all these things shall be ministered unto you; or
shall be cast unto you. He uses a word taken from them that buy fruits, as
Pears, apples, or the like; who when they bestow money and pay it, they have
commonly cast unto them somewhat above the number. So (says Christ) if you
seek first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, earthly benefits shall
be added and ministered, over and above your expectation. Where the Sun is,
there is light and warmth; where the soul is, there is lively motion and
action; where the favor of the Prince is, there is honor and preferment; and
where the kingdom of God is, and his righteousness, there is joy, plenty,
peace, prosperity, and what not? Therefore if we desire to abound with all
good things, let us seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness.

Here perhaps some may say; many godly people, and Paul himself by name, who
chiefly did seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness; yet spent their
life in hunger, 2. Cor. 11.23. etc.
and thirst, and fastings, and cold, and nakedness: and then how is this
promise true, that all other things shall be cast and ministered unto us? yea,
but behold Paul's mind and contentation: for he could say; Phil. 4.11.12.13.
I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content: and I can be
abased, and I can abound; every where in all things I am instructed, both to be
full, and to be hungry, and to abound, and to have want; I am able to do all
things through the help of Christ, which strengthens me. Whereby we see, that
other things are cast and ministered unto the godly, either in very deed, or
else as much as they do desire. He has no need of any thing, that desires
nothing. Very little is enough for him, that is filled with the love and fear
of God, and depends on Gods providence and liberality, and seeks chiefly the
kingdom of God, and his righteousness. A certain Philosopher could say, when
he saw a fair fraught with all variety of wares; Basil. Constable. mon. cap. 5.
Quam multis ego non egeo? How many things are there here, which I need not?
An ancient Father says, that as oftentimes when we muse and contemplate
earnestly on things of this life, the mind is so deeply fixed on the
cogitation, that the ears, eyes, and other senses do not execute their
function; but the mind (as it were) forsakes the outward senses, and
altogether strickes in the contemplation: so our vehement fastening of our love
on God and godly things, will easily expel and chase out vain thoughts for
worldly profit and pleasure. So that God casts all things unto him, Genesis
15.1. and 17.1.
who wants nothing; and unto whom God is all things, and who has learned with
the Apostle, in whatsoever state he is, therewith to be content: that is, who
thinks whatsoever he has, to be sufficient, and longs after no more then he
has. Saint Chrysostom says fitly, that none that goes to a rich feast, is
careful for that days diet; and none that goes to a Well, is careful for
his thirst. Therefore since we may (and must assure our selves of the
liberality, and merciful providence of God,) far more plenteous then all
feasts and wels; let us not account our selves poor and needy: Luke 14.16.
Let us go to the great supper, unto which we are invited, and we shall not
lack meat in the way: let us go to that Fountain which said, If any man
thirst, let him come unto me, and drink; Ioh. 7.37.
and we shall not want drink in the journey. So true is it, that Christ says
here, that if we absolutely and principally seek the Kingdom of God, and
his Righteousness, all these things shall be ministered unto us; as things,
either necessarily depending on the former, or else following them of their
own accord.

Questionles, of our selves we are unapt to seek the kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness, because our depraved nature is repugnant unto it, and is rather
delighted with the works of darkness, then with the armor of light. Therefore
we must beseech God to give us the grace of his holy Spirit, that we may
apply our hearts to the heavenly Wisdom, and incline our stubborn
disposition to ^is blessed and acceptable pleasure and commandment. And we
must diligently attend and hearken to the word of God, which is the
incorruptible seed, whereby the Spirit does regenerate us, 2 Pet. 2.2.
and work effectually in us. Why do many not long for the Kingdom of God,
and his Righteousness? Because they are carnal: and the carnal cannot conceive
the things of Gods kingdom, which is spiritual: 1. Cor. 2.14.
for spiritual things are spiritually discerned. When the spirit of God comes
upon us, then these muddie and earthly cogitations, and delights, and desires,
will flee from us. It fared so with Saul: for at Samuels first speech of the
Kingdom, he answered contemptuously, and sportingly Am not I the son of
Iemini, of the smallest Tribe of Israel? 1. Sam. 9.21.
and my Family is the least of all the families of the tribe of Benjamin:
wherefore then speak thou so to me? But when he was anointed with oil,
and when the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, he took to him a royal
mind, and changed into another man, he began to imagine things worthy of his
estate. It is hard indeed to contemn the pomp of the world, and the
enticements of riches, and the allurements and baits of pleasures: but we
must not cease from attempting: for every good and virtuous thing is hard.
Learn of Solomon, to seek first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness: for
when God appeared unto him by night, and said, 1. King. 3.9.
Ask what I shall give thee; Solomon asked not for himself long life, nor
riches, nor the life of his enemies; but an understanding heart, to discern
between good and bad; Learn of Job, to seek first the kingdom of God, and
his righteousness: Job. 1.5.
For when the days of his childrens banqueting were gone about, thinking that
they had sinned, and blasphemed God in their hearts; he was accustomed daily
to sanctify his children, and to rise up early in the morning, and to offer
burnt Offerings, according to the number of his Children.

Learn of Daniel, to seek first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness: for
when he understood, Dan. 6.10
that the King had established the statute, that whosoever should ask any
petition of any god or man, for thirty days, save of the King, he should be
cast into the Lions den; he went into his house, and courageously opening
his window in his chamber toward Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees three
times a day, and prayed and praised his God, as he did aforetime. Learn of
David, to seek first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness: who affirms
of himself, Psalm. 55.7
that with forcible vehemency he would pray and call unto God, Ps. 5.17
Evening, and Morning, and at Noone; and that he did cry unto the Lord, and
his prayer should early come before him; and that he had sworn unto the Lord,
Ps. 88.13.
and vowed unto the mighty God of Jacob, that he would not enter into the
tabernacle of his house, nor come up upon his pallet, Psalm. 132.2.3.4.5.
or bed; nor suffer his eyes to ^leepe, nor his eyelids to slumber, until he
had found out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty GOD of
Jacob. Learn of the very Ethnickes and Pagans, to seek first the kingdom of
God, and his righteousness: For they had the first and chiefest care for their
Religion and superstition; and did establish, compose, and settle that before
all other things. Lampridius writes in the life of Alexander Seuerus the Roman
Emperor, that when he heard a controversy between some Christians, and
certain Hucksters, or Inne-keepers, touching a common place and field, which
the Christians kept to pray therein, but the Inne-keepers said it was theirs,
and in former times properly belonged unto them: the infidel Emperor answered,
Quoquo modo fit, satius est eo in loco Deum c^l^quam cauponas exercere;
Howsoever it be (^^^h he,) it is better that GOD be worshipped in that place,
then that Inne-keeping should be there used. In the Senate of Rome, those
things were ever first proposed, which concerned Religion, and the worship of
their gods. Albertus Noui-camp. in orat. ad Hungar. Princip.
And at this day, as often as the Great-Turke does deliberate with his Bassaes
and Nobles, a Professor of their law is commanded to be present, to take
careful heed, that nothing be concluded against their Religion.

It is memorablie reported of Albinius, Val. Max. lib. 1. ca. 1.
that when the Galls had taken Rome, and the Flamen, and Vestall virgins fled
with the implements and instruments of Religion, Albinius carrying his wife and
children in a Carte or Wagon, preferring public Religion, before private
charity, commanded his people to descend from the wagon, and placed therein
the Flamen and Vestal virgins, for their easier carriage of the holy things;
and by this his forward, yet blind devotion, makes one to say, that this course
and homely waine, did either equal, or exceed the most glittering triu^phall
chariot that ever was. Cannot Christ's commandment? Cannot the inconceivable
glory, and joys of Gods heavenly kingdom, prepared for those that love and
fear God unfeignedly? Cannot the examples of Gods true Servants, that have
shined as Lamps and stars, in the midst of wicked wordlings, stir us up
to seek first the kingdom of God, and his Righteousness?

Why then, let us blush for shame, to be exceeded by the very Paganes; and let
us do that in the worship of the true GOD. that they did in the adoring of
their Idols; least otherwise they arise against us in the day of judgment, and
condemn us.

Quintus Cicero writing a tract to his brother Marcus Cicero, De petit. Consul
^t.
touching the suing for the Consulship; which was then the highest ordinary
dignity in the world: admonishes him to set this always before his eyes and
mind, whether he were at home, or whether he went into the Commonplace, or
whether he entered into the Senate House; and to say to himself these words;
Nouus sum, Consulatum peto, Roma est; I am of no ancient house, I am a suitor
for the Consulship: I sue for it at Rome. For he thought that each of these was
able to provoke and excite him to virtue.

First, that he was not a Roman citizen borne, nor of an Ancient house, but an
Arpinate, and descended of an obscure Family.

Secondly, that he sought after the supreme dignity.

Thirdly, that he sued for it in the City of Rome the most magnifice^t stage
of the whole world, and among a great number of most worthy Competitors. But
we Christians, all and singular, do seek and sue, not for a Consulship in
one city, but for the kingdom of Heaven.

Therefore that we may seek it aright, let every one of us say to himself,
Nouus sum, gloriam and beatitudinem aeternam peto, Coelum est; I am naturally
no citizen of Heaven, I seek for the glory and happiness that is eternal,
Heaven is the place.

First, we are not borne Citizens of the kingdom of Heaven, as our first
Father Adam was, in the Paradise of pleasure, and in the state of Innocence.
But we are by nature sons of wrath; strangers, soiourners, and pilgrims;
borne in the world, that lies all in sin; and borne of the Flesh, and
conceived in iniquity. We live in a cursed earth, in which we eat our bread
with the sweat of our brows.

And to cast off this oldnesse and corruption, we must fight many skirmishes;
we must overcome many temptations; we must bear many tribulations. Secondly,
we seek eternal glory, not a Consulship of one year. And the afflictions of
this life, are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed
unto us. Romans 8.18
Who would not live a poor and a private life ten years, that he might be
sure to abound in glory and riches fifty years?

1. Cor. 9.25.
Shall we murmr then, to brook the short afflictions of this fading life;
that we may live, nay, reign for ever, in glory everlasting.

All those that strive for a Maistery, abstain from all things, they do
withdraw from their body, meat, drink, and clothes, and annoint themselves
with oil, that they may strive and struggle, naked, and nimble, and give their
adversary no occasion to hold them: for the flesh anointed with oil, is very
hardly holden. So we must cast away the immoderate care for meat and
clothes; and we must be anointed with the oil of Faith, Love, and Mercy;
that earthly things hinder us not; and that Satan get no opportunity to lay
hold on us; for he lays hold on us by means of our sins. And they that
annoint their bodies, do this, to receive a crown that perishes, and to
win praise, short, frail, momentanie, and vain: but we to receive glory,
endless, incorruptible, sound, and stable.

At Rome, (the way to the Consulship) was to be popular; to deserve well of the
Commonwealth; and to bestow many private benefits. But our way to heavenly
glory, is holiness, vprightnes, innocence of life, continual worshipping of
God, and sincere love of our neighbor. For the grace of God that brings
salvation unto all men, has appeared, and teaches us, that we should deny
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, Tit. 2.11 12.
and that we should live soberly, and righteously, and godly, in this present
world: Soberly and temperately in respect of our selves; righteously and
justly, in respect of our neighbors; and godly and holily, in respect of the
service and worship of GOD.

This is the way to Gods kingdom; which Christ expressed in one word, when he
said, that We must seek the kingdom of God, and his Righteousness; For it is
not enough to seek Gods kingdom, or to wish for it; but we must seek and
labor to perform that Righteousness that is pleasing to God. The penny of
immortality is not given to Loyterers in the marketplace, but to those that
labor in the Lords vineyard.

Lastly, it is Heaven to which we go, Matt. 11.12
and in which we seek to reign with GOD. But the Kingdom of God suffers
violence, and they that take it, must take it violently, and perforce.

Will thou know the way to Heaven? Hebr. 11.36.37.
Ask of them that have walked in that way. They will tell thee that they have
been tried, by mockings, and scourgings, by bonds, and prisonments; that they
were stoned, they were hewn asunder, they were tempted, they were slain with
the sword, they wandered up and down in Wildernesses, and mountains, and
dens, and caves of the earth, clothed in sheepes-skinnes, and goats skins,
being destitute, afflicted, and tormented.

He that will go to the Indies to traffic, does not refuse the labor of
sailing: He that will be cured of a grievous disease, rejects not a bitter
medicine: He that will buy a Farm, first thinks of the price. So he that
seeks for the kingdom of GOD, must seek and first think of his
Righteousness, which is the way unto it; and of the Merits of CHRIST, which are
the price thereof; and of a lively and effectual Faith, whereby we are made
partakers of the glory to come.

As for worldly cares, what do they avail us? Nay, how much do they hinder
us? Saint Basil says, Epist. 64.
as a polluted glass, can receive no impression of Images and visages; so the
soul possessed of worldly cares, is not capable of the Illumination of the
holy Ghost.

And Saint Austin says excellently, Amor rerum terrenarum, est viscus
spiritualium pennarum: that the love of earthly things, is the Birdlime of our
spiritual feathers.

Let every worldling know, that spiritual things are only needful: and
that Christ says to every one, as to Martha: Martha, Martha, thou carest, Luke
10.41.42.
and art troubled about many things: but one thing is needful: Mary has
chosen the good part, which shall not be taken away from her. Can the globe of
the earth be mingled with the globe of the heaven? how then can the soul
contain the careful love of celestial and earthly things? Divine thoughts
fly from a soul that is forestalled with worldly desires: B^r. (...). 77.
^^cat.
Nec misceri poterunt vana veris, aeterna caducis, spiritualia carn^^bu^, summa
imis, neither can vanity be joined and confounded with truth: things eternal,
spiritual, and high, with things transitory, carnal and base: so as at one
time we may conceive and perceive things above, and things beneath. We see, how
the Iuy does claspe about the tree, spreads it self, and mounts upward by the
help thereof: but at last, it sucks and draws away the juice and moisture of
the tree, and causes it to wither: so excessive care and pensive care for
worldly things, does load the mind, and choke the soul, and make them
unable to aspire to heavenly felicity.

Therefore we must imitate the custom of hawkers and hunters: for hawkers are
wont to cover their hawks heads with hoods, and suffer not their eyes to
wander hither and thither, least striving to fly after the things which they
desire naturally, they be not so heedfull to their preie, when time and
occasion shall serve: and hunters do tie and couple their dogs, that their
sent may be sound and perfect for the game which they shall hunt. So must we
do. We must contain our minds in the love of God, and in the care of
heavenly things, and not permit our affections to straie aside to the anxieties
and distrustful cares of this world. Heaven is the preie which man's soul must
follow: this it must desire: this it must take by violence: this it must be
careful of: and on this it must bestow her chief desire and study. If it
fly, or run out to other things, it will not care for eternal things.
Therefore let us remember the exhortation of the blessed Apostle Paul: Col.
3.1.2.
Seek those things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of
God: set your affections on things which are above, and not on things which are
on the earth.

If we must seek first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, then those
are to be reprehended, who chiefly seek, search, and hunt after the good
things of this world, and the delights and joys thereof: pampering the frail
and sinful body: and neglecting the soul, which is the mistress and
gouernesse of the body, and never dies. It is recorded in histories, that the
Philosopher Heraclitus did always weep, for the miseries and calamities of men:
and that the Philosopher Democritus did always laugh at the follies and vanities
of men. If Heraclitus and Democritus were now alive, they should have as great
cause, to lament the woes, and to deride the follies, which men procure to
themselves, and which they embrace, as they had in the days wherein they
lived. In the Poets time men refused wholesome counsel to embrace virtue
chiefly, and to seek after it above riches and honors: and they gladly
consented to that corrupt lesson of the covetous chuffe.

O ciues, ciues, quaerenda pecunia primum, Horat. Epist. l. 1. Epist. 1.

Virtus post nummos.
Wherein he taught, that money and coin is first to be sought, and virtuous
manners and conditions afterward.

Are not these fashions of this age? We purchase land, we build houses, we
provide the best food and apparel that we can, we h^^t for promotion, honor,
and dignity: but what c^re is there for the eternal habitation, and for the
felicity and good estate of the soul? Neither only in our health and youth
do we so: but even in our old years, and in our sickness we retain the same
custom. For when we are sick, we attempt all courses, and labor by all
means of physic to recover health: Ecclus. 38 1.2.4.
and herein we do well, for physic is from the highest, and herbs and
plasters are ordained of God. Ietros gar aner pollon antaxios allon. Homer.
And therefore the learned Physician is to be honored for necessities sake: *
seeing he is to be preferred before many other men. For he oftentimes restores
health: preserves health, cures not only apparent maladies, but inward
infirmities: and sometimes staieth the soul in the body, when it is ready to
fly and to break out of it, as it were out of a prison. This is much: but it
is but the Physic of the body: and he that does it, is but a Physician of the
body. Mat. 9.2. Isay. 53.4.
Christ is the Physician of the soul: that cures the diseases of our minds:
that bare our infirmities, that sits in heaven, yet heales those that are
diseased on earth: that is, Isid. de su^. bono. lib. 1. cap. 14.
Non tantum ostensor vulneris, sed and sanator, not only a searcher and
declarer of the wound, but also a healer and saluer thereof. As Physicians of
the body do sometimes cure by things like, and sometimes by things dislike:
as heat by cold things, and coldness by hoate things: so Christ the Physician
of souls coming down from heaven, and finding mankind attainted with so
great and many infirmities, Lib. 2^. ^
he partly healed us by things like, (says Gregory,) and partly by things
contrary. For he came to man in the flesh of man: but he came to sinners in
perfect righteousness: and he agreed with us in truth of humane nature: but
disagreed from us in righteousness and innocence. Magnus per totum munaum
iacebat aegrotus, says Saint Austin: a great Patient lay sick throughout the
whole world, that is, all mankind was subject to many anguishes and griefs of
body and soul: and therefore Christ the great Physician came, by whose
stripes we were healed.

O admirable matter, and full of love and commiseration, Quod fusus est sanguis
medici, and factus est medicamentum phrenetici, that the blood of the Physician
was shed, and made the medicine to heal the Frenzy of sinners.

Therefore since the physic of the soul so far eclipseth the dignity of the
physic of the body, and the infirmities of the body proceed and issue from
the inward corruption of the soul, as from a fountain; let us first labor to
be reconciled to the Lord, Ecclus. 38 9.10.11.12. etc. 2. King. 23.2.3. 2.
Chron. 16.12.
and seek to appease his anger by repentance and prayer, as good King Hezekiah
did: let us not repose more confidence in the Physician of body, then in the
power and goodness of God, as Ala did: and let us not persist in the customarie
error, to seek the Physician, before we seek God, and to respect the state of
the body, more then the state of the soul. For whither it be not fitter, to
begin with the Divine, and end with the Physician: then to begin (as the common
usage is) with the Physician, and at last, perhaps when all strength and
memory fails, to come to the Divine: let all judge, that can judge: and that
hear Christ's commandment: Seek first the kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, and all these things shall be ministered unto you.

If we must seek first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness: then those
are to be reprehended, that are so much addicted and wedded to worldly gain
and commodity, that they regard not to have their children and servants
instructed in the knowledge of Christ and of his word. If our people be sick,
we repair to the Physician: if they break a bone, we go to the Surgion: if
natural love and affection move us, we provide nourishment, clothes, and
livings for them, that they may maintain themselves in decent sort. All this
is but for this life: which is as unconstant, as a shadow: as fugitive, as a
dream: as brittle, as glass: as short, as a span: yea, as one sand of the
seashore, in comparison of the whole earth, if it be compared with eternity:
and shall we not be careful to procure our children and families to be
instructed in the doctrine of our Savior Christ, whereby their vices my be
reformed, and they may live as becomes those that carry the name of Christ,
and whereby they may possess heaven for ever with Christ? Some think every
sermon too long: and all time lost that is bestowed in diligent repairing to
the house of God: and therefore are unwilling to give the seventh day
(according to Gods ordinance) to the worship of God: though they have six
days allotted to the works of man's necessity. They will ride then, confer
then, meditate then upon their worldly business: or if they have no earnest
business to exercise them, they will rather pass the time, or (to say truth)
leese the time in play, pastime, joys, trifles, and vanities, then spend the
Lords day, in the Lords service. Let none be so profane, to think that Time
lost that is employde on Gods service. If an unworthy servant of Christ shall
not be believed; yet believe David, a man after Gods own heart, and inspired
of the Lord; who thus describes the blessedness of the man that deliteth in the
law of the Lord, and meditates therein day and night; Psalm. 1.1.2. etc.
Namely, that he shall be like a tree (planted by the river of waters) that
will bring forth her fruit in due season; whose leaf shall not fade: so
whatsoever he shall do, shall prosper. But the wicked contemners of Gods
laws, shall be as the chafe which the wind drives away, they shall not
stand in the Judgment, nor in the assembly of the Righteous, for their way
shall utterly perish. If an unworthy servant of Christ shall not be believed;
yet believe GOD himself, who made this promise to the old Israelites, Exodus
34 24.
I will cast our the Nations before thee, ^^d enlarge thy Coasts, so that no
man shall desire thy Land, when thou shall come up to appear before the Lord
thy God, thrice in the y^^re. The Israelites were to ascend thrice yearly out
of all Iewry, unto the temple of Ie^u^alem; leaving at home only their wives
and small children; and many of the Tribes w^^^ distant from the Temple the
journey of sa^^^a^es God does promise, that by their ascending, they should
receive no damage in their House-holde affairs, and that no enemy, or thief
should spoil their land, or possessions in their absence. This is a type for
us, and written for our learning, that we may know, that GOD will have care
that we shall not be damaged in te^porall things, if we care to serve him, and
to labor for the bread that perishes not. At a word, if an unworthy servant
of Christ shall not be believed; yet believe our Savior CHRIST himself, who
says here without any ambiguitie; Seek first the kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness, and all these things shall be ministered unto you.

Finally, if we must seek first the kingdom of God and his Righteousness;
those are to be reprehended, that undertake their daily works and businesses,
without commending their labors and endeavors to the blessed protection and
benediction of God, by prayer and supplication. What can the most ingenious or
industrious man perform of himself, without the blessing of God? Psalm.
127.1.2.
Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it; Except the
Lord keep the City, the Keeper waketh in vain: It is in vain to rise early,
and to lie down late, and to eat the bread of sorrow; For it is the Lord that
surely gives rest to his beloved. For that we depend not upon God, we flee
not to God, we pray not to God; Am. 5.11. Zeph. 1.13. Agg. 1.6.
Is not this the cause, that many sow much, and reap little; build houses,
and other dwell in them; plant Orchyards, and eat not of the fruits; eat,
but have not enough; drink, but are not filled; cloth themselves, but are not
warm; earne wages, but lay it up in a broken and bottomless Bag? Say not, I
cannot come to the church to prayer, every day before I go forth to my labor;
I am not learned; it is for clergy men to be so diligent in prayers. Although
thou can not come to the church, yet have thou not a private devotion, and
prayers to power forth in thy house, and on the way and in the field, and in
thy labor? Although thou be unlearned, yet art thou not able to utter the
Lords prayer, and in a word or two, to beg mercy of God? Although thou be no
clerk, yet art thou not subject to manifold temptations as well as clergy men?
They that travel through vnwholsom countries and infectious aires, take
preservatives to be safe from hurt; and those that know, their enemies lie in
wayt for them in every corner, carry still some weapon to defend themselves.
And shall not a Christian arm himself with the Armor of prayer, and defend
himself with the preservative of godly meditations? since Satan seeks by the
venom of sin to infect all our actions; and lays a bayt to entrap us in our
meat, and in our drink, and in our garments, and in our speeches, and in all
our doings? Wherefore, whatsoever we shall do in word or deed, Col. 3.17
let us do all in the Name of the Lord JESUS; praying heartily to GOD the
Father, for the obtaining of his holy Spirit, merciful protection; 1. Tim. 4.5.
that all his Creatures may be sanctified unto us by his word and prayer: and
that whatsoever we shall enterprise, or attempt, may redound to the glory of
God, the profit of our Neighbors, and our own salvation. How comfortable is
the promise? Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, Matthew. 7.7.8.
and ye shall find: knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For whosoever
asks, receives: and he that seeks finds: and to him that knocks, it
shall be opened. How gracious is God, Psalm. 145.8. Isay, 65.24.
to hear the requests of all those that call upon him faithfully? for he has
said; Yea, before they call, I will answer; and while they speak, I will
hear. How can it be, that the prayer of the Righteous should not prevail
much, Romans 8.26
and pierce the clouds? since Christ makes intercession for us, at the right
hand of God; and though we know not what to pray as we ought yet the Spirit it
self makes request for us, Luke 18.1 1 Timothy 2.8
with sighs, which cannot be expressed. O then let us pray always, and not wax
faint! O then let us lift up pure hands every where, without wrath vr doubting.

O then let Prayer be the salt to season all our actions; and the Dove to
bring us the olive leaf; that is, the messenger to fetch down from Heaven the
favor and loving mercy of God upon us; Genesis 8.11.
and whither we go forth of our houses, let us pray; and whither we return
home let us pray; Hieron. in Epist.
Nec prius corpuscalum requiescat, quam animam pascat; and let not our body
rest, before it feed the soul with this celestial food.

To conclude, and to bind up all (as it were) in one little bundle, let us
often, and seriously consider, the vanity and fleeting mutabilitie of this
life, and of all the Pride and Pomp thereof; and the unspeakable joys and
perpetuity of the Kingdom of God; and then this exhortation and precept of
our Lord and Master CHRIST JESUS (which contains the whole sum of a
Christian man's duty, and may be in stead of a thousand Sermons) will never
slip out of our hearts, wherein he says; But seek ye first the Kingdom of
God, and his Righteousness, and all these things shall be ministered unto you.

A WHIP FOR LOYTERERS.
Matthew. 20.6. And he went about the eleventh hour, and found others standing
idle, and said unto them, Why stand ye here all the day idle?


IN that none received the penny in the evening, but such as labored longer or
less time in the vineyard; we are taught, that none of discretion, age, and
years, shall receive the recompense of the reward, and the joys of Heaven,
but such as in this present world labor diligently in their calling, and
endeavor to bring forth the fruits of such good works, as are commanded in the
word of God, and proceed from a true Faith, and serve for the honoring and
glorifying of Gods holy name.

But as none shall be crowned in the kingdom of glory, that has not finished
his course in the Kingdom of grace, that is, in the vineyard and church of
God; so none can of his own power and natural forwardnes abound with good
works, or do any thing acceptable to the Lord, except his heart be renewed by
the holy Ghost: for none wrought in the vineyard, but those that were hired,
and effectually called. Therefore they that are delighted with doing well, must
acknowledge Gods grace on this behalf, and not either flatter themselves, as
if they performed it by their own strength; or despise others that do not so
well: as if by nature they were better then they. And those that were called,
and sent into the vineyarde, were not called all together, and in one hour,
but some were called at the Dawning of the day, and some about the third hour,
and some about the sixth and ninth hour; and some about the eleue^th hour;
that is, but one hour before the setting of the Su^ne: So all they on whom God
has decreed to bestow Eternal life, are not effectually called at the same
moment and minute of life; but some are called sooner; some latter, some in
their Childehood; some in their youth; some in their constant and settled age;
some in their old age; Luke 23.40.
and some, but even a little before the end of their life: as appears by the
example of the thief upon the cross. And therefore charity wills us, not
to despair or misdoubt of those whom we see not yet reclaimed; but to continue
in using all the best means for their conversion, since God calls whom he
will, and when he will, and how he will, and where he will. Yet though the
Lord all the day long stretch forth his hand, ready to receive sinners that
repent, in the arms of mercy; we must not be a disobedient and gainsaying
people, deferring and procrastinating our ame^dment; because none can promise
to himself, grace and space to repent. Therefore every one must hearken to that
voice of the holy Ghost, To day, if ye shall hear his voice, harden not your
hearts. On which Paul infers, Heb. 4.12.13.
Take heed brethren, least at any time, there be in any of you an evil heart,
and unfaithful, to depart away from the living God, but exhort one another
daily, while it is called to day; least any of you be hardened through the
deceitfulnes of sin. For unto those that post over and delay their
reformation, the words of the Housekeeper (to those that stood idle in the
Market place, about the eleventh hour) may be spoken; Why stand ye here all
the day idle? So that the purpose of CHRIST in the parable of the laborers in
the vineyard, is no other, but to prick and provoke us forward, to a continual
diligence, in discharging the charge of our vocation and state of life; and to
teach us not to be weary of well-doing, through a vain persuasion that we have
done enough; and not when half the course is scarce ended to sit down in the
mids of the race; but to forget that is behind, and endeavor our selves to that
which is before, and follow hard toward the mark for the price of the high
calling of God, Phil. 3.13 14.
in Christ Jesus: and to protest with the kingly Prophet, that we will not
suffer our eyes to sleep, nor our eyelids to stu^ber, until we find out a
place for the Lord, Psalm. 132.4.5.
an habitation for the mighty God of Iaacob; that is, till we have built a
spiritual temple in our hearts, wherein Gods grace, mercy, and favor may delight
to dwell This industry in our several rancks and places, is that which God
enjoined to the first man Adam; when he had said unto him, In the sweat of thy
face shall thou eat bread, Genesis 3.19.
till thou return to the earth. In which we are taught, that every man must
take pains, in that condition and state of life which God has cast upon him.
For so S. Paul seems to expound that commandment given to Adam and his
posterity, Romans 12.9.7.8.
and thus to comment thereupon; Seeing then that we have gifts that are diverse,
according to the grace that is given unto us, whither we have prophecy, let us
prophecy according to the portion of faith; or an office, let us wait on the
office; or he that teaches, on teaching; or he that exhorts, on exhortation;
he that distributeth, let him do it with simplicity; he that rules with
diligence, he that shows mercy with cheerfulnes.

Therefore that we may have prosperous success in our vocation; first every
one must know and understand the offices and duties appertaining to the
calling, unto which God has put him apart; and he must diligently, busily, and
constantly labor in that his calling. Secondly, every one must only meddle
with those things which are prescribed and belonging to his vocation, avoiding
curiosity and things impertinent to his calling. 1 Thessalonians. 4.11.
For so the Apostle teaches the Thessalonians, to study to be quiet, and to
meddle with their own business, and to work with their own hands. Thirdly, we
must with true humility and fear of God acknowledge our own great
infirmity, and call upon God, and crave help and happy success of him; and
with assured confidence of Gods assistance, laboring thus diligently in our
places, let us know for a surety, that as the labors and counsels of men
cannot prosper without God: so when we desire aid of God, our labor shall not
be in vain in the Lord; Psalm. 37.5
but as we commit our way unto the Lord, and hope in him, so he will bring it
to pass. And if any difficulties and crosses fall out in our way: let us not
be dismayed and broken in courage, neither forsake our vocation: but constantly
and confidently let us expect deliverance from God with quiet minds.

If then we be commanded by God himself, to be industrious and painful in
our calling; we are also in the same forbidden to be idle and negligent. For
idleness is Satan's cushion, or featherbed, on which he secretly takes his ease,
and rules and turns the idle person at his own pleasure; and therefore
because idleness is the mother and nurse of all vices, we must carefully fly
from it. When men do nothing, they learn to do ill. For when they are not
embusied in the lawful offices of their calling, then they muse how to entrap
their neighbor; how to defraude the simple; how to prevent the unadvised: how
to slander the harmeles; how to revenge wrongs; how to raise up dissension
among brethren; and how to live Oite melissaon camaton true chousin aergoi. Hes.
(like droane bees) by the honey of other men's labors. The Loyterer is an open
mark for Satan to shoot his arrows against; the Loyterer is a city and
castle without wall, exposed to the irruption and invasion of spiritual foes;
the Loyterer is an odious and loathsome sink that receives all ill
suggestio^s, tentations, and cogitations. As Nature admits no vacuu^ and
emptines; for where there is no body to fill, there the air fills: so Satan
cannot endure a mind to be empty, and a body to be sloathfull; for where
there is no virtue, there he sowes vice; and where there is no good done, there
he allures to ill doing. Satan world have us to be remiss and careless in
veri^e, but withal to be busy in vice, for he is never idle, but walks
about as a roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5.9. Rev. 12.12.
seeking who^ he may devour; and because he knows he has but a short time,
therefore he still tempts to ungodliness, to distrust, to unthankfulness, to
covetousness, to deceit, to hatred and malice; and where he finds an idle
person, Matt. 12.43.
there he enters in with his companions as bad as himself; because he finds
the room empty, swept, and garnished. Therefore that we may repel these
continual assaults, and escape these snares, and quench these fiery darts,
and defend the castle of our soul from sealing and sacking, we must be
diligent and laborious in our places, studying to honor God, to edify his
Church, and to benefit the commonwealth; and above all things we must avoid
idleness: for if we stand all the day idle, and work not in the vineyard, we
open the door for Satan to enter; and we set up a ladder, that thereby he may
scale the walls of our souls.

Nulius fructus o^ij imo magis dispendum: Epist. ad v^r^^llens. Genesis 25.30.
there comes no profit by idleness; nay there comes great disprofit, says S.
Austin. What got Esau, in that he had rather receive meat, then labor for
meat, but the loss of the birthright and blessing? Matt. 7.19.
What is ye end of every unfruitful tree that bears no fruit; nay, that
bears no good fruit, Ioh. 15.2.
but to be hewn down, and cast into the fire? What becomes of every fruitles
branch, but to be taken of, and pruned away from the vine? Matt. 25.30.
What must the negligent servant look for, that did hide his talent in the
napkin; but to be cast into utter darkness, Luke 12.47.
where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth? What is the reward of the
servant that knew his masters will, and prepared not himself, neither did
according to his will; but to be beaten with many stripes? For this is the
sentence pronounced long ago; Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord
negligently. Ier. 48.10 Sin. ep. 33. Themisto. Demet. P^^us Mir.
An heathen man could say, Male mihi esse in^lo, quam molliter, I had rather be
ill at ease, then idle. Another called idleness the grave of an idle man.
Another likened Idleness to the dead sea, that never ebs and flows. Another
says, that loitering persons that are not addicted to a certain state of
life, do live no otherwise then brute beasts; for they do not live: but
only draw breath, as beasts do. And therefore whereas the Roman Seruilius
Vacia. a very welthy man, loathing employment in affairs, had retired
himself, and lived closely in a farm which he had near to Cuma; and was
famous only for living so securely; and whereas other that were laden and
pressed with business, were wont to exclaim thus; o Vacia, thou alone know
what it is to live: on the contrary, Seneca condemning his sluggish Idleness,
says, that he did not live, but lurk; Epist. ^5.
and therefore on a time passing by that farm, he sportingly said, hic situs
est Vacia, here lies Vacia; Plut. in rac^n.
meaning that there was no ods between a dead man, and one buried in Idleness.
Cleomenes the Lacedemonian Captain, being demanded, why the Argiues were not
destroyed, that had so often fought against the Lacedaemonians, and were so
often vanquished; because they may give occasion (says he) to our young men to
exercise themselves. For he thought that youth was corrupted by loytering, the
teacher and root of all mischief. And this made Scipio Nasica to say, when
some thought the Roman state to be most safe, for that the Carthaginians were
extinct, and the Greeks vanquished; nay (says he) now we are in greatest
peril, when we have none, whom we may fear, or reverence.

And therefore when one asked of Lycurgus the Lacedemonian lawgiuer, Id. Ibid.
why he exercised maidens of his country in running, wrestling, throwing of
coites and darts; he answered, that he did it, partly that the children might
be the stronger and nimbler, taking this beginning of strength in their mothers
bellies: partly that they might the more patiently enduce the pains of
childbirth: and partly that (if such necessity constrained) they might be able
to fight for themselves, their children, and country. Whereby it is clear,
that the wise lawgiuer understood, how great a pestilence and contagion of a
commonwealth idleness is: and on the contrary, how moderate labor does make
weak bodies, healthy and strong bodies: but delicate and idle nicenes does
enfeeble and effeminate the stoute^^ and strongest. Sweet and wholesome waters
a^e ea^e m^ouing, and thereby convey under their stream that hurtful matter
that might infect them. This the Poet perceived, and therefore, sange.

Ovid 1. Pont. ^.
C^ruis vt ignauum corrumpant otia corpus,
Vt capiant v^tium, ni moueantur aque.
In an house uninhabited, unclean beasts, as mise, rats, vermin, and spiders
do multiply and increase. In a desolate city, Zijm. and Ohim, and Satyrs,
and wild beasts, and Howlets, and Ostriches, Isa. 13.21.
and Scritchowles make their abode: as the Prophet says of desolate and
ruinated Babylon. Beasts that lie long and often on the ground, not using their
legs, do leese their hooues. Birds that tarry much in their nests, become
destitute of their feathers. Far im nota to^pet, ignem agitata rest^tuit; A
torch that is not moved, burns slowly; but when it is shaken, it recouers the
flame. Sen. de Clement.
Iron unexercised soon gathers rust. Flies easily stick to the cold pot, but
avoid the heat and boiling pot. The soil that is not manured yeeldes briars
and thistles. And we say commonly, that they which do not use their privilege
and charter, or else do abuse it, do loose it: so he is deprived of the gifts
of grace, and keeps not the good seed that is sown in his heart, and
receives tares of ungodly desires, who is sleepie and slothful. For (as Greg.
says) the soul of man in this world represents a ship, sailing against the
stream, and it cannot remain still in one place: because it falls back, unless
it strive to go forward. Ser. de^s. Andrea.
Bernard in that kind of speech proceeds farther, and says: that as ye water
secretly enters through the chinke of the ship, and so increases, till at
length by the mariners carelesnes the vessel sinkes: so from Idleness and
sloathfulnes there arises a multitude of wicked thoughts and co^cupiscences,
until at the last the ship of the heart (yielding unto them) be deeply
endangered in sin and wickedness. Therefore Jerome gives this advise to his
friend, Rustinis Gallus the Monk; do something, that the Devil may still
find thee busy. If ye Apostles having power to live by the Gospel, did work
with their hands, that they might not charge any, and did relieve others,
whereas they might have reapt carnal things for spiritual things? Why do
not thou prepare one thing or other, that may redound to thy profit? Either
frame a basket, or make a panyer, or rake and weed the ground, or contriue and
plot the beds of an herb garden. And he affirms, that Monasteries of Egypt
had a custom, to entertain none that could not labor with hands; not so much
for that otherwise they could not maintain them, as that it might be
beneficial to their souls health.

Ask of Solomon the wisest man that ever was borne of woman, 1. King. 3.12.
after the ordinary sort, what an idle person is; and he will tell us, that the
idle person is he, that says when he should travel any whither for his
profit; Prou. 26.13.14.15.
A Lion is in the way, a Lion is in the streets: as the door turns upon his
hinges, so does the slothful man upon his bed: the slothful hides his hand
in his bosom, and it greeueth him to put it again to his mouth. Ask of
Solomon again, what is the fruits of Idleness, and he will answer clearly,
that it is beggerie: Prou. 20.4
for the slothful man that will not plough because of winter, shall beg in
summer, Prou. 6.10 11.
but have nothing: and when the loyterer says, yet a little sleep, a little
slumber, a little holding of the hands to sleep; poverty comes as one that
trauelleth by the way, and necessity like an armed man. Therefore since
beggerie is the fruit of idleness, we must with Solomon gather instruction,
and gain experience by the example of others; for so he writes of himself;
Prou. 24.30.31.32
I passed by the field of the slothful, and by the vineyard of the man
destitute of understanding, and lo, it was all grown over with Thorns, and
nettles had covered the face thereof, and the stone wall thereof was broken
down: Then I beheld, and I considered it well, I looked upon it, and received
instruction.

All Creatures that in the beginning of their creation received a co^mmandement
to labor, do labor till this day. The Heavens cease not to move; the Earth
ceasseth not to bring forth plants, and herbs; the Beasts, Byrds, and Fishes
cease not to multiply; only Man who was commanded to eat his bread in the
sweat of his face, neglects his charge. And therefore Gods word sends the
idle and slothful to base creatures, to learn their duty, even to the Emmot:
Go to the Pismi^e, o sluggard, and behold her ways, and be wise: Prou. 6.6.
for she having no guide, governor, nor ruler, prepares her meat in the
su^mer, and gathers her food in harvest; says the Wise man. Shall the
Pismire that has no leader, nor co^ducter, gather food in su^mer and harvest,
against winter and tempests? And shall we be negligent to provide in health and
youth for sickness and old Age? who have the example of Christ and the saints
set before us, and the precepts of Christian Rulers, and th'admonitions and
reprehensions of teachers and overseers of our souls. Let the idle and
sluggard beware then least that not the Queen of the South, or the Ninevites,
but the contemptible and base Pismire, rise to condemn them in the day of
judgment. Now if we ask whence there are so many beggars? whence such
filching? whence so many Roagues, caterpillars, and unprofitable members in
the commonwealth? the Answer is easy: Idleness is the true cause of all these.
Therefore if we would have the number of beggars and thriftles persons to
decrease; parents must inform their children in honest Trades; and governors
of parishes must employ orphans in good courses; and Officers must punish
idleness, as the laws prescribe.

Exodus 32.6.
Besides poverty, Idolatry is a fruit of idleness: for the idle Israelites
sat them down to eat and drink, and rose up to commit Idolatry. Besides
Idolatry, toys and curiosity are a fruit of idleness: for the loytering
Athenians and strangers that dwelt among them, gave themselves to nothing else,
but either to tell, Act. 17.2^.
or to hear some news; and the younger widows being idle, 1. Tim. 5.13.
learn to go about from house to house; and are also pratlers and
busybodies, speaking things that are not comely. Besides, toys and
curiosity, hiding of Gods gifts and talents, is a fruit of idleness: Matt.
25.25.
for the slothful servant went and hid his talent in the earth. Besides hiding
of Gods gifts, leesing of the seed of Gods word sown among us, is a fruit of
idleness: for while men slept, the enemy came, and sowed tares among the wheat.
Matt. 13.25.
Besides leesing the seed of Gods word, to be excluded from the marriage of the
bridegroom, is a fruit of idleness: for while all slumbred and slept, the
foolish virgins that trimmed not their Lamps, were shut out at doors, and
heard this voice, Verily I say unto you, I know you not: Matt. 25.12.
If then idleness breed beggerie, idolatry, curiosity, hiding of Gods gifts,
leesing of the seed of the word, excluding from the marriage of the
bridegroom; and what not? Doubtless it is a sin most loathsome before GOD,
and most studiously to be avoided of us.

Who has not heard of the horrible punishment of Sodom, by fire and brimstone
from Heaven? And who quakes not at the remembrance thereof? So horrible a
plague must needs be for heinous sin.

And what were the sins of of Sodom? Ezechiell rehearses them in this
manner: Behold, this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, Ezekiel. 16.49.
Pride, Fulness of Bread, and abundance of idleness was in her, and in her
daughters; neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy. If we
will be free from the punishment of Sodom, we must be free from idleness,
and other sins of Sodom.

Chrysostom teaches by a familiar example, Hom. 16 in Ephesians.
how grievous a sin idleness is. Nihil boni facere, hoc ipsum est
m^lefacere. Not to do some good, is to do evil. Tell me (says he) if thou
have a servant, who does neither steal, nor rail, nor co^tradict, nor is
dru^ken, nor does any ill; yet sits all the day idle, and does not any of
those things which a servant should do to his master; would thou not scourge
him? yet he has done no ill. Even so God will punish the idle, Psalm. 34.14.
because they are idle. For the righteousness of a man consists in two points;
not only in abstaining from evil, but also in doing good. Idleness seemed so
absurd a thing to the best Philosophers, as that they had rather affirm that
the world has bin from everlasting, and without beginning, then by confessing,
that the world was created; thereby (as they supposed) to confess, that God
was idle, before he made the world. This opinion of the Philosophers was both
foolish, and wise. It was foolish, in respect of the idleness which they
imagined in God; (because before the world was created God had greater things
in himself, wherein to work, then were the creation and government of the
world; namely, the Conte^plation of his own divine Essence, his infinite Love,
the communication of the divine persons, and the election of them that shall
inherit heaven:) and yet it seemed to show some wisdom, in that they did so
much detest idleness, as that they thought it did not become God. If it become
not God, that needs nothing: how much less becomes it men, that are of
themselves most needy, and do pray continually even for daily bread? S. Paul
held idleness so damnable a fault, that he commands the idle person to be
restrained from meat: 2 Thessalonians. 5.10. Herodd. 2.
For thus he writes to the Thessalonia^s; When we were with you, this we warned
you of, that if there were any, which would not work, that he should not eat.

Amasis King of the Egyptians made this Law, that every one of his Subjects
should show yearly to the Governors of his provinces, by what means he lived,
and that he that did not this, or could not show by what lawful courses he
lived, should be put to death.

Socrates and Draco, brought the same law into the city of Athens, Sabell. l.
6. ca. ^.
and the highest Court and counsel of the Areopagites partly established it.
And at Florence in Italy, at this day, the idle persons are grievously
punished; and if any being asked whence he gets his Diet and clothes, cannot
yield a probable reason, he is either sorely punished, or else bannished out
of the City as a pernicious member.

The Gymnosophists, who were the wise men of India, did so far detest
loytering, that when meet was set on the table, they did first ask of the
young men what they had learned, or done after they rose in the morning; and he
that gave no fit answer was debarred of his dinner. And they buried Loyterers
that had done nothing in their life, as if they had not lived at all, no
otherwise then brute beasts are buried. Among the Romans, he that did not
look well to his field, but suffered the briars and moss to ouergrowe it;
And he that did not proyne his Trees, and vynes, had a Fine set on his head by
the Censor. Among the Anabathaej they were heavily amerced, that did by
negligence and sloth diminish that Wealth which their fathers had left them.
Among the Lucanj who in old time inhabited part of Italy, men were Indicted,
as well for Idleness, as for other crimes; and if any were convicted for lending
any thing to any that lived in idleness and pleasure, it was decreed, that he
should leese that he had lent. But what should the ordinances of other Nations
be rehearsed? We have as necessary and laudable Statutes enacted against
Vagrant persons, sturdie Beggars, and Loyterers, as any country ever had, or
now has; and if ready execution (which is the vigor and soul of the Law)
were answerable to the strictnes and goodness of the Law; and if the Law (in
this case) were not oftentimes as a sword hidden in a scabberd, he that should
inueigh against Idleness and Loytering, should but set up a man of straw to fight
wtall.

It appears then by the Word of GOD, by the course of Nature, by the censure
of Philosophers, by the Laws of Heathenish nations, and by the Decrees of all
well-gouerned Kingdoms, that Idleness is a most odious sin, and therefore to be
shunned and abandoned from every honest and well disposed person. Wherefore if
Magistrates and Officers shall foreslacke to administer judgment and justice,
and shall deal corruptly and partially in their places; and shall not punish
the offender, and give reward and encouragement to the well-doer they must be
content to have this speech of the Householder applied to the^; Why stand ye
here all the day idle? If Ministers and Shepherds of souls, shall not regard
to feed the flocks, over which the holy Ghost has made the^ overseers, but
shall suffer the wolf to scatter and tear the sheep, whom CHRIST has
raunsomed and redeemed with his precious blood; they must be content to have
this s^eech of the Householder applied to them; Why stand ye here all the day
idle? If those that are adorned with wisdom, understanding, experience, and
other profitable gifts, do not exercise them to Gods glory, and the good of
humane society; but do shut them up as close prisoners under lo^ke, or as rare
jewels in a box; they must be content to have this speech of the householder
applied to them; Why stand ye here all the day idle? If the rich in this world
be not rich in God, and in good works and do not endeavor to lay up a sure
foundation against the time to come, but do trust in uncertain riches, and set
their hearts on them, forgetting the necessity and penury of such as desire but
the crummes of their superfluities; they must be content to have this speech of
the Householder applied to them; Why stand ye here all the day idle? If
Artificers and craftesmen, that have no other means but the labor of their
hands, by which they may maintain themselves and their families, delight in
loytering and wa^dering up and down the streets, and in haunting Tauerns and
Alehouses, and in carouzing and bouzing so long, till they spend all their
thrift, and leave thereby, either their sickness, or their old age, or their
children, or all these, to be relieved by the compassion of others; whereas if
they would learn of the Pismi^e, they might rather be helpful, then
burdensome to their neighbors: and if hirelings and day-labourers make no
conscience to discharge their duty, but work negligently, not regarding the
charges and provision bestowed upon them; they must be content to have this
speech of the householder applied to them; Why stand ye here all the day idle?
If the ignorant in the mysteries of Christ's religion, do either disdain to be
instructed, or refuse to be admonished, or proceed very little in knowledge,
or stand at a stay as unfruitful hearers, though they bear the world in
hand, that they are sauorers of the word of God, and Gospel of Christ, by
diligent frequenting the Church, and attending to the word read, or preached;
they must be content to have this speech of the householder applied to them;
Why stand ye here all the day idle? If the swearer, blasphemer, drunkard,
adulterer, envious and malicious person, or any other addicted to some one or
other spiritual sin, do stop their ears with the deaf adder, as that they
will not hear the voice of the charmer, charm he never so skilfully: and do
harden their hearts like a diamond, that the words of exhortation cannot enter:
and do cast reproof behind their backs, putting over their amendment and
conversion from year to year, from month to month, and from day to day,
till the wrath of God suddenly overtake them: being like those that run
after their shadow, but never ouerget it: and those that lie in a slumbering
sleep, and called upon, say, We will come, yet fall asleep again: and those
that do parturire, non parere, travel in the birth of newnes of life, but
bring forth no child of righteousness: and those that would feign wade over
the water, but look till the running water stop his course, that they may
pass dry: and those of whom the Satyrist says.

Pers. sat. 5.
(Nam quamuis propete, quamuis temone sub vno,
Vertentem sese frustra sectabere canthum,
Cum rotaposterior curras, and in axe secundo;)
That sitting by the second wheel of the chariot, imagine they shall catch the
former and first wheel, that still rowles from them: these must be content to
have this speech of the householder applied to them; Why stand ye here all the
day idle?

This carelessness and negligence in the matter of salvation, is both perilous
and pernicious. Christianity is a warfare, and by Baptism we are enrolled
soldiers in the Army of Christ: therefore we must be circumspect; we must be
watchful; we must be courageous. Ephesians. 6.11.12.13.
Our enemies are Satan and his ungodly accomplices: for we wrestle not against
flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, and against the
worldly governors, the Princes of the darkness of this world, against
spiritual wickednesses, which are in the high places. And therefore we must
put on the whole armor of God, that we may be able to stand against the
assaults of the devil; and that we may be able to resist in the evil day, 2.
Tim. 4.7.8.
and (having finished all things) to stand fast. If we fight a good fight, and
finish our course, and keep the faith, from henceforth is laid up for us the
crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous judge shall give to us
at that day, and to all them that love that his appearing. They that have given
their names to Christ, and that shall be so plenteously rewarded for their
labors in the Lord, is it not a shame for them to loyter, or be found in the
camp of Satan? Christianity is a wrestling: and against what must we
wrestle? against the darkness and ignorance of the flesh, 1. Cor. 1.20. Ioh.
^.3.5.
whose wisdom is foolishnes before God, and cannot comprehend the mystery of
salvation: for except a man be borne again, and be borne of water and of the
Spirit, he cannot see the kingdom of God, nor enter into the kingdom of God.
And we must wrestle against the hatred and enmity of the flesh and world: Ioh.
15.1^.20.
for we must resolve our selves, that since the world hated Christ, it will
hate us also: the servant is not greater then his master: if they have
persecuted him, they will persecute us also. And we must wrestle against the
allu^^ments and tentations of the ^^^sh, which is an intestine and secret foe,
and ^ d^m^sticall Judas, ready always so betray us into the power of our
spiritual Enemy. For (...) our flesh naturally dwells no good: Rom ^.1^.
etc.
the fle^^h (...) find no means to perform that is good: the flesh suffers
us not to do the good we would, but the evil that we would not do, that we
do: the flesh expels the delight, that the inner man has in the law of God,
and rebelling against the law of our mind, l^ades us captive into the law of
sin.

Neb. 4.17.
Sa^^alla^, and ^ob^ah, and the Arabians, and the Amm^^^^es, and the Ashdodims
did not more withstand the repayring and reedefying of Jerusalem; then the
flesh and the sinful motions thereof do resist the salvation of the soul,
and the subiecting of it to the will of God. The bu^^^ers of Jerusalem being
hindered by their malign^rs: when they builded on the walls, and when they bare
burdens, and when they laded, did the work with one hand, and with the other
hold the sword. And they that are to wrestle against such, so importunate,
strong, and flattering an Adversary, may not be secure, and remiss, and cast
aside their spiritual furniture, seeing an old and most practiced wrestler,
not ignorant of Satan's sleights, cries out on this sort: Romans 7.24.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death.
Christianity is a race: and that we may so run that we obtain:
mortification, patience, ^. Cor. 9.24.25.
and perseverance is required of us. They that run and prove maisteries for
a corruptible crown, use a most exquisite diet, and abstain from all things
that may make them unfit for the race: and they are not rewarded with the
prize, unless they run to the goal: and will any imagine, that he shall
receive the incorruptible crown of life, except he persevere in faith and
godliness? What shall it avail, to hear the word, to participate of the
Sacraments, to follow the calling of Christ for a while: and at length and last
to fail and faint, either enchanted by pleasures, or corrupted by the examples
of the world? for not he that fights, and faints, or flies: but he that
overcomes, shall have power given him over the nations, Reu. 2.26.27. Reu.
3.1^.
and he shall rule them with a rod of iron, and as the vessels of a potter,
shall they be broken: he that overcomes shall be made a pillar in the temple
of God, and shall go no more out, and upon him shall be written the name of
God, and of the city of God, and that new name: V^rse. 21.
he that overcomes shall sit with Christ in his throne. And what means our
Savior when he says, Luke 9.62.
No man that puts his hand to the plough, and looks back, is apt to the
kingdom of God? but that he admits no such scholars, that do not wholly
consecrate themselves to him, but reflect an eye to worldly desires and
vanities. For as the Ploughman that looks not directly forward, but does cast
his eye aside, makes no right furrowe, but a balke, so they that do not bend
their whole endeavor to promote Gods glory, and to renounce the cares of the
world, cannot proceed aright in the way of life, but must needs decline,
either to the one hand, or to the other. And this our race is not in a corner,
M^tt. 5.14.15.
nor without beholders: for we are as a city, that is set on a hill, and
cannot be hid, and as a candle, that is not lighte^ to be put under a bushel,
but on a candlestick, 1. Cor. 4.9.
that it may give light to all that are in the house: and we are as gazing
stocks unto the world, and unto Angels, and unto men: Matt. 5.16.
and therefore being placed in such open view, Let our Light so shine before
men, that they may see our good works, and glorify our father which is in
Heaven.

He that has a long journey, and but a short time in which he must make it,
will never end his journey, except he travel forward continually. We must go
to heaven: and the journey is long: for we must overcome many tentations, and
keep many commandments, and do many good works, and endure many
tribulations, before we can come thither. The time for traveling to heaven is
this life, whose days are short: and we cannot be sure of to morrow. Why then
do we loyter in the way? Nay, why do we slumber? When there are many
impediments in our way: as when it is hard to find, or thieves lie in ambush,
or the passage is rough and uneasy: is it not needful that the Traveler
should walk so much the more speedily? In the path of life there are many
trials, many conteruailes of Satan, many difficulties: therefore we must never
loyter, but hold on continually. If a friend offer unto us the means, whereby
we may be delivered from inconveniences: does not he abuse his friend, that
neglects those means? God daily affoordes us his grace, by means of which we
are certainly freed from the danger of leesing our souls: and shall we abuse
the long suffering of God, in not apprehending the grace and favor of the
Almighty? At a word; is not he to be blamed justly, that omits the
opportunity and just occasion to obtain any thing? It is usually said, that
time and tide tarry for none. And Ausonius thus describes the statue and
representation of Occasion and opportunity, which P^^dias carved; that she
stood on a wheel, to show her rolling inconstancy: that she had wings on her
feet, to show her ha^tie departure: that she had a lo^ke of hair on her
forehead, to show how hardly she can be discerned, and that she must be
apprehended when she offers her self: that the hinder part of her head was
bald, to show that she could not be caught, if she were once escaped; and that
her companion is Repentance, to show that sorrow waits on those, as a due
portion, that reject just occasion of doing good, when it is offered unto them.
Apelles the famous painter, was wont to complain, that he had lost that day,
in which he had drawn no line: and shall not the godly be grieved, if they
have spent a day without proceeding and profiting in godliness, and in the fear
of God? One says, that we must chiefly be heedfull of two times; the morning,
and the evening; that is, we must consider, what we will do, and what we have
done: for so we shall in good sort, both dispose our time, and order our duty.
And therefore Catoes manner was to repeat in the Evening, what he had done,
seen, or read in the day before; and to recall himself to an account, not
only for his business, but for his leisure. The wise man fully perceived, that
time is most precious, and the loss of time unrecoverable. Which thing if all
men would consider, the sharp reprehension of the grave Censurer of depraved
manners should not be renewed in our age; when he says, That we have not little
time, Sen.
but we leese much time; that we receive not a short life, but make it short;
that we want not life, but are wastfull of life; and that whereas men are
sparing in keeping their patrimony, when they come to loss of time, they are
most prodigal in that, in which covetousness and pinching deserves
commendation. If we must think all time lost, wherein we have not thought of
God, as Bernard says: when we call our selves to a reckoning; how slender a
part of our life shall we find imparted on God? how few hours spent in his
service? how rare the thoughts directed and erected toward Heaven? Let many
carefully recount, what they have thought, spoken, done, in the day: what shall
they see, but innumerable wicked and unbridled thoughts: idle words, redounding
neither to the profit of the speaker, nor hearer: backbitings: slanders:
lyings: blasphemies: swearings: and a whole harvest of vanity and iniquity?
Indeed all our life is the time appointed of God, for the laying hold on his
grace, which brings salvation unto believers: but let us suppose every day to
be our last day: and this time to be the accepted time: and this day to be the
day of salvation: and then we will in no case permit this time of grace to slip
and slide away: and we shall perform the Prophets exhortation: Esai. 55.6.7.
Seek ye the Lord, while he may be found: call ye upon him, while he is near:
let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous hi^ own imaginations,
and return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God,
for he is very ready to forgive.

Wherefore let us not curiously pry into other men's actions, but descend every
man into his own soul, and see how we have labored in Gods vineyard. And
that we may be the willinger to work in the vineyard, and to employ the
talents with which we are entrusted, to the glory of our Master Christ, and
the edifying of his elect, let us have an eye to that wages and penny which
shall be paid unto us in the Evening, when this transitory and wretched life
is ended. And what is that pe^nie? It is eternal life; it is our Masters joy:
it is the glory of heaven: it is the wiping away of all tears: it is the
resting from all labors: it is the end of sorrow, sickness, trouble, care,
hatred, and anger: it is the beginning and perpetual enjoying of true
pleasure, joy, and blessedness. Austen says excellently: Soliloq. c. 21.
If thou O Lord have ordained for this base and corruptible body, so great and
so many blessings: from the heaven and air, the earth and the sea, the light
and darkness, the heat and shadow, the deaw and shewers, the wind and rain,
the birds and fishes, the beasts and trees, and the variety of herbs and
plants, which successively serve our turns, and ease our tedious loathing:
what manner, how great, and infinite are those good things which thou have
prepared (for those that love thee) in that heavenly country, where we shall
see thee face to face? If thou bestow so great things on us, now being in
prison: what will thou bestow upon us when we are in the Palace? If thou give
us such comforts and pledges of thy love in ye day of tears: what will thou
give us on the marriage day? If thy gifts are so infinite and diverse, which
thou impartest both on thy friends and enemies: how sweet and delectable shall
those be, which thou will bestow upon thy friends alone? And elsewhere he
says; Enarrat. in Psalm. 85.
o my brethren, think on and consider the good things, which God gives to
sinners; and by them understand what he keeps for his servants. God gives
the heaven, and the earth, God gives fountains, fruits health, children,
plenty, abundance, to sinners that do blaspheme him daily. He that gives
these things to sinners, what (must we suppose) does he reserve for his
faithful people? This has been the wisdom of the Saints, when they have
seen the beauty and bravery of this world, not to be bewitched and beguiled
therewith, but thereby to climb up (as it were) by stairs and steps, to the
contemplation of the happiness of that other world. As it is reported of
Fulgentius, when he fled the persecution of the Arrians, and soiourned at Rome;
and when he saw the glory of the city and Senate of Rome, that he spoke thus
to the companions of his exile; How beautiful may the heavenly Jerusalem be,
if earthly Rome do so shine? and if in this world there be given such dignity
and honor to those that love vanity and error: what honor and glory shall
be given in heaven to the Saints that love verity and virtue?

It is too apparent, how greedily we do gape after earthly treasure, and
fading riches; which is either lost by shipwreck, or consumed by fire, or
stolen by thieves, or taken away by fraud and oppression, or corrupted and
empaired by rust, canker, and long space of time, or at last left behind in
death? But how backward and unwilling are we to labor for the riches and
wealth that never decaieth? Wherein we forget, why God has placed the metals
(which we so much esteem) in the bowels and entrails of the earth, and has
displayed the face and cope of heaven, where the true treasure is stored up:
namely, because we should not so greedily seek and search for the one; but
thirst and long after the other. Neither has he only laid open the heaven to
our view and fight, that we might always remember the maker thereof, and for
what place we were ordained, after the race of mortality is finished; but
whereas other creatures are so formed, that they bend downward to the earth,
God has given to men a shape erected and lifted up toward heaven, that they
may more easily contemplate heavenly and spiritual things. When Anaxagoras was
asked, for what purpose he thought himself to be borne, he said, It was to
behold the Heaven and Sun. Which speech though otherwise men have much
admired, Instit. l. 3. c. 9.
yet Lactantius laughed at it, affirming, that he brake forth into these
words, not knowing what true answer to yield, and that if a man indeed with
wisdom indeed, should be demanded, why he was borne, he would answer
presently, that he was created to serve God his Creator. Psalm. 19.1. Romans 1.20
But with Lactantius favor; does not the Majesty of God clearly shine in the
outward beauty of the heaven? and does not the heaven declare and proclaim
his glory? and does not God (as it were) stretch out his hand to lift us up
from groueling on the ground, to behold the fairenes of his work; and thereby
also to extol his power, wisdom, goodness, and mercy? Wherefore we must blush
to bear a crooked mind in a straight body, and to suffer our soul to wallowe
in dirte and dross of the earth, whose conversation should be in heaven, and
which was created for heavenly and divine things. Heaven then is the penny
given for working in the Lords vineyard: and that we may be dilligent in that
working, let us fix our minds in the consideration of the celestial and new
Jerusalem; where that penny of immortality shall be delivered us; whose Ruler
and King is the sacred Trinity; whose law is perfect charity; whose walls
are of Jasper, and the city pure gold, like to clear glass; Reu. 21.18.21.
and Reu. 22.1.2. Heb. 12.22. 1. Cor. 13.12.13. 1. Pet. 2.24.
whose gats are pearls, and every gate is of one pearl; whose inhabitants are
Angels, and the Spirits of just and perfect men; where is the pure river of
water of life, and the tree of life; and where all imperfect things shall be
done away, and we shall no more see darkely through a glass, but clearly face
to face, and shall know God, as we are known. Of all which good things,
Christ Jesus the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls, (who his own self bare
our sins on his body on the tree, that we being dead to sin, should live in
righteousness, and by whose stripes we were healed,) make us everlasting
beholders and possessors, for his endless and incomprehensible goodness and
mercies sake: that at last, as the mariner after surging storms, quietly
arriues in the harbor: and the patient after drinking of a bitter medicine
obtaines health; and the soldier after brunts in the battle is rewarded by
his Captain: so we diligently and continually walking in our calling, and in
the narrow way to life, may in the end be partakers of the end of this way,
which is endless joy and blessedness: and may rest in the kingdom of Christ,
with the Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and Saints of all ages. Amen.

HYPOCRISY UNMASKED.
Matt. 22. 11. Then the King came in, to see the guests, and saw there a man
which had not on a wedding garment.

12. And he said unto him, Friend, how came thou in hither, and have not on a
wedding garment? And he was speechles.

13. Then said the king to the servants: bind him hand and foot: take him
away, and cast him into utter darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth.


THe name of a Christian is derived from Christ our Savior: and signifies a
scholar of Christ; and one that follows the precepts and life of Christ; and
one that has fellowship with Christ, and is engraft into Christ.

But as the Apostle says of the Jews, Romans 9.16.
that all they are not Israel, that are of Israel; so it may be said truly,
that all are not Christians in deed, that bear the Name of Christ. For there
are two sorts of Christians; the one appearing and seeming; the other right and
true. They are only seeming Christians that are baptized, and are of the
outward congregation, and profess Christ; yet without true conversion and
repentance: that is, they are dissembling Hypocrites, and christians but in
tongue.

Of these seeming Christians, our Savior says: Many are called, but few
chosen. Matt. 20.16.
They are right and true christians, who are not only baptized and profess the
Faith of Christ; but also are endued with a lively Faith, and do declare the
same by fruits of Repentance, and by faith are made the members of Christ, and
partakers of his anointing: that is, by Faith and the holy Ghost, 1. Ioh. 2.27.
(who is signified by the name of annoynting) true christians are joined to
Christ, and engraft into him; even as a branch is fastened to the stock, and a
member knit to the head; whereby we are made partakers of his juice, and of
his life; and being truly made one with him, do bring forth fruits worthy of
our calling. All true Christians are appearing christians; For Christ says;
Mat. 5.16
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven. Iam. 2.18
And S. James says, Show me thy faith out of thy works, and I will show thee
my faith by my works. But on the contrary, all appearing christians are not
true christians: For to many that will say, Lord, Matt. 7.22.
Lord, have we not by thy name prophesied? and by thy name cast out devils? and
by thy name don many great works? Christ will thus profess, I never knew you:
depart from me, ye that work iniquity So that the visible and outward Church
in this world, has good and bad, has worthy and unworthy has elect, and
reprobate. Matt. 13.24. Mat. 13.47. Mat. 13.3
For it is the field wherein there grows wheat and tares: and it is the
draw-net which cast into the sea, gathers of all kinds of things; and it is
the receiver of the seed of Gods word; which sown, fell four ways: some by
the way side; some upon stony ground, some among thorns, some in good ground.

And all this is plainly set forth by our Savior, in the parable of them
that were called unto the marriage. Of which parable, partly out of ye words of
Christ, partly out of the circumstance of the time, and persons, when, and to
who^ they were spoken, we may gather this to be the sense and meaning. The King
that made a marriage for his Son, is God the Father. The Kings Son is
Christ. The marriage, is the blessedness of heaven; which the elect after this
life shall for ever enjoy with Christ. The first and worthier sort that were
called, are the Jews. The servants whom the King sent, are the prophets. The
calling to the marriage, is the drawing to faith and repentance. This calling
the Jews despised, being given to the love of earthly things: and many of them,
chiefly the rulers of ye people, contumeliously entreated the prophets and slew
them. Therefore God destroyed them by his hoasts and warriors, that is, by the
armies of the Romans; First, under the co^ducting of Vespasian, and after of
Titus his son: and he burnt up Jerusalem their City with fire. Afterward,
rejecting the Jews, God sent the Apostles unto the Gentiles, and called the^
into the place and room of the Jews: in whose steed they were, and are, and
shall be, unto the end of the world; as well good as bad, that is, as well
elect as reprobate; of who^, the one are, of evil made good, by ye holy Ghost;
the other are left in their natural wickedness. The marriage garment, is true
holiness; which is of 2. sorts; the one is the holiness of Christ's sacrifice,
imputed unto us by Faith; the other is an holiness wrought in our minds, by the
sanctification of the holy Ghost; which shows it self by holiness of life.
Whosoever are not clothed wc this wedding garment, shall be thrown out from the
marriage into utter darkness; that is, into ye eternal torments of Hell: and
that shall be done by the Servants, that is, Gods holy Angels. Therefore
being all invited and called to the marriage of the Kings Son, that is, to
the fruition and participation of the joys of heaven; We must neither
contemn and refuse the abundant mercy of God, that so lovingly bids us;
either by addicting our selves wholly to the vanity and mucke of this world;
or by despising of Gods Messengers, who are sent to inuit us; neither must we
presume to approach, without the marriage garment, making only a bare
profession, and naked show, without any sincerity. For though we spin
Hypocrisy with never so small a threede, so that the eyes of man cannot
discern it; yet when the King of heaven, whose eyes are ten thousand times
more bright then the Sun, shall come in to see the Guests, he will pull off
the vizard from the masked dissembler; and discover the counterfeiter; and as
the Hypocrite pretends only love and amity to Christ's religion, and entends
far otherwise with his heart; So the King shall Ironically and colourably call
him Friend; but a painted friend; and therefore he shall say; How came thou
in hither, and have not on a Wedding garment? Bind him hand and foot: Take
him away, and cast him into utter darkness.

Wherefore that we may examine our selves, our souls, and consciences the
better; whether we are arrayed with the Wedding garment, or not? and that we
may labor and pray, that we may be more and more apparelled therewith; whereby
we may never be cast out of the presence of the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords; and that we may know, how to profess CHRIST aright: For it is a most
important matter; and to profess is not enough, except we profess aright: it
shall be unfolded; First, what the Wedding garment is: without which, we
cannot be partakers of Heavenly blessedness: secondly, what Hypocrisy is, and
how detestable and odious it is in the sight of God.

The Wedding garment is Justification, 1 What the Wedding garment is.
and Sanctification; or Faith and good works; or to believe well, and to live
well. All this is but true holiness; which is of two sorts: Namely, the
righteousness of Christ's sacrifice, imputed to us by Faith; and inherent
righteousness wrought in us, and brought into us by the holy Ghost. So that this
garment is of two colors: partly red, partly white. It is red, by reason of
Christ's blood, shead on the Cross, for the purging of our souls; and this is
our Justification and Righteousness before God. It is white, by reason of holy
and harmeles conversation, which shines before the world; and this is the
putting on of the new man Christ Jesus; and the washing of our robes, and the
maki^g of them white in the blood of the lamb; and our sa^ctification and
holiness in the eyes of men. Justification is attained by Faith; and
sanctification bri^geth forth good works: justification cannot be without faith,
and faith cannot be without good works: justification therefore and holiness are
inseparable companions; and where the one is, there is also the other. They
agree in the efficient cause; For God is the Author and worker of them both, by
the merit of Christ: They agree in the instrument, which is Faith; for faith
receives Justification, and Faith brings forth sanctification: they agree in
the scope and end; that is our eternal life; but justification as the cause;
sa^ctification as the way and therefore the Apostle says, Ephesians. 2.10
that we are Gods workma^ship, created in Christ Jesus, unto good works, which
god has ordained, that we should walk in them. What then is this true faith,
by which we are justified before God, and accounted righteous; and absolved
from the guiltines of all our sins, Romans 11.
and reputed as holy, as if we had never sinned, and had our selves fulfilled
all the commandments of God? Faith is the means, help, and instrument,
whereby a sinner does apprehe^d Christ wc all his benefits, Ephesians. 3.17 Luke 2.11
and does apply them particularly to himself, and is joined to Christ, and
does live in Christ. This faith is lively and effectual, both in respect of
our affections, and in respect of our actions It is lively in respect of our
affections; for it works in us an affected feeling of the love of God toward
us: Romans 5.5.
it works in us an undoubted expectation of eternal life: it works in us a
sonne-like love, and fear, and reverence, whereby we love Christ, and are
delighted in Christ, and desire to please God, and carefully avoid offe^ding of
him: it works in us consolation, 1. Pet. 1.8
and peace of conscience, for the forgiveness of our sins, and gladness, and
spiritual joy, through the taste of Gods favor: it works in us sighs of the
spirit, that cannot be expressed, and a confidence, whereby we call God, Abba,
Father: Romans 8.26
it works in us patience in adversity, and rejoicing in affliction: it works
in us a contempt of the world, Gal. 4.6.
and a spiritual security and constancy, thorough the grace and friendship
of God.

Lastly, Romans 8.15 Romans 3.33 38. Psalm. 16.3 Romans 10.9 14.
Faith works in us Charity and Love toward our neighbor for Gods sake: and
courtesy, kindness, ge^tlenes and a delight in ye godly: as the Psalmist says of
himself, That all his delight was in the Saints that were on the earth. Faith is
lively, in respect of our actions: for out of the foresaid inward affections,
there breaks out godliness; 2. Cor. 4.13. Matt. 7.7. Romans 12.8.9. Phil. 4.11
Gal. 2.20. Gal. 3.26. Act. 10.43. Acts. 13.39. Romans 9.12 Ephesians. 3.12. Act. 15.9.
^. Ioh. 5.14.
and righteousness; and thanksgiving; and prayer; and confessing of Christ's
Faith; and peace and concord with all men; and mercy toward all, even our
enemies; and newnes of life; and a good conscience; and an holy care,
faithfulness, and diligence in our calling; and contentation in whatsoever state
of life. So that, that the godly are engraft into Christ, and are in him, and
have fellowship with him; and are made the Sons of God; and obtain remission
of sins; and are righteous in the sight of God; and are not ashamed; and have
bold access and entrance to God; and have their understanding and will
regenerate, and their hearts purged; and are saved: and do obtain their
petitions of God; and do conquer the world and Satan; and do renounce
Satan, and all his works, Ephesians. 5.11.
in heart, word, life, and manners, and do altogether rely upon God, and are
delighted with his Law day and night: Psalm. 1.2.
All these things Faith works in the godly; and yet to speak, as the thing is,
Faith performs not these things, but he whom Faith apprehe^ds, that is, Phi^.
^.3.
JESUS CHRIST, in whom we are able so do all things necessary to salvation.
Yea, but (may some say) where shall we find such Faith, that is adorned with
all these things? It is true, that the like measure of Faith is not given unto
all men; Romans 12.3.9. Ephesians. 4.16
but to some is given more Faith, and to some less, and to every one of the
Elect is given faith sufficient unto salvation. For God moderates and orders
the matter so, that those which shall bear the more brunts in the world, and
show forth Gods glory more the^ other, they should have the greater measure
of faith, for that purpose.

Notwithstanding, more and less changes not the nature of things; a dwarf is
as much a man in substance as a Giant; and a feeble and frail Faith in Christ,
(though not perfect) yet is a true Faith, and shall save, if it be fixed on
Christ, and straye not from Christ; and shall attain atonement with God, and
remission of sins, and eternal life, no less then the strongest Faith.

Therefore Isaiah says of Christ, Isai. 42.3.
A bruised Reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he not
quench: that is, He shall mercifully succor the weak, he shall strengthen
the wavering in faith, and he shall foster and cherish those that have but a
sparkle of true godliness and grace in them, though it be almost dead and
extinguished.

God does not at an instant plant and place a full and perfect faith in our
hearts; but he does it by degrees, and steps, and increases, and in that
measure, and manner, and time it pleases him.

For as the Philosophers say, that we are, and are nourished by the same
things; and as an Infant is fed and sustained with the same blood (when he is
borne,) being turned into milk; So God confirms Faith in us by the same
means, by which he plants it.

1. Pet. 2.2.
The principal means is the often hearing of Gods word; And therefore S. Peter
says, As newborn Babes desire that sincere milk of the Word, that ye may
grow thereby.

And Saint Chrysostom says, Fides nostra instar Lampadis accensae, quae
facile extinguitur, nisi subinde is fund^tur Oleum; That our Faith is like to a
Lamp set on fire, which is easily put out, if Oil be not now and then powered
upon it.

This Oil is the Word of God. Another means, is the often receiving of the
Lords supper, according to Christ's commandment; Eat this, Drink this.
Another means are daily Prayer, and supplication with D^uid, that God would
stablish that he has wrought in us; Ps. 68.28
and with the Apostles, that the Lord would increase our Faith. Luke 17.5
Another means of breeding and feeding true Faith in us, is a desire of godly
life, and Charity toward our Neighbor.

And therefore Paul says, that we must hold fast Faith, and a good conscience;
1. Tim. 1.19. 2. Pet. 1.5.6.7.8.9.10.
And Peter says, that we must make our calling and Election sure, by giving
all diligence to join Virtue, with Faith, and with Virtue, Knowledge; and with
Knowledge, Temperance; and with Temperance, Patience; and with Patience,
Godliness; and with godliness, brotherly kindness; and with Brotherly kindenes,
Love.

For if these things be among us, and abound, they will make us that we
neither shall be idle, nor unfruitful in the acknowledging of our Lord JESUS
CHRIST; For he that has not these things is blind, and cannot see a far
off, and has forgotten that he was purged from his old sins: but if we do
these things, we shall never fall.

Are works necessary then unto salvation? (will some say:) If we take it thus,
that works are necessary to salvation, as the meritorious cause of
Righteousness and eternal life, it is false: If we take it thus, that new
obedience is necessary, as being a sequel and effect necessarily following
our reconcilement to God, it is true. For God will save none without
Repentance; and the giving of the holy Ghost, is necessary to eternal life;
as CHRIST says; Ioh. 3.3.
Except a man be borne again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.

Again, Faith, without which we cannot be saved, cannot be without good works;
for Faith has evermore Love joined with it, either actually, Gal. 5.6. De
interpellatione Da^^d. 4. vel Psalm. 7^.
or potentially. Again, Bernard says truly, Bona opera sunt via Regni, non
causa regnandi; Good works are the way to the Kingdom of Heaven, not the cause
that we attain to the Kingdom of Heaven. Neither can any attain to
Eternity, unless he walk in the way of good works.

And that our works may be good indeed, and acceptable unto God, it suffices
not, that they be only done in outward show, as Gods law prescribes; but
there must be an inward sincerity of mind, proceeding from faith, and purging
the heart: and there must be an assured persuasion, that that we do pleases
the Lord; For, Whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin; Romans ^4.23. Act. 13.9.
that is, Whatsoever we undertake with a doubtful conscience, whether it
please God, or not; and whether God command it or not, is sin.

Lastly, that a work may be good, it must have respect to Gods glory alone,
as to the principal end thereof. For the hypocritical Pharisee gave Alms,
and the Publican gave Alms, after his Justification: but the Alms of the
Pharise was odious to God, because he gave to be seen of ^en; and the
Publicans alms was pleasing, not so much for that it was commanded, as for
that it proceeded from sincerity and faith, and tended to Gods honor.

Therefore because the Law of God does chieftie respect the fountain of
sincerity, Matt. 2^ 37.
whence a regard to Gods glory must proceed; the unregenerate though their
works seem never so glorious outwardly, yet because they do not that well,
that is of it self good, that is, they do it not of faith, to Gods honor their
works are not good, but dead; Genesis 3.7.
and are like Adams fig-leaues, that cover the inward corruption. Io^. 14.4.
T^^. 1.^5.
For how can cleannes proceed from uncleanness? And unto them that are defiled,
and unbelieving, nothing is pure, but even their minds and consciences are
defiled. But the man regenerate, because he has recovered by faith some part
of sincerity of mind, according to the measure of sincerity recovered, he is
fit to perform good works.

S. Cyprian excellently declares the matter by a similitude; De ^^^gularit^^e
C^^ric^^^.
A Bishop (says he) that consecrateth a Church, and confirms children, is
not then consecrated a Bishop, when he does those things; yea, except he were
before that time consecrated a Bishop, those things were unprofitable, and
childish, and foolish, and toyous: Even so, a Christian being consecrated and
sanctified by his faith, he does good works but he is not first sanctified,
or made a Christian for these good works; for this only pertaines to Faith;
Yea, except he believed, before he did good works, they should be
unprofitable, and wicked, and damnable sins.

Wherefore the marriage garment is Faith and good works: without faith, there
is no salvation: without good works, there is no true faith. Iam. 2.14
For so S. James says, What avails it, though a man says, he has Faith;
when he has no works; ca^ that faith s^ue him?

As though the Apostle should say; Faith cannot be without works; more then
the Sun can be without brightness; and a costly Ointment, without smell; and a
living body without a soul; therefore it is a painted Sun that has no
brightness; and a vile ointment, that smells not sweetly; and a dead carkase,
that has no soul; and an idle and unprofitable faith; Nay, no faith at all,
that is destitute of good works. Bern. ser. 12. de Resurrect. Domini.
Sicut corporis huius vitam ex mot^ suo coono^^^^n^^; ^ta and fidei vitam ex
^onis op^ribus As we know that our body lives, because it mooues: so we know
that our faith lives, because it brings forth good works: and as the soul
is the life of the body whereby it is moved, and has feeling so the life of
faith is love whereby it works. In Psalm.
And therefore Austen says fitly; Sic docet me, vt agam; non vt tantummodo
scia^, quid agere debeam; God teaches me so to do, that I should not only
know what I ought to do: For as it is said of Christ, that he knew no ill, by
which we conceive, that he did no ill: so that man may truly be said to know
good, that does good. 2. What Hypocrisy is, and the unmasking thereof.


Hitherto the true profession of CHRIST, which is the wedding garment, has
been set forth unto us: now let us take a view of Hypocrisy, and fained
friends, that come to the marriage without the marriage robe; to whom the King
will say, Friend, how came thou in hither. and have not on a Wedding garment?

What then is Hypocrisy? Hypocrisy is dissimulation: for the original word
signifies a covering and concealing of Judgment, when a man shows one thing
indeed, and an other thing in the judgment and eyes of men. And properly an
hypocrit is he that plays his part in a stage play: But in common use, and in
divinity, hypocrites are, that like stage players will seem to be other, the^
they are in very deed.

And therefore Austin says, Tracta. de ser. domini in monte. In sermon. de
ieiunio.
That Whosoever desires to seem that he is not, is an Hypocrite; For he
fayneth that he is righteous, and is not such a one in deed.

And Chrysostom says more plainly, He is an hipocrite, that is a
stage player, that takes upon him on a stage, the person of another: for as a
servant oftentimes represe^ts a Master, and a private person a Prince; so they
counterfeite on the Theater, and stage of this life, that bear another thing
in their heart, Matt. 23.4.5.6.7.16.23.24 25.27.
then they pretend before the world.

But none can painte out an Hypocrite in more lively colors, then Christ our
Savior has done; when he says, that Hypocrites bind heavy burdens, and
grievous to be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders, but they themselves will
not move them with one of their fingers: and that Hypocrites do all their
works to be seen of men; For so the Hypocritical Scribes and Pharisees made
their Phylacteries broad, and the fringes of their garments long; and loved
the chief places at Feasts, and the chief seats in the Assemblies, and
greeting in the Market, and to be called of men Rabbj, Rabbj; and accounted the
gold greater then the Temple that sanctified the gold, and the oblation
greater then the Altar that sanctified the oblation: and that Hypocrites
strain out a Gnatte, and swallowe a Camel; tithe Mynt, and Annise, and
Cummine, and leave the weightier matters of the Law, as Judgment, and Mercy,
and Fidelity, and that they make clean the utter side of the Cup, and of
the Platter, but inwardly, they are full of briberie and excess. And ye
hypocrites are like to whited tombs, which appear beautiful outward, but are
within full of dead men's bones, and all filthiness. One father says, Greg. li.
8. Moral.
that hypocrisy is the cloaking of a secret vice, under the show of virtue:
and that the life of an hypocrite is nothing else, but quaedam visio
phantasma^is, the show of an imaginary matter, which appears something, and
is nothing: Id. Ibid.
and compares the hypocrite to Simon of ^yrene, that bare Christ's cross, but
died not with Christ; so every hypocrite professes to live to Christ, but will
not die to sin, and to the world. Another father likens the hypocrite that
seeks God fainedly, Chrysostom. super. Matt. 12.
but finds not his true service, to Herod, that promised devotion to the wise
men, yet mean while did whet his sword, and paint his malice of heart with the
color of humility. And he says again, Hom. 57. de diuersis.
A man that is righteous in deed is like to a fair woman, that needs no
external ornaments, but has natural beauty: but the hypocrite, whose
holiness is dissembled, is like to a filthy and deformed harlot, which uses
many meretricious colorings, yet cannot cover her filthiness: but the nearer
any draws unto her, the more he mislikes her. Super Matt. sept.
And again he says, that an hypocrite is like a wolf clothed in a sheep
skin: but that he is found out, by his voice, and by his doing: for the sheep
bleats, and looks toward the earth, and eats grass, which is a sign of
humility and meekenes; but the wolf howles, and looks toward heaven, and
eats the flesh of beasts, which is a sign of pride and cruelty. They that can
make White of black, and black of white, are like to Bell, the Image of the
Babylonians, which outwardly was covered with brass, but was inwardly clay.
And therefore one says well; Bell. in entholog. sacra.
Qui Curium simulat, cum sit nequissimus, illum
Cur ego non Belem iure v^care queam?


Why may not I call him Bell, that faines himself righteous, and yet is most
wicked? As Aristotle the Prince of Philosophers says of moral fained amity,
Lib. 9. Ethic.
He that faines himself a friend, and is none, is worse then a co^ner of false
money. So it may be truly said of religion and Gods fear with that holy
father; Counterfeit piety, is no piety, but double iniquity; Aug. in Psalm.
23.
because it is iniquity and dissimulation. The hypocrite has Iaakobs voice,
but the hands of Esau; that is, he talks religiously and zealously, but he
walks impiously and profanely: the hypocrite is like the statues of Mercury,
that were wont to be set in cross ways, to direct travelers to some city,
or town; but did not travel, nor move their selves: the hypocrite is like
the burning candle, that consumes it self, by giving light to other, that is,
by his work he profits other; and by ill doing thereof he procures his own
punishment: the hypocrite is like the stage-plaier, that when he cried out, o
God, he pointed with his finger to the earth; and when he cried out, o earth,
he pointed with his finger to the Heaven; Phi^ost.
and therefore wise Polemon gave him no reward, being judge of the Actors;
saying, ^ic manu Solaecismum fecit, this fellow has spoken false language,
and committed an error with his hand: the hypocrite is like the deaf and
hollow nut, which has no kernel within, but is wasted of the worm, and
therefore is fit for nothing but for the fire: the hypocrite is like the golden
Image, that outwardly is gilded, but inwardly is but rotten wood; for he
couers a sink of iniquity, under a cloak of piety: the hypocrite is like
the false messenger, that bears a box painted with the Princes Arms, but he
has therein neither the Princes letters, nor the seal: Job. 39.17. etc.
the hypocrite is like the Ostrich, that lays eggs indeed, but leaves them in
the sand, and hatcheth them not her self;

So though the hypocrite admonish others well, and show them how to work well,
yet he brings forth no good works himself, nor gains any to Christ by his
own good example: the hypocrite is like to the Swan, that has white feathers,
Le^^. ^1.16.18.
yet black flesh: and therefore as one thinks, the Swan was forbidden to be
eaten of the Jews, to show that God abhors all dissimulation: the hypocrite
is ^^ke silver, that is white in show, yet makes black strikes and lines: the
hypocrite is like the Vintner, that delivers good wine to his guestes, and
drinks the lees himself: and therefore though he speak never so holily, yet
he must remember, Ma^^. 7.21.
That not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven, but he that does the will of God which is in Heau^n: and that it must
be said unto him, Ma^^. 7.3.^5.
Why feast thouthe moate that is in thy Brothers eye, and perceiuest not the
beam that is in thine own eye? Or how say ^^ou to thy brother, suffer me
to cast out the moate out of thine eye, and behold a beam is in thine own
eye? Hypocrite first cast out that beam out of thine own eye, and then shall
thou see clearly, to cast out the moate out of thy brothers eye. In which
words Christ forbids the hypocritical censure and judgment: and that is, when
to obtain praise and a reputation of goodness, men do reprove other for such
faults as are in themselves, either in the same, or in greater measure. Luke
4.2.3. Romans 2.^.
They that are blamed and judged by such, presently say, Physician heal thy
self: and, In that thou condemnest another, thou condemnest thy self. For
wicked men that are full of hatred and sin, do presume to judge their
brethren: and do directly look on the offenses of other, and therefore do
censure them as they list: but they consider their own offenses by a
reflection, and thwart sight, and circumstances; whereby they endeavor, either
to cover them, or to extenuate and lesse^ them. Contrarily, the good and godly
are sharpe-sighted in their own sins, and in the virtues of other; but they
are blind in the sins of other, and in their own virtues. The hypocrite is
like Gold made by Alchimy, that appears as gold, but is not so; and has a
disease called, noli me tangere: for though he be speedy in reprehending of
other, yet he himself will not be reprehended. God in forming a man, first
frames the heart: a painter in portraiting a man, first deciphers the face. So
the good man imitates God, and uses an inward consideration: and though he
cannot excuse the outward action, yet he excuses the good intention: but the
hypocrite like a colourer and counterfa^ter, he begins from the face, and uses
outward censure, and judges after the outward appearance. God commanded the
Israelites, Ioh. 7.24. Leu. 19.1^.
not to let their cattle gender with others of diverse kinds; not to sow
their field with mingled seed, and not to suffer a garment of diverse things,
as of linen and woollen, to come upon them. In these words God forbids
hypocrisy, for it is the hypocrite that sows diverse seeds and grains,
that speaks well, but does ill: that has wheat in his mouth, and tares in
his heart: that is clothed with the garment of virtue before men, and with the
rags of impiety before God: and that reprooues other, for that he does
himself. There is a kind of rotten wood, and some skales of fishes, that
glimmer in the night, and yield forth, not a true, but a seeming light: so
hypocrites have an appearing light of virtue, but no substance thereof: and
they ambitiously affect an opinion of virtue, more by judging and controlling
of other, then by reforming themselves. Epiphan. in ^ysiologo.
It is written of the fox, that he faines himself dead when he comes among
birds and pulterie: but when he sees them come near unto him, he suddenly
prays on them: so the hypocrite like one dead to the world, and a man
mort^fied, and a sheep led to the slaughter, conuerseth among the harmeles, so
long, Matt. 3.7
till he get some occasion of calumniating, biting, and reprehending.

This is John Baptists generation of Vipers: that inwardly nourish poison, but
outwardly hiss forth a kind of zeal.

If we be desirous to see hypocrisy exemplified in true performance: let us
consider, Esai. 7.10
how Ahaz being commanded, to ask a sign of the Lord for his deliverance
from the furious wrath of Rezin the King of Aram, and Rekah Remaliahs son,
that for a time were as smoking firebrarnds, but should quickly be quenched:
and how he fained, that he would not tempt God, nor offend him by requiring a
sign: though indeed he regarded not how much he grieved the Lord: let us
consider, 1. King. 14.2.
how covertly Ieroboams wife disguised her self, when she went to Ahijah the
prophet, to ask what should become of her son that was sick: Amos 7.12.
how smoothingly Amaziah persuaded Amos the Prophet, to flee into the land of
Judah and to live and prophecy there: but not to prophecy in Bethel, because
it was the Kings chapel, and the Kings court: how cunningly Gehazi
counterfaited, 2. King. 5.22.
both with Naaman, to get a reward, and with Elisha his Master, at his
return, as though he had gone no whither: Ezra. 4.2.
let us consider, how the enemies of the Jews beyond the River, came
colourably unto them, as though they would have aided them in the building of
the Temple; whereas indeed they hindered it by their possible endeavor, and
accused the Jews of wickedness and rebellion, and wrote letters to Artaxerxes
for the stay and stopping of the work: Neh. 6.2.
and how Sanballat and Geshem sent unto Nehemiah, that he should meet them; as
though they would have conferred with him for the furtherance of the repairing
of the walls of Jerusalem; they being fully minded to work Nehemiahs evil,
and to overthrow the building which he had repaired: Let us consider these
things, and we shall clearly perceive, that the usage of hypocrisy is, under
a mask of sincerity and plainenes, to cover all iniquity and doublenes. Mar.
7.3
The Jews that did not eat without often washing of their hands, though they
came but from the market: honoring God with lips, when their heart was far
from him, and worshipping God in vain, teaching for doctrines the commandment
and tradition of men: Luke 6.2.
the Pharisees that were so scrupulous, that they rebuked the disciples of
Christ, for plucking ears of corn on a Sabbath day; albeit they were hungry,
and might therefore defend themselves by the example of David, who when he was
an hungered, entered into the house of God, and eat the shewbread, and gave to
his followers which was not lawful to eat, but for the Priest only: Luke
13.14.
the ruler of the synagogue, that blamed the diseased to come to Christ to be
healed on the Sabbath: esteeming it to be lawful then to loose an ox or an
ass from the stall, but unlawful then to loose a man or woman from an
infirmity: the persecutors of our Savior that had no conscience, to accuse
him falsely, and with all violence and bloudines to procure his death; Ioh.
18.28.
yet that forbear to enter into the common Hall, least they should be defiled,
and might not eat the P^sseouer with external sanctity; and that thought it
not lawful, to put the money into the treasury, Matt. 27.6.
which Judas the Traitor had brought again, because it was the price of
blood, though their selves had paid it for betraying the innocent lamb of
God: Simon the Sorceror, Act. 8.6.
that had a kind of temporary and historical faith, and was baptized, and
continued with Saint Philip: albeit he had neither part nor fellowship in the
business; for his heart was not right in the sight of God, and he was in the
gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity: Ananias, that made, Act. 5.1.
as if he were a true disciple, and bare unfeigned love to the brethren; yet
that put aside part of the price of his possession, Act. 23.2.3.
and lied to the holy Ghost: the high Priest of the same name, that heard the
cause of Paul, and sitting (as a whited wall) to judge him according to the
law, commanded him to be smitten contrary to the law: Reu. 3.9.
and those dissemblers, that in the Church of Philadelphia called themselves
Jews, when they were the synagogue of Satan, and nothing less then Jews of
circumcised hearts: these, and all these are the lively Image, picture, and
representation of counterfaiting, hypocrisy, and dissimulation.

Thus we see, the ugly shape of an hypocrite; and how Chymaera like he is
compact of diverse forms: let us also consider the punishment of hypocrisy.
Hypocrisy is darkness: for where there is no sincerity, there is darkness; as
Christ teaches, Matt. 6.22.23.
saying; The light of the body is the eye; if then thine eye be single, thy
whole body shall be light: but if thine eye be wicked, then all thy body shall
be dark: wherefore if the light that is in thee, be darkness, how great is that
darkness? If hypocrisy be darkness, and a work of darkness; where shall it be
punished but in utter darkness? Take him away, says the king, and cast him
into utter darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Job.
8.11.12.13.14.15.
Can a rush grow without mire? Or can the grass grow without water, though
it were green, and not cut down, yet shall it wither before any other herb:
so are the paths of all that forget God, and the hypocrites hope shall perish:
his confidence also shall be cut off, and his trust shall be as the house of a
spider: he shall lean upon his house, but it shall not stand; he shall hold
him fast by it, yet shall it not endure; Job. 15.33 34.
as Bildad once said to his afflicted friend; God shall destroy the hypocrite,
as the Vine does her sour grape, and shall cast him off, as the olive does her
flower: for the congregation of Hypocrites shall be desolate, and fire shall
devour the houses of bribes. The rejoicing of the wicked is short, Job.
20.5.6.7.8.9.
and the joy of the hypocrites is but a moment: though his excellency mount up
to the Heaven, and his head reach unto the clouds; yet shall he perish for ever
like his dunge, and they which have seen him, shall say, where is he? he shall
flee away as a dream, and they shall not find him, and shall pass away as a
vision of the night: so that the eye which had seen him, shall do so no more,
and his place shall see him no more Christ speaking of the evil servant that
shall say in his heart, Matt. 24.48.
My master does defer his coming, and therefore shall begin to smite his
fellows, and to eat, and to drink with the drunken, that servants Master
will come (says he) in a day when he looks not for him, and in an hour that
he is not were of; and will cut him off, and give him his portion with
hypocrites; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth: And what is the
portion of hypocrites? What, but that spoken of in the scripture? Job. 13.16
which says, that the hypocrite shall not come before God. It is grievous, to
be tortured in fire and brimstone: it is grievous, to be thrust out of the
blessed company, and out of heavenly glory: it is grievous, to know that
there shall be none end of these torments: but how unspeakable and intolerable
anguish shall it be, to be secluded and separated from the very sight of
heaven, and of the king of immortality: so that nothing shall be seen, heard,
or felt, but lamentation, woe and mourning? Wherefore if we will avoid these
extreme and exquisite pains; we must in no case presume to come to the
wedding, but in the wedding garment. One says of earthly glory, Cic. lib. 1.
Offic.
and reputation of this world; Compendiaria est via ad gloriam, vt qualis
quisque haberi vult. talis sit; It is the ready way to glory, that every one
be such a one indeed, as he would seem to be. Much more it may be said of
eternal glory, that the direct way to it, is to be such Christians indeed, as
we appear outwardly to be; that is, to be godly in word, and godly in work.
Seneca says, That it makes a far greater matter, what manner of person thou
appear to thy self, Epist. 87.
then what manner of person thou appear to other: and, that none can long
bear a counterfaite show; ficta in naturam suam cito recidunt, fained things
do soon return to their own nature; but those things that are supported by
truth, and do rise from soliditie, they grow greater and better; as he writes
to Nero the Emperor; God is the sou^der, searcher, and ^eer of hearts; God is
not mocked: God cannot be blinded; God will quickly desire the guest that is not
fitly apparrelled: God will challenge him, and say unto him, Friend, how came
thou in hither? and have not on a wedding garment: God will punish him, and
command his Angels to take him away, and to cast him into utter darkness, 1.
Cor. 2.11.
where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. None knows the things of a
man, save the spirit of a man, which is in him: therefore every one must
severally enter into the closet of his own mind, and examine his own soul
privately, whether his heart be sincere before the Lord, and whether his soul
be free from hypocrisy and dissimulation. God deceiues none, and may be
deceived of none: his eyes are the infallible touchstone, that try our faith,
whether it be true, lively, and effectual. But the fruits of good works, are
the touchstone, whereby men make judgment of faith. Matt. 22.33.35. Matt.
7.16.17.18.
And for this cause our Savior says; Either make the tree good, and his fruit
good; or else make the tree evil, and his fruit evil, for the tree is known
by his fruit: do me^ gather grapes of thorns? or figs of thistles? so every
good tree brings forth good fruit, and a corrupt tree brings forth evil
fruit; a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit: neither can a corrupt tree
bring forth good fruit; a good man out of the good treasure of his heart,
brings forth good things; and an evil man, out of an evil treasure,
brings forth evil things: for of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks. Where there is seen zeal and devotion charity and commiseration,
patience and humility, an earnest endeavor and sincere desire to keep the
law of God: it may be said, that there is a Christian faith, and there is an
unfeigned Christian. Where there is seen coldness in religion: neglect of the
word, prayer, and sacraments: envy, strife, malice, covetousness, deceit,
dissimulation, pride, incontinencie, swearing, drunkenness, and other marks of
the flesh: it may be said, that there is no manifest step and trace of true
faith, there is no sincere Christianity, there is no sign of the marriage
garment. Where there is seen haunting of the Church, and listening to sermons,
and outward favor and countenance to the word of God, and frequenting of the
use of the Sacraments, and continual boasting of faith and profession, yet
without the life and soul of faith and profession, which is performance and
practice: it may be said, that there is false semblance and hypocrisy: or else
what manner of thing is hypocrisy?

It is said of Epicurus, Cic. ^. Tuscul.
that he did put on but the bare habit of a Philosopher, and was not a
Philosopher in truth. It may as truly be spoken, that many in this age put on
but the naked shape of Christians, and are not Christians indeed: and that many
color their wickedness by outward pretense of religion, and by bearing Bibles
in their hands, and the word in their mouth, though it be never settled in their
hearts: being like the Carbuncle, that has a fiery show, yet never flames: and
like those that use musk and pomanders, to conceal their unsavory and
stinking breath. Diogenes seeing one clothed in a Lions skin, Laer. l. 6. cap.
2.
and flattering himself, as if he were thereby valorous: Will thou not cease,
(says he) to disgrace the apparel of valor? and may it not be said to him,
that has but a show of godliness, 2. Tim. 3.5.
and religion, and by works denies the power thereof: Will thou not cease to
disgrace the profession of Christianity? Plut. in regum and Imperat. apoph.
For as Alexander the great, when some commended the frugalitie of Antipater,
in that he led an austere life, exempt from all deliciousnes; he said that
Antipater wore a white cloak outwardly, but inwardly his heart was wholly of
purple color; wherein he glaunced at his dissembled parsimonie and thriftines,
whereas else his heart desired honors and the purple robes of Princes, even so
against the outward zeal, and piety, and protestations, and humility of some
in our time, it may be objected, that these are but the disguised cloakes of
hypocrisy, serving only for the shadowing and shrowding of irreligiousnesse,
impiety, falsehood, and haughtines. 2. Mace. 6.23.
There was once an Eleazar, that could be drawn to play the hypocrite, by no
flatteries and allurements, no not to save his life thereby, and to avoid most
grievous tortures: though he might have done it, by eating indeed such flesh as
was lawful for him to use, and only by faining that he did eat swines flesh:
but he considered discreetly, as became his age, and the excellency of his
ancient years, and the honor of his graie hairs, and his most honest
conversation from his childhood, but chiefly the holy law made and given by
God; therefore he desired rather straight ways to be sent to the grave, then
to play the dissembler; and he gave this answer, to them that privately had
given him counsel to use dissimulation for his life: It becomes not our age,
said he, to dissemble, whereby many young persons might think, that Eleazar,
being fourscore years old and ten, were now gone to another Religion: and
so through mine Hypocrisy (for a little time of a transitory life) they might
be deceived by me, and I should procure malediction and reproach to mine old
age: For though I were now delivered from the torments of men, De morte patris
sui.
yet could not I escape the hand of the Almighty, neither alive nor dead.

And Nazianzene could once say of his Father that he chastised pride, and loved
humility, not fainedly, or superficially, or colorably; and that he reposed
humility in the secret closet of his soul, and not in his garments, or
bowing down of his neck, or low speech, or thick and long beard, or
colored hair, or grave pace in going: for these things (says he) are easily
devised, Matt. 21.28.
yet quickly reproved; for no counterfeit thing can be durable. Such men there
were once: but where are they now to be found? and how rare are they? Are there
not in these days far more, that are like the younger son, that being
commanded of his Father, to work in the Vineyarde, said; I will Sir, yet went
not; then that are like the elder son, who being commanded to work in the
vineyard, said, I will not, yet afterward he repented himself, and went.

Are there not some, that say, Ier. 7.4.
The Temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord; this is the temple of the
Lord, and yet they amend not their ways and works, nor execute judgment
between a man and his Neighbor, but they oppress the stranger, the fatherles,
and the widow?

Mic. 3.11
Are there not some, that judge for reward, and teach for hyre, and Prophecy
for money; and yet will lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among
us? As though they would veil their sin by the vizard of leaning on Gods law.
Are there not some, that are very quick of sight in earthly things, and yet
blind in these things which pertain to the heavenly life? Luke 12.55.56.
and that are those Hypocrites, that can discern the face of the Earth, and of
the sky, but cannot discern the acceptable time and day of salvation. Matt.
6.2.
Are there not some, that seek the praise of men, when they do good works,
blowing the trumpet when they give alms, praying with ostentation and
vaineglorie, fasting with sour and disfigured faces; and that seek to merit
their salvation, and to sanctify their souls, by their outward and dissembled
holiness? Whereas God abhors their coloring and dissimulation, and God
looks unto him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, Isai 66.^.3.
and trembles at his words: but their Hypocritical works he will reject, as
he rejected the Jewish oblations, when he said of them; He that kills a
Bullock, is as if he slew a man; he that sacrifices a sheep, as if he cut
off a dogs neck; he that offers an Oblation, as if he offered swines
blood; he that remembers incense, as if he blessed an Idol; and the reason
is, because they had chosen their own ways, and their soul delighted in
their abominations.

For they that brag and vaunt of their own worthiness, Prou. 30.12.
are that generation that are pure in their own eyes, and yet are not washed
from their filthiness: And therefore when they do good, or less ill then
others, in that they cast it in Gods teeth, and think thereby to win mercy,
they are foolisher then beggars, Ber. sermon. de Adue^tu Domini.
who when they implore help and Alms of men, they show not forth costly
garments, but sores and naked limbs. When the Emperor Frederick the third,
heard one say, yt he would go into those places, where no hypocrites were,
Thou must the^ (said he) fly beyond the remote Sauromates and the ycie Ocean;
and yet when thou co^mest thither, the place will not be clean without
hypocrisy; unless thou be a God, and not a man. For perhaps the Emperor
remembered ye saying of the man of God; Every one is an hypocrite; Isai. 9.17.
and therefore affirmed that Hypocrisy abou^deth every where. Our days were
happy, Psalm. 50.16.17.18 19.10.22
if it might be said to none; What have thou to do to declare God ordinances,
that thou should take Gods covenant in thy mouth? seeing thou hate to be
reformed, and have cast his words behind thee: For when thou see a thief,
thou runnest with him; and thou art partaker with the Adulterers: thou give
thy mouth to evil, and with thy Tongue thou forgest deceit; thou sit and
speak against thy Brother, and slanderest thy Mothers son: o consider this
ye that forget God; least he tear you in pieces, and there be none that can
deliver you.

Is it not found among us, as Ezechiel found among the Jews, Ezekiel. 14.3.
that many dissemble, as though they would hearken to the admonitions of Gods
word, when they have set up their Idols of sin in their hearts, and put the
stumbling blocks of iniquity before their faces. Ecclus. 19 25.
Is it not found among us, that some being about wicked purposes, do bow
themselves down, and are sad; when their inward parts burn altogether with
deceit? Is it not found among us, Ier. 5.2.22.
that some say, The Lord lives; yet do swear falsely? and for all their
pretensed piety, yet do not sincerely fear the Lord: Nor are afraied of his
presence, which has placed the Sand for the bounds of the Sea, by the
perpetual decree that it cannot pass, and though the waves thereof rage, yet
they cannot prevail: though they roar, yet can they not pass over it. Is it
not found among us, that some are named Christians, and thereby bear in hand,
that they are full of Faith and good works? but when they speak of the
vildenes of sin, of salvation, of immortality, and of heavenly and
spiritual things, they show, that it comes out of a wrong bow; they cannot
say with the Psalmist: The zeal of thine house has eaten me; Psalm. 69.9. and
119.139.
my zeal has even consumed me, because Gods enemies have forgotten his
words. But as when Callidius said; that he would prove by witnesses and
writings, and examinations, that Gallus went about to poison him; but he spoke
so heinous a matter with so calm a countenance, so fainte voice, and so remiss
gesture, that Cicero (the Advocate of the person accused,) gathered by his
gesture and action, that he spoke fainedly, and therefore said, Tu, nisi
fingeres, Callidi, sic ageres? o Callidius, Would thou so plead the cause,
unless thou did dissemble? So when these keye-colde Christians say, that
they hate sin, embrace virtue, believe in Christ, love his Gospel, and their
brethren; they do it so remissely and faintly, that it may be excepted, and
said against them; would you so slenderly and negligently speak of these
things, if you were so well resolved?

On the contrary, there are some so forward in citing scripture, in
reprehending of sin, in glorious protestation of their faith, hope, and
charity, in listening to the Word, read, and preached, as it may be thought,
that they are mounted high in the steps of mortification, and that they are
crucified to the world, and the desires thereof: but if we approach to the
fig tree, that flourishes with such fair and green leaves, we shall find no
fruit thereon; Matt. 21.19.
but shall think, that those Jews are revived, that were wont to talk of
the Prophet by the walls, and in the doors of houses, Ezekiel. 33.30.31.32
and to speak one to another, and every one to his brother, saying, Come I
pray you, and hear what is the Word that comes from the Lord; yet when they
sat before the Prophet, and heard his words, they would not do them; but with
their mouths they made ieasts, and their hearts went after covetousness; and
the Prophet was unto them, as a ieasting song of one that has a pleasant voice
and can sing well: For they heard his words, but they did them not.

It were to be wished, that it were not true that one says, that if the closet
of men's hearts were unlocked, and the clouds of the countenance chased away,
there would be seen strange mo^sters lodging in the heart; as strange as
Nilus, and Ganges and Lybia, and C^ucasus have brought forth. There would be
found the bloody Tiger, the cruel Lion, the savage Wolf, the venomous
Basiliske, the Aspe, that brings into a deadly drowzinesse, the stinging
Scorpion, the counterfeiting Crocodile, the false Fox, and the dissembling
Hiena. And it would appear that oftentimes fained godliness couers cruelty, En
vetere^ Pharisaismu^, and recente^ papismum.
and a godly show shrowdes wickedness; whereas on the otherside, naked virtue,
is oftentimes coursely attired, and lodges in a homely cottage, and boasts
not of lofty titles, and scorns popular applauses, and follows not great
Patrones, but seeks by all means to live retiredly, in a secret habitation.

If then Hypocrisy be so odious in the eyes of God, and shall be so sharply
punished in the world to come, and be so daily and usually found in the lives
of men. For these days are no freer then Paul's time, wherein there were some,
that did profess, that they knew God, but by works denied him, and were
abominable, and disobedient, Tit. 1.16.
and unto every good work reprobate.

Let us steadfastly cleave to the Lord, with full purpose of heart; and let us
abandon hypocrisy, that we may please the Lord; and let us reject
dissimulation, that we may be blessed; and let us avoid counterfeiting; that
we may not be fashioned according to this present World; and let us not
presume to carry the Name of CHRIST, without sincerity of Faith and christian
life, and godliness of conversation, and continuance in well-doing.

For it is not enough to begin well, except we persevere, Greg. in Homil.
Quum desi^eria bona concipimus, semen in terram mittimus; When we conceive
goods desires, we cast seed on the ground; and when we begin to do well,
then springs up the blade; and when we profit in well doing, then appear the
ear; and when we are rooted and stablished in well doing, then there is full
Corn in the ear. Let us not fall away from well doing, Gal. 6.9. Chris. in
Mat. ^4. Hom. 53.
till the Harvest come that our works may be plenteously rewarded: for in due
time we shall reap, if we faint not.

The money of this world, if it be enclosed in a bag, it remains alone; but if
it be curra^t, and go from hand to hand, it is multiplied by the use thereof:
So the Faith of a Christian, if it be kept close prisoner in the heart, it not
only abides alone, but it is lessened by idleness, and waxes sloathfull, and
at last falls to nothing: but if it be daily exercised in the scriptures, and
stirred up by good speeches, and confirmed by good works, it will not only
multiply, but also never cease to grow and increase, till it bring us to the
marriage of the Lamb of God, CHRIST JESUS, in heaven, where we shall have the
end of our Faith, Even the salvation of our souls.

The God of peace, that brought again from the dead, our Lord Jesus Christ,
the great Shepherd of the sheep, Hebr. 13.20.21.
through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, make us perfect in all good
works, to do his will, working in us, which is pleasing in his sight, through
Jesus Christ, to whom be praise forever and ever. Amen.

How to vanquish Satan.
1. Pet. 5.8.9. Be sober, and watch: for your adversary the Devil as a
roaring Lion, walks about, seeking whom he may devour: whom resist steadfast
in the faith.


MAn naturally is desirous of peace and quietness, and abhors vexation and
trouble: yet when he has obtained his desire, being too secure, and yielding
himself a captive and slave to the suggestions of the flesh and Satan, he
abuses ease and tranquillity to his own hurt and destruction. And therefore
that we may avoid security and be heedfull, the scriptures do often show unto
us, how full of dangers our life is, in that they compare it, sometimes to a
Pilgrimage; sometimes to a Warfare. Note what the Patriarch Jacob said, when
Pharaoh asked of him how old he was; Genesis 4^.9.
The whole time (says he) of my pilgrimage, is an hundred and thirty years;
few, and evil, (and full of trouble) have the days of my life been.

Note what penitent Job said of his life; Is there not an appointed Time for
man upon earth: and are not his days, Job. 7.1.2.3.6.
as the days of an hireling? As a servant longs for the shadow, and an
hireling longs for the end of his work; So I have had as an inheritance the
months of vanity; and pinefull nights have been appointed unto me: my days
are swifter then a Weauers shittle. Note what Moses, the man of God, says;
Psalm 90.3.5.6.10.
Thou (o Ood) turnest man to destruction; Again thou say, Return ye
sons of Adam, thou have ouerflowed them they are as a sleep; In the morning,
he grows like the grass; in the morning it flourishes and grows, in the
evening it is cut down and withers: the time of our life is threescore
years and ten, and if they be of strength, fourscore years: yet their
strength is but labor and sorrow; for it is cut off quickly, and we flee away.
Note what the great Apostle and doctor of the Ge^^iles, Paul says, Ephesians.
6.12.13.
We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against Principalities, against
powers, and against the worldly governors: the Princes of the darkness of this
world, against spiritual wickednesses, which are the high places.

And therefore he adds presently, For this cause take unto you the whole armor
of God; that ye may be able to resist in the evil day, and having finished
all things stand fast. Even so does Peter in this present place; declaring unto
us the cou^terwaites of Satan; and exhorting us diligently to beware and take
heed of them: And therefore he says, Besober, and watch: for yuur adversary,
etc. In which words the holy Apostle does three things: first he exhortes us
unto a continual care for our salvation; which care consists in Sobriety,
and vigilancie, or watchfulnes, in these words; Be sober, and watch: secondly,
he adds a reason of his exhortation; and therein is contained a description of
our grand-enemie Satan, in these words; For your adversary the Devil, as a
roaring Lion walks about seeking who^ he may devour. Thirdly, he shows what
we must do in this case, in these words; Whom resist, steadfast in the faith.

1. We must continually care for our salvation.
First then, the Apostle commends unto us a perpetual care and study, for the
saving and health of our souls. And because he has an eye and respect to
warfare, he uses a double metaphore and borrowed speech, from the things that
are requisite, and necessary in Earth, Warfare, and Military discipline.

The first borrowed phrase is this, Be sober: that is, use tempera^cie in all
your actions. For as surfeting and dru^kennes makes the body unapt for worldly
business. So they that drown their souls in the sink of earthly delights and
pleasures, they cannot desire and follow the kingdom of heaven. And as the
worldly souldior, that stuffes and crains himself too full with meat and
drink, cannot readily and nimbly resist his bodily enemy; So CHRIST'S souldior
that lives intemperately, cannot withstand the enemies of his soul, as he
ought to do. And therefore the Apostle says, Be sober. When Peter says, Be
sober, he says no other, then that which Christ says; Take heed to your
selves, Luke 21.34.35.39
least at any time your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness, and
cares of this life, and least that day come on you at unawares. For as a Snare
shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the whole earth watch
therefore, and pray continually, that ye may be counted worthy to escape all
these things that shall come to pass, and that ye may stand before the Son
of man. When P^ter, says be sober; he says no other, the^ yt which Paul
says, It is now time that we should arise from sleep, for now is our
salvation nearer, the^ when we believed it: the night is past, Rom 13.11.12.1^.
and the day is at hand, let us therefore cast away the works of darkness, and
let us put on the armor of light: so that we walk honestly as in the day; not
in gluttony, and dru^kennes; neither in cha^bering and wantonness; nor in strife
and envy. When Peter says, 1 Thessalonians. 5.5.9.7.8.
Be sober; it is no other, then that which Paul says again; Ye are all the
children of light, and the children of ye day: we are not of the night, neither
of darkness: therefore let us not sleep, as do other, but let us watch and be
sober: for they that sleep, sleep in the night, and they that be dru^ken, are
dru^ken in the night: but let us which are of the dai, be sober. When Peter
says, Ephesians. 4.22.23.24
be sober, it is no other, the^ yt which Paul says again, cast off;
concerning ye conversation in time past, that old man which is corrupt through
the deceiuable lusts; and be renewed in the spirit of your mind: and put on
the new man, which after God is created unto righteousness and true holiness. And
what is te^pera^cie or sobriety? It is a virtue that moderates the desires of
meat and drink; that we may neither by excess hinder meditation and prayer,
and the labors of our calling; nor yet on the other side, hurt our bodily
health by too much abstine^ce. Therefore elsewhere our Apostle says; Be sober
and watching in prayer. For what atte^tion, ^. Pet. 4.7.
or intention ca^ dru^kards use in prayer? and how ca^ they muse, and think
devoutly of God and godly things? S Basil says truly; Drunke^nes chaseth away
the gifts of ye no y^ Spirit* smoke drives away Bees; and dru^kennes driuet
away the gifts of the holy Ghost. And the Hathenish Poet says well, Corpus
onustum.

Hesternis vitijs, animum quoque praegnauat vna, Horat. ser. l. 2. sat. 2.

Atque affigit humi diuinae particulam aurae.
When the body is surcharged with excessive diet, it burdens the mind also,
and fasteneth to the earth that portion of the divine breath.

Drunkenness (says Austin) is a flattering Devil, a sweet poison, a pleasant
sin; In sermons quod.
which whosoever has, has nor himself; which whosoever commits, not so much
commits sin, as is altogheter made sin. Drunkenness is the bewitching
Circe, that metamorphoseth and turns men into Swine; and Dogs, and Lions, and
Apes; discovering and setting on fire the vices that were before secret; and
drawing forth into the light of the Sun those qualities of the mind, which
were lurking in close caves and cabbines.

Then the unchaste professes and publishes his disease; then the wanton
refraines, Sen. ep. 8
nor tongue, nor hand; then appears the pride of the insolent; the cruelty of
the unmerciful, the envy of the malignant; Omne vitium grassatur, and prodit:
Every v^ce then rages and rusheth forth. And who becomes not a Beast (in his
Drunkenness?) when he knows not himself, nor others; he cannot speak
plainly and intelligiblie; he speaks to no purpose; he rowles his eyes; he
staggars and reeles; he vtters and vomits his own secrets and shame; he
feels the swimming of the head; he imagines one candle to be two; and that
the very house whirleth round about him; and he finds that of the Poet
verified in himself, ^agnu^ hec vitium est vinc:
Plautus in Pseudolo.
Pedes captat primu^: luctator dolosus est.


That the great fault of immoderatie drinking of wine is this, that like a
crafty wrestler, it first seeks to trippe up the heels.

Drunkenness makes men worse then beasts: For beasts will not by compulsion
take more meat or drink, then their need craves: And therefore Drunkards,
and those that enforce others to drink excessiuely, are in this respect to be
judged worse then Asses, and worse then Dogs, says S. Chrysostom.

Hom. 58. in Matthew.
If therefore we will think reverently of God and his works, and pray
zealously, and govern and manage our life circu^spectly and rightly, we must
embrace sobriety. The passages and conduits through which our diet passes
into our bodies are but small, and narrow, to teach us moderation and
temperancie. And what arises from immoderate swilling and gurmandizing, but
thick, gross, and troublous vapors, which do manifold hurt to the
contemplation of the mind: and do cause almost a continual giddines and
dizzines of the head: and bring forth doting and ioious fantasies: as both
daily experience proves, Hos. 4.11.
and the Prophet witnesses, saying: Wine, and new wine take away the heart of
man? And. Seneca among many other things, L^b. 12. Epist ^4.
which he speaks of the shunning of drunke^nes, says, Vt^ta vino concepta,
etiam sine vino durant, that Vices bred in wine, do continue also after wine:
and that continual drunkenness brings the mind to fury: and elsewhere he
doubts not to call drunkenness will full madness; Epist. 2^. Basilmag. Ser. de
ebriet.
because men wittingly, willingly, and wilfully do slip into it. Which moved
that learned father to say boldly, That the furious and possessed of an evil
Spirit, ib to be pitied; but the drunkard that behaueth himself like to the
frantic person, is worthy of no pity; because he serves the unclean
Spirit of his own accord. Further, if we will preserve our bodily health, let
us embrace sobriety. For one says well, Chrysostom.
That enough is food, and health; and pleasure; but too much is infection, and
pain, and sickness. Do we not see, how too much watring choakes an herb and
plant; but moderate moistening quickens it? so many diseases are procured; and
bodies weakened, and killed by excess: but many maladies are avoided by
sobriety. For intemperancie is the breeder and feeder of many infirmities of
the body; and where sobriety has no place, there Air, and earth, and water,
and fire, are mingled together: that is, there is congested and cast into one
paunch the fowls of the air, the fruits of the earth, the fishes of the sea,
and strong wine, hoate spices, and the like enflaming and fiery matter. When
the elements are thus confused, variable tempests and thundrings must needs
arise in the brain, and rheumes and catarhes are engendered by the continual
ascending of the vapors; for that the stomach so forced with hoate and cold,
moist and dry, soft and hard, heavy and light, cannot but hoyle and tumble
like a wrestles Sea.

We that will be safe from these storms, and be unattained of diverse
sicknesses, must retain sobriety. And it is not only true, that many
diseases are avoided by sobriety; but more may be also said; that many
diseases are remedied and driven away by sobriety: as may be confirmed by the
speech of a famous Physician, Celsus.
who says, that many great ^i^e^ses are cured by abstinencie and test: and b^
the example of Aureli^nu^ the Emperor, of whom it is written, that when he was
sick, he did never call the Physician, but cured himself by abstinencie. If
we will live continently and chastely, we must embrace sobriety: for the
drunken are easily thrust forward by Satan unto uncleanness and wantonness. It
is well observed of an ancient and learned father, that the drunkenness of one
hour, Hier in ep. ad Nepotian.
made Noah to uncover those thighs which before he kept covered for the space
of six hundred years. And who is so forgetful, as not to remember; or so
simple, as not to mark, that Lot committed incest with his own daughters,
Genesis 9.33.
when he had drowned his reason and understanding in excessive wine? Est Venus
in vinis, ignis in igne furit: lust lurkes in excessive wine; and fiery desires
rage through fiery drinks. If we will shun many enormous actions and speeches,
we must embrace sobriety.

For when men are drunken, for what quarrels, for what slanders, for what
swearings, for what blasphemies, for what sins and vices are they not fit? If
we will be masters and gouerners of our wits and understanding, we must embrace
sobriety. Arist.
For the Philosopher says, that the Greeke^ called sobriety Sophros^^en as it
were Zozo^sa^ten p^ronesin, a preserver of the understanding and wisdom.

Isocrat. ad Them. Leotychidas apud Plutar.
And another writes excellently That when the mind is corrupted by wine, it is
like a chariot that has cast off the waggoner. And fitly one answered, when
he was asked, Why the Spartanes drank so little? that other (says he) may not
consult for us, and give counsel to us, but that we may consult for other, and
give counsel to other. Wherein he sharply tau^ted at the intemperate drinker,
as at one that is unfit, either to take advice, or give advice.

But most graphically does Solomon decipher the vnseemelines and effects of
drunkenness, when he says; To whom is woe? to whom is sorrow? to whom is
strife? to whom is murmuring? to whom are wounds without cause? Prou. 23.29.
etc.
and to whom is the rednes of the eyes? even to them that tarry long at the
wine; to them that go, and seek mixed wine: Look not thou upon the wine, when
it is red; and when it shows his color in the cup, or goes down
pleasantly: in the end thereof it will bite like a serpent, and hurt like a
Cockatrice; thine eyes shall look upon strange women, and thine heart shall
speak lewd things: and thou shall be as one that sleeps in the midst of the
sea, and as he that sleeps in the top of the mast: they have stricken me,
shall thou say, but I was not sick; they have beaten me, but I knew not when
I awooke.

Lastly, if we will retain the grace of God, and his holy spirit, and the
inheritance of eternal life, we must embrace sobriety; and we must not be
drunk with wine, wherein it excess, but be fulfilled with the Spirit: and we
must beseech the holy spirit of the Lord to endue us with sobriety and
temperance; Ephesians. 5.18. Gal. 5.23.
for it is his special gift, as the Apostle witnesses; and let drunkards, and
gluttons, and all intemperate persons remember this one most short lesson of
the Apostle, Be sober: if they will not, but will run on still in the same
excess of riot; then let them take this for a cooling card in the heat of
their drink; that drunkards shall not inherit Christ's kingdom, but shall lie
without the gates of the celestial and new Jerusalem. If any crave scripture
for this, let him search the 5. to the Ephesians, where the Apostle says, Ephesians.
5.5.
That no whoremonger, neither unclean person, nor covetous person, which is an
Idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ, and of God: and the
22. of the Revelation, Reu. 22.15.
where the Evangelist says, That without the gates shall be dogs, and
enchanters, and whoremongers, and murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever
loves, or makes lies. And are not drunkards, that deprive themselves of
reason and common sense; that abuse the good creatures of God; that de^^ their
souls and bodies with vices; and prepare themselves to be as spunges to
receive all iniquity: are they not comprehended under the name of unclean
persons and dogs* If any say, that these are but probabilities and collections:
then behold those most clear places, where the holy Ghost says by the mouth
of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 6.10. Gal. 5.21.
that drunkards shall not inherit the kingdom of God; and that drunkenness, and
gluttony, are manifest works of the flesh; and that they which do such
things, shall not inherit the kingdom of God.

The second Metaphor and borrowed speech, which the Apostle uses in his
exhortation, is likewise taken from earthly soldiers and warfare; when he
says; and watch. If the soldier that lies in field against his enemy, be
not watchful; but careless and sleepie; how soon may his foes prevent, and
circumuent him? so if they that are enrolled soldiers in Christ's band, to
fight his battles under his banner, be remiss, drousie, and negligent, the
enemies of their souls may soon overthrow and destroy them. It is necessary
therefore for us to watch. And why must we watch? We must watch for the coming
of Christ our Lord and Master: for so he commands: saying; Watch therefore:
for ye know not what hour your Master will come: If this be sure, that if the
good man of the house knew, Matt. 24.42.43.44
at what watch the thief would come, he would surely watch, and not suffer his
house to be dug through: therefore be ye also ready; for in the hour that
ye think not, will the Son of man come. And again: Let your loins be
girded about: Luke 12.^5.36.
and your lights burning: and ye your selves like unto men that wait for their
Master, when he will return from the wedding, that when he comes and
knocks, they may open unto him immediately And why must we watch for Christ's
coming? because it will be sudden: for the day of the Lord shall come even
as a thief in the night: 1 Thessalonians. 5.2.3.
for when they shall say peace and safety, then shall come upon them sudden
destruction, as the travel upon a woman with child, and they shall not
escape. And whereto must we watch? we must watch to righteousness, godliness,
virtue, and good works: for so the Apostle S. Paul does admonish us; saying,
awake to live righteously; and sin not. 1. Cor. 15.34.
As if he had said: sin is like the Aspe: for as that Serpent, when it stings
any, it brings them into a drousines, and they die sleeping: so they that are
hurt with the sting of sin, fall into a drousie forgetfulness of God and
godliness, and (except the Lord touch their hearts with repentance,) they
senselesly sleep up into the second death. Ephesians. 5.14.
Awake therefore thou that sleep; and stand up from the death of sin, and
Christ shall give thee light. And why must we watch? we must watch, least
Satan sow tares among the good seed of Gods word, and take it away out of
our hearts; and choke it with the thorns of cares and voluptuous living.
Matt. 13.34.25.
For Christ says expressly, That the kingdom of God is like unto a man which
sowed good seed in his field: but while man slept, there came his enemy, and
sowed tares among the wheat, and went his way.

Briefly, wherein must we watch? we must watch in prayer: for so our Savior
taught his disciples; Matt. 26.41. Luke 21.36.
saying, Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation. And again; Watch
therefore, and pray continually, that ye may be counted worthy to escape all
these things that shall come to pass, and that ye may stand before the son
of man.

And so Saint Paul commands; continue (says he) in prayer, Col. 4.2.
and watch in the same with thanksgiving. And justly might he command us to
pray continually: for what else is prayer to the soul, but that which the
keele is to the ship, and the foundation to the house, and the moisture to the
tree, and the sinews and joints to the body? Take the keele away, and the ship
is dissolved: take the groundworke away, and the edifice falls: take the
moisture from the tree, and there comes no fruit: take away the sinews, and
cut the joints of the body, and the members will not hang together: and take
away prayer from the soul, and it is exposed as a preie to every Enemy.
Prayer to the Christian is as a sword to the traveler, that chaseth away the
thief; and the bow of the hunter, that kills the savage beast: and the
fortress and bulwark, that defends the city and castle: for the wicked
spirits are put to flight, when they see our souls armed with supplication;
and the enemies that (as greedy beasts) would devour our souls, are driven
off by the spiritual arrows of zealous prayer; and the castle of the soul is
protected by prayer, and thereby made inexpugnable: Chrysostom. de diuersis.
and therefore if prayer be taken from the soul, perinde est, ac si piscem ex
aqua traxeris: vt illi vita aqua, ita anima preccs: it is as though a fish were
drawn out of the water; As water is life to the fish, so prayer is life to the
soul.

Art thou in tranquillity? pray to God, that thy tranquillity may be
permanent. Do thou see a grievous storm coming? pray to God, that he would
auert it, and turn it into calmenes. Art thou heard? thank God for hearing
thee.

Art thou not heard? persevere, that thou may be heard. For although God
defer for a little space: yet he does it not of hatred toward thee, neither
for that he reiects thee, but by deferring, he keeps thee the longer by him:
Chrysostom. de profectu euangelij.
as fathers are wont not to grant presentl^ to their children who^ they love
entirely, ^he things which they desire; but to put them off with some delay,
that they may tarry the longer with them; and desire it the more fervently,
and esteem it the more regardfully, when it is granted.

Wherefore since prayer is so profitable and necessary for us, let none pass
away the time ordained for prayer in sleep and trifling, and in worldly cares
and musings, or in uttering the words of prayer coldly and negligently, and
with a roauing and wandering mind, only using his lips; but let us power
forth our prayers before the Lord with attentive minds and careful hearts.
Cyprian says well, Let the mind muse on nothing else, then that which it
prays for. And again, How can thou desire to be heard of God, when thou
hear not thy self? Vis esse deum memorem tui, cum tu ipse memor tui non
sis? Will thou have God to remember thee, when thou remembrest not thy self?
Bernard also has a memorable sentence; I offer (says he) great injury to
God; when I pray him, to hear my prayer, which I do not hear, that utter it
forth: I beseech God to give heed to me; when I my self give heed, nor to
him, nor to my self; but (which is much worse) by tossing unclean and
unprofitable things in my heart, I bring before his sight an horrible stinch
And another said as fitly, that as in a garland it is not enough, Chrysostom. hom.
4. cum esset presbyter designatus.
for the flowers to be pure and clean, except the hand that ioynes and binds
them up, be pure and clean also: in like sort in the praises and prayers
offered to God, not only the words must be godly, but also the mind whence
they proceed.

The second thing to be considered in Saint Peter's words, is a reason of his
exhortation; 2. A description of Satan.
and therein a description of our arch-enemie Satan; in these words: For your
adversary the D^uell, as a roaring lion walks about, seeking whom he may
devour. S. Peter says, that we are soldiers, and must fight as long as we
remain in this world; and does admonish us, that we have to do, not with a
common enemy, but with one, that like a lion runs hither and thither, ready
to devour: and therefore he infers hereupon; that we must be sober, and watch.
And here we may see, what thing our life is, and how the Apostle does paint it
out, as that none regenerate by Gods spirit, will not wish continually to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ. For we are here exposed to the assaults of
Satan, like a traveler that is to enter into an Inn, full of thieves and
robbers.

Without doubt, before he entered into that house, if he must needs enter, he
would arm and furnish himself as much as he might, and he would sleep very
little in it, that he might depart again out of it without hurt. Even in the
like danger do we live here on the earth: where Satan bears great swaie,
and so rules in the hearts of worldlings, as that he holds them captives at
his own pleasure. This is a terrible matter, if it be duly considered.

And therefore blessed Peter labors to put us in mind, that we look to our
selves carefully and earnestly; that is, that we be sober, and watch. For we
often abuse peace and quietness, unto idleness and sloth: and thence it comes to
pass, that now and then the Enemy beguiles and oppresses us: because thinking
our selves free from all dangers, we pass over our time in delights and
pleasures, as the flesh desires. How needful is it, that we should watch?
since we have an Enemy: and what Enemy? that eminent and notable adversary
the devil. And what is he? a lion: and what lion? a roaring lion: and what
roaring lion? a roaring lion wandering up and down: and why wandering and
walking up and down? that he may spoil and devour the souls of men. Matt.
4.3. Ioh. 12.31. 2. Cor. 4.4 Matt. 12.29. Isa. 27.1. Reu. 12.3. Luke 10.18.
Heb. 2.14.
This adversary is a tempter to impiety: he is the Prince of the world: he is
the God of this world: he is that armed man that keeps his house with
munition; he is the hugie and hideous whale, that does swallow the ungodly in
the gulf of perdition: he is that great dragon and old serpent: he is like to
lightning, that will pierce most nimbly and straungely, and do wondrous
things, contrary to all expectation: he has the power of death: for from him
came sin, and sin brought forth death: he it is of whom Saint John says;
He that ommitteth sin is of the Devil; 1. Ioh. 3.8.
for the devil sins from the beginning. And it is to be marked, that he
says not, the Devil has sinned; but, the Devil sins; to teach us, that
he does nothing else but sin, and entice to sin.

One calls him magnum illum Peripateticum, that great Peripatetick, or walker.
And he may well be so called: for when he stood among the children of God, Job.
1.6.
The Lord said unto Satan, whence come thou?

And Satan answered the Lord, saying, from compassing the earth too and fro,
and from walking in it.

Yea, but if Satan be such a wanderer and compasser of the earth; how can that
place of Saint Peter stand, 2. Pet. 2.4.
where he says, that God spared not the Angels that had sinned, but cast them
down into Hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be kept unto
damnation? If the wicked Angels are delivered into chains of darkness, and so
kept; how can they wander up and down? The answer hereunto is; that God in
the beginning, as soon as the Angels had rebelled and sinned against him, he
thrust them into H^ll, and the depth under the earth; and yet in that sort,
that as often as it pleases him, he suffe^s them till the last judgment to
go forth upon the earth, and again after a time shuts them up into the d^pth,
that they may hurt no more, nor no longer, then it seems good to his heavenly
wisdom. Reu. 9.1.
For where we read, that the keye of the bottomless pit, that is, of Hell, was
given to an Angel, and when the pit was opened, destroying grasse-hoppers came
forth: that is infernal and hellish spirits, whose king was the Angel of the
bottomless pit, and was called in Hebrewe, Abaddon: and in Greek, Apollyon:
that is, a destroyer: and that power was given them to vex and disquiet men
for a certain time: and where we ceade, Reu. 20.1.
that an Angel descended from heaven, which had the keye of the bottomless pit,
and a great chain in his hand, with which he bound Satan for a thousand
years, that he might deceive the nations no longer, until the 1000. years
were accomplished: for afterward he must be loosed again for a small space:
what may be learned out of this, but that the hellish spirits are so enclosed
in their prison, that is, in Hell, and in the depth under the earth, that now
and then they are sent forth upon the earth, and then again shut up and bound
at Gods pleasure?

But while Satan is suffered so to compass the earth, he never cease, nor
never rests to assaye all enterprises, and undertake all courses, that he
(...) ^^^lest the godly, make himself sure of the wicked, and so increase the
subjects of his infernal kingdom. Genesis 3.
He beguiled Euah in the person of a subtle Serpent. If Paradise had no
privilege; and if the first woman created holy and unspotted of sin, were
subject to his allurements: who can promise security to himself? He deceived
Saul in the form of the old, sacred, and grave Samuel: he seduced Ahab by the
mouth of Prophets: 1. Sa^. 28. 1. King. 22. 1. Chron. 21. 2. Cor. 12.7. Luke
22.31. Luke 4.13.
he stird up the Patriarch David, to number the people: he moved Paul to be
proud of the vision: he sought to winnow the Apostles as wheat, to sift them
to and froe, and to cast them out: he tempted Christ himself: nay he often
tempted him; for it is said, that the Devil departed from him for a little
season.

If this be done in the green tree, what shall be come in the dry? He that
tempted Christ our Master, will also tempt his servants, either not to do
good, or if they do good, to be proud of well doing: and so through pride to
poison their virtuous actions: that as the moth is bred in the garment, and
eats the garment: and as the worm arises on the herb, and consumes the
herb: so the haughty conceit and reputation which they have imagined of
their own works, may cause them to loose the things which they have wrought,
2. Chron. 6.30.
and not to receive the reward. It is he, that though he cannot see the
thoughts of the heart, (for that is proper to God alone,) yet because he
searches out the affections of the mind, by our speeches, and gestures, and
outward behavior, and constitution and complexion of body, he labors busily
to steal the hearts of men from God, 2. Sam. 15.
as Absalom did the hearts of the Subjects from his father David. As the Cole
takes fire, when it is put to it, for that it was apt and fit to take fire: so
satan notes the inclination, and tempts accordingly; some to Anger, some to
wantonness, some to gluttony; some to pride; some to contention; some to
covetousness; and if resistance be not made, the flame follows, yt bellows and
the motion breaks out into performance. Aug. super Genesis li. 10.
And yet oftentimes Satan is deceived by ye outward lineaments of the body,
and the conjectures that he gathers thereupon; for if he could see the inward
Faith, Constancy, and other qualities of the mind, there are many whom he
would not tempt; and if he could have seen the admirable patience of Job, he
would never have been so often foiled and discomfited. But when he has
ensnared and bound any in the Fetters of sin; as the Poet says of Mezentius
the Tyrant; Mortuae quinetiam iungebat corpora vinis, Vi^gil. Aeneid. 8.

Componens manibusque manus atque oribus orae;
That he joined dead bodies with lively bodies, laying hand to hand, and mouth
to mouth; to the end the dead should defile and corrupt the living: So this
cruel Tyrant and torturer of souls, linkes the living soul to the love of
the world, and the pleasures of sin, as to a rotten carcass; that at the
last also the soul may be holden of eternal death. It is he that knows that
we are born anew of the immortal seed of Gods word; and therefore he
endeavors, either to steal the word out of our hearts, Luke 8.12
that it may not be rooted; or he withdrawes us from the Love, hearing, and
reading of it; or else he procures hatred and slander against the minister,
that his person may make us to loath the word. It is he that tra^sfigureth
himself into an angel of light not in regard of his substance; 2. Cor. 11.14
for he is still an angel of darkness; but in regard of his coloring and
counterfeiting: For by his glozes, shifts, and superstitions, he will feign
himself to be an angel of glory, sent from God out of heaven; and will
persuade men to obey his counsels.

It is he that alleges Scripture to seduce souls the rather, and pretends
piety, under the bare show of Gods word; but he bewraies himself to be a
subtle sophister. For as Procrastes the Tyrant of the city Corydallus, dealt
with his guests, making them always fit for his bed; for if they were too long
he cut them shorter; if they were too short, he lengthened them with pieces
of their own bodies: So Satan, (in whose steps also the Heretics of all
Ages have walked,) applies scripture to his wicked purpose; either omitting
part thereof, if it serve not his Argument; or else adding somewhat theret^,
and interpreting, and wresting it to a wrong sense.

So he cited Scripture in the tentation of GHRIST, when he set him on a
pinnacle of the Temple, and said unto him; Matt. 4.6
If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down. For it is written, that he
will give his Angels charge over thee, and with their hands they shall lift
thee up, least at any time thou should dash thy foot against a stone.

He produces indeed a place of the Psalm: Psalm. 91.11.
as though God promised, that his Angels should safeguard and defend his
children; even when they do despise the means that he has ordained; and when
they prove whether God will, (or can) save them without those means: whereas
God promises succor only to them that walk in their ways, which God has
set down unto them, and therefore do obediently use the means which God has
ordained.

For this cause, he abridgeth, or rather mangleth the Word, and leaves out
these words, (in all thy waves;) whereas he should thus have produced the
intier Scripture; He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in
all thy waves. And therefore, when the devil abuses Scriptures, in tempting
of us, the safest way is, to oppose Scriptures again unto him, as CHRIST did:
Because it is certain, that God does not contradict himself in scripture: and
therefore the Devil cites scripture in a false sense, when he alleges it,
to persuade us to that which is repugnant to the manifest word of God.

It is he that is the spiritual Pharaoh, that studieth how to stay all the
male chidren of the Israelites, Exo. 1.16*
in the very birth. That is, he goes about to choke and smoother (eue^; a
good thought as soon as it arises in the mind) that it may not grow to full
age and ripenes. It is he that is the mighty Nimrod, and Hunter of souls;
Luc. Flor. de gest. Roman. li. 1. cap. 7.
and that famous Robber, that seeks for the worthiest booties and preyes, and
strikes off the heads of the Poppies, with Tarquinius Superbus. Robbers and
Thieues go not thither, where there is hay and straw, but where there is
Gold and silver; says S. Chrysostom: Chrysostom. hom. 4 in Isai.
so Satan bends all his might and maine to the sacking and destroying of the
best of all. And as it is seen among Sailors, that they which have an empty
ship, fear not the assault of Pirates, who come not to sink or take a
ship that carries no wealth; but they fear Pirates, that have a ship
fraught with Merchandise and riches: because Pirates covet to come where there
is gold, silver, and precious stones: so Satan does not so much pursue a
sinner, that is deuoide of virtue and godliness, as the holy, Chrysos. homil. 9.
de Ozia.
godly, and righteous, that possess the true Treasure. And as Pirates do not
set upon the ship, that is sailing forth of the Harborough, when they know it
is unfurnished of substance; but then they endeavor by all assayes to apprehend
it, when it returns home to the Harborough, being laden with variety of
store. So the envious and unclean spirit, inuades us most, and labors to
spoil us, when he perceiues that the ship of our Soul is replenished with
the Jewels of godliness, and our life is beautified with manifold good works,
testifying that we love and fear God unfeignedly. For did not ye Dragons tail
draw the third part of the stars of heaven, Reu. 12.4.
and cast them to the earth? Was not Apollinaris so cast down? and Nestorius
so cast down? and Ph^tinus so cast down? and Origene so cast down? and
Tertullian so cast down? though they were men of incomparable, Contra haeres.
cap. 15.16.23 24.
and admirable learning, judgment, eloquence, and experience; Yet they were
both tempted by errors themselves, and did grievously tempt others: as
Vincentius Lyrinensis largely and learnedly shows.

If it fare thus with the Cedars of Libanon, and the Oaks of Bashan, and the
Ships of Tarshish; shall not the shrubs look about them?

Who can sleep in the mids of Snakes, and serpents, and ravenous beasts? As
the neighbor enemies of the Jews did still gape for their blood; the Ammonites
in the East, the Philistines iin the west; the Syrians in the North, the
Egyptians in the South: So we have an Adversary that continually besieges
the Castle of our heart, and takes advise how he may ransack it. We must fight
wi^h an army of vices; If we put down covetousness, incontinencie will rise
up; if we vanquish incontinencie, ambition will succeed; if we discomfite
ambition, Anger, Hatred Malice, Envy, Pride, Drunkenness, and what not? will
band themselves in a pernicious Troop, and lay siege to batter the faithful
Forte.

If our enemy find us fortified on the one side, he will presently assail
us on the other side; if he cannot prevail this way, most speedily he
presses us that way; and never cease, never takes Truce, never intermittes
stratagems, or omits the battle.

It was truly said of Gregory the great, That either he spoils by open
violence, or flies hither and thither, by counterwaites, or flatters by
persuasion, or terrifieth by threatening, or dismayes by distrust, or beguiles
by promises. If any ask why Satan has such an implacable malice against all
mankind, and specially against the godly? The Answer is, that he does it of
hatred toward God; and because he^ is not able to hurt God, he maligneth those
that are created after the Image of God; as he that cannot violate the person
of a prince, will abuse his feature and representation.

Saint Basil says, In sermo^^ in aliquo^ scripturae locos.
that he has partly seen it, partly heard it, and that it is an undoubted
thing, that the female Libarde is such an enemy to man, that if but the image
and portraiture of a man be showed forth unto her, she will rend it in
pieces, as though it were a man himself: So the Devil (says he) not being
able to touch GOD, he makes war with the godly, and pursues the image of
God in man, after which he was once created.

And another compares Satan to a malicious and coozening man who seeing an
Orphane to have his Fathers substance, Chrysostom. hom. 2^. Matthew.
he often bestows ba^quets upon him, or gives him fair garments, or flatters
him with enticing speeches, till he have defrauded him of his patimonie: So
Satan (says he) seeing man to have an heavenly treasure that is (an
immortal soul) and heavenly wisdom, laid up in an earthen chest; he shows
him money, and costly clothes, and delicate dishes, and glorious honors, and
the desirable things of this world, that bringing him under the yoke of
pleasure, he may deprive him of his souls salvation, and bereave him of the
grace of God.

For albeit the sin of the wicked Angels, for which they were exiled out of
heaven, and thrust into hell, be not expressly mentioned in the scripture;
yet it may be collected out of the third of Genesis, that it was rebellion
against God, springing from pride and hautines. For there we read how the
devil caused our first parents to be cast down from their state of
Innocence; Namely, by breathing into them the poison of pride, that they
should presume to aspire to a paritie and equality with God in wisdom; saying
unto the woman: When ye shall eat of the forbidden fruit, Genes. 3.5.
your eyes shall be opened and ye shall be as Gods knowing good and evil. It
is very likely that Satan sought to dispossess man of his felicity, by the
same way and means that he was dispossessed of his own felicity. And he
knew, that God is still like himself, and that he inflictes like punishments
upon like Offenses: therefore he endeavored to draw our first Parents to his
own rebellious pride, and he cease not hitherto, nor will cease till the end
of the world, to allure and persuade mankind, to oppose themselves against the
will and commandment of the Lord, that as they participate with him in Pride
and rebellion, so they may also participate with him in plagues and destruction.

Why then, if the case so stand with all men generally, and with true
Christians and the faithful sons and servants of God specially, we must
seek for furniture and weapons to defend our selves. And we need not to seek
far: for they are at hand for us; and are framed and fashioned of the holy
Ghost, by the mouth of the Apostle. And what are they? they are contained in
these words; Whom resist, steadfast in the Faith.

As the power of that Adversary ought to whet us, and make us more
circumspect; 3. Weapons against Satan.
so it is to be feared, least our minds being attainted with immoderate fear,
would be clean discouraged, if hope of victory should not be showed unto us.
Therefore now the Apostle labors, that we may know, that the event and issue
of the battle shall be prosperous if we fight under Christ's banner. For
whosoever armed with Faith shall enter the combat, the Apostle pronounces, that
undoubtedly he shall have the victory. Resist; (says he) if any ask how? he
answers, that there is might and strength enough in faith. For Satan is
powerful against unbelievers, weak against believers.

For when thou receiuest Gods word into thine heart, and cleanest faithfully
unto it, the Devil cannot vanquish thee, but must needs fly. For how soon
did he betake himself to flight when Christ beat him off with the weapons of
holy scripture: Matthew. 4.
When thou can say, Scriptum est; it is written; Thus says the Lord; Here
I stand last, To this I stick; This is my Fortress and Shield: presently
thou shall see him depart; and sadness, and evil desires, and Anger, and
Avarice, and faintnes of heart and distrust to vanish away with him. But such is
the craftiness of Satan, that he is most unwilling that we should come to
his safeguard; and therefore he chiefly endeavors to deprive us of this sword.
And this he easily brings to pass, when he makes us sluggish; our body being
now unfit for battle, and enclining to ease and deliciousnes. For so with
little adooe, he wresteth out of our hand the sword of the Spirit, which is,
the Word of God, as he prevailed against Euah.

She had the word of God; if she had stickt unto it, she had not fallen. But
when Satan saw that she was something careless in keeping Gods word; and that
she turned the absolute commandment of God into a conditional peradventure;
he took the Word out of her heart; And so soon as she yielded a little unto
him, he had the victory.

Therefore, Resist, steadfast in the Faith. Paul rehearses the whole furniture
of a Christian Soldiour, and all the parts thereof; when he says; Stand
therefore, Ephesians. 6.14.15.16 17.18.
and your loins girded about with Verity, and having on the Breast Plate of
Righteousness; and your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace;
Above all, take the Shield of Faith, wherewith ye may quench all the fiery
darts of the wicked; and take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the
spirit, which is ye word of God; and pray always, with all manner prayer and
supplication in the spirit. The weapons of a Soldiour must partly defend,
partly offend; and with both these the Apostle armeth the Soldiour of Christ.
He props and girds us up with truth, that we may stand; For without Truth, which
is Christ himself, all other Virtues fall: Least our breast should be wounded,
and we become forgetful of our duty, he gardes us with Justice, that gives to
every one his own: our feet must be covered, (that is) the whole race of our
life must be so ordered, yt we may ru^ne in the gospel of peace, not
following our affections, but Gods word, that breeds tra^quillitie of
conscience: that we may repel ye darts of distrust and concupiscence, he
armeth us with the shield of Faith, which expels distrust, bridles
concupiscence, and makes us to lead a life (worthy of our profession:) And
that Satan may not strike the head and trouble the reason of man, he gives the
helmet of salvation, that is, Jesus Christ the head of the Church, and Savior
of the whole body.

If any say, I have not those weapons, I am unarmed; Whence shall I get them?
He shows that they are gotten by Prayer: and that God gives his gifts to
them that pray for them. So that Paul is larger in this point the^ Peter, 1.
Ioh. 5.4.
but the sense is one; for Faith only is our victory against the world. For
all that is borne of God, overcomes this world; and this is that victory that
has overcome this world, even our Faith; as S. John affirms.

Mark, that he uses the time that is past, saying, that Faith has overcome
this world; to give us to understand that though as yet we be in the battle,
yet questionles we shall be conquerors: and we may assure our selves of the
victory. For Faith is the instrument, and (as it were) the mean and hand
whereby we lay hold upon him, that has indeed performed it, even Christ
Jesus.

It is but to resist in Faith, and immediately the field is won, as saint
James witnesses; Resist the Devil (says he) and he will flee from you. If
we fly, he is a Lion; if we stand stoutly and manfully; Iam. 4.7.
He flees as a fly: and why not? for he is Beelzebub: that is, the God of
Flies. For if any should say, If Satan tha^ be bound, why does he prevail
so much?

It is true indeed, that he prevails much; but he dominieres but on the
lukewarm and negligent, and them that do not fear God in truth.

He is tied like a dog, bound in chains, and he ca^ hurt none, but him that
securely comes too near unto him And how foolish is the man that is bitten of
a dog bound up in chains?

Join not thy self to him by the pleasures and desires of the world; Aug.
sermon. 197. de tempore.
and then he will not presume to approach unto thee. He may bark, he may
allure, he can byte none, but such as are willing. For he hurtes not by
enforcing, but by persuading; and he does not extort a consent from us, but
he begges and dsires it. He can do much indeed; but not without Gods
sufferance.

If his power were not bounded, Psalm. 141.
he would molest and destroy the whole world, and not suffer one godly person
to remain alive. But he that keeps Israel, will neither slumber nor
sleep: the Lord himself is the keeper of the godly: so that the Sun shall
not burn them by day, nor the moon by night: the Lord shall preserve their
going out, and their coming in for evermore. Job. cap. 1. and 2.
Satan could not afflict Job, either in body or goods, without leave granted
him of God; 1. King. 22
he could not seduce Ahabs prophets, without leave granted him of God; he
could not enter into ye Heard of swine, without Christ's permission. Mat. 8.31
Let us therefore be courageous, for the hairs of our head are numbered; and
the Dragon, that old Serpent is bound and cast into the bottomless pit; and
cannot come out, Reu. 20.
till the Lord appoint a time for his losing. He is a busy te^pter indeed, but
fix thy Faith on CHRIST: Matthew. 12 29. Col. 2.15.
for he has bound ye strong man, and spoiled his house; he has spoiled the
principalities and powers, and has made a show of them openly, and has
Triumphed over them in the cross; he is the Son of God, that was made
manifest for this purpose, 1. Ioh. 3.8.
that he might destroy the works of the Devil.

And he not only conquers himself; but also he imparts the conquest on them
that believe in him. 1. Ioh. 2.13.14
And therefore John writes to the young men, because they had overcome that
wicked one; and because they were strong, and the Word of God abode, in them,
whereby they overcame that wicked one.

He is a walker, and wanderer, and compasser of all the Earth indeed; but he
walks only, 2. Pet. 2.4
when God permits him to go out of his Dungeon and prison, for otherwise he
cannot stir, being fast bound in chains of darkness.

He is an accuser of the godly indeed: but who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods chosen? It is God that justifies; Romans 8.1.33.34.
who shall condemn? It is Christ which is dead, yea, or rather, which is risen
again; who is also at the right hand of God, and makes request also for us:
And there is no condemnation to them that are in CHRIST JESUS.

He is a deceiuer indeed, but he cannot prevail against Gods Elect. Mat. 7.24.
The winds may blow, and the Rain fall, and the Floudes beat upon the
faithful; but their Faith is built on the sure ground, and therefore it cannot
be demolished.

The godly may be afflicted: Ioh. 16.21.
but their sorrow shall be turned into joy, as the sorrow of a woman vanishes
away, when a child is borne.

The billows and surging Seas may dash against Christ's Church; Matt. 16.18.
but for that it is stablished and settled on CHIST the Rock, the gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it. For as Physicians use Serpents and Vipers in
Triacle, for the help of men; so God uses Satan in tentation, for the profit
of his children, and for this purpose, so orders his tentations, that as he
should blind the hearts of the disobedient, and at last punish them eternally;
so he should only try and make known the Faith, Hope, Patience, and
Constancy of the godly, that Gods Grace may be sufficient for them: and that
after they have bin tried for a while, they may receive the crown of glory
that never withers.

Therefore, if he would friendly insinuate himself, pretending to do us good,
that he may the sooner draw us out of the narrow way; let us oppose the
express will and commandment of God against him, and not depart therefrom,
either to the right hand, or to the left hand. If he go about to rip up our
conscience with the knife of the Law, and to daunt us with the ugliness and
haynousnes of our sins; Genesis 4. Matt. 27. 1. Ioh. 1.9.
as he dealt with Cayne and Judas; let us remember, that if we faithfully and
penitently acknowledge our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive our
sins, and the blood of JESUS CHRIST, his Son, cleanses us from all
unrighteousness. And to the believer, God has twice thundered this most
comfortable voice from heaven; Mat. 3. and 17.
This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased. If he persuade us to
murmr in dearths; or be discontent with the flourishing state of some ungodly
persons; as he threw this stu^bling block before David, Psalm. 33. and 73. Job.
27.7. Ierem. 12.
and before Job, and before Ieremias; let us submit our selves under Gods
mighty hand, and cast all our care upon him, for he cares for us all, and not
fear, because it is our Fathers pleasure to give us a Kingdom.

If he would puff us with pride for well doing, and make our hearts swell with
prosperity; let us consider, that when we have done all, we are unprofitable
servants; and that we are but stewards of Gods gifts, and shall one day be
called to an account for our stewardship. If when he is expulsed once or twice,
yet he return again: Exodus 14.
for as Pharaoh stird vehemently to bring back the Israelites, when they were
departed out of Egypt; and as the spirit raged and fomed mightily, when he was
expelled out of him whom he had possessed from his infancy; Matt. 9.20.21.
so the Pharaoh that tyrannized over the souls of sinners, if he leese his
pray, he incessantly attempts to win it again: and generally, (as our
Savior witnesses, Matt. 12.43.44.45.
) when the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks throughout dry
place, seeking rest: and finding none, he says, I will return into mine house
from whence I came; and if he find the room empty, swept, and garnished, he
takes seven other spirits worse then himself, and they enter in, and dwell
there; and the end of that man is worse then the beginning: therefore to escape
that lamentable pernition, if Satan return after his expulsion, let us betake
our selves to earnest prayer: and then as the Lion fears at the sight of a
Cock, and flies at the crowing of a Cock; so this roaring and ramping Lion
fears at the sight of a faithful person, and flies at his prayer. For as some
remedies against poison are hoate, and some cold; so the remedies against
tentations and troubles, are either the mildnes and coldness of patience, or the
vehemency and ardentnes of prayer.

What if thou can not still use long and set prayer, and uttered with tongue,
either for that thou art unlearned, or for that thy business hinders and stops
it, or for that the time and place forbid it? Yet pray continually in heart,
and pray earnestly in mind, and pray zealously in spirit; August. ad Proba^.
as it is reported, that the Christians in Egypt were accustomed to use often,
yet short prayers, and to utter them forcibly, yet speedily, least the
intention and heedfulnes, which is requisite for him that prays, per
productiones moras euanescat and hebitetur, should vanish away, and become dull
by long stay: do this, and thou shall try undoubtedly, that such prayer,
though brief, yet it is an aid to the soul, a sacrifice to God, a scourge to
Satan.

For though while our life is in this pilgrimage, it cannot be without sin
and tentation; for our profiting is known by tentation; neither does any know
himself, except he be tried: neither can any be crowned, except he overcome;
neither can any overcome, except he strive; neither can any strive, except he
have an enemy and trials: though then the Sea can no more be without tempests,
then the world without tentations: yet we must valiantly by vehement prayer
resist the assault and battery: and when the surge of trial flows upon us,
we must call and cry with the Apostles when the ship was covered with waves,
Master save us, Matt. 8.25.
we perish: and then we shall see, that the winds and storms will cease, and
that he does n^^ sleep, that seemed to sleep for a little season. And above
all things, we must take heed, that we resist Satan's suggestions and
allurements in the beginning: for he could not prevail over us, unless we did
increase his strength by our vices, and did give him room to enter in and
dominiere in us by our iniquities.

For this cause the Apostle speaking of anger, says: Ephesians. 4.26
that the Sun must not go down upon our wrath, and that we must not give
place to the Devil.

As if he said, that anger, or any other sin will grow past cure, (like a
wound that by delaie waxes incurable,) if it be not repressed speedily: and
because continuance in sin makes an entrance for Satan, who having entered
upon our hearts does peece-meale at last wholly possess them, therefore we must
betimes shut the doors against so hurtful a guest. For as a Serpent easily
conuaies in the rest of his body, if he get an entrance for his head: so Satan
that subtle and slippery serpent, if we permit one sin to creep into us,
and give consent thereunto, he insinuates his whole train, and he draws us
from consent to practice, from practice to delight, from delight to custom,
from custom to boasting in sin, from boasting in sin, to obdurate hearts.

Hier. in epist.
Dum paruus est hostis, interfice, vt nequitia elidatur in semine kill the
Enemy of the soul, while he is but little, that ungodliness may be crushed in
the seed: as the Cockatrice is most safely slain in the shell, before he be
hatched and brought forth. Suppose that we had seen Adam in his tentation, when
thoughts arose in his heart, and when he was straightened between the
commandment of his Creator, and the request of his yoke-fellowe; should we
not have cried out and said unto him; o thou wretch, Bernard. inser. om. sanct.
take heed to thy self; see thou do it not; the woman is seduced; believe
not her entisements? Should this have been our persuasion to Adam, that he
should look to himself, and shall we not persuade our selves after the same
manner, when we are compassed and thronged with the like tentations? As the
dog that stands by the table, Chrysostom. hom. 3. de Laz.
if he that eats cast some bone or crust unto him, he tarrieth and waits
still for more; but if nothing be given him, at length he departs, and waits
for sustenance no longer: so Satan that greedy and biting dog, standing
about our life, if he receive from us some ungodly speeches, or wicked doings,
he remains and expects longer; but if we nourish him not by word, nor deed,
he forsakes us, and seeks after another preie.

Therefore if we will subdue Satan, we must quickly flee all appearance of
evil; 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
we must speedily flee the time, the place, the opportunity to commit sin:
we must by and by fear the bait, suspecting that it couers the hook; and we
must never forget that the fowler carries himself most guilefully, when he
calls and allures most pleasantly. And this is the adiuration and coniuration
that repels Satan; namely, a true and steadfast faith, that knows the mercies
of God toward mankind, revealed in Gods word: and that assures and
persuades us of those mercies toward our selves also: and that depends and
relies wholly upon those mercies: and that is not barren, idle, or dead, but
abounding with good works.

The sum of all is this: we must live soberly, and watchfully: and w^y?
because we have an Adversary: to wit, the Devil: that as a roaring Lion does
walk about, seeking whom he may devour. But we must be of good courage; and
constantly believe on Christ, the seed of the woman, that has bruised the
Serpents head: and has not only vanquished the infernal powers, but also is
our grand-captaine in these spiritual wars: and has promised victory to
those that fight valiantly under his banner: Ioh. 16.33.
and has willed us to be of good heart, because he has overcome the world:
and commands his holy Angels to pitch a camp round about the godly, and to
put those wicked spirits to flight. We read, 2. King. 6.14.
that when the king of Aram had sent horses, and charets, and a mighty host,
and they came and compassed the city Dothan by night, where the Prophet
Eliz^us lay: and when the servant of the man of God arose early to go out, and
saw the city compassed with horses and charets, he said unto Elizans, alas
Master, how shall we do? his Master answered, fear not; for they that be
with us, are more then they that be with them. Then Elizeus prayed, and sad,
Lord, I beseech thee open his eyes, that he may see: and the Lord opened the
eyes of the servant, and he looked, and behold, the mountain was full of
horses and charets of fire round about Elizeus Even so forasmuch as we are
weak of our selves, and unable to defend our selves: and we have a great
company of spiritual foes, which invent a thousand ways to entrap us, and to
bring us to everlasting shame: and lay wait to ensnare us both in wealth and
poverty: both in pleasure and affliction: both in our words and in our works:
and are vigilant when we are negligent: let us beseech our mighty and
merciful God, to have mercy on us, and to increase our faith: that being
harnessed in complete Armor, we may do valiantly, and tread down Satan our
Arch-enemie under our feet: and we may have the eyes of our minds opened, to
behold the invincible charets and spiritual horsemen, that are on our side:
and that being strengthened through the power of his might, we may be able to
resist, and stand against all the assaults of that wicked one: and that holding
the faith, and finishing our course, and fighting a good fight, we may in the
end triumph eternally with our Savior Christ Jesus in the kingdom of Heaven.
Amen.

PRACTICE MVST Accompany profession.
Tit. 3.
8. This is a true saying, and these things, I will thou should affirm,
that they which have believed God, might be careful to show forth good works.
These things are good and profitable unto men.
AS he cannot rightly be called a good Citizen or commonwealths man, that does
not observe ye laws of the city or commonwealth: so he cannot be truly
called a Christian, that follows not the direction of the Christian faith, and
of the Church of God. And that we may follow this; it is necessary that we
know what it is. What it is, the Apostle declares a little before; Verse.
3.4.5.6.7.
saying: We our selves also were in times past unwise, disobedient, deceived,
serving the lusts and diverse pleasures, living in maliciousnes, and envy,
hateful, and hating one another: but when that bountifulnes, and that love of
God our Savior toward man appeared: not by the work of righteousness which we
had done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of the new
birth, and the renewing of the holy ghost; which he shed on us abundantly,
through Jesus Christ our Savior: that we being justified by his grace, should
be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life.

In which words the holy Apostle shows, first, what we are by nature: namely,
unwise, disobedient, deceived, serving lusts and diverse pleasures, living in
malitiousnes, spite, and hatred.

Secondly, he shows the cause of our salvation: namely, the bountifulnes and
love of God our Savior: by which two, namely, our own vildenes, and Gods
mercy, he excludes utterly in the matter of salvation, our righteousness, and
our merits.

Thirdly, he shows the manner how we are saved; namely, by regeneration, and
the renewing of the holy ghost: and in Christ we have as well the one as other.

Out of all which this may be gathered; that this is the sum of our
salvation, that God so loved the world, Ioh. 3.16.
that he has given his only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him,
should not perish, but have everlasting life.

And therefore whosoever have not this faith, they are destitute of the spirit
of God; For hereby shall we know the spirit of God: 1. Ioh. 4.2.3.
every spirit which confesses, that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of
God: and every spirit that confesses not, that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, is not of God; but this is the spirit of Antichrist. But because in this
sum of the Christian faith, either distrust and doubling, or carnal
security and the liberty of the flesh do assail us; S. Paul preuents and
stops both those, when he says; This is a true saying; and these things I will
thou should affirm etc, First he remooues doubtfulnes, in that he says,
that it is a true saying* that we are saved by Christ Jesus. As though he
should thus say; there is no doubt to be moved in this speech; for that is
before spoken is firm, and undoubted, and certain, and cannot deceive any:
and therefore farewell they, that make doubts touching the maine points of the
Christian faith. For these words, this is a true saying, may fitly be referred
to the foregoing words, which entreated of the pith and sum of our salvation.
And by this phrase he shows the certainty of his doctrine; like as Christ in
the gospel declares the infallibility of his doctrine, when he says: Verily,
verily, I say unto you.

Wherefore the faithful must diligently note and remember this singular
comfort, in whatsoever troubles and afflictions. For our faith is continually
battered and beaten on, by manifold tentations and trials. Christ says, That
the time shall come, Ioh. 16.2.
that whosoever kills the godly, will think that he does God service: and
that the godly shall be betrayed of their parents, Luke 21.16.17.
and of their brethren, and kinsmen, and friends, and shall be hated of all
men, for his names sake. And when Paul had made report of his own persecutions
and afflictions which came unto him at Antiochia, at Iconium, and at Lystri: 2.
Tim. 3.11.12.
he adds presently a general conclusion: Yea, and all that will live godly in
Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. Now in the mids of these afflictions
and adversities, what can stay and help us: but a clear, and a good, and a
sound, and a settled conscience, grounded on the faith of Christ Jesus? And
therefore the Apostle witnesses, that the faith in Christ Jesus, is a most
sure and undoubted faith: this is a true saying.

And this sum of our salvation may be easily proved: because the whole
scripture does agree therein.

For that man is naturally wicked and ill disposed, Psalm. 14.2.3.
how plainly do David and Isaiah teach? David, when he says, that the Lord
looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see, if there were any,
that would understand, and seek God. And what was the sequel of Gods search?
All are gone out of the way, they are all corrupt, there is none that does
good, no not one. Isaiah, when he says, Isai. 64.6.
that we have all been as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness as
filthy cloutes, and we all do fade like a leaf, and our iniquities like the
wind have taken us away. Man being so polluted, was not able to save himself:
for then sacrifices could have appeased and pleased God; but sacrifices were
not able to perform that: Psalm. 50.5.9.10.11.12.13.
for it is said in the psalm by the Lord, That he will not reprove for
sacrifices, or burnt offerings, that have not been continually before him: I
will take no bullock out of thine house, says God, nor goats out of thy
foldes: for all the beasts of the forest are mine, and the beasts on a
thousand mountains: I know all the fowls on the mountains, and the wild
beasts of the field are mine; If I be hungry, I will not tell thee; for the
world is mine, and all that therein is: will I eat the flesh of ^^ls, or
drink the blood of goats? And another Prophet says; Isai. 1.11.12.13.
what have I to do with the multitude of your sacrifices, says the Lord? I am
full of the burnt offerings of rams, and of the fat of fed beasts, and I desire
not the blood of bullocks, nor of lambs, nor of goats: when ye come to
appear before me, who has required this of your hands to tread in my courts?
Bring no more oblations in vain: incense is an abomination unto me: I cannot
suffer your new moons, nor Sabbaths, nor solemn days, (it is iniquity,) nor
solemn assemblies.

And most evidently speaks the holy ghost by the mouth of Paul; Heb.
10.1.2.3.4.
that the law having the shadow of good things to come, and not the very
Image of the things, can never with those sacrifices, which they offer year by
year continually, sanctify the comers thereunto. For would they not then have
ceased to have been offered, because that the offerers once purged, should have
had no more conscience of sins? But in those sacrifices there is a
remembrance again of sins every year. For it is impossible that the blood of
^uls and goats should take away sins. If then legal sacrifices and
ceremonies were insufficient to abolish and take away our natural corruption;
there must of necessity be some other means. This means is Jesus Christ, who
is all in all; Col. 1.19.20.
for it pleased the father, that in him should all fulness dwell, and through
peace made by that blood of that his cross, to reconcile to himself through
him, all things, both which are in earth, and which are in heaven. Genesis 3.15.
and 22.18. and 49.10.
God promised, that Christ the seed of the woman should break the Serpents
head: and that in him all the kinreds of the earth should be blessed: and that
the scepter should not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiuer from between his
feet, unto Shiloh, that is, Christ the Messiah come, and the people shall be
gathered unto him.

Dut. 18.18. Act. 3.22.
Christ is he, at whom Moses pointed, when he foretold the children of Israel;
that the Lord their God should raise up unto them a Prophet, even of their
brethren, like unto him.

Christ is he, whom the types and ceremonies of the law prefigured and
signified; and namely the Paschall lamb; for the Baptist cries: Ioh. 1.29.
Matt. 27.51.
Behold that lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world.

And therefore the veil and partition of the holiest place, from the utter
part of the temple, did rent from the top to the bottom, when Christ suffered:
to show, that now there is no more distinction of nations, Act. 10.34.35.
and God is no accepter of persons; but in every nation he that fears him,
and works righteousness, is accepted with him. Christ is he, which has this
testimony of God the father from heaven; This is that my beloved son, Matt.
17.5. Ioh. 8.12.51.
in whom I am well pleased, hear him. And he himself calls us unto him,
saying, that he is that light of the world, and he that follows him, shall
not walk in darkness, but shall have that light of life: and that if a man
keep his word, he shall never see death.

He says of himself, that he is greater then the temple; greater then Jonas;
Matt. 1^.6.1.22.
greater then the wise Solomon.

And in the great and last day of the feast of the tabernacles, he cried,
saying; If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. Ioh. 7.37. Ioh.
17.11 15.17.21.24.
And to make it manifest, that our salvation is most dear unto him, he prays
most earnestly for the faithful, that they may be kept in the name of God; and
that they may be kept from evil, and that they may be sanctified by the word
of truth; and that they may live in unity and concord; and that at last they
may be with him in heaven, to be hold his unspeakable glory.

This is he, Matt. 13.2.
unto whom the multitudes resorted; and that taught with authority: and at
whose doctrine they were astonished, and at whose gracious words they maruailed.

And Christ is he, whom the Apostles preached; Act. 4.11.12.
namely, that he is the stone cast aside of the builders, which is become the
head of the corner: neither is there salvation in any other; for among men
there is given none other name under heaven, 1. Tim. 2.5.6.
whereby we must be saved: And that there is one God, and one Mediator between
God and man, which is the man Christ Jesus; which gave himself a ransom for
all men, to be that testimony in due time: 1. Ioh. 2.1.2.
And that if any man sin, we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ,
the just: and he is the reconciliation for our sins: and not for ours only,
but also for the sins of the whole world.

Ioh. 14.6.
So true is it which our Savior says to Thomas; I am the way, and the truth,
and the life.

Aug. super. Joan.
Which words Saint Austin thus interprets: Ambulare vis? ego sum via: falli non
vis? ego sum veritas: mori non vi^? ego sum vita: Will thou walk? I am the
way: will thou not be deceived? I am the truth: will thou not die? I am the
life. Man is here a pilgrim, and a soiourner, and a traveler: and has no
abiding City; and the place we seek for, and aspire unto is Heaven.

Every Christian aims at this mark, and sails to this Harborow; and runs
to this goal: yet there is but one right way, path, and course, Namely, CHRIST
JESUS. And therefore Christ says to Thomas, that he is the way to the
heavenly Father, and to everlasting joys.

If any be traveling toward Rome, Constantinople, Jerusalem, or any other
famous place; that he may travel the beter, he enquires the certain way: So
they that will travel to Heaven, must learn the true way; which is, to walk
in Christ, and by Christ, and through Christ. Man is sinful, and heaven is
purer man is mortal, and the joys of Heaven eternal: man is carnal, and
cannot discern spiritual things: And therefore since flesh and blood, as it
is merely natural and unregenerate, cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; man
must needs walk in the right and straight path, CHRIST JESUS.

And Christ is mot only the way to Heaven; but also the door of Heaven; as he
says, Ioh. 10.9.
I am the door; by me if a man enter in, he shall be safe, and he shall go
in and out, and find pasture. Christ is not only the door of heaven, but he
has the Keye of heaven; Reu. 3.7.
for he is ye holy one and the true one, who has the key of David, who
ope^s, and none shuts; and shuts, and none ope^s. CHRIST has not only the key
of heaven, but he is the Light of heaven; For that City needs nor Sun nor
Moon to lighten it, Reu. 21.23.
but the glory of God does enlighten it; and the light thereof is the Lamb
Christ Jesus. CHRIST is not only the light and burning lamp of Heaven; but the
leader and feeder of the heavenly Saints; for they shall hunger no more, nor
thirst no more; neither shall Sun, or any heat scorch them; because the
Lamb which is in the mids of the Throne, Reu. 7.16 17.
shall feed them, and lead them to the fresh and lively Fountains of waters;
and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.

CHRIST is not only the governor and leader of the heavenly souls, but
heaven is his kingdom; And therefore the thief said to Christ hanging on the
Cross; Lord, remember me, when thou co^mest into thy kingdom; And Christ
presently answered him, Today thou shall be with me in Paradise: Luke 23.
to teach us, that as the first Adam (for sin) was shut out of earthly
Paradise, and the Cherubims, or Angels kept the gate thereof with a flaming
sword; Genesis 3.
So Christ, the second Adam has satisfied for sin; and has sheathed ye sword
of Anger in ye scabberd mercy; and has opened the heavenly Paradise to all
belieuers. CHRIST is the true Iordane, that does wash away the spots of our
sins, like Naamans leprosy: and the true Arc that saues our souls from
sinking in iniquity: and the true ladder of Iaacob, whereby we mount to
heaven: and the true Joseph, that feeds our souls in the natural famine and
scarcity of grace and godliness: and the true Moses, that conducteth us through
the wilderness, and manifold Assaults of this wicked world: and the true
Ioshuah, that leads us into the land of Promise, and the heavenly Canaan,
flowing with milk and honey; and the tender-harted, and compassionate
Samaritane, that powers into our wounds of mind, both corrasiue wine, to fret
and cleanse them, and restauratiue oil, to heal and comfort them. Therefore
since man is by nature odious in the sight of God; since man cannot save
himself; since sacrifices and oblatio^s are unavailable; since Christ is that
alone reco^ciler of God and man, promised before the law, expressed and
represented in the ceremonies of the law, preached unto all Belieuers, by God
himself from heaven, and by the blessed Apostles in their sermons and
writings: Let us all rely on this sure foundation; and say with Paul, God forbid
that we should rejoice, but in the Cross of Christ Jesus. Gal. 6.14.
For this is a true saying, that we sinners are saved, not by our own works of
righteousness; but by the bountifulnes and mercy of the Lord, in Christ Jesus
our Savior. 2. Tim. 3.16.
And without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness; which is, GOD is
manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels, preached
unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World, and received up in glory.

Secondly, the holy Apostle stops the security and liberty of the flesh, when
he says; These things I will thou should affirm; That they which have
believed God, might be careful to show forth good works. It is naturally
engraft in all men to pamper the flesh, and the concupiscences thereof; and
they are loath to have their pleasing Appetites and Affections brideled. But it
is the duty and part of the minister to rebuke sin, and to persuade to
holiness of life.

Trusse up thy loins (says the Lord) to Jeremiah: Ier. 1.17.18.
And arise, and speak unto them, all that I command thee; Be not afraid of
their Faces; least I destroy thee, before I destroy them. For I, behold, I this
day have made thee a defenced City, and an iron Pillar, and walls of brass
against the whole land; against the Kings of Judah, and against the Princes
thereof, against the priests thereof: and against the people of the Land. And
the word of the Lord came to Ezekiell, saying: Son of man, Ezekiel. 3.17.18. and^
I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel; Therefore hear the
Word at my mouth, and give them warning from me. When I shall say unto the
wicked, thou shall surely die: and thou give not him warning, nor speak to
admonish the wicked of his wicked way, that he may live: the same wicked man
shall die in his iniquity, but thou have delivered thy soul. Likewise, if a
righteous man turn from his righteousness, and commit iniquity, I will lay a
stumbling block before him, and he shall die; because thou have not given him
warning, he shall die in his sin: and his righteous deeds which he has done,
shall not be remembered; but his blood will I require at thine hand.
Nevertheless, if thou admonish that righteous man, that the righous sin not,
and that he does not sin, he shall live, because he is admonished; also thou
have delivered thy soul. Ezekiel. 33.3. etc.
If when the watchman sees the sword come upon the land, he blow the Trumpet,
and warn the people; then he that hears the sound of the trumpet, and will
not be warned, if the sword come and take him away, his blood shall be upon
his own head: For, he has heard the sound of the trumpet, and would not be
admonished: therefore his blood shall be upon him: But he that receives warning
shall save his life. But if the watchman see the sword come, and blow not the
trumpet, and the people be not warned: if the sword come and take any person
from among them; he is taken away for his iniquity; but his blood will I
require at the watch-mans hand; So thou, o son of man, I have made thee a
watchman to the house of Israel, (says the Lord to Ezechiel.) This strait
charge laid on the Ministers of the word of God, made the Prophets to rebuke
vice and wickedness without fear.

How boldly did Eliah reprehend Ahab? How boldly did Nathan reprehend David?
1. King. 18 2. Sam. 12 Isai. 1.5.6 10.
How boldly did Isaiah reprehend the whole state of Judah? when he called the
chiefest Rulers the Princes of Sodom? and when he said of all the inhabitants
of the Land generally, The whole Head is sick, and the whole heart is heavy;
from the sole of the foot, unto the head, there is nothing whole therein, but
wounds, and swelling, and sores full of corruption; they have not been
wrapped, nor bound up, nor mollified with oil. How boldly did Jeremiah reprehend
the Jews? blowing his Trumpet, and saying; That the Lord would bring a great
destruction from the North? ^ere 4 7.
The Lion is come up from his den, and the destroyer of the Gentiles is
departed, and gone forth of his place to lay thy land waste, and thy Cities
shall be destroyed without an inhabitant. Iere. 7.33 34.
The carcasses of this people shall be meat for the fowls of the heaven, and
for the beasts of the earth, and none shall fray them away: Then I will cause
to cease from the Cities of Judah, and from the streets of Jerusalem the voice
of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the Bridegroom, and the voice
of the bride: for the Land shall be desolate. Luke 3.19.
How boldly did John Baptist reprehend Herod, for all the evil deeds which
he had done? Matthew. 23
How boldly did OUR SAVIOVR reprehend the hypocrisy, dissimulation, pride,
covetousness, and false Doctrine of the Scribes and Pharisees? And how boldly
did the Apostles reprehend the Idolatry and iniquity of the Nations, among
which they preached the Gospel?

Seeing therefore it so deeply concerns the ministers of the word and
gospel, Ioh. 21.15
to feed the flock and lambs of Christ, Act. 20.18.
and to take heed to the flocks, whereof the holy Ghost has made them
overseers: it is no marvel yt Paul wills Titus, and in Titus al other
shepherds of souls, to stir up all professors of Christ to lead their lives
in godliness, and in the fear of the Lord. I will (says the Apostle) that
thou should affirm: That is, that you should avouch it, as a thing most
certain, and in no case to be doubted of: For the foregoing words, (This is a
true saying,) may also be referred to that which follows. For Paul is
accustomed to use this sort of speaking, when he earnestly affirms a matter
ensuing: As when he says; This is a true saying, and by all means worthy to
be received, that Christ Jesus came into ye world to save sinners: 1. Tim. 1.15.
And when he says, This a true saying, If any man desire the office of a
Bishop, he desires a worthy work. And therefore, when he says, 1. T^m. 3.1
I will that thou affirm; He says thus in effect; I will that thou affirm
these things courageously, and with authority; and that thou urge this, and
insist on this, and omit Fables, and other vain things, which some do deliver.
Avouch these things, because they are true, and worthy to be believed.

Here we are admonished, that Ministers must stoutly affirm, that which
concerns Faith, and the edifying thereof. And we may gather, that the Minister
must affirm nothing, but that which is undoubted and certain; and that nothing
must be taught and preached in the Church of God, besides the word of God. For
who can be an affirmer, or an auoucher, but he that is assured, that he
preaches not the doctrines of men, but the Word of God?

And what is it, that the Minister must so firmly affirm? That they which
have believed God must be careful to show forth good works. That is, that they
which have believed God, should meditate on true, just, and good things. For it
becomes those that boast, that they are delivered from their sins, by the
free mercy and goodness of God, so to pass over their lives, as that they may
answer the profession of Christ, and not appear contrary to so great and
glorious promises. For they that have the Name of Christ in their mouth, and
do not follow his example in their life, are not unlike the trees, that
floorish every year with leaves, but never bring forth fruit. They are
green indeed as the Box tree; but they yield either no fruit, or little
fruit. For they seek their own, and respect their own; but they do not
seek and respect that which concerns the glory of God, and the good of their
neighbor.

Neither is Paul so careful of good works; as to neglect the root, which is
Faith; while he gathers the branches and fruits, which are good works: but he
has regard to both parts; and (as it is meet) he gives and allots the first
place to Faith. For he says, that they which have believed, should be careful
to show forth good works.

Whereby he means that Faith must go first, and works must follow. For
those works only are acceptable to God, that proceed from Faith, Heb, 11.6
without which, none can please God: Nay, they alone do know what good works
are, and are able to do them, who do believe in Christ: whereas all other,
are both blind in knowing, and unable in performing any manner of thing that is
good.

And the Apostle stays not here, but he adds, These things are good and
profitable unto men. In which words he yeeldes the reason, why he commands
Titu^ to teach and affirm these things in his Church; to wit, because they are
things true, and good, and right, and honest, and comely, and profitable. And
withal he intimates and signifies, that whatsoever other things are
delivered, they are not to be esteemed; because they are unprofitable and
unfruitful: as on the contrary, all that is commendable and praiseworthy, 1.
Tim. 4.8.
that avails to salvation, and promoteth godliness, which is profitable to
all things, and which has the promise of the life present, and of that that is
to come.

Now that this exhortation of the blessed Apostle may be the better perceived
and performed of us; let his words be diligently considered. Good work (says
he) are good, or convenient, or comely or such as ^eseeme Christians. Mal. 1.6.
For why? A father must be honored; and a Lord and Master must be obeyed: but
GOD is our Father, and we are his sons by grace and Adoption in CHRIST; and
God is our Lord and Redeemer, who ransomed us from the thraldom of the
spiritual Pharaoh and Egypt of sin, by the death and precious blood of his
most dearly beloved Son CHRIST JESUS. Since then our sanctification is the
will of God our heavenly Father, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3.
and it is his pleasure, that we should live godly; shall we not obey his will
and commandment? In great horses prepared for the wars, it is chiefly
regarded, that they be flexible, and easy to be turned with the bridle: For
what is it worth, if an horse run a fair race, either out of the way, or
else not as ye rider will, but as himself will? So in the faithful and true
Christians, ordained for the spiritual wars of Christ, no virtue and good
quality is more required, then prompt and ready obedience, to submit our wills
to the Lords will.

We are by nature fleeting, and running after all vanity and wickedness; and
therein we are like to water, and we must be stayed, as the water is. And how
is that?

The water is very hardly stayed, and scarce stayed with it own bonds;
because naturally it flows abroad; but it may well be limited and bounded
by some other thing, and kept from continual fleeting: So our nature, that
flits still after the transitory vanities of this world, is very da^gerously
bounded by our own will; For it so flows continually after concupiscences
and pleasures; but it is best stayed only by the will of God; after whose
similitude and likeness it was at first created. The Smith when he prepares
any work, thinks on him for whom he prepares it; that he may fit it after
the breadth, and length, and proportion prescribed unto him; For if either he
forget the form delivered him; or else do willingly despise it, he must needs
err in the performance of the work: in like manner, we must always carefully
retain in memory, and obediently practice the will and commandment of God;
or else we shall err in the actions of our calling. Who knows not, 1. Cor.
12.27.
that Christ is the head; and the faithful are the members? Let us therefore
be sound members, and not sick of the palsy. For as the parts of the body
that are attainted with the Palsy, do not move, as the head directs: so
those Christians are holden of the palsy of soul, that do not move as CHRIST
the head commaundes: but as perfect and sound parts of ye body are easily
moved, as the sense and reason of the head does lead; So sound and true
Christians are most ready to accomplish those things which Christ the head
enioynes. Are not also our good works due unto God? and must we not do them,
to declare our thankfulness toward him, of whom we have received so many
and so great Blessings, both temporal and eternal? We are debtors, not to
the flesh, to live after the flesh: Romans 8.12.
For if we live after the flesh, we shall die; but if we mortify the deeds
of the body, by the spirit, we shall live. Luke 1.74.5.
And why has the Lord delivered us out of the hands of our enemies; but that
we should serve him without fear, all the days of our life, in holiness and
righteousness before him? We are justified, we are the sons of God, we are the
holy temple of the Lord, we are made in CHRIST Kings and Priests we are
anointed by the holy Ghost: and to what purpose have we obtained this dignity?
not that we should live as we list; but that being clothed with the
righteousness of the new man, we should with mind, mouth, life, profession,
and practice, set forth the praise of God. For how ca^ justification and
sa^ctification be sundered If we be good Trees, we will bring forth good
fruits: if we be the sons of God, Mat. 7 17 Romans 8.14 1. Io. 3.9.
we will be led by the spirit of God: if we be borne of God, we will not commit
sin, with delight and greedines: but on the contrary, we will study to live
holilie: for the seed of God abides in us: that is, the holy spirit of God,
which is called holy, because he works holiness in us, and by his virtue and
operation as by a certain seed, we are regenerate and made new men. We must
remember, that we are enrolled soldiers in Christ's Camp, to fight his battles
against the Flesh, the World, and Satan. Let us therefore, not receive the
grace of God in vain; let us hold fast the Faith; let us fight a good fight;
let us finish our course; let us seek to please him, that has chosen us to be
Soldiers. A good soldiour must be obedient and faithful: obedient to execute
his commandment; Faithful to stick to his Captain in all dangers. Scipio
Major pointing at his soldiers that he had in Sicilie said that there was not
one of them, Plut. in Romans Apoph.
that would not ascend into a tower, and from thence cast himself head^ong
into the Sea, if he did command it. Bapt. Tulgosius. l. 1. c. 1. rerum memorab.
And one remembers an example of such obedience: For when ye ^a^le of Campania,
was Ambassador to the Prince of the Assasines in Sy^i^; the Prince to show the
great obedience of his people, showed the the Earl certain men that stood on
the top of a tower, and called one by name, commanding him to leap down from
the tower: the fellow immediately obeyed the commandment, and died with the
fall: and the Earl could hardly refrain the Prince from commanding the rest
also to do the like.

Shall there be such obedience given to Earthly rulers; and shall we refuse
to obey the commandment of our Heavenly King? specially when he craves, not
that we should vainly spend our lives, but that we would subdue our
affections, our corrupt desires, our inordinate concupiscences, and ungodly
motions. Let us not therefore be bare protestants, and not performers; Let us
not live in the reformed Church, and have deformed manners; Let us not be
entertained in Christ's Camp, and bear his colors; yet wish the enemy well;
and promote the cause of the enemy; and seek opportunity with Judas to
betray CHRIST; and with the traitorous soldiour to fly to the enemy. What is
profession worth, except practice be coupled therewith? We know what S. James
says; Iam. 1.22.23.24.25
Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves:
For if any hear the word, and do it not, he is like unto a man that beholds
his n^turall face in a glass: for when he has considered himself, he goes
his way, and forgets immediately what manner of man he was: but who so
looks in the perfect law of liberty, and continues therein, he not being a
forgetful hearer, but a dooer of the work, shall be blessed in his deed. And
we know what ye lord says; Mat. 7.21
Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into ye kingdom of
heaven; but he that does my Fathers will which is in heaven. And what gains
that servant that knows his masters will, and does it not; August.
but to be beaten with many stripes? He is thy best servant (says an ancient
Father, speaking to God) not ye desires to hear of thee, what he would; but
rather yt is willing to perform what he hears. And therefore whereas the poet
Hesiod^ was much commended by most men for his devise, in that he gave the
chiefest wisdom, to him that knows of himself what is good and meet; and the
next to him that hearkens to another, when he himself is ignorant.

Diog. Laert.
Zeno Citticus did correct that sentence of Hesiode, and did attribute the
chiefest wisdom to him, that hears the good counsel of another; and the
next to him, that is wise of himself: And his reason for the animaduersion
was; because he that is wise of himself, and gives advise to another, has
but the understanding and knowledge of the matter: but he that hearkens to
counsel delivered, puts the thing in execution and practice. Besides this, ye
Apostle says, that goodworks are profitable. And to whom are they profitable?
to our Neighbors, and to our selves.

Good works are profitable to our brethren; in that we comfort and relieve
them by our good deeds; and we stir them up by our example to fear the
Lord; and they are caused to praise God, for bestowing such grace upon us. And
good works are profitable to our selves, in that they are the fruits of our
faith; 2. Pet. 1.10. Iam. 2.17.
and thereby they assure us of our election and vocation; and being by them
declared to be new creatures, we cherish in our selves the hope of eternal
life. As for the commodity that we reap by good works, what speech can be
answerable thereunto? since the Lord has promised, to reward our good works
most largely and ple^tifully, with blessings as well temporal as spiritual? Deuteronomy.
28. Leu. 26.3.


Let us not therefore be weary of well doing; but let us behold the recompen^e
of the reward; for in due season we shall reap, Gal. 6.9.
if we faint not. If we be not careful to show forth good works, we must not
expect the reward: if we do not trim and prepare our lamps with oil, Matt.
25.2.
against the coming of the bridegroom, we shall not enter into the palace of
glory: if we do not work, while we have the light, the darkness will come;
Ioh. 12.35.
And he that walks in the dark, knows not whither he goes. It is not
enough to abstain from evil, but we must also do good. Remember, Matt. 25.30.
how the unprofitable servant was cast into utter darkness: and why? not
because he was wicked, but because he was idle; and not for that he committed
ill, but because he omitted good. Indeed it is hard to do well, and to
persevere in well doing: For there are many intisements and allurements to
iniquity. But let us hear our Savior: Strive to enter in at the strait gate:
Luke 13.24. Matt. 7.14.8.
because the gate is strait, and the way narrow that leads unto life. Though
the gate be strait; yet if we struggle and strive to enter* we shall find an
entrance: for whosoever asks, receives: and he that seeks, finds: and to
him that knocks, it shall be opened. The eshnick Greek Poet partly perceived
this by the glimmering light of natural reason, and therefore said; Hes.
Tes ^' hareres id^ota the^i proparoithen ethecan athanatei: That God had put
sweat before virtue: and that the way unto it was long, and tedious, and rough
at the first: but after one aspired to the top, it was as easy then, as it was
uneasy before. And the Latin Poet could also say.

Hor. l. 1. Epist. 2. Ep.
Dimidium facti, qui caepit, habet; sapere aude, Incipe. He that has begun,
has half ended: be conragious to follow virtue: begin once. There must be a
beginning attempted, to do well: and when the ye is broken, the wading
thorough is not difficult. And thereupon another wittily discanteth.

Incipe, dimidium facti est caepisse; Auson.
supersit
Dimidium, rursum hoc incipe and efficies.
Begin (says he,) for to begin, is to end half; and when thou have begun, if
there remain half, begin again, and thou shall end all. Virtue is like the
Palm tree, and the Lote tree the Palm has a sharp and rough rind, and the
Lo^^ has a bitter pill; but both the one, and the other have most sweet
fruit. Chrysostom says notably, Orat. 4. Aduersus Indaeos.
that as in moneys, he that has gained two crowns, is ready to gain ten,
or twenty crowns, so it falls out in virtue; he that does a good work once,
and once performs his duty, he is thereby encouraged and stirred up to do more
good, and to add ver^ue to virtue. And another says, Stobaeus ser. 1. de Vir^.
that as they that begin to climb a ladder, go from round to round, till they
aspire to the top; so he that has once begun to do well, mounts higher and
higher. We see the most gay picture, begins from rude draughts, and lines, and
shadows, and proceeds from color to color, till at last it be absolute: so
virtue and the habit of well doing, is not presently engraft in us; but it
rises to full grows by daily increases. Epist. 86.
It was ingeniously applied of Seneca; that as Phidias was skillful to make
statues and Images, not only of marble, and of brass: but if he had vilder
and courser matter, he could likewise make a statue thereof, as good as the
matter would permit: so (says he) a wise man, (and why not a Christian?)
endued with virtue, will show it in riches, if he be rich: in poverty, if he
be poor: in authority, if he be a Magistrate: in health, or sickness,
according to his place: quamcunque fortunam acceperit, aliquid ex ca memorabile
efficiet; in whatsoever state he live, he will do some praiseworthy thing
therein.

On the other side, as good works are good and profitable, so evil works are
dangerous and unprofitable. Psalm. 5.6. Romans 2.25. 2. Tim. 2.6. Ephesians. 4.30.
For evil deeds are displeasing to God, that hates all the works of
iniquity. Evil deeds disgrace our profession, and Gods glory: what lies in
us. Evil deeds make us the slaves and vassals of Satan: and by them he
domineers over us. Evil deeds hinder all spiritual exercises: Deuteronomy. 28.
for by them faith faints, the conscience is hurt, prayer ceases, and the holy
spirit of God is grieved. Evil deeds do procure and pull on us punishments,
both public and private: as wars, famines, pestilence, and the like. At a
word, evil deeds do merit eternal torments after this life; For they that
do commit evil works, have no part in Christ's Kingdom, Gal. 5.21. 1. Cor.
6.10.
neither shall possess it. And is it so? Is death the stipend and wages of
iniquity? What exhortation then is fitter, then that of the holy Apostle? Let
not sin therefore reign in our mortal body, that we should obey it in the
lusts thereof. That is, Romans 6.23
let us not freeze in the dregs of ungodliness: Let us not wallow and welter
in the puddle of wickedness: Romans 6.1^
Let us compare and examine our lives and doings by the rule and line of Gods
laws and statutes: and where we find our faultines and imperfection; (and who
will be able to say, My heart is clean? Since ye righteous falls seven times
in a day:) therefore let us heartily repent for the same; and beseech God the
Father to forgive our offenses, for the merits and Passion of his dearly
beloved Son CHRIST JESUS. Let the swearer and blasphemous person forsake his
Oaths, and vain profaning of Gods sacred name: Let the abuser of the
Sabbath, and neglecter of Prayer, and Sermons, and Sacraments, reclaim
himself, and sanctify the Lords Sabbath: Let the envious and malicious person
lay aside his hatred and spitefulnes: Let the covetous and greedy mizer,
forsake his inordinate love of money, which is the root of all evil: Let the
drunkard abstain from drunkenness, and the fornicator from uncleanness; and the
hypocrite from counterfeiting; and the liar from slanderous and uncharitable
reports; and the brawler and conte^der from strife and d^ssention: To be short,
let the ignorant of the mysteries of their salvation, seek to be filled with
the knowledge of Christ, and spiritual understanding; And let the breaker and
offender of Gods Laws persuade himself, that it is sufficient to have spent
the time past in wa^tonnes, lusts, concupiscences, and abominable
tra^sgressions; and let him not suffer sin to reign and swaye longer in his
mortal body. CHRIST our high Priest, Heb. 7.26
that offered a full, perfect, and sufficient sacrifice for our Redemption, was
holy, innocent, undefiled, separate from sinners, and higher then ye Heavens.
And this our holy, and high Priest has sanctified us by his Sacrifice, that
we should also be holy, innocent, and undefiled; For, Heb. 2.11
He that sa^ctifieth, and they which are sanctified, are all of one. And CHRIST
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, Tit. 2.14.
and purge us to be a peculiar people unto himself, zealous of good works.
Therefore we ought also (as being sanctified by Christ our redeemer, as being
members of so worthy an head, as being made conformable to so excellent an
Image;) we ought also to loath, detest, and abhor sin and iniquity. F^^e
from si^ne as from a serpent for if thou co^mest too near it, it will bite
thee: Ecclus. 21.2.3.
the teeth thereof are as the teeth of a Lion, to slay the souls of men: All
iniquity is as a two edged sword, the wounds therefore cannot be healed:
says the Wise man.

Consider, how pestilentiall, how horrible, how foul a thing sin is; and
tell, whether it be a fit guest to be harbored and lodged of us, or not. What
is it, that makes a separation between God and our silly souls, but sin?
Hearken what the Lord says by his holy Prophet: Behold, Isai. 59.1.2.
the Lords hand is not shortened, that it cannot save; neither is his Ear
hea^e, that it cannot hear; but your iniquities have separated between you
and your God, and your sins hau^ hid his Face from you, that he will not
hear. And how un, speakeable a loss is it, to be separated and divorced from
GOD? As almost every one offers wrong to a Widow, because she wants a
protector: So every unclean spirit, and every creature rises up against the
soul that is a widow: Psalm. 70.10.11.
that is deprived of the GRACE OF GOD; And the spiritual Foes that seek such
a soul, take counsel together, and say: God has forsaken that Soul,
Persecute and take it; for there is none to deliver it.

The Ship that has lost her Mast, and Rudder, and Governor, yeeldes to the
flawes and floods, is driven hither and thither, and tossed by every Tempest,
and at last is dashed against a Rock, and is broken in pieces: and the City
that is besieged of most cruel enemies, having no Walls nor Bulwarks to
defend it, and no Garrison nor strength of Soldiers to protect it; but the
Citizens that are in it are in hostility and civil discord; this city must
needs be sacked and ransacked: Even so the wretched soul, destitute of the
love and favor of God, it is exposed to innumerable floods of temptations, and
is near to shipwreck; it is as a prey ready to be torn and rent by her
enemies, Satan, the world, and the Flesh; and it is cast forth, by the very
body that it quickens, to unclean spirits to be devoured.

When the King remooues his Court, all the Kings household, and all the
Courtiers depart with him; and we say, that the Court is removed; Ezekiel. 18.14.
So when God departs from the soul, all the Angels that are Gardians to the
soul, and celestial Courtiers, depart also from it; and the very good works
which were formerly done, are forgotten, and do leese their reward. For so
says the Prophet; If the righteous man turn away from his righteousness, and
commit iniquity, and do according to all the abominations that the wicked
man does, shall he live? all his righteousness that he has done, shall not be
mentioned; but in his transgression that he has committed, and in his sin
that he has sinned, in them shall he die.

Of the departing of this heavenly Court Saint Basin thus says, In Psa. 33
Like as smoke drives away Bees, and a stinking smell chases away Doves: so the
noisome smell of sin puts to flight the Angel, that is appointed to defend
us. And so Josephus writes, De tello Iudaico Li. 7. c. 12.
that when Jerusalem was to be besieged of the Romans, in which siege it was
destroyed, before Vespasian came with his train, there was a voice of Angels
heard therein, crying, Migremus hinc, let us depart hence. Cyp^ian therefore
says pithily; Hoc sunt peccata lapsis, Ser. 5. de lapsis.
quod grando frugibus, quod turbidum sydus arboribu^, quod armentis pestilens
vastitas, quod nauigijs saeua tempestas: sin to the offender, is as hail to
corn, as a scorching star to trees, as a murraine to beasts, as a fierce
tempest to ships. For sin destroys the fruit of all good work, corrupts the
powers of the soul, and brings man wholly to destruction. If a Merchant after
long and perilous sailing from the Indies, bring home gold, silver, and many
precious commodities, and the next day after his return, do hazard all his
wealth at one cast of the dice, and so loose it: who will not call him, both
foolish, and wretched? but in the same case, and far worse is he, that will
leese the good things which he has already wrought, for the pleasure of
sin, and by suffering it to reign in his mortal body? If then we will not
be divorced and divided from God; if we will not be a prey to all our
spiritual enemies; if we will not chase away the holy Angels of God, which are
the ministering spirits to the heirs of salvation; Heb. 2.14.
if we will not have our former good deeds forgotten and unrewarded; let us
not suffer sin to rule, manage, and govern us: but let us set before us the
example of Lysimachus the King of Macedonia, Plut. in lib. de ^^enda bona
valetudine.
who waging war among the Scythians, being enforced by extreme thirst, to
yield both himself and his host to his enemies; after he had drank cold
water, he burst out into these words; Good God! for how short a pleasure, how
great a kingdom have I lost? so let every sinner say, when the pleasure of sin
is past; O what an heavenly kingdom have I lost, for short pleasures sake! let
him sincerely say thus, and be truly sorry, and rise by unfeigned repentance,
and not throw his soul again into the like danger, by suffering sin to
have the upper hand, and to reign in his mortal body. For there is almost no
sinner, but if he be demanded, why he commits sin, he will allege
pleasure and delectation for a reason. Call the drunkard to an account; he will
speak of the strength and pleasantnes of his liquour. Call the unchaste to an
account; he will speak of the Sirens Song, and alluring bait of
incontinencie. Call the covetous and greedy to an account; and he will speak
of the cordial glittering and tentation of money. Call the proud and ambitious
to an account; and he will speak of the tickling and provocation of honor and
reputation. Call the malicious revenger to an account; and he will speak of
the delitiousnesse of revenge; and how it is sweeter then life it self, to
tread down, and to subdue an Enemy. Thus pleasure tempts a sinner to commit
iniquity: but what is the end and sequel of this delight? What but this? that
the pleasure of sin, which in the beginning is as sweet as the honey comb,
in the end becomes as bitter as gall and wormwood. When sin is permitted to
reign, and has the reins loosed unto it, then at last comes the worm of
conscience, then comes the judgment of God, which the ungodly cannot escape,
Pro 2^.1. ^s^^. ^7 ^0 1 ^o. 3 2^
then the wicked flee, when none pursues them; then the wicked are as a
tumbling sea, which cannot rest then the conscience has no tranquillity and
peace: for destruction and unhappiness are in the ways of the obstinate and
obdurate sinner, and the way of peace have they not known: and because they
have eaten the sour grape of iniqui^ie, their teeth are set on edge, and they
cannot discern and taste, I^r. 31.3^
how good and gracious the Lord is. Behold ^osep^s brethren: when they went
first into Egypt and had endured some vexation, they presently re^embred the
sin which they had committed twenty years before against their brother
Iosep; Genesis 42.11.
saying, We ius^ly suffer this, (...) w^ ^^^^ed against our Brother We th^^
w^llowed in sin, shall fear the rattling o^ ^ leaf: shall think every bush
to be a torme^ter; shall imagi^e that the flashes of lightni^g shall presently
consume him. This is that which the Psalmist says; Beho^d, he shall travel
with wickedne^: Psa. 14.1,
for he has conc^iued misch efe, but he shall bring forth a lie: he has made
a pit, and dug it, and is f^llen into the pit that he made. Upon which Saint
^hr^s^stom^ says, that the travel of a sinner, is not like the travel of a
woman with child: for a woman, though she endure extreme pains in her
travel, yet for joy that a man is borne into the world, she ^emembers her
sorrows no more: but ^he ^rauell of a sinner is like the hatching of the
viper, wherein the young brood gnaweth out the damnes belly; and though there
be del^g^t and pleasure in the conception, nourishment, and bringing forth of
wickedness, yet when the sinner be holds the ugly and deformed child of
sin, he is touched with ^nguish and remorce of conscience. And so Saint
Austen speaks truly; Vo uisti Domin^, Confess. l. 1. c. 1.
and ua^st* vt omnis animus mordinatus sibi ipsi sit ^ae^; O Lord, it is thy
will, and to it comes to p^sse, that every inordinate and sinful mind should
be a pu^ishment to it self. Therefore since the reigning of sin in our
mortal bodies, does cause the sting and worm of conscience at the last; let
it not suffer it to reign in our mortal bodies; neither give our selves over
to ungodliness, to commit sin even with greedines; that we may enjoy that
peace with God, and quietness of mind, Pro. 19.13.15.
which is a continual feast and most dainty banquet, more to be desired and
embraced then all the gold and treasures of the rich Indies.

Thus we have seen good and bad, life and death, cursing and blessing: and who
will now doubt, what to choose, and what to refuse? But as when the sweetness and
profit of meat is commended to one that is hungry, and the comfort of drink is
declared to the thirsty; this is no remedy, but rather a greater grief to the
hungry and thirsty; except a way be showed them, how they may satisfy their
needs: so all the exhortation to good works, and commendation of them, shall be
vneffectual; and rather meat and drink shall be showed to the hungry and
thirsty, then leave given them to eat and drink, if it do not appear, what
good works are to be done, and whence they are to be learned. The Law and
commandments of God, are the path that we must walk in; and the lantern that
must direct our steps; and the goal that we must run at; and the
looking-glass, wherein we may see what good works are required of us. It is
hard to find out, Nazianz ^orat. de ^aupertate
what virtue is most excellent, that we may attribute the chief praise unto
it; says Gregory the Divine: as it is hard in a medowe or garden replenished
with diverse and fragrant flowers, to discern the flower that is fairest, and
smells most sweetly; since this flower, and that flower does allure our eye, and
smelling unto it, and does (as it were) desire that it may be plucked first.
Lack we patience? we shall learn it out of the word of God? Lack we
humility? there we shall learn it. Lack we sobriety and temperance, there
we shall learn it. Lack we wisdom and understanding in the knowledge of
salvation? there we shall learn it. Lack we zeal to the Gospel, and prayer?
there we shall learn it. Lack we repentance for our sins and ungodliness?
there we shall learn it. Whatsoever we lack or desire to know, touching our
duty to God, or man, there we shall learn it abundantly. For the law of God
is perfect, converting the soul; Psalm. 19.7.8.
the testimony of the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom unto the simple: the
statutes of the Lord are right, and rejoice the heart: the commandment of the
Lord is pure, 2. Tim. 3.26.7.
and gives light unto the eyes. And the whole scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to convince, to correct, and to
instruct in righteousness; that the man of God may be absolute, being made
perfect unto all good works.

Wherefore let us embrace the Word of God, and muse thereupon day and night:
Let us love God with all our heart, soul, mind and power: Let us be truly
penitent for our offenses, that the misery which our sins have committed may
be taken away: Let us be fervent in prayer and supplication; and above all
things, let us pray CHRIST JESUS who is the invincible Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, to strengthen us against that coaring Lion, who continually walks about
seeking whom he may devour; and who is that saving Serpent, lifted up first on
the word of the cross, and after on the theater of the world by the preaching
of his Gospel, to make us wise against the assaults of that old and subtle
serpent? and who is that white and immaculate Lamb, that has vanquished the
tyranny of Satan, to grant us his silly sheep the assistance of his sacred
spirit, that confirmed and strengthened by him, we may gloriously overcome and
triumph over all the attempts of our ghostly enemies; and that from our hearts
we may obey the Lord, walking in newnes of life; and from henceforth live not
after the lusts of men, but after the will of God? Finally, let us hear the
summarie abridgement of all: Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, Phil. 4.8.9.
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are worthy love, whatsoever
things are of good report, if there be any virtue, or if there be any praise,
Jews think on these things, and do these things, and the God of peace shall
be with us. Amen.

THE CVRBING OF COVETOVSNES.
1 Thessalonians. 4.3.6. This is the will of God; that no man oppress or defraude his
brother in any matter: for the Lord is auenger of all such things, as we also
have told you before-time, and testified.


GOd of his infinite wisdom has so ordained, that no man should live in this
world, so furnished with all things necessary, but that he should stand in
need of some one thing, or other, which other men may afford unto him. Diverse
are gods gifts, whither we respect the soul or the body, or the blessings of
the earth, that do comfort both: and diversely does the Lord bestow these his
gifts, distributing severally as he lists; unto some more, unto some less,
unto every one something: unto no man al things. For why? as God has tempered
and disposed the body of man, 1. Cor. 12.14. etc.
that every member should have and execute his distinct and proper duty and
function; so that the eye sees for the whole body, and the hand works for
the whole body, and the foot goes for the whole body, and every member is
delighted and sympathizeth, and suffers each one with the other; least
otherwise there might be dissension in the body, if one part were not beholding
to another: So also God has ordered, for the preservation of society, love,
and amity among men, that one should want wealth, and another have riches to
aid the needy; one should want counsel, and another have discretion to advise
the simple; one should want strength, and an other have might to defend the
weak; one should lack this, or that, and therefore seek to buy; and another
have store; and therefore be ready to sell. If all were full, if all had
plenty, if all did abound; where would love and charity be; which arises
from nothing more, then from the necessity that is cast upon us, to be
beholding one to another?

But such is the malice of Satan to mankind, that what God has appointed for
the good of men, and for their mutual society and concord, he labors by all
means to turn to the damage and hurt of mankind. For where Gods providence
has decreede, that some should abound, and some lack; and some should buy,
and some sell; to the end we might the more regard and esteem one of the
other; Satan upon this necessary intercourse and traffic of business
between man and man, takes occasion to bring in violence, and wrong, and
oppression, and craft, and deceit, and subtlety.

And therefore the Apostle Saint Paul to reduce things to their right order and
performance, tells the Thessalonians, and in them all other Christians, That
this is the will of God, that no man oppress or defraude his brother in any
matter: for the Lord is auenger of all such things; as he had told beforetime,
and testified.

In which words there is a prohibition, not to deal unjustly, a reason, why no
unjust dealing should be used; and an insinuation, or implication of the duty
of the Minister. The prohibition is in these words; This is the will of God,
that no man oppress, or defraude his brother in any matter: the reason of the
prohibitioa is in these words; For the Lord is auenger of all such things: the
insinuation of the Ministers duty is in these words, As we also have told you
before time, and testified.

The pro^^^^tion.
This is the will of God, that no man oppress, or defraude his brother in any
matter. When one vpbraided Lysander the Lacedemonian Captain, that he wrought
many exploites by fraud and subtlety; it is reported, that he answe^ed
smilingly, (...).
that when a man could not obtain his purpose by a Lions skin, he must sow a
fores skin upon a Lions skin: meaning, that if an intent could not be attainted
by rigor and severity, it must be achieved by craft and subtlety. Cic.
Offic. lib. 1.
And agreeably thereunto said the Roman Orator, That a wrong is done two
ways; either b^ force, or by fraud: and th^^ fraud is the Foxes, and force
the Lions. But he cretically censureth as well the one, as the other; and says,
That both these wa^es of doing wrong must be most f^r off from a Man. Both
these kinds of wronging are here forbidden by the Apostle, when he says,
This is the will of God, that no man oppress or defraude his brother in any
matter For by oppression he means open violence of the Lion, when the
stronger apparently presumes to hurt the weaker: and by defrauding, he means
the craft and subtlety of the Fox; that secretly creepes in, and covertly
vndermindes pretending one thing, and entending the contrary.

For so Saint Basil defines defraud^ng; in Psalm 33
Fraud (says he) ^s a close doin^ of ^ll, offe^^d to any vnd r^ show of good
things.

And thereunto subscribes the Ciuilian, Seruius.
when he says; That fraud is a practice to deceive another, when one thing is
done, and an other thing is fained to be done. So that this is the sense of
Saint Paul's words; that it is the will and commandment of God our heavenly
father, that we should do no manner of injury to our brethren and fellow
Christians: either by open oppress^on and violence, if we be stronger then
they: or by secret guile and cunning, if we be wiser then they. Neither let any
ask, why he should do so? for this is a cause urgent and enforcing enough, to
use plain dealing and sincerity; because it is the will of God. For if a
subject, and a servant, and a Tenant, and a child, have sufficient cause, to
avoid this or that enormitie and unlawful deed; for that it displeases, and
is strictly forbidden by his Prince, master, Landlord, or father: who can be
so senseles, as once to think; or so shameless, as once to say; that the will
and pleasure of our eternal king, master, Lord, and father, is not a motive
powerful enough, to compel us to use just and upright dealing? Leu. 19.^5.36.
And that it is Gods will; see the 19. of Leu. where it is thus written: Ye
shall not do unjustly in judgment, in line, in weight, or in measure: you
shall have just balances; true weights; a true Epah, and a true Hin: as though
it were said for our capacity, that we must have a true yard, a true elle, a
true bushel, a true pecke; a true quart, Pro. 11.1.
a true pint. See the 11. of Salomons proverbs; where it is thus written:
False balances are an abomination unto the Lord; but a perfect weight pleases
him. See the 6. of the proverbs; Pro. 16, 11.
where it is thus written: A true weight and balance are of the Lord: all the
weights of the bag are his work: as if he should say; if weights be true and
just, they are Gods work, and he delights in them: but if they be false, they
are the work of the devil, and to their condemnation that use them. See the
2. of the proverbs; Prou. 20.10.
where it is thus written: diverse weights, and diverse measures, both these
are even abomination unto the Lord: that is, it is odious to the Lord, when we
use variable weights and measures; a greater and a longer to buy withal, and a
lesser and a shorter to sell withal. (...) 6.11 ^^ 1^.
See the 6. of Micahs prophecy; where it is thus written: Shall I iust^^e the
wicked balances, and the bag of deceitful weights? says the Lord; nay, where
men are full of cruelty, and speak lies and have deceitful tongues in their
mouth, God will make them sick, in smitting them, and in making them desolate,
because of their sins: they shall eat, but they shall not be satisfied; they
shall sow, but not reap; they shall tread the Olives, but not be anointed
with the oil; and they shall make sweet wine, but they shall not drink wine.
By all these places we see clearly, that it is Gods will, that we should
decline from fraudulent and false dealing.

And whence proceeds violence and defrauding but from coveting and unlawful
desiring of our neighbors goods and commodities? Therefore when the Apostle
says, that we must not opprsse, or defraude our brother in any matter; he
says this also, that we must not covet, and be greedy of that which is not
ours. Luke 12.15.
The same lesson Christ our Lord gives us: Take heed, (says he) and beware of
covetousness: for though a man have abundance, yet his life stands not in his
riches. The same lesson the Apostle gives: Heb. 13.5
Let your conversation (says he) be without covetousness, and be content with
those things that ye have. Ephesians. 5.3.
The same lesson the Apostle gives again: fornication (says he) and all
uncleanness, or covetousness, Let it not be once named among you, as it becomes
Saints. The same lesson the Apostle gives again: Col. 3.5.
Mortify (says he) your members which are on the earth, fornication,
uncleanness, the inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness,
which is Idolatry. And why does he call covetousness Idolatry, and worshipping
of Images? because ye covetous person does trust in his money, and adore his
money, and make it his Idol, and call it his god, and fear to touch it, and
empaire it, as the Idolater does his holy Relic.

Ser. 9 i would pass.
Leo says, That the soul which is greedy of gain, will not fear also to
perish for a little; and that there is no sign of Justice in that heart in
which Avarice has taken up her dwelling place. H^mi. 13. in ^. Mat.
Chrysostom says, That there is nothing that makes a man so much subject to
the D uell, as to be overcome with the desire of having. Timon called
vnsatiablenes (elementu malorum,) the beginning and first original of evils.
Stob Ser. 10.
B^on called Covetousness (Improbitatis Metropolin) the mother and chief
Metropolitan city, in which all iniquity dwells. Act. 2 in Verrem.
Cicero says, That there is nothing so holy, that may not be profaned;
Nothing so defensed, that may not be vanquished by money. Therefore the oracle
of Apollo Pythius answered, and foretold; (He philochrematia Spartan heloi,
allo de ouden:) that Sparta should be overthrown by nothing but Avarice. And
that there be not only a bare affirmation in words, but also a farther
confirmation by examples and proofs; let us consider the fruits and effects of
covetousness. Josh. 7.
Covetousness made Acha^ to steal the Babylonish garment, the 2^0. shekels of
silver, and the wedge of gold; whereby he provoked the anger of God against the
whole host of Israel. Judge. 16.
Covetousness made Delilah to deceive Sampson, and to deliver him into the hands
of the Philistims. Covetousness made Gehazi the servant of Elizaeus, 2. King. 5.
to run after Naaman the Syrian Captain, and to forge a lie unto him, for
two talents of silver, and two change of raiments. Matt. 26.15.
Covetousness made Judas Iscariot to sell his Master, and our Savior Jesus
Christ, for thirty pieces of silver. Covetousness made the soldiers that
guarded Christ's tomb, Matt. 28.13.
to deny the resurrection of Christ, and to noise abroad this saying among the
Jews, that his disciples came by night, and stole him away while they slept.
Covetousness made the Pharisees to scoff at Christ's doctrine. Luk 16.14. Act. 5.
Covetousness made Ananias and Sapphira to lie to the holy Ghost, and to
interuert part of the price of their possession. Covetousness made Vespasian the
Roman Emperor to disgrace his high estate with base indignity: Su^ton in
Vespas.
for when he had appointed a reuenew to be paid for urine; and his son Titus
had admonished him, that it did disparage his place; he gave no answer, till
the first payment was made; and then holding that money before his son; Lucri
bonus estodor ex re qualibet.
he asked, whither the smell offended him? and when his son said, No: yet
(said he) this came of urine. Again, when certain Ambassadors had told him,
that there was a decree made, for erecting of a Statue for him of a great
price; he commanded them to erect it presently: and showing forth his hand
folden up together: behold (says he) a prop and pillar for the Statue:
meaning, that what money they had decreed to expend on his Statue, when he was
dead, they should deliver into his hand, while he was alive.

Again, when his Muletour lept down in travel, as if he would shoe his
Mules: but in deed to give time and space to one that had a plaint in law, to
have access to the Emperor: Vespasian suspecting the fetch, asked of the
Muletour, what was the price of the shoeing? and took part of the gain.

Again, when one of his dear servants had made intercession for one, (whom he
fained to be his brother,) that an Office might be committed unto him: the
Emperor perceiving the purpose, called the Suter privately to himself, and
craving the money which he had promised to the Intercessor, he forthwith
granted his request. The servant ignorant hereof, made suit again for his
brother: the Emperor said; Seek thee another Brother; this, whom thou
think thine, is become my Brother.

This explaines the Philosophers saying, Bion apud Laert. l. 4. cap. 7. Stob.
ser. 8. de iniustitia.
when he said, that a certain rich man did not possess his goods, but his
goods possessed him. And Diogen^s therefore compared covetous persons to those
that are sick of the dropsy: for covetous persons the more money they have,
the more money they desire; as they that are sick of the dropsy, the more
they drink, the more they thirst. And one says, Chrysostom. hom. 40. in Matt.
that as Pharaoh compelled the children of Israel to gather stubble; and the
stubble when it was gathered, did but kindle a fire, and bake brick: so the
devil does stir up men to get silver and gold; and these when they are gotten
do but increase covetous desires; and defile those that possess them with
insatiable greedines; as the claye and brick did defile the Hebrews For riches
to many are as an ill Physician; who depriues them of their sight, that could
see, when he came unto them. Covetousness made Pygmalion to kill Sichaeus his
own sisters husband, Virgil. auid. l. and 3.
for his money: and it made Polyma^ster the King of Thracia to kill Polydorus
his wives brother, for his gold and riches* Cic. de Natura D^^r. l. 3. Aelian.
lib. 1. var. hist. Val. Max. li. 1. cap. 1.
Covetousness made Dyonisius the Tyrant to spoil the temple of Proserpina at
Locri; and to pull off the golden cloak of great weight from Jupiter Olympius;
and putting his woollen garment upon him, to say, that the golden cloak was
heavy for Summer, and cold for winter; but that his woollen garment was meeter
for both seasons: and it made him to shave off Aesculapius golden beard;
saying, that it was not fit, that A^ollo the father should be beardles, and his
son Aescula^ius have a long beard: and it made him to take away tables of
gold and silver, and platters and crowns of gold, which the Images bare up in
their stretched out hands; saying, that he received these things kindly, and
took them not away violently; and affirming, That it was folly, not to take
good things of them, to whom we pray for good things. Plut. in Reg. and Imper.
apoph.
Covetousness made Darius to rip up the monument of Semiramis once Queen of the
Carians; that is reported to have built Babylon; and to have caused these words
to be engraven upon her Sepulcher: Wh^tsoeuer king shall want money, let him
open this ^^^ument, and take as much as he (...) winning the city, and
believing ^^ericle, with much ad^e moving awa^^ great sto^e wherewith the
Monument was shut v^, he found no money at all; but on the ^ther side of the
stone he saw this written; Except thou were an ill man, and such a one as
could ^^t be satisfied with money, thou would not trouble the graves of the
dead. Ioseph^^.
Covetousness made the Roman soldiers to massac^e the Jews most inhumanely
and sauagely; for while Titus did besiege Jerusalem, his soldiers,
understanding that some of the Jews fleeing out of the city by enforcement of
famine, had swallowed down pieces of gold, that they might so keep them from
the enemy; they cut them in pieces with their swords, that by that means they
might find in their intrailes the gold which they had swallowed: and through
too much greedines, not staying a small time, wherein the gold would have been
exonerated, they slew two thousand of the Jews in two days, after this sort;
and would have slain more, unless Titus had forbidden it under a grievous
punishment. Covetousness choakes friendship, kindred, neighborhood; and breeds
envy, malice, swearing, forswearing, lying, contempt of Gods word; and what
not? Covetousness plots and enterprises any treasons; and oftentimes effects
them. Plutar. in regum and imperator. apoph.
Therefore Philip King of Macedonia thought no city so well fensed, into which
he might not drive an Ass laden with gold. Therefore Jews the eleventh King of
France, said, that he often won the Victory, when he fought with golden or
silver spears and lances.

Therefore when the Heluetians bragged, that their country of Heluetia was so
enrounded by rocks, the ^^owie Alps, and high hills, as that it could not be
vanquished; the French answered, that they could easily climb those
mountains, and overcome those craggie rocks, if they had guns that could
shoot forth golden bullets. Deuteronomy. 16.19.
Covetousness and a gift in secret peruerts justice, and blindes the eyes of the
wise: as the famous Lawyer confessed, who refusing a while to patronise a cause
not very good, when the Sollicitour cast down before him a great sum of
pieces of Hungarian gold, on which were enstan ped the Images of armed
soldiers, Splinx ph^los. cap. ^2.
he thus cried out; Thou have taken me captive: for who can resist so many
armed men? In regard of all this, had not the Poets great cause to exclaim?

Quid non mortalia pectora cogis Virg.

Auri sacra fames?
O execrable hunger of gold, what do thou not enforce men's hearts to do!
And; Ovid.
Opes irri^imenta malorum: wealth is a provocation to wickedness. But most
chiefly had not Saint Paul great reason to say? that They that will be rich,
1. Tim 6.9.10.
fall into tentation and snares, and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which
drown men in perdition and destruction: for the desire of money is the root
of all evil, which while some lusted after, they erred from the faith, and
pierced themselves thorough with many sorrows And most aptly calls he
covetousness the root of all evils. For as from the root spring branches,
boughs, and fruits; so from Avarice spring all sorts of wickedness: as from the
root nourishment is sent and conveyed to the whole tree; so Avarice nourishes
all iniquity: as by the root the Tree sticks fast to the earth; so our
minds a^e fixed on earthly and transitory desires, and lie groueling in them,
by means of insatiable Avarice.

Therefore since covetousness is so perilous a Vice, breeding impiety,
perjury, dissimulation, falsehood, treachery, oppression, and fraud: let
this prohibition of the holy Apostle never slide out of our minds, wherein he
teaches, that it is the will of God, that no man oppress, or defraude his
brother in any matter. Matt. 7.22.
And so much the rather let us beware of covetousness; because it proceeds from
the natural corruption of the heart; as Christ affirms: and therefore being
all by nature corrupt in our desires* we have much more need, then the holy
Prophet D^uid had, who was a man regenerate and framed by the spirit of God,
Psalm. 119 36.
to pray thus to the Lord; Incline mine heart to thy testimonies, and not to
Covetousness. For as the Diamond laid by the loadestone, debarres the
loadestone from drawing of iron; or if the loadestone have drawn it, the
Diamond pulls it back again: so covetousness dissents from Christian godliness,
and by all means draws from Virtue and the law of God, and suffers not the
mind to stick fast to Christ.

2. The reason of the prohibition.
For the Lord is auenger of all such things. Read the 5. of Jeremiah: Among my
people (says God) are found wicked persons, that lay wait as he that sets
snares: they have made a pit, to catch men: as a cage is full of birds, Ier.
5.^6.2^.28.9
so are their houses full of deceit: thereby they are become great and waxen
rich: they are waxen fat and shining, they do ouerpasse the deeds of the
wicked: they execute no judgment; no not the judgment of the fatherles: yet
they prosper, though they execute no judgment for the poor: shall I not
visit for these things, says the Lord? or shall not my soul be avenged on
such a nation as this? Here we see, that God is auenger of violent and
fruadulent dealing. Read the 8. Amos 8.4.5.6.7.8.
of the Prophet Amos: Hear this, o ye that swallowe up the poor, that ye may
make the needy of the land to fail? saying, when will the new month be gone,
that we may sell corn? and the Sabbath, that we may set forth wheat, and make
the Ephah small, and the shekell great, and falsify the weights by deceit?
That we may buy the poor for silver, and the needy for shoes: yea and sell
the refuse of the wheat? The Lord has sworn by the excellency of Jacob;
surely I will never forget any of their works: shall not the land tremble for
this, and every one mourn that dwells therein? Here we see, that God is
auenger of violent and fraudulent dealing. Read the^. of the Prophet Habakuk:
Heb. 2.6.7.9.10.11.12.
how he that increases that which is not his? how long? and he that ladeth
himself with thick claye? shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite
thee? and awake, that shall stir thee? and thou shall be their pray? Ho, he
that coueteth an evil covetousness to his house, that he may set his nest on
high, to escape from the power of evil: thou have consulted shame to thine
own house, and have sinned against thine own soul: for the stone shall cry
out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer it: Woe unto him
that builds a town with blood, and erecteth a city by iniquity. Here we
see, that God is auenger of violent and fraudulent dealing. Read the 15.
Psalm: there we shall see, that he that uses deceit in his tongue; that does
evil to his neighbor; that swears to his neighbor, and disappoints him, if
it be to his damage; that frets out and bites with usury, and takes reward
against the innocent; shall not dwell in Gods tabernacle, nor rest upon his
holy hill. And no marvel, that no deceitful person shall dwell in Heaven: for
David, that was but a man, though a godly man, protests, Psalm. 101.7.
that there should no deceitful person dwell within his house; and that he
that told lies, should not remain in his sight. Read the 2^. of the
Proverbs: the bread of deceit is sweet to a man, (says Solomon) but
afterward, Pro. ^0.17.
his mouth shall be filled with gravel. Here we see, that God is auenger of
such things, Read the 6. of the 1. to the Corinthians: 1. Cor. 6.9.
Know ye not (says the Apostle,) that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
kingdom of God? be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor
adulterers, nor wantons, nor buggerers, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor
drunkards, nor traitors, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God.
Read the 5. to the Ephesians: For this ye know, (says Paul, Ephesians. 5.5.
) that no whoremonger, neither unclean person, nor covetous person which is an
Idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ, and of God. Here we
see, that God is auenger of such things. And though God permit Pharaoh to
tyrannise and oppress his children for a while; yet, (as the old and true
proverb affirms,) cum duplicantur lateres, tunc venit Moses: when the number
of brick is doubled, Ex. 5.9. and 6.1. etc.
then comes Moses; that is, when oppression increases, deliverance is at
hand; and the more cruelly that tyrants rage, the nearer is Gods helps.

Yea but some do flourish, that are oppressers and guilefull; and they come
not into the misfortune of other men; and there is a continual course of their
prosperity without interruption; where then is this vengeance of God? Indeed
David himself did fret at the prosperity of the ungodly; when he saw them
not in trouble as other men, neither plagued with other men; Psalm. 73.7.8.9.
etc.
when he saw pride as a chain unto him, and cruelty to cover them as a
garment; when he saw their eyes to stand out with fatnes, and to have more
then their heart could wish; when he saw them licentious, speak wickedly of
their oppression, talk presumptuously, set their mouth against heaven, walk
with their tongue through the earth, saying, How does God know it? or is there
knowledge in the most high? And he was almost forrie, that he had cleansed his
heart, and washed his hands in innocence; and that he was punished and
chastised every morning for his offenses. But when he went into the sanctuary
of God, then he understood the end of the wicked how that God has set them in
slipperie places, and casts them down into desolation; how they are suddenly
destroyed, perished, and horribly consumed, as a dream, when one awaketh; and
how God makes the Image despised. The oppressors and defrauders flourish,
indeed outwardly; but we see not their inward anguish and worm of conscience.
They flourish for a time in this world, but how unspeakable are the tortures
prepared in the world to come, for such as continue still in sin, and wallowe
in wickedness? They flourish themselves: but what says the holy Prophet? Ier.
17.11.
As the Partrich gathers the young which she has not brought forth: so he
that gets riches and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his
days, and at his end shall be a fool: that is, as the Partrich by calling
gathers others which forsake her, when they see that she is not their damme;
so the covetous man is forsaken of his riches, because he comes by them
falsely. So true is it, that ill gotten goods are ill spent; and that the third
heir rejoices not of things ill gotten. Ambrose says, Luke 4.5.
that it is fitly spoken, that the devil did show Christ all the kingdoms of
the world in a moment, Or in the twinkling of an eye; Lib. 4 in Luc. ^. 4.
for thereby is not the quicknes of light so much showed, as the frailty of
fading power expressed: for all those things pass away in a moment, and
oftentimes the honor of this world goes away, before it come. What can abide
long in the world, since the world it self abides not long? The world before
God, Wisd. 11.19.
is but a small thing that the balance weighs. The voice of God commanded
the Prophet to cry; All flesh is as grass, Isai. 40.6.7.8.
and all the grace thereof is as the flower of the field: the grass withers,
the flower fades, because the spirit of the Lord blows upon it; surely the
people is grass: the grass withers, the flower fades: but the word of our
God shall stand for ever. 1. Ioh. 2.16.17.
All that is in this world, (As the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes,
and the pride of life,) is not of the father, but is of this world: and this
world passes away, and the lust thereof; but he that fulfilleth the will of
God, abides ever. What is our life? Iam. 4.14
It is even a vapor, that appears for a little time, and afterward vanishes
away. Well said Seneca: Why do thou marvel; Epist. 111
why art thou amazed at the riches of this world? It is but a pomp, or
glorious spectacle: these things are rather showed, then possessed: and they
pass away, while they delight us.

Do thou not see, how that order of the Pomp though proceeding slowly, and
contrived in due manner, yet it passes away within few hours? such is the
glory of this world. Heraclitus describing the fleeting away of earthly
glory, Apud Senecam E^^^.
said, that we go not down twife into the same River: for albeit the name of
the River remain, yet the water slideth away. This is most manifest in the
water: and somewhat clear also in the goods of this world.

For consider, within the memory of man, how many owners there are sometimes
of one house, or Tenement, or Manor: and who cannot perceive the sliding away
of Heraclitus River? They have seen and acknowledged this fading glory of the
world, who have chiefly enjoyed it. Sueton. in Aug.
Augustus Caesar being near to his death, when he had been Ruler over the
whole world above 5. years, said thus to his friends: Do I not seem to have
played my part fitly enough in this Interlude of the world? Valete ergo, and
plauaite: farewell then, and give me an applause. Saladine the Sultan of Asia,
Syria, Bapt. Fulgos. l. 7. c. 2.
and Egypt, commanded at his death, that his inner linen garment should be
hanged on a long spear, and carried through the Camp; and that he that
carried it should cry out thus with a loud voice: Saladine the subduer of
Asia, does carry away with him but this linen garment, of all the riches of
Asia, Syria, and Egypt.

Gelimer king of the Vandales being taken captive in Afric by Belisarius,
Paulus Diacon. l. 6. hist.
and brought to Justinian the Emperor; when he came into the horse race, and
saw both the Emperor sitting aloft in a chair of state, and the common
people standing on either side, he ceased not to laugh, and to cry out; vanity
of vanities, Eccles. 1.2.
all is vanity: for affliction and adversity opened his eyes, which ease and
prosperity had before blinded. Therefore let us not account such to be happy;
as flourish for a short space in this world, like the green baye tree: for
though in their momentany iolitie, they spread their iniquity with transitory
glory; Psalm. 37.36.37.38.
Yet they pass away, and are gone; if they be sought, they cannot be found:
but mark the upright man, and behold the just; for the end of that man is
peace: but the transgressors shall be destroyed together, and the end of the
wicked shall be cut off. Pro. 6.8. Matt. 16.26.
For better is a little with righteousness, then great revenues without equity.
And what shall it profit a man though he should win the whole world, if he lose
his own soul? or what shall a man give for recompense of his soul? Lacr. lib.
cap. 4. Stob. ser. 2
And therefore Chilon well resolved, That damage and loss is better then
unjust gains: because loss greeues but once; but unjust gain stings the
mind continually.

Yea but (may some say) if we be persuaded to just dealing, we be persuaded to
folly: for how can wisdom and just dealing stand together? He that has a
fugitive servant, and an unwholesome and pestilent house; and knows these
faults himself alone; when he is minded to put them away; if he conceal it,
to have the greater price, he is unjust; if he confess it, and have the lesser
price, or else sell them not at all, he is foolish. He that meets with one
that selles gold, thinking it to be copper; or silver, thinking it to be lead;
if he admonish the seller thereof, and so buy it the the cheaper, he is unjust.
He that in a shipwreck at sea, is in peril of drowning, and sees one weaker
then himself floating on a planke; if he thrust the weak person from the
planke, to save his own life, he is unjust; if he do it not, since there is
none to witness against him in the Sea, he is unwise. He that in a flight from
the enemies in war, while the enemy pursues, shall find one of his fellow
soldiers riding an horse, and by reason of his wounds but weak; if he cast
him from his horse, to escape himself thereon, he is unjust; if he do it
not, he is foolish. These were the arguments of crabbed Carneades, to prove
that wisdom and just dealing cannot stand together. Li. 5. c. 17.
And Lactantius says of them; argula haec plane and venenata sunt, and quae M.
Tullius non potuerit refellere; sed irrefutata haec tanquam foueam est praeter
gressus: These reasons (says he) are witty and pestilent; and such as Tully
could not confute, but passed by them without refutation, as it were by a
dangerous ditch. Indeed this is the wisdom of the world, to do ones self
good, though with the hurt of others; and to rise, though with casting down of
others; and to swim, though with sinking of others. These are sine subtilties
indeed, but unrighteous; Ecclus. 19 24. 1. Cor. 3.18.19.
as the son of Syrach. And what says the Apostle? Let no man deceive
himself: if any man among you seem to be wise in this world, let him be a
fool, that he may be wise: for the wisdom of this world is foolishness with
God: for it is written, he catches the wise in their own craftiness; and
again, the Lord knows that the thoughts of the wise be vain. To advance and
enrich our selves by whatsoever means, is wisdom indeed: but what wisdom?
not that that comes down from above, Iam. 3.15.17.
which is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of
mercy and good fruits, without judging, and without hypocrisy; but it is the
wisdom that is earthly, sensual, and devilish Howsoever flesh and blood
allure us to gain by others losses; yet the true and eternal wisdom of God
teaches us, Mat. 7.12
to do to other, whatsoever we would that other should do to us. If thou were
to buy or sell thy self: would thou be beguiled? If thou were on a planke
thy self in a shipwreck: would thou be thrust from it? If thou were on
horseback, and in flight from the enemy: would thou be cast from thy
Horse? Why then do to other, in this, or the like case; as thou desire that
other should do to thee. This is the law of God; and the law that Natures
finger has engraven in the heart of every one.

Yea, but in these days (will some say,) men are generally so addicted to
deceit, that it is even necessary to use fraud and subtlety: for other
deceive us, say they: and were it not as good to deceive, as to be deceived? We
cannot live, except we feign, and flatter, and face, and lie for advantage.
Yea, but it is not meet that we should live, if we distrust Gods providence,
that he cannot, and will not maintain us, in the lawful discharge of our
place and calling, and vn^esse we use oppression and fraud.

He that chose us before the world was; created us, when we were not;
redeemed us, when we were utterly lost; ordained the Heavens above to shine
upon us, and the earth, and the Sea, to bear us up, and feed, and comfort us:
is not he able to sustain us, except we use sleights, and shifts, and
unlawful practices invented by Satan, the Arch-enemie of God, and of our
salvation? What if the world be full of fraud? Will thou say then; Why may not
I convert my goods and commodities to my best advantage, as well as others? I
think, thou would say, Why should I not convert my goods to mine advantage,
as in as others? What if other do wrong? can that excuse thy doing of wrong?
What if other wallowe in dirt; will thou bear them company? What if the world
lie in wickedness? 1. Io. 5.19 Math 10.16.
yet shall we forget, that we must be wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves?
that is: though we must be wi^e as serpents, to avoid hurt: yet we must not
be wise serpents, to do hurt: but simple and sincere, as Doves: and shall we
forget? 1 Pet. 2.9.
that we are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy nation, a
people set at liberty, that we should show forth the virtues of him that has
called us out of darkness into marvelous light: and shall we forget? that we
must be blameless, and pure, Phil. 2.15
and the sons of God without rebuke in the midst of a naughty and crooked
nation, among whom we must shine as lights in the world.

It shall be vain to say: that we use guile but in small things: and that we
do it to win estimation among men; since every man is so much accounted of to
other, as he is worth to himself. For a learned Father says, Chrysostom. hom. 3.
in 2. ad Tim.
peremptorily, That as he is more an adulterer, that sins with a base and
beggarly personage, then he that sins with a noble and great personage; in
that her wealth, beauty, and bravery were incitements; but there, no such
thing was found: and as he is more a drunkard, that is drunken with any common
wine, then he that is drunken with the strongest wine: so he is more covetous,
and more unjust, and more a thief, that spoils and deals wrongfully in small
things: for he that takes the greatest things, will perhaps contemn the
lesser; but he that deceiues in little, will do it much more in great things.
As touching the estimation, that riches and worldly wealth procures; it is
true indeed, Chilon apud Stob. ser. 89.
that as vilde purses though of no worth, yet are accounted of, according to
the money which they contain: so rich men that are void of virtue, are priced
after their possessions. And as Bucephalus, the Horse of the Great Alexander,
as often as he was naked, Plin. l. 8. cap. 42.
he suffered every one to ride him; but when he was adorned with trappings,
he would bear none but Alexander, and raged against all other: so some in
their poverty, can bear any, and apply themselves unto them; but when they
are enriched, they despise the vulgar sort.

Therefore to obtain this reputation procured by riches, many care not what
craft, what deceit, what oppression, what cunning they practice: nay, as
Agrippina the mother of Nero, when the Astrologers told her, that her son
should be Emperor indeed, Sueton. in Mer.
but should slay her in the time of his Empire; answered, Occidat, modo
imperet:) Let him kill me, so he may be Emperor; and both things came to
pass: so where many will say, Let me loose my soul, let me loose Christ, let
me loose heaven, so I may be rich and esteemed on earth; let them beware, least
these things be accomplished, as well the one, as the other.

Sen. de vita beat. c. 26.
What is an horse the better for his golden bridle? What is a shipmaister the
skilfuller for a fair and large vessel? What is a man the better for his
golden, great, and rich estate? When Philip King of Macedonia was proud, and
insulted in his letters written to the Lacedaemonians, Plutar. in Lacon.
for a victory obtained over them; Archidamus the Lacedaemonians answered
him; If (says he) thou measure thy shadow, thou shall find it no greater
then it was before the victory: the like may be said to those, that being
advanced to offices; promotions, and wealth, do reckon themselves worthier and
greater then other.

If thou see a Viper, or Aspe, Epictesses apud S^^b. ser. 3.
or Scorpion, in an Iuorie or golden box; thou do not love them, or greatly
account of them, for the pretiousnesse of the matter wherein they are
contained; but thou abhorrest and detestest them for their pernicious nature
and quality: so when thou see a malicious mind compassed with riches and
earthly pomp; will thou admire the outward bravery, or contemn the inward
impiety? But howsoever the ambitious themselves do more esteem of false and
transitory honor, then of true glory; that proceeds from virtue; as
children account more of penny Cock horses and Puppets, then of true horses,
and true pictures: and howsoever men are commonly deceived in valuing of a man;
Seu. epist. 77.
for that we esteem him not, by that he is to be esteemed indeed, but by the
outward ornaments; Whereas none of those (as the Philosopher says) whom riches
and honors do advance, is great, but seems to be great, for that we
measure him with the Base and pillar whereon he stands; for (paenilio magnus
non est, licet in monte constiterit; Colossus magnitudinem suam seruabit, etiam
si steterit in puteo:) A Dwarf is not great, though he stand upon a^ Hill: a
Colosse and G^ant-like Image will retain his bigness, though he stand in a pit:
Howsoever men respect the external appearance; yet God the incorrupt Judge, is
no respecter of persons, and outward shows; and accepts not the rich for his
wealth, or the fair for his beauty, or the noble for his honor; neither
disdaines the poor for his beggarie, Act. 10.35.
want, and baseness; But in every nation he that fears him, and works
righteousness, is accepted with him. Questionles the sweetness of lucre, the
desire of reputation, and the example of the world, will tempt us earnestly to
oppress and defraude. For as he that walks between two enemies, Hom. 38. in
Matt.
(says Saint Chrysostom) if he covet to content both; must needs be a
turnecoate to them both, and speak ill of the one to the other, on each side:
so he that uses buying and selling, can hardly avoid lying and forswearing:
for the buyer commonly says and swears, that it is not worth the price; and
the seller says and swears, that it is worth more then he asks for it. And
therefore the same Father says, that as when wheat, or some other gain is
winnowed and tossed too and fro in the sieue; all the corn falls through the
sieue by little and little, and at last there is left but trash and chafe in
the sieue: so the substance of the world passes away in buying and selling;
(Et in nouissime nihil remanet negociat oribus nisi peccatum:) and at last,
nothing but sin remains to those that traffic. And since the case so
stands with buyers and sellers, by the judgment of Chrysostom; as Zeno, Max.
ser. 5.
when his friends asked him, how they might still retain justice, and never
do any wrong; Answered, If you shall suppose, that I am always present with
you: so if any be desirous to know, how he may avoid oppression and defrauding;
it may be answered, if he remember, and think, that God is present every
where, and sees al things, and is (as the Apostle says) auenger of all such
things.

As we also have told you before time, 3. The Ministers duty.
and testified, When Saint Paul was abding among the Thessalonians, he had told
them, that they ought to avoid covetousness, which breeds oppression and
defrauding; because God is auenger of all such things. And this is not all: he
did not only tell them so, barely and coldly; but he did testify it; that is,
he did vehemently and earnestly foretell it, and with comminations and
threatenings. And this must specially be marked of us. For such is the flownes
and backwardnes of men, that except they be egged and stirred forwards, they
will be touched with no sense of Gods judgments. And therefore the Ministers
and overseers of souls, must not coldly, and slightly inueigh against the
sins of men; but they must constantly and courageously (not without
threatenings contained in holy scripture) oppose and set the vengeance of God
against iniquity and wickedness. But peradventure there is no such occasion to
preach these things among us, as there was for Paul to preach then at
Thessalonica. David affirms, that in his time, there were eaters of men; that
did eat up the people of God, Psalm. 14.4. Prou. 3.1.15.
as bread. And Solomon affirms, that in his time there were horseleaches, a
generation whose teeth ^ere as swords, and their jaws as knives to eat up the
afflicted out of the earth, and the poor from among men: and that cr^ed, Give,
Give: being as vnfatiable, as the grave, and the barren womb, and the earth
that cannot be satisfied with water, and the fire that says not, It is
enough: and some that did spread nets, (as the net is spread to catch birds,
Pro. 2.17.
) that they might get profit and advantage, even by taking away of the life of
the owners thereof: Pro. 20.^^
and buyers that would say, It is naught, it is naught; but when they were gone
apart, they would boast of their good cheap penniworthes. Were their times so
corrupt, when there were so good Prophets and instructors? and are our times
holy and unblameable? It is to be wished, that it were so; but daily and too
common experience teaches, that it is not so. For consider our markets, our
faires, our private contracts and bargains, our shops, our cellars, our
weights, our measures, our promises, our protestations, our politic tricks
and villainous Machiauilisme, our enhauncing of the prices of all commodies: and
tell, whether the twelfth Psalm may not as fitly be applied to our times, as
to the days of the man of God? in which the faining, and lying, and facing,
and guile, and subtlety of men, provoked the Psalmist to cry out: Help Lord,
Psalm. 12.1.2.4.
for there is not a godly man left: for the faithful are failed from among the
children of men: they speak deceitfully every one with his neighbor,
flattering with their lips, and speak with a double heart: which have said,
with our tongue we will prevail; our lips are our own; who is Lord over us?
If we look into the ordinary dealing of most men; we may say, Terras Astraea
reliquit; Just dealing has forsaken the earth: and that this is the iron age,
in which (Fugere pudor, verumque fidisque
Ovid. Met. 1.
In quorum subiere locum frau^^sque ^ol^que
Insidiaeque and vis, and amor sceler^tus habe^di:)


Shame, and ruth, and fidelity, are fled away; and craft and deceit, and
counterwaits, and violence, and a wicked desire of having, are gotten into
their ro^me. But if we look on the greedines and covetous desires of many men;
we may say on the contrary, Propert. l. 3. and 11.
(Aurea nunc vere sunt saeculat plurimus auro
Vaenit ho^^s: Auro conciliatur Amor:
Auro vict^ Fides: Auro ven^lia Iura:
Aurum Lexs^quitur mox sine lege pudor:)


Now is the golden world indeed: for (among some) Honor, Love, Fidelity,
Law, and Shame, are Bought, Procured, and vanquished by Gold.

Herod.
When Alemaeon was willed by Croesus, to go into his treasure-house, and take
away as much gold as he could carry; he provided a long hanging garment for
that business, down to his Anckles, and great Boots, and filled them both:
Nay, he stuffed his mouth with gold, and tied wedges of gold to the very locks
of his head. The greedy Alcmaeon yet lives, and has a bottomless bag; the more
it receives, the more it desires, and were it not for hurting his brain and
belly, he would forse the skull of his head, and the bowels of his body with
money. Who is there, that will not say, he loves just and true dealing; and
abhorres covetousness, and the love of money? But if his actions be scanned;
this justice appears but seldom, and in matters important, unto which many
have an eye. Agis hearing some to commend the ^lei, Plut. in Lacon.
for their just judgment in the games of Olympus: said, What marvel i^ it, if
once within five years they be just? for those games were celebrated only
once within five years. And when they continued to praise them; As if (says
he) it were marvelous, to use justice in a noted thing The wiseman meant that
the praise of Justice cannot agree to him, that deals not justly in all his
actions, throughout his whole life. Many hold fraudulent and unjust dealing to
be unlawful, Plutar. in Lace.
as the old Lacedaemonians by Lycurgus laws held theft to be unlawful. For
theft among them was not punished, if it were carried secretly; but he that was
discovered for stealing, was punished, not for stealing, but for behauing
himself no more warily and advisedly in stealing. So there are, that think
fraud no fault; if they can convey it cunningly, and smoothly, and closely.
And there is a generation of people, that plot most falsehood, when they
protest most plainenes. Laent. l. 1. c. 9. enagora ^psudein.
Anacharsis said, that he did much marvel, that the Athenians having a law,
that did command, not to lie in the Market; yet did use such lying and
dissimulation in their traffic. How would he marvel, if he were now alive,
and should find worldlings to lie most, when they make most show of saying
truth? Virgil. Georg. 4.
Proteus in the fable, turned not himself into more shapes; (sometimes
resembling a Lion, sometimes a Fox, sometimes a Wolf, sometimes Fire,
sometimes Wat^r, that he might delude those that would take hold on him;) then
the covetous person; who will sell his soul for gain, and swear, and
flatter, and lie, and protest simplicity, that his fraud may not be
perceived. These that cover their Injustice under the veil of Justice, are the
vniustest persons in the world; and that (...) the ^erdict of the Ethnic
writer: Cic. Off. li. 1.
of all justice (says he) there is none more pestilent, then of those, who
when they deceive most, d^e bear men in hand, Petrach. dial. 62.
that they deal well. If any in these days, should wonder, when he is
deceived, he is rather to be wondered at himself; for that he supposes, that
he may converse among men and not be deceived. Fidelity is banished; fraud
swaies; and the Hunters and Hawkers have not so many nets and snares, to entrap
beasts and birds, as crafty men have to entrap the simple. He is reckoned
wisest, that is most cunning to beguile: and therefore if any be loath to be
deceived, he must either d^e, or flee the conversation of men. He that is
deceived in this age, must leave of to complain; and learn to beware in whom
he reposeth confidence; and remember, that guile and falsehood of other must
sharpen, exercise, and stir up his wit to circumspection. If any should reply,
and say; that he was deceived, whence he thought not: it may be asked, whether
he himself have not at another time deceived other, that thought not of
deceit. We are prone to deceive, and yet cannot take at the hands of other,
that our selves do to other. If any reply again, and say; that he was
deceived of his friend; it is to be answered, that there is an error in that
speech: For in friendship is no deceit. But we deceive our selves, thinking
those to be our friends, that are not our friends. We conclude too soon upon
friendship; either upon a feast, or a conference, or two; and so we loose
friendship before we have it: and where we had not true friends, we say,
friends deceived us, laying the blame of men's falsehood on friendship, a most
precious and inualuable Virtue.

Cic. pro. Milone.
^s thus it remains true, that one says; There are many creekes and Labyrinths
in the minds of men; and that man's nature is clouded under many vailes and
curtains of dissimulation; Cic. ad Q fratrem.
and that (frous, oculs, vultus persaepe mentiuntur:) the forehead, eyes, and
countenance do many times lie.

Therefore since men in our age, are men as were in elder ages, and in Saint
Paul's time; is it not convenient, that we be admonished with Saint Paul's words?
Th s is the will of God, that no man oppress, or defraude his Brother in any
matter: and that it be not coldly once spoken, but iterated, and inculcated,
and earnestly testified, that God is auenger of all such things? Saint
Augustine wished to have seen three things; Christ in the flesh; Paul in the
pulpit; Rome in her pompous prosperity. It were vanity, to wish for things,
which by time and nature are impossible: but indeed it were to be wished, that
we might see Christ's doctrine, and Saint Paul's preaching believed and
performed. And why should it not be wished? since it is so requisite and
necessary, that it should be so? For Christ is our Lord and master, and we
are his disciples and scholars: therefore since Christ is void of deceit, and
no guile was found in his mouth; if we desire to be true Christians, 1 Pet.
2.1. 1 Cor. 14.20. Ioh. 13.36 1 Cor. 13.5. 1 Timothy 6.6.7.
let us lay aside all dissimulation and guile: let us be children in
malitiousnesse; but of ripe age in understanding: let us remember, that if we
will be Christ's scholars, we must be known by love: and if we have true
love, love is void of deceit, and thinks no evil: let us not forget, that
Godliness is great gain, if a man be content with that he has; for we
brought nothing into the world, and it is certain, that we can carry nothing
out: Luke 6.38
let us give good measure to other, if we desire good measure from other; and
then we shall have measure pressed down, shaken together, and running over:
let us not pinch the weight, the size, the lawful measure of any commodity:
only let us abate the measure of one thing: and what is that? it is the
measure of our iniquity and ungodliness. For such measure as we meat thereof
unto God, such measure will he return: if we fill out our measure of sin,
God will not spare and pinch the measure of punishments: Genesis 15.16.
though God suffer the Amorites for a time; yet his vengeance falls, when the
measure of their wickedness is full: and though the ungodly suppose to
continue always in their iniquity; yet God can cast a talent of lead upon the
mouth of the Ephah, in which the Woman sits; that is, God keeps wickedness
in a measure, and can shut it, or open it at his own pleasure. And above all
things, let us not forget, that our life stands not in riches and possessions:
but that our days are as a span, a skadowe, a flower, a dream: and therefore
we must prepare our selves: for we know not, how soon we shall be called to
the Bar of Gods Justice, and shall hear that voice; Luke 16.2
Give account of thy stewardsh^p, for thou may be no longer steward. Let us
bear in mind the terriblenes of the last dreadful judgment: wherein no
bribe shall clear us: no spokesman plead for us: no shift and evasion
discharge us: but all crafts shall be displayed, and ill gotten goods shall
give evidence against the unjust owners: and the books and records of men's
own consciences shall condemn them; and then they shall wish too late: O that
we had never oppressed and defrauded! for now we feel too truly, that GOD is
auenger of all such tshings.

Lastly, let us still call to mind the vanity of earthly riches, wealth, and
promotions: when they are at length gotten by swearing, lying, wrong, and
deceit: and the eternity and incomparable joys of Heaven, which God has
promised, and Christ has purchased for the godly, and true repenters. For what
is gold and silver? but the bowels of the earth. And what is worldly glory? but
a vanishing air and breath. And what is belly cheer? but the food of worms.
Christ is a King: and he will enrich us, and glorify us, and nourish us. One
says well: Bernard. ser. 4. de aduentu domini.
O ye sons of men, you covetous generation! What have you to do with gold
and silver? which are neither true good things, nor yet your own good things.
For what is gold, but red earth? and what is silver, but white earth? And what
makes them precious, but the covetousness of the sons of Adam? which
covetousness, if it were taken away, they would not be precious. If they be
your own, take them out of the world with you. Psalm. 49.
But as you come naked out of your mothers womb, when you were borne; so you
shall return naked to the earth, the common Mother of all flesh, when you die.

And it is easy to prove, that man's opinion makes money precious: for the
things that are fair by nature, do obtain estimation alike among all people;
as the brightness of the Sun, the beauty of the heaven, the profitablenes of
the water and other Elements: but among the Indians and Ethiopians (as
Tertullian witnesses, De culta mulier.
) gold, silver, and Jewels, were accounted as dirt; and were wont to be worn
but in ^^a^^ups and shoes, only for contempt; and among the Ethiopians
malefactors were bounden chains of gold. In the land of H^uilah, Genesis 2.12.
there is good gold. In the land of Promise, in the heavenly Jerusalem, in the
land of the living, there is gold indeed: Reu. 3.18. Mat. 6.20
gold tried in the fire; gold which neither moath, nor rust can corrupt; gold
of more value then the richest mines of the whole earth can yield up. If we
must needs thirst after gold. O let us thirst after this gold; let us be
covetous after these durable riches; let us lay up treasure for our selves in
Heaven, and of unrighteous Mammon, perhaps not well gained, and ill kept, and
worse laid out, let us make friends in time, that when we shall want, Luke
16.9
they may receive us into everlasting habitations. If we were Ethnicks, and
hoped for no life after this, it might peradventure be hard to cast aside our
affection to earthly things. But in that we look for Heaven, and those things
which are in Heaven, how can this be hard unto us? Chrysostom. hom. ^. ^n A^^^.
Apost.
If one should say thus on the contrary; Love, and desire riches* a Christian
should be offended thereat, and say; How should I desire gold and earthly
riches, since I look for Heaven, and they hinder me from heaven? Chrysostom. super.
Psalm. 24.
Every thing that grows, when it is come to a due and convenient measure of
stature, leaves off to grow; but the money of the covetous never cealeth to
grow. But let not our desire be insatiable, resembling the fire, the water,
the fishes: the fire, Chrysostom. in aliquot scrip. loca. Basil. ^om. 7. in auaros.
B^sil. hom. 7. Hexam.
that is so vehement in increasing it strength, that it takes hold on all
things near unto it: the water, which rising from a small beginning,
increases so fast, that it sweepes away every thing it meets withal: the
fishes, that devour and consume one another, according to their strength and
greatness: so let us not oppress and overthrow the weaker and poorer sort,
when our store and plenty is increased. Let us put off the love of the things
of this world, that the love of heavenly things may enter unto us; Exodus 3.5
as Moses put off his shoes, yt he might talk with God: let us not put trust
in the fleeting and fading joys of this life, but despise them in comparison
of colestiall and true pleasures; as the woman of Samaria left her pitcher,
Ioh. 4.28. 1. Ioh. ^.15.
when she had heard Christ: Let us not love the world, neither the things of
this world: if any man love this world, the love of the Father is not in him:
Iam. 4.4.
for the amity of the world is the enimitie of God: and whosoever will be a
friend of the world, makes himself the enemy of God: Let us remember, that
we are in the latter end of the world; And therefore they that have wives, 1
Cor. 7.29.30.31
must be a^ though they had none; and they that weep, as though they wept not:
and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not: and they that buy, as
though they possessed not: and they that use this world, as though they used it
not: for the fashion of this world goes away: that is, let us not fix and tie
our affections on earthly things: Heb. 13.^4.
For we have h^ere no continuing City, but we seek one to come: but let us
hunger and th^rst after ^ighteousness^ that we may be filled with eternal
blessedness through our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus. Amen.

KNOW THIS, THAT GOD WILL bring thee to judgment.
Luke 21.36. Watch therefore, and pray continually, that ye may be counted
worthy to escape all these things, that shall come to pass: and that ye may
stand before the Son of man.


WHen our Savior had showed the terriblenesse of that last and great day,
wherein he will come to judge all flesh, and to give to every one after his
doings: he exhorts all men to have these things in continual remembrance,
that they may attain to eternal blessedness, and escape everlasting
wretchedness. For they that are drawn from sin, neither by the love of God,
nor the desire of heavenly blessings, nor by the embracing and following of
virtue: yet, if they give heed to that they hear, they must needs be
terrified, and consequently something refrained from evil, by the expectation,
and looking for of this dreadful iudgem^nt. And therefore our Savior
propounds this as a meane^, to reclaim obdurate and obstinate offenders; and
concludes the fearful description of the day of doom, with this admonition;
Watch, therefore, and pray continually, that ye may be counted worthy to escape
all these things that shall come to pass, and that we may stand before the
Son of man. And that which in this Evangelist is spoken briefly, in Saint
Matthew, is expounded and amplified more largely, where Christ says; Watch
therefore; Matt. 24.42. etc.
for ye know not what hour your Master will come: Of this be sure, that if
the good man of the house knew at what watch the thief would come, he would
surely watch, and not suffer his house to be dug through: therefore be ye
also ready; for in the hour that ye think not, will the son of man come.
Who then is a faithful servant and wise, whom his Master has made ruler over
his household, to give them meat in season? Blessed is that servant, whom his
Master when he comes, shall find so doing. Verily I say unto you, he shall
make him ruler over all his goods. But if that evil servant shall say in his
heart, my Master does defer his coming, and begin to smite his fellows,
and to eat, and to drink with the drunken; that servants Master will come in
a day, when he looks not for him, and in an hour that he is not ware of, and
will cut him off, and give him his portion with hypocrites: there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. Likewise our Savior says in S. Mark; Take
heed, watch, and pray: Mar. 13.33.34. etc.
for ye know not when the time is. For the Son of man is as a man going into
a strange country, and leaves his house, and gives authority to his
servants, and to ^uery man his work, and commands the porter to watch. Watch
ye therefore, (for ye know not when the Master of the house will come, at
even, or at midnight, at the cock crowing, or in the dawning,) least if he
come suddenly, he should find you sleeping. And those things that I say unto
you, I say unto all men, Watch.

Now to the end we may be the more prepared, and the more watchful, and the
more earnest in prayer; let us weigh with our selves; first, the dreadfulnes of
the last judgment; secondly, why the day thereof is not known; thirdly,
whereunto the expectation and remembrance thereof is profitable. 1. The
dreadfulnes of the last judgment.


The fearefulnes of the last judgment, the Lord describes in the foregoing
words, when he says; Then there shall be signs in the Sun, and in the
Moon, and in the Stars, and upon the earth trouble among the nations with
perplexity, the sea and the waters shall roar: and men's hearts shall fail
them for fear, and for looking after those things which shall come on the
world: Luke 21.25.26.27
for the powers of heaven shall be shaken; and then shall they see the Son of
man come in a cloud, with power and great glory. Thus also it is expressed in
Saint Matthew; Matt. 24.^9.30.31
And immediately after the tribulation of those days, shall the Sun be
darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light, and the Stars shall fall
from heaven, and the powers of heaven shall be shaken. And then shall appear
the sign of the Son of man in heaven: and then shall all the kinreds of the
earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of man come in the clouds of heaven
with power and great glory. And he shall send his Angels with a great sound of
a trumpet, and they shall gather together his elect, from the four winds, and
from the one end of the heavens unto the other. The substance of Christ's words
is this: that then all Elements and heavenly bodies, shall both suffer
strangely in themselves, to affright the wicked; and shall also work strangely
on the wicked, by casting upon them diverse torments, as well of soul, as of
body: and that all Creatures above and beneath, shall be cryers and trumpetters
to summon men before that horrible Tribunal seat; which because they have
contemned, therefore they have persisted still in all ungodliness. How the Sun
shall be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light, and the stars
shall fall from heaven, and the powers of heaven shall be shaken, and the sea
and floods shall roar in such ghastly sort, that men shall be ready to yield
up the ghost through fear and anguish; At this time we cannon conjecture, but
the event it self will declare; and though the manner thereof be not known to
us, yet to God it is well known. But howsoever it shall be; because the use of
the scripture is, by the darkening of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and by the
like things as Christ here foretells, to discipher and signify the extreme
storms and tempests of Gods wrath and vengeance; therefore those threatening
predictions in the old Prophets, may be applied to the last day of Judgment,
in which they prophecy, that the world shall be in such anguish and perplexity,
as that men shall think the Sun to be darkened, the Moon to be bloody, the
Sars to leese their brightness, the earth to tremble, the Sea to roar, and all
things else to manace a present ruin; not, as if it were so indeed; but
because men shall be so straightened, as that they shall think it is so.

And because those notable reuengements of God on the Babylonians, Tyrians,
Egyptians, Jews, and other nations, were (as it were) paintings out of the
great day of judgment, and forerunners thereof; we may fitly apply unto that
day, such descriptions as the Prophets have made of those reuengements. Behold
then what Isaiah says, speaking of the punishment of the Babylonians: Behold,
the day of the Lord comes, Isa. 13.9. etc.
cruel, with wrath and fierce anger to lay the land waste, and he shall
destroy the sinners out of it: for the stars of heaven, and the planets
thereof, shall not give their light; the Sun shall be darkened in his going
f^rth, and the Moon shall not cause her light to shine. Therefore I will
(says the Lord) shake the heaven; and the earth shall move out of her place,
in the wrath of the Lord of hoasts, and in the day of his fierce anger: and it
shall be as a chased Do, and as a sheep that no man takes up: and I will
visit the wickedness upon the world, and their iniquity upon the wicked, and I
will cause the arrogancy of the proud to cease, and will cast down the pride
of tyrants? Behold again, what the same Prophet says, speaking of the
punishment of all ungodly enemies of the Lords Church; Isai. 34.1.2. etc.
Come near, ye nations, and hear; and hearken ye people: let the earth
hear, and all that is therein; the world and all that proceeds thereof: for
the indignation of the Lord is upon all nations, and his wrath upon all their
armies; he has destroyed them, and delivered them to the slaughter: and their
slain shall be cast out, and their stink shall come up out of their bodies,
and the mountains shall be melted with their blood: and all the host of
heaven shall be dissolved, and the heavens shall be folden like a Book, and
all their hoasts shall fall as the leaf falls from the vine, and as it
falls from the fig tree. Behold again, what Ezekiel says, Ezekiel. 32.4. etc.
speaking of the punishment of Egypt; I will leave thee upon the land, (says
the Lord God,) and I will cast thee upon the open field, and I will cause all
the fowls of the heaven to remain upon thee, and I will fill all the beasts
of the field with thee: and I will lay thy flesh upon the mountains, and fill
the valleys with thine height: I will also water with thy blood the land
wherein thou swimmest, even to the mountains, and the rivers shall be full of
thee: and when I shall put thee out, I will cover the heaven, and make the
stars thereof dark, I will cover the Sun with a cloud, and the moon shall
not give her light: all the lights of heaven will I make dark for thee, and
bring darkness upon thy land, says the Lord God. Behold again, what the
Prophet Joel says, speaking of the plagues that should light upon the Jews;
Joel. 2.1.2.31.
Blow the trumpet in Zyon: and shoute in mine holy mountain: let all the
inhabitants of the land tremble: for the day of the Lord is come: for it is at
hand: a day of darkness, and of blacknes, a day of clouds and obscurity: the
Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood. When we behold
these, and the like speeches, let us suppose, that they are foretellings of the
last judgment. When the Psalmist says; The God of Gods, even the Lord has
spoken, and called the earth, from the rising up of the Sun, Psalm. 50.1.3.4.
unto the going down thereof: our God shall come, and shall not keep silence:
a fire shall devour before him, and a mighty tempest shall be moved round
about him: he shall call the heaven about, Zephan. 1.14. etc.
and the earth to judge his people. When the Prophet Zephania says; The great
day of the Lord is near: it is near, and hastes greatly, eue^ the voice of
the day of the Lord: the strong man shall cry there bitterly: that day is a
day of wrath, a day of trouble and heaviness: a day of destruction and
desolation: a day of obscurity and darkness: a day of clouds and blackenes: a
day of the trumpet and alarm against the strong cities, and against the high
towers: and I will bring distress upon men, says the Lord, that they shall
walk like blind men: because they have sinned against the Lord, and their
blood shall be powered out as dust, and their flesh as the dongue: neither their
silver, nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the day of the Lords
wrath, but the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousy: for he
shall make even a speedy riddance of the^ that dwell in the land. When the
Prophet Daniel says; I behold, Dan. 7.9.10.
till the thrones were set up, and the ancient of days did sit, whose garment
was white as snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wool: his throne
was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire: a fiery stream
issued, and came forth from before him: thousand thousands ministered unto him,
and ten thousand thousands stood before him: the judgment was set; and the
books opened. When these things are spoken: what else is it, but that the
Divine says? And I saw a great white throne, Reu. 20.11.12.13
and one that sat on it, from whose face fled away both the earth and heaven,
and their place was no more found: and I saw the dead, both great and small
stand before God: and the books were opened; and another Book was opened,
which is the book of life: and the dead were judged of those things, which
were written in the books, according to their works; And the sea gave up her
dead, which were in her: and death and hell delivered the dead, which were in
them: and they were judged every man according to their works.

This is the second coming of Christ, much differing from his first coming.
For in his first coming, he appeared humble in the shape of a servant; in his
second coming, he shall appear stately in the shape of the King of Kings, and
Judge of all; in his first coming, he was subject to reproach; in his second
coming, he shall shine in glory: in his first coming, he appeared weak; in
his second coming, he shall appear in heavenly power: in his first coming,
he did undergo the judgment and condemnation of the reprobate; in his second
coming, he shall judge and condemn all the wicked and reprobate. In his first
coming, he fought like little David against Goliath, without worldly furniture:
in his second coming, he will descend like armed and angry David, 1. Sam. 25
21.22.
against unthankful Nabal; and will say, as David said of Nabal; Indeed I
have kept all in vain that this fellow had in the wilderness, so that nothing
was missed of all that pertained to him; for he has requited me evil for
good: so and more also do God unto the enemies of David: for surely I will not
leave of all that he has, by the dawning of the day, any that pisseth against
the wall. Even so Christ may say: Indeed in vain have I bestowed so many
benefits on wicked and obstinate mankind; in vain have I showed so many
mercies: in vain have I taken flesh for ungodly and unfaithful men, and
suffered death, and preach the Gospel, and sent my Apostles, and offered the
graces of my holy spirit, and instituted my Sacraments, and winked at them so
often, and imparted on them so many good things of nature and of the earth, and
(what lay in me for my part) I have caused, that nothing has perished of all
that pertained to man: in vain have I done all this for ungodly and
unfaithful men, since they requite evil for good. Ungrateful and foolish
men, are like to sottish Babel: for they have received my benefits, yet have
se^ued Satan and the flesh: and when I sent my children, my poor, and my
distresied members unto them, they did not cover the naked, nor feed the
hungry, nor comfort the afflicted. God do so, and more, also unto mine
enemies: For I will destroy them, and make them know, how dangerous a thing it
is, to fall into the hands of the living God, who is even a consuming fire.
Abigail met with angry David, Heb. 12.29.
and appeased him, but in the last Judgment, when Christ shall descend to
revenge the contempt of the ungodly, that regarded not his salvation offered
unto them: No Abigail shall make Intercession for sinners; as S. Chrysostom
proves clearly out of the Scriptures. Hom. 22. ad pocul. Antioche^.
Behold (says he,) how he that was not arrayed with the Wedding robe, was cast
out at the doors, and none was a petitioner for him: Behold, how he that
gained not with his Talent, was punished, and none made Intercession for him:
Behold, how the five foolish Virg nes were excluded, and their fellows made no
request for them. Therefore the terror of this day is unutterable, and cannot be
expressed, because the Judge shall be inexorable, and cannot be entreated. Then
shall be heard the great and loud voice of the Archangell, and the Trumpet of
God, which all the Elements obey; which cleaues the Rocks; opens Hell; breaks
the bonds of the dead; Chrysostom. sup. 1. Cor. 15.
calls souls out of the depth, and joined them again with their bodies: and
all this it does, sooner then an Arrow does fly through the Air; For the
Apostle says, that it shall be done in a moment, or twinkling of an eye.

Then shall come the time, when the unbelieving and vnrepenting shall say to
the hills, Fall upon us; and to the Mountains, Cover us; Luke 23.30.
and shall hide themselves from the presence of him that sits on the
Throane; and from the wrath of the Lamb; and shall seek death, Reu. 6.16 Reu.
9.6.
and shall not find it; and shall desire to die, and death shall fly from
them; and shall go into the holes of the Rocks, Isai. 2.19.
and into the Caves of the earth, from before the fear of the Lord, and from
the glory of his Majesty, when he shall arise to destroy the earth. Then
there shall be a most strickt examination. For what is less then an idle word?
yet the Lord says, Mat. 12.39.
That of every idle word, that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof at
the day of Judgment.

Then the hidden and secret cogitations shall be disclosed: 1. Cor. 4.5
For when the Lord does come, he will lighten things that are hid in darkness,
and make the counsels of the hearts manifest; and then shall every man have
praise of GOD. Then shall be done to the wicked and impenitent sinners, which
Nathan threatened to David; Thou did it secretly, 2. Sam. 12 12
but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before the Sun; That is,
the lurking sins of the ungodly shall be displayed before the view of the
whole world. 2. Cor. 5.10.
Then we must all appear before the judgment seat of God, that every man may
receive the things which a^e done in his body, according to that he has done:
whither it be good, or evil: Eccles. 12.14.
for God will bring every work unto judgment, with every secret thing,
whether it be good, or evil. Then Jerusalem shall be searched with lanterns:
Ezekiel. 8.12.
and the wall shall be dug down: and the abominations shall be seen at an
open door, which sinners have done in the dark, and in their privy chambers,
when they fondly said in their imagination, The Lord sees us not, the Lord
has forsaken the earth.

Then the Sons of men shall be called to a reckoning for all their works; as
scholars are brought to repetitions in the end of the week; and laborers
receive their wages in the evening; and merchants pay (when the fair is done,)
for the wares which they have stayed and taken up. Then the wicked shall feel
the sh^rpenes of the two edged sword of Gods wrath, which now is shut up in the
scabberd of mercy: and the burning flame of Gods displeasure, which is now
covered (like the Sun) under the cloud of long suffering: and they shall no
more be able to resist Gods fiery anger, Matt. 3.12.
then the chafe can resist the fire: for they are the chafe, that shall be
burnt up with unquenchable fire. Then Satan will convince the obdurate
transgressor by his own offenses, and charge him with the debts he owes him,
even as the Creditor conuinceth his debtor by his own handwriting. Then the
sins of the unbelievers shall be opened, as a fardell in the market, and
shall appear in judgment against them, and like bastard children borne of
wickedness, Wisdom. 4.6.
shall be witnesses of the wickedness against their parents, when they be asked.
If any should have his secret faults revealed in an open assembly in this
world, Chrysostom. hom 5. ad Romans
would he not rather wish to die, and to be swallowed up quick of the earth,
then to have so many witnesses of his sins? What then shall become of
wretched sinners, when all their doings shall be disclosed to the whole world,
upon an open and perspicuous stage, and shall be seen of infinite thousands,
whom they never knew? Now the sins of the wicked are so hidden, as if they
were written in Gods book, not with clear Ink, but with the juice of a
citron, or orange. Those things which are written with the juice of an orange,
appear not, till they be brought to the fire, and then they may be read
plainly: even so the secret iniquities of the ungodly, shall clearly appear
in the fire of the last judgment, For in Fire shall God judge the world.

This made David to say; Oh Lord, thou have tried me, Psalm. 139 1.2.3.4.
and known me: thou know my sitting, and my rising; thou understand my
thoughts a far off: thou compassest my paths, and my lying down, and art
accustomed to all my ways: For there is not a word in my Tongue, but lo, thou
know it wholly o Lord.

And this made Job to say, that his steps were numbered; Job. 14.16.17.
and his sins were not delaied, and his iniquity was sealed up, as in a
bag.

If God do this in this fleeting life, much more will he do it in the great
judgment? If God do thus in David and Job how much more will he do it in the
wicked? If the righteous can scarcely be saved, Bern. Ser. 15. in Ca^t. Greg l.
27 Moral. in Job.
where shall the sinner appear? Quid in Babylone tutum, si in Jerusalem manet
serutimum? Qui^ facient ^abulae, quando ^remuns Columna? If the search be so
narrow in Jerusalem: what can be hidden in Babylon? If the Pillars of the house
tremble, what shall the weak planckes do? That is, If God so deal with his
dear children in this life, and so punish ofte^tunes their sins in this
world, where there is a place for mercy; how severe shall his sentence be
against the wicked in the world to come, where only justice shall be found?

Unless perhaps, there be any so faithless, and so profane, as to call into
question the last judgment, and to doubt, Aristotle.
whether the world shall have an end or not. Indeed the Philosopher affirmed,
that the world was eternal, without beginning, without ending: and another
spoke as impiously; Non alsuno videre patres, aliumne minores Aspicient?

Our Fathers (says he) saw none other world; Mani^^^s.
And shall our posterity see any other?

But to these Infidels and Ethnicks, may be opposed the Tradition of the
Gentiles themselves; who by the direction of ancient Oracles, did maintain,
that Jupiter was the chiefest of the Gods: and that his son was the Judge of
the souls of men in Hell; And yet that this Son was not Apollo, Liber, or
Mercury; who were accounted heavenly: but he was Minos both a King, and
Lawgiver; As if they had meant, that the Son of God should be Judge of the
world; but yet such a one, as was both a Man, and just; to wit, a Mediator;
That was, both God and Man.

Against a Poet may be cited another Poet, which says; Ovid. Met. 1.
Esse quoque in fatis reminiscitur, affore tempus,
Quo mare, quo tellu, correptaque regia caeli
Ardeat, and mundi ^oles operosu laboret:


That the time shall come, in which the Sea, earth, heaven, and whole frame of
the world shall be burnt with fire. And above all Poets, the eminent
Prophetisse Sib^ll, proves the final and general judgment, in her Acrostich
verses; Lib. 8. Iesous Christos theou uios soter stauros.
where the first letters make up these words in the Greeks tongue, whe^in she
wrote, Jesus Christ, the Son of God, our Savior, that suff^red on the
Cross; and where (agreeably to ye scriptures) she shows, that Christ shall
come to judge all flesh: and that the trumpet shall blow, and that the dead
shall be raised up, and shall see Christ, and mourn before him: and that all
secrets shall be revealed and that the Sun, Moon, and Stars shall loose
their light; and that heaven, earth, and the Sea, shall be burnt with fire; and
that the Saints shall be set at full liberty, but the wicked horribly
punished. But of those mockers of the last day, that say; 1. Pet. ^.4.
Where is the promise of Christ's coming? for since the fathers died, all
things continue alike from the beginning of the creation: of those mockers,
what should be asked but this? whether, they do not believe the Article of the
Christian faith, which holds, that Christ shall come in the end of the world
from heaven, to judge both quick and dead? and whether, if they believe the
Resurrection, they must not of necessity also believe the last judgment: for
that God may judge all the dead, he must raise them up from death: and why
should he raise them from death, but to receive their judgment? and whether
Nature do not demonstrate this principle unto us, that God is just, and
therefore the good must of necessity be blessed for ever, and the wicked
cursed for ever: which thing since in this world it comes not to pass, (where
the^e are so many wicked men, and Atheists, upon whom God does not show
vengeance in this life and where on the contrary, godly men, and sincere
worshippers of the Lord, are so far from a recompense in this life, 1. Cor.
15.19.
that of all men they seem to be most miserable;) there must needs remain a
certain and infallible judgment, wherein the wicked shall be punished, and
the just shall receive a reward of their piety. Lastly, what should be asked of
these mockers, but this? whether they will not believe the holy scripture,
which in manifold passages inculcates ye great judgment? as when it says:
that God shall judge the world in righteousness, Psalm. 9.8.
and shall judge the people with equity; and when it says; that the Lord will
judge with fire, Isa. 66.15
and with his word all flesh; and when it says, that nothing is secret, Luke
8.17 Ioh. 12.48.
that shall not be evident; neither any thing hid, that shall not he known,
and come to light; and when it says, that he that refuses Christ, and
receives not his words, has one that judges him; the Word that Christ has
spoken, Romans 2.16
it shall judge him in the last day; and when it says, that at the last day,
God shall judge the secrets of men's hearts by Jesus Christ; Heb 9.17
and when it says, that it is appointed unto al men, that they shall once die,
and after that comes the judgment: Jude. 14.15.
and when it says, that the Lord comes with thousands of his Saints, to give
judgment against al men, and to rebuke all the ungodly among them, of all
their wicked deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of all their wicked
speakings, which wicked sinners have spoken against him; and when it settes
down the whole proceeding, Matt. 25.
manner, and execution thereof at large.

Besides this; Is not the sentence of death pronounced against the tra^sgressor
of the law, Genesis 2.17.
before the fall of Adam; and the repetition of the same sentence by the mouth
of God in the Law, Deuteronomy. 26.^6.
a Fore runner, and Herald of the last Judgment?

Is not the Hand writing of God, Gal. 3.10.
engraven in man's conscience whereby his thoughts do either accuse him, or
excuse him, Romans 2.15
a summoning to the last Judgment? Are not the examples of Gods wrath
heretofore executed on the World, (as the Flood, the burning of Sodom; the
reiection of the Jews; the destruction of erusa^em, and the like;)
demonstrations of the last Judgment? And are not daily calamities, both
public and private, and the death of the body; are not these representations
and Images of the last judgment? Wherefore since it is so certain, that the
day of judgment shall come, at the time prescribed of God; and since that day
shall be so searefull and terrible; Let us watch and pray continually, that we
may be counted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass; and
that we may stand before the Son of man.

Secondly, we must note, The day of judgment not known, and why.
that the day and hour of the day of Judgment is uncertain and unknown. For
this our Savior teaches most evidently. For when the disciples asked, what
sign there should be of his coming, and of the end of the world? Christ did
not answer, when his coming should be, but after what manner it should be. He
declares the fashion of it, but he concealeth the season of it. If any shall
say, that the approaching of it, may be discerned by the signs and tokens,
which our Savior himself has set down: and that therewithal the time of it
may be somewhat coniectured: It may be answered, that the prognostications and
signs of the day of judgment are of two sorts: some are precedent, an^ going
before it; and some are conjoined, and going with it. And of the foregoing
tokens, some go long before it; and some go not long before it. The signs
that go long before the day of judgment, Matt. 24.24.3^.38.
are these: First the preaching of the Gospel, throughout the whole world, and
among all nations: secondly, that strange security and gluttony, such as was
in the days of Noah before ye flood: thirdly, a departure from sound doctrine,
of which Paul speaks, 1. Tim. 4.1.
when he says, That the spirit speaks evidently, that in the latter times
some shall depart from the faith, and shall give heed unto spirits of error,
and doctrines of Devils fourthly, a wonderful disorder and corruption in
manners: for in the last days (says the scripture) shall come perilous
times; 2. Tim. 3.1.2.3.4
for men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, cursed
speakers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural
affection, truce breakers, false accusers, intemperate, fierce, no lovers at
all of them which are good, traitors, headie, hie-minded, lovers of pleasures
more then lovers of God: fifthly, ye revealing of that notable Antichrist, for
the Apostle says; 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
That no man must deceive us by any means; For that day shall not come, except
there come a departing first, and that that man of sin be disclosed, even the
son of perdition: sixthly, Luke 2^.12. Matt. 24.10. Matt. 24.11.
the persecution of the godly, and betraying of them for the name of Christ:
seventhly, public and notorious scandales and offenses: eighthly, many false
Christ's and false Prophets, saying, I am Christ: that is, using the name of
Christ; or faining, that they are sent of Christ; or that they are, that which
Christ is: showing forth signs and wonders, to deceive the very elect, if it
were possible: ninthly, neglect of love and charity, and a falling from the
faith.

The signs going nearly before the day, yet such as the day shall not
presently follow, are these; First in heaven, Mar. 13.17.24.
the sun shall be darkened; that is, there shall be eclipses of the Sun,
the Moon shall loose her light, the Stars shall fall from heaven, that is,
shall seem to fall; the powers of heaven shall be shaken. Secondly, in the
earth, there shall be great earthquakes, sturs, and tumults; nation shall rise
against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; Luke 11.9.10.15. Mar. 13.7.8.
Luke 21.23.
no place shall be free from wars, pestilences, famines, persecutions, and
vexations. 3. In the sea, there shall be fearful roaring, sounding and
flowing. 4. In the air, there shall be dreadful and terrible tempests.

In a word, the heaven, earth, and all Elements shall express the face of an
angry Judge, that sinners may be warned to repent, Super. Matt. 24.
except they will perish suddenly. And therefore Saint Chrysostom says; When
the good man of the house dies, the family lamenteth, and apparelleth it
self with black garments; so when mankind draws to an end, the powers of
heaven, which were made for mankind, do mourn, and putting aside beauty, are
overwhelmed with darkness. When the king of heaven arises to judge the quick
and dead, the Angelical powers shall be moved; and the terrible servants shall
go before the terrible Lord. Unto these foregoing signs may be added the
conversion, or gathering of Israel to the faith, that is, of the whole Jewish
nation to the Church of Christ, Luke 21.24. Isai 59. Romans 11.
when the fu^^s of the gentiles is come in: of which conversion, both the
Prophet, and the Apostle makes mention; and the which, how, and when it shall
be, none knows but God. These are the signs, that go before the second
coming of Christ. The tokens conjoined and going with the day of judgment
are; the wayling of the kinreds of the earth; Matt. 24.30.
and the sign of the Son of man, which shall be seen in the heaven, when
the Lord shall come in the clouds, which some take for the sign of the
Cross; and some take for the excellent glory and Majesty, which shall give
witness, that Christ is come to judge the whole world. Now by the accomplishing
of the foregoing signs which we have scene, and do see daily performed, we
may gather the near approaching of the day of judgment; but of the sign that
shall go with it, the time is uncertain: and therefore our Savior says;
Matt. 24.33.
When ye see all these things, know that the kingdom of God is near, even at
the doors: and he adds presently: but as the days of Noah were, Verse.
37.38.39.
so likewise shall the coming of the Son of man be: for as in the days
before the flood, they did eat, and drink, marry, and give in marriage, unto
the day that Noah entered into the Arc, and they knew nothing till the flood
came, and took them all away, so shall also the coming of the Son of man
be. And he ads withal: of this be sure, Verse. 43.44.
that if the goodman of the house knew, at what watch the thief would come, he
would surely watch, and not suffer his house to be dug through; therefore be
ye also ready; for in the hour that ye think not, will the Son of man come.

2. Pet. 3.10.
This Peter learned of his Master Christ, when he said, That the day of the
Lord will come as a thief in the night. And likewise Paul, These. 5.2.3.
when he said, That the day of the Lord shall come, even as a thief in the
night; for when they shall say, peace, and safety, then shall come upon them
sudden destruction, as the travel upon a woman with child, and they shall not
escape. Luke 21.35.
And our Savior says also, that that day shall come as a snare, on all them
that dwell on the face of the whole earth.

Very fitly may the coming of that great day be compared unto a snare. For as
a bird, or beast, fears nothing less then the snare; but they flee and w^nder
freely and without fear, in the fields and woods, seeking their food; and yet
by the c^aft and Art of men, of which they are not aware, they fall into traps
and snares, and so are slain: even so upon earthly men, which dwell upon the
face of the earth, and which still gape on gain of the world, the providence
of God, which such people think not of, brings the judgment of God suddenly,
and so holds them entangled in eternal condemnation. The day then of
judgment must needs be uncertain: since Christ sets it forth by very sudden
things; to wit, Noah's flood, a thief, a snare. And the cause of the uncertain
day thereof is, that we should take heed, beware, watch, pray, and be
prepared. If the bird, or beast did know of the snare before hand, how
carefully would they avoid it? For if the bird, or beast once escape out of the
snare, they will hardly return to that place again. Against thieves men build
strong houses: and shut their doors with locks and bars; and keep their
dwellings with dogs, and watchmen, and weapons. If there were as great care
for the soul and eternal salvation, as for the life temporal, and earthly
treasures and possessions, who would not be ready for the day of judgment?

And as God has hidden the time of this last judgment from us, that we should
daily and hourly expect Christ's coming; and be watchful, that that day find
us not unready, and that the number of the elect may be fulfilled, 2. Pet. 3.9
Reu. 6.11.
and the remnant of the faithful may be called by the Gospel to the Church of
Christ; and that our faith, hope, and patience may be tried, and we stird up to
repentance: and that the ungodly, that contemn the lenity of God, Romans 2.4.5.
and the space that he has so bountifully granted for their amendment, may be
made more and more inexcusable; 2. Pet. 3.8.9.
so also God has hidden the time of the judgment from us, to bridle our
curiosity, that we should not enquire after his hidden and secret Counsels.
For Christ himself says, That of that day and hour knows no man, Mar.
13.32.
not the Angels which are in heaven, neither the Son himself, but the Father.

In which words our Savior would hold the minds of the faithful in suspense,
least by false imagination they should prefixe a day and certain time for the
last redemption. For such is men's curiosity, that neglecting things necessary
to be known, they most scrupulously desire to know that which God has not
vouchsafed to reveal unto them. The Apostles themselves were attainted of this
curiosity; and for this cause Christ said unto them; when they asked, whether
he would restore the kingdom to Israel; It is not for you, Act. 1.6.7
(said he) to know the times, or the seasons, which the Father has put in his
own power.

Therefore to draw us from this curiosity, and to cut off all occasion of
inquiry, after that Christ had discovered of his coming, and the occurrences
thereof, he presently speaks of the uncertain day and hour thereof. For he
would have the day of his coming to be so looked for and hoped for, as that
none should presume to enquire, when he would come; and he would have his
disciples to walk in such light of faith, as that being uncertain of the
time, they should patiently wait for the revelation thereof. And therefore we
must take heed, that we be not more careful and curious, in the seasons, and
moments of time, then the Lord does permit. For the chiefest part of Christian
wisdom consists herein, that we contain our selves within the limits and
precincts of the word of God. And therefore when the Apostle for the
consolation of the godly, had fore-tolde some things of the last times and
Christ's coming, he immediately adds against this curiosity; But of the
times and seasons, 1 Thessalonians. 5.1.
brethren (says he) ye have no need that I write unto you. Yea, why should
it grieve men to be ignorant of that day, since the Angels of GOD know it not?
Were it not too great pride, and too importunate desire, for us worms and
wretches that creep on the earth, to seek to know more then the Angels of
heaven? Therefore let us be willing to be ignorant of that, of which God would
have us to be ignorant.

Yea, were it not the extremest folly, to be unwilling to submit our selves to
that ignorance, which the very Son of God himself has not refused to
undertake for our sake? Indeed for that many have thought, that it becomes
not Christ, to be ignorant of any thing, they have endeavored to mollifi^ the
hardness of the speech, (as they accounted it,) with their own invention.

And it may be, that the malice of the Arrians, who by this place labored to
prove, that Christ was not the true and only God, enforced them to this
starting hole, as to say, that Christ knew not the hour of the Judgment,
because he would not reveal it unto other.

But seeing it is clear, that an ignorance is attributed to Christ, common
with the Angels, some other fitter meaning must be sought out of these words.
For it is nothing to say, that Christ is God, and God is ignorant of nothing:
for there are in Christ two natures, so joined in one person, that each nature
retains it own proprieties; and specially the Deity did (as it were) rest,
and not show it self forth, as often as for the accomplishing of the office
of the Mediator, it was requisite, that the humane nature should by it self
work that which appertained unto it. Therefore it is no absurdity, for Christ
that knew all things, as he is God, to be ignorant of something, as he is man.
How else could he have been like unto us, and subject to grief and
heaviness? And it is a great absurdity for any to reply; that ignorance,
which is the punishment for sin, beseems not Christ. For first, it is
folly, to think, that the ignorance, which is here ascribed to the Angels,
proceeds from sin, and again it is folly, not to acknowledge, that Christ
took upon him our flesh, to the end he might undergo the punishments that
were due to our sins. And that Christ knew not the day and ha^re of the last
judgment, according to his humanity, it derogates no more from his divine
nature, then that he was once mortal and subject to death.

Now questionless, Christ in attributing this ignorance to himself, had
respect to the office enjoined him by his Father: as he did, when he said, that
it was not his part, Math. 20.23.24.
to place any on his right, or left hand, in the kingdom of heaven.

For he does not there absolutely derogate that authority from himself, but
the sense is, that he was not sent from the Father, with this commandment,
while he lived among men: so here also we must understand, that as he
descended to be our Mediator, till he had executed that office, he had not that
given him, which he received after his resurrection. For he affirms, that
then the power over all things is given unto him. Math. 28.18.
And therefore as he took on him all other things pertaining to man's
infirmity, Heb. 2.17.14.15.
being in all things like unto men, sin excepted; so he took on him also the
knowledge, and ignorance, and reason, and understanding of man; which by
degrees is increased, and diminished; and in respect whereof, he is said, not
to know this, or that. Luke 2.52.
As elsewhere it is written, that Jesus increased in wisdom, and stature,
and in favor with God and men.

Where are they now, that profess their knowledge of the year of the last
iddgement; when Christ the only Son of God confesses, that he is ignorant
of it? Some Anabaptists have boasted of their prophecies and revelations to the
simple multitude, and have not doubted to prefixe the certain year, month,
and day of the judgment: some have calculated the day by iudiciarie
Astrology, and by the position and aspect of the stars, or by Arithmaticall
and imaginary supputations of numbers and times: some have been endured, or
rather seduced to determine the day by ancient and frivolous predictions of
others: but of these it may be said, as the acute and excellent Epigrammatist
taxes a forward Calculator.

Nonaginta duos durabit mundus in anno, Joan.

Munaus ad arbitrium si sta^, ab^que tuum: Oven.

Cur mundi finem propiorem non facis? vt ne
Ante obitum mendax arguerere: sapis.)
That they are wise in setting the day so far off, least otherwise in their
life time they should be convicted of lying. Some have been misled by weak
conjectures; producing the Oracle received by the tradition of the Jews, which
they refer to Eliah and to his school; namely, that the world should last six
thousand years: so distributing those years, that two thousand should be
spent before the law, two thousand under the law, and two thousand under the
kingdom of the Messiah; and adding, that these last two thousand years shall
scarce have full consummation, because of the most grievous iniquities of the
world: but these must know, that that prophecy is vain; because there were
before the law two thousand five hundred and thirteen years; and much less
then two thousand years under the law. Some have fained, that the world
should continue six days, as it was created in six days; but for every day
they have allotted a thousand years, Psalm. 90.4.
as though David meant so, when he said; That a thousand years in the sight of
the Lord, are as yesterday, when it is past. Some other have supposed, that the
mystecall body of Christ, which is the Church, shall abide on earth thirty
three years: because Christ, in regard of his body which he took of the
Virgin, abode so long in this world; and for every year they appoint fifty
usual years, that they make up the year of Iubilee; but these are to
understand, that the end of the world depends not on the law or course of
nature, or from any other secondarie cause, but on the pleasure and secret
determination of the Lord.

Some on the contrary, are so far of from calculating of a certain year
and day, as that they fear not to make a flat doubt, whether there shall be an
end of the world or not: 1. Pet. 4.7. Iam. ^.8.
because Saint Peter says, that the end of all things is at hand; and Saint
James says again, that the coming of the Lord draws near; and yet Saint
Paul does plainly contradict them, as they think; affirming that the day of
the Lord should not yet come: but these must remember, that the Apostles are
not contrary among themselves: for they speak not of the same things, nor in
the same respect. For S. Peter and S. James say, that the day of judgment is
at hand, in respect of God, with whom a thousand years are but as one day;
Whereas S. Paul denies, that the day of the Lord was at hand: in his Age, and
while he lived; disputing against the false Prophets, nor prefixed a mere and
certain time; and yet he denies not, that the coming of the Lord drew near;
or that these are the last times in comparison of former Ages, and of the
appearing of ye Messiah, which no other time shall in such sort succeed, nor
have so long continuance, as was the continuance from the creation of the world
to the Birth of Christ. And though that hour be so uncertain, as that we
neither may, nor ought to search after it; yet by the foregoing signs, which
we daily see accomplished, and by the deprauation and ungodliness of manners,
which is come to the very top, it is evident enough, that the day of Christ is
not far off even as the buds of trees declare the approaching of the Summer,
and the Husbandman gathers by ye waxing yellow of the Ear, that Harvest is
near at hand: and these signs are (as it were) Criers and Apparitors to
summon men to Christ's Tribunal seat; though touching ye Year, Month, Day,
Hour, and moment, men know nothing, because in scripture there is revealed
nothing. For Austen says well, That as the last age of man, which is his old
age, cannot be limited by a certain number of years, like ye rest of the
ages: namely, Childhood, youth, constant and settled age; So the last age of
the world cannot be determined by certain years. Wherefore we must reject
curious, superstitious, and unprofitable questions, wherein satan entangleth
many, that they should neglect faith, hope, charity, and the necessary
offices of virtue; and when we hear mention of the last judgment, we must
prepare our selves to watch and pray, that by the unlooked for coming thereof,
we be not oppressed suddenly. For this sudden coming of the day of judgment
cuts off all delays, that are commonly made for leading our lives in the fear
and awe of God. Let none say, that so many threatenings have past of that day of
judgment, and that it is not yet seen; and therefore that they may live
securely: for how far off, or near soever the general judgment be; yet the
day of death, which will bring thee to thy particular judgment, may be very
nigh; and because of the shortness of man's life on the earth, cannot be many
years off. If a king should give thee a Lordship, on this condition, that
within one hour, thou should dispatch the letters of donation; and cause
the great Seal to be annexed thereunto: what diligence and speed would
thou use, by thy self and thy friends, to perform that condition? This life is
as it were an hour, (neither can thou assure thy self of one hour;) and it
is promised thee of God, that thou shall obtain the everlasting in heritance,
if thou watch and pray. Why then do thou cease to watch against sin, and to
pray for Gods grace and mercy, that thou may be counted worthy to escape all
these things, and to stand before the Son of man? That is, to appear boldly,
to obtain favor of the judge, and not to be rejected, either in the general
judgment, when all flesh shall receive their doom, or in the particular
judgment of thy soul, when it shall be separated from the tabernacle of the
body by death? But perhaps, because thou see many to live long; you do
promise to thy self ling life, and therefore do defer to prepare for thy
judgment. And do thou not also see, that many are taken hence in their
flourishing Age, and on the sudden?

Who will not beware of a mad Dog, that bites all that passes by? Death is
like a furious Dog, that spares none, and warnes few. But in this regard we
are like unto Swine. For when Swine see their fellow killing, and hear his
grunting; they all run about him, and grunt, and make a great stir; but when
their Fellow is killed, and cries no more, presently they return to the dyrt
and dongue, and care no longer for it: So worldly, carnal, and voluptuous men,
when one of their acquaintance dies, as long as the Funerals last, they are
moved, and serrified, and troubled, but anon after the Funerals are finished,
they soon forget it, and return again to the filthiness of their pleasures,
and former iniquities.

The deferring of repentance, and doubling of sins, is most perilous. A
Ship b^eares many burdens; yet it may be laden so long, till it sincke
again. God is gracious, but if he be provoked every day; he will whet his
sword, and bend his Bow, and shoot his Arrows, against the obstinate
offenders. Patience too much wronged, Psalm. 7.^^
is turned into Fury at last.

It is reported of the Diamond, that it is the hardest of all stones; but when
it is broken, it is scattered into most small pieces, that can hardly be
discerned with the eyes, and can never be joined together again. Let us
beware, that the Lord be not by so much the more severe against us, if we abuse
his loving kindness; by how much the more favor he has formerly showed unto
us. He that hears the Thunder, is afraid of the lightning. The preaching of
the word, is a thundering of the judgment to come: Let us next fear the
lightning of the justice of God. The longer we have lived, and the more
punishments we have escaped, that were due to our sins; the more let us
expect the judgment that will come speedily and surely.

T^eramenes, a Citizen of Athens, when he had avoided the fall of an house,
which fell as soon as he was out of it, cried out, Aelian. de vaer. histor. l.
9.
O Jupiter, cuinam metempor^reseruea? o God, for what time do thou keep me?
And anon after, he was compelled by the thirty Tyrants to drink poison, and
so dyed.

The like thing must the sinner expect, that remains impenitent, and has not
yet felt the hand of God. Wherefore, say not, Ecclus ^.4, 5.6.7.
I have sinned, and what evil has come unto me? for the Almighty is a
patient rewarder; but he will not leave thee unpunished: because thy sin is
forgiven, be not without fear to heap sin upon sin; and say not, the
mercy of God is great, he will forgive my manifold sins: for mercy and wrath
come from him, and his indignation comes down upon sinners. Make no tarrying
to turn unto the Lord, and put not off from day to day: for suddenly shall the
wrath of the Lord break forth, and in thy security thou shall be destroyed,
and thou shall perish in time of vengeance.

Thirdly, Let us see to what the remembrance, 3. To what the remembrance of the
judgment avails.
the Fear, and the expectation of the last judgment avails.

To meditate on the day of judgment, will bridle and refrain the desire and
delight in sinning. And therefore, Saint Basil says well; If thou perceive thy
self to be provoked to any sin, says he, call to mind that fearful
judgment of Christ, which no mortal man may endure, and stay thy soul, as it
were (with this bridle.) For as the Sun obscures and darkens all the Stars
with his brightness; In Psalm. 33
So the remembrance only of this judgment, puts out all the concupiscences of
the soul, by the terriblenes thereof.

And therefore the Prophet David shows, that the forgetting of this judgment
is the cause of sin. For when he had said, that the ungodly does persecute
the poor, make boast of his own hearts desire, is so proud, that he cares not
for his God, has his mouth full of cursing, deceit, and fraud; He yeeldes the
reason, Psalm. 10.6.11.
when he says, That Gods judgments are far above out of his sight; For he
has said in his heart: God has forgotten, he hides away his face, and will
never see it; I shall never be moved, nor be in danger.

Therefore, when we are allured and tempted to evil, let us resist
temptations, and say to our selves: I will not do this evil; and I will not
commit this sin; For a day will come, wherein I shall not be able to answer
for it; in which the Heaven and Earth, the Air, and water, and whole world
will stand up, and give witness of my sins; and though all things should
hold their peace, yet my very thoughts and works shallbe before mine eyes, and
shall accuse me before the Lord. When Satan shall persuade us, that we shall
find favor in that day, though we persist and wallow in ungodliness; let us
oppose and set against this assault, the sort and quality of the last
judgment; which shall be horrible, intolerable, unavoidable, sudden, and
wherein the judge shall not be miscarried by favor and entreatie.

For on the right hand shall be sin, to accuse; On the left hand, infinite
Devils to torment; Under, the hydeous Gulf of Hell; Over, an Angry Judge;
Without, the World, flaming; Within, Conscience burning.

There the Righteous shall only be saved: Ah, wretched Sinner! whither will thou fly, being so taken? To be hidden, it is impossible; To appear, it is
intolerable. Nothing can be so available, to lead our life in the fear of
God, Ambros. de Gffic.
as firmly to believe, that he shall be the judge, whom no secret thing can
deceive, and none offense hurt, and who is delighted with virtue, godliness, and
the fear of the Lord. And if when our cause is to be heard of an earthly
judge, we be so heedefull to prepare an Advocate, and to make ready all
proo^es that may do us good: how diligent should we be to have our faith fixed
on Christ our Mediator and Advocate, and to declare our faith by virtue and
godliness of living, that we may be absolved and prevail against the dangerous
enemies and accusees of our souls in the last and great day of judgment? For
where our Savior says, That the hour shall come in the which all that are in
the graves shall hear his voice: Ioh. 5.28.
we must attentively consider, that it is said, that the hour of the last day
shall come. For because we do often so much pursue the vanity of this world,
and therein passes away the tediousnes of hours and times; in that we are
taught, that the hour of judgment shall come, and we know not how soon,
this must make us careful and watchful in the love and embracing of godliness.
For they that affirm, that all shall at the last be said, how can they
answer to that speech of him, that cannot lie; when he speaks of the
resurrection and last judgment? saying, They shall come forth, that have done
good, Ioh. 5.29.
unto the resurrection of life; but they that have done evil, unto the
resurrection of condemnation. In which words Christ shows, that the twofold
state of men shall appear in the end of the world also: and not without just
cause. For as men have been diverse in this life, some elect, some reprobate;
so every one shall have his reward; and Christ shall gather all nations before
him, and separate them as the Shepherd separates the sheep and goats;
setting the sheep on the right hand, and the goats on the left hand. All
shall live indeed after the general judgment; but there shall be a
distinction of this life, by the judgment of Christ the just Judge. For Christ
being God, that takes no pleasure in iniquity, when he has gathered the
wheat into his gainer, that is, when he has called and received the faithful
and godly to the perpetual possession of his kingdom; Matt. 3.11.
then he will burnethe chafe, that is, unfruitful persons, and workers of
iniquity, with fire that cannot be extinguished; and the Angels shall go
forth, and separate the evil from the just, Matt. 13.41. Mar. 9.41.
and throw them into the furnace of flaming fire, where shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth, and the worm will never die

This the Divine expresses in these words; He that ouercometh shall inherit
all things, and I will be his God, ^eu. 21.7.8.27.
and he shall be my son; but the fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable,
and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all liars,
shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which
is the second death: for none unclean thing shall enter into Heaven, neither
whatsoever works abomination or lies: but they which are written in the
lambs book of life. The Apostle preaching to the Athenians, Act. 17.31.
said, that God has appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness. As if Saint Paul had said, that the circumstance and
consideration of ye time must stir us up to repentance and amendment of life:
for this is the time of grace, in which men may be partakers of Gods mercy, if
they repent. But if men stubbornely reject the mercy of the Lord offered unto
them; they must know, that all men shall in the prefixed day, be arraigned
before Gods Tribunal seat, which can neither be avoided, nor refused.

For albeit God suffer the ungodly for a time; yet he does it not, for that he
allows their wickedness, but that by his forbearance he may allure them to
repentance: and if they contemn his kindness and long suffering, when he
inuiteth them to his fear; at length, will they, nill they, they shall find
him a sharp and severe Judge.

As he patiently for a long time expected the conversion of the old world in
the days of Noah; but at last said, Genesis 6.3.
That his spirit should not always strive with man, because he is but flesh; and
that his days should be an hundredth and twenty years; that is, because men
could not be won by Gods lenity and long sufferance; whereby (as it were) he
strove to overcome them; he would no longer stay his vengeance, but definitely
prescribe the term of an hundredth and twenty years in which ye inhabitants
of the earth might rep^nt, before the Earth were destroyed: Genesis 19.19.24.25.
and as God patiently for a long time expected the conversion of the Sodomites,
in the days of Lot; but at last for their hardness of heart, consumed them with
fire and brimstone from heaven, and their cities, and that that grew upon the
Earth: and as God patiently expected for a long time the conversion of the
Israelites, sending his servants the Prophets daily unto them, that they might
be spared; 2. King. 17.13.14.
but at last for rejecting and contemning of his admonitions and threatenings,
he destroyed Samaria and Jerusalem: so whosoever shall do wickedly, and yet
shall think to escape Gods judgment, Romans 2.^.4 5.6.7.8.^.10
despising the riches of Gods bountifulnes, and patience, and long sufferance,
not knowing, that the bountifulnes of God should lead him to repentance; he
after his hardness, and heart that cannot repent, heapeth up (as a treasure)
unto himself, wrath against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the
just judgment of God, who will reward every man according to his works; that
is, to them which through patience in well doing, seek glory, and honor, and
immortality, eternal life; but unto them that are contentions, and disobey
the truth, and obey unrighteousness, shall be indignation and wrath: tribulation
and anguish shall be upon the soul of every man that does evil, of the Jew
first, and also of the Grecian: but to every man that does good, shall be
glory, and honor, and peace, to the Jew first, and also to the Grecian. And
why is the separation of the good and bad expressed by the comparison of the
sheep and goats; ^
but partly for the consolation of the godly; who in this mixture of good and
bad, are manifoldly molested by the reprobate, as the sheep are by the goats;
partly for the instruction and admonition of the godly, that we should be most
studious in this life, to cast aside the manners and malice of goats, and to
express the simplicity and innocence of sheep?

When the world goes about to draw us to the pleasures of youth; and by
addicting our selves to vanity, to forget God and his worship; let us call to
mind what Solomon says of this matter; rejoice, says he, Eccles. 11.9.
o young man in thy youth, and let thine heart cheer thee in the days of thy
youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes;
but know, that for all these things, God will bring thee to judgment.

When the love of the world, and the desire of riches and honor shall move us,
to be unconscionable, unmerciful, ready to say and swear falsely, for
hatred, favor, or gain; let Malachies prophecy he remembered; where the Lord
says thus; Mal. 3.5.
I will come near to you in judgment, and I will be a swift witness against
the southsayers, and against the adulterers, and against false swearers, and
against those that wrongfully keep back the hirelings wages, vex the widow,
and the fatherles, and oppress the stranger, and fear not me, says the Lord
of hosts.

For what shall it profit a man, Matt. 16.26.
to win the whole world, and to loose his soul? or what shall he give for a
recompense of his soul? Bernard.
since that day shall come, (in quo plus valebunt pura corda, quam astuta
verba, conscientia bona, quam marsupia plena.) in which a clean heart shall
more avail, then a subtle tongue, and a good conscience more then a full
purse; Because that Judge will neither be deceived by words, not be wrested by
gifts.

For the great and last judgment shall be after another manner, then the
judgments that are holden in this world.

Romans 14.10.11.12.
It shall not avail to run away; For we shall all appear before the judgment
fear of Christ, and every one of us shall give accounts of himself to God.

Dan. 7.9.10.
It shall not avail to deny the faults; for the book of every man's conscience
shall be opened, and evidence given of every man's doings.

It shall not avail, to endeavor to beguile the Judge; for Christ knows all
men, And he needs not that any should testify of man; Ioh. 2.25. 2. Pet.
3.7.
for he knows what is in man. It shall not avail to trust in riches,
honors, and treasure; for the earth, with all the riches and works thereof,
shall be burnt up. What is it then that will avail at that day? Even this,
that Christ acknowledge us for his own servants: and Christ will acknowledge
and confess those only to be his, Matt. 10.^2.33.
who have believed in him, and confessed him before men. Saint Ieromes words
are most worthy of observation, when he thus speaks of himself; Whether I
eat, or drink, In com. in Matt.
or do any other thing, always that voice seems to sound in mine ears,
Arise o ye dead, and come to judgment: as often as I muse on the day of
judgment, so often do I tremble with my whole heart and body: for we must
after such a manner pass over the pleasantnes of our life, as that the
bitterness of the judgment to come be never forgotten.

Again, as the remembrance of the day of judgment will curb us from hardness
of heart, and continuing in sin; so it will comfort and cheer us in our
afflictions and miseries. And therefore our Savior proposed the parable of the
fig tree; saying; Luke 21.28.9.^0.31.
Behold the fig tree, and all trees; when they now shoot forth, ye seeing
them, know of your own selves, that summer is then near: so likewise ye,
when ye see these things come to pass, know ye that the kingdom of God is
near: And when these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up
your heads; for your redemption draws near.

In which words Christ not only means, that those troublesome times shall be
as certain a sign of his coming, as we certainly know that summer
approaches, when trees bud forth; but he signifies another thing besides.
For whereas in winter, trees being drawn together with roughnes of cold,
seem to be the stronger; but when in the spring that hardness is dissolved,
they appear weaker, and (as it were) cloven and opened, that new tendrels and
springals may break out: so the strength of the Church is not hindered, when
afflictions do soften it in the eyes of men. For as the inward juice dispersed
through the whole tree, when it is softened it increases force to renew that
which was before (as it were) dead: so the Lord does bring forth the full
restoring of his children from the corruption of the outward man. The sum is
this; that by the feeble and frail state of the Church, we should not
conjecture a destruction and decay, but rather hope for immortal glory; unto
which the Lord prepares his eiect by the cross and tribulation. For that
which the Apostle speaks of the several parts, must be applied to the whole
body of the Church; 2. Cor. 4.16.
namely, That though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed
daily.

In the mean time, art thou afflicted with poverty, want, and scarsitie? be
of good comfort; a day is at hand, when thy Savior will came to give thee the
glory of Heaven, that exceedes pearl, precious stones, all the gold and
treasure of Ophyre, and all things of this world most desirable. Art thou
molested with sickness, and infirmity of body? Be of good comfort; a day is at
hand, when thou shall be partaker of that Kingdom, where is no sickness, no
sorrow, no enemy, no envy, no danger, no death, no fear of death. Art thou
falsely slandered, and unjustly accused, and oppressed wrongfully, and deprived
of thy right? Be of good comfort; a day is at hand, when the cause of the
Poor, and Fatherles, and widow, shall be righted; And no Bribes, no
partiality, no gloses, no fleights, no fetches, shall either suppress truth,
or oppress the true. 2 Thessalonians 1.6.7.8.9.10.
For it is a righteous thing with GOD, to recompense Tribulation to them that
trouble the godly; and to them which are troubled, rest, when the Lord JESUS
shall show himself from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming Fire,
rendering vengeance unto them, that do not know God, and which obey not unto ye
Gospel of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, which shall be punished with everlasting
perdition, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power;
when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be made merueilous in
all them that believe in that day.

And when the royal Psalmist says, That precious in the eyes of the Lord is
the death of his Saints; Psalm. 116.15.
He gives us notable consolation, and does defend us (as it were) with a
Buckler, not only against the terrors of death, and darts of Satan, in the
public persecutions of the Church, but also against private grief and sorrow.

Romans 5.3.
Therefore the Apostle says, That we rejoice in Tribulations; That is, we
judge afflictions to be a glorious thing, which God will after change into
glory; and this is the peculiar wisdom of the Church, which the world
perceives not.

Mors impiorum, pessima. vulgata translatio, ex Graeco. Psalm. 6.8.
If the death of the ungodly be evil, there must needs remain a judgment,
wherein this shall be made manifest to all; and Tyrants shall receive
punishment for their cruelty: but the godly shall be ^dorned w th eternal
glory.

For if God number the tears of the faithful and put them into a Bottell; Ps.
34.21.
How can he suffer the blood that is shed for the confession of his divine
Name, to perish and vanish away to nothing?

Do thou quake and tremble at the remembrance of that horrible day? 2. Pet.
3.10.
in which the Heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the Elements shall
melte with heat, and the earth with the works that are therein, shall be burnt
up? Be of good comfort, For thy Judge is also thy Savior; he is thy Brother;
he is thy head; and thou a member of his body; He loves thee most ardently;
he is thy Jesus, That is, SAVIOVR, Patron, Advocate, Redeemer, Intercessor;
He laid down his life for thee; Ioh. 5.24.
He has sworn with an oath, that if thou believe in him, thou shall have
eternal life; He makes request for thee, and who shall condemn thee? He
comes to finish the troubles of the World, and to avenge himself of his
enemies, and to deliver the godly from the hands of sinners; and he comes not
to condemn thee, but to absolve thee; and not to torture thee, but to rid thee
from all misery, and to make manifest thy full Redemption, and to free thy
body also from all calamities, and to perform that promise of eternal life,
which so often he has made unto thee, in his sacred word. For he that hears
his word, and belieueth God, that sent him, has everlasting life, and shall
not come into condemnation, but has passed from death to life. Therefore as
Christ says, Surely, Reu. 22.20.
I come quickly; So thou may say with the Evangelist; Amen; even so, come Lord
Jesus. It is for the wicked yt have no part in Christ, to tremble and be
dismayed, at the very mention of the great day. For what have they to do with
it? Amos. 5.18.19.10.
the day of the Lord is as darkness, and not light: as if a man did fly from a
Lion, and a Bear met him; or went into the house, and leaned his hand on the
wall, and a Serpent bit him: shall not the day of the Lord (to the wicked) be
darkness, and not light? even darkness, and no light in it? Zach. 9.9.
But the Prophet Zachariah bids the Daughter of Zyon to rejoice, for the
coming of her King. And upon good reason: Isai. 35.4.
for (as another Prophet testifies;) The same day that brings wrath and
vengeance to the ungodly, brings a recompense and salvation to the godly. For
which cause the holy Apostle Paul sets this down for a mark of the
faithful, by which they may be known; Namely, 1. Cor. 1.7 2. Tim. 4.8.
yt they wayre for the appearing of CHRIST, and love his coming. Therefore if
we shall happen to live at such time as Christ shall come to Judgment; against
the beholding of those ghastly signs, which shall be joined with his Coming,
we must comfort our selves with Christ's promise; that then our Redemption draws
near; that is, that he will take us to himself into heaven: and finally
deliver us from all miseries. In the mean time, let us believe with the
Apostle, That there is laid up for us the crown of righteousness, which the
Lord the righteous Judge shall give us at that day; and not to us only, but
unto all them that love that his appearing. And when we see the clouds of the
Heaven, let us be admonished of these things. For as when Christ Ascended, Act.
1.11.
a cloud took him out of sight; and as Christ shall so come again, even as
he was taken up; that is, in the clouds; 2 Thessalonians. 4.17.
so the clouds shall as a Charret to lift us up to eternal glory, and we
shall be rapt up into the clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air.

Psalm. 20.3. etc.
When we hear the Thunder which is the terrible and mighty voice of God; let
us suppose, that we hear the loud voice of the high Judge, pronouncing the
Sentence both of the sheep and goats. When we see the swift, and bright, and
sudden flashes and flakes of lightning; Let them call to our minds the sudden
and unexpected, and Epiphaneian 2. Tim. 4.8.
clear, and perspicuous coming and appearing of the supreme Judge; For as the
lightening that lighteneth out of the one part under heaven, shines unto the
other part under Heaven, so shall the Son of man be in his day.

Luke 17.24.
And since these things must be so; (For heaven and earth shall pass and be
changed, but the word of the Lord abides for ever;) what manner persons ought
we to be in holy conversation and godliness? looking for, and hasting unto the
coming of that day of God, by which the heavens being on fire, 2. Pet.
3.11.12.13.14.
shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melte with heat? But we look for
new Heavens and a new Earth, according to his promise, wherein dwells
righteousness. Wherefore, seeing we look for such things, Let us be diligent,
that we may be found of him in peace; without spot and blameles. Let us take
heed to our selves, Luke 21.34.
least at any time our hearts be oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness, and
cares of this life, and least that day come on us at unawares.

There are three Robes and Garments belonging to a true Christian: The first
is, a Purple robe: the second is, a white robe: the third, is a golden robe. If
we will attain to true happiness and holiness; Jude. verse. 23.
we must cast off our own polluted rags, and deny our selves, and we must
put on these rich and precious garments. First, we must be arraied in a purple
garment, dyed, and dipped in the blood of the Son of God; That is, Gal. 3.27.
we must freely receive forgiveness of sins, and be reconciled to GOD,
through CHRIST, and Faith in his blood; and this is our Justification.

Next, Romans 13.13.
we must be clothed with a white robe; That is, it becomes us to be renewed in
the spirit of our mind, and to serve God in holiness and righteousness; and this
is our Sanctification.

And thus if we put on, first, Isai. 61.10. Ezekiel. 16.10.11.12.13. Psalm.
4^.13.14.
the Purple robe, and then the white robe; At last, we shall be adorned with
the Golden robe; which is the glittering Garment of perfect Righteousness, and
eternal life in Heaven; and this is our glorification.

They therefore that have these purple and white robes, are to be cou^sailed,
that they defile them not; but yt they walk in white, that they may be
worthy, Reu. 3.3.4.
and watch for ye coming of him that will come as a Thief in the night; and
they are to be admonished, that have not these purple and white garments, that
they beg them devoutly and earnestly of God, that they may be clothed, and that
their filthy nakedness do not appear: Reu. 3.18.
and out of Gods word, they are to be pronounced Blessed, that watch, and keep
their garments, lest they walk naked, Reu. 16.15.
and me^ see their filthiness. For he that is arraied with the purple robe of
Christ's righteousness, and the white garment of Newnes of life, in this world,
shall (without all doubt and peradventure) in the end be garnisht and clad with the
golden robe of immortality and glory in the kingdom of heaven. Whe^efore,
whither we be young, or old, rich, or poor; at home, or abroad; buying, or
selling, sick, or healthy; joyful, or heavy; acting or conte^plating; let us
all still bear in mind this lesson given us, of our SAVIOVR JESUS CHRIST, even
this; Watch therefore, and pray continually, that ye may be counted worthy
to escape all these things, that shall come to pass; and that ye may stand
before the Son of man.

AMEN. Vni-trino Deolaus and gloria.
THE SECOND part.

THE TITLES OF THE treatises tending to this purpose are set down in the next
page.

By R. W. Minister of Gods word.

Matt. 7.1.2. Judge not, that ye be not judged: for with what judgment ye
judge, ye shall be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured
to you again.

LONDON Printed for Arthur Johnson. 1612.

THESE TREATISES contained in the second part.
Spiritual balm for the afflicted. A triumph over tribulation Ministers ought
to move to mercifulnes. Pitiful persons lend to the Lord. A gh^st for the
Soul. The humble Centurion. Constancies crown.
TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, S. Edward Gyles Knight, Accomplishment of all godly
desires, and continuance of the Love of God and men.
SIR if we ponder things duly in the Balance of consideration; we shall
find that the Sons of Adam, are cummonly either crossed and combred with the
burden of trouble and a iuersitie; or else do enjoy (in more or less
measure) quietness and prosperity.

The first sort (for the most part) repine and grumble against Gods sacred
providence; as though he that keeps Israel, did slumber or sleep, and they
are enfeebled, and faint, and welnigh fail, under the weight of tribulation;
as though even as Christ suffe^ed, and then entered into his glory, So we
also should not through many afflictions enter into the kingdom of God: and
they turn aside to bypath out of the right course; seeking plenarie
contentation in transitory delights, where it cannot be found; forsaking the
Fountain of living waters, and following broken Cesternes, that can hold no
liquor; repairing to Beelzebub the god of Ekron, as though there were no God in
Israel, or Balm in Gilead.

The second sort forgetting, that Christians (as fellow members of one body)
are interessed one in another Felicity, and therefore ought to simpathize
mutually, and participate their joy with their brethren; are either negligent
in making their Election sure, by good works, and in manifesting the
sincerity of their Faith, by Love and Charity: Or, albeit they have a most
sure word of the Prophets, to guide them: yet they do not take heed unto it,
as unto a Light that shines in a dark place, until the Day dawne, and the
Day Star arise in their hearts: Or, they are insolent and proud of their
virtues, and puffed up, with an ouer-weening conceit of their imaginary
perfection: Or, they are tired, and quickly wearied in the race of piety, and
at last fall away from their own stedfastnes.

They that are attainted with these, and the like, daily and dangerous
maladies, by advised perusing, and effectual practizing of these following
Treatises, shall (through the blessing of the God of all Consolation,) feel
their infirmities, if not altogether cured and removed, yet much diminished and
mitigated: specially, if they apply the enjoined Medicines, in such manner as
they ought; Namely, with reverence, zeal, and faith; and if they bring a mind
and longing desire to be recovered.

For it falls out in spiritual diseases, as it does in corporal: when a
Medicine is not taken in decent order, it becomes unprofitable: And when the
grieved person does not desirously covet health, all potions are unfruitful.

Neither only the receipts are here prescribed; but their reasons are drawn
out of that Book, unto which all humane reason must be subject: least perhaps
otherwise some Patient might say, as the Prince of Philosophers did in his
grief to his Physician; Come not to heal me, as if I were a Neat-heard, or
an Hedger, but yield me a reason of the things thou command, and I will the
more promptly observe them.

My doings shall be battered with detraction, Cauillation, Controlling. For
some feed themselves with the gaul of Animaduersion, and bitterness of
reprehension, as it is reported, that the Quail lives by poison. But my
comfort is this; that these backe-biters, are not very powerful, albeit they
be fraught with carping; as the Serpent Porphyrus has venom, but he has it
to himself only, for that he wants Teeth: and that they will oppugn and
push faintely, and so retire theirselues, because they can do no more hurt;
as the Waspe strikes, and then flies away, leaving her sting behind her: and
that by attempting to ruinate the invincible Bulwark of Truth, they will
bewray their own imbecillitie, and fall groueling backward; as he that
throws a stone against a Marble pillar, breaks not the Marble, but by the
vehement repercussion breeds his own peril.

What courtesy soever the curious and malignant will affoorde me; seeing my
purpose was to please, pleasure, and profit many, and to displease, gaul,
and offend, none that are godly: whether he that studies to do good, though
he perform it not, be not to be accepted; since he that is willing to do
harm, though he effect it not, is to be rejected; Let the unkind traducer
answer; as the Philosopher expostulated, when he departed from the Syracusane
Tyrant.

When Antimachus was forsaken of all his Auditors, except Plato, yet he
proceeded in reading his Book, esteeming Plato to counterpoize them all; So
though the Critic and disdainefull, shall contemn and deride my doings; yet
if the well disposed, that hunger and thirst after righteousness, that are poor
in Spirit, and pure in heart; that mourn for iniquity, shall entertain
them, they are to me in stead of all, and I desire no more Readers. As for the
dainty; I exhort them to feed on the fine Flower of the Learned, whose
manifold Books abound with exquisite cates; and to pass by this course Bean,
which is convenient only for hungry Stomachs. But those that had rather
such dangerous opinions, out of eloquent words, then profitable instructions
out of ordinary terms; As though it were better to drink poison out of a
golden pot, then wholesome liquor out of an earthen cup: and those that consume
the precious Time of this Posting life, in long turning and pervsing of toyous
and vain discourses; As though it were safe Fishing with a Golden hook in
troubled waters, where the labor will yield small advantage, but the loosing
of the hook may be damageable.

If they will not follow the Example of Marie, in chosing the good part, which
shall not be taken away: yet I admonish them to consider, that though Heaven
and Earth shall pass away, yet the word of God abides ever; and that
howsoever the lovers of this fugitive world are devoted, yet to the truly
religious, the Law of the Lord is sweeter then Honey, or the Hony-combe, and
better then thousands of gold and silver; and that at last they that try the
inventions of men in the conflict of Conscience, will cry out with the
children of the Prophets, Death is in the pot; and with Jeremiah, What is the
Chafe to the Wheat? and with the patient Job to his Friends, Miserable
comforters are ye all; Shall there be none end of words of wind?

If you shall favorably vouchsafe to countenance these few vnfiled Treatises,
Dedicated by him, that wishes you the continual multiplying of Gods graces; I
shall account the fruit of my labor in some forwardness; and be strictly
obliged ever to remain.

Your Worships, submissiuely devoted. Rob. Wolcombe.

SPIRITVALL BALM FOR THE afflicted.
Ioh. 16. verse. 20. Verily, verily I say unto you, that ye shall weep and
lament, and the world shall rejoice, and ye shall sorrow, but your sorrow
shall be turned to joy.

Verse. 21. A woman when she trauaileth has sorrow, because her hour is
come: but as soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembers no more the
anguish, for joy that a man is borne into the world.

Ver. 22. And ye now therefore are in sorrow; but I will see you again, and
your hearts shall rejoice and your joy shall no man take from you.


CHrist had before said to his disciples; a little while, Verse. 16.
and ye shall not see me, and again a little while, and ye shall see me; for
I go to the father. In which few and somewhat dark words he foretold two
things, to wit, his death and his resurrection. First of his death, he thus
says; a little while, and ye shall not see me: that is, after a little while
you shall not see me; for too morrow I shall be crucified and shall be hidden
in my sepulcher. Secondly, of his resurrection he thus says; and again a
little while and ye shall see me: that is, after a little while, to wit, the
third day, you shall see me again; because then I will rise from the dead, and
show my self unto you.

Now when the disciples had mused and reasoned of these words; saying among
themselves, Verse. 17.18.
What is this that he says unto us, a little while, and ye shall not see me;
and again a little while, and ye shall see me; and, for I go to the father.
What is this that he says, a little while? we know not what he says.

Christ prevented their asking of the question, Verse. 19.
what he meant, and said unto them; Do ye enquire among your selves, of that I
said, a little while, and ye shall not see me; and again a little while, and
ye shall see me? Verily, verily I say unto you, that ye shall weep and lament
etc. In which portion of scripture the Lord first replaines his former
speeches, in the 20. verse. And he does not openly name his death and
resurrection; but he insinuates and signifies both of them by the effects
following: his death, by the weeping, lamentation, and sorrow of his
disciples, and the joy of the world, that is, of the wicked Jews: his
resurrection, by the joy and gladness of his disciples. Secondly, he illustrates
and depaintes that sorrow and joy of his disciples, by a similitude, in the
21. verse. In which words he compares the sorrow of his disciples for his
death, to the sorrow of a woman in travel; and on the other side, he compares
their joy for his resurrection, to the joy of a woman, which has brought forth
a child into the world. Thirdly, he applies that comparison to his disciples,
in the (...). verse In which words Christ does promise, that he will rise
again, and show himself unto them: and he amplifieth the gladness that should
thereby grow unto his disciples; partly by the greatness thereof, when he
says, your hearts shall rejoice; partly by the perpetuity and eternity
thereof, when he says, and your joy shall no man take from you. As if our
Savior should thus say: you that are my disciples shall be tempted hardly and
heavily; for when I shall be put to death, the wicked people of the world shall
triumph, and you shall lament; and the ungodly worldlings shall judge themselves
happy, and repute you miserable.

But by the operation of the holy Ghost, your sorrow shall be turned into
joy; not as though you should live exempted from all sorrow; (For, as long as
you dwell in these earthly Tabernacles, you shall fight a hard fight, and you
shall feel and bear indignities, and you shall have many occasions of
Lamentation, and you shall Fast and weep, when the Bridegroom is taken from
you: Mat. 9.15.
) but yet with whatsoever sorrow you shall be burdened, spiritual joy shall
swallowe it up, and you shall be so renewed by the power of the holy Ghost, that
you shall put off all former feeling of infirmities, and with Heroical courage
and magnanimity, you shall tread down all evils that shall rise up against
you

Consider how Weomen are griped with sudden grief, when the time of Travel
ouertakes them; and how their grief is so great, that they are little distant
from death; but when they have brought forth a Child, their joy is by so
much the greater, by how much their anguish was the extreamer. So you, that are
my Disciples, and are in travel, that is, shall be renewed by the regeneration of
the holy Ghost, you shall first be vehemently distressed and afflicted: And
because the Lord shall withdraw his help, and seem to stand on your
Adversaries part, you shall reckon your condition to be forlorn and
desperate; But when the day of Redemption shall come, you shall be refreshed with
unexpected joy, and your perplexity shall not be comparable to your
consolation.

And when I shall see you, and visit you, by the graces of the holy Ghost,
this your joy shall not be Fleeting and transitory, like the worldly joy: but
true, solid, and permanent.

The world must needs be quickly deprived of their joys; because they seek
them, and repose them in fickle and fading things: But I am the joy and
comfort of believers: and therefore their joy is perpetual, because I am
perpetual: Romans 6.9.
For though I shall be Crucified, yet I will rise the third day, and die no
more: Death has no more dominion over me.

Therefore it is not sorrow indeed, which is turned into eternal joy; Nor it
is not joy indeed, which is turned into eternal sorrow:

Therefore the wicked are not blessed, which rejoice in this world, and in the
world to come, shall for ever be sorry, weep, and howl; Neither are the
godly miserable, that in this life are sorry, weep, and lament, but in the
world to come shall rejoice for ever: therefore faint not in tribulation,
knowing this, that though your outward man perish, yet your inward man is
renewed daily: 2. Cor. 2.10. Iam. 1.2.12.
and account it exceeding joy, when ye fall into diverse tentations: for
blessed is the man that endures tentation; for when he is tried, he shall
receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him.
And this is the sum and substance of Christ's words to his disciples.

Neither did Christ speak this only for his Apostles, that they should
sorrow and lament in this life, and that their sorrow should be turned into
gladness; but it is to be applied to all Christians, who shall weep, and
lament, and be diuersely troubled, as long as they carry about this body o^
death.

Who has not heard of the tribulation of Iaco^, of Joseph of David of ^o^, of
the rest of the Saints recorded and mentioned in holy scriptures? And why were
they afflicted? it was that their faith and godliness might be tried and
exercised, as being the elect people of God, and those that should be crowned
in the world to come. But we read not of the affliction of Esau and other, that
were rejected and not beloved of God; G n. 15.16.
for they were suffered to fill out the measure of their iniquity. The time is
come, says Saint Peter, that judgment must begin at the house of God. 1. Pet.
4.17.18.
If it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them, which obey not the
Gospel of God? And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly
and sinner appear? It is the lote of every creature; Romans 8.22.
not only of those that have the first fruits of the Spirit; unto the day of
the last redemption; what to do? not to rejoice: but Sustenazein cai sunodinein
to groan and travel in pain; and not to be pinched with slight pain, but
with such smart as frets and consumes the heart with carefulnes and anxietie.

If all creatures; why then the godly must be here pressed also, until being
freed from the continual miseries of this present life, they openly behold the
fruit of their faith. For the faithful that are regenerate in Christ, when
they are entered into the kingdom of heaven, and that blessed life, they are
like to women that have brought forth children; but they are like to women
great with child, and traveling with child, while they are held captines in
the prison of the flesh, and do aspire unto that blessed state, that now lies
hidden under hope.

Fifthly says Gregory; Lib. 21. ^ 4. Moral. in Job.
the righteous are refrained from the sweetness of transitory delight; as the
stire which shall live under labor, is kept under the yoke; but that which
shall be for the shambles, is fed in free pastures. As fruitful trees are
shaken, and broken, and despoiled, when their fruits are gathered; yet those
trees are suffered to grow longest; contrarily unfruitful trees are not so
vexed and broken, but they are sooner cut down, and cast into the fire: as the
physician will not permit the sick person, in whom there is some hope of
recovery, to take whatsoever he desires; but he forbids nothing, and
restraines nothing, from those that are desperately sick: as pa^ents do
chastise the children of whom they have expectation of good proof; and whom
they correct, for them they provide inheritance; but the incorrigible and
forlorn they leave to themselves, and deprive them of their possessions: so
for the most part, they which shall perish eternally, are pampered here with
the good things of this world, and do enjoy their pleasurable desires; but
those whom the Lord has ordained to life immortal, they are here shaken, and
bruised, and afflicted, and exercised, and bereaved of many good things which
the world desires. It is written of Demonax the Philosopher, that when one of
his acquaintance did lament immoderately for his dead son, and would not be
comforted, he surely promised, to rise up his son to life again, if among
all men he could name three unto him, that either had never lamented the death
of any friend, or never had felt any adversity. But when the fellow had
carried his thoughts on all which he knew, and could find no one such man;
Demonax replied; Why do thou then so vex and disq ^et thy self, as though
thou had suffered some rare and unaccustomed thing? In our affliction let us
also make inquiry, whether ever any three were discharged and acquitted of all
sorrow and trouble: and if we find it, (as we shall find it,) to be the
portion allotted to all the godly and to all Christ's disciples, to weep, and
lament, and be sorry in this world; what reason have we to look for a
privilege and immunitie? And herein we must behold the example of our Master
Christ, and walk in his steps: 1. Pet. 2.20. etc.
for heereunto were we called, that as Christ suffered for us, and when he did
no sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth; yet when he was reviled,
reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed it to him
that judges righteously; so forasmuch as Christ bare our sins in his body on
the tree, that we being dead to sin, should live in righteousness; and since
by his stripes we were healed; for we were as sheep going astray, but are now
returned unto the shepherd and Bishop of our souls; when we do well, yet we
must suffer wrong, and take it patiently; for this is acceptable to God.

Although this be the portion of the godly, to weep and lament in this world,
Psalm. 112.4.
yet there springs up to the righteous joy in their trouble, and light in their
darkness. For God is the father of mercies, 2. Cor. 1.3.4.
and the God of all comfort, faith Saint Paul; which comfort us in all our
tribulation. He says not, in one, or two tribulations: but in all our
tribulations. Romans 15.5.
Therefore the scripture calls God, the God of patience and consolation;
because he engrafts patience in our hearts, that otherwise would rebel against
his decrees; and because he comforts us, both by the sweet promises revealed
in his word, and by that comforter, Ioh. 14.16.17.26. and Ioh. 16.13.
that abides with the godly for ever; even the spirit of truth, who shall
lead into all truth: and teach the faithful all things requisite to their
salvation, and bring all things to remembrance, that Christ has told us. Matt.
5.4.
Christ says expressly; Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be
comforted. One Prophet thus comforts the Jews; Sorrow and mourn, Micah. 4.10.
o daughter Zion, like a woman in travel: for now thou shall go forth of the
city, and dwell in the field, and shall go into Babel, but there shall thou
be delivered: there the Lord shall deliver thee from the hand of thine enemies.
And another Prophet thus; Isay. 54.7.8.
for a little while have I forsaken thee, but with great compassion will I
gather thee: for a moment, in mine anger, I h^d my face from thee for a little
season, but with everlasting m^rcie have I had compassion on thee, says the
Lord thy Redeemer.

And another Prophet thus; Come, Hos. 6.1.2.
and let us return to the Lord; for he has spoiled, and he will heal us;
he has wounded us, and he will bind us up: after two days will he revive
us, and in the third day w^ll he raise us up, and we shall live in his sight.

These words are fully fraught with heavenly consolation, and may be
appropriated to all and every one of the faithful.

See the truth hereof in the beggar Lazarus, who though he were full of sores
in this world; yet he was after this life in Abraham's bosom; but the rich
glutton, though he fared deliciously, and were clad gorgeously every day, yet
after this life he was in hell, tormented in fiery flames. And hereof Abraham
yeeldes no other reason but this; Son remember, Luke 16. ^ 26.
that thou in thy life time receiuedst thy pleasures, and likewise Lazarus
pains; now therefore is he comforted, and thou art tormented. Wherefore as in
the works of nature God declares his providence, not in taking away diseases
utterly from men's bodies, but in providing fit remedies for all maladies: so in
the works of grace, God declares his goodness; in that he has not altogether
taken away tribulation from his elect, neither would he have them exonerated
from all sorrows; but against all afflictions and crosses, he has given us
the certain expectation of the life to come, as a shield and rock of defense;
and therefore Christ says, your sorrow shall be turned to joy.

As it is appointed for the godly, to be sorry in this world, and then to
rejoice; so on the contrary, the ungodly rejoice here, but at length their
gladness is changed into sorrow.

Isay. 65.13.14.
So says the Lord by the Prophet Isayah; Behold my servants shall eat, and ye
shall be hungry; behold my servants shall drink, and ye shall be thirsty;
behold my servants shall rejoice, and ye shall be ashamed; behold my servants
shall sing for joy of heart, and ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall
houle for vexation of mind. Reu. 18.6.7.8.
Ihon the Divine says of the great whore of Babylon; reward her, even as she
has rewarded you, and give her double according to her works; and in the cup
that she has filled to you, fill her the double: in as much as she glorified
her self, and lived in pleasure, so much give you to her torment and sorrow:
for she says in her heart, I sit being a Queen, and am no widdowe, and shall
see no mourning: therefore shall her plagues come at one day, death, and
sorrow, and famine, and she shall be burnt with fire; for that God which
condemns her, he is a strong Lord. As it is said of the godly, Matt. 5.4.
Luke 6.25.
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted: so also it is said
of the ungodly, woe be to you that are full, for ye shall hunger: Woe be to you
that now laugh, for ye shall wayle and weep. Worldlings desire to conform and
fashion themselves according to this present world; to fulfill the lusts of the
flesh; to walk after the flesh; to rejoice in strife, envying, chambering,
wantonness, drunkenness, gluttony, deceit, guile, lying, covetousness,
backbiting, revenge, hatred, malice, and anger. These are the works of the old
man; these are the desires of ye world; these are the reioycings of the
unregenerate, and of the children of disobedience. But all this, what is it,
but to heap up wrath against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the
just Judgment? For though the wicked act their parts never so plausibly; yet
when the Tragedy is ended, and the stage broken down, then they shall cry
out one to another; We have wearied our selves in the way of wickedness and
destruction, Wisd. 5.7.8. etc.
and we have gone through dangerous ways; but we have not known the way of
the Lord. What has pride profited us? or what profit has the pomp of
Riches brought us? All those things are passed away like a shadow, and as a
Post that passes by: As a ship that passes over the waves of the water, which
when it is gone by, the trace thereof cannot be found. neither the paths of it
in the Floods: or as a Bird that flies through the Air, and no man can see
any token of her passage, but only hear the noise of her wings, beating the
light wind, parting the air, through the vehemency of her going, and fleesh
on, shaking her wings, whereas afterward no token of her way can be found: or
as when an Arrow is shot at a mark, it parts the Air, which immediately
comes together again, so that a man cannot know where it went thorough.

Even so we, as soon as we were borne, we began to draw to our end, and
have showed no token of virtue, but are consumed in our own wickedness. And how
can it be otherwise? For the hope of the ungodly is like the dust, that is
blown away with the wind, and like a thin foam that is scattered abroad
with the storm, and as the smoke, which is dispersed with the wind, and as the
remembrance of him passes, that tarrieth but for a day. Is the matter even so?
why then it is vanity to trust in the joys of the world: For all the
imaginations of worldlings, of their gold and silver, of their honors and
promotions; of their houses and possessions; of their wives and children; of
their Banquets and sportes; do fade away in a moment, as if they had nere been.

What are the joys of the world, but the dreams of them that sleep? For so
says the Prophet; Isay. 29.8.
And it shall be like as an hungry man dreameth, and behold he eats; and
when he awaketh, his soul is empty; or like as a thirsty man dreameth, and
lo, he is drinking, and when he awaketh, behold, he is faint, and his soul
longs: So shall the multitude of all Nations be, that fight against Mount
Zion.

This is true generally, of all the joys of the ungodly; although Literally,
the Prophet compares only the glory and power of the Assyrians, and their
Adherents, that oppugned the Church of GOD, to the pleasure of those that
dream they eat and drink; whereas it is a false and illuding pleasure.

In a Map or Chart, are seen Kingdoms, and Provinces, and Cities, and Seas,
and diverse Countries: and yet all this is paper and ynke, which is blurred
and corrupted with one drop of water.

The heart of man possessed with the vain delites of the world, is such a map:
He that thinks, that he shall, or does possess Towers, and Castles, and
honors, and Treasures, and what not? shall find all these to be but as paper
and yuke, and a table painted in the imagination, which one Ague or other
sickness, by the approaching of death, utterly defaceth and dissolueth.

Let the wicked flatter himself never so much; Job. 20.6.7.8.9.
yet his rejoicing is short; and the joy of Hypocrites is but a moment: though
his excellency mount up to the Heaven, and his head reach unto the clouds:
yet shall he perish for ever, like his Dung, and they which have seen him
shall say, where is he?

He shall fly away, as a Dream, and they shall not find him; and shall pass
away as a vision of the night; so that the eye which had seen him, Hom. 2. ad
popul. Antioch.
shall do so no more, and his place shall see him no more.

Therefore S. Chrysostom affirms, that in he has laughed at the folly of
some men, who in their last Wills and Testaments, have bequeathed the use of
some Houses and Fields to one man, and the Lordship of them to an other man:
whereas in truth, the use only of these things is granted unto men, and not
the Lorship: For the earth is the Lords, and all that is therein.

Howsoever men persuade themselves; yet we are in this life but Guests,
Strangers, and Pilgrims; and we have the world, for a lodging place, not for an
abiding City. Let us therefore use this world, as if we did not use it: for
the fashion of this world passes away; Let us not set our hearts on riches,
though they increase: Let us not set our affections on earthly things, but on
heavenly things; Fixing our hearts there, where true joys are found.

Again, on the other side, when we are afflicted, we must not be dismayed; but
we must remember, that afflictions are very profitable unto us For they stir
us up to prayer they try and prove our Faith, whither it be true, or
temporary only; they work Patience in us, which the holy Ghost powers into
our hearts, by suggesting and affoording manifold consolations; They cause us
to yield obedience to the commandments of God; they humble us, in that they
show unto us our weakness, and enforce us to depend upon God, they move us to
repentance, and cleanse away the dross of iniquity, that hangs so fast on;
they breed at length the praises of God in our minds and mouths; and instruct
us, both to comfort other, with that comfort, wherewith we our selves are
comforted of God, and to Sympathize, and be compassionate toward them, that
are in other, or the like case.

And who will not with patience endure afflictions, if he consider that they
are sent from the gracious providence of God, which measures them out unto us,
according to our strength; and as he foreseeth, that they will redound to our
salvation? For as the best and skilfullest Physicians do heal dislike diseases
by dislike curings; remoouing some by sweet medicines, some by bitter; and
though to some they apply searing, to some launcing, to some oil, to some
gentle Plasters, yet by most variable means, they seek one and the same
health.

So GOD, if he scourge us severely, he cures our souls, (as it were) by
Searings and cuttings; if he refresh us with prosperity, he comfortes us, (as
it were) with oil, and pleasant plasters; working by diverse courses, one and
the same salvation.

If Tribulation prick thee; and thou will derive the name thereof from a
Tribulus
Thistle; yet the Lord will so order it, that it shall but prick thee to
amendment, and forsaking of sin; or prick thee to run the race that is set
before thee to eternal life, with more diligence and watchfulnes.

Or if thou account Tribulation to be as a Threshing-toole, as the Tri^^la.
name thereof also may seem to importe; Yet as the Threshing tool does not
crush or bruise the good grain, but only exempts it from the d^^r and chafe,
that after the Chafe is separated and blown away from the good Corn, it may
be converted to Bread, the strengthening of man's heart: So Tribulation, by the
gracious appointment of the Lord, shall not extinguish our Faith and godliness;
but by little and little, abandon and chase away the relicts of our natural
pollution, that our virtue and good works may be laid up in Gods garner, and
we obtain the end of our Faith, even the salvation of our souls.

This is evidently declared by Saint Peter, when he says, that Affliction is
laid upon us, for the trial of our Faith, 1. Pet. 1.7.
that it being much more precious then Gold that perishes, (though it be
tried with Fire,) might be found to our praise, and honor, and glory, at the
appearing of Jesus Christ. And he uses a most apt similitude, in comparing
affliction to a fire. For as fire works diverse effects upon things of diverse
natures, for it melts wax, and hardens claye: it purges gold, and burns
dross; so affliction has diverse operations according to the persons on which
it is inflicted: for it consumes the wicked with impatience, or obdurates them
with distrust; but the godly are thereby mollified, to mortify their
concupiscence, to call on God, to fashion themselves to his holy will, to
manifest their faith in taking tribulation patiently, that the Lord may temper
the bitterness thereof with his love and gentleness. If then affliction be but a
purging fire, it is to be feared of chafe, and not of pure metal. For it is
the chafe that is burnt and turned into ashes in the furnace; but gold is
there purified and refined. Aug. in Psalm. 60.
The furnace is the world, the gold are the righteous, the fire is tribulation,
the goldsmith is God. The goldsmith does what he lists: and when he
punishes, we must suffer; for he commands us to suffer, and he knows how to
purge us. Although the chafe flame, to burn and consume us: yet the chafe is
turned into ashes, and we are made clean thereby. And therefore seeing
affliction is so beneficial to our salvation, and God uses it as a remedy to
reform our imperfections; it must be so far off from our hearts, to suppose
our selves miserable in wrestling with tribulations, that with the Ethnic,
Democritus apud Sen. de prou.
we must account them wretched, that have never been wretch^d: Et nihil
infalirius eo cui nihil aduenit vnquam aduersi that he is most unhappy, that
was never crossed with any adversity.

How can the godly be wretched in their afflictions? since God our merciful
father does so guide and moderate them, that they cannot exceed that measure
which he prescribes, nor transgress the limits and bounds which he prefixeth.
Chrysostom. hom. 4. de diverse.
We see the Musician neither to strain ye string, that it should break: nor
to slacken the string, that it should mar the melody; but to wrest it
temperately, that the tune may be proportionable: so God bestows upon us,
neither continual prosperity, nor continual adversity; but according to his
endless wisdom, he deals with us; so as neither continual prosperity may
make us slothful: nor continual adversity make us dismayed. It is not still
winter, nor still summer: it is not still te^pestuous weather, nor still calm
weather: it is not still night, nor still day so tribulation shall be, but it
shall not be always. Art thou beaten with the storms of winter? be of good
comfort: there will come a spring. Art thou thronged in the rough bushes of
calamity and trouble? be not daunted: there grows some wholesome herb in
those hard briars. Art thou pursued by the swelling surges of adversity? take
courage to thee: for though the floods rage horribly, yet the Lord commands
the seas and winds, and they obey; and though the waves swell fearfully, yet
God has limited them their bounds; and has said, thus far you shall come,
and no further. For it is he that mittigateth our miseries, and asswageth our
griefs, either by taking of them away utterly, or by assisting and comforting
of us in our distress most fatherly. The Israelites were straightly enrounded,
having before them the red sea, behind them their enemies the Egyptians, on
either side mountains: so that (considering their imminent peril) they said
to Moses; Have thou brought us to die in the wilderness, because there were no
graves in Egypt? But what was the answer of Moses? and what deliverance did
the Lord promise and perform? Fear ye not, (says Moses, Exodus 14.11.13.14.
) stand still, and behold the salvation of the Lord, which he will show to you
this day: for the Egyptians, whom ye have seen this day, ye shall never see
them again: the Lord shall fight for you this day; therefore hold you your
peace. Act. 12.
When Peter slept between two soldiers bound with two chains, and the
keepers before the door kept the prison; what way could the understanding of
man epsy for his escaping? yet the Angel of God did wonderfully deliver him;
so as (for the present) Peter himself knew not that it was true, which was
done of the Angel, but thought he had seen a vision. Even so, when we are in
perplexity, and can see no way to pass out; yet if we faithfully trust in
God, and zealously call upon him, he will give an issue and evasion for our
escaping; and deliver us out of danger, as out of the lions mouth; and shake
all fear from our hearts, as the chains fell off from Peter's hands.

For why? 2. Cor. 1.10.
God has delivered his children from great dangers, and does deliver them,
and will deliver those that trust in him: 2. Tim. 4.17.18.
God will assist and strengthen them, and deliver them from every evil work,
and will preserve them unto his heavenly kingdom: 2. Pet. 2.9.
God knows to deliver the godly out oftentation, as he delivered just Lot
vexed with the uncleanly conversation and unlawful deeds of the wicked: and
God the author of all grace, 1. Pet. 5.10.
which has called us to eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that we have
suffered a little while, will make us persit, confirm, strengthen, and
stablish us. And the Apostle may well say, that we suffer but a little while:
for how can our sufferings belong in so short a life? Psalm. 90.5.6.^0.13.14.1^.
Man grows up like grass, which in the morning flourishes and grows, but
in the evening it is cut down and withers: for our days pass away as a
thought; the time of our life is threescore years and ten, and if men be of
strength, fourscore years: yet their strength is but labor and sorrow; for
it is cut off quickly, and we flee away. Therefore we must hope, that the Lord
will return, and be pacified toward his servants and fill us with his mercy,
that we may rejoice and be glad all our days; and that he will comfort us
according to the days that he has afflicted us, and according to the years
that we have seen evil. Wherefore when D^u^^ had said of himself out of his
own experience, that when he had sought the Lord, he was heard, and delivered
out of all his fear: he infers generally, the Angel of the Lord pitcheth
round about them that fear him, Psalm. 31.7.8.15.17.18.19.20.
and delivers them; taste and see, how good and gracious the Lord is: the
eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto their
cry: the righteous cry, and the Lord hears them, and delivers them out of
all their troubles: The Lord is near unto them that are of a contrite heart,
Psalm. 94.12.13.14.
and will save such as be afflicted in spirit: Great are the troubles of the
righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of them all: He keeps all his
bones, not one of them is broken. Blessed therefore is the man whom the Lord
chastises, and teaches in his Law; that he may give him rest from the days
of evil, whiles the pit is dug for the wicked: Surely the Lord will not
fail his people, neither will he forsake his inheritance.

If then God do deliver his children out of their afflictions, Pathemata.
Mathemata.
Adversity may be called an University, and School of the holy Ghost, where
we are instructed to pray earnestly, and to the Lord alone. And that we
should be the readier to pray, God has commanded us to repair and flee to him
in our distress, and promised that we shall be heard: Psalm. 50.5.
Call upon me in the day of trouble, So will I deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. And to whom should we pray, but to the Lord God; that feeds
his Flock like a Shepherd and gathers the Lambs with his arm, Isay. 40.11
12.15.22.23.29.30.31.
and carries them in his bosom, and guides them with young? who has
measured the waters with his fist, and counted heaven with the span, and
comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the Mountains in
a weight, and the Hills in a balance: Behold, the Nations are as a drop of a
bucket, and are counted as the dust of the balance; Behold, he takes away the
Isles as a little dust: he sits upon the circle of the earth, and the
inahbitants thereof are as grasshoppers, he stretches out ye Heavens as a
curtain, and spreads them out as a Tent to dwell in: He bringe^h the
Princes to nothing and makes the Judges of the earth, as vanity: He gives
strength unto him that faints, and unto him that has no strength, he
increases power: even the young men shall fainte, and be weary, and the young
men shall stumble and fall; but they that wait upon the Lord, shall renew
their strength; they shall lift up the wings as the Eagles; they shall run,
and not be weary; and they shall walk and not fainte. And thus says the
Lord, Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his Arm, and
withdraws his heart from the Lord: Ier. 17.5.6.7.8.
For he shall be like the Heath in the wilderness, and shall not see when
any good comes; but shall inhabit the parched places in the wilderness, in a
salt land, and not inhabited: but blessed is the man that trusts in the
Lord, and whose hope the Lord is: for he shall be as a tree that is planted by
the water, which spreads out the roots by the River, and shall not feel
when the heat comes; but her leaf shall be green, and shall not care for
the year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding fruit. If we should
trust in man, in whom should we trust, rather then in Princes?

But what says the man of God? Put not your trust in Princes, Psalm.
146.3.4.5.6.
nor in the son of man, for there is no help in him: his breath departs,
and he returns to his eatth: then his thoughts perish: blessed is he that
has the God of Jacob for his help, and whose hope is in the Lord his God;
which made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that therein is: which keeps
his Fidelity for ever.

But although we are to implore the aid of God alone in our troubles; and
although God has promised to hear us, and to assist us with his help; yet we
must beware, that we neither murmr against God, if he answer us not as we
think fit; nor appoint and set down a time of our deliverance; but we must
abide the Lords leisure.

Thou will not appoint a time to the Physician of thy body, when, or what, or
how, he shall minister unto thee: and when thou art seared or launced, thou
endurest; and if thou call on the Physician, he hears not as you lists, but
as he judges fittest for thy recovery

And will thou be offended, if God satisfy not thy request by and by? Or will thou defigne a time, when he shall ease thy sorrow? forgetting that GOD is
the Physician of thy soul; In Psalm. 2^
and that Tribulation is Medicamentum ad salutem, non poena ad damnationem, A
Medicine to salvation, not a punishment to damnation; as Saint Austin says.

Hieron. in Proumio, in Abakuk prophet.
If he that is sick of a burning Fever, call for cold water, and say to the
Physician, I am g^ieued, I am tormented, I burn, I am astonished: How long
shall I cry upon thee, and thou will not hear?

What will the wise Physician answer him but this? I know when I ought to
give that thou c^auest; and I take no pity upon thee now; because this
pity were cruelty and thy will does wish thine own damage.

Even so, our God knowing the weight and measure of his own mercy, does
sometimes not hear him that calls upon him, that he may try him, and provoke
him to more earnestnes in prayer; and make him more righteous and clean: as it
were refined by the fire of tribulation.

The Heathenish Poet, that never knew the truth of God, but only groped after
it, by the light of corrupt Reason, could say: Saepe bibit succos quamuis
inuitus amaros
Aeger, and oranti mensa negata mihi est. Ovid. lib. 1 de remed. Amor.

Vt corpus redim^s, ferrum patieris and ignes,
Arida nec sitiens ora leuabis aqua:
Vt valeas animo, quicquam t^llerare negabis?
At praetium pars haec corpore maius habet.


Wherein he rebukes those that refuse wholesome counsel, restraining from the
delectation of vice; and yet can tolerate bitter potions, and the Chyru^gians
instruments, and thirst, to be strong in body; and says; that it is a shame
for them to endure all this for the body, and to suffer nothing to be sound
in mind; seeing that part of man is far more precious then the body.

Wherefore, though we see no effect of our petitions presently; Heb.
10.35.36.37
yet we must not cast away our confidence, which has great recompense of
reward; For we have need of Patience, that after we have done the will of
God, we may receive the promise; For yet a very little while, and he that
shall come, will come, and will not tarry.

But thou say, that thou can not subdue thy passions, and digest the
bitterness of thy tribulation. Yet we see, that tamers of wild beasts, do so
manage and break their savage nature, Epist. 86.
that they become meek and mild.

Seneca says, that some tamers of Lions and Tigres, have made them so gentle,
that they have put their hands into their mouths, and laid their own mouths
upon the beasts mouths; and that, Elepha^tem minimus Aethiops iubet subsidere
in genua: The least Aethyoptan commands the Elephant to sit on his knees: and
he concludes hereupon; why should not a wise man be so cunning to tame his
adversities and troubles, as that grief, and poverty, and slanders, and
prisonment, and exile, and whatsoever terrible things when they happen, may be
conquered, and not trouble the mind, may be joyfully entertained?

When Children are afraid of maskes and vizards, we put them into their hands,
and turn the inside out, and make them to handle them, that so they may cast
away their vain fear: and men are wont commonly, when their horse either
starts, or will not go forwards, at the fight of a stone block, or bright
thing in the way, to spur him on vehemently, and to drive him forciblie, upon
that which terrified him, that so by approaching near unto it, or by tra^pling
on it, he may not be dauuted. Ioshuah commanded the chief men of Israel to
put their feet on the necks of those five kings of Canaan, and to tread them
down; Josh. 10.35.
saying, Fear not, nor be faint hearted; but be strong, and of a good courage:
For thus will the Lord do unto all your enemies against whom ye fight.

Even so if we narrowly note the fruit and benefit of adversity, that
redou^ds to the godly, and look advisedly into the nature of things as they
are indeed; we shall find afflictions to be wild beasts, yet such as may be
tamed; and to be ugly maskes, yet such as appear more hideous and fearful,
then they are in truth; and to be blocks in the way, yet such as may be past
by; and to be terrible Tyrants in outward show, yet as easy to be vanquished
by the true Israelites, and faithful Christians, as the five Kings were trodden
down by the old Israelites Will thou say, that affliction grinds thee? It is
for thy amendment and reformation; that thy Faith and Hope, and patience, and
other good qualities that are in thee, may be brought to light; and that thy
example may edify and profit others; Even as the strength of spites, when
they are ground and beaten small is ^^ace more evident and effectual. Wilt you
say, that aff^iction blows and beats upon thee as a blusterous wind? It is,
that you may remember, ye thou art like a ship at Sea, still in danger of
rocks, quick-sa^ds, waves, storms, pirates, lack of victuals, and other
incumbra^ces, and that can never be at rest, till she arrive in the Harborough.

Who will praise the skill and courage of a ship master, that feels no
tempests, and that directs his course without tossing of storms? but men
praise him, that scriueth against the winds, and works earnestly against the
slouds, and that fears not, either when he is mounted up to the heaven, or
when he descends to the depth: so that governor and guider of his own soul
is to be praised, that vanquisheth adversity with patience, and ouercomes it
with courage, and is not puffed up with prosperity, nor broken with adversity.
Be not dismayed therefore when the mind is troubled, and thy soul staggereth;
but guide thy ship by the rudder of long suffering; and at last thou shall
arrive, where there is no pirate, no robber, no oppressor, no enemy, no night,
no death. Will thou say, that thou art injuriously deprived of thy goods,
substance, and livings? It is for thy trial, Heb. 10.34.
and for thy reward; that if thou endure a great fight of afflictions, and
suffer with joy the spoiling of thy goods, thou may receive in heaven a
better, and an enduring substance. Hom. 35. super eua^gel. cum audieritis
praelia.
For (as Gregory well notes) our patience is proved three ways; some things
we suffer from God; some things from that ancient enemy of mankind; some
things from our neighbors. We suffer persecutions, and losses, and reproaches
from our neighbor: we suffer tentations from that old Enemy; we suffer
chasticements from God. But in all these ways of trial, the soul must
heedfully have an eye to her self, least by the injuries of a neighbor, it be
drawn to the requital of evil; least by the tentations of the spiritual foe,
it be seduced to delight in sin, and to give consent thereunto; and least by
the correction of our Creator, it break forth into repining and murmuring.
When a scholar of Zeno returning home to his father, was asked by him, how he
had profited in the study of Philosophy, I will show thee; says he. And
because he said no more, his father boiling with wrath, and supposing that his
charge was lost, began to beat his Son. The scholar bare most contentedly
this severity of his father: and when his father craved again some show and
token of his profiting, and expected some notable and witty conclusion; This
fruit (said his son) have I reapt by Philosophy, that I can quietly endute
my fathers ang^^. In like sort, we shall declare how well we have profited and
proceeded in the school of Christianity, and the fear of the Lord, by
dearing patiently the chasticements of our heavenly father laid upon us,
either immediately by himself, or mediately by our neighbors and brethren.
Will thou say, that thou art wronged and slandered without cause? 2. Pet. 2.20.
It is thy greater praise, when thou do well, and take thy wronging
patiently: for what praise is it, if when we do ill, and are punished for our
faults, we take it patiently? In such case, Plut. in Lacon.
may not the speech of Agesilaus be renewed? who when he heard that a malefactor
had constantly endured punishment and torture; What a notorious wretch (said
he) was that fellow, to bestow such patience on so wicked and vild things?
What if thou be railed on undeservedly? show no token that thou art moved and
troubled, and thine enemies will soon surcease from railing; Laert. l. 6.
as Diogenes gave counsel to a young man once, that told him he was troubled
by many Adversaries. And if thou desire to repaie thy backbiter or reproacher;
hear what S. John Chrysostom will tell thee, Si vindicare vis, sile, and
funestam ei dedisti plagam; If thou will avenge thy self on a contumelious
person, refrain thy tongue, and thou have given him a deadly blow. For long
since a man wise but in worldly wisdom, observed this, Philemon.
Ho loidoron gar, ean ho loidoroumenos
Me prospoietai, loidereitai ho loidoron:


That the slander recoiles on the slanderer, if he that is slandered, do not
make show that he is moved.

Say not, that it greeues and gauls thee, that thou can not give requital:
Sen de ira. c. 15.
for he has a great and noble mind, that like a great palfry cares not for
the barking of little dogs: and it is the part of a base and wretched man, to
run to every one that bites him; like mise and pismires, that turn their
mouth to the hand that touches them never so slightly.

If thou be adorned with true magnanimity, Sen. l. 4. de virtut.
thou will never think thy self to be reproched: and thou will say of thine
enemy; he has not hurted me, but he had only a mind to hurt me: and when
thou shall see him in thy power, thou will suppose it revenge sufficient, to be
able to revenge: For to pardon is a great and commendable kind of reuengement.

And that we may accomplish this the better, we must esteem and weigh
afflictions by the first cause, from which they proceed, that is, from the
providence and dispensation of God.

If we respect outward causes and occasions, we shall be impatient: but if we
look on the ordinance and appointment of the Lord, we shall bear tribulation
patiently. Mat. 10.29.30.31.
For we are taught by him that cannot lie, that two sparrowes are sold for a
farthing, and yet not one of them falls to the ground without our heavenly
father; yea, that all the hairs of our head are numbered: and therefore that we
must not fear, because we are of more value then many sparrowes. Genesis 45.5.
and 50.20.
This consideration made Joseph, to forgive the cruelty and malice of his
brethren: in that he turned his eyes from their hard handling of him, unto the
divine ordinance: saying, that God sent him before into Egypt for their
preservation; and that when they thought evil against him, God disposed it to
good. This consideration made Job not to make mention of the Shabaeans and
Caldaeans that robbed him of his oxen, asses, and camels, but to ascribe the
whole calamity to the Lord: Job. 1.21.
saying, The Lord has given it, and the Lord has taken it. This consideration
made Moses to withdraw his conceit from Korah, Dathan, and Ab^ram, that
conspired against him, and from the people that murmured against him, and to
rest well pleased with Gods appointment; and therefore when wrath was gone
forth from the Lord, and the plague begun, to say to Aaron, Number. 16.46.
that he should make an atonement for the people, with his censer filled with
incense and kindled with fire of the Altar, and that he should stand between
the dead and them that were alive, that the plague might stay.

This consideration made David to curb the revenging of his servants, that
would have smit^en Shimei, that cursed him, and to humble himself under Gods
rod, 2. Sam. 16.10. Psalm. 38.12.13.14.15.
acknowledging the judgment of God in that behalf; and saying, He curses,
even because the Lord has bidden him curse David. And therefore when his life
was sought after, and snares laid, and his enemies went about to do him evil,
and talked wicked things, and imagined deceit continually; he became as a deaf
man, that hears not; and as a dumb man, that opens not his mouth, and
utters no reproves; and because it was Gods doing to chastise him, he waited
on the Lord, his salvation.

And what should make Paul to call himself the prisoner of Jesus Christ, Phil.
v. 1.
but this consideration? Act. 21.
For he was delivered by the Jews into the power of Caesar, and reserved to
the examination of Augustus: and yet because his affliction was ordained and
ordered by God, and for the advancement of Christ's Gospel, and the edifying of
the Church, he turns his thoughts from the Jews malice, and Caesar's
authority, and terms himself the captive of Jesus Christ. Wherefore since
our portion of affliction is duly proportioned unto us by the unspeakable
wisdom and decree of God, for his own glory, and our good, and the
encouragement of other by our constant faith and patience; 2. Tim.
2.3.4.5.6.11.12.
let us suffer affliction as good soldiers of Jesus Christ; coveting to
please him that has chosen us to be soldiers; and remembering, that as if any
man strive for a maisterie, he is not crowned, except he strive as he ought to
do; and as the husbandman must labor before he receive the fruit: so if we
will live together with Christ, we must die with him; and if we will reign
together with him, we must also suffer affliction with him.

Let us not think it strange, when we are afflicted, as though some strange
thing were come unto us; 1. Pet. 4.12.13.19.
but let us rejoice, inasmuch as we are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that
when his glory shall appear, we may be glad and rejoice; and let them that
suffer according to the will of God, commit their souls to him in well doing,
as unto a faithful Creator.

Iam. 5.7.8.9.10.11.
Let us be patient unto the coming of the Lord: behold the husbandman waits
for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long patience for it, until the
former and the latter rain. Let us be patient therefore, and settle our
hearts; for the coming of the Lord draws near; behold, the Judge stands
before the door. Let us take the Prophets for an example for suffering
adversity, and of long patience, which have spoken in the name of the Lord:
Behold, we count them blessed, (says blessed James,) which endure. We have
heard of the patience of Job, and have known what end the Lord made: for the
Lord is very pitiful and merciful. Finally, Matt. 7.24.
that our house may not be founded on the sand, and so fall when the rain
falls, and the floods come, and the winds blow, and beat upon it; but may be
grounded on the rock, that no tempest, nor wave can shake, or remove; let us
stick fast and cleave firmly to this consolation and promise of our Redeemer
and Savior Christ Jesus, that though while we soiourne in these brittle
tabernacles of claie, we shall weep, and lament, and be in sorrow; yet in
this life the assistance of Gods spirit will support and prop us up, that our
hearts shall rejoice in ye midst of tribulation, and shall be replenished with
true and sound gladness, that no man shall take from us: and that though
affliction fall upon us, as travel upon a woman with child; yet as the mother
forgets her pain of travel, when a child is borne into the world; so after
these transitory troubles and travels are vanquished and vanished, we shall
rejoice for the eternal inheritance that is reserved for us in heaven. Amen.

A LETTER TO A PENSIVE FRIEND.
ALthough I doubt not, but your own wisdom and fear of God do procure you
comfort in your discomforte; yet as a Friend I am bound to give you advise in
the Lord.

Now God calls you to repetitions, to make you show your former profiting,
by what you have both heard and read out of his word; and (after the example of
the blessed Virgin, Luke 2.19
) laid up and pondered in your heart. Declare your self therefore a good
Scholar, and one that firmly remembers this lesson; Act. 14.22.
That we must through many Afflictions enter into the Kingdom of God. As you
daily pray, that the will of God may be done; so now it is done, murmr not
against Gods will; But say with the mirror of patience, Job. 1.21.
Blessed be the name of the Lord. Can we auert Gods decree? Are we stronger
then he? May not his purposes be likened to the decrees and statutes of the
kings of the Medes and Persians, Est. 8.8. Dan. 6.15
which might not be revoked, or altered? Happy then is the man, that bears
patiently and thankefully, that he must needs bear. We must not resemble
flies, that stick fast upon sores and boyles; but slide and flip from sound
places: so we must not still muse on our miseries; but we must reflect our
thoughts on the good things past, and be animated with hope of good things to
come. Job. 2.10.
Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and not receive evil? Is not
heavenly joy worth affliction; that in respect of eternity, lasts but the
twinkling of an eye? Shall mariners endure ye threatening floods of the Sea;
and husbandmen bear the storms and tempests; and soldiers suffer wounds and
dangers; and champions contemn blows and buffets, for the hope of temporal
and perishing commodities? And shall we repine and grumble at the adversities
of this momentanie life; having heaven set before us for a reward, and those
unspeakable and eternal blessings? If there be no trial, there is no crown:
if there be no striving, there is no prize: if there be no endeavoring, there
is no honor: if there be no tribulation, there is no triumphing. Take away
rain, and clouds, and frost, and winter: and what harvest will there be? Now
is our tempest, now is our frost, now is our winter: and therefore let us bear
the storms and winter of adversity patiently, that we may reap in the
harvest of glory plenteously; and that we may experiment in our selves that of
the Psalmist; They that sow in tears, Psalm. 126.5.6.
shall reap in joy: he that now goes on his way weeping, and hears forth
good seed; shall doubtless come again with joy, and bring his sheaues with
him. Sorrow is a pernicious guest; harder to remove, then to receive; for it
stays willingly, where it finds nourishment, and but easy repelling; like the
gout in a dainty and rich man's leg; and it frets the mind and body, as the
moth consumes the garment, and the worm the timber. Shut the door therefore
against it, and give it not the least entertainment. Sorrow is like a false
spectacle, that makes a thing to seem bigger then it is indeed. Retire your
mind from your grief, in which you must needs be a partial Judge; and look
round about you on other men's estates. Who in one sort, or other, has not
tasted, perhaps drank deeply, of ^^ter cup of tribulation? Chilon said to one
that was excessiuely sorry for his misfortunes, that he should bear his
miseries with the more contentation, if he equally ballenced the afflictions of
other men. Carry your cogitation every way, and see, whether none else have
been exposed, to that sort of anguish that molesteth you. If none have felt the
like tribulation, you have just reason to sorrow the more vehemently: but if
you want not partners; why do you vex your self, as though some strange
thing were befalne you? If you crouch to grief, you are conquered: if you bend
your force against it, you become conqueror. What should the speeches and rash
censurings of other molest and disquiet you? Men's tongues are unbridled, and
because they are their own, they will not be stopped. Let your own good intent
in your actions, and the sincerity of your conscience, more proppe and stay
you up; then the reproaches and backbitings of the malicious discourage you.

One says, that the ladder of inward peace (which that Angelical tent-maker
frames for the godly) has three steps and rounds, ^ Thessalonians 5.16.17.18.
by which we must climb up to the kingdom of heaven; namely, to rejoice
evermore, to pray continually, in all things to give thanks. He that can
rejoice, is past his grief; he that can pray, is passing from his grief; and
he that can give thanks has obtained his desire. If you cannot rejoice, as if
your grief were past, then give thanks, because your grief is profitable to
your souls health; if you cannot think, that your grief is worth thanks:
then pray, that you may hand patience to bear it; and it is impossible, that
in praying, thanking, or rejoicing, any grief should want sufficient patience
to digest it. What if we murmur something now and then? and what if our
patience and rejoicing in tribulation be imperfect? Are we not babes in this
world in regeneration? Are not all our good works imperfect? As a tender
hearted father has compassion upon his children; Psalm. 103.13.14.
so is the Lord pitiful to them that love him, bears with their
infirmities, and accepts of a cheerful giuers mind, though he give but two
mites of patience. For he knows whereof we are made; and he remembers that
we are but dust.

As you opened your case plainly to me; so I have given you plain counsel;
desiring you to accept kindly of my true affection; and praying God to comfort
you effectually with the spirit of patience and long suffering. If you find
consolation by this simple treatise following, I will praise God, and account
my labor best bestowed. You may read for our comfort in affliction, the ^.
chapter to the Romans, the 11. and ^2. chapters to the Hebrews; and the whole
Psalter; but specially these Psalms; the 3.4.6.22.25.30.31.34 39
4^.42.57.91.103.116.121.123.130.136.145.146. In many of which you shall
clearly see, what were the conflicts of the man after Gods own heart,
between hope and distrust; and how at the last hope and joy had the victory.
I have quoted the margent of the treatise with the texts and places of
scripture, that you may (at your leisure) have recourse to the fountain it
self; and may be persuaded, that in yielding assent to the exhortation, you
are not carried by the blasts of men's devises and doctrines, but taught by the
lively word of God, which is able to build farther, to save our souls, and to
bring us to the inheritance of the Saints in light. Amen.

A TRIVMPH OVER TRIBVLAtion.
THey that are righteous in ye sight of God, Romans 5.2.3 4.5.
by an assured faith in Jesus Christ, being persuaded, yt they are ye children
of God by grace and adoption, have peace of conscience toward God, and rejoice
under the hope of heavenly glory. Neither this only, but also they rejoice in
tribulation; knowing ye tribulation brings forth patience; and patience
experience of Gods mercy in strengthening their weakness; and experience hope,
that they shall ever be comforted; and this hope will never deceive, nor shame
them: because the love of God and his unspeakable favor is shed and spread
abroad in their hearts. And although flesh and blood cannot yield a reason, of
this rejoicing of the godly in their tribulatio^s; more the^ it ca^ show a
cause, why a candle should burn in the midst of water: yet if we withdraw our
minds to the contemplation of heavenly things, we shall easily find true
reasons of this strange joy; and withal motives and prouocations thereunto.
For why? whence come our afflictions unto us? do they come unto us at
adventure? Do they come unto us without the knowledge of our heavenly father?
If we say so, we deny the providence of God: nay, we deny God to be God, that
orders and appoints all things in heaven and earth. It is certain then,
Matt. 6.26.28. and 10.29.30.
that he which feeds the fowls of the heaven, and cloatheth the ^^^ies of
the field, and so regards the sparrowes, that not one of them falls to the
ground without his knowledge, Psalm. 121.4.6.
he also has numbered the hairs of our head; and the Sun shall not burn us
by day, nor the Moo^e by night; because God that keeps Is^^^^ will neither
slumber, Psalm. 56.8.10.11.
nor sleep. Since then our afflictions are allotted unto us of God, and he
puts our tears into his bottell, and notes all things in his book: why are
our souls so heavy, and so disquieted within us? and why do we not say with
holy David? In Gods word will I rejoice; in the Lords word will I comfort me;
yea, in God have I put my trust, I will not be afraid, what any trouble can
do to me.

And why should we not say so, and believe so? 1. Cor. 10.13.
since God is faithful in keeping his promise, and will never suffer his
children to be over tempted. Consider well the bands, Heb. 11.33.34. etc.
the imprisonments, the rackings, the scourgings, the banishments, the
mockings, the manifold and marvelous tribulations of the faithful; and how
God desended, and protected, and succored them in all their distresses: so
that by faith they subdued kingdoms, wrought rigteousnes, obtained the
promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped
the edge of the sword, of weak were made strong, waxed valiant in battle,
turned to flight the armies of the Aliants. Consider these things well, and may
we not truly say, Romans 8.28.35.36. etc.
that all things work together jointly, for the good and salvation of them
that love God? and may we not say; who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? shall tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness,
or peril, or sword? In all these things we are more then conquerors, through
him that loved us. For we must be persuaded with the Apostle, that neither
death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature,
shall be able to separate us from the love of GOD, which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord.

We think amiss, if we think, that God does chastise us by crosses, because
he hates us. Was not Abraham beloved of God? and the Patriarchs beloved of
God? and Moses, and David, and the Prophets beloved of God? yet all these
sailed in the Sea of Tribulation. Luke 22.40.41. etc. and 24 26.
Which is most of all; was not CHRIST our Savior most dearly beloved of GOD?
yet was he not afflicted, troubled, tossed, tormented? and does not the
Scripture testify, that he must suffer many things, and so enter into his
glory.

Wherefore by Tribulation the Lord makes us like the Image of his own Son;
and being faithful, we are the children of God; and if we be Children, Romans
8.17.18.
we are also heirs, even the heirs of GOD, and heirs annexed with Christ:
if so be that we suffer with him that we may also be glorified with him. For
we must count, that the afflictions of this present time are not worthy to be
laid in comparison with the glory that shall be showed unto us. Let us then
run with patience, the race that is set before us; Hebr. 12.1.2. etc.
looking unto JESUS, the Author and finisher of our Faith, who for the joy that
was set before him, endured the Cross, and despised the shame, and is set at
the right hand of the Throne of God. Let us consider him that endured such
speaking against of sinners, least we should be wearied and faint in our minds
For whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and he scourges every son whom he
receives.

If we endure chastening, God offreth himself to us, as unto sons; for what
son is it whom the father chasteneth not? If therefore we be without
correction, whereof all are partakers; then are we bastards, and not sons.

When fathers chastise their unruly sons, by removing them from their table,
by correcting them with stripes, by giving them vilde and reproachful terms,
or after any other fashion; yet when they do thus, they love their sons, and
cease not to be fathers; nay they show themselves most of all to be fathers,
when they do these things.

Shall men, that are often transported with fury and rage, be thought to
punish their sons, (whom they love,) not of cruelty, but of care and love?
and is it not much more meet to think, that the love of God in afflicting his
children, does exceed the greatest love and affection whatsoever of earthly
and natural fathers? for as Parents, when their children are too much
delighted with their play mates, and thereby depart farther from them then
they should, do cause their Servants, or some other, to fraye them, that being
terrified, they may run home to their parents, and wander no farther. So God
oftentimes, not only permits other things to afflict and molest us; but also
himself now and then seems to threaten us, and to show an angry and severe
countenance toward us, not to confound and discourage us, but to reclaim and
bring us home unto himself again.

Gregor. in Job. lib. 23. cap. 22.
And what is this life, but a way to Heaven, our abiding City, and desired
Country? and therefore we are often exercised with tribulation, to the end we
should not love the way to our country, more then our country it self.

We see many Travelers, when they behold pleasant and alluring Fields in the
way, to turn aside, and to fall from their former haste: and to prevent this,
God does make the way of this world rough and uneasy to his Elect that are
traveling toward him; least whiles they are delighted with the joys of this
present life, they should forgot their Country to which they travel.

Solon, one of the seven Sages of Greece, when his friend bewailed his misery
immoderately, he took him with him into the Castle of Athens, from which he
might behold the City under him; and he willed his friend to consider, what
sorrow there had been, and then was, and would be after, under so many Roofes;
thereby admonishing him, to take grief and misery more patiently, that was
generally incident to all mankind. And he said also, that if all men should
lay their Troubles into one common mass and heap, out of which every man
should take his equal portion; He that did endure great anguish, were better
to rest content with his portion that befalls him, then take it by due
proportion out of that general heap.

If then no new thing happens unto us, when we are afflicted, but such as
agrees with the nature and condition of man; we must arm our selves with
patience, that thereby we may possess our souls, and declare our selves to be
the Sons of God. For God afflicts the Faithful and the unfaithful also;
but yet in diverse manners. The Faithful he afflicts as a Father, ye
unfaithful as a Judge.

And therefore the Faithful have comfort in their sorrow, knowing that light
will rise out of darkness; and that their bitter potion will breed health of
soul: but the unfaithful murmr under the hand of God, and increase their
affliction with impatiencie, as the Horse that is fallen under the load, hurts
himself by too much struggling.

Saint Austin says excellently; As by one and the same fire, De Ciuit. Dei,
lib. 1 cap. 8.
Gold shines, and Chafe smoketh; and under one and the same threshing
instrument, the stubble is broken; and the grain purged; and the Foam is not
mixed with the Oil, because it is wroong out, under one and the same press:
So one and the same force of Affliction, when it comes, it approoueth,
purifieth, and clarifieth the good; but it condemns, spoils, and destroys
the wicked.

And therefore in one and the same affliction, the wicked do detest and
blaspheme God, the good do pray, and praise God.

So great is the difference; not what things every one suffers: but what
manner of person every one is that suffers. For wish the like agitation and
moving, the Puddle stinckes loathsomely, and the Ointment smells fragrantly.

One says of pleasures, that we must look on them, not when they are coming
toward us, but when they are departing from us: for they come with a smiling
countenance and doves face, but they leave behind them sorrow and repentance,
as the scorpions tail.

So it may as well be said of afflictions, that we must not look on them,
when they are coming, but when they are departing; For they come with a grim
and sad countenance, but when they depart, they cast joy and gladness on as
many, as have employed them, as they ought to do.

For what is Tribulation to the godly, but a plough, that rips and opens the
soil of their hearts, that the seed of virtue and godliness may take root an^
find nourishment, and that nociue weeds of vices may be extirpated and
abandoned? Even as the plough breaks the ground, that weeds may wither, and
good seed be received into the bosom of the earth, for the better tructifying
thereof. Chrysostom. Hom. 4. de Po^nit.
And an ancient and holy father calls tribulation A spiritual marcha^dize.
For as they that desire to gain money, and to traffic in worldly
merchandise, cannot augment their wealth, except they endure many perils of
Land and Sea: For they must needs willingly bear the counterwaites of
Robbers, and the assaults of Pirates, and all other incumbra^ces, for the
expectation of profit, and they do not make moan at the feeling of any
inconveniences.

Even so we must rejoice and Triumph, when we consider the Inualuable riches
of this Spiritual marchaundize, and those inconceivable and Invisible good
things, which shall succeed the transitory troubles of this wretched world.
Ioh. 16.21 22.


A Woman when she trauaileth has sorrow, because her hour is come: but
as soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembers the anguish no
more, for joy that a man is borne into the world: And the godly in this life
are in sorrow and heaviness, but by Faith, Repentance, and Prayer, (in which the
Spirit of God helps their infirmities,) their sorrow shall be turned into joy,
and their hearts shall rejoice, and no man shall take their joy from them. 2.
Cor 4.17.18.
And how can we but rejoice in tribulation? For our light Affliction, which is
but for a moment, causes us a far more excellent and an eternal weight of
glory: while we look not on the things that are seen, but on the things that
are not seen; for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things
which are not seen are eternal.

Indeed this joy in Tribulation arises not in us, of our own nature, which is
corrupt, and still repineth against the correction of our heavenly Father;
Neither does it arise from the nature of Tribulation it self, which has
enforced even the holy Patriarks and Saints, that shined as glittering Lamps
and Stars in their ages, Job. 3.2.7.8.9.11.12
to groan under the burden of misery.

Job was the lively picture of patience; yet how bitterly did he inueigh
against the very day of his Nativity? and how earnestly desired he, that the
Holy one would destroy him, and cut him off.

David was inspired by the holy Ghost, Psalm. 6.3 and 32.4. and 102. and 88.
and 58. and 6^. and 77.7.8. etc.
yet how does he make his moan, that his foes oppressed him; and that he
seemed even forsaken; and therefore exclaimeth on this sort: Will the Lord
absent himself for ever; and will he be no more entreated? Is his mercy
clean gone for ever; and is his promise come utterly to an end for ever? Has
God forgotten to be gracious; and will he shut up his loving kindness in
displeasure? Eliah was a Prophet of such holiness, that he obtained ye
privilege of Enoch; which was, to be rapt up into Heaven alive, and not to be
taken hence after the ordinary sort of other men: yet when he fled from
persecuting Iezabel, 1. King. 19.4.
he sat down under a Iuniper-tree, and desired that he might die, and said,
It is now enough: o Lord take my soul, for I am no better then my Fathers.
Ierem. 11.5. and 15.10. and 20.14.15.
Jeremiah was a man sanctified from his mothers womb; yet he cries out, woe is
me, that my mother bare me! Cursed be the day wherein I was borne; Cursed be ye
man that showed my father saying; Aman child is borne unto thee. How did Jonah
frette, Jonah. 3.3
for that the ruin of Niniuie did not accompany his commination? O Lord
(says he) take, I beseech thee, my life from me; for it is better for me to
die, I^n. 4.9.
then to live. And when he was inflamed with anger, for that the vehement East
wind had smitten his gourd; and God had asked him, whether he did well to be
angry for the gourd; he answered, I ^oe well to be angry, 2. Cor. 1.8.
unto the death And blessed Paul the chosen vessel of Christ, complains,
that by his affliction in Asia, he was pressed down out of measure passing
strength; so that he altogether doubted even of life. Matt. 26.38 and 27.46.
Yea, how did Christ himself, the head and general Captain of all believers,
faint and fear in the garden, when he said, that his soul was heavy even to
the death? and how lamentable was his cry on the cross; My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? If this were done in the green tree: what shall be
done in the dry? If the hard seem to shrink, what shall the members do? If
the son himself be shaken, how shall the servant quake? If those patterns
of righteousness were somewhat impatient, and discouraged, and even almost
drouped, that they might see their own infirmity, and not trust in
themselves, but in ye living God, that does raise the dead; it must not dismay
us, that are but Nouices and young soldiers in Christ's wars, if now and
then the weakness of the flesh, and the imperfectness of our Regeneration, do
seem to eclipse this spiritual rejoicing in Tribulation.

For as long as we carry about us this frail Tabernacle, we know but in
part, and see through a Glass darkely, and we think, 1. Cor. 13.9.
speak, and understand, as children in heavenly mysteries; and there is a
continual and vnappeaceable battle between the spirit and the flesh; Romans
7.19
So that the good which we would do, that we do not, but the evil which we
would not do, that we do. So that this spiritual joy proceeds not from
Music, or from pleasant company, or from respite and space of Tim^, (which
some affirm to cure and assuage grief,) or from our selves any way; but it
proc^edes from the holy Spirit of the Lord.

And that we may conceive the matter more plainly, we must ponder and
remember, 2. Cor. 4.16.
that in the faithful there is a double man; to wit, the outward man, and the
inward man. And as there is a double man; so there is also a double judgment,
and a double will; one of the spirit, and another of the flesh. Christ our
Savior was not ashamed to confess this, when he said in his Agony, Matt.
26.39.
speaking to his Father; Yet not my will be done, but thy will.

So that while the godly are afflicted they do complain to God; and yet for
all that, they submit themselves under Gods hand: and when they are humbled
and cast down sufficiently, the spirit of God, (which does never forsake
them,) does withdraw their minds from troubles, to ponder the love of God
toward them, which will not suffer any thing to betide them, that shall not
work for their salvation. And therefore they do so retire their souls from
sorrow, as that they do not only cease to lament; but they do also begin to
rejoice; and do account Affliction to be a note and testimony of Gods favor
and mercy. And at length, when the spirit has vanquished and subdued the
frail flesh, they can sing with the Prophet; Psalm. 119.7^. Psalm. 71.7.
It is is good for me, that I have been afflicted, that I may learn thy
statutes: I am become as a ^o^ster unto many, but thou art my sure trust.
Wherefore it may be truly affirmed, that affliction makes the godly to be
Trumpets, to found out the praise and glory of God. For as the Brass is
molten and formed into a Trumpet, that sounds sweetly; where before it had no
such form, Aug. in Psalm. 94.
nor yielded out such a sound: So the knocking, and hammering, and framing of
Tribulation and Affliction, ^akes the godly (as Tru^pets) to exalt and extol
the honor and praise of the living God. And therefore, as the Arc of Noah, the
more the waters of the Flood abou^ded, the higher it floated; So the godly, the
greater the waves of Tribulation are, the farther they are from sinking. The
Sun may be covered with clouds for a season, but at last he displayeth his
beams and brightness in greater measure: So Affliction as a veil, may cover
the joy of the Faithful for a small space; but at length the veil will be
rent with succeeding comfort.

And albeit affliction affright the outward man with it greesly look; yet by
the assistants of Gods spirit, the inward man is strengthened thereby, and
Tribulation becomes as a fire, not to confound, but to conform. For like as
wax, when it is brought to the fire, it is mollified, and leesing the print of
the old Seal, receives a new: so our hearts (being brought to the fire of
Tribulation, are softened, and laying aside their former Vices, they are framed
and fashioned according to the new man.

It is evident then, that Affliction comes from God, and not by chance: and
that God will not suffer us to be afflicted above our power; but will strengthen
us in the greatest heat of tribulation: and that tribulation is not cast upon
us, because God hates us, but because he loves us, and labors by chastisement
to reclaim us, and to reform us; that we may amend our imperfections, and
consequently, not be condemned with the ungodly, and unrepentant Worldlings:
and that the Regenerate, and Saints, 1. Cor. 11 32.
do sometimes croutch under the weight of Tribulation, and even murmr in
bitterness of grief: and that it is impossible for Flesh and b^o^d to rejoice
in Tribulation, except the holy Spirit of God do bring forth Patience, and
Consolation.

What is the conclusion then of all this? but to remember, what Saint James
says; Is any among you afflicted, Let him pray And why must he pray? Iam.
5.13. Iam. 1.4.5.6.7.
That patience may have her perfect working; and that he may be entier and
perfect, and lack nothing. For if any lack Wisdom, let him ask of God,
which gives to all men liberally, and reprocheth no man, and it shall be given
him. But let him ask in Faith, and waver not: For he that wauereth, is like a
wave of the Sea, tossed of the wind, and carried away; neither let any man
think, that he shall receive any thing of the Lord. In which words, the
blessed Apostle does most highly commend Patience, in that he calls it wisdom;
because it is wisdom to submit our selves to Gods hand, and and not to resist
his Will, which must needs be accomplished; and in that he says, that the
patient person is absolute, entier, perfect, and lackes nothing. For Patience
is Armor of proof, which repells all the darts of whatsoever Tribulation; and
makes her Owner to cry out, and say; Come Life, come Death, come grief, come
sorrow; come Crosses, come losses; come what can come, I am fixed on the love
of God the Father, who made me; of God the Son, who redeemed me; of God the
holy Ghost, who is my eternal directer and comforter: and therefore what
anguish can break this threefolde cord of Comfort? Let us therefore beseech
the Almighty and merciful God, which is the strength of the weak, the stay of
the feeble, the Joy of the pensive, the refuge of the troubled, the help of
the afflicted, the GOD of Patience and Consolatioon; to strengthen our souls
with Patience, that we may abide constant in his Fear and Faith; and that in
all our troubles was may have a taste of his Fatherly affection toward us; and
that we may be confirmed with all might, through his glorious power, unto all
patience, and suffering; and that we may praise him for evermore; Be it in
prosperity, or adversity, in joy, or misery; that so, suffering in this
world with CHRIST; we may also together with him, reign for evermore, in the
kingdom of Heaven.

AMEN.
MINISTERS OUGHT TO MOVE TO MERCIFVLNES.
GALL. 2.10. Warning only, that we should remember the poor: which thing
also I was diligent to do.


SAint Paul having before-shewed, how his Office and Apostleship was approved
by James, Peter, and John, that were counted to be Pillars, and the chiefest in
the Church; insomuch that they gave to him and Barnabas the right hands of
Fellowship; that as the other did preach to the Jews, so they should to the
Gentiles: In these words he shows what warning and Memorandum, James, Peter,
and John, gave to him and Barnabas, to be observed in the Peregrination and
Preaching among the Gentiles. Namely, that they should remember and care for
their poor of Iudaea, and procure for them among the Gentiles, alms,
collections, and beneuolences. And as James, Peter, and John were earnest to
admonish Paul and Barnabas, to have regard of their poor; both because they
knew the penury and necessity of their poor; and because they knew, that
the Gentiles abounding with riches and store, might easily and liberally
afford relief; and besides Paul and Barnabas might justly crave it; for if
they did sow among them spiritual things, they might lawfully reap their
carnal things; so on the other part, Paul was as diligent to perform it; and
it is not likely, Act. 11.24.
that Barnabas being a good, and a godly man, full of the holy ghost and faith,
did forget the warning which was given him. But for Paul's readiness herein, we
hear what he says: Which thing also I was diligent to do. How diligent Paul
was to remember the poor of Jerusalem may be seen, 1. Cor. 16. where he
ordaines among the Corinthians, as he had ordained among the Galathians, that
every first day of the week, every one should put aside and lay up, as God had
prospered him; that when he came, he might receive their liberality, and from
thence s^nd it, or go with it himself unto Jerusalem. And they that would
know more of Paul's diligence on this behalf, may peruse the 8. and 9.
chapters of the latter epistle to the Corinthians; where the Apostle moves and
excites the Corint^s to take compassion on the needy brethren of Jerusalem,
both with arguments and exhortations; and with the example, both of the
Macedonians, who though they were much afflicted their selves, yet their
extreme poverty abounded to their rich liberality; and of Christ Jesus
himself, who being rich, for our sakes became poor, that we through his
poverty might be made rich. Neither was Paul only diligent for the poor of
Jerusalem; but he cares for the needy people of Ephesus, 1. Tim. 6.17.18.19.
exhorting Timothy the first elected Bishop of ye place, To charge them that
are rich in this world, that they be not high minded, and that they trust not
in uncertain riches, but in the living God, (which gives us abundantly all
things to enjoy,) that they do good, and be rich in good works, and be ready
to distribute and communicate, laying up in store for themselves a good
foundation against the time to come, that they may obtain eternal life.
Besides this, he was diligent for the procuring of relief for whatsoever
poor; for thus he writes to the Galathians; Gal. 6.6.
While we have time, let us do good to all m^n. Thus we see, how careful the
chief Apostles, James, Peter, and John were to marry Paul and B^rnabas to
remember their poor: and we see, how diligent Paul was to execute their
warning, and by all means and ways, both of preaching and writing, to procure
relief for the distressed Christians. And may it not be inferred heerevpon,
that it is the duty of every Minister of the Gospel, to remember the poor,
and to stir up men's minds to liberality toward the ne^die? since the Apostles
themselves were so diligent in this case, Act. 2. and 4. and 5. and 6.
as that they undertook the business at first; and afterward ordained and
selected Deacons for that purpose.

And as it is the duty of the Minister to persuade and exhort; so it is the
duty of the people to be persuaded, and to suffer the words of exhortation:
which that all may be the readier to perform, let us weigh first the
commandment that we must be liberal to the poor: Secondly, the example of
such as have excelled therein: Thirdly, the reward of liberality to the
needy: and lastly threatenings against the unmerciful thundered out in the
Book^ of God.

In the law written by Moses, First motive to mercy. Deuteronomy. 15.7.8.9.10.
God gave commandment for providing for the poor; charging the children of
Israel on this sort: If one of thy brethren with thee be poor, within any of
thy gates in thy land, which the Lord thy God gives thee, thou shall not
harden thine heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor brother: But thou shall
open thine hand unto him, and shall lend him sufficient for his need which he
has: beware that there be not a wicked thought in thine heart, to say, the
seventh year, the year of freedom is at hand; therefore it greeueth thee, to
look on thy poor brother, and thou give him naught, and he cry unto the
Lord against thee, so that sin be in thee: Thou shall give him and let it not
grieve thine heart to give him: for because of this the Lord thy God shall
bless thee in all thy works, and in all that thou putte^t thine hand to. And
God commanded also, that when the Israelites did reap their harvest, Leu.
19.9.10.
they should not reap every corner of their field, neither should they gather
the gleanings of their harvest: and that they should not gather ye grapes of
their vineyard clean, neither gather every grape of their vineyard; but that
they should leave them for the poor and for the stranger. Mercifulnes so much
pleases God, that whereas fasting is a preparatiue to prayer and repentance,
and thereby a means to obtain foregiuenes of sins; yet it is distasteful to
God, if it be not seas^ned with works of mercy; Isai. 58.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.0.
and therefore God says by his holy Prophet to the fasting Jews: You say,
Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see it not? we have punished our selves,
and thou regardest it not: behold in the day of your fast, you will seek your
will, and reqiure all your debts: behold ye fast to strife and debate, and to
smite with the fist of wickedness: Is it such a fast that I have chosen, that a
man should afflict his soul for a day, and to bow down his head as a
bulrush, and to lie down in sackcloth and ashes? will thou call this a
fasting, or an acceptable day to the Lord? Is not this the fasting that I have
chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, to take off the heavy burdens, and to
let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? Is it not to deal
thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that wander to thine
house? when thou see the naked, that thou cover him, and hide not thy self
from thine own flesh? Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and
thine health shall grow speedily: thy righteousness shall go before thee, and
the glory of the Lord shall embrace thee: then shall thou call, and the Lord
shall answer, thou shall cry, and he shall say, here I am.

Neither is alms and bountifulnes an adorning of our fastes only; but it is
an infallible note and mark of sincere and unfeigned devotion; Iam. 1.27.
as Saint James affirms, saying; Pure religion and vndefi^ed before God even
the Father, is this, to visit the fatherles and widows in their adversity.
This is the true treasure which our Savior ^ids us to lay up in heaven; Matt.
6.19.20.
Lay not up (says he) treasures for your selves upon the earth, where the moth
and canker corrupt, and where thieves dig through and steal: but lay up
treasures for your selves in heaven, where neither the moth nor canker
corrupts, and where thieves neither dig through, nor steal. And never to be
forgotten is that saying of Christ, by those that either ambitiously lavish out
their goods, to win praise of men; or else couetously hunt after recompense in
all their feastings; when he says; When thou make a dinner, Luke 14.12.13.14.
or a supper, call not thy friends, nor thy brethren, neither thy kinsmen, nor
the rich neighbors, least they also bid thee again, and a recompense be made
thee: but when thou make a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, and
the blind: and thou shall be blessed, because they cannot recompense thee; for
thou shall be recompensed at the Resurrection of the just. And this
commandment, to show mercy to the needy, is perpetual and still stands in
force; and therefore the poor we have always amongst us; as God said to the
Israelites; Because there shall be ever some poor in the land, therefore I
command thee, saying, Deuteronomy. 15.11.
thou shall open thine hand to thy brother, to thy needy, and to thy poor in
thy land. The commandment to love one another, and consequently to aid and
succor one another, is both new, and old: old, because it was given in the
law written by Moses, Leu. 19.18.
and engraven by the finger of Nature in the tables of our hearts; and new,
because it was renewed by our Savior Christ in the Gospel; Ioh. 13.34.
and therefore must never wax old, or decay. Is it not meet, that we should
acknowledge, that good things come unto us, not by chance, but by the good
providence of God? and how can we acknowledge this better, then by yielding
obedience to Gods commandment, that requires, to impart of our store on the
necessity of other? If thou confess, Hom. 1.
that temporal good things (says S. B^sill) proceed from the divine
ordinance: can thou think, that God is unjust in distributing unequally
these temporal things unto us? Why do thou abound, and another beg? but
that thou may be recompensed for thy bounty, and he be adorned with the
strength and arm of patience? It is the bread of the hungry, which thou
withdrawest: it is the garment of the naked, that thou layest up in thy
wardrope: it is the shoe of the barefooted, which rottes in thy custody: it
is the silver of the needy, which thou possessest: and therefore in not
distributing, thou destroyest all those, whom thou may assist and succor.
Shall we daily and hourly receive good things from our heavenly father, and
shall we deny benefits to our brethren? Ecclus. 28.3.4.
or shall we expect mercy from our maker, that withhold mercy from men like
to our selves? Bernard reduces the mercies of the Lord toward us unto the
number of seven; In Cant. ser. 88.
saying, that The first mercy is, that God does stay us from failing into many
sins, into which otherwise we should fall: the second is, that God does bear
with us, when we sin, and does patiently expect our conversion: the third is,
that God does visit our heart with his holy spirit; and cause us to loath the
sin, which before we loved: the fourth is, that God does mercifully receive
us, when we repent; so as we may be found among them of whom the Psalm
speaks; Psalm. 32.1.
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven: the fifth is, that God gives us
power, to live more circumspectly hereafter, and not to commit a relapse;
least the last error be worse then the first: these five mercies are in
delivering from evil, the other two are in bestowing of good: for the sixth
is, in that God gives us the grace to live in new and holy conversation; and
the seventh is, in that upon so often experiment of his goodness, he permits us
unworthy and sinful wretches to assure our selves of heavenly good things. Are
these the mercies of the Lord toward us: and shall we be unmerciful to our
afflicted brethren? H^th God so loved us? 1. Ioh 4.11.
and shall not we love one another? If thou were distressed and in necessity
thy self, would thou not be glad to be comforted? and would thou not
desire and expect aid from other, that could do it? Matt. 7.12.
Therefore whatsoever thou would that men should do to thee, even so do
thou to them: for this is the law and the Prophets. And that more is; do
thou know, what may betide thee before thou die? Art thou sure of the
permanencie of thy flourishing estate? Will thou in misery look for relief,
that in prosperity were merciles? With what measure thou metest, Matt. 7.2.
Nazianz. in Oratione de panperibus amandis.
it shall be measured to thee again. It was gravely spoken by that great
Divine long since; as he that saileth is near to shipwreck; and the nearer,
the more audacious he is: so he that is clothed with this mortal body, is
obnoxious and subject to bodily calamities; and the more, the prouder he is,
and the more disdainefull he is toward those that lie under his feet. While
thou say lest, (says he) with prosperous winds, stretch out thine hand to
him, that has suffered shipwreck: while thou art helthy and welthy, aid the
miserable. Stay not so long, till thou learn in thy self, how great an evil,
in humanity and unmercifulness is, and how great a good thing it is, to open
the bowels of compassion to the distressed. How requisite and necessary then
is it, for Christians to show mercy; that receive of God such continual
mercy, and stand in continual need of mercy? and how highly is the
commandment of showing mercy to be esteemed of us, since both the law and
gospel do enjoin it so strictly? and since Paul (as a learned father well
observes) does not barely say, Chrysostom. hom. 35. ad Heb. Col. 3.12. Antisthenes
apud Stob ser. 1. de prud.
that we must show mercy; but that we must put on the bowels of mercy; to
teach us, that Alms must be as a garment, which is still about us: and since
the Pagane Philosopher could affirm, that they are alike impious, that remove
the Altar out of the Temple, and that remove compassion out of man's nature: and
since the Latin Orator could give no greater commendation to Caesar, then to
praise him for his mercy; when he said unto him; Cic. pr^ Lagar.
that among his many virtues, none was more admirable and acceptable then his
mercy; For men approach by nothing so near unto God, as by saving and
succouring of others; and that in his estate there was nothing greater, then
that he was able; and in his Nature there was nothing better, then that he
was willing, to save and show mercy.

This then is the precept and commandment, 2. Motive to mercy.
to be liberal and compassionate to the afflicted and poor: but who has
performed it? Holy, religious, and faith^ull men and women in all Ages.

Look upon Job, Job. 29.12 13.15.^6.
who in his Golden and Halcyon days, delivered the poor that cried, and the
fatherles, and him that had none to help him; and had the blessing upon him,
of him that was ready to perish, and caused the widows heart to rejoice; and
was the Eyes to the blind, and the feet to the lame, Job. 31.16 17.19.20
and a Father to the poor; and restrained not the poor of their desire; nor
caused the eyes of the widow to fail; and ate not his morsels alone, but the
Fatherles ate with him; and suffered none to perish for want of clothing, but
the loins of the poor blessed him, because he was warmed with the Fleece of
his Shee^e.

Look on Obadiah, the Governor of Ahabs house, 1. King. 18 13.
who, when Iezebel slew the Prophets of the Lord, did hide an hundred of the
Lords Prophets, by fifties in a Cave, and fed them with bread and water. 1.
King. ^7.
Look on the widow of Z^rep^h^, which in the great famine nourished and
lodged the Prophet Eliah. Tob. 2.2.
Look on Tob^, who when he saw at his table abundance of meat, he bad his
son Tob^^ to go into the city, and to bring whatsoever poor of his
brethren he could find; and would not eat till his son returned. And these
are some of the golden and grave sentences, which he gave to his son, not
knowing whether he should ever give him more: Tob. 4.7.8.9.10.11.
My son (says he,) give Alms of thy substance: and when thou give alms,
let not thine eye be envious, neither turn thy face from any poor, least that
God turn his face from thee: give alms according to thy substance: if thou
have but a little, be not afraid to give a little alms: for thou layest up a
good store for thy self against the day of necessity: Because that Alms does
deliver from death, and suffers not to come into darkness: for Alms is a
good gift before the most high to all them which use it. Look on Zichaeus the
Publican, who said to our Savior Christ, Luke 9.8.
Behold Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have taken
from any man by forged cauillation, I restore him four fold. Look on Dorcas,
which is commended by the holy Ghost to be a woman, full of good works and
alms; Act. ^.39.
for whose death all the widows wept before S. Peter, showing him the coats
and garments which she had made, while she was with them. Look on Cornelius
the Captain, Act. ^.4.
of whose prayers and Alms the Angel gives this testimony, That they were
come up into remembrance before God. Unto which speech of the Angel, Homil. 9.
super. Matt.
S. John Chrysostom seems to allude, in his description of Alms; when he
says; that it is a friend of Gods, and still near to God, and has the gates
of heaven opened unto it; and when it enters in manner of a Queen, none of the
Porters or keepers dare say unto it, What art thou? or, whence came thou? but
they presently receive it. Virgo est habent alas aureas; Alms is a Virgin
having golden wings, adorned with gay colors; and yet so well feathered and
nimble, that it still stands before the throne of the superiall king. Act.
^.3^.34.35.
Look on the Infancy of the primitive Church, Where there was one heart and
mind, neither any said, that any thing of that which he possessed, was his
own, but they had all things common: neither was there any among them that
lacked; for as many as were possessors of Lands, or houses, sold them, and
brought the price of the things that were sold, and laid it down at the
Apostles feet, and it was distributed unto every man according as he had need.

Act. 11.28.29.
Look on the Church of Antiochia in which Believers were first called
Christians; how when Aga^us signified by the spirit, that there should be
great Famine throughout all the world: the Disciples, every man according to
his ability, purposed to send succor unto the brethren which dwelt in Judea.
2. Cor. 9.2.
Look on the Church of Corinth and Achai^, how ready they were to contribute,
and distribute to the necessity of the Saints; so that Pau^ was bold to boast
himself of them to Macedonie; and affirms that their zeal had provoked many.
Look on Placilla, the most devout wife of Theodosius the Emperor; Nicephor.
Callist. l. 2. c. 4.
who being blamed for visiting the sick, and ministering to them with her own
hands, and giving them large money; she answered, that it became the Emperor to
give the money, and it became her to consecrate the ministry of her hands to
him, that had bestowed the Empire on her Husband. Look on Amadaeus the Duke of
Sau^y, Munst. lib. 2. Cosmograph.
who being asked of certain Orators and Ambassadors that were before him,
whether he kept Hounds, or not? he leckned unto them, that they should return
the next day. And when they were come, Cor. Nepos. Plutarch. Xenoph.
Amadaeus from a Galiery, on a side of his house, showed them a great company
of Beggars, that sat at meal together, and said unto them; These are my
H^unds that I nourish every day, and by which I hope to hunt after the glory
of Heaven. Here may be remembered also the bountifulnes of Ethnicks to the poor
and needy; as of Pomponius Atticus, that sustained many poor people; Of
Cyrus, Ontos ego umin Dipso charizesthai, Plut. Chremata ^^asthai men os
chroto, chreschai de os timoto.
that swear, he was more delighted to bestow good turns upon other, then to
enrich himself; and that said, that he did thirst to use liberality; Of Timon
the Athenian, that suffered his Fields and Orchyards to lie open, that the
poor might take of the fruits without asking leave; and of whom it is
reported, that he did get Riches to use them, and did use them, to spend them
honorably on the needy.

And of Titus, the Roman Emperor, who upon a time as he sat at Supper,
remembering, that he had the day before done no good turn to any, he brake out
into these words, Amici, diem perdidi; Friends, Sueton.
I have lost a day. These Presidents of Ethnic liberality to the needy, we
must endeavor to follow; and those former bright stars of godliness, that
shined in the mids of a dark and perverse generation, we must behold and
imitate, if we purpose to observe the commandment of the Lord, and to be
partakers of the blessing that accompanies liberality toward the needy.

Third motive to mercy. Heb. 13.15.16.
And what is that blessing? It is to have the favor and love of God toward us:
for the Apostle says; Let us ^ffer the sacrifice of praise always to God;
that is, the fruit of the lips, which confess his name: to do ^ood, and to
distribute, forget not for with such s^crifices God is pleased As if Paul
should thus say; Let us offer the oblations that are now pleasing to the Lord:
the old corporal sacrifices are abrogated and abolished; but the true and
spiritual sacrifices remain, which consist partly in giving thanks; and
partly in liberality to the poor; with which sacrifices God is delighted.
Luke 6.38.
Give, (says Christ,) And it shall be given unto you: a good measure, pressed
down, shaken together, and running over shall men give into your bosom. Of
the merciful man the Psalmist pronounces, Psalm. 112.9.
That as he has distributed and given to the poor; so his righteousness
remains for ever. That is, his piety and righteous dealing shall not only be
approved and applauded in this world of God, Angels, and men; but also shall be
adorned with eternal reward in that other life. Pro. 19.17.
The wise King of Israel says, He that has mercy upon the poor, lends
unto the Lord; and the Lord will recompense him in that which he has given.
Men desire commonly to commit their money and goods to trusty persons, that
will re pay surely according to promise: In Epist.
Therefore (as Saint Austin says) If thou will be a good Merchant, and a
notable Usurer, give that which thou can not keep, to the end that thou
may receive, that which thou can not leese; give a little, that thou
may receive an hundredth fold; give of thy temporal possession, that thou
may obtain the everlasting inheritance. Who is it ye will not most gladly
Till the Field, that will never miss to yield increase? And who desires not
to be guided in his journey by signs and directions, that he may not swerue
and straye? Hear then, In sermon de verb. Domin.
what the same Father says; Foecundus est ager pauperum; The Field of the
poor is fertile, and soon yeeldes fruit to them that give: Via coeli est
pauper, The poor man is the way to Heaven, by which we come to our heavenly
Father: Begin therefore to bestow on the needy, if you wilt not err from the
straight way.

As flowing Wells, Cl^m. Alex. Pedag. lib. 5. cap. 7.
though they be emptied, yet they return to their former measure and fulness;
and the more they are exhausted, the more they are replenished, and the purer
the water is: So giving to the poor, which is the fountain of liberality,
that gives drink to the thirsty, and succor to the needy, is increased and
filled again; Hom. 33. a^ pop. Antioch.
as milk comes again in the breasts that have bin sucked. And for this S.
Chrysostom doubts not to call liberality to the poor, ^he gainefullest Art
and Trade in the world. Him. 37. ad pop. An.
And he asks ye question, whether a man can be so ignorant as not to know,
that God commanded us to give Alms, not so much for the benefit of the poor
that take, as for the recompense of them that give.

He that would enter into a Potentates Palace, procures the Porters favor to
be admitted: wilt you be admitted into the Palace of Heaven? the poor are the
Porters; as our Savior witnesses, when he says; Make ye Friends with the
riches of iniquity, Luke 16.9.
that when ye shall want, they may receive you into everlasting habitatio^s. He
that gives Alms, is like one that agrees with the owner of an Orchard, to eat
as much as he ca^ wtin the Orchard, but to carry no fruit out of the Orchard:
which condition because he finds somewhat strict, he eats in the Orchard till
he be satiate and carries indeed no apples with him out of the Orchard, yet
while he is eating, he now and then flings an apple over the Orchard wall or
hedge, which when he comes forth, he may find and enjoy.

So they that are rich in the world, and rich in God; though they have received
their riches on this condition, that they shall carry away nothing with them
out of the world, yet they show a godly wisdom, while they use here the
blessings of this life; and in bestowing on the poor, they do (as it were)
cast over the wall of ye Orchard, that which they shall find recompensed in
the world to come. A man that knows certainly, that after a small time he
shall be removed into a strange country where forsaking his native soil, he
shall live in need all days of his life; if he be not sottish, he will be
well content to have his goods carried before him into that country where he
shall after enjoy them, though for a little space he want them where he now
dwells: and who will not account them foolish, that knowing the brittle and
fading state of this life, and the short abode that they have here, do refuse
by Alms and liberality to the poor, to send their goods before them into
Heaven, where they most assuredly know, that they shall live in all affluence
and plenty, and receive the eternal reward? specially since now we live, Heb.
13.14.
not in our abiding city and true country, but in a strange country; and
since by liberality to poor and distressed Christians, our goods are conveyed
into our immovable abiding place; What folly is it then, to leave our riches
there, whence we must depart? and not to send it thither before hand, Chrysostom. in
Matthew. Hom. 6.
whither we shall go? Place therefore thy substance there, where thy country
is. He that places his treasure in Earth, has not what to hope for in
Heaven, Why should he look up toward Heaven, where he has nothing laid and
stored up for him? Manus pauperis est Gazophylacium Christi: Petr. Rau. in
quadam Sermon.
The hand of the poor, is the Treasury of Christ; and whatsoever the poor
receive, Christ does accept, as given to himself: Give therefore earthly
things to the poor, that you may receive heavenly things; give a crumbe and
piece; that thou may receive the whole; give to the poor, that it may be
given to thee; For whatsoever thou give to the poor, thy self shall have;
whatsoever thou give not to the poor, another shall have. And all this the
Son of Syrach has summarily comprehended in few words, when he says;
Ecclu^^, 19.9.1.11:12.13 16.
Help the poor for the commandments sake, and turn him not away, because
of his poverty: Lose thy money for thy brothers and neighbors sake, and let
it not rust under a stone to thy destruction: Bestow the treasure after the
commandment of the most H^gh, and it shall bring thee more profit then gold:
lay up thine alms in thy secret chamber, and it shall keep thee from all
affliction: A man's alms is as a purse with him, and shall keep a man's favor
as the apple of the eye, and afterward shall it arise, and pay every man his
reward upon his head: it shall fight for thee against thine enemies, better
then the shield of a strong man, or spear of the mighty.

If the plentiful reward of liberality move thee not; Fourth motive to mercy.
Prou. 21.13. Prou. 28.27.
yet have remorse at the terrible manaces against the unmerciful. Hear
Solomon; He that stops his ear at the crying of the poor, he shall also
cry, and not be heard. Again; He that gives to the poor, shall not want; but
he that hides his eyes, shall have many curses. Do thou not tremble at the
remembrance of the fearful judgment of Sodom, that was destroyed with fire
and brimstone from heaven? How grievous a punishment was it to be heard of? how
grievous to be seen? nay, how grievous to be suffered? And will thou know
their sins, that caused this horrible punishment? The Prophet tells thee;
saying; Ezekiel. 16, 49.
The iniquity of Sodom was, pride, fulness of bread, abundance of Idleness in
her, and her daughters: neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and
needy. Quakest thou not, to muse on the rich Glutton, Luke 16.15.
that once fared delicitiously every day, and was clothed gorgeously in purple
and fine linen; but now lies in Hel^ in torments, and desires to have his
flaming tongue cooled with one drop of water, and cannot be refreshed? And why
is no ruth and compassion showed upon him? because he was merciles to the
beggar Lazarus, refusing to give him the very crumbs which fell from his table.
Have thou forgotten, that at the dreadful day of Judgment, when all shall
appear before the Tribunal seat of Christ, and shall yield an account of
their works, there shall be examination of Alms and works of charity? and
as the godly shall hear this; Matt. 25.3^.41.42. Why, and how the sentence of
the last judgment shall be pronounced according to works, see the treatise
following.
Come ye blessed of my father, take the inheritance of the kingdom prepared
for you from the foundation of the world; so the merciful shall hear that;
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the D uel
and his Angels. For (says Christ the eternal King and Judge unto them,) I was
an hungered, and ye gave me no meat; I thirsted, and ye gave me no drink; I
was a stranger, and ye took me not in unto you; I was naked, and ye clothed me
not; sick and in prison, and ye visited me not. Then shall they answer him,
saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, or a thirst, or a stranger, or
naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee: Then shall he
answer them, and say; Verily I say unto you, in as much as ye did it not, unto
one of the least of these, ye did it not to me. In schools those that are
desirous to take degree, knowing that strict examination shall be made of their
sufficiency, they are wont to study and labor much in that question and
point in which they shall be examined and sifted; and so they that are but
meanly exercised in an Art or profession, shall be able to unfold the
difficulties of that one point and question. Now since Christ the Judge has
foretold, that in the last Doom, (where the question shall not be for degree
of momentanie honor, but for the crown of immortality,) the chiefest
inquisition shall be touching Alms and works of mercy; if we neglect this
one work, may it not be imputed to our own slothfulnes, if we be repelled in
the great and terrible day?

And if they that give not to the poor shall be so punished: what shall the
end be of the oppressor and defrauder of the poor? Prou. 22.23. Prou.
23.10.11.
God will defend the cause of the oppressed and afflicted, and spoil the soul
of those that spoil them: and if any remove the ancient bounds, and enter into
the fields of the fatherles, he that redeemeth them is mighty, and he will
defend their cause: Ier. 22.13.
says Solomon. Woe unto him that builds his house by unrighteousness, and his
chambers without equity, using his neighbor without wages, and giving him not
for his work: says the Prophet Jeremiah. Ezekiel. 22.29.31.
On them that vex the needy God will power out his indignation, and consume
them with the fire of his wrath, and render their own ways upon their heads:
says the Prophet Ezekiel. Amos. 4.1.2.
Against the kine of Bashan that oppress the poor and destroy the needy, the
Lord God has sworn by his holiness, that he will take them away with thorns,
and their prosperity with fishhookes: O ye that swallowe up the poor, Amos.
8.4.5. etc.
and ye that make the needy of the land to fail; making the Ep^ah small, and
the shekell great, and falsifying the weights by deceit, that ye may buy the
poor for silver, and the needy for shoes: the Lord has sworn by the
excellency of Jacob, Surely I will ^euer forget any of these works: shall not
the land tremble for this? and every one mourn that dwells therein? I will
turn your feasts into mourning, and your songs into lamentation, and I will
bring sackcloth upon all loins, and baldnes upon every head, and I will make
it as the mourning of an only son, and the end thereof as a bitter day:
Amos. 5.11.16.
says the Lord by the Prophet Amos. Forasmuch as your treading is upon the
poor, and ye take from him the burdens of wheat, (and his food, by which he
should live,) ye have build houses of hewn stone, but ye shall not dwell in
them; ye have planted pleasant Vineyards, but ye shall not drink wine of
them. For the Lord God of Hosts, the Lord says thus; Mal. 3.5.
Mourning shall be in all streets, and they shall say in all the high ways,
Alas, Alas: and they shall call the husba^dman to Lamentation, and such as can
mourn, to mourning: as it is in the same Prophet, I will come near to you to
judgment, and I will be a swifte witness against the Soothsayers, and against
the Adulterers, and against false-swearers, and against those that wrongfully
keep back the Hirelings wages, and vex the Widow and the Fatherless, and
oppress the stranger, and fear not me, Iam. 5.1.2.3.4.
says the Lord of Hosts, by the Prophet Malachy.

Go too now, (says the holy Apostle James) weep and howl, for your miseries
that shall come upon you; Your riches are corrupt, (your garments are
moath-eaten: your gold and silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a
witness against you, and shall eat your flesh, as it were fire: For why, behold
the hire of the Laborers, which have reaped your fields, which is of you kept
back by fraud) cries, and the cries of the^ which have reaped, are entered
into the ears of the Lord of hosts: ye have lived in pleasure on the earth,
and in wa^tonnes, ye have nourished your hearts, as in a day of slaughter. They
must remember this, that deprive the poor of their livings; that wthold the
wages of the laborer; that beguile the needy in bargaining and selling; that
smoother and suppress legacies, that are bequeathed to the poor,
intreruerting and converting them otherwise then the Testators mind was. Let
none think to thrive thereby: for as the Eagles feathers, if they be laid by
the feathers of other bi^des they will fret and consume them; So the goods of
the poor wrongfully detained from them, will consume and confound the residue
of men's wealth and substance. And here is a memorandu^ for all officers,
Collectors, and overseers for the poor, that they use all diligence,
plainenes, truth, and sincerity, to gather and dispose the Rates, for the
relief of the needy; knowing that if they perform not their duty with a
good conscience: God is the auenger of such things; Romans 2.6.
but if they deal faithfully and carefully, God will recompense them according
to their works.

Thus have we been persuaded to be liberal to the poor; by the commandment
of God; by the example of the Faithful; by the reward of mercy; and by the
threatenings against the mercifulnes: and if the incompassionate and flinty
hearted person shall deeply ponder these things, there is hope, that hereafter
he will be mollified and put on the tender bowels of compassion. Sen. lib. de
beneficijs.
When the Cynick begd a talent of Antigonus he answered, that a talent was too
much, for a Cynick to beg; and when the Cynick asked a penny, he answered
again, that it was too little for a king to give. This was shameful and
sophysticall cauillatio^, to devise a means how to give nothing: for he
respected the Cynick in the talent, and a king in the penny; whereas he might
have given a pe^ny to the Cynick, and a talent as he was a king. In these days
also many will forge excuses, why they restrain their liberality from the
distressed; but these excuses are not so soon allowed of God, as devised of
man. For let not the covetous person, that seldom or never gives to the poor,
say: I have but little, scarce enough for my self, and mine own family. Give
then after thy state; 2. Cor. 8.12. and 9.7.
and give wc a cheerful and single heart, and the Lord will respect thee; not
according to that you have not, but according to that thou have; if there be
first a willing mind: for God accepts a cheerful giver. Luke 21.2
He that has praised the widow, for casting of 2. mites into the tresury, has
also promised, Math. 10 42.
that if thou give but a cup of cold water in his name, you shall not leese thy
reward. He yt has noght else to give, let him power forth prayers and good
wishes for ye poor^ and distressed; Psalm. 41.1.2.3.
saying, The Lord deliver him in his trouble, the Lord keep him, and preserve
him, ^he Lord bless him, the Lord stre^gthen him upon the bed of his sorrow,
and comfort him in his sickness; and he shall be blessed, that so considers the
poor, says the man of God. So truly says an ancient Father, That the Alms
is not weighed, Chrysostom.
by the largenes of the things given, but by the liberal mind of the giver.
Aug. in Psalm. ^03.
And another says, If thou can give, then give; if thou can not, then use
corteous speeches: God rewards the inward willingness, where he finds not
outward ablenes: Naz. in Orat. de pauper. amandis.
let none say, I have not to give; for charity is not measu^ed by the purse.
And another says likewise; Give some small thing to him that wants; and yet it
shall not be small, to him that wants all things: nay, God will not account it
small, if thou give after thy power, account it for a gift; if thou give
comfortable words: si nihil habes, collachryma: if thou have nothing to bestow,
shed tears with him that is in misery. Amb in ep. ad Cor.
For, non solum quaeritur quantum. sed and de quanto, and quo animo detur. The
question is not only how much is given, but from what ability, and from what
mind it proceeded. Let not the covetous person, that seldom, or never gives
to the poor, say; before I give to another, I will first see, whether I shall
want my self or not. For remember, how the meal in the barrel, and the oil
in the crewse of the widow of Za^^ptha, 1. King. 17.
failed not; though she gave to Eliah, leaving not for her self and her son.
God has promised, That the liberal person shall have plenty; Prou. 1.25.
and he that waters, shall also have rain. And it was excellently said of the
second Tiberius the Emperor, when he was reproved for exhausting and spending
the treasury in Alms; That the Treasury should never want money, as long as
there were poor to receive alms, Let not covetousness, (which is the root of
all evil: 1. Tim. 6.10. Luke 12.15. Ephesians. 5.5.
and of which Christ bids us to take heed and to beware: because a man's life
stands not in riches: and which is Idolatry: for that the auaritious person
reposeth in his money the confidence due to God:) let not covetousness make us
to distrust the promise of God, or the providence of God: for he that has
provided our mot hers milk to nourish us, before we were borne: and he that
has clothed us, and provided necessaries for us, that came naked into the
world: will not he feed, and succor, and sustain us, when we walk in ye
obedience of his commandments? If we hear yt poor, the corn, Ho^.
2.1^.20.21.22.
and the wine and oil will hear us: and the earth will hear the corn and
fruits: and the heavens will hear the earth, and the Lord will hear the
heavens, and marry us unto himself for ever, in righteousness, and in
judgment, and in compassion, and in faithfulness. Let not the covetous person,
that seldom or nere gives to the poor, say; that he will not give to the
needy; because they are ignorant in religion, idle, unruly, theeuish,
unthankful, railers: and therefore that he will follow the counsel of the
son of Syrach, saying, Give unto such as fear God, Ecclu^s, 12.4.
and receive not a sinner: do well to him yt is lowly, but give not to the
ungodly: hold back thy bread, and give it not unto him, Verse. 3.
least he overcome thee thereby. Indeed these are the words of the son of
Syrach: but what says he in the same place? He cannot have good, that gives
10 Alms, and therefore he speaks co^paratiuely and respectively; not excluding
altogether the needy, (though lewd) from Alms; but showing the choice and
discretion in giving he bids us, when we will do good, to know to whom we do
it. For in liberality a regard is to be had both of the things and persons of
things, Gre^ in Epist.
that all be not given to one, but somewhat to every one; whereby we may do
good to the more; according to that of the Prophet, he has dispersed and
scattered here and there, and given to the poor: of persons, that we give
first to the good, and then to sinners unto who^ not wtstanding we are
prohibited to give, Non qui homine sed quia p^ccatores, not for ye they are
me^, Gal. 6.10.
but for that they are sinners. So S. Paul says, that pri^cipally we must do
good to the household of Faith, that is, to the godly: but immediately before
he had said, while we have time, let us do good to all men. Therefore there
must be wisdom, discretion, and choice in distributing our alms. Niceph. li.
14. ca. 14.
For though Atticus the Bishop of Constantinople, when he sent money to
Calliopius the Nicene Priest, to be distributed among the poor, did bid him in
bestowing the money, not to regard so much as religion in the poor, but only
to have an eye to this, that the needy might be sustained, and not to prefer
those that do live as Christians should live; yet he adds wtall, that they
should have most given to them, that did blush to beg, and not that did make a
trade and traffic to beg, Ad Olympiad.
for the filling of their bellies S. Chrysostom. also, prescribing a form of
giving Alms, says among other things, that Bountifulnes is to be measured by
the need of those ye crave. This is ye sum; Nazianz.
It is far better to do good to the unworthy for the sake of the worthy; then
not to do good to the worthy, for the sake of the unworthy. For what if ye
poor do not their duty? wilt yt therefore not do thy duty? Although in many
respects they are not worthy of alms, yet give them for Gods sake; for the
Commandments sake; for Christ's sake; for the declaration of the faith and
godliness. If yt can not give to them as they are faithful belieuers, and
people worthy of liberality yet give to them, as they are men and women created
of the same God, consisting of the same substance; drawing the same air:
attainted with the like passions and infirmities; subject to the same dissolution
and death; and due to the same earth, the general Mother of every mothers
son and daughter. Matt. 5.45.
Herein you shall imitate thy heavenly father, and be merciful, as he is
merciful; making his Sun to arise on the evil and the good and sending rain
on the just and unjust. The force of which reason is so pregna^t, yt if
compelled even a Pagan to say, that it is the part of liberality to give to
every one that asks, Sen. lib. de beneficijs.
and therein to imitate God. If thou do imitate God (says he) give also to
the unthankful. For the Sun arisetth upon the wicked; and the Seas are open to
Pirates, and God the good author of things, begins to bestow benefits upon them
that know it not, and holds on to bestow benefits upon the ungrateful: God
cease not to heap up his blessings, only with this intent, that he may do
good: let us therefore imitate him; and let us give, though many things be given
in vain. When thou have seriously considered the needy, and can find in
them nothing worthy of relief, yet call to mind, that though they are unworthy
of help yet they were created after the image of God, as thy self were: and
therefore weigh whether Lactantius speak not fitly, when he says; that if the
worshippers of the false Gods do adorn the senseles Images, Lib. 6. c. 13. de
vero cultu.
and bestow all their precious things on that which can neither use it, nor
render thanks for it; how much meeter and righter is it, to adorn the living
Images of the true God; which as they make use of it, and yield thanks; so
God, in whose fight we do good, will both allow^ of it, and also reward our
piety? It is to be wished, that when this objection is cast against the most
part of the poor, it might be answered with a single denial; that it is false
and slanderous. But he should be convinced by daily experience, that should
absolutely deny it. Wherefore as the rich have been exhorted, to be liberal to
the poor, so the needy are to be admonished, that they endeavor to be worthy
of liberality, and to be thankful for charity and devotion extended toward
them; and to pray for the happy state of their benefactors, and to carry
themselves soberly, and truly, and humbly, and contentedly in their state of
life: that so the graces and blessings of God may be multiplied upon all, both
rich and poor, in this life; and at last, we may be all inheritors of eternal
blessedness in Heaven, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PITTIFVLL PERSONS LEND TO the Lord.
Prou. 19.17. He that has mercy upon the poor, lends unto the Lord: and the
Lord will recompense him that which he has given.


THis golden Aphorism and sentence of Solomon, the wise king of Israel, is a
most pithie commendation of liberality toward the poor and needy; and
therewithal an effectual exhortation to embrace the same. In which speech two
things are presented to our consideration: the first is a description of mercy
to the poor; what it is: the second is the fruit and profitablenes thereof;
what it brings unto us. If any would know, what mercy to the poor is; he
hears it called here, A lending to the Lord: he that has mercy upon the
poor, lends unto the Lord. If any ask, what commodity redounds to the
merciful; he hears it here affirmed, that the merciful giver of Alms shall
be rewarded: The Lord will recompense him that which he has given. So that the
wise man mounts by degrees: alms on the poor is no leesing of our goods,
(says he;) but a giving: it is no giving away of our goods, never to have them
again; it is but only a lending of them: it is no hazardous lending of them
to a debtor, either beggarly, that cannot repaye; or careless, that will be
bankrupt; or deceitful, that will defraude his Creditor, or deny his due: but
it is a lending to the Lord of heaven and earth; who is both a faithful God,
and therefore will perform his promise made to the merciful; and an almighty
Lord, and therefore is able to recompense what is bestowed on the needy. As if
Solomon had thus spoken: Hoorde not up treasure in this world; neither fix
your hearts on the riches of the earth, which is the broken bag that cannot
hold. For if treasure be heaped up on earth, it is uncertain; it prouokes
envious eyes; it stirs up those of a man's own house, and that converse
familiarly with him, to endeavor to spoil him. But if you desire to have your
riches safely kept, why do you desire and seek men's help? The Lord is ready
to receive them, and to keep them, and to recompense them with large usury.

None can take them out of his hands; for he will keep you and your riches
safe: and when he has done it, he craves not a recompense for keeping, as men
do; but he himself will bestow a reward upon you. If you respect gain, and
wish that your coin may increase with great usury: behold rare and unheard of
gain, promised by him that cannot lie; namely, a large recompense from the
Lord of Lords.

Men do oftentimes lend great sums of money, upon hope of gain and
advantage; and they take but the word, or the band of a mortal man, whose
breath is in his nostrils: but you that give to the poor, lend not to men; nor
have not assurance from men, to be rep^ied, but you lend to the Lord, and you
have his word that abides for ever, and his obligation and hand writing for
repaiment. If some great Prince or Potentate should command a crier to
proclaim, that whosoever would lend him money, should in short space receive
again, not only the principal sum, and that interest which the law
tollerates, but far more, namely twice as much; nay, an 0. sold: there would be
none, when he should hear of this proclamation, that would not presently lend
to that Prince as much money as he had; and if he had none, that would not sell
away his possessions, and so procure money, that he might obtain that
extraordinary munificence and recompense of the Prince.

But if perhaps the Potentates promise and proclamation should not move some,
but that they would keep their moneys by them at home, and not lend them; they
must of necessity, either be justly censured of folly, in neglecting of such
great gain; or be convinced of distrustfulnes, in not yielding credit to so
royal promises. Wherefore (says Solomon) since God does not take away our
^iches, but preserve them and keep them for us, and does recompense them
again with large and ample usury; nay, does promise for temporal and
transitory wealth, eternal and never perishing; what excuse can those make,
or what pardon can those look for, that refuse to lend to the Lord, and that
regard not the most liberal recompense, which God bestows on them, that show
mercy and compassion upon the poor and miserable?

And this is the force and meaning of this proverb of Solomon; which of it
self is sufficient to stir up tractable and flexible minds, to perform the
works of mercy on the afflicted. But for that good things cannot be spoken
too often, nor dilated too plainly; and in this last age of the world, love
wareth cold, as it did before the destruction of Jerusalem, Matt 24.
according to the words of our Savior; it will not be impertinent to amplify
this Argument somewhat more.

For that which we find in the swellings and infirmities, that stick deeply
in our bodies, namely, that there must be long time, much labor, and
discretion used in applying remedies, that they may be removed, without
endangering the life: the same we may perceive in covetousness, and other vices
and diseases of the soul. For the greedy love of worldly things has taken
such root in the minds of many, that it cannot be cured by one or two
exhortations: but manifold admonition must be used; that at last by often
compassing with the armies of godly persuasions, and by loud blowing the
trumpets of severe threatening, and by bearing the Arc of the word of the Lord,
the strong holds and fortresses of covetousness may be battered and demolished,
like the walls of Ierico. Josh. 6. Plin. i. 32. c. 4.
Some write of the Narmensian field, that it is the drier for rain, and the
moister for drouth; and therefore Cicero iested thereupon, saying, that in that
place, Rain did cause dust, and sunshining dirt: so there is a generation of
people, that will bend contrary to the force of exhortation, and row against
ye stream of persuasion, and wax worse and worse for admonition. But though
dogs bite those, Matt. 7.6.
yt cast holy things unto them, and swine turn back and rent those, that
throw pearls before them: and though some stop the ear to the charmer, like
the deaf Adder, Psalm. 58.5.6.
that will not hear the Enchanters voice, charm he never so cunningly; Matt.
11.16.19.
and though some are those stubborn sinners, that will neither lament, when
they hear weeping; nor dance, when they hear piping; that is, that regard
neither the sharp manaces of the law, nor the sweet comforts of the Gospel:
yet wisdom is justified of all her children: and they that are endued with
the grace of Gods spirit, will hearken to the statutes and voice of the Lord,
and will say with the holy Prophet, when they are reproved; Heal us, o Lord,
Ier. 17.14 and 31.18.
and we shall be whole: save us, and we shall be saved: convert us, and we
shall be converted.

The form of Diogenes supplication when he begd, L^^r. l. 6.
was this: If thou have before this time given to any, give also to me; but if
thou never gave to any, begin now with me: whereby he meant, that he was in
the case of other beggars, and therefore desired, that he that gave to every
one, would also give to Diogenes: and that it was time for him that was so
niggish as to give to none, at length to begin to give somewhat. The same
supplication of beggars may be used in our age: and therefore, that we may
either learn at length to lend to the Lord, and amend our backwardnes, or else
persevere in liberality, and have the good work confirmed, which is already
begun in us: it shall be declared, first, why we (...) give to the poor:
secondly, to what poor (...) must give: thirdly, how, and after what manner we
must give.

First why we must give.
We must have compassion on the distressed, to declare, that we have love: and
who knows not, that every Christian must entertain love and charity? For if
the most excellent things are to be embraced, as they are indeed: what is more
excellent then love? They that speak with the tongues of men and Angels, 1.
Cor. 13.1.2.3.8.
and have not love; are as sounding brass, or a tinckling cymball: they that
have the gift of Prophecy, and know all secrets, and all knowledge; yea that
have all faith, so that they can remove mountains, and have not love, they
are nothing: they that feed the poor with all their goods, and give their
bodies, that they be burned, and have not love; it profits them nothing. When
prophesying shall be abolished, and tongues cease, and knowledge vanish away;
and when faith and hope shall be determined and ended; namely, when our souls
shall come to that blessed life; then love shall still remain: for love does
never fall away. Can there be any virtue comparable to love, that is the soul
and life of other virtues; and that suruiues and lives after other virtues do
cease and are abolished? He that has mercy on the poor, makes it manifest,
that he has love; and that he loves, 1. Ioh. 3.18.
not in word and tongue only, but in deed and truth. For to say, that we love
our brethren, and yet not to give to their necessities, is that cold charity,
which Saint James reprehends, Iam. 2.15.16.
when he says; If a brother, or a sister be naked, and destitute of daily
food; and one of you say unto them, depart in peace, warm your selves, and
fill your bellies: notwithstanding ye give the^ not those things which are
needful to the body; what helps it? This colorable love, is like faith
without works and a painted fire without warmth, and a counterfeit stream
without moistnes; and a tree full of leaves without any fruit. Therefore to
show, that we are not void of so rare and excellent a virtue, as love is; we
must have mercy on the poor. Again, we must show mercy on the poor, because
we have obtained mercy our selves; and because when we love the brethren, we
declare, that we love God. Who is there, that will not love God; who made us of
nothing: redeemed us, when we were utterly lost; preserves us daily, and
powers upon us his innumerable benefits? He that loves not, knows not God:
for God is love: 1. Io. 4.8.
says S. John. He uses a most forcible word; when he calls God love: it is far
more, then if he had said; God is merciful; God is kind and gracious; God is
gentle and favorable, God loves us infinitely. God (says he) is love it
self. If God then so loved us, ought not we to love him again? Every one will
here answer; I love God: yea but note what ye blessed Apost^e says; 1. Ioh
3.17.
Whosoever has this worlds good, and sees his brother have need, and
shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? 1.
Ioh. 4.20.
If any man say, I love God, and hate his brother, he is a liar: for how can he
that loleth not his broth^^ whom he has seen, love God, whom he has not
seen? By this shall all men know, that ye are my disciples, Ioh. 13.35.
if ye have love one to another: says our Savior Christ. Servants and
soldiers are known of what retinue and army they are, by their badge,
cognizance, and colors: love and compassion is the true badge and cognizance
of Christianity: therefore let us wear these cognizances and colors, that we
may be known to be the servants, and soldiers of our Master Christ Jesus.
Hom. 36. de elecnios.
As the sons of great and rich men do wear golden ouches and jewels about
their necks, (says S. Chrysostom) and do not put them off, but carry them
always about them, as tokens and testimonies of their descent and nobility:
so let us put on, and still carry about us the tender bowels of compassi^n and
mercy, showing our selves to be the sons of a merciful father, of whom we
have received unspeakable blessings: specially, since this our mercy will show,
that we love God, and dwell in God.

Again, we must have mercy on the poor, because we are members one of
another; and we that are many members severally, yet are but one body in Christ.

We see plainly, what an harmony, sympathy, and agreement there is in our
body: 1. Cor. 12.
For if one member suffer, all suffer with it; if one member be had in honor,
all the members rejoice with it. There is no division in the body: but God has
so tempered the body, that the parts should have the same care, one for
another. Verse. 14.15.16. etc.
The body is not one member, but many: If the foot would say, because I am not
the hand, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of ye body? If the ear
would say, because I am not the eye, I am not of the body; is it therefore not
of the body? If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? If the
whole were hearing, where were the smelling? But God has disposed the members
every one of them in the body, at his own pleasure: for if they were all one
member, where were the body? But now are there many members, yet but one body.
And the eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee: nor the head
again to the feet, I have no need of you. Even so, since Christians are all
members of one body in Christ, one depending upon the other, and one having an
interest in the other; let us weep with them that weep; and rejoice with them
that rejoice; let the learned instruct the ignorant; let the wi^^ give counsel
to those that want experience; let the healthy comfort the sick, let the
strong bear with the weak; and let them that abound, supply the want of those
that need.

Again, we must have mercy on the poor, because in releeuing the poor, we
relieve and succor Christ himself: who accounts that given to himself, that
is given to his afflicted members; and who will reward it plenteously, as given
to himself. If Christ should come unto our houses poor and naked, hungry and
thirsty, sick and harborles; who would not extend his devotion upon him? But
Christ sits at the right hand of God in heaven; and he has left the poor
among us unto the end of the world; and he sends them as his Bailiffes to take
up his rents and revenues of mercy; and if we deny it to them, we deny it to
Christ himself; and if we deliver it to them, they are a sufficient quittance
and discharge of themselves. Many refuse to pay rent to these poor Bailiffes,
and rather repel them for their needfulnes, and deride them for their
destortion, deformities, and diseases of body, then receive and entertain
them. But who made them distorted, deformed, and loathsome for their boyles and
infirmities? was it not the highest Ruler of heaven and earth, that has power
to inflict that punishment upon many, or all; that he inflicts upon any, or
some? He that mocketh the poor, Prou. 17.5. and 14.31.
reproacheth him that made him; but he that has mercy on the poor, honors
God, says Solomon. Howsoever some leath and contemn the poor; yet the
faithful poor are most precious and dear in the eyes of Christ. It is
written of Lawrence, that constant Martyr and worthy Deacon of the Church of
Rome, that when the Tyrant demanded the treasure of the Church, expecting
chalices, candlesticks, and other ornaments of gold; he gathered the poor of
the city, the lame, the maimed, the leapers, the attainted with manifold
maladies, that were relieved by the Alms of the Christians, and showed these
to the Tyrant, as the riches of the Church; but when the Tyrant disdainefully
frowned, and abhorred those silly people, Lawrence told him, that they were
the beauty, and wealth, and gains of Christ's church, and that though they
were ragged and unseemly now in the eyes of men, yet they should one day shine
in incomparable gloriousnes before the throne of God; and that they were not to
be detested for their outward infirmities of body, since the inward foulnes,
and diseases, and vices of him and other worldlings where far more odious and
loathsome. Pruden^. Peristeph. in Laurent.
Swelling pride (says he) is worse then the dropsy: pinching covetousness is
worse then the gowte, or crampe: filthy incontinencie and fornication, is worse
then dirtie fluttishnes: boiling ambition is worse then a burning fever: an
unbridled tongue is worse then an itching soar: malice and envy, is worse
then a putrified impostume: superstitious Idolatry is worse then the Kings
Evil.

Peccante nil est tetrius,
N^l^am leprosum aut putridum;
Cruda est cicatrix criminum,
Oletque vt antrum tartari:
There is nothing so foul, so leprous, so rotten, as a sinner; the scar that
remains after the wound of iniquity is never whole, but still fresh and raw,
and smells like the den and dungeon of Hell.

To leave Lawrence: mark what Christ says in the 25. of Matthew, and see,
whether he do not there most lively demonstrate and show, what he accounts of
the faithful poor, and what estimation he makes of Alms bestowed on them:
for there he says, Matt. 25.31. etc.
that when the son of man comes in his glory, and all the holy Angels with
him, then shall the he sit upon the throne of his glory: and before him shall
be gathered all nations, and he shall separate them one from another, as a
Shepherd separateth the sheep from the goats: and he shall set the sheep on
his right hand, and the goats on the left: Then shall the king say to the^ on
his right hand, Come ye blessed of my father: take the inheritance of the
kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world. For I was an
hungered, and ye gave me meat. I thirsted, and ye gave me drink; I was a
stranger, and ye took me in unto you: I was naked, and ye clothed me; I was
sick, and ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye came unto me. Then shall the
righteous answer him, saying, Lord when saw we thee an hungered, and fed thee?
or a thirst, and gave thee drink? and when saw we thee a stranger, and took
thee in unto us? or naked, and clothed thee? or when saw we thee sick, or in
prison, and came unto thee? And the king shall answer, and say unto them,
Verily I say unto you, in as much as ye have done it unto one of the least of
these my brethren, ye have done it to me. How terrible shall the day of
Judgment be, to those that are not persuaded that Christ shall be as well
their absoluer and acquitter, as their Judge and censurer? 2. Pet. 3.10.
For the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the which the
heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the elements shall melt heat, and ye
earth with the works that are therein shall be burnt up: and in that great,
and general, and Impartial Judgment, the book of all offenses shall be
laid open; the Grave Death, and Hell, shall yield forth all that are in them;
all corners shall be swept, and all plaites and wrinckles shall be unfolded; the
Sun shall be darkened and the Moon eclipsed, and the stars shall fall from
Heaven; Christ the Judge of quick and dead, shall take in hand the glittering
and two-edged Sword, being ready to throw the Thunderbolts of his fierce
wrath; and the unfaithful and ungodly shall be driven to such straites and
extremity, that they shall cry to the Hills, Fall on us: and to the
Mountain, ^ouer us: and to the Waters, Swallow us up. Happy are they that may
stand then boldly in that day: but that love their poor brethren, shall have
boldness and confidence in the day of Judgment: For as he is, so are we in
^his world, (says the Apostle; that is, 1. Ioh. 4.17.
GOD will not condemn those that are like himself; but the merciful in this
world are like to God: for God is merciful and gracious: and therefore the
merciful need not to fear the sentence of condemnation.

And we must mark, that CHRIST will say, Take the inheritance of the
Kingdom: For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat. He will not say, enherite
the kingdom of heaven because ye have prophesied in my Name, and cast out
devils in my Name: For many that shall say so in the last day, shall hear this
Answer; Mat. 7.23
I never knew you; Depart from me, ye that work iniquity: Neither shall
Christ say, enherite the Kingdom, because you have not covered your Neighbors
goods: because you have not committed fornication: because you have not defiled
your hands with blood: although the avoiding of these things be necessary for
Christians; for Fornicators, and murderers, and unclean persons, and covetous
persons, Gal. 6.21.
shall not possess the kingdom of God. Neither shall Christ say to Abel,
because thou have suffered for righteousness; to Noah, because thou have built
the Arc, for the worlds preservation; to Abraham, because thou have offered up
thy Son; to Moses, because thou have published the law; to Peter, because
thou wast Crucified; therefore inherit the Kingdom of heaven: But Christ
shall only say, enherite the Kingdom, because ye ministered to the poor
Saints in their necessities. Which words of our Savior, must not be so taken,
as if Alms, or any other of our works did merit eternal life.

Alms merit not, and why mention is made of works of mercy in the last
judgment
For the Scripture expressly teaches, that our Election is of grace; and if it
be of grace, it is no more of works; or else were grace, no more grace: but if
it be of works, it is no more grace: or else were work, no more work: Romans
1.5.^. and the scripture teaches, that we are saved by grace, through faith,
and not of our selves, it is the gift of God: Ephesians. 2.8. and the scripture
teaches, that Christ by his merit has sufficiently obtained for us eternal
life, in that he gave his life for the ransom of many: Matt. 20.28. and the
scripture teaches, that Christ being an high Priest of good things to come, by
a greater and a more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands; neither by the
blood of goats and calves, but his own blood entered once unto the holy
place, and obtained eternal redemption for us: for if the blood of bulls and of
goats, and the ashes of an heifer, sprinkling them that are unclean,
sanctifies as touching the purifying of the flesh; how much more shall the
blood of Christ? which through the eternal spirit offered himself without
fault to God, purge our consciences from dead works to serve the living God.
Heb. ^.11.12.13.14. This doctrine clearly taught in holy scrripture, utterly
excludes boasting on our part, in the matter of salvation.

For that any work of our may merit; first it is required, that it be
freely our own, and not due to him, to whom it is performed: but whatsoever
good we do, it is only some part of our duty, which we owe to God: Luke
17.10.
For when we have done all those things which are commanded us, we must say, we
are unprofitable Servants; we have done that which was our duty to do: To.
11.35.
And, who has given to the Lord first, and he shall be recompensed; Romans 8.12
and, we are debtors, not to live after the flesh, but after the spirit.

Next it is required, that our work, or gift that we offer, be profitable and
commodious to him, of whom we merit: but no action or work of ours, can
bring any commodity to the Lord: Psalm. 16.2
For the Prophet says; My well doing extends not to thee o Lord: And the
Temanite, Job. 22.^.3.
Jobs friend, says; May a man be profitable unto God, as he that is wise, may
be profitable to himself? Is it any thing unto the Almighty, that thou are
righteous? or is it profitable to him, that thou make thy ways upright? Or
what things wants God, that is in our power? Is it the beasts of the Forest?
Psa. 50.12
or the fowls on the Mountains? or the wild beasts of the field? If I be
hungry, I will not tell thee, says the Lord: for all the world is mine, and
all that therein is.

Thirdly, it is required, that the thing done, or offered by us, be equivalent
and answerable in price and dignity, to that which we re^iue again, and which
he (at whose hands ^e merit) rewards us withal: but no works ^ours are
cou^teruailable, and meet to be laid ^n the balance against Salvation and
eternal life, which we receive of God: For what proportion can there be
between our works and eternal life? Romans 8.18
which made the blessed Apostle to conclude and count, That the Afflictions of
this present time, are not worthy of the glory, Romans 6.23
which shall be showed unto us. So that our Alms and works of mercy can
merit nothing with God; Charisma.
and the eternal inheritance is the free gift of God.

And therefore, when the Scripture says, that God shall render to every man
according to his works; Psa. 62.13 Matthew. 16 27. To. 2.6. Revel. 22.12.
and that Christ shall pronounce the sentence of the last Judgment, after the
works of Mercy done, or not done, by the sheep and goats: The meaning is
not, that works are the causes that do merit salvation: but that the Elect
shall be rewarded according to their works: not as if they were the causes of
life and reward; but as they are undoubted effects, arguments, and
declarations, giving true testimony of the causes, both of the one and the
other. For the true and only causes of life and recompense, are the decree of
God from everlasting; and his calling of us to life, and justifying of us, at
the due time.

For in that Christ, when he calls the Elect, and sends them into possession of
eternal life, says unto them, Come ye blessed: These words show sufficiently
the cause of their sending into eternal life to be, for that they are blessed
with all spiritual blessings in Christ; and freed from the curse of the law;
Ephesians. 1.13 Gal. 3.14.
and heirs and sons of God by his free promise, and consequently call ed and
justified: For Adoption, and Calling, and Justification, are parts of that
blessedness, which in due season shall be revealed: And therefore whom Christ
first called (Blessed of his Father, Matt. 25.34.37.
) he calls after, Righteous: and he calls the kingdom of heaven an Inheritance.

Neither must we suppose, when Christ says, (For I was an hungered;) that he
yeeldes a reason of the blessedness of the Elect, that it does flow from their
Alms and works: but the reason is drawn from the effects, that demonstrate
the cause, and bear infallible record thereof: As though our Savior should
say thus: Go into Heaven; because ye are blessed, and ordained to the
Kingdom of heaven: For by your Alms and works of mercy; you have given
plain testimony; that you are blessed and prepared from everlasting to that
heavenly Kingdom. Why then say thou) does he pronounce the sentence in the
last doom, after works? because works are more perspicuous, and better known
unto us; as effects are better known, then the causes: For God will have all
things in the last judgment to be apparent and manifest to our senses; that
true and lively Faith may be discerned by her natural properties and true
fruits; least otherwise the mask and vizard of Faith, should be pretended in
steed of true and effectual Faith.

And Christ speaks only of the works of mercy, not to show the cause of
salvation; but to commend thsoe works unto us; and to excite and encourage us,
to perform and embrace them the more readily, in that our labor in the Lord,
and in the works of godliness, shall not be frustrate, or lost; and to show,
that the inheritance and possession of heaven pertaines only to the Sons of
God. For who so much prove themselves to be the sons of God and to be like
unto him, as the merciful do? Therefore Christ says, Be ye merciful, as
your Father also is merciful: And when he calls the Elect to the possession of
Heaven; he says, Luke 6.36
Come in herite the kingdom, as your own, and duly belonging unto you, by
right of inheritance: For the Sons of GOD, ought also to inherit the
Kingdom of God. Wherefore if we will have mercy, we must show mercy: Iam.
2.13
for there shall be condemnation merciles, to him that shows no mercy.

2. To whom we must give.
Next, we must impart our Alms, and works of mercy, upon all those that shall
stand in need of help. For we are commanded to love our Neighbor as our
selves: and who is our Neighbor? but he that may be succored and aided by
us, in his distress; of whatsoever state, sort, or condition he be. This
Christ proves, Luke 10.29.
by the example of him that fell among Thieves, and was wounded, and robbed,
and therefore was to be comforted by any that should find him in that
pitiful plight: Howbeit the Priest and the Leuite, that passed that way, did
disdainefully neglect to affoorde him relief, upon a false supposall, that he
was not joined to them by the band of Neighbor-hood; and only the Samaritane,
considering his lamentable case, did esteem him for his Brother and Neighbor;
and therefore executed on him the offices of kindness and Charity. Lib. 6. c. 11
For this cause, Lactantius justly calls the saying of Plautus detestable, when
he says, Male meretur, qui mendico dat, quod edat:
Nam and illud, quod dat, perit;
Et illi producit vitam ad miseriam:


That is, He does ill, that gives meat to a beggar, for that he gives is
lost; and he prolongs the miserable life of the beggar.

Indeed the covetous and Machiauillian miser is very ingenious to devise such
reasons, that he may pretend some colorable excuses, why he hardens his heart,
and turns his eyes, and refraines his hands from imparting out of his
superfluity, on the wants of the poor. But we ought not to devise such
causes, why we should withholde our bounty; rather we ought to regard the
commandment of our gracious God and Lord, who commands us, not to turn our
eyes from our own flesh, that is, from the poor; who are made of the some
substance of which our selves are. And therefore worthily also Lactantius
reprooues that speech of Cicero: Namely, Ibid. apud Lactant.
That we must often give of our goods unto men that need, if they be meet to
receive: and he checks it, saying, Quid personas eligis? quid membra inspicis?
pro homine tibi habendus est, quisquis precatur; ideo qui^ te hominem putat:
Why do thou choose persons? why do thou behold the parts of the body?
whosoever begges of thee, is to be accounted a man by thee, Li. 6. c. 12
because he accounts thee a man. And elsewhere he says, Vbicunque homo
desiderabitur, ibi exigi officium nostrum putabimus: Wheresoever the help of
man shall be needful, there let us think, that our duty is required.

For as he that does any work, considers in his mind the person of him, for
whose sake he does it; Chrysostom. in ca. 6. Mat.
So he that writes an Epistle, wherein he salutes his friend, as long as he
is writing, he sees in his thoughts the person of his friend, to whom he
endites the Epistle: So an Artificer that holds his work in his hand, always
thinks on him that committed the work unto him, that it may be finished
accordingly as he enjoined: in like manner, he that does Alms for Gods sake,
does respect the person of none in his heart, but of God, for whom he does it.

Chrysostom. ser. de poenit.
Consider how the Lord, when many daily blaspheme him, and commit Fornication,
and theft, and diverse enormities, yet he cease not to be Bountiful; but to
declare his mercy, he sendes on them his common Sunneshining, his common
Rain, his common fruits of the earth: so do thou also: and while there is
time of mercy, help the poor, feed the hungry, succor the afflicted, and
cast aside curious inquiry.

Hier. in Epist.
Whether the distressed be a Priest, or a Coosen, or of acquaintance; Nihil in
illo aliud consideres, nisi paupertatem: Take notice of nothing in him, saving
of his poverty: Give in simplicity to all that need; not respecting to
whom, but for whose sake thou give.

It was well answered of Aristotle, when he was blamed, for giving to a
miserable person, yet wicked; L^ert. lib. 6. cap. 1,
that he pitied not the manners, but the man; and that he gave not so much to
the Man, as to the nature of man.

Shall I, (will some say) maintain those that have lived wickedly? shall I be
liberal to those that show small godliues or religion? shall I not pass by
the unworthy?

Indeed the best are to be best relieved, and most succored; the faithful
and zealous are to be preferred before the irreligious and profane: They which
in their youth, have been honest, true, sober, and painful, if they fall into
penury and scarcity, they are to be better provided for, then those which
have been Loyterers, Drunkards, inciuill, and inordinate persons: as Saint
Jerome says well, In Epist. ad Paulin.
that We must have regard of Christ's substance, that we do not foolishly
waste it; that is, that we do not with inconsiderate judgment, give the
goods of the poor, least (as the wise man said,) Liberality be lost by
liberality. And we may deservedly say to the loytering and sturdy beggar, yt
is able, not willing to get his living, by his own pains and labor, Plutare.
in Lacon.
as that Lacedemonian said, when a certain beggar asked somewhat of him, If I
give thee ought (says he) thou will continue the longer a beggar; For he was
the c^use of this thy reproachful life, that first gave unto thee, and made
thee idle. But yet howsoever the poor fall into want, if they suffer want
indeed, none are to be neglected.

But for that the Objection of the unworthiness of the poor, and debarres many
from Liberality; Let us note the full Answer thereunto, uttered by the Golden
mouthed Father, in his second Homily of the beggar Lazarus: Chrysoct.
these are his words: If it be the worst person that lives and wants
necessary sustenance, let us supply his need. For so Christ commanded us to
do, saying, Do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which hurt you,
and persecute you; Matthew. 5.44.45.
that you may be the children of your Father that is in Heaven: For he makes
his Sun to arise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the just and
unjust. The merciful man is an Harborow for those that are in necessity: and
an harborow receives all that suffer shipwreck, and frees them from danger: be
they good, be they bad; be they of what sort soever that are in danger, it
receives them into it bosom. Eue^ so thou, when thou see on earth a man
fallen into the shipwreck of poverty, censure him not, enquire not after his
deeds, but ease his misery

Why do thou procure thy self more business then is needful? God has freed
thee from all this curiosity. What excuses and delays would many make, if God
had commanded us to search out the life and conversation of the poor, and then
to show mercy on them? But now God has eased us of all this care. Why then do
we pluck upon us unnecessary cares? It is one thing to be a Judge, another
thing to be a merciful man. When we give an Alms, though it be to the
unworthy: yet it is an alms. If we be curious about the unworthy, perchance
also the worthy may escape us: but if we give to unworthy, both the one and
the other will come to our hands. So it came to pass to blessed Abraham. Genesis
18.3. Heb. 13.2
For he not being inquisitiue touching those that came by, and to his house;
at length he lodged Angels also unawares. Let us follow Abraham, and Lot also
descended from the same stock; who so diligently imitated the munificencie of
his Ancestour Abraham that he says of himself, My door was open to every one
that came: it was not open to one, and shut to another, Job. 31.32
but it was open absolutely to every one that came. So let us do without
curious examining of the needy. It is ye poverty of a beggar that deserves an
alms; and whosoever brings this poverty unto us, let us respect no more. We
give not to the manners, but to the man; neither do we show compassion on any,
for his virtue, but for his misery: that our selves may obtain the mercy of
our Lord, and that our selves being unworthy, may receive kindness.

For if we will narrowly and precisely search and seek out the worthiness of
our fellow-seruants; Math. 7.1.1.
so will God also deal with us: for as we judge, so shall we be judged again,
says Christ. And thus far out of Chrysostom, to who^ we must give. Now as
Paul requires yt the rich be charged, that they be not proud, nor repose
assurance in wealth; 1. Tim. 6.17.18.19
but that they be liberal and abounding in good works, and willing to bestow
and co^municat; whereby they may lay up in store for themselves, a good
foundation, against ye time to come, and obtain everlasting life: so there is
a charge also to be delivered to ye poor. And what is it but this? That if
they will have the welthier sort to contribute to their necessities, they must
remove and take away one of the greatest stops and hindrances of liberality,
which is, their own unworthiness.

They must show their humility toward their benefactors, and return thanks
for relief; not craving alms as their inheritance and rents, and
expostulating and murmuring, if they cannot have their humors fed. They must
lay aside ignorance, and grow daily in the knowledge of God; first learning
the ground and fundame^tall points of Christianity themselves, and the^
bringing up their children and people in the Cathechisme and fear of the Lord.
They must resort diligently to the house of God, and pray for the good state of
the kingdom, and for the prosperity of those that succor them; and when they
come to the door to beg, they must pray for the happiness of that house; and if
they refuse to pray, or cannot pray, they are unworthy of an alms: Nay, it
were not amiss to wtdraw alms from those that are unwilling, or unable to
pray. They must be dilligent to apply themselves to the doing of that work and
labor, which they ca^ do, and educate their children in painfulnes and
industry, fleeing idleness, the true breeder of many beggars. And they must
forbear, and refrain their hands from picking, purloyning, and spoiling of
men's commodities; which because oftentimes they do without Conscience, good
manners, or fear of God, they harden the hearts, and tie the hands of many,
from bestowing their liberality upon them. If the poor shall thus reform
themselves, it is not to be doubted, but the Lord will move the Rich to be
compassionate toward them.

As for the manner, 3. How we must give.
how we must give our Alms: we must give with a sincere and good Conscience;
not with Hypocrisy, and ostentation to win praise of the world. So our
Savior teaches, when he says; Take heed that ye give not your alms before
men, to be seen of them, Matthew. 6.1.2.3.4.
or else ye shall have no reward of your Father, which is in heaven: therefore
when thou give thine Alms, thou shall not make a trumpet to be blown before
thee, as the Hypocrites do in Synagogues and in the streets, to be praised of
men; Verily I say unto you, they have their reward: but when thou do thine
alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand does, that thine alms
may be seen in secret; and thy father that sees in secret, he will reward thee
o^e^ly. In which words of our Savior, we are to note, that a good thing may be
done, and yet it may not be well done: and therefore that old saying is not
erroneous, that Aduerbs are b^tter the^ Verbs: Praestant Aduerbia Verbis.
that is, that God respects more, how a thing is done, the^ that it is done.
If the work be not commanded of God, but done upon the inue^tion of man's
fancy, and a supposed good intent, Isai. 1.12.
God will say, Who has required these things at your hands? If the work
proceed not from a sincere faith, to manifest it before men; (since Faith is as
the shekel of the Sanctuary by which every thing vowed and Consecrate to the
Lord was to be weighed); Leui. ^7.3
^ Romans 14.23. Heb. 1.6.
it will at last be found true, that Whatsoever is not of Fai h, is sin: and
that without Faith, it is not possible to please God. If the work be done, to
have a Name blown abroad with the trumpet of man's praise; and not to honor
and glorify God, but our selves; our Saviors censure is past upon it, as upon
the alms of the glorious Scribes, Pharisees, and Hypocrites; that when the
giuers and doers of such alms and works have the commendation of men, which
they hunted and sought after, they have their reward; and all the reward which
they shall have: for God is not pleased, nor appeased with such works.

And it seems, Noson echeis, chaireis didous. Epichar^
that the very Ethnic Philosopher had an eye to this abuse in giving, when he
said, That he that rejoices and braggeth in giving, has disease and a fault
in giving.

Besides this, we must give with a cheerful mind; not unwillingly, and
grudgingly. And to teach this, in old time they fained, that there were three
Graces, which signified liberality: and the one was named Agla^a, that is,
cleerenes; the second Euphrosine, that is, gladness; the third Thalia, that is,
pleasure: whereby was meant, that gifts must be bestowed, cheerfully,
joyfully, and pleasantly. The Philosopher writes therefore excellently, when he
says; Sen. de benefic.
That as it is a savage cruelty, to protract punishment; so the gift is the
more acceptable, that is quickly bestowed: and as in darts, there is one and
the same nature and force of the iron; but the ods is infinite, whether they be
flunge forcibly, or faintly; so there is difference in that is given; how it is
given; whether speedily, or sparingly. When one (says he) confers but little
upon me, yet it is to be esteemed; because he could do no more: but when one
gives much; yet with doubting, yet with delaying, yet with murmuring, yet with
pride, he conferd it upon his own ambition, and not upon me. Moreover, we must
give bountifully and liberally; not sparingly, and pinchingly; accounting all
that lost which we give; and all all that too much which we bestow. This let
us remember, 2. Cor. 9.6.7.
that he which sows sparingly, shall reap also sparingly; and he that sows
liberally, shall reap also liberally: as every man wishes, (and freely
determines) in his heart, so let him give; for God loves a cheerful giver.

If thou say, that thy ability is but small, and therefore thou can give but
little: give then after thy ability; if thou abound, give abundantly; if thou
have but little, bestow accordingly. Prou. 5.16.17.
For when Solomon says; Let thy fountains flow forth, and the rivers of
waters in the streets; but let them be thine, even thine only, and not the
strangers with thee: he means, that our inheritance, goods, and possessions
must be thriftily dispensed and disposed, for the necessary uses of us and
ours: yet for all that, that we must bou^teously help the needy, without
great and notable endamaging of our selves, and those that depend upon us. And
this moderation S. Paul commands to be kept in giving, when he says, That
other must not be eased, and we grieved; 2. Cor. 8.13.
but our abundance must supply the lack of others. And the truth of an alms
consists not, either in the party to whom we give; whether he be good, or
bad, so he be needy and miserable; nor the quantity of that is given; whether
it be much, or little; but it consists in our selves; namely, with what mind
we give. The rich may give much, and they of slender ability may give little;
and yet the gift of the rich may not be worthy of the name of an Alms; and the
gift of the meaner sort may be justly called an Alms. Matt. 10.42.
Whosoever shall give but a cup of cold water to drink, (and what is less?) to
a faithful poor person, in the name of Christ, and for Christ's sake, shall not
lose his reward. And who knows not Christ's verdict of the two mites of the
poor widow? Luke 21.1.2.3.4.
For when he saw the rich men cast their gifts into ye treasury, and a
certain poor widow also to cast in thither two mites; he said, Of a truth I
say unto you, that this poor widow has cast in more then they all: for they
all have of their superfluity cast into the offerings of God, but she of her
penury has cast in all the living that she had. Therefore it is not the
quantity of the gift; but the mind and the manner of the giving, that is
respected of the Lord.

But perhaps some will say, I have wife, children, and family my self: why
should I give? I know not what want I and mine may have: I have people of mine
own to maintain.

The rather for this cause thou must relieve the poor, that by a small portion
which thou give, nay lendest to the Lord, thou may provide his blessing
and favor for thy wife and family after thy departure. If thou will have care
for thy family and children; can thou do it better, then in leaving them
sure bonds and obligations of debt, not confirmed by the hands and seals of
mortal men, but by the undoubted promise of the king of kings and Lord of
Lords? The Apostle proves out of the Psalm, that he that sparseth abroad, and
gives to the poor, his benevolence shall remain for ever, and be
everlasting, and he shall never want to give to the poor: For God that finds
seed to the sower, 2. Cor. 9.9.
will minister likewise bread for food, and multiply the seed, and increase
the fruit of his benevolence.

And the same Apostle elsewhere wills us, not to be weary of well-doing; Gal.
6.9.
For that in due season we shall reap, if we faint not. In which places, he
compares the bestowing of alms and relief on the poor, to sowing and
sparsing of grain upon a fruitful soil. And S. Chrysostom says well; Semen
vocatur el^emosyna, quia res haec non tam sumptus est quam redditus; Alms is
called seed, because it is not so much a charge, as a revenue. Depaenis. 7.
ser.
If corn (says he) be shut up close in the house of the husbandman, it
increases not, but is consumed of vermin: but if it be sparsed on the ground,
it is not only kept safe, but also increased: so the wealth that is shut up in
chests, and kept vnderlocks and bars, soon flees from the owners but if it be
distributed in liberality to the afflicted, it remains not only surely kept,
but rises also to more increase.

He that hid^^^ is treasure upon earth, Chrysostom. hom. 9. in Matt.
and sends it not by liberality to heaven; does as if an husbandman should
take seed, and not sow it on fertile soil; but scatter it into the water;
where he can neither enjoy it, nor preserve it from corruption. Id. hom. 5. in
Matt.
For where seed is fitly sown, there follows multiplying of fruits.

And if thou find a fat and fruitful ground, thou will not only manure it, and
till it plenteously with thine own seed, but thou will also borrow seed of
other; and reckon it a great loss, if thou should be sparing in tillage
thereof: since then if thou be liberal to the poor, thou sowest on a field,
that will yield increase with manifold usury, linger not, nor procrastinate;
but understand this, That by sparing thou shall leese, and by sparsing thou
shall gather. When we sow our seed, we do not so much look upon the emptying
of our barnes, as hope for the fruitful harvest to come: and that also when we
are uncertain of the event; for the rust, and Caterpiller, and unseasonable
storms may frustrate our expectation. Shall we be so cheerful to commit our
seed to the ground; and shall we linger to commit our seed of alms into Gods
hands, and into the heavens; where no tempests, nor calamities can hurt it, and
where unspeakable fruit shall be gathered? For in sowing of grain, the
seedtime and harvest are of one nature; he that sowes wheat, or barlie, or any
other grain, shall at harvest reap the same sort of grain: but in sparsing
of the seed of alms, it is not so.

For we sparse silver, and we sparse bread, and we sparse clothes, and we
sparse other earthly things; but (if we sparse in faith, and with a willing
mind,) we reap mercy, and we reap a recompense, and we reap heaven, and
those incomprehensible blessings that transcend and exceed man's seeing,
hearing, and understanding.

Say not, that thou will take order on thy Testament, that somewhat shall be
bestowed on the succouring of the needy; and therefore that thou will bestow
little or nothing while thou live. For know thou, yt thy legacy shall
always be performed according to thy purpose? and may not many, that at this
present time stand in need, depart out of this world before thy Testament be
in force; and so thou leese the offered opportunity of doing good? and is not
thy gift after thy death, like a candle lighted at thy back, that cannot guide
thy feet in darkness? and have thou forgotten the counsel of the son of
Sirach? Ecclus. 14.12.13.14.15.16.
Defraud not thy self (says he) of the good day, and let not the portion of
the good desires ouerpasse thee: shall thou not leave thy travels unto another,
and thy labors for the dividing of the heritage? give, and take, and sanctify
thy soul; (work thou righteousness before thy death,) for in Hell there is no
meat to find.

Remember that death tarrieth not, and that the covenant of the grave is not
showed unto thee: do good unto thy friend before thou die, and according to
thine ability stretch out thine hand and give him Wherefore while thou have
space, be diligent in imparting thy knowledge in counsel upon the simple; thy
wishes on the desires of them that want; thy power on the helping of the
needy: Nosse inco^silijs, velle in desiderijs, posse insubsidijs
for these things thy neighbor must have, if he want them.

Thy life is a race to the goal of eternity; so run then, that thou may
obtain: and thou shall run the nimbler, if thou throw from thee upon the
distressed, somewhat of this worlds wealth that presses thee down so
waightily.

Chrysostom. hom. 5. de auar.
A Lion, or a Libard, (says an ancient Father,) or a Bear, or some other such
wild beast, while it is shut and pind up in the dark, it rages and fumeth
horribly: even so when riches are shut up and hid closely, they rage worse then
lions, and trouble all things. But if thou bring them out of darkness, and
sparse them on the bellies of the needy, where before they were savage beasts,
they will become sheep; where before they were rocks, they will become
harboroughs; where before they caused shipwreck, they will breed a calmenes.
For as in shipping, too heavy loding sinckes the vessel, but by a moderate
loding it has prosperous sailing: so if we fill our houses with too much and
unnecessary store, the invasion of an unexpected matter may drown the boat:
but if we lay up what is meet, and bestow the overplus on the poor, though a
vehement whirlewind blow upon us, yet we shall pass through the waves, and not
leese all.

Hoord not up then too much, least thou leese even that is necessary. And that
thou may accomplish these things the better, ponder earnestly that of the
wise son of Syrach; My son, Ecclus. 14.11. Aug. in enchir.
do good to thy self of that thou have.

As if he should say: He that will proceed aright in giving of alms, must
begin from himself, and bestow it first upon himself: for alms is the work
of mercy: and if mercy be fit for other, is it not for thee? If we must love
our neighbor, as our selves; we must first love our selves in the fear of the
Lord, and with godly and Christian charity, as we ought to do, and then
secondarily love our brethren by the same Rule. For charity begins from it
self: and none can so love his neighbor, as he ought to do, except he first
earnestly love himself, and wish well to himself. V^ ^en^^s (...) ^^e (...).
For that which the Philosopher spoke of the good man, may be much more rightly
spoken of the godly man, namely, that he is the greatest selfelouer; that is,
he loves himself most and first with the true love commanded and allowed of
God. Are we commanded then to love our enemies, and to pray for our enemies,
and to bless and do good to our enemies: and shall we not love our selves,
and seek to do good to our selves? Shall we take remorse on those that are
shut up in prison, and visit them? and shall we be regardles of our silly
soul, and cruel toward it; that is fettered by sin, like a captive in the
chains of this mortal body; and never visit it, and consider in what state
it is? Shall we feed the hungry, give drink to the thirsty, cloth the
naked? and shall we not labor to have our souls fed with the heavenly Manna
of Gods word; and refreshed with the sweet water of the fountain of life; and
apparelled with the robe of Christ's righteousness, by a lively faith, that it
may appear holy and unspotted in the sight of God?

Shall we comfort the distrefied with adversity, giving them kind speeches:
and shall we not speak kindly to our own ^^les; and rehearse and relaie unto
them the manifold and marvelous merceies of God? Shall we have more care of
our bodies, that they may be in health, quiet, and good liking? nay, shall we
have more care of the bodies of others, that they want not things requisite
for this life, which is so fading and fickle; then we have of our souls, that
were bought, not with silver, and gold, or corruptible things, but with the
inestimable price of Christ's blood, that immaculate lamb of God; that they may
be partakers of the eternal and unchangeable life?

Wherefore that we may give bountifully to those that want, and as we ought to
give; let us be first compassionate, charitable, and tender hearted toward our
own selves; and let us be careful, not to pollute that which the precious
blood of Christ has purified; and let us labor to govern our understanding,
and our will, and our desire, as we ought to do; and (because our frailty is
such, that we must needs fall often, while we live in this world,) let us
beseech our heavenly father, so to enlighten our understanding, and so to
subject our wills to his holy pleasure, and so to moderate our desires; that
we growing in grace, and in the knowledge of God, and his Christ our Redeemer,
may live godly and circumspectly in this world, waiting for the blessed hope of
eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A GHEST FOR THE SOVLE.
Col. 3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteously in all wisdom.


THe Gospel describing the perilous and slipperie state of ma^s life in this
world, proposes the parable of the unclean spirit, Matt. 12.43.44.45
which being cast out of his hold, after many consultations at last enters
into the same person out of whom he was expelled; if he find him empty and
idle. And we must diligently mark this. For whereas Adam by his fall brought
death into the world, and corrupted the whole nature of man, and thereby we are
prone and inclined to all evil and ungodliness: we are delivered from this
pollution and misery by our Savior Christ Jesus. Notwithstanding, Satan
retains his disposition, and we retain ours. For Satan seeks, and hunts,
and allures, and lays, counterwaits to devour us; and we are carele^^, and
negligent, and secure; and many times pull ^^to us occasions to do evil. And
what comes to p^p^? The last end is worse then the beginning: for to the Lord
is wont to punish our contempt, negligence, and unthankfulness. We see then
that it suffices not, to be once freed from the spiritual tyranny and
thraldom of Satan; but we must strive and endeavor, not to look back to
Sodom, and not to defile our garments, when they are washed in the blood of
the Lamb. It is God alone that does preserve us from fo doing; and therefore
we daily pray unto him, That he would not lead us into tentation. And albeit
it is God alone that does defend us from backsliding; yet he has also left us
a means and help of this defense and preservation, in which our selves may
exercise our selves. Of this S. Paul entreates in this passage, saying; Let the
word of Christ dwell in you plenteously in all wisdom. As though he should
thus say: the word of God is the breeder of faith in your hearts, and by faith
you apprehend Christ and his merits, and so consequently are saved; therefore
lay a sure and settled ground work in this word of God: for if you hear the
word and surely keep i^, it will cause you to grow from grace to grace, from
virtue to virtue, from good work ^o good work, till ye come to the full age
of perfect men in Christ.

This is large commendation of the word of God: The cer^en^^ (...) ^ui^^ (...)
of the (...) of God.
but (say some) we would willingly know, how we may be assured, that the
scripture has undoubtedly proceeded from God, and has been endited by the
holy Ghost: to the end we may give the more reverence unto it, and the rather
receive it. Let us then consider the implacable and ir^econciliable hatred of
Satan and the world, wherewith they pursue the doctrine of the scripture,
whereas they tolerate other doctrines, though never so absurd and impious: and
the utter downefal of the persecutors and haters thereof; (for not one of those
cruel Roman Emperors, that raised the ten first persecutions in the
primitive Church, escaped a miserable end:) and the inconquerable firmenes,
whereby the scripture has stood, and miraculously triumphed against so many
sleights of Satan and rags of the world; 1. M^^ ^ 59.60.
as when Antiochus commanded, That the books of the law which were found,
should be burnt in the fire, and cut in pieces; and that whosoever had a book
of the Testament found by him, or whosoever consented unto the law, should be
put to death; yet presently these books shined (as it were) out of darkness,
and not long after they were translated into the Greek tongue, and divulged
through the whole world: Let this be considered, and who may deny, that the
scripture has proceeded from God? 1. Cor. 2.4
Let us consider the venerable Majesty of the spirit of God, which shines
every where in the scripture, under a plain simplicity and humblenes of
words, together with an evident appearance of heavenly wisdom: and the
subject and matter of the scripture, which in every place contains divine
doctrine, not sauouring of earthly wisdom; and shows the pure and perfect
law of the Lord; Deuteronomy. 4.6.7.8. Psalm. 9.9.
and declares that means of salvation, which is not repugnant to the glory
and most perfect justice of God, but appears and calmeth man's conscience: and
the efficacy and powerful working of the scripture in the minds of men; Heb.
4.12. Psalm. 119.11. Act. 12.13.
namely, in man's conversion, when the scripture does unfold an hidden force,
whereby a man is stricken, and inwardly moved, and so transformed into a new
man; and in adversity, when it kindles a lively and strong consolation in our
hearts, as that we regard the scripture more then all other things, and suffer
our selves to be separated from it, by no kind of torments, no not by death it
self; as appears in the Martyrs, with whose blood it has been sealed: Let
this be considered, and who may deny that the Scripture has proceeded from
God?

Let us consider the consent of the whole Church generally, and of several
godly persons particularly, for so many Ages, and in so many Nations, in
receiving and retaining the scriptue: Let us consider so many and notable
miracles, 1. Kings. 17.12. 2. Kings. 4 13. and 17.21. Ex. 14.21 Josh. 3.15.6.
Josh. 10.12. 2. Kings. 10.11. Exo. 2.7.10. and ^.2 Act. 7.2^. etc. Am. 7.14.
Act. 2.11. and ^.^^.
as well of the Old Testament (which Satan could not imitate only in color;
as the raising of the dead: the dividing of the Sea and Rivers: and the
standing still, and going back of the Sun;) as of the New, which the Jews
themselves cannot deny; though at this day, they say, that Christ's Miracles
were done by some superstition of the word Schemhamph^ras, least they should be
compelled to acknowledge Jesus to be the Christ the Son of the Virgin Marie,
and so yield to the Truth: Let us consider the marvelous calling of Moses,
and the Prophets, and the Apostles; of whom the most part were unlearned and
private men, and such as had learned nothing in humane schools, and yet
disputed with a majesty of heavenly mysteries; and the strange conversion of
Paul into a new man, being before a professed, cruel, and bloody enemy; and
that these had no regard to their own estimation and profit, but only to the
glory of God and of Christ and to the salvation of men: Let us consider the
admirable harmony and consent of the doctrine of Moses, the Prophets; Christ,
the Evangelists, and Apostles; so that as when two Lutes of the same
proportion, are tempered and tuned alike, at the touching of the one, the other
will move the strings, by reason of the consent and Harmony; So the old and
new Testament, agreeing in the same tune, being written by the same spirit, if
the string of the one be touched, the string of the other will sound, that is,
if we understand the type and figure of the old Testament, we shall presently
perceive the truth of the new; and if we perceive the truth of the new, we
shall understand the type and figure of the old: Let this be considered, and
who may deny, that the script has proceeded from God? Let us consider the
Event and accomplishment of the prophecies of the Scripture; as of the Messiah,
the Savior of Mankind; Genesis 3.15
Of the going down of Abraham's posterity into Egypt, of the bondage of
Egypt, and the deliverance out of it, Genesis 15.^3.14 15 Act. 7.6.7 Genesis 49.8.
Isa. 45.22 I^ai. 22.1. Ezekiel. 1^ 6. 2. King. 22.4. Dan. 9.3.^. Mat. 24.^2 Ier
12.15 and 15.11.1^. Isa. 44.23 and 45.1.2 1. King. 13.2. 2. King. 23.15. Dan.
7.17 1 and 11.2. and 5.24.25.26.27
that should be, and was, four hundredth years after it was fore told to
Abraham; Of the Principality and Kingdom that should be erected in the Tribe
of Judah: Of the vocation of the Gentiles, after a long time, to the free
Covenant of God: O^ the destruction of Jerusalem; Of the return of the Jews
from the Babylonish captivity.

Of the works of Gyrus favor toward the Jews, described an hundredth and
seventy years before they were done; Of Josiah, the King of Judah, that
should kill the Idolatrous Priests, and ^urne men's bones on the Altar of
Bathel, three hundred years before Josiah was borne, and three hundredth fifty
nine years before it was bone.

Of the Four Monarchies, and their courses, and periods; Of Antichrist and his
doctrine; Of the end of the world, and the like; and of the coming and death
of Christ: All which could not before seen by the quicknes of man's wit, nor be
gathered by natural causes and yet were most surely performed: ^dde hereunto
the antiquity of ye Scripture which delivers those things, which no Books of
humanity, have truly and directly mentioned; As the Time and Order of the
worlds Creation: and the Progress of the world the names and families of the
Patriarks: and the causes of the Corruption of the World: and the state and
condition of souls after this life: Let all this be considered, and who may
deny, that the Scripture has proceeded from God? Besides this, the Jews
themselves do witness with one consent, that the books of the old Testament were
given by inspiration from God, and therefore they read and keep them
studiously; For which cause, one calls them, Librarios Christianorum: Aug.
the keepers of the Library of Christians, in that they have affoorded us the
reading of those sacred Books, the using of which themselves neglect: Yea, the
Jews do confess, Joseph. lib. 18. cap. 4. Antiq. Iud^c.
will they, nill they, that Jesus Christ was famous for Wisdom, and unheard of
Miracles, and was slain of the people, and rose again the third day.

But these reasons, and this testimony of the Jews to prove that God is the
author of the scripture, and that it proceeded from him; is nothing to that one
inward Testimony of the holy spirit, which does speak within, to our hearts;
and does assure us, that the scripture was written by divine inspiration; and
does seal it up in our hearts: Isa. 3 1. Matthew. 13.11. Luke 8.10. 1. Ioh.
^.^0.27.
For the Arm of the Lord in working ma^s Redemption, has not been revealed to
all; and every one understands not the secrets of the kingdom of Heaven; but
whosoever are led by Gods spirit, they easily acknowledge the force of the
spirit, speaking in the scripture, and they have an anointing from that Holy
one; and know all things; and they need not that any man teach them, but the
same true anointing, and not lying, teaches them of all things; and therefore
the Apostle says, 1. Cor 1.15.
That he that is spiritual, discerns all things.

This testimony of the spirit does chiefly confirm us, and does only
satisfy us, for the certainty of the Scripture, Ioh. 14.17
and is only known to the Elect; without which, the testimony of the Church
auailes nothing: For as God is only a meet witness of himself, in his word;
so his word can find no credit in our hearts, before it be sealed by the
inward witness of his holy spirit. And this is the Authenticke, irrefragable,
and undoubted Authority of that scripture, of which Paul speaks, when he
says; Let the words of Christ dwell in you plenteously, in all wisdom; that
is, Exercise your selves in the word of God, and put it in practice.

The Word of Christ, is the Doctrine of Christ, and the word of the Gospel,
and generally, the whole Canonical Scripture; The whole scripture is the word
of Christ, because it aims at him, as a book does aim at the Title.
which is able to instruct in true Religion, that is in Faith, and love; and
therewithal, to save our souls. And the word of the Apostle has a great
Emphasis and force; in that he says not, Let the word of Christ be in you:
but, Let the word of Christ dwell in you. And how? not sparingly, and
niggishly, and a little: but plenteously, richly, and abundantly.

His meaning is, that ye doctrine of the Gospel should be very familiar and
well known to the Faithful, and that it should be so far off from them to
be ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, Romans 1.1
which is the power of God unto salvation, to every one that believes: as that
on the contrary, 1. Pet. 3.15.
they should be ready always to give an answer, to every man that asks
them a reason of the hope that is in them, with meeknes and reverence.

And here we may gather, with what spirit they are led at this day, who do
strictly forbid the multitude and common sort from reading and perusing the
Scripture: crying out, that there is no greater pestilence to be taken heed
of, then the reading of the word of God by the common people. For questionles,
Paul speaks here to men and women of all states and conditions: and he would
have them, not only to take a slender and slight taste of Christ's word, but he
charge, that it should dwell in them; that is, that it should be rooted and
stablished in them; and in all plenteousnes: whereby they may daily profit and
proceed in the attainment of everlasting salvation.

But for that some have a preposterous desire of learning, abusing the word of
God, either to ambitiousnes, or vain curiosity; or deprauing the sincerity
thereof one way or other; therefore he ioynes immediately in all wisdom. As if
he had said: it is not enough to have the word of Christ among us, and to
handle it daily, unless we do it wisely, and reason and dispute of it
religiously and reverently.

For there are some profane and vnreuerent men, who handling the Scriptures
with unwashed hands, and talking of them with rash tongues, do speak grossly
of God, and things pertaining to God: and do carnally expound that which
co^taines some secret mystery. Therefore prudence, and discretion, and
sobriety is necessary, for him that will handle the word of God profitably,
and to edifying. For the Scripture does comprehe^d mere Oracles, and sets down
the holy and eternal will of God, and therefore it requires readers and
hearers, studious of holiness, and addiected to godliness: who with fervent
sighs and groanings, and zealous Prayers, conceived in the fear of the Lord,
Psalm. 111.10. Prou. 1.7.
must desire to be instructed from above. For the fear of the Lord is the
beginning of Wisdom, (says David:) and of Knowledge says Solomon,

And that this precept of the holy Apostle may be the better performed of us;
let us consider, first, how profitable and necessary the word of God is for
us: and secondly, after what sort, and with what heart we must hear it.

1. The profitablenes of the Word.
First, let us see the profitablenes and commodity of the word of God. If we
observe duly the titles that God has enstamped on his Word in holy Scripture,
we may easily perceive the inestimable commodity that redounds to us, by the
searching, reading, and hearing thereof. Deuteronomy. 8.3.
It is the spiritual Manna, that proceeds out of the mouth of God, and gives
life to men; represented by that food of Angels, and Bread sent from Heaven,
ready without labor; Wisd. 20.21.
which had abundance of all pleasures in it, and was meet for all tastes, and
served to the appetite of him that took it, and was meet to that that every
man would. It is the light, and the Truth, that leads us in this world, and
that gives direction to the people that walk in darkness; Psalm. 43.3. Isa 9 2.
Ex. 28.18.
and shines upon them that dwell in the Land of the shadow of death, expressed
by the bright Carbuncle that was set in Aarons breast plate. It is the pure
Wheat, in comparison whereof, the traditions and devises of men are but
chafe. Ier. 32.28
It is the nourishment and Bread of life, for want and scarcity of which, Am.
8.
there comes ye pining, staruing, and death of soul: in comparison whereof the
fantasies of men are but husks fit to nourish swine withal. Psalm 23.2. Ier.
36.25 Ier. 2.13. Ier. 32.24. Psalm. 119.30. Isa. 22. Psalm. 12.6. Matt. 13.43.44.
It is the pure water of salvation; in comparison whereof, men's inventions are
broken cesternes that can hold no water. It is the powerful fire, and the
hammer that breaks the rocks; and the word of truth, and the silver purified
and refined from the earth; in comparison whereof the doctrines of men are
dreams, and dross, and impuritie. It is the inualuable pearl and treasure,
which no earthly riches can counteruaile; and therefore to be sought and bought
of all them that will be provident Merchants for their souls health. Io. 6.68.
Isa. 59.5. 2. Tim. 2.17. Matt. 2.16.17. Luke 2.62. and 10.42. and 13.34.
It is the word breeding eternal life; whereas humane ordinances are but
Cockatrices eggs, and Spiders webbes, and fretting cankers. It is the new
garment, that must not be matched nor patched with old rags; and the new wine
that abhorres old bottels. It is the plough, that manureth the Church of God;
and the one thing necessary to salvation; and the nest into which Christ
gathers his chickens, and couers them under the wings of his merciful
promises; and the yoke, Matt. 11.29.
which every one must undergo, that will be the disciple of our Savior. It is
this word, 1. Pet. 1.23. Io. 15.5.
that regenerates and begets us anew with an incorruptible seed, and that
cleanses us from our pollution; and that (as a crystal mirror and looking
glass) not only shows us our spots, I^m. 1.23.25. Ier. 15.16. Io. ^5.4 Io.
15.7. Heb. 4.12.
but also affoords us water to cleanse and wash them away; and that replenisheth
the hearts of the faithful with unspeakable joy; and that ioynes us with
Christ inseparably; and that makes us obtain all things of God; and that is
lively, and mighty in operation, and sharper then any two edged sword, and
enters through, even unto the dividing asunder of the soul and the spirit,
and of the joints, and the marrowe, and is a discerner of the thoughts, and the
intents of the heart. The sum of all is this; the word of God teaches us the
knowledge of God; and the word of God is the food and nourishment of our
souls; and the word of God is the spiritual armor, to beat down our
invisible enemies; and the word of God will make us absolute, and entire; if we
receive it aright.

If this be true; then Gods word is most useful and behoofefull unto us; and
it is requisite, that it dwell plenteously in us.

But it is most true: for that Gods law does teach us the true service and
worship of God, the Psalmist does witness, when he says; Psalm. 19.7.8.9.
The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul; the testimony of the
Lord is sure, and gives wisdom unto the simple: the statutes of the Lord are
right, and rejoice the heart; the commandment of the Lord is pure, and gives
light unto the eyes: the fear of the Lord is clean, and endures for ever;
the judgments of the Lord are truth; they are righteous altogether. They that
are enclosed in a dark Labyrinth and intricate room of many turnings, hope in
vain to get forth without light: so being in endless windings of sin, error,
and ignorance of this life, we cannot escape out, without the light and
guidance of the word of God. And therefore Saint Peter calls it a sure word,
which if we follow, we shall never stray: we have (says he) a most sure word
of the Prophets, 2. Pet. 1.19.
to the which ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a
dark place.

As though he had said; we are compassed about with a night of wickedness and
infirmities, and we are tossed as in a sea of surging calamities; and therefore
as mariners direct their course by the North star; least they wander out of
the straight course, and fall among sands and rocks; so we must level and aim
all our thoughts, words, and actions, after the prescription and appointment of
Gods word. Origin makes an opprouable gradation: Homil. 3. in exodus
man (says he) that is reasonable, though he be void of skill and learning,
yet if he be compared with other creatures, that lack reason and speech, he
will seem eloquent. But if he be compared with learned and eloquent men,
replenished with all wisdom, he will seem vneloquent and dumb. But if a man
consider the holy scripture, and the divine wisdom contained therein, and
weigh with himself, how great and unsearchable that learning is: he will
confess himself to be more brute and dumb before God, then beasts are
before men. That is, as far as a man by natural wisdom exceedes a beast;
and as far as a man by Art and humane learning exceedes natural wisdom; so
far does the deep knowledge of the word of God surpass all humane Arts and
learning whatsoever.

That the word of God is the Mann^ and food of our souls, Saint Peter
shows, As newborn babes (says he) desire that sincere milk of the word,
2. Pet. 2.2.
that ye may grow thereby. Heb. 5.13.^4.
And likewise Saint Paul says; Every one that uses milk, is inexpert in the
word of righteousness: for he is a babe. But strong meat belongs to them that
are of age, which through long custom have their wits exercised, to discern
both good and evil.

Which speech an ancient Father seems thus to expound and amplify: Orig.
(...) 8. in Lieu.
not only (says he) unreasonable Creatures do know their proper and peculiar
meats: for the Lion uses one, and the Goat another, and the Ox another, and
the bird another, but in men also there are differences in the desire and
appetite of food.

He that has an able and strong body, receives hard meat, and presumes to
eat of any thing; and the Babe, though not able to speak, yet by proof
shows, that it desires but milk.

Thus every Creature is delighted with proper and competent meat. And so it
fares in the sustenance of the soul, which is the word of God, every one is
not nourished with the selfsame part of the word; one is nourished with
milk, that is, with plain and easy doctrine of moral exhortations, and
rudiments of Christianity; and another takes the profounder mysteries and
hidden secrets. How plentiful a storehouse then is the word of God, that has
fit food for every soul? Some will say; if the word be the food of our
soul, why is it then so dark in many places, as that the vulgar sort cannot
any way comprehend the sense, and the learned themselves strive for the true
interpretation? whereas food should be easy to be perceived, and easy to be
received. The answer is; that the scripture is clear for the fundamental
points of the doctrine of salvation; as the Articles of the faith, Psalm.
119.105.
and the commandments. And therefore it is called a lantern for those, whose
hearts the Lord does open; and it is said by Solomon; Pro. 8.9.
That all the words of God are plain to them that will understand, and
straight to them that will find knowledge. In these points, it is dark only
to them that perish: 2. Cor. 4.3 4
as the Apostle says. If the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost;
in whom the God of this world has blinded the minds, that is, of the
Infidels, that the glorious Gospel of Christ, which is the Image of God,
should not shine unto them. Howbeit also some things in the scriptures are not
manifest to the very elect: and why? partly, that they should not trust to
their own wit, but should pray to God for the understanding of them; partly,
that they should be stird up to a more diligent search and meditation on them;
partly, that they should the more esteem of the ministry, which is Gods
ordinance, for the explanation of the holy scriptures. For though the Ministers
of the word are our brethren, and men subject to the like passions as we are;
and therefore in that respect we may say to them, Physicians heal your selves:
yet they have a treasure in an earthen vessel; and to animate us the more to
embrace his will, 2. Cor. 4.7.
God speaks unto us by our own flesh and blood; and to declare his love and
favor toward base men, he exalts him to this dignity, to be a Trumpetter of
his pleasure. 1. Cor. 4.1.
Ministers are called disposers of the secrets of God; that we should give ear
unto them, as to them that are sent of Christ, for this end and purpose, that
we might receive (as it were) at their hands, the treasure of salvation, that
is drawn out of the secrets of God. They are called Ambassadors in the name of
Christ; because they have the word of reconciliation between God and us, and
are Ministers thereof, praying the faithful in Christ's steed, as if God did
pray in them, 2. Cor. 5.20. Ephesians. 4.11.
that they be reconciled to God. They are called Pastors and feeders of souls,
teachers and instructors of the ignorant; and planters of minds in the Garden
of Christianity; 1 Cor. 3.6. Reu. ^.20.
and waterers of hearts, with the showers of godly persuasions; and Angels,
that is, bringers and messengers of joyful tidings; and Stars, that hold
forth unto us the shining light and lamp of the Gospel; which shows unto us,
how we should pass the time of our abiding here; and discouers unto us the
will and pleasure of God, both what God will have us to do, and how he will be
wo^shipped of us; and also what he will do with us, and how he will save us.
1. Cor. 3.10.11.1^.
They are called builders, that must bui^d upon the foundation that is laid,
which is Jesus Christ, gold, silver, and precious stones, 1. Pet. 2.5.
that we should suffer our selves to be framed with the hammer of their
doctrine, as lively stones, and be made a spiritual hou^^ an holy Priesthood to
offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. They are called
the salt of the earth and light of the world; Matt. 5.13.14.
that we should suffer our corrupt lives to be seasoned and purged with the
salt of their wholesome words; and our steps to be ordered by the brightness of
their exhortations, that we may walk vnblamably and circumspectly in this
present world, that lies in wickedness. Ezekiel. 33.7 Act. ^0.28.
They are called watchmen and overseers, that we should hearken to their
warming, when they foretell of the counterwaites, and coming, and danger of
that old and subtle Serpent, that studies nothing, but for the destruction of
the souls of men.

Luk 10.2.
They are called laborers in the harvest, that we should remember, by their
doctrine to bring forth the fruit of good works, that may be gathered into
the Lords garner, and be everlastingly rewarded.

They are called fishers of men; Matt. 4.19. Luke 5.10.
that we should by their preaching of the glad tidings of salvation, be caught
in the net of eternal life.

They are called laborers together with God; that is, those that serve under
him, 1. Cor. 3.9.
for the gathering together of the elect; not as if they could do any thing of
their own strength, but by the grace of God, that makes them able; and all the
increase that proceeds from their labor, does so come from God, that no part
of the praise is to be attributed to the under servant.

Lastly, Obad. v. 21. Romans 11.14. 1. Cor. 9.22. 1. Tim. 4.16. Iam. 5.20. Isai
43.3. Act. 4.12.
the Ministers of the word are called Saviors, and are said to save others.
Yea but (will some say) is there contrariety in the scripture? It affirms,
that there is no Savior besides the Lord; and that there is none other name
under heaven, by which we must be saved, but the name of Jesus: What Savior
then is the Minister? The answer is: that there is no discord nor repugnancie
in the scripture: for God is the alone author and worker of our salvation; and
we are saved only by Christ's merits and passion; as touching the fountain
and original substance of our salvation; but the Minister is said to save his
hearers, inasmuch as he is an instrument, that by the doctrine and publishing
of the Gospel applies the salvation unto our souls. For there are diverse
steps and degrees of our salvation: we cannot have salvation, but we must be
reconciled to God; we cannot be reconciled to God, without Christ; we cannot
have Christ, without faith; we cannot have faith, without the preaching of the
word. Romans 10.14.15.17.
This is clear by that saying of the Apostle; How shall they call on him, in
whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him, of whom they
have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher? and how shall they
preach, except they be sent? Out of which he infers this conclusion; then faith
is by hearing; and hearing by the word of God. If then we have such help by
the Ministry, for the understanding of the mysteries of salvation, contained
in the scriptures; whosoever despise the preaching of the word of God, (which
in respect of us is the first step of salvation,) and contemn the preachers
and publishers thereof; do despise their own salvation, Chrysostom.
and the means whereby they may be partakers of it: seeing (per ipsos Christum
induimus; per ipsos dei filio coniungimur; per ipsos membra beati ipsius
capitis efficimur:) by the help of the Ministry, we do put on Christ; we
are conjoined to the son of God; we are made members of him, that is the
blessed head of the Church.

That the word of God is the spiritual furniture and Armor, that beats down
strong holds; and discomfites the Arch-enemie of our salvation, Satan; Ephesians.
6.12.14.15.16.17.
it is evident by Paul, who reckoning up the weapons that must defend us,
against principalities, against powers, against worldly governors, against the
Princes of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickednesses, which
are in the high places; as the girdle of verity, the breast plate of
righteousness, the leg harness of the Gospel of peace, the shield of faith,
the helmet of salvation; he names among the rest, the sword of the spirit,
which is the word of God. Saint Chrysostom doubts not to say; Ser. 3. de Lazaro.
that the very sight of the Bible chaseth and drives away the devil.

For (says he) even as where there is armor of proof laid up in an house;
though none use it yet it breeds security and safety to those that dwell in
that room; inasmuch as no robber, nor underminer of walls, nor any other
malefactor dares to assail that house, where such furniture is kept: even so,
wheresoever those heavenly books are, from thence all Satan's force is
expelled, and the inhabiters want no consolation: Heads the reason: (Quando
quidem ipse etiam librorum aspectu^, segniores nos reddit ad peccandum:)
forasmuch as the very sight of the Books, does withhold us from sinning. If
the very sight of the sacred Bible in our houses, will cause us to think thus,
I will not swear vainly; I will not blaspheme; I will not offend the divine
Majesty, this way, or that way; because yonder lies the holy Book of God,
which forbids sin, and threatens sinners, and shows the punishment of
ungodliness: If the very sight of the Bible do so much; how will the reading,
and perusing, and reverent meditating on the scriptures amend and reform our
manners? Lastly, that the word of God will make us absolute, Saint Paul
teaches, when he says to his scholar Timothy; 2. Tim. 3.15.^6.11.
that the holy scriptures were able to make him wise unto salvation, through
the faith which is in Christ Jesus: for the whole scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to convince, to correct, and to
instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may be absolute, being made
perfect unto all good works.

As if he had said, the scripture teaches the truth of the Christian faith;
and conuinceth erroneous doctrines; and rebukes vices; and instructs in all
godliness and holy conversation.

And, that more is; Rom 15.4.
(as the same Apostle affirms,) as the scriptures were written for our
learning; so they were written for to breed in us patience, and consolation,
and hope in all our afflictions. If the word of God be able to prepare us on
this wise, to every good work; who will not admire the fulness and sufficiency
thereof? He that would say, that the scripture contains not all things
necessary to salvation; but that some unwritten verities are to be believed
equally with the written word; such as were those things that Paul ordered when
he came to Corinth; 1. Cor. 11.34. 2. These. 2.15. 2. Io. 11. and 3. Io. 13.14.
Io. 21.25.
and the instructions and traditions that he uttered to the Thessalonians; and
those things which ye blessed Evangelist would not write with pen, ynke, and
paper, but speak mouth to mouth; and those other things which Jesus did, the
which if they should be written every one, the Evangelist supposes, that the
world could not contain the Books that should be written.

He that would object this, to procure authority to men's devises, must know,
that the things which Paul ordered among the Corinthians, were not fundamental
points of Christian doctrine; but such things as pertained to order and
decency; as place, time, form of prayers, and other such like; for which the
Apostle took order in congregations, according to the consideration of times,
places, and persons: and he must know, that the instructions and traditions
given to the Thessalonians, were nothing else but the selfsame doctrine which
formerly the Apostle had delivered unto them, either by word, or by letter: and
he must know, that the Evangelist means not any other Gospel, 1. Io. 1.1.
then that which he had before preached and written, even Jesus Christ ye
eternal life, which was from the beginning, which he had heard, and seen with
his eyes, and looked upon, and handled with his hands; but he means some
particular matters, that privately belo^ged to some special persons, and were
not tending to the edification of the whole Church: and he must know, that
though all things are not written, Io. 20.31.
that Jesus did, yet enough is written, that we might believe, that Jesus is
that Christ, that son of God, and that in believing we might have faith
through his name; and Christ's Church is built upon the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Ephesians. 2.20.
Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone; and no revelations, or
apparitions are to be expected, Luke 16.29. Heb. 1.1.
for we have Moses and the Prophets and must hear them; and albeit at sundry
times and in diverse manners God spoke in the old time to our fathers by the
Prophets; in these last days he has spoken to us by his son; that is,
although the former declaration of Gods will made by the Prophets was not full,
yet nothing must be added to this latter. For the sacred scriptures are the
touchstone, to try truth and falsehood; as Cyprian shows by an excellent
similitude; in which he likens ye scripture to a pipe or conduit of water. If
(says he) a conduit of water do suddenly fail, In epist ad Pompeiu^ co^tra
epist. Stephani.
which before ran copiously and abundantly; do we not presently go to the
head of the spring, that we may see, whether the veins increasing, the head be
dried up; or whether they running full from thence, it fail in the mid, or
mean way? And if we find, that the pipe be corrupted, or broken, we amend it,
that the current of water may run, as it formerly did. Even so must the
Ministers of God do: they must keep them fast by the co^mandeme^ts of God;
that if the truth reele or stagger in ought, we may return to the fountain of
the Lord, and the Gospel, and that which has been delivered by ye Apostles;
and that a reason of our doing may thence arise, from whence both the order and
original thereof proceeded. For if we have recourse to the welspring of Gods
ordinance, all error of man cease, and whatsoever is obscurely hidden under a
dark cloud, it is opened by the light of truth. Since then the word of God is
so useful and necessary for us, Chrysostom. ser. 3. de Laz
let us follow the custom of Smythes, Carpenters, and other such Artificers.

They have st^ll the tools and instruments of their science ready and fit;
and though dearth or poverty constrain them; yet they had rather do any
thing, then sell their tools, and so maintain themselves; and they had rather
pay use for money, then engage their instruments.

For why? they well know, that if they sell their tools, their art decaies,
and the foundation of their gain falls to ground: but while their tools are
left, and they apply their faculty, in process of time it may come to pass,
that they may pay their debt.

But if they do away their tools, before they pay their debt; what hope or
expectation is left? Of this mind must every Christian be. And as their
tools, are the hammer, and tongs, and anuile, and the like; so our instruments
are the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, and the whole scripture given by
inspiration of God.

As they finish the works which they take in hand, by their instruments and
tools; even so by these Books we frame our selves, and corrupt our lives, and
reform and renew our souls.

But herein is the ods: that the Artificer by his craft only ads a form and
shape, to that he works on; but he cannot change the substance and matter;
for he cannot turn silver into gold, or iron into copper; but he only alters
the outward shape and proportion of them: but a Christian may do otherwise,
and far more, by the working of the Spirit, that blesses the study of the
scriptures; (nam ligneum vas acceptum, poteris aliquando reddere aureum:) for
thereby thou may make that a golden vessel, which thou receiuedst a wooden
vessel.

Who will now call into question, the profit that the scripture brings to them
that love it, read it, hear it, and think upon it? And how brazen are his
brows, that dares to affirm, Bellar. tom. 1. l. 1. c. 16.
that the translation of the scripture into vulgar languages, is neither
necessary, nor much profitable, but ofttimes hurtful; and therefore the
reading of them is not to be permitted to any, but to such as shall be licensed
thereunto by their Ordinary? Ioh. 5.49.
If Christ commend and command the searching of the scriptures: if the Eunuch
of Cana^ce be never to be forgotten, Act. 8.28. Act. 16.11.
for busy perusing of the word of God: if the noble Beraeans did well, in
receiving the word with all readiness, and searching the scriptures daily,
whether those things were so: Act. 18.24.26.
if Apollos, Aquila and Priscill^ were diligent readers and expounders of the
things of the Lord: if he that spoke as he was inspired of God, Psalm. 1.2.
pronounce the man blessed, that meditates on Gods law day and night: they that
will debar men from reading and hearing of Gods word, must be contented to be
ranked in the number of those, on whom the man of God does cast a view, Isa.
5.20.
when he says; Woe unto them, that speak good of evil, and evil of good;
which put darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for
sweet, and sweet for sour.

Does not the wiseman show, how necessary the scripture, and the exposition
thereof is for the people, in that he writes, that where there is no vision,
Prou. 29.18.
(that is,) declaration of Gods word) the people decay? does not Christ show,
that the not knowing of the scriptures is the mother of error; Matt. 22.19.
when he says, that the Saduces believed not the Resurrection, and were wrapped
in ignorance, because they knew not the scriptures? Does not the holy Apostle
clearly beat down the maintenance of ignorance; 1. These. 5.20. 1. Tim. 4.13.
when he commands, not to despise prophecy, that is, the exposition of the
word of God? and when he charge the Minister, to apply reading, exhortation,
and doctrine? Does it not manifestly appear, that the scriptures were read of
Ezra to the people in their known tongue? Noh. 8.18. and 9.3. Luke 21.22.
and likewise of Christ himself? in that upon the reading and expounding of a
place of the Prophet, when Christ had said, this day is the scripture fulfilled
in your ears; they all bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious words,
which proceeded out of his mouth: and likewise of the Apostles, Act. 2.11. and
13.15.
who preached to the Greeks and other nations, not in the Hebrewe tongue, but
in the Greek tongue, and in that tongue that was understood of the hearers?
But that in old times the common people were commanded to read the
scriptures, and to read them in that tongue that they understood, Deuteronomy.
6.6.7.8.9.
it is most evident by that place, where it is said; Hear O Israel, these
words which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart; and thou shall
rehearse them continually unto thy children, and shall talk of them when thou
tarriest in thine house, and as thou walk by the way, and when thou lie
down, and when thou risest up; and thou shall bind them for a sign upon
thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes also thou shall
write them upon the posts of thine house, and upon thy gates.

Cor. Agrip de ^an. scient. Incapite Ieiunij.
One says, that is was decreed in the first Nicem Counsel, that no Christian
should want a Bible in his house. Augustine speaks thus to his people; Let it
not suffice, that you hear the scriptures read in the Church; but also in your
own houses, either read them your selves, or seek some to read them.
Chrysostom speaks thus to his hearers: In Joan. Hom. 9 (...) ^p^^ Co^os
I admonish and desire you, to get you Books: hear this all ye secular men:
get you Bibles, which are medicines for your souls. If you will have naught
else, get you even the new Testament, the Apostle, the Acts, that are
continual and diligent teachers. Origin speaks thus; In Isai. hom. 2.
Would God, that all of us would do that is written; Search the scriptures.
Jerome speaks thus of the company of women, that were conversant with Paul
at Bethleem; In epitaph. Paula.
It was lawful for none of them to be ignorant of the Psalms, and not to
learn somewhat every day out of the holy scriptures. Despir. sancto. c. 1.
Basil speaks thus; As much as humane nature can bear, we may be like to God:
and the likeness cannot be without knowledge: and this knowledge consists of
doctrine: and the beginning of doctrine is speech: and the parts of speech are
syllables and sounds. As if he had said; Except men know sounds and syllables,
they cannot perceive the speech: except men perce^ue the speech, they cannot
apprehend the doctrine: except men apprehend the doctrine, they cannot be like
to God.

Julian that most wicked Emperor objected to Christians, Cyrill contra Iuliad.
lib. 6. In fu^^^. Orat. ^e s^r. Gorg.
That their women were spiteful in the scriptures: and Nazianzen witnesses of
his sister Gorgonia, that she was excellently exercised in the old and new
Testament. If women, if the common people, if every fort were commanded to
read and search, and did read and search the scriptures; who are to be
exempted from this duty? If Moses wish, Number. 11.29. Psalm. 1.9.10. 1. These. 4.1.
that all the Lords people had knowledge, and could prophecy: if Paul wish to
all Gods people daily and large increase of knowledge: to call ignorance the
Mother of Devotion, is that heresy, that called Ignoarnce of the truth,
knowledge. I^en. l. 2. c. 19.
For Ignorance is the Mother of all errors: Council. Tol. 4. c. 24.
and not to know the scripture, is not to know Christ: Hier. distinct. 38. fi
iuxtra.
and they which know not those things which pertain to the Lord, are not
known of the Lord: Greg. in pastoral. l. 1. c. 1.
and it is the greatest torment and pain to the Devils, to see any to apply
the word of God, and studiously to seek out the knowledge of Gods law, and
the mysteries of the scripture: this is the flame and fire wherein they burn;
for they possess all those that lie in Ignorance: Orig. in Numb. hom. 27.
and as the body cannot live except it breath; so the soul cannot live, except
she know her Creator: for not to know God, is the death of the soul. Basil.
in exhor. ad Baptis. Iud. 16.
Wherefore they that will dominere over the Church of God, and keep the vulgar
sort in such awe, as to lead them whither they list; (as the Philistimes led
Sampson after their pleasure, when they had shaven his hair, and pulled out his
eyes, though otherwise he were strong and big: Ioh. 12.35.
) For he that walks in the dark, knows not whither he goes: and they that
will neither themselves teach the people, nor permit them to read the
scripture, that they may teach themselves: these must appropriate those places
to themselves; Matt. 23.13.
Woe unto them, that shut up the kingdom of Heaven before men, neither going
in themselves, nor suffering them that would enter, Deuteronomy. 27.18. Matt. 15.14.
to come in: And, cursed be he, that makes the blind to go out of the way:
And, If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch: And, where
there is like people, like Priest, Isai. 24.1.2.
the Lord makes the earth empty, and turns it vpside down, and scatters
abroad the inhabitants thereof: And, Isai. 30.10.11.12.13.14.
where there is a rebellious people, that will not hear the law of the Lord;
Which say unto the Seers, see not, and to the Prophets, prophecy not unto us
right things, but speak flattering things unto us; prophecy errors; depart
out of the way, go aside out of the path; cause the holy one of Israel, to
cease from us: Thus says the holy one of Israel, because you have cast off
this word, and trust in violence, and wickedness, and stay thereupon; therefore
this iniquity shall be to you as a breach that falls, or a swelling in a
high wall, whose breaking comes suddenly in a moment: And the breaking
thereof is like a potters pot, which is broken without pity, and in the
breaking thereof is not found a sheard to take fire out of the hearth, or to
take water out of the pit.

Secondly, let us see, 2. How the word must be heard.
how the word of God must be heard. When meat is conveyed into the stomach,
every member and part of the body receives his nourishment, and conuerts the
sustenance into his own nature: for example: that which the liver receives, is
turned all into blood; that which the gall receives, is turned all into
choler; that which the lungs receive, is turned all into fleame; and that
which the breasts receive, is turned all into milk: Chrysostom. hom. 38. in Matt.
So when the Ministers of the Church speak the word, all do receive it,
(vnusquisque autem conuertit illud secundum cor suum:) but every one does
convert it according to his own heart. So as one and the selfsame word in
good hearts proceeds to life, in perverse hearts it breeds anger, like
choler; in some it works love, like sweet milk; and in other some it
breeds hatred, like bitter gall.

Theodoritus de curatione infidelium Graecerum ser. 5.
It is commonly experimented, that it is the nature of the loade-stone, to
suffer any matter and substance to lie quiet, except iron: but to hale or draw
iron to it, and sometimes to pull it up aloft, and to cause it to hang there,
not stayed or propped by any thing, or bound above by any link or band, but
only by an hidden force and virtue not seen of man.

Even another such thing, every one that gives heed thereunto, may mark in
the preaching of the word of God. For the greatest part of people will incline
the ear unto it, yet only the faithful are delighted therewith and drawn
after it: when for all that, under them appears no comfort of worldly
felicity; neither is there seen any band by which they are tied from above;
but only it is by the operation and efficacy of Gods spirit, that secretly
frames the motions of our hearts.

Saint Augustine has a most excellent saying: (quicquid loquimur in Dei
nomine, In Psalm. 98.
quoni^m Dei est per nos loquentis, imber Dei est: vid^te vos, qualis terra
sitis:) whatsoever we speak in the name of God, because it is the word of God
that speaks by us, it is the shower of God: look you to it, what kind of
soil you are.

For when the rain falls on the earth, if it be good ground, it yeeldes good
fruit; if it be ill ground, it brings forth thorns; yet is the rain
comfortable, both on the fruits, and on the thorns. He that hears the word,
and becomes worse, and by watring brings forth thorns; let him not accuse
the rain, but look to be burnt. But he that is bettered thereby, and brings
forth good fruit out of his good ground, let him commend the rain, and assure
himself, that his fruit shall be laid up in the garner of heaven. And what is
all this, but that which our Savior plainly expresses by the seed, Matt. 13.
which being sown fell diuersely, some by the way side, some upon stony
ground, some among thorns, and some in good ground: the fowls devoured up
that which fell by the way side; that which fell on stony ground, withered
away for want of depth of earth; that which fell among thorns, was choked;
and that only fructified, which fell in good ground.

Out of which words, who is so simple, that he cannot gather, that the greater
part receive the word unprofitably? Some have open hearts, to lodge and harbor
all ill affections and desires, like the common way: some are wrapped and
tangled in worldly cares, as with thorns: some are soon ripe, soon rotten;
spring up quickly, and wither quickly; because they want deepenes of root;
like corn sown on stony ground. Therefore if the seed shall speed well, it
must be sown in good ground. And what is this good ground? The chiefest and
skilfullest manurer and husbander of the heart does show: Luke 8.15.
That which fell in good ground (says Christ,) are they, which with an honest
and good heart hear the word, and keep it, and bring forth fruit with
patience.

First then there must be an honest and good heart: honest in the outward show,
and good in the inward qualities and gifts; which not only seems such a one,
but is such a one indeed. The Poet says, Sincerum nisi vas, quodcunque
infundis acescet: If the vessel be not clean, whatsoever thou powrest into
it, it does leese his savor. If we put a drop of honey into a great vessel
full of vinegar; the honey is lost, and the vinegar still remains eagre. So
where a man lies in wickedness, preach the word unto him, the word is fruitles,
and his sin abides.

When a shower distills on a stone, Chrysostom.
the stone sweates without, but it is dry within; because the moisture cannot
piecce it. The worldly and unregenerate person is like the hard and dry stone;
only the sound of the word beats upon his carnal ears; but nothing
descends into his heart. Psalm. 25.14.
For the secrets of the Lord are with them that fear him; and he will not
admit the sinful soul into the mysteries contained in his holy word. If we
will have our hearing of the word to prosper, we must remove the curtain of
wickedness from our hearts; 2. Cor. 3.15.
else we shall hear without profit; as the Jews read the law, and
understand it not; because the veil is not taken from them. If we will be
rightly instructed and sanctified by hearing the word, and bring forth
acceptable fruit, we must break up the fallowe ground, Ier. 4.4
and not sow among thorns: for if the good seed fall among thornie sins,
that naturally sprout and spring up in us, they will choke all the good plants
of holy doctrine that are graffed in our hearts. If we will approach near to
God by hearing the word, we must not bring a profane and a wicked heart; Leu.
10.3.
as Nadab and ^bihu offered strange fire before the Lord; for God will be
honored in them that draw nigh unto him. If we will grow in grace by our
entrance into the Lords house; we must look to our feet, (how much more to
our hearts?) when we come thither; Matt. 22.11.
and we must not thrust into the marriage feast, not arraied in the marriage
robe; that is, we must not presume to hear the word of God, with a polluted,
unclean, and unsanctified heart.

An honest and virtuous heart rinsed and cleansed from the dregs of iniquity,
makes us cheerful, and forward, and desirous to hear the word of God. And as
hunger is the best saw for meat; so the desire of the word, is the best
motive and provocation to the hearing thereof; and where that desire is, there
the words of the Psalmist shall be heard; How sweet are thy promises unto my
mouth? Psalm 119.103.
yea more then honey unto my mouth. To be hungry for meat, declares good health
of body; so to long for the word of God, Hom. 2. in Isai.
argues good constitution of soul: says Saint Chrysostom. And why do many
get so little good by hearing? It is because the honest and good heart is not
in them, that brings forth the true desire of hearing. When Diogenes was
repelled of ^n^sth^nes, he put his head under his staff, and said; beat me,
Laer^. l. 6.
as long as thou will; for thou shall find no staff so hard, that may drive
me away from thee, as long as thou speak any thing that I may learn. If our
desire of divine wisdom, were answerable to Di^genes his desire of humane
wisdom, no labor, no pains, no business should pluck us back from hearing
of the word. But therefore do we neglect to hear, because we desire not to
hear; and therefore we desire not to hear, because we know not the true
benefit of hearing, and have not the good heart, that should excite us to
seek it out. For as the things which we behold a far off, are represented
bigger to our view, then they are indeed; and those things seem big which are
near unto us: so to a sinner that loves earthly things, all things pertaining
to God, because they are far from his eye, and the whole knowledge of divine
matters appears small and contemptible; and the joys and commodities only of
this world seem fairer and desirable, because they are near to his eye, from
this blindness and proposterous judgment, springs that difference between
corporal food set on the table, and spiritual food delivered in preaching.
For when we are invited to a banquet, we do not refu^e, as if we wanted not
meat: but when we are invited to hear the word, we oftentimes refuse, as if
we needed no preaching.

When we sit at table, we would gladly be served with the best meat, and care
not before whom the course meat be set: but in hearing the word, (as in the
reprehension of some vice, that chiefly makes for the souls health,) we
remove the best from us, and shift it off to other, saying, this touches him,
or him, not me. When we sit at table, we would be first: but when we shall
hear the word, we care not if we be last. When we sit at table scarce any
banquet seems too long: but when we hear the word, almost every sermon is
tedious.

Lastly, at table we eat often, and almost daily the same food, without
disdain: but in hearing the word, we can scarce hear one speech twice uttered
without loathing. And what is the cause of all this; but for that our stomachs
are queasie, and our appetites decayed toward heavenly things? Wherefore as
the blind Bartimaeus cast away his cloak, Mar. 10.^0.
when he should come to Christ, to receive his sight of body: so we must cast
off our rags of sin, when we come to the word, to receive knowledge and our
inward sight of mind. For the fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge;
Pro. 1.7.
Gods graces will not come to the heart, nor remain in the heart, that is not
cleansed from wickedness; if we will have Christ to teach us, Mar. 4.34.
as he expounded all things to his disciples apart, we must also go apart from
iniquity, and the love of the things of the world; and we must earnestly beg
that honest and good heart, of him that sees and rules all hearts, that our
souls being made undefiled Virgins, Reu. 14.3.
may sing the Virgins song, which none can learn, but such as sing it.

Next, we must hear, and keep, and retain the word in our hearts, that it
may dwell in us plenteously. He that puts bread, or any other meat into his
mouth; first chewes it, and then conuaies it into his stomach: so when we have
heard Gods word, we must meditate on that we have heard; and we must consider,
what was spoken, and how it was spoken, and to what purpose it was spoken.

There is much ado to keep the word, when it is heard; for the flesh and the
devil fight against the Spirit, that seeks by the preaching of the word to be
a new ghest in our souls. 2. King. 9.20.
But as Iehu was known by his furious marching: so an honest and good heart is
known by zeal and earnestnes, to finish a good purpose in hearing and keeping
Gods word, that it may dwell in us. And as Iaakob when he wrestled with the
Angel, said, I will not let thee go, Genesis 32.26.
except thou bless me: so a true Israelite will say, when he hears the word,
I will six it in my heart, and I will not let it depart, till it reform my
mind, and bring forth fruit.

Neither auailes it ought to hear the word, except the heart keep it, and
faith engraue it deeply in the soul. What did it profit Adam, Genesis 3.11.
to hear the commandment, to abstain from the tree of knowledge of good and
evil, when he neither believed, nor kept it? What did it profit Lo^s wife, to
hear that commandment; Genesis 19.17.
Escape for thy life, look not behind thee, neither tarry thou in all the
plain, escape into the mountain, lest thou be destroyed; when she
disobediently retained it not in her heart? Psalm. 95.7.8.9.
What did it profit the children of Israel, to hear the voice of the Lord;
when they kept it not; but hardened their hearts, and tempted God, and proved
him, though they had seen his work? For they that are thirsty, must draw
nigh to the waters, and must incline their ears, and must come to the Lord; if
they will have their souls to live, and will be partakers of Gods everlasting
covenant, even of the sure mercies of David: and then they shall see, Isai.
55.1.3.10.11.
that as the rain comes down, and the snow from heaven, and waters the
earth, and makes it to bring forth and bud, and returns not again thither
from whence it came: so the word of God, that goes out of his mouth, shall not
return void; but shall accomplish that which God will, and shall prosper in
the thing whereto it is sent.

What did it profit the hearers of the old Prophets, Ier. 6.8. and 7.24.25.26.
to have their ears beaten on with an external sound; when they would not be
instructed: and when they would not obey, nor incline their ears, nor walk in
the ways which God commanded; but went after the counsels and stubburnenes of
their wicked heart, and went backward and not forward; and hardened their
neck, and did worse then their fathers? Mar. 6.20.
What did it profit Herod, to hear John gladly, and to reverence him, and to
do many things by his preaching; when as he imprinted not the word in his
heart, nor kept it; Heb. 4.2.
and therefore it profited not, because it was not mixed with faith? What did
it profit Felix, to hear Paul of the faith in Christ; Act. 24.24.25.
and to tremble, when he heard him dispute of righteousness, and temperancie,
and of the judgment to come; when the word of God had no rooting in his heart,
and his affection thereunto was but as a sudden flash of lightning in ye
darkness, which comes quickly, and vanishes quickly? For as the blessed
Virgin, Luke 2.33.51.
not only marvelled at the things which were spoken of Jesus, but also kept
all those sayings in her heart: so when we hear the word of God, we must not
only receive it with outward cares, but we must give it access into the
closet of our hearts, and keep it, Iam. 1.21. Luke 10.23.24.
and graffe it there, if we will have it to save our souls. It is a step to
blessedness, to hear the Gospel preached; for blessed are our eyes, which see
that which many Prophets and Kings have desired to see, and have not seen: and
to hear those things, which we hear; and have not heard them: but he is
indeed blessed, not that hears the word only, Luke 14.35.
but that hears and keeps it. Therefore to teach, how profitable a thing it
is to hear the word and keep it; Christ makes it a mark and cognizance of
his elect, that when the name of God is declared unto them, Reu. 1.3. Ioh. 17.6.
they keep his word. And that we may learn, that it suffices not to hear,
except we hear and keep; both Christ, and the disciple whom he loved, Luke
9.44. Matt. 13.9. Reu. 2.7.11.17. and 13.9.
that in his last supper leaned on his breast, when they proposed things again
and again to be pondered, they required their words to be marked; and charged,
that he that has ears, should hear; that is, that ears and hearts should
join together in receiving and holding the word of God. For though the word be
still salt; yet when it is not well kept, Luke 14.35.
it becomes as salt that has lost his savor, and preserues not the soul from
putrefying in sin and wickedness, through want of faith in the receiver. Ezekiel.
3.1.
Ezekiel was commanded to eat the roll and book, that was showed unto him:
to teach us, that we shall hear Gods word in vain, unless we retain it, and
delight in it. For as meat that is received into the stomach, if it be
presently discharged out, it nourishes not the body, nor is turned into the
substance thereof: so the word does the soul no good, when it is heard only,
and not kept, and digested, and chewed, and converted unto the souls
nourishment. When a tree is planted, it can bear no fruit, if it be shaken and
overthrown with storms and winds: no more can the word bring forth fruit,
when it is planted in the heart, if it be not kept sure, but suffered to be
shaken with the wind of every tentation. Ioh. 4.14.
It is not enough to come to the well, but if we will never thirst, we must
drink of the water which Christ gives us. For as he says, I am come into my
garden, Cant. 5.1.
I gathered my mirre with my spice, I ate mine hony-combe with my honey, I
drank my wine with my milk: so he says also, O friends, drink and make you
merry, O well-beloved: that is, as Christ in his kingdom of grace, like a
delicious Paradise and garden, into which we enter by the preaching of the
word, has prepared a spiritual banquet; so he liberally inuites all men to
the participation thereof, which is obtained by holding fast and keeping of his
word and gospel.

Wherefore since it is not enough, to admire the food of our souls, and to
call it Man, Ex. 16.16.
that is, what is this? except we gather it as we ought, and keep it as we
ought, and eat it as we ought: Let us beseech God, the giver of every good and
perfect gift, to endue us with the honest and good heart, which hears the
word, and keeps it; that Gods word may evermore remain in us. 1. Cor. 3.7.
For neither is he yt planteth any thing, neither he yt waters, but God that
gives ye increase. Except the Lord build ye house, Psalm. 127.1.
they labor in vain that build it; except the Lord keep the city, the
keeper watches in vain. Therefore Austin and Gregory say agreeably
thereunto; Aug. tract. 3. in ep. Joan. Greg. l. 11. c 5. Mor. in Job.
(Omnia Eeclesiae magisteria forinsecus sonant, cathedram habet in caelo, qui
intus docet: Mutum est os omne quod loquitur, si Deus interius in cord non
clamet; qui etiam aspirat verba quae audiuntur:) that is, all the teaching of
the Church founds without; he that teaches within, has his seat in heaven:
Every mouth that speaks is dumb, unless God cry within in the heart; who also
gives life to the words which are heard.

The third property of the good hearer, is to bring forth fruit with
patience. The grain of wheat will being forth none other fruit, but fruit of
his own nature and sort: so the Gospel and word of Christ, when it is sown
on the good heart, that hears and keeps, will bring forth none other
thing, then that it teaches and delivers. Faith in Christ, amendment of
former life, knowledge of God, love to God and man, are preached and sown: and
where there is the honest and good heart, and these things are heard, kept, and
dwell; there these things spring, grow, and flourish.

God required the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 31.12.
to gather the people together, men, and women, and children, and the strangers
that were within their gates, that they might hear, and that they might
learn, and fear the Lord their God, and keep and observe all the words of
his law. Hearing, and learning, and fearing the Lord goes before; and then
keeping and observing the words of the law comes after. For God commanded
Moses, to teach his ordinances and laws to the people; Deuteronomy. 6.1.2.
that they might do them, and fear the Lord, and do all that was commanded.
Therefore when the Israelites would promise an absolute and entire worship of
God; Deuteronomy. 5.27.
they said, that they would hear all that the Lord God should say unto them,
Isa. 29.13.15.1^.
and do it. For they that come near to God with their mouth, and honor him
with their lips; but have their heart removed from him, and do not fear him
in their works; are cursed, though they seek deep to hide their counsel
from the Lord, and do their works in darkness, and say; Who sees us? and who
knows us? their turning of devises shall not be esteemed more then the
potters clay: for shall the work say of him that made it, He made me not? or
the thing formed, say of him that fashioned it, He had none understanding? That
is: for all their craft, they shall not be able to escape Gods hands; no more
then the clay that is in the potters hands has power to deliver it self. When
Christ gave commission to his Apostles to go and teach all nations, and to
baptize: Matt. 28.20.
he ads how they should teach the^; teaching them (says he) to observe all
things, whatsoever I have commanded you. Iam. ^.22. To. 1.13.
We must not only be hearers of the law, deceiving our selves; but also doers
of the law: for not the hearers of the law are righteous before God, but the
doers of the law shall be justified. We must not only profess good things;
but practice good things: for if we know what is good, Job. 13.17. Luke 12.47.
yet we are blessed, if we do it; and the servant that knows his masters
will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. We must be good
trees, that do not only bear leaves and blossoms; Luke 6.44.46.
but also bring forth good fruit in due season: otherwise Christ will say unto
us; Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things that I speak? We must
not deal with the scripture in performance, as ye Papists deal with it in
exposition, calling it a nose of wax; that is, we must not make it serve our
wills and affections; believing what is promised, but not doing what is
commanded. Idle boys sometimes strike fire out of ye f^int, not to kindle a
fire; but to see, how the sparkles fly out; praising and admiring sometimes
these, sometimes those sparkles; and putting no fuel or substance that may
fire a flame: so many hearers, more curious then Christian, bring their
understanding as a flint, to the preachers voice which is like the stryking
steel, only to hear how oratoriously and eloquently he speaks; and not
putting thereunto the fuel of their desire, that it may be kindled to virtue
and good works.

When they have heard many preachers, they will say; He is learned; another is
eloquent; this man is copious; that man is swift in utterance.

Therefore a Sermon to them is like a Musical song; wherein the voice of the
singer is commended; but the subject of the sonnet is not considered.

And it often falls out, that as when Music sounds by night in the streets, a
man may rise out of his bed, to hear it; but as soon as it is ended, he goes
to his bed again, and sleeps as erewhiles he did: so many worldly, covetous,
proud, and voluptuous persons, when the Sermon is heard; they profit nothing
thereby, but carry home the same minds which they brought forth, and lie down
again to sleep securely in the bed of iniquity.

But if we will have the word of Christ to dwell in us, and be profitable
hearers; we must hear with an honest and good heart; and we must hear, and
keep, and bring forth fruit.

And how must we bring forth fruit? with patience. For the chiefest fruit that
comes of the right receiving of the word of God, is the propagation thereof
unto others also; that being freed from Satan's tyranny, they may be made
citizens of Christ's kingdom. This cannot be done in the world without crosses,
adversities, and persecutions. Therefore we must have patience; for without
patience this principal fruit of the word cannot be yielded forth; 2. Tim.
2.12.
forasmuch as all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution.

This caused the Apostle to say, To. 2.7.
that the way to everlasting life, is patience in well doing: he says not,
well doing, and no more; but patience in well doing; because without patience
we can hardly do any good. 2. Cor. 6.4.
This caused him to reckon Patience, for the first virtue, that must always be
in a good Minister of the word; howsoever other virtues may not always be in
him, nor without exception, unless it be according to the affection of the mind.

This caused him to say, Heb. 10.36.
That we have need of patience, that after we have done the will of God, we
may receive ye promise. This caused Christ, when he had foretold many and
bitter calamities of ye professors of his name; to conclude the speech with
this; Luke 21.19.
By your patience possess your souls: as though he had said; when you are
pressed with miseries on every side, it will be hard for you to possess your
souls, except ye be valiant, courageous, and bear up manfully by patience:
for Virtue without patience is a Widow. Patience can turn reproaches into
joy, infirmities into glory, tribulations into gladness: for it made the
Apostles to go away joyfully, Act. 5.41.
for that they were counted worthy to suffer rebuke for the name of Christ: and
it caused Paul to take pleasure in his infirmities. 2. Cor. 12.10. Hab. 2.4.
Heb. 11.1. Romans ^.25.
Patience is the life of the righteous: for the righteous lives by his faith:
and faith is ye ground of things which are hoped for: and hope is propped up by
patience, for hoping for that we see not, we do with patience abide for it:
therefore the righteous live by their patience. Patience increases the reward
of weldoing: and therefore Chrysostom well weighing the force of Paul's words,
1. Cor. 3.^.
(where he says, Every man shall receive his wages according to his labor,)
writes on this sort: I will say a thing which may seem to exceed the opinion
of many, but it shall not exceed the truth. Although a man shall do some
worthy and courageous thing, In epist. ad Olymp.
and yet without labor and danger, he shall receive no great reward. For every
man shall receive his own wages, according to his labor; not according to the
greatness of the work, but according to the quality of the labor and
suffering. And he proves this by examples out of the scriptures. For Paul
glories not, 2. Cor. 12. Job. 1.1. and 27.6.
but in his infirmities and tribulations. Job before his calamities which he
suffered, was a just man and righteous, and that feared God, and of wonderful
godliness; for his heart reproved him not for his days past: But all this
Satan accused, and said, Does Job fear God for naught? Job. 1.9.10.
have not thou (O God) made an hedge about him, and about his house, and about
all that he has on every side? But when he had lost all that he had, and was
stricken with grievous boyles, and yet retained patience, Satan departed, and
could cauil and wrangle no more against him. Lastly (says he) Christ Our Lord
bare in his glorious body ye marks and scars of his wounds, and carried them
into heaven, for none other cause, but to teach us, that the work of his
passion far surpassed in dignity all his other works and miracles. For as
odours do disperse their sweet smell farther, when they are moved: so the
virtues of the godly being stirred by patience, yield forth a more acceptable
savor, both to God, and men. Therefore that Christ's word may dwell in us, we
must have an honest and good heart; and we must hear the word; and we must
hear and keep the word; and we must bring forth fruit with patience.

Wherefore since the word of God is so beneficial and profitable for us; and
must be heard after this manner: let us all beseech our heavenly father, that
we may be partakers of that inestimable commodity of the scriptures; and may
be right and worthy hearers, readers, and keepers thereof.

Art thou young? Let the word of Christ dwell in thee plenteously: for if a
child be taught in the trade of godliness, Pro. 22.6.
he will not depart from it, Psalm 119.9.
when he is old: And wherewith shall a young man redress his way? but in
taking heed thereto according to Gods word: and Timothy knowing the scriptures
from a child, 2. Tim. 3.15. 1. Tim. 4.6.
and being nourished up in the words of faith, and of good doctrine, did
continually follow it.

Art thou old? Let the word of Christ dwell in thee plenteously: for it will
teach thee, to repent for thy former sins; to bewail the vanities of the
world; to prepare for thy dissolution; to fix thy faith on Christ Jesus, who
has ordained a Mansion for thee in heaven; and therefore to say with old
Symeon, Lord, Luke 2.29.30.
now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word; for mine
eyes have seen thy salvation.

Art thou virtuous, and a lover of the word? Let the word of Christ dwell in
thee plenteously: let us be led forward to perfection: Heb. 6.1.
let us follow the direction of the scripture, till we come to heaven; Matt.
2.^.
as the wiseman traveled by the leading of the Star, till they came to
Christ.

The kingdom of God is compared to a grain of musterd seed; Matt. 13.31.
which at the first is the least of all seeds; but when it is sown, it
becomes first an herb; then the greatest of herbs; then a tree; then the
birds make nests in the branches thereof: so the godly must proceed from the
seed of godliness, to the herb of godliness; from the herb to the tree; from
the tree to branches, so great, that birds may make nests in them; that is,
their fruits and good works must be so manifest, that others may be brought to
the fear of the Lord by their president.

When Eliah was gone a days journey in the wilderness, and sat and slept under
a Juniper tree, Gods Angel called upon him, up, and eat: and when he slept
again, the Angel the second time called upon him, 1. King. 19.5.6.9.13.15.
up and eat, for thou have a great journey: and when he had traveled 40.
days, and was lodged in a cave, the Lord called upon him, what do thou here
Eliah? and when he was brought forth to the mount, the Lord said unto him,
What do thou here Eliah? go, and return by the wilderness unto Damascus,
and do thus, and thus. So when we are entered into the way of life, we must
up, and eat, and strengthen our selves, first with milk, then with stronger
meat; we must walk from virtue to virtue; we must remember, that we have a
great journey to go; we must always think, that every blessing of God
bestowed upon us, is a farther calling and provocation to godliness; and that we
hear a voice that calls us forward, thou have yet a greater journey to go,
what do thou here Eliah? Art thou vicious? yet labor and desire, that the
word of Christ may dwell in thee plenteously; and hearken attentively to the
word, and thou shall see the admirable efficacy thereof. If Polemon a drunken
and intemperate young man, when he rushed with his accomplices into Xeno^rates
school, Laert. lib. 4.
after a contemptuous sort; were so altered by the Oration of the Philosopher,
that afterward he embraced sobriety: much more can the doctrine of Christ
dutifully and heedefully heard, move a sinner to renounce wickedness.

When the chief Priests and Pharisees had sent messengers to take Jesus, as he
was preaching to the people; the messengers tar^ying till he had ended his
sayings, (not with a purpose to learn, but to entrap him in his words,) were
so pricked in heart and changed, that they returned without doing their
message; and being asked, why they had not brought Jesus; Ioh. 7.46. Confess.
l. 5. c. 13. and. 14.
they aunswerad, never man spoke like this man. Saint Austen reports of
himself, that being yet polluted with the error of the Manichet, hearing
Ambrose preaching, not with an intent to believe his doctrine, but with a
purpose to mark his eloquence; though he contemned the matter, and was
delighted with the words only; yet with the words which he loved, there came
to his mind also the things which he neglected; and when he opened his heart,
to consider (quam diserte diceret, pariter intrabat and quam vere diceret,) how
eloqently he spoke, it entered also into his mind, how truly he spoke.
Therefore since the hearkening to the word brings such profit; though it show
thy vanities, and spots, and faults, and imperfections; yet despise it not, nor
throw it away from thee; as the Ape when he beholds his deformity in the
glass, does throw it from him, and seeks by all means to break it. But
rather, as when thou art trimmed of the Barber, thou look on the glass, to
see, whether thou a^t well trimmed or not: so when thou go from hearing the
word, consider, whether thou be made better, or worse, by the hearing. Art thou
learned? Let the word of Christ dwell in thee plenteously; and despise not the
preaching and exposition thereof. Though thou know much, yet thou may be
confirmed in knowledge: though thou read privately with devotion; yet that
which moved thee not then, nor seemed worthy to be observed, when another
vtters it, may work on thy soul: 2. Sam. 12.1.
though David were a singular Prophet; yet Nathan roused him out of his
security: though Pharaoh remembered his dream; yet Joseph made the
interpretation thereof clear unto him. Genesis 41.17.
Art thou unlearned? pray that the word of Christ may dwell in thee
plenteously; and love it earnestly, and meditate thereupon continually; and
then thou shall say with the Prophet; Psalm. 119.98.99.100.
by thy commandments (O Lord) thou have made me wiser then mine enemies; Psalm.
119.98.99.100.
for they are ever with me; I have had more understanding then all my teachers:
for thy testimonies are my meditation: I understood more then the Ancient;
because I kept thy precepts. For true it is, Ean es philomathes, ese
polumathes. Isocrat.
yt the Athenian Orator wrote over his school door in golden letters; If
thou love learning, thou shall attain to much learning. Art thou poor, or
rich? Art thou a father, or a child? Art thou a Master, or a servant? Art thou
a Magistrate, or a private person? Of what rank, or condition soever thou art:
Let the word of Christ dwell in thee plenteously. For if thou be tempted to
sin, it will call to thy mind, what is written, and what thou have read: if
thou doubt, what is to be done by thy self, or other; it will direct thee in
the right way: if thou would reprove vice, it will teach thee the will of
the Lord: if thou would confirm truth, or confute error, or comfort the
afflicted; there thou shall be satisfied, and learn the whole duty of man.

Wherefore since they that are of God, Ioh. 8.47. 1. Io. 4.6.
hear Gods words; and they that despise it, are not his children: let us show
our selves Gods children by hearing his word: let us remove from us the love
of the world, that does commonly hinder it: let us shun pleasures and cares,
that do choke it: let us hear it with an honest and good heart, and a purged
mind, and a sincere faith, and a prompt will, and an humble and reverent fear
of the Lord, and daily and diligent prayers and supplications for the true
understanding thereof: let us keep it by continual meditation, and obedience,
and watchfulnes, and profession, and practice: that so lodging the word of God
as an heavenly guest in our soul, and suffering it to dwell therein plenteously
in all wisdom in this life; in the life to come, we may dwell eternally with
that word, Ioh. 1.1.4.
which is God, and which is life; and may sit down with Abraham, Isaak, and
Jacob in his heavenly kingdom. Amen.

THE HVMBLE CENTVRION.
Matt. 8.8. But the Centurion answered, saying, Master, I am not worthy, that
thou should come under my roof: but speak the word only, and my servant
shall be healed.


THis is the answer of the Centurion to Christ, when he had desired him, to
heal his servant that was grievously pained with the palsy, and when Christ had
said, that he would come and heal him. As if the Centurion had thus answered:
Master, I believe, that thou art the Messiah, and Savior of believers; I
believe, that thou art the only son of God; I believe, that thou art
omnipotent, and able with a word to call and remove sicknesses and diseases
from ma^s body. Eue^ as I have my soldiers at command, and when I say to one,
go, he goes; and to another, come, he comes; and to my servant, do this, he
does it: so if thou bid sickness enter on a man, it enters; if thou bid sickness
depart from a man, it departs; if thou bid sickness return to a man, it
returns; if thou bid sickness kill a man, it kills him; if thou bid sickness not
to touch a man, it touches him not.

Since then I know thy Majesty, authority, and power, I suppose it needles
to entreat thee to come to my house, as if in thine absence thou could not
heal my servant; or as if thou were like other Physicians, that must behold
the sick patient, and consider of many circumstances, that are to be weighed
in applying of medicines: but it shall be sufficient, if thou speak the word
only. And what should I expect thy coming to mine house, seeing I am a
sinner, and altogether unworthy that thou should enter under my roof? It is
doubtful, which was greater, and more to be admired; whether the Centurions
faith, or the Centurions humility. His faith is highly extolled by Christ
himself, Verse. 10.
when he said, Verily I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, even in
Israel. As if our Savior had said; In Israel there are that do embrace my
doctrine; and stick to me; and follow me; and acknowledge, that I am the
lamb of God, that takes away the sin of the world: but these have been
always brought up in religion; and have continually heard the prophecies ^ead,
that testify of my coming in the flesh: this Centurion is a stranger borne,
and a Gentile, naturally void of ye knowledge of the laws written by Moses
and therefore forasmuch as he makes so excellent a profession of my power and
worthiness, I am constrained to marvel, and I must needs say, that I have not
found so great faith even in Israel Christ has so fully and plenteously
commended the Centurions faith, that it needs no farther explanation, or
amplification; unless we should be exhorted to the imitation of it namely, that
in all our dangers, troubles, crosses, and afflictions, we rely wholly on the
mercy of our only Savior, not distrusting, but that he can and will at an
instant and in a moment succor us, if he speak the word only, and see, that
it shall redound to Gods glory, and to our salvation. Let us then see, what
edification we may retain by the Centurions humility; when he says, Master,
I am not worthy, that thou should come under my roof.

If this were the same Centurion that S. Luke writes, Luke 7.2.4.7.
of (as some very learned men have thought, though there seem some difference
in the narration;) doubtless he was a Nobleman, and appointed by the Romans a
Governor and a president of Capernaum, the chief city of Galile; who so much
loved the Jewish nation, that he built a Synagogue for them; and therefore the
Elders of the Jews were intercessors to Christ for him, saying, that he was
worthy, that he should do this for him. Yet this Centurion respecting neither
the Noblenes of his birth; nor the worthiness of his place; nor his deserts
toward Christ's nation; nor the love and favor of the Jews, in which he
lived, reputes himself altogether unworthy, not only of the benefit which he
desired for his servant, but even of the sight of Christ: Wherefore (says he)
I thought not my self worthy to come to thee. This most profound humility of
an Ethnic, is worthy of great observation. And in like sort godly men have
always humbly thought, and spoken of themselves. Iaacob praying, that he might
be delivered from the hand of his bloody brother Esau, set up this
supplication to the Lord; O God, Genesis 31.9.10.
I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and all the truth, which thou
have showed unto thy servant. This was the humility of Iaakob. Job a just and
upright man, that feared God, and eschewed evil, Job. 1.1.
confesses, that all man's reasons cannot stand up in disputation with God, but
that the most mighty helps do stoop unto him; Job. 9.14.15.
How much less (says he) shall I answer him? or how should I find out my
words with him? for though I were just, yet could I not answer, but I would
make supplication to my Judge. And when he had seen with the eye, having
before only heard of God by hearing of the ear, he could not keep in this
protestation; Therefore I abhor my self, Job. 42.6.
and repent in dust and ashes. This was the humility of Job. Joseph, when he
was brought to Pharaoh to interpret his dream, which none of the Southsayers
or wisemen of Egypt were able to interpret; when Pharaoh had said unto him, I
have dreamed a dream, Genesis 41.15.16.
and no man can interpret it, and I have heard say of thee, that when thou
hear a dream, thou can interpret it: Joseph answered submissely, without
me, God shall answer for the life of Pharaoh: that is, if I can expound thy
dream, it comes of God; of my self I can do nothing. This was the
humility of Joseph. Wise Daniel in the like case, when Nebuchadnezar the
Bbaylonian Monarke had said unto him; Art thou able to show me the dream, Dan.
2.26 27.28.
which I have seen, and ye interpretation thereof? he answered with all
lowlines, The secret which the king has demanded, can neither the wise, the
Astrologians, the Incha^ters, nor the Southsayers declare unto the king; but
there is a God in Heaven that reuealeth secrets, and shows the king
Nebuchadnezzar what shall be in the latter days This was the humility of
Daniel, David, when from the sheepfold he was advanced to the crown and
scepter, and from the dust to the royal throne of Israel, he was so far off
from waxing proud in conceit for his extraordinary dignity, that he burst out
into these speeches; 2. Sam. 7.18.
Who am I o Lord God, and what is my house, that thou have brought me hitherto?
This was the humility of David. Peter and John having given perfect
constitution and disposition of body to the Cripple, when the people ran
amazed into Salomons porch, to wonder at them, Act. 3.1^.16.
Peter answered to the people; Ye men of Israel why marvel ye at this? or why
look ye so steadfastly on us, as though by our own power or godliness, which
had made this man go? The name of Jesus Christ has made this man sound; and
the faith which is by him, has given to him this perfect health of his whole
body This was the humility of Peter and John. And when Peter saw the great
multitude of fishes that was enclosed, he fell down on his knees, saying to
Christ; Lord, Luke. 5.8.
go from me; for I am a sinful man. This was again the humility of Peter.
When Paul had healed the Cripple at Lystra; and the people lifted up their
voices, and said, Gods are come down to us in the likeness of men; Act.
14.11.14.15.
and would have sacrificed unto him and Barnabas; the Apostles rent their
clothes, and with all earnestnes refrained the people from such ungodliness;
saying, O men, why do ye these things? we are even men subject to the like
passions that ye be This was the humility of Paul and Barnabas. 1. Cor.
15.8.9. 2. Cor. 12.11. Ephesians. 3.8. 1. Tim. 1.15.
Paul acknowledges himself to be as a man borne out of due time; and the
least of the Apostles; not meet to be called an Apostle; and that he was
nothing; and that he was the least of all the Saints; and that he was the
chiefest of all sinners, whom Christ Jesus came into the world to save. This
was again the humility of Paul.

Neither let any suppose, that Paul lied for modesties sake: for he made a true
and humble confession, drawn from the inward sense of his heart. But if any
should ask, why Paul does account himself the chiefest offender; since he
fell only by ignorance of sound doctrine, Gal. 1.1 Phil. 1.
being otherwise unblameable before men throughout his whole life? We must know,
that in that saying of Paul, we are admonished, how heinous and grievous a
sin infidelity is before God; specially when obstinacy and rage against the
truth, is joined thereunto. It had been easy for the Apostle, to have
extenuated under a color of inconsiderate zeal, all that he confessed of
himself; but he is not ashamed to confess, that though he were a man
spotless before the world, and endued with singular virtues, yet because he
was an Adversary to the doctrine of the Gospel, and wrapped in stubbornenes
and incredulity, he reckoned himself for a notorious and egregious sinner; to
teach us, that the pomp of hypocrisy preuailes nothing with GOD, when it
frowardly resists Christ; and that God rejects incredulity and obstinacy,
but accepts of the obedience of faith. Christ's humility is most graphically
and lively described of the Prophet, who says, Isai. 53.2.3 4 ^.7.8.
that he had neither form nor beauty; that he was despised and rejected of
men; that he was a man full of sorrows, and had experience of infirmities;
that he was indeed as a man plagued and smitten of God; that he was wounded for
our transgressions, and broken for our iniquities, and chastised for our peace,
and scourged for our healing; that he was oppressed and afflicted, and brought
as a sheep to the slaughter; that he was cut out of the land of the living,
and plagued for the transgressions of believers, and had his grave made with
the wicked. This was the humility of Christ our Lord. Eminent is the example
of John the Baptist, unto whom the Jews sent Ambassadors, to wit, Priests and
Levites from Jerusalem, to know, whether he were the Christ, or not; and to
ask of him, Ioh. 1.19.
Who art thou? They never conferred this honor on Christ; they never sent
Ambassadors to him; they never asked but captiously of him, whether he were the
Christ. And why was this? The works of Christ were greater then the works of
John, for John did no miracle; that Christ's glory might be the greater; and
that the Jews might the sooner receive him for the Messiah. Christ's doctrine
was more heavenly then John's: for Christ taught as one having authority, and
not as the Pharisees, and other Doctors of the Law. Ioh. 7.46.
The Jews themselves confessed, that never man spoke, as Christ spoke. And a
principal Pharisie could not but say; Ioh. 3.2.
None could do these miracles that thou do, except God were with him. What
then is the reason, that they neglect and despise Christ, and send this
solemn, honorable, and noble Embassage to John, even from Jerusalem, their
Metrapolitane City? Was it because Christ did sharply tax and reprehend
their life? But John did it more sharply speaking thus to the Pharisees; Matt.
3.7
O generations of Vipers, who has forewarned you to flee from the anger to
come. Surely this was the only cause, for that they reputed Christ vilde, and
a Carpenters son; but they accounted John a noble man, and the son of a
noble man; whose father was Zachariah the Priest, and his city was in Judah:
whereas they supposed, that Christ was borne in Nazareth, a base and simple
city in Galile; Ioh. 1.46.47.
and therefore Nathaniel, otherwise a just man, and a true Israelite without
guile, said, Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth? The Jews respected
(after the fashion of the world) external nobility; and they had rather
acknowledge John for the Messiah, that was honorably descended, then Christ,
who was borne in humility; whether we respect the place of his birth, or the
place of his education, or the state and condition of his mother and supposed
father Joseph. For carnal and worldly men are most acute and sharp eyed in
perceiving, handling, and discerning of worldly things and businesses; but they
are blind and ignorant in spiritual matters.

And therefore well writes Saint Basil; As the sight of an Owl preuailes in
ye night; Hom. ^. hexae^*
but when the sun shines, it is much dazeled and dulled: so the mind of men
wise in the things of this world, seems to be most acute and quick, to
discern vain things; but to be dull and dark to perceive the true light
indeed. Howsoever it were, and howsoever the Jews were blinded with an
ouerweening opinion of John's excellency; yea howsoever John were extolled of
Christ himself, that cannot lie, nor be deceived; Matt. 11.11.
when he was commended, for the greatest Prophet, that arose among men borne of
women; yet this John so noble, so excellent, so temperate, so sincere, so
commended, how humbly did he esteem of himself? and what was his answer to
the Ambassadors? Ioh. 1.26.2^.
I baptize (says he) with water; but there is one among you, whom ye know
not: he it is that comes after me, which was before me, whose shoe latchet I
am not worthy to unloose. This was the humility of John the Baptist. There is
a memorable history recorded of the seven wisemen of Greece, how modestly they
shifted the name and reputation of wisdom from one to the other; on this
manner. Val. Max. l. 4. c. 1.
One had bought the draught of fishers, that drew their net in the Milesian
coast: there arose a controversy, by reason that a golden Delpian table of
great weight was drawn to land: the fishermen affirming, that they had sold
the fishes that should be taken; and the fellow saying, that he had bought the
fortune of the draught: the case being brought before the whole people of the
city, for the novelty of the matter, and for the value of the table, it
pleased them to ask counsel of Apollo of Delphos, to whom the golden table
should be adjudged. Apollo answered, that it should be given to him, that
surpassed others in wisdom; in this oracle.

Hos sophie panton protos, touto tripod an do. Then the Messiah with one
consent gave the table to Thales: Thales gave it to Bias, Bias to Pittacus; and
he presently to another; and after from one to another of all the seven, it
came last of all to Solon; who bestowed upon Apollo himself, both the title,
and the reward of the greatest wisdom.

And thus it appears, that the better every one is, the more humble every one
is; and the more he esteems other better then himself. The fuller the vessel
is, the baser sound it yeeldes; but the emptier it is, the louder it rings. The
higher the Sun is in the heaven, the lesser shadows he makes; and the lower
he is, the greater shadows do fall from bodies. Sound and full eggs do sink
in water; but rotten, and putrified, and empty, do float and swim. When the
bird will mount upward in flight, she bends down her head toward the earth,
that she may rise the higher; which she does not, when she walks on the
ground. Wood that in burning yeeldes the greatest smoke, does give the
smallest heat. The bough whereon fruit hanges, and the ear full of corn bend
downward to the earth; but the bough and ear that are void of fruit do
stand upright. Even so they that are destitute of true virtue and of good
works, make most ostentation; but the soul that is replenished with virtue
and godliness beholds the earth; that is, man's frailty and earthly condition;
from which arises the cause of humbling our selves.

And every one must confess, Genesis 18.27.
(as Abraham did talking with God,) that he is dust and ashes; not only in
respect of the body, which is most manifest; but also in respect of the soul;
and thereby truly abase and humble himself. For as ashes are vild and of no
reputation; so the soul by sin is vild and abominable before God. As ashes
are scattered with each blast of wind; so man of himself cannot resist a
small tentation, but he often falls at the uttering of a small speech. As ashes
cannot return to the former matter and substance of which it was made; so a
sinner cannot return to the state of salvation, from which he fell, but by the
grace and mercy of God.

The consideration of this is needful for us: for to esteem too well of our
selves, and to be willing to be thought that we are not, and to be unwilling to
be thought that we are, is a disease incident to most men. Which disease, of
man Socrates fitly expressed, when he said, Stob. ser. 21.
That if upon the stage any should command all shoemakers to stand up,
shoemakers only would stand up; likewise if carpenters, or weauers, or other
particular craftesmen were to stand up, these only would stand up; but if wise
men, and just men were commanded to stand up, all present would straightway
stand up; because all are willing to be accounted such. And therefore since
self-love and selfe-liking is an hereditarie sickness in us, it is behoofefull
for us to observe, what remedies may cure this dangerous infirmity. Surely
whatsoever we consider; whether the things without us; or the things within us;
or the things beneath us; or the things above us; or the things against us; all
these things will teach us deiection and humiliation of our selves. By those
things which are without us we may be humbled; if we consider, that other have
more virtue and goodness in them, then our selves have.

By those things which are within us we may be humbled; if we consider our own
offenses, our wicked inclinations, or defects; or even our good qualities,
which are from God, and not from our selves. By those things which are under us
we may be humbled; if we consider the beasts, in that we see them stronger; the
birds, in that we see them nimbler; the fruits, that grow out of the earth, in
that we see them more profitable, and more beautiful the^ our selves are. By
those things which are above us we may be humbled; if we consider God, whose
power we cannot escape, whose wisdom we cannot delude, whose justice we
cannot corrupt, and whose mercy by our own strength we cannot merit, and yet
without whose mercy we cannot live, move, or have our being. By those things
which are against us we may be humbled; if we consider the inconstancy,
importunity, and cruelty of our enemies; the inconstancy of the world, the
importunity of the flesh, the cruelty of Satan and his adherents: so that
every one may say, Lam. 3.22.
It is the Lords mercy, that we are not all consumed. In this so variable
consideration, who can be so lofty, not to think submissely of himself? yet
few do consider these things. It is commonly said, he that lies on the
ground, has not from whence to fall. So it may be said of humility: he that
thinks humbly of himself, will hardly fall into sin; doubtless in temporal
things he will offend little. Pro. 13.10.
For as by pride only a man makes contention, in seeking a higher place, for
which many strive and contend: so humility is the breeder of peace, in seeking
a lower place, for which none contends. We must not be puffed up with an opinion
of our worthiness, for that we are endued with one or other good property: but
we must call to mind, in how many things we come too short of our duty, and
how far we are from the goal and mark that is set before us. Hom. 20. in
Matt. 5.
If thou call to remembrance but the sins of one day, that remembrance will
pull down thy pride: says Saint John Chrysostom. When the proud Peacock
beholds his black feet, he presently casts down his glorious train, that
puffed his heart with haughtines: so he that weighes his slides, his
imperfections, and his defects, will deem himself unworthy, though otherwise
he may repute himself worthy.

He that couers himself only from the hand-wrest to the elbowe with his
garment, being naked in his whole body else; may be justly judged foolish, if
he always look on that sleeue of his, thinking himself well clothed because
of that one sleeue, and being offended with other that look on his nakedness
and laugh at it: so he that for one or two virtues pleases himself, and
applaudeth himself, whereas mean time he abounds with many vices, he is
worthily derided of men, and justly rejected of God.

And therefore Ambrose says sweetly; Lib. 3. de virginit.
That as Bees, when they doubt of troublesome air, they oftentimes take up
little stones, and therewith do ballast themselves in the clouds, least the
flawes of wind should carry them away: so he that is afraid of the wind of
vainglory, least by the force thereof he be drawn aside, let him stay the
cogitations of his mind with the consideration of his faults and
imperfections; that this may thrust him down, as much as vain praise would
lift him up. This practice is most profitable for us: specially, since Gods
holy spirit rests in a contrite and humble minds; And God is in arms and
fights against the haughty and proud, Isai. 57.15. 1. Pet. 5.5. Luke 1.53.
but gives grace to the lowly; and fills the hungry and thirsty after
righteousness with good things, but the rich in their own conceit he sends away
empty; and threatens to demolish and pull down the stately Cedars of Lebanon,
Isai. 2.12.13.14.15.16.17.
and the oaks of Bashan, and the high mountains, and the hills that are lifted
up, and every high tower, and every strong wall, and the ships of Tarshish, and
all pleasant pictures; that is, the day of the Lord of hoasts shall be upon all
the proud and haughty, and upon all that is exalted, and it shall be made
low; and the haughtines of men shall be brought low, and the loftines of men
shall be abased, and the Lord shall only be exalted in that day.

If thou will replenish any vessel with some solid liquor, or other
substance, thou must remove the air and wind: so if thou will engraffe any
good thing in the mind, thou must cast out haughtines and pride. For as a
little gall corrupts a whole pot of liquor; so a little leaven of pride
leaueneth and depraueth the whole lump of Virtue. How can it be otherwise?
Ecclus. 10.14.
For pride is the fountain, head, and original of all iniquity: and
therefore as before David slew Goliath, the host of the Philistimes stood
courageous in their rancks; 1. Sam. 17.
but when the monster was vanquished, the uncircumcised Army was put to
flight: so while pride keeps possession in the soul, the host of vices
stands strong and encouraged; but as soon as pride is overcome, other vices are
therewith discomfited. And pride must be rooted out, otherwise sin cannot be
cured, nor removed. As S. Augustine shows by a fit comparison; when the
Physician (says he) shakes off a sickness, In Joan. tract. 28.
if he cure that was bred by another cause, and cure not the cause it self
that did breed the sickness, he seems to cure indeed, but he cures but for a
time. For as long as the cause remains, the disease returns. As for example:
the humor in the body breeds a scab, or boiles; and thereof there arises a
fever and grief in the body. Some medicines are applied, that may stay the
scab, and assuage the heat of the ulcer; and they are applied profitably. Thou
see the man whole, that was before scabbed and full of sores: but because the
humor is not expelled, he returns to the scab again. The Physician knowing
this, purges the humor, and withdrawes the cause, and so there will be no
more sores. And whence proceeds the abundance of iniquity? from pride: cure
pride then, and there will be none iniquity. Therefore the son of God came
down from heaven, and was made man, that the cause of all diseases, that is,
pride, might be remedied and cured. This says Saint Austen. But it is hard to
subdue and expel pride. For when other vices forsake us, then pride will link
it self with our good works and virtues, as the chafe mingleth it self with
the pure grain: and when we begin to aspire to the top, then pride will most
assail us: and when other troops of vices are put to flight, then pride will
renew the battle. Pride would infect our prayer, our alms, our zeal, our
love to the word, our temperance, our just dealing; and unless we be wary, it
will deprive us of the reward of well doing.

Aug. in ep. 56. ad Dioscoru^.
As when we sin, we must fear other vices: so when we do well, we must fear
pride: (ne, illa quae laudabiliter facta sunt, ipsius laudis cupiditate
amittantur:) least through desire of commendation, those things be lost which
were done co^mendaably. And therefore Saint Chrysostom teaches, that this
pestilent vanity is like a shipwreck in the very harborough. Hom. de profectu
euangelij.
As a ship (says he) that has passed many floods, and avoided many tempests,
when at last she runs on a rock in the harborough it self, she loses all
the treasure that was stored up in her: so he that after many labors and
virtues, has not refrained his tongue and mind from the desire of praise, he
has suffered shipwreck in the very harborough.

For this cause the Philosopher calls pride the last garment, that the soul
puts off: Pl^^m Timeo.
as though he had glimmeringly perceived, that in putting off the old man,
pride is the last ragge. Which another expresses in words somewhat differing:
Isid. de su^mo b^^^ l. 2. c. 28.
Pride (says he) is first in sin, and last in conflict: because as it is the
original of all faults, so it is the ruin of all virtues.

Therefore when we are escaped out of Sodom, Genesis 19.30.
let us take heed that with Lot we do not commit incest with our own
daughters, and so bring forth an offspring odious to the Lord: that is, let us
not when we have shunned sin, be enamoures and proud of our virtuous doing,
least our deeds displease God. And when we have brought forth fair male
children, let us hide them in secret, Exodus 1.22.
least Pharaoh command them to be cast forth: that is, when we have done
well, let us not vaunt of it, least Satan through pride make our works
frustrate. Christ commands us to flee man's praise in our well doing, and
therefore says, That when we give Alms, we must not make a trumpet to be
blown before us, Matt. 6.2.3. Chrysostom. hom. 13. in Matt. oper imperfect.
to be praised of men; and that when we do Alms, the left hand must not know,
what the right hand does: that is, the will of the flesh, which is still
contrary to God, must not know, what is done of the will of the mind and of
reason that is subjected unto God. Matt. opar. imperfect.
The hidden treasure is safest from thieves and robbers: so concealed virtue is
freest from pride and the snares of Satan. The fruits that grow by an high
way, do seldom come to ripenes; because greedy travelers do gather them
and eat them before due time: so the works that are done to be seen of men,
and of ostentation, never grow to soliditie and perfection; because the praise
of men makes the doer to swell with an opinion of his worthiness, and so he
waxes unfit, either to proceed in virtue, or to undertake other good works.
The hen that cackles, as soon as she has laid her egg; gives occasion of
taking away her egg, and loosing her brood of chickens: so they that presently
extol their own works, as soon as they are done, or seek to have them
extolled, bring to pass, that no fruit follows of their works. 2. King.
20.17.
Hezekiah king of Judah was vehemently blamed of the Prophet, for showing his
riches and treasure to the Babylonian Ambassadors; and those things which of
ambition and vaineglorie he had showed, were carried all into Babell; so when
we hunt after praise by our well doing, the devil like the Tyrant of Babell
spoils us of our treasure. It is wisely said of Saint John Chrysostom, that
as when we lay gold and a precious garment in an open place, we provoke many to
lie in wait for them; Hom. 3. in Matt.
but if we hide them close, we shall keep them safe: so if we daily carry the
riches of virtues in open view, as it were to be sold, we arm our enemy, and
we provoke our enemy, and we stir up our enemy to steal and spoil; but if
no other know it, but he that sees in secret, our precious jewels are out of
all perils. Mat. hist. l. 10. c. 3. and l. 36. c. 19.
Pliny reports, that the Eagle builds her nest on high; and that the Serpent
Parias lies in wait for her young: but for that he cannot come near them
because of the height, he draws the wind unto him, and then casts forth a
poison, that the infected air mounting to the young ones, may so kill them:
which mischief to prevent, the Eagle of a natural instinct, puts the ieat
stone in her nest, and mooues it always against the wind; which ieat stone
dispearceth that Serpents poison. The like care and diligence must we use, if
we will have our good works ascend into the presence of God, and be acceptable
to him, and not be infected with the venomous wind of pride which that
spiritual Serpent will cast forth against them, we must set the honor and
praise of God, as a preservative and precious stone, between our works and
the wind of vainglory. For whosoever studieth by his good works to please
men, is like one that always draws water, and puts it into a cesterne that is
full of holes. For what can be more deceitful, then the praise and
commendation of man; and what greater vanity, then to seek after it? Chrysostom.
hom. 17. in ep. ad Romans
Is it not folly, when thy state is in Heaven, to choose beholders upon earth?
A wrestler where he strives, there he seeks to be tried: thou striuest in
high matters, and will thou be crowned in low things? Let our rejoicing be the
testimony of our conscience, 2. Cor. 1.12. 1. Cor. 4 3.
in simplicity and godly pureness: and let us pass very little to be judged of
man's judgment.

Though the vizards of stage plaiers be cunningly made, and exactly set on; yet
who will desire to were them continually; seeing they represent but a fained
and counterfeit person?

What is the praise of men, but the mask and vizard of true praise? seeing men
oftentimes speak otherwise then they think: and if they speak as they
think, yet their praise is but momentanie, and lasts but for the space of
this life, and may be turned into contempt and obloquie. They that put their
consciences in other men's lips, are sometimes great, sometimes little,
sometimes nothing: and so the fool changes as the moon, Ecclus. 27.11.
waxing and waining after the judgment of them that commend him. Heathen men
have little regarded the commendation of the multitude.

Polycletus the Statuarie made two Images, placing the one publicly, Aelian.
var. hist. l. 14.
and altering it after the opinion of the common people, as every one that
passed by and be held, did think fit; but the other he formed privately in his
own house, according to his own art, and skill. When he had set both these in
the market place, and all admired at that which was framed privately, deriding
ye public Image, in which scarce one member was proportionable to ye other;
That you dispraise (says Polycletus) proceds from your art; that which you
commend, Id. l. 2.
I have shaped according to mine own skill. Hippomachus ye Champion, when one
of his scholars had showed an experiment of his art, and the multitude
delighted with the circumstances gave him applause; he stroke his scholar with
a rod, saying; Thou have done ill; for if thou had done artificially, this
multitude would never have praised thee. Antisthenes, when one said to him,
Laert. l. 6.
that many did commend him; What ^ll (said he) have I done? And when the whole
assembly asse^ted to Phorions opinion, persuaded in an Oration, Pl^t. in
Ph^ria^e.
turning to them that stood by him, he said; Ah wretch that I am, I fear lest
I have spoken some foolish word Is it not a shame for Christians not to see the
vanity of the praise of the multitude; when Ethnicks have so well considered
it? Yet many are like Organe plaiers, that cannot play, except some blow the
bellows; so they can do no good thing, unless they be praised for it. But as
David suffered not his servants to come in his sight, 2. Sam. 10.4.5.
that had half their beards shaven; but commanded them to tarry in Jerusalem,
till their beards were grown again: so God will not admit our works into his
sight, that are done by halfes; that is, that in substance have the show of
good works; but err in the scope and intent; being referred, not to Gods
glory, but to vain glory and praise of men. For as the whole house must needs
fall, not when one beam falls, or some rafters are rotten; but when the
groundwork and fundation is putrified and decayed: so when humility is taken
away, and the glory of God (which is the end and foundation of all good deeds)
is not respected, the whole spiritual edifice must of necessity fall. If a
city be defenced against the siege of the enemies with a great bulwark, and
be compassed with strong walls, and be guarded with a watchful garrison upon
eurey part, yet only one gap being left vndefenced therein through negligence;
the enemy without all doubt will enter in at that one hole, whereas before he
seemed to be utterly excluded: and he that entrencheth himself round with good
works, and leaves one gap for pride and vainglory, receives the spiritual
enemy, and so is overthrown. For humility that deiecteth and abaseth our
works before God, makes them to be acceptable; as spices smell more
fragrantly, when they are ground and beaten abroad in the mortar.

If the praise of others be vain, and not ambitiously to be sought for; since
it is so uncertain and unstable: it is too mild a term to call it folly,
when some will praise themselves. The wiseman forbids such resounding out of
our own worthiness: Pro. 27.2.
Let another man (says he) praise thee, and not thine own mouth; a stranger,
and not thine own evil lips. As pride proceeds from Satan; who breathing
pride and ambition into our first parents, by this voice, You shall be as Gods:
Genesis 3.5.
made them to trust to their own wisdom, and to depart from the word of God,
and to desire the supreme degree of the Image of God, and altogether to be
like to God: so bragging and boasting has no other original and welspring, but
haughtines and pride. And as they that are drunken, do imagine one candle to
be two, and other objects that they see to be double: so they that are puffed up
with pride, if they have any gifts in them, they dream yt they are far
greater, then they are in truth. Some will boast of learning; some of toys;
some of humility; some of what good they have done; some of riches; some of
honor; some of beauty; some of good works and merits. They that boast of
learning, must remember; 1. Cor. 8.1.2.
that knowledge puffs up, but love edifieth; and therefore if any man think,
that he knows any thing, he knows nothing, yet as he ought to know. For
though a man had the gift of prophecy, 1. Cor. 13.2.
and knew all secrets and all knowledge; yea, if he had all faith, so that he
could remove mountains, and had not love, he were nothing. And they that are
wont to boast, that they are some great men, Act. 8.9.
like the Sorcerer of Samaria: and that like the presumptuous Caldeans will
say, Dan. 2.4.
Show us the dream, and we will show the interpretation; and that for the
knowledge of some Greek and Hebrew phrases do suppose with the impudent
bragger, that learning was borne with them, Palaemon.
and shall die with them: and that repose the chief felicity in idle
speculations, and phantasticke conceits, and curious enquiries: let such know,
that he is better, that knows himself, then he that neglects himself, and
has the knowledge of stars, and herbs, and complexions of men, and natures
of all living Creatures: and that it avails nothing, to know all things, if
we know not Christ Jesus and him crucified. They that boast of toyous and
unprofitable faculties, must remember, what the Lacaedemonian said to him that
vaunted of his long standing upon one foot; Plut. in Lacon.
Indeed (said the Lacedaemonian) I cannot do it; but every goose can do it.
And when one rejoiced much for his skill in swimming; Aristippus could not
brook it; but said; Laere. l. t. c. 8.
Art thou not ashamed, so insolently to boast thy self of those things which
pertain to Dolphins? meaning, that a man ought to boast of things belonging to
man; and that to excel in reason is fittest for man; but that the cunningest
swimmer is exceeded by Dolphins and other fishes.

They that boast of humility must remember, that in their humility they
nourish pride and haughtines. Gregor.
For there are four ways by which arrogancy demonstrates it self: either
when we think, that the good which we have, we have from our selves: or when
we believe, that though it be given us from above, yet it is given us for our
deserts: or when we boast, that we have, that which we have not: or when we
despise other, and covet to be accounted singular in that we have. The Cypres
trees are great, yet bear no fruit: so many boast much of humility and other
virtues, Plut. in Phorione.
but yield no performance: as Pnorion said to Laosthenes, that bragd much of
valor, and showed none. The counterfeit humble person, that pretends lowlines
of mind, yet is clean deuoyde thereof; is like to the Stoickes, that calling
themselves invincible, Plut. in moral.
and such as were free from passions, yet apparently convicted of the
contrary, were justly compared to ships, that sometimes are named Good speed,
Providence, felicity, when they are slow, uncircumspect, unfortunate. And as
Diogenes when he saw Olympia and the Rhodian young men pretiously and
sumptuously apparelled, Aelian. lib. 9. de var. histor.
said, this is naught but pride: so when anon after he saw the Lacedaemonians
arried in ragged and sluttish garments, he said, this is pride also, but of
another sort: whereby he meant, that a proud mind does not always appear in
gorgeous and gallant ornaments, but also in homely and course attire; namely,
when the rich go in vilde raiment, to win thereby the praise of men, as though
they would be proud in the very midst of humblenes.

They that boast of the good works which they have done in former days, must
remember, that it is nothing worth to begin well, except we persevere; Matt.
24.13. Luke 18.21.
for he that continues unto the end, he shall be saved. The ruler could boast,
that he had observed the commandments from his youth; but when he was
commanded to continue in the unfeigned love of his neighbor, and to cherish the
poor and needy, though it were with the expense and say of all his
possessions, he went away heavy and sorrowful. And as one said to him that
boasted, that at Rhodes he had done strange things, and had leapt farther then
any could leap; here (said he) is Rhodes, here is a place to leap in;
meaning, that he should then and there show his nimblenes, of which he made
ostentation: so it may be said to some that brag, what godly deeds they have
done in times past, now also declare the same godliness again. They that boast
of their riches and wealth, must remember, what the blessed Apostle enioynes to
Timothy, 1. Tim. 6.17.
namely, that he should charge them that are rich in this world, that they be
not high minded, and that they trust not in uncertain riches, but in the
living God. Ser. de ver Dom.
Upon which words Saint Augustine says, that riches bring forth nothing so
much as pride: and that every apple, every grain, every corn, every wood has
his worm; for there is one worm of the apple, another of the pear, another
of the bean, another of the wheat; and that the worm of riches is pride; and
that therefore the Apostle to exclude the fault, and retain the use, bids
Timothy to charge the rich, that they be not high minded. And why boastest
thou of thy riches and wealth? The more riches thou have; have thou not the
more envy and enemies? have thou not the more danger hanging over thee, of
robbing, and spoiling, and backbiting, and subuerting? have thou not the more
cause to fear a fall and ruin? Cyp. de fingularitate Glericorum.
have thou not observed that Captains and Princes are more assaulted in the
battle then soldiers? and that high Turrets are vehemently blown upon by
winds and storms? as the Poet said long since, Hor. Car. l. 2. Od. 10
Saepius ventis agitatur ingens
Pinus, et celsae grauiore turres
Decidunt casu, feriuntque summos
Fulmina montes.
If thou boast of thy riches, as if thine own labor and industry had gotten
them, call to mind what the Prophet says; Psalm. 127.1.2.
Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that built it; except
the Lord keep the City, the keepe^ watches in vain it is vain for men to
rise early, and to lie down late, and to eat the bread of sorrow, except the
Lord did give rest to his beloved. For to purpose to get riches without Gods
blessing, is that evil boasting which Saint James condemns, when he reproues
those that will say, to day, or to morrow, Iam. 4.13.15.
we will go into such a City, and continue there a year, and buy, and sell,
and get gain; for that they ought to say, if the Lord will, and if we live, we
will do this, or that. The pride of many may be repressed, if they would
consider, how small, or rather how nothing their wealth is, if it be compared
with the whole world. Stobaeus.
Therefore Socra^es seeing Alcik^ades proud of his wealth, riches, and
possessions, he brought him into a place, where was hanged a Cosmographicall
Table, and Map of the whole earth; and he bad Alcik^ades to seek out Athens
therein; which when he had found, he bad him seek out his possessions in
Athens: but when Alcik^ades said, that they were not set down there: why then
(said Socrates) art thou proud for those things, which are not in any part of
the earth? If this consideration cannot stop boasting of wealth and riches; let
the proud in this kind remember, that this bragging is the imitation of him
that tempts to all iniquity; for he once said to Christ, Luke 4.6.
All this power will I give thee, and the glory of those kingdoms; for that is
delivered to me, and to whomsoever I will, I give it

Iam. 4.14.
They that boast of beauty must remember, That our life is even a vapor, that
appears for a little time, Psalm. 103.15.
and afterward vanishes away: and that the days of man are a^ grass, as a
flower of the field so flourishes he.

May not beauty be defaced by sickness, grief, or age? Why art thou proud then
thou earth and ashes? Have thou forgotten, whence thou came, and whither thou
go? what thy beginning was, and what thy end shall be? that thou wast
corruption, and shall be rottennes? Genesis 3.19.
and that as thou art dust, so thou shall return to dust. If this cannot
beated own the Peacocke-like pride of some, that are too conceited for their
beauty; then let those that sincerely worship God, take occasion to adorn
their souls, by example of such, as spend much cost and time in decking their
bodies; and let them seriously ponder, what is written of Pambo; Eccles. hist.
l. 8. c. 1.
who when he saw at Alexandria a woman proud of her gorgeous apparel, he wept;
and being asked, why he wept so bitterly, he aunsweared; There are two things
which move me: the one is the dangerous case of this woman, that runs headlong
to perdition: the other is, that I, which profess the name of a Christian, do
not seek so much to please God by innocence of life, as this woman does
desire to please incontinent persons. They that boast of their honor and
dignity must remember, what Christ answered Pilate, when he said, Ioh.
1^.10.11.
Know thou not, that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to loofe
thee? Jesus answered, thou could have no power at all against me, except it
were given thee from above. As the body remains the same, when ye shadow
increases or decreaseth so promotion, or honor changes not ye person to
better, or worse, but the good, or ill use thereof. And it is so far off, that
Offices should breed virtues, that the Philosopher could say, that If there
were a commonwealth of such good men, as should be indeed, Plato P^lit. 1.
there would be as great strife, to avoid rule, as now there is strife to
obtain rule. Lathe b^esa^.
Albeit they are to be reproved, that embrace that lurking of Epicure, and
refusal of all function of teaching and ruling. For as God will not have
superior places to be inordinately desired; so also he commands, that they
that are conscious of meet gifts in themselves, should willingly bestow their
labors on the Church and Commonwealth.

This moved the Apostle to say, that if any man desire the office of a
Bishop, 1 Timothy 3.1
he desires a worthy work. And therefore Ammonius the Scholar of Origene,
(when being called to the Bishopric of Alexandria, he had cut off his
right ear, and therefore was reprehended by Euagrius, Niceph. Callist. l. 9.
c. 37.
that also had refused a Bishops function,) answered rightly; but (...) (said
he) have sinned more grievously, because thou have cut off thy tongue; and
dare not to use it, to set forth Gods glory by preaching the Gospel; and
use not the graces of GOD, least thou should s^eme to arrogate them to thy
self. And whosoever they be that abuse their gifts, either to oftentation,
that they may get praise, or to covetousness, that may get riches; they seek
to destroy themselves by not taking heed to feed the flock of Jesus Christ,
whereunto they are called. But they that are thirsty of worldly honor, and
exalt themselves therein, must call to mind what our Savior says; Math. 23.12.
Whosoever will exalt himself, shall be brought low; and whosoever will
humble himself, shall be exalted. As a learned Father reports of a godly
woman; that she was the greatest of all, by making her self the least of all;
Hier. in Ep. ad Eusta.
that the more she abased her self, the more Christ advanced her; that she was
hidden, and not hidden; that in fl^eing glory, she deserved glory; (quae
virtutem quasi vmbra sequitur, et appetitores sui deserens, appetit
contemptores;) for glory follows virtue as a shaddowe, and passing by those
that desire her, desires those that contemn her.

They that boast of their good works, as though they did by them merit the
crown of eternity; must remember, that there is no good thing in us which we
have not received; 1 Cor. 4.7 Phil. 2.13. 2 Cor. 3.5
and if we have received it, why rejoice we, as though we had not received it?
It is God which works in us, both the will, and the deed, even of his good
pleasure. And we are not sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of
our selves; but our sufficiency is of God. Of what then may we boast? Who
will believe the wall, Ber. Ser. 13. in Can.
if it would say, that it brings forth the Sunne-beame, which it receives at
the window? Who would not laugh, if the clouds would say, that they breed the
rain? And who sees not, that man is not the cause, but the instrument of
well-doing? and therefore for a man to praise himself for it, is to fight
against GOD Beggars, when they would obtain an Alms, do not adorn
themselves with golden chains, and precious clothes; but they show their
miseries, the rather to move to compassion: and the Gibeonites obtained mercy
of Israel, Josh. 9.4.5.
by taking old sacks, and old bottels rent and bound up, and old shoes and
clouted upon their feet, and old raiment, and dried and mouled bread: so if we
entend to find favor with God, we must humbly prostrate our selves, and
confess our unworthiness. The Paganes were persuaded, that God resists the
proud, Stob.
and gives grace to the humble: for Aeso^e being asked of Chron, what God
did, he said, That he did beat down lofty things, and extol low things: and
Artahanus dissuading Xerxes from his voyage against the Greeks, Herod. lib. 1.
Do thou not see, (said he) how God does strike great beasts with lightning,
and lets pass the little? and do thou not see, how oftentimes the flashes
of lightning do strike great houses and great trees? for God throws down all
eminent things; and therefore an hugie host may be discomfited by few. Where
is Pharaoh that said, Exodus 5.2
Who is the Lord, that I should hear his voice, and let Israel go? I know not
the Lord, neither will I let Israel go. Where is Benhadad the king of Aram? 1.
King. 20.10.11.
who swore, yt he would so ransacke Samaria, that the dust thereof should not
be enough to all the people that followed him, for every man an handful;
forgetting, that he that girdeth his harn^s, must not boast, as he that puts
it off. Where is Sancherib king of Ashur? that said; 2. King. 18.32.35.
Who are they among all the Gods of the nations, that have delivered their land
out of mine hand, that the Lord should deliver Jerusalem out of mine hand? Obey
not Hezekiah, for he deceives you, saying, The Lord will deliver us. Where is
Haman, Est. 5.11.
that told his friends and his wife, of the glory of his riches, and the
multitude of his children, and all the things wherein the king had promoted
him, and how that he had set him above the Princes and servants of the king?
Where is the proud Assirian Monarke? that said, Isai. 10.13.14.
By the power of mine hand I have done it, and by my wisdom, because I am
wise; therefore I have removed the borders of the people, and have spoiled
their treasures, and have pulled down the inhabitants like a valiant man: and
mine hand has found as a nest the riches of the people, and as one that
gathers eggs that are left, so have I gathered all the earth: and there was
none to move the wing, or to open the mouth, or to whisper. Where is the king
of Babylon? Isai. 14.12.1^.
which did cast lots upon the nations; and said in his heart; I will ascend
into heaven, and exalt my throne above beside the stars of God; I will ascend
above the height of the clouds, and I will be like the most high; how art thou
fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning? and cut down to the
ground. Ezekiel. 27.3.27.
Where is Tyrus, which was the mart for the people of many isles; and which
said, I am of perfect beauty? What is become of her riches, and faires, and
merchandise, and Mariners, and Pylots, and calkers, and occupiers of
merchandise, and all the men of war that were in her, and of all the multitude
which was in the midst of her? They are fallen in the midst of the sea, in the
day of her ruin. Ezekiel 28.2.7.8.
And did not the Prince of Tyrus, that said once, I am a God, I sit in the seat
of God in the midst of the sea, at length see, that he was a man, and not God;
and that his brightness was defiled; and that he was cast down to the pit, and
died the death of a man? Where is Nebuchadnezar? Dan. 3.15.
that said; who is that God, that can deliver you out of mine hands? Is not
this great Babel, that I have built for the house of the kingdom, by the might
of my power, and for the honor of my Majesty? Where is Edom, and 4.27. Obad.
that because he dwelt in the clefts of the rock, and on high, said in his
heart, Who shall bring me down to the ground? Though thou exalt thy self as
the Eagle, and make thy nest among the stars, thence will I bring thee down,
says the Lord. Where is the rejoicing city Nineveh, Zeph. 2.13.14.15.
that dwelt careless, and said in her heart, ^am, and there is none b^side^ ^e?
how was she made wast and ^esolate like a wilderness? for the flocks did ^^e in
the midst of her, and all the beasts of the nations, and the Pe^c^ne, and the
owl did abide in the upper posts, and the voice of birds did sing in the
windows, and desolation wa v^o^ the posts. 2. Macc. 9.8.10.
Where is Annochus, that was so proud beyond the condition of man, that he
thought he might command the floods of the Sea, and weigh the high mountains
in the balance, and reach to the stars of heaven? Matt. 3.9. Io. 8.23.39. and
9.28.
Where are the haughty Scribes and Pharisees, that gloried of their honorable
descent, and that they were the disciples of Moses? were not all these consumed
in their pride; and compelled to feel the puissant and iron scepter of the
Lord; and forced to confess, that all honor and glory is to be ascribed to
the highest? If then the proud have still vanished away, as a vapor and cloud;
and have perished in ye imaginatio^s of their own hearts; let us learn to be
humble, Gregor. l. 25. Mor^l.
either remembering our miseries considering where we have been; or fearing ye
sentence of Gods judgments, considering where we shall be; or having an eye to
the afflictions of this life, considering where we are; or contemplating the
joy of the supernall country, considering where we are not; by which four
considerations one says, Ie^. 9.23.24.
That humility is engraft in our minds: and let not the wife man glory in his
wisdom, nor the strong man glory in his strength, neither the rich man
glory in his riches; but let him that glories, glory in this, that he
understands, and knows the Lord and let every one say with the humble
Centurion; Master, I am not worthy, that thou should come under my roof.

For why? our souls naturally are depraved and corrupted with the pollution of
original sin, which is derived from Adam our great grandsire; by which
original pollution, the Image of God after which we were at first formed, is
deformed in us; and all innocence is defaced in us; and we are deprived of the
knowledge of God and spiritual things; and we are fraught with pride,
darkness, ignorance, and vnholines. Our souls being thus originally, by the
grace and mercy of the Lord, they are made temples and dwelling places of the
holy Ghost; who forms and frames us anew; who shuts out at doors the old man,
with his deceivable works, and brings the new man in possession, which is
created in holiness, and true righteousness, after the Image of him that at first
created him; and who refines our thoughts, and casts our minds in a new
mould; Isa. 11.6.7.8.
so that the Wolf forgets his greedines, and the Leopard his fiercenes, and
the Lion his sauagenes, and the Bear his rauenousnes, and the Cockatrice his
poison, Mic. 4.3.
and the warrior turns his spear into a sith, and sword into a mattock;
that is, by ye spirit of God, we are regenerate, newborn, and made new
creatures. In that then our minds, which naturally are cages and receptacles
of pollution and ungodliness, are made mansions, palaces, and temples for the
holy Ghost and his sacred motions to dwell and lodge in, we may justly say,
Lord, we are not worthy, that thy grace and holy spirit should come under the
roof of our souls.

Again, by nature we are the children of wrath, subject to eternal death; and
of our selves we had no power or means to deliver and save our selves. But God
so loved us, that he gave, not an Arkangell, or an Angel, or a Patriarch, or a
Prophet, to pay our ransom; but he gave his only and beloved son Jesus
Christ to the death, and the cursed and ignominious death of the cross, for us
wretched sinners, that sat in darkness and in the shadow of death. Christ is
our Redeemer, our mediator, our advocate, our Moses that stood in the gap
between us and Gods anger, that made peace between God and man; that
cancelled ye handwriting of the law that was against us; that brake down the
partition wall, and of strangers made us fellow citizens with the Saints; and
that combines and unites our souls (as members) to himself, by a lively and
saving faith. By this faith we apply the promises of mercy, and Christ's
merits and worthiness to our souls; by this faith we appear just and
unblameable in the fight of God; by this faith in Christ, we are accounted as
holy and righteous, before the Tribunal seat of God, as if we had never
committed any sin, and as if we our selves had wrought that atonement and
satisfaction, which Christ has wrought for us. In that then we are so
metamorphosed and altered, that of sons of damnation, we are become heirs of
salvation, we may justly say; O Lord, we are not worthy, that this
inconceivable love of God, this all-sufficient satisfaction of Christ, this
justifying faith, should come under the roof of our souls.

Again, who knows not, how manifold the afflictions of the godly are in this
present world? Satan continually seeks to pray upon us; the world labors to
fashion us like it self; the flesh which we carry about us, like an intestine
traitor is ready to beguile us, and to draw us from the narrow way of life
to ye wide way of destruction. Unto these may be added, the unfaithfulness of
men, the ingratitude of the world; the maladies and sundry infirmities of the
body; the anguish and terrors of conscience; the variable crosses and
tribulations, which continually succeed one the other, as Jobs messengers
reported il news one upon the other. Job. 1.
If the God of co^^olation did not arm us with strength, to quench and repel
the fiery darts of the wicked* and with constancy to fight valiantly, till we
be more the^ Conquerors in all tentations; and with patience to submit our
selves to the blessed will of God, in all changes and chances of this mortal
life; and with firm hope of remission of sins by the blood of Christ, and of
obtaining eternal life by his intercession; the^e surging and swelling floods
of tribulation would go over our souls, and ouerwhelme us. In that then the
holy spirit of God, the only comforter, does sweeten the bitterness of
affliction, and does strengthen our feeble knees, and stablish our fainting
hearts; we may justly say; O Lord, we are not worthy, that such consolation
should come under the roof of our souls.

Besides this; as the Centurion said, Master, I am not worthy, that thou
should come under my roof: so we may inuert, and turn about, and stretch
his speech farther, and say; O Lord; we are not worthy, that we should come
under thy roof. And why? The world in which we inhabit is Gods house; and we
are all Tenants at will, to be put out at our live lords pleasure. In this
house of the world, Man is a great commander, having dominion over the works
of Gods hands, and having all things put under his feet. The Sun and the
Moon give him light; the sheep, and oxen, and beasts of the field, the fowls
of the air, and fishes of the Sea, yield him sustenance; the birds delight him
with singing; the flowers solace him with smelling; all the works of Gods
fingers serve, either for this profit, or pleasure, or both. In that then Man,
a worm, and the son of rottennes and corruption, is brought into such a
spacious and specious, a great and gay house of God, as the world is, and made
little lower then God, and crowned with glory and worship; we may justly say;
Psalm. 8.4.
O Lord our Lord, what is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the Son of
man, that thou visitest him? We are not worthy, that we should come under the
roof of thy house. Nay, when we consider our houses, that protect and shroud
us from the fury and violence of the weather; our beds whereon we case our
selves, when we are weary and sick; our livings and goods, by which we
sustain our selves; our children, which are an heritage and gift that comes
from the Lord, and which possess the fruit of our labors, and which preserve
our memorial on earth: when we consider these and many other blessings, which
God bestows on us, that daily and hourly offend him, and transgress his
commandments; and which many others do want, who notwithstanding are
redeemed with ye precious blood of Christ, as well as we: may we not proceed
farther, and say; O Lord, we are not worthy, that we should come under the
roof of our own house.

Furthermore, the material temple and Church is called the house of God. For
why? In the Church we are taught the statutes and laws of God, and God speaks
unto us in his sacred word: In the Church we speak unto God by prayer; and we
worship God by singing forth the sweet praises of his mercy and goodness: In
the Church we are by Baptism cleansed from our sins; and received into
Christ's Church and congregation, which is the spiritual house of God; and we
are incorporated into Christ's body, and made members thereof: In the Church we
spiritually feed on the body and blood of our Savior Christ, and we are
thereby partakers of Christ's merits and righteousness, to the fruition of
eternal life. In that then the material Church is the house of God, and the
sovereign Apothecary shop, where every sinner may find a spiritual medicine
and salve to cure the maladies and infirmities of his soul: we may truly say,
when we are going into the temple and Church, where we participate of so many
divine things; O Lord, we are not worthy, that we should come under the roof
of thine house.

Lastly, let us contemplate on the joys and felicity of Heaven; where is joy
without sorrow; plenty without scarsitie; glory without envy; life without
death: where is the tree of life, and the river of the water of life; where the
Seraphins sing continually, Holy, holy, holy, and all the Angels and Saints
praise God incessantly with most sugared and harmonious melody; where the elect
receive the penny of immortality for working in the vineyard, and sit down
with Abraham, Isaak, and Iaakob; and where are those unspeakable good things,
which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor heart of man can conceive?

In that then God has ordained us to this eternal rest, and from the dust
has exalted us to his heavenly kingdom; we may truly say; O Lord, we are not
worthy, that we should come under the roof of Heaven. Thales Milesius being
old, and having devised some admirable invention of the motion of the Heavens,
he did communicate it with Mandrita another Philosopher; who gave him thanks
for the instruction, and asked, what recompense he should give him for the
document: to whom Thales said, O Mandrita, it shall be sufficient to me, if
when thou will utter this which thou have learned of me, thou do not ascribe
it to thy self, but confess that it was mine invention. This a man craves of
a Man: how much more justly does God require of us, that if we have any virtue,
or any knowledge, or any wisdom, or any strength, or any good thing, when we
make use of it, we attribute it, not to our selves, but acknowledge, that it is
received from him? Wherefore, let us humble and prostrate our selves with this
Noble and godly Centurion; let us praise the Lord for all his blessings, with
unfeigned thankefulnes; let us confess our unworthiness either that God should
come under our roof, or that we should come under Gods roof, let us amend our
lives, repent for our iniquities, and express true gratitude by our good
works; that God may augment and heap his mercies upon us continually; and
that Christ may hear us, as he heard the Centurion; and that as by the mercy
of God, we entered into the house of God, the world, and dwell therein; and as
by the same mercy, we enter from time to time into the material Church, which
is the house of God; so at last by the favor and grace of Christ, we may
ascend and mount into the glorious and magnificent house of Heaven, there to
remain with him for evermore. Amen.

CONSTANCIES CROWN.
Gal. 6.9. Let us not therefore be weary of well doing: for in due season we
shall reap, if we faint not.


THe holy Apostle Paul in these words does admonish ye Galathians, and in the
Galathians all other Christians, to be plenteous in good works, and to bring
forth the fruits of the Spirit; neither this only, but to persist and
persevere in well doing, that they may obtain the reward of eternal life. The
speech contains first an exhortation to continue in well doing: secondly, a
reason and motive, why we should not faint in well doing. The exhortation is
this; Let us not therefore be weary of well doing. If we refer this well doing
to beneficence and liberality toward the needy, which is spoken of in the
verse following, where the Apostle says, While we have time, Calon poiountes,
1. eupoiountes, euergetountes.
let us do good to all men, as if well doing, were doing well, and bestowing
well on the poor; then where Paul says, Let us not be weary of well doing;
he means, that we should not be weary of succouring and releeuing the needy
and wretched.

But if we refer well doing to the exhortation in the sixth verse, Keckerman in
analys. Gym. Log.
where the Apostle exhorts the hearers to maintain their Minister; saying, Let
him that is taught in the word, make him that has taught him partaker of all
his goods: then the meaning is, that Paul proceeding in his exhortation, to
maintain the Minister, does in these words preoccupate and prevent an
objection, which some might make, saying; If we be so liberal to the
Ministers, and continue in it, we shall wast and consume our substance: To
which the Apostle answers, that we shall not consume, but increase our store:
for God will not forget our works of piety and charity that please him so
well; but in due time we shall reap, if we faint not. But howsoever we refer
well doing, either to the releeuing of the needy, or to the maintenance of the
Ministry; this exhortation serves also for continuing in good works, of what
sort or nature soever they be.

The reason and motive why we should continue in well doing, is this; For in
due season, we shall reap, if we faint not. Eccakein, Ecluesthai
To be weary, and to faint, is all one thing; and to faint, or to be weary,
is (as it were) to be dissolved and loosed; as if one joint, or finew were
separated from another. So that Paul says, that in due season we shall reap
the fruit of our good works, if we make no breach and interruption of well
doing; and if we conioyne one virtue to another virtue, and one good work to
another good work; as the joints and sinews of the body are compacted and
united among themselves, and as the linkes of a chain are knit and fastened one
to the other. The Apostle had said before; Verse. 7.8.
Whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap; for he that sows to his
flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that sows to the spirit,
shall of the spirit reap life everlasting. In which words he uses a Metaphor
and borrowed speech, co^paring the life, as well of the godly, as of the
ungodly, unto sowing of seed: as though ye Apostle in those words did say
generally, yt every one shall receive either a reward, or a punishment,
according to his deeds done in this world. And he proceeds in ye same
metaphorical speech, saying, In due season we shall reap, if we saint not. In
which words, he puts a difference between the time of sowing, and the time of
reaping. Now is the time to sow, and to do good to other, while Christ does
shine unto us in this life by his Gospel; but the time of reaping and of
harvest shall be in the world to come. Ecclus. 11.4.
Solomon says, He that observes the wind, shall not sow, and he that
regards the clouds, shall not reap: that is, he that will always look for
happy and prosperous success in well doing, shall never do good. For men
will ever be ungrateful; and the world will ever recompense evil for good to
the godly. And therefore least we should be weary and faint in well doing, S.
Pau sets before us a most ample and large reward; when he compares eternal
life unto an harvest, or a reaping. What? do good works merit then; since
they are rewarded? No, for well doing is the path leading to Heaven: but Heaven
it self and eternal life is the gift of God, Romans 6.23.
through Jesus Christ our Lord. When we do well, we are in the way to Heaven;
and well doing shall be plenteously rewarded; but none by his godliness deserves
the reward: In psalm. 120.
for God rewarding our works, (dona sua coronat,) crowns his own gifts;
says S. Augustine. Why is it called a reward then? Not because it is a reward
merited; but freely given of Gods mercy: and because as the day labourer
works all the day, and receives his wages in the evening; so when we have done
good works all our life long, in the evening of our days, that is, in the end
of our life, we shall receive the reward of everlasting joy.

Although good works cannot save us, nor make us righteous before Gods
judgment throne; Isai. 64.6. Psalm. 130.3.
for all our righteousness is a menstruous cloth; and if God should be extreme
to mark what is done amiss, who may abide it? yet we must labor diligently
to abound in all good works, and to persevere in them; whether we consider
God; or whether we consider our neighbor; or whether we consider our selves.
If we respect God, we must do well, and continue in well doing; that his
commandments may be obeyed; 1. Io 5.3. 1. These. 4.3. 1. Pet. 1.14. Tit. 2.14.
Ephesians. 4.30. Gal. 5.22. Matt. 5.16. Ephesians. 5.1.
that his will may be done; that we may show our selves obedient children to
God our father; that we may show our selves thankful for our redemption by
Christ; that we may not grieve the spirit of God; but walk according to the
same; that God by our good works may be glorified, and that we may be good
imitators and followers of God. If we respect men, we must do well, and
continue in well doing, Luke 6.38 1. Pet. 3.14. 1. Cor. 10.32.
that our neighbor may be helped in worldly things; that he may be won by
our example to godliness; that we may prevent the giving of any offense, and
that by doing good, we may stop the mouths of our adversaries.

Lastly, if we respect our selves, we must do well, 2. Cor. 5.17. Ephesians. 5.8. 2.
Pet. 1.8 10. Iam. 2.17. 2. Tim. 2.6. Psalm. 89.32. Gal. 6.9.
and continue in well doing, that we may show our selves to be new creatures;
that we may walk as the children of light; that we may be assured of our faith
and salvation; that we may discern true faith from counterfeit and dead faith;
that faith and the gifts of God may be continued unto the end; that the
punishments of sin, both temporal and eternal may be avoided; and that the
reward may be obtained, which God freely in mercy has promised to men for
their good works. These are the causes for which we must do well, and
continue in well doing: not to merit eternal life by our good works: for when
we have done all that we can do, we are unprofitable servants, Luke 17.10.
and we have done, but that was our commanded duty: but we must do good
works, and continue in them, for Gods glory, our brethrens edification, and
the declaration of the truth of our faith. This doctrine we propose; this
doctrine we persuade; this doctrine we urge and press: and therefore our
adversaries slanderously abuse our Church, when they call us licentious
Libertines, and those that open a school to sin and wickedness, and that
dehort and dissuade men from good works. For though we teach not, that good
works are to be done, because they merit the reward, as the Papist untruly
teaches yet we teach, that good works are to be done, because they shall be
crowned, and receive the reward; as the holy Scripture affirms. It deserves
not the name of virtue, nor we are not to be called virtuous, for performing of
one good deed; for a wicked person may do one or two good deeds, either of a
sudden motion, without due regard; or of spite and malice to cross his enemy;
or through vehement persuasion of some friend; or to win praise and
commendation of men; or to avoid shame and reproach of ye world; or least he
should do something, that might hinder his prosperity, or else because his
lusts and affections do strive and struggle as the winds, so as yt which is
the stronger prevails on the rest, and brideleth them from breaking forth
into action: so a vain glorious man will make a show to be liberal, to the
end he may serve the turn of his ambition; on the other side, a covetous man,
that he may spare charges, will set light by honor, though inwardly his mind
be fired with ambition: so a proud man will be bountiful, to be extolled among
the common people: so she that fears the reproach of the world, though her
mind be defiled with unchaste lusts, yet outwardly she will be chaste. But it is
not virtue, to do well after this sort: but to do good after a good sort, is
when it is done, Arist. spo^^e, sci^^ter. cons^anter.
(as the Philosopher teaches,) willingly, and not by coaction and enforcement;
with aduisement, and due regard of circumstances; with continuance and
perseverance, and without wearines and fainting.

Perseverance in well doing is most requisite for us: Mat. 10.22.
for why? it receives the crown. It is written, that He that endures to the
end, he shall be saved. It is written, that they are rewarded with everlasting
life, Romans ^.7.
that through patience in well doing, seek glory, and honor, and
immortality. It is written, that the bountifulnes of God is great toward us,
Romans 11.22.
If we continue in this bountifulnes; or else we shall also be cut off. It is
written, Phil 3.13 14.
that we must forget that which is behind, and endeavor our selves to that
which is before, and follow hard toward the mark, for the prise of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus. It is written, that Christ has now also
reconciled us in that body of his flesh through death, Col. 1.2^.^^
which were in times past strangers and enemies, because our minds were set in
evil works; if we continue grounded and stablished in the faith, and be not
moved away from the hope of the Gospel, whereof we have heard. It is written,
2. Tim. 2.5.6.
taht if any man strive for a maisterie, he is not crowned, except he strive as
he ought to do: the husbandman must labor, before he receive the fruit. It is
written, Heb. 3.6.1^.
that we are the house of Christ, if we hold fast that confidence and that
rejoicing of hope unto the end; and that we are made partakers of Christ, if we
keep sure unto the end that beginning, wherewith we are vpholden. It is
written, Eze. 18.24. and 33.13.
that if the righteous man turn away from his righteousness, and commit
iniquity, and do according to all the abominations that the wicked man does;
all his righteousness that he has done shall not be mentioned; but in his
transgression that he has committed, and in his sin that he has sinned, in
them shall he die. Finally, it is written, Reu. 2.1^.
that if we will have the crown of life, we must be faithful unto the death.
Compare all this that is written; and tell, whether perseverance in well doing
be not most necessary; since without it, we cannot be partakers of
immortality?

If we go not onwards in well doing; we shall fall from well doing, and fall
into ill doing. For Vice gives many assaults and batteries against Virtue.
Every Virtue has two extreme Vices; one on the left hand in defect; the other
on the right in excess; ready to devour her on every side; as the roaring
Lion is ready to prey upon the silly lamb. Matt. 7.14.
The way of virtue is narrow: if we slip never so little, either on the one
side, or on the other side, we fall into the dirt and puddle of vice. Our own
corrupt nature and frail flesh will seduce us; the example and custom of the
world will persuade us; the enchanting cups of pleasure and sin will deceive
us; if we bend not all our force and endeavor to continue in well doing. That
old serpent and red dragon Satan, 1. Pet. 5.8.
walks about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. When God asked
of him, Job. 1.7.
whence he came, he answered; from compassing the earth. Mark how the devil
calls himself a Compasser. He is not idle; but embusied always, (when he is
let loose,) to ensnare and beguile souls, and to withdraw men from good
works. He would discourage the Minister from taking pains, by setting before
him, how the people contemn his doctrine, and sometimes his person, and how
they profit little in knowledge and godliness, notwithstanding his many and
manifold exhortations. He would stop the Magistrate and Officer from diligent
discharging of his charge and place, either with fear to offend some, or with
affection to spare some. He would draw the plain Tradesman from true dealing,
and cause him to betake himself to fraud and deceit, that he may be called
indeed a Craftesman: and why? because he cannot enrich himself by simplicity
and plain dealing: and therefore he casts into one shop a false measure,
into another shop deceitful weights, into another shop adulterate and
imperfect wares. He frets and fumes at diligent resorting to prayer, and
Sermons, and Sacraments; and therefore to hinder us from it, he will cast in
our way, either worldly business, or pastimes, sports, and pleasures. At a word,
to pull the resolved Christian from the awe of God; he will tempt him to
swear, to surfeit, to carouse, to be drunken; by the bait and allurements of
sociablenes and good fellowship. If then our own flesh like a domestical
Judas, be ready to betray us in every conflict and skirmish; if ye sugared
perswasio^s of worldly examples are like the bewitching songs of the Sirenes,
and the enchanting cups of Circe; if Satan be so busy and industrious to
steal away Salvation from us; how behoofefull and necessary for us, is it to
do well, and to persevere in well doing?

It is hard to continue in well doing, against so many adversaries: but let us
look on those, whom the word of God commends, and sets forth before us, as
lamps and torches to direct our feet in the darkness of this world. Behold
how David could not be discouraged from encountering the hugie Goliath, 1. Sam.
17.
either by the check of Eliab his brother; or the disswasion of king Saul; or
by the unfitness of the Armor; or by the railing and reuiling of the Giant
himself; but he held on with Heroical fortitude, and flew the monster. As
David fought against Goliath, and overcame him by constant resolution; so we are
to fight against the ugly monster of wickedness; and if we purpose to vanquish
it, Ephesians. 6.11.13.
we must take to us the whole Armor of God, and stand fast. Behold Noah, that
continued so just and upright in his time, that the universal deluge of
iniquity, (which had overwhelmed all flesh, Genesis 6.6.9.
and caused God to repent, and be sorry, that he had made man, that is, to
disauowe him to be his Creature,) could not pollute him. Genesis 39.
Behold Joseph, that could not be entrapped in the net of incontinencie, by any
alluring entisements, and wanton dalliances, and fond prouocations of his
unchaste mysteries. Est. 3.2. and 5.9.
Behold Mordecai the magnanimous Jew, that would not fawn on the proud Haman,
nor flatter him in his eminency, nor reverence him, either by bowing the knee,
or standing up, or moving for him; but preserved in his disdayning of him, or
rather of his haughtines and pride; because he was an Agagite of the stock of
the Amalekites, Deuteronomy. 25.18.19.
whose memory was to be rased out from under heaven, for that they cruelly
slew the weary Israelites, when they came out of Egypt. Behold Daniel, and the
three young men his fellows; of which, they so constantly resisted Idolatry,
that they regarded neither the majesty and power of the commanding Monarch,
Dan. 3.18.
nor the hatred and despite of their accusing enemies, nor the fiery heat of
the flaming furnace: and Daniel was so far off from forsaking his religion,
that when the king had decreed, that whosoever should ask any petition of any
God or man for thirty days, save of the king, he should be cast into the
den of Lions; as soon as he understood of this degree, Dan. 6.10.
he went into his house, and his window being open in his chamber toward
Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and prayed and praised
his God, as he did aforetime. So much did he dislike the practice of some
politic temporisers, that will ever apply themselves to the time, and never
row against the stream, or bend against the tempest; but will direct the
course of their ship according to the blast of wind, and will turn too and
fro in any sort, that they may arrive in the harborough which they have
conceited in their imagination. Behold the blind man, to whom Christ gave
sight; how constant and firm he was in confessing, that Christ was a Prophet,
and not a sinner, for else (said he) He could not have been heard of God, Ioh.
9.17.31.
and opened mine eyes. Behold the boldness of Peter and John, who though they
were straightly forbidden to preach any more in Jesus name; yet they stoutly and
courageously answered the Counsel on this wise; Act. 4.18. and 5.29.40.41.
We ought rather to obey God, then men. Behold the Baptist, how settled he abode
in reproouing vice and ungodliness; Matt. 14.
and how he had rather yield his head to be stricken off, then excuse the incest
of tyrannous Herod. Behold both Joseph of Arimathea, the noble Counsailour,
that retired not from his believing and cleaving to Christ, Mar. 15.43.
when he was crucified, and did hang upon the cross between two malefactors;
but went in boldly unto Pilate, and asked the body of Jesus: and those
religious and devout women, that as they had ministered to our Savior in his
life time of their substance, and despised ye scoffing of ye unbelieving Jews;
Matt. ^7.55. Luke 24.1
so they forsook him not in his last passion, and when the soul was separated
from the body; but prepared odours for his burial. Behold how Nicodemus
persisted in his love to Christ and his doctrine; Ioh. 3.2. Ioh 7.51. Ioh.
19.39.
so that from coming secretly to him in the night, he proceeded to defending
of him in the open council; and from that, to his manifest honoring of his
burial: as though his knowledge and profession of the Gospel were as the
morning light, that goes on by degrees til it shine clearly; Pro. 4 18. Mar.
8.24.25. Reu. 3.2. Reu. 2.13. Reu. 3.8.10.
and like the sight of the blind man, who first perceived men walking as trees,
and after saw evidently. Behold the Minister of the Ep^esine Church, who
though for the name of Christ he were burdened, yet he had patience; and
though he labored, yet he fainted not: and the Minister of Perga^^us who kept
the name Christ, and denied not the faith, even in the days of bloody
persecution: and the Minister of the Church of Philadelphia, who retained
always some strength, and denied not Christ, but kept ye word of patience.
Behold ye Martyrs, yt have most courageously endured torturing and death, for
ye profession of the faith of Christ Jesus, Reu. 12.11.
and loved not their lives unto the death; nay accounted it the highest
dignity, to spend their blood in and for the testimony of Christ. Niceph.
Ca^^est. l. 8. c. 36.
As (among infinite others) it is memorable of Vi^h^zanes the Eunuch of Sapores
the Persian king, whose instructor at first, and after faithful servant he
was; that when by the kings commandment he was to be brought forth to
punishment, for that he professed the doctrine of Christ; as a recompense of
his many benefits bestowed on the king, and his perpetual loyalty to the
com-monwealth, he desired that this one thing might be granted to him, that it
might not be reported and rumored, that he was put to death, as a Traitor, or
one that had been disloyal to the kings house, and that a Crier might publicly
testify, that Vsthazanes was slain for no other cause, but for that he did
only embrace Christian religion, and therefore would not adore the Sun, or
exhibit divine worship unto it. Which thing having obtained, he died most
quietly, and rejoiced that he had turned off a scandale and imputation from the
Christian profession, and that he was vouchsafed the honor, to die under the
name of a disciple of Christ Jesus. Behold the most excellent professor of
Christ Saint Paul, that gave us this counsel to persist in well doing, how
firm he was in discharging his calling, for preaching the Gospel to the
Nations. In his farewell to the Elders of ye Ephesine Church, he said; And now
behold, Act. 20.2^.23.24.
I go bound in the spirit to Jerusalem, and know not what things shall come
unto me there, save that the holy Ghost witnesses in every city, that bands
and afflictions abide me: but I pas not at all, neither is my life dear unto
my self, so that I may fulfill my course with joy, and the ministration which
I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God.
No prediction of dangers could appall him: for while he tarried in Caesarea,
Act. 21.11.12.13.
there came a certain Prophet from Judea, named Agabus, who took Paul's
girdle, and bound his own hands and feet, and said, Thus says the holy
Ghost: So shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man, that owes this girdle,
and shall deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles; and when the Brethren
besought him, that he would go up to Jerusalem; Paul said, What do ye
weeping and breaking mine heart? for I am ready, not to be bound only, but
also to die at Jerusalem, for the name of the Lord Jesus What could hinder him
from well doing, who to finish his course, and to hold fast the faith of
Christ, 2. Cor. 11.23. etc.
in sufferings exceeded other Ministers? For he was in labors more abundant;
in stripes above measure; in prison more plenteously; in death often. Of the
Jews he received five times forty stripes save one; he was thrice beaten with
rods; he was once stoned; he suffered thrice shipwreck; he had been in the
deep Sea night and day; he traveled often in perils of waters, in perils of
robbers, in perils of his own nation, in perils among the gentiles, in perils
in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils among
false Brethren; in wearines and painfulness; in wa^chings often, in hunger
and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness. Besides the things which
were outward: he was cumbred daily, and had the care of all the Churches: Who
was weak? and he was not weak? who was offended? and he did not burn? 1.
Cor. 9.19. etc.
Though he were free from all men, yet he made himself servant unto all men,
that he might win the more. Unto the Jews, he became as a Jew, that he might
win the Jews: to them that were under the law, as though he were under the
law, that he might win them that were under the law: to them that were
without law, as though he were without law, that he might win them that
were without law: to the weak, he became as weak that he might win the weak: he
was made all things to all men, that he might by all means save some.

Let the Ethnicks cease to advance their Cato, who was never changed, Pl^^. is
Ca^.
though the state of the Commonwealth were often changed; and who being
exhorted by his friends, that (his hopes being forlorn) he should flee to
Caesar's clemency; he answered, that it became men conquered and offenders, to
be Suppliants, but that Cato was not conquered, nor taken, since he showed
himself invincible in all his life, and had exceeded Caesar in valor and
justice; and that rather Caesar was vanquished and subdued; who denied still,
that he fought against his country, yet was now co^uicted thereof; and that
therefore other should entreat Caesar for themselves, that would, but none
should entreat for Cato. Who will admire Socrates any longer? whose wife
Xantippe was wont to report, that when he returned home, whatsoever brunts and
contentions he had borne abroad, he kept always one look and one countenance,
neither troubled with sad accidents, nor over joyous with prosperity. And none
may account Diogenes matchless; who being admonished, yt in his old age he
should surcease turning of his Tub and the following of his Philosophical
labors and studies; What if (said he) ^a^ in a race; L^rt. l. 6.
should I slack my course being near ye gole; or rather be the earnester in
running? Whereby he me^t, that the study of Virtue is the more earnestly to be
urged, the less space of our life remains; because it is a shame to grow
cold in so laudable a purpose. For why? the holy Apostle Paul has declared
himself, Stob.
to be no more remoueable from continuance in his calling, then the Statue and
Image is from the base and pillar that supports it: and to be the Salamander,
Naz.
that could live in the heat and fire of tribulation, without any damage;
rather extinguishing the flame, then hurted by the strength thereof: Anshel.
and to be the quadrate stone with six corners, which stands firmly upon
whatsoever side it fall; for he abode constant in prosperity and adversity,
in liberty and captivity, in open view and in secret places: and not to be a
resembler of the Chamaeleon, that lives by the air; or of the fish Polypus,
that takes to it the color of each stone to which it sticks: (whom many
follow in gaping after popular praise, and in applying their glove to every
hand; Epiph. in Physiol
) but to be a resembler of the wise Serpent, that chiefly labors to keep his
head from blows, howsoever the rest of his body be beaten; therein searching
us in all batteries of tribulation, to preserve our faith sound and sure, by
which we apprehend Christ Jesus, the head of all believers: and finally, he
declared himself to be the mirror of Constancy, that the Poet dreamed of,
but could not find in his Paganism; who might be terrified and drawn from
his virtuous intent, neither by the rage of the multitude, nor by the severity
of Tyrants, nor by the blustrous tempests and flakes of lightning; but (Si
fractus illabatur orbis, Hor. l 3. Car. Ode. 3.

Impauidum ferient ruinae,)


If the frame of the whole world fall down upon him, Act. 9.15.
yet the ruin thereof would not dismay him. This was the Apostles
vnmooueablenes and firmenes in well doing, which is recorded for our
instruction.

But thou will say: that Paul was inimitable: being singularly inspired from
heaven, and selected to be a Vessel, that should bear the Gospel of Christ
before kings and Potentates; and therefore it is no marvel, if he abode so
firm: but we are not to expect such superabundant grace. Why then, behold the
multitude, that followed Christ three days together in the wilderness and
therefore Christ said of them, Mar. 8, 2.
I have compassion of the multitude, because they have now continued with me
three days and have nothing to eat. In which words our Savior yeeldes a
reason, why he had compassion upon them; to wit, because they had continued
with him three days. God does not forsake his children, when his children do
not forsake him. So Christ says to ye Apostles; Luke 22.28.29.30.
Ye are they which have continued with me in my tentations; therefore I appoint
unto you a kingdom, as my father has appointed unto me: that ye may eat and
drink at my table in my kingdom. Of this heavenly banquet which is bestowed
on those, that are not weary of well doing; we have a lively Image and
representation in that refreshing and feeding of the multitude in the
wilderness, when they had followed Christ three days together. Bernard says,
Ser. 1. de euang. 7. panum.
that We must needs spend three days in this wilderness: the first day is the
fear of punishment, which works the beginning of our conversion; the second
is the day of godliness, in which we rest in the hope of Gods mercies; the third
is obedience, which must needs be yielded to Gods commandments. For that which
fear begins, hope of pardon helps forwards: but no good ensues, except there
be added thereunto obedience to the precepts of the Lord. Many have the two
first: they fear punishment, and hope for pardon: but where is there
obedience? But they that will not follow Christ three days in the desert of
this life, shall not taste of his loaves. When ye hound hunts an hare, or some
other beast, if he find not of it, he goes sloathfully and carelessly; but if
he perceive yt sent of the beast, he runs nimbly and busily, and he runs
till he find the game. So if we have tasted indeed of God if the fragrant
perfume of his goodness do come to our nosthrils; if we duly understand Gods
present blessings and future promises; questionles we would run after the
savor of these good ointments; and we would run cheerfully even to ye end,
till we came to the heavenly house of God. But they that are unacquainted with
ye savor of these heavenly things; Heb. 6.4.5.
and that have not tasted of ye heavenly gift, and of the good word of God, and
of the powers of the world to come; and that have not seen how gracious ye
Lord is, Psalm. 34.8. and 73.1.
and how good he is to Israel, even to the pure in heart; these walk
remissely, and do not follow Christ so much as one day; nay they cannot watch
with Christ one hour; but they follow their own desires, and ye
co^cupiscences of the sinful flesh. The faint hearted soldier sinkes and
shrinkes at ye first; and he yt has been daintily brought up at home, either
staggers, or flies at the first brunt of the battle; whereas the old soldier
and experienced in labors, will fear neither the shot, over him, nor the
slain before him, nor the thundering Canons about him, nor the troops of the
enemies near him; but affrighted with the sight of no danger, he expects the
end of the Battle. This Suldiour obtaines glory; the other reapes shame. So
it falls out in the spiritual warfare of Christians. He that continues in the
love of God and of his neighbor; in the fear, worship, and service of God, in
performance of good works; regards neither the proaches of the ungodly that
fly over his head; nor the multitude of sinners before him; nor the raging of
Satan about him; nor the entisements of the flesh and of the world near him;
but he abides continually in the service of God, and shall in the end receive
the eternal weight of glory.

G^^. 15.^^.
As Abraham when the fowls fell on his sacrifice, still drove them away, and
was not by their importunity hindered from so good a work: so we must repel
all lets and stops that may breed wearines in well doing. If we will obtain
the reward, and reap the fruit of eternal life, we must not only begin well,
but persevere to do well; and we must not only sow the seed with the
sloathfull husbandman; who after he has plowed and sown leaves the work
imperfect; but there must be harrowing, and hedging, and weeding, least the
fowls devour the seed, or the cold starve it, or the Sun parch it, or the
beasts break in and spoil it, or the noisome weeds choke it. Every tree
almost in the Spring, will bear flowers and blossoms; but that tree is most
regarded, which brings forth timely fruit. Almost every field will make show
of corn at the beginning; but we regard that field most, that yeeldes sure and
plenteous increase. De^^^^ credonae cap. 7.
The schools of Rhetoricians, says Saint Austen) are replenished every where
with companies of young men; but few do attain to the eloquence of Tully,
fewer do become good Orators, and most few are famous: such a thing is
religion: for the multitude of the unskillful and sinful do frequent the
Churches; yet few do get perfection in the mysteries of Religion. Commonly
with many, in the race and course of Virtue, the beginning is hot, the
proceeding luke warm, the end kaie cold. A type of this was in the Image which
Nabuchadnezar saw in his dream; Dan. 2.
whose head was of fine gold; whose breast and arms were of silver; whose
belly and thighs were of brass; whose legs were of iron; and whose feet
were part of iron, and part of clay. So many wax worse and worse: begin in the
Spirit, and and in the flesh; as the Apostle says of the Galathians. Many at
first comparable to fine gold, Gal. 3.3. Lam. 4.2.
may after be esteemed as earthen pitchers, even the work of the hands of the
pottar; as Jeremiah says of the men of Z^on. Many may have that renewed of
them, which Isaiah spoke of Jerusalem; Isai. 1.21.
How is the faithful City become an harlot? thy silver is become dross: thy
wine is mixed with water. Many will begin their journey well, from the slavery
of sin toward the land of righteousness; as the Israelites did march at the
first willingly out of Egypt toward the land of Canaan: Number. 11.5.
but after a little while they will murmr for they change, and fall to
lusting after the wonted pleasures and baits of iniquity; as the Israelites
longed for the fish, cucumbers, and other fruit of Egypt. Many will begin to
leave the Sodom of ungodliness: but as Lots wise looked back, when she had
left Sodom; either of a love to her old nest and dwelling place, or else to
try, whether the Lord would bring the destruction threatened; so they will
reflect their eyes and hands, at least their hearts, to their former vanity
and impiety, either enchanted with their accustomed delectation, or else
doubting of the certainty of Gods promises and comminations. Genesis 19.
But such must call to mind the punishment inflicted upon the wife of Lot, for
fainting from her good beginning; and must persuade themselves, that a relapse
into wickedness never goes unpunished; and therefore our Savior says, Remember
Lots wife. Luke 17.52.
Many will travel a little way to the kingdom of heaven; but when they find
the voyage long and the way uneasy, then they return to the land of sin
again; as Orpah brought her mother in law Naomi going toward the land of
Israel, but then left her at one disswasion: but what scarsitie is there of
Ruthes, that will depart out of the borders of their sins, and be so linked
in society and company of the faithful and godly, that they will say
constantly against all repulses; Ruth. 1.14.16.17.
Entreat me not to leave thee, nor to depart from thee; for whither thou go,
I will go; and where thou dwell, I will dwell: thy people shall be my
people, and thy God my God: where thou die, will I die, and there will I be
buried? Many will pretend zeal to religion, and the preaching of the Gospel;
but at small occasions will be so incensed, that they will go back with those
re^negates which walked no more with Jesus, working their destruction by the
very doctrine of salvation: whereas firm professors will say with Peter;
Master, Ioh. 6.68.69.
to whom shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life: and we believe and
know, that thou art that Christ the Son of the living God. Many will salute
the Brethren for a time, and labor for the truth, and promote the Gospel of
Christ, Col. 4.14. 2. Tim. 4.11.
but when the perilous scirmishes come, they will flee with the dastardly
soldier, and with Demas forsake Paul, and cleave to this present world. Many
will say, Lord, I will follow thee, whithersoeuer thou go; but when they
hear, that Foxes have holes, and the birds of the heaven nests, but the Son
of man has not wherein to lay his head; and when they call to mind their
worldly businesses, they will first go and bury their father, and they will
first bid them farewell that are at their house, and then they will follow
Christ: Luke 9.17. etc.
But no man that puts his hand to the plough, and looks back, is apt to
the kingdom of God. When the Philistines sent home the Ark of God, setting it
on a carte drawn with heifers, whose calves were shut up at home; they took
this for a sign, that it was God's Ark, and that they were plagued for keeping
it; if those heifers, whose calves were so shut up at home, did go on directly
into the land of Israel, 1. Sam. 6.
and did not return unto their calves, till they had brought the Arc into it
own proper place. So when the faithful soul suffers much for Christ and
his faith, and does much good; it is an argument, that they are works of
godliness, if we directly and still proceed in good works, walking from virtue
to virtue, Psalm. 84.7.
till we appear before the God of Gods in Syon. But the soul that returns to
the Calves shut up at home; that is, to sensual passions, and appetites, and
affections, and relics of the old man, it shows, that it bears not the
Arc, nor is the true and living Temple of God.

When the Apostle says, Romans 13.14. Gal. 3.24
that we must put on the Lord Jesus Christ; and that as many, as have been
baptized into Christ, have put on Christ; he commends unto us the virtue of
perseuering. For what else means the scripture by putting on of a thing; but
to be so joined unto it, as never to depart therefrom? So the wicked man that
delights in cursing, is laid to be clothed with it, as with a raiment; and to
be covered with it, Psalm. 109.18.19.
as with a garment; and to be compassed with it, as with a girdle: so Christ
that is the absolute pattern of all righteousness, Isai. 11.5.
is said to be girded about the loins with justice, and girded about the
reins with faithfulness: so the obstinate sinner, Job. 8.22
that bewraies his hatred toward God, by continuance in sin, is said to be
clothed with confusion and shame: whereby we may learn, that to put on
Christ, is to be apparelled with ye new man, and to be so arraied with the
Armor of God, as not to put it off again, but to be found harnessed
therewith. It may be said of many, that they are like new broomes, yt for a
little space sweep clean, but they daily decrease and decline: showing
themselves not to have a true affection to godliness and the heavenly wisdom:
Ecclus. 24.24.
for she protests, that they that ea^e he^, shall have the more hunger; and
they that drink her, shall thirst the more When the painter Euphranor had
undertaken to paint twelve Gods at Athens, Val. Mar. l. 8. c. 12.
he delineated the Image of Mercury with as excellent colors of Majesty as
he could; making show, as though he would have represented Jupiter with greater
dignity: but al his endeavor being consumed in the former work, his latter
attempts could not rise to the height at which they aimed: For though Nature do
often suffer Art to imitate her power; yet sometimes she smiles at the vain
enterprise of Art; as Euphranors pensill did truly prove. But God in working
out our salvation, follows not the order of Art, but of Nature; proceeding
from that which is imperfect, to that which is perfect. As in the whole matter,
after the letter and ceremonies of the law, he gave the law of grace and the
Spirit, keeping the good wine with the bridegroom of Cana until the end of
the feast: so in particular, Ioh. 2.10.
God proceeds from the good using of a smaller grace, to the bestowing of a
greater. Nature by continual operation brings forth an high tree, of a small
plant, or seed; and the drop of water frets the stone, not by force, but often
falling; and the fire is maintained by continual putting of fuel thereunto:
so the God of Nature, by his grace, as by a seed, and by a perpetual
influence, does produce admirable virtues in his elect, causing the latter end
ever to be better then the beginning. 1. Cor. 15.46.
For that is not first, which is spiritual; but that which is natural is
first, and after succeedes that which is spiritual. God commanded, that in
Aarons garment beneath upon the skirts there should be made pomegranats of blew
silk, and purple, and skarlet, round about the skirts thereof, and bells of
gold between them round about; that is, Exodus 28.33.34.35
A golden bell and a Pomegranate round about upon the skirts of the rob^. The
bells were, that when he ministered, and went into the holy place before the
Lord, and came out, his sound might be heard: and why may not the Pomegranates
express the perfection and consummation of virtue and godliness? in that the
Pomegranate among al other fruits seems to have the resemblance of a crown:
and the end is the glory and crown of the work: and this crown (as it were)
was set, not in the highest part, nor in the most, but about the lowest edge,
or skirts of the high Priests to be: and why may we not gather hereby, that we
must abide in godliness unto the last gasp, and continually speak well, and
do well?

Yea, but how may we obtain to this constancy and perseverance? By earnest
prayer to God. For the spiritual Armor by which we overcome the wicked, Ephesians
6.10 Phil. 1.6 Phil. 2.13
and quench his fiery darts, is the Armor of God. God that has begun this
good work in us, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ. God works
in us both the will and the deed, even of his good pleasure. 1. These. 5.24. 1.
Pet. 5.10. Heb. 13.21. Ephesians. 3.16 2 Thessalonians. 1.1. 2 Thessalonians. 2.16. and 3.3.
God is faithful which calls us, who will also do it. God will stablish us.
God makes us perfect in all good works, to do his will, working in us that is
pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ. God grants us according to the
riches of his glory, that we may be strengthened by his spirit in the inner
man. God makes us worthy of his calling, and fulfils all the good pleasu^e of
his goodness, and the work of faith with power. God gives us everlasting
consolation and good hope through grace; and does comfort our hearts, and
stablish us in every word and good work; and is faithful, Jude. ^^r. 3.4.
and will stablish us, and keep us from evil; and is able to keep us, that
we fall not, and to present us faulties before the presence of his glory with
joy.

Therefore pray we earnestly to God, that he would so confirm us with his
grace; that we may so run, that we may come to the goal of eternal
happiness. For it is God alone, that can and will grant this perseverance unto
the end, to those that unfeignedly beg it of him. Therefore the holy Psalm^st
speaks thus in the person of Christ; Psalm. 36.8
I have set the Lord always before me, for he is at my right hand; therefore I
shall not slide. As if Christ had said; I have confirmed my says, by the
consideration of the will of God. For I knew, that I should be offered up a
sacrifice for mankind, by the special and unspeakable determination of God:
and beholding and setting this decree of God before mine eyes, I see and assure
my self, that God is present with me, stands on my right hand, sustaines and
helps me; therefore I turn not mine eyes from him, and I am certainly
persuaded, that I cannot be overcome and swallowed up of these sorrow. And as
Christ does confirm himself; so all the godly must know, that when they are
pressed with encumbrances and tentations, they must promise to themselves
certain deliverance. For yt which was auailable in Christ, must needs be
auailable in his members also. And where are the Doctors of diffidence and
distrust, that teach men, that they cannot ascertaine themselves of their
final perseverance, and therefore they must still remain doubtful? since
David in the person of Christ, does not only mention his confidence for the
present time, but also extends it to the time to come; and therefore says,
that he should not slide, be shaken, or moved.

Psalm. 138.7.
Say not, what though David could say? Though I walk in the midst of trouble,
yet God will revive me; he will stretch forth his hand upon the wrath of mine
enemies, and his right hand shall save me. And what though Paul said of the
Corinthians, 1. Cor. 1.8.
that God would confirm them unto the end, that they might be blameles in the
day of our Lord Jesus Christ? And what though the same Apostle could say by
inspiration? that he was persuaded, that neither death, nor life, Romans 8.38.39.
nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to
come; nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate
us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Yet how shall we be
sure, that we shall never fall away from our own stedfastnes? Consider what
our Savior says; Ioh. 6.37.
that all that the Father gives unto him, shall come to him, and him that
comes to him, he casts not away: Ioh. 10.28
and that he gives eternal life to his sheep, and that they shall never
perish, neither any shall pluck them out of his hand. Consider what the
Apostle says; Romans 11.2^.
that the gifts and calling of God are without repentance: and that God is
faithful; which will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able, 1.
Cor. 10 13.
but will even give the issue with the tentation, that we may be able to bear
it. Consider what Christ says again; that the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against his Church and children: Matt. 16.18. Luke 22.32.
and what he says to Peter; I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not.
Nay, consider this, that if thou be the sheep of Christ; if thou believe in
him, if thou cleave unto him; Christ prayed for thee, as for Peter, Ioh. 17.20.
that thou may be one with him, united to him, and never fall from him.

Let the unfaithful reject the wisdom of God against themselves; yet the
elect will not only embrace it, and cleave unto it; but also defend it,
maintain it, and justify it: For wisdom is justified of her children. Matt.
11.19. Matt. 13.8.
Let the fowls devour the seed that fell by the way side, and the Sam^e
parth the seed that fell on the sto^e ground, though if have a tempora^te
flourishing; and the thorns choke the seed that fell among thorns; yet that
seed that falls on good ground brings forth fruit, one corn an hundred sold,
some sixty fold, and another thirty sold: that is, Luke ^.5
They that have an honest and good heart, bear the w^rd, and keep it, and
bring forth fruit with patience. Act. 5.
Let Ananias and S^phira fall from sincerity; and let many Antichrists depart
from the true Church and faith of Christ yet the Lords seal abides sure on
his elect; and the holy Ghost has given the censure; 1. Ioh. 2.19.
They went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us,
they should have continued with us: but this comes to pass, that it might
appear, that they are not all of us Let Pharaohs heart be hardened at Gods
correction, and let him repel the scourges that should reform him, as the
hard Anuill bears off the strokes of the hammer: yet Paul, and every faithful
person, that has his stony heart changed into a heart of flesh by the working
of the spirit, will be bettered by the terrors, and threatenings, and
chasticements, whereby God prepares us to subjection, and will presently cry
out and say, Lord what will thou have me to do? Act. 9.6.
behold, I am ready to fulfill thy commandment.

Now since good works, and continuance in well doing, are so necessary for
the glorifiing of our heavenly Father; and for the profiting and edifying of
our neighbors; and for the infini^e reward promised to the godly; and for the
avoiding of the sharp punishments threatened to the wicked; there remains an
instruction, both for them that have not began to do well, and for those that
have began to do well. To the swearer, the fornicator, the drunkard, the
malicious person, the railer, the unmerciful, the unjust; in a word, to them
that wallowe in their sins without remorse, the saying of Paul is to be
proposed; The wages o^ sin is death. Romans 6.23
If the sweet pleasures of sin, have so sour sauce; and if the workers of
iniquity have deadly pay and wages; detest and abhor sin then, as a biting
serpent, and at length begin to do well, and to embrace virtue. The Prophet
says of the stiff-necked Jews, Zach. 7.11.12.
that they refused to hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their
ears, that they should not hear: yea, they made their hearts as an adamant
stone, least they should hear the law, and the words which the Lord of hoasts
sent in his spirit by the ministry of the Prophets.

There is no stone so hard as the Diamond: yet the disobedient were as hard as
the Diamond. Let not us Christians equal their hardness; and let not us be
found harder then the Diamond; so that the speech of an ancient Father may be
appropriated to us, when he says; that the Diamond though most hard, Cyp. de
d^p. martyri^.
yet it is mollified and maistered with the blood of an he Goat; but that we
do not east aside our hardness, nor as yet are softened by the blood of
Christ; who was the true escape goat, Leu. 16.21.
shadowed out in the types of the old sacrifices, upon which Aaron was to put
his hands, and to confess over him all the iniquities, and trespasses, and
sins of the children of Israel, and to send him away (by the hand of a man
appointed) into the wilderness; and which was a true figure of Jesus Christ,
that bears the sins of the people. Moses struck the rock with his rod,
Isai. 53.4. Psalm. 78.2^.2.
and the waters gushed out: so let the remembrance of Christ's sufferings, and
the infinite benefits that we receive thereby, pierce our hearts, and draw
forth tears of true repentance, and of amendment of life. Psalm. 78.8.9.10.11.
For as the Israelites were a rebellious generation, a generation that fet not
their heart aright, and whose spirit was not faithful to GOD; and the children
of Ephraim being armed, and shooting with the bow, turned back in the day of
battle; and kept not the covenant of God, but refused to walk in his law;
because they forgot his Acts, and his wonderful works that he had showed
them: so what truer reason can be given of rebellion against Gods ordinances,
but our forgetting of Gods incomprehensible love, Romans 8.32 Ioh. 3.16.
who spared not his own Son, but gave him for us all to death? and that so
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whoseuer
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Shall we so long exhilerate and encourage our spiritual foes, by wallowing
in the filthiness of sin; and give them occasion to say in their hearts; O
our souls rejoice; Psa. 35.25
we have devoured them? And shall we not by our conversion procure joy to the
holy Angels of GOD; Luke 15.7
that rejoice more for one sinner that conuerteth, then for ninety and nine
just men, that need none amendment of life?

Let us dash the young children of Babylon against the stones: that is, Psa.
137.9
let us destroy the brood of sin in the cradle and infancy, before it
wholly possess us; and let us speedily drive away the tentations and
enticements to wickedness, that we may say with the man of God; Psalm 18.37.38.
We have pursued our enemies, and taken them, and have not turned again till
we have consumed them; ^e have wounded them, and they were not able to rise,
they are fallen under our feet. Let us beware how sin take root in us: for
as inueterate maladies of the body, crave long and sharp curing; and as cloth
often and deeply dipped in the fat, hardly, or never leeseth his color: so
the in^eterate vices of the soul are not easily removed; and the corruption
of the mind that becomes an habit, cannot be washed away without much ado.
Ier. 3.23
Can the black Moore change his skin? or the Leopard his spots? then may they
also do good, that are accustomed to evil: says the Lord by his holy
Prophet. Let us break the bands of Satan, and escape out of his snare, wherein
he would hold us at his pleasure; and let us not suffer him to deal with us,
as the child deals with the bird, which he tieth with a threede by the foot,
permitting it sometimes to skip freely, but then pulling it back, when it
thinks to escape; so let not Satan tie us by the use and custom of
iniquity, that though we seem likely sometimes to fly from him, yet he may
draw us back, because we are fettered in the traps of sin. Let us avoid and
shun the bait of wickedness, with the wary fish; least if we swallow down the
bait, the hook also catch us, and then our ghostly Enemy lead us hither and
thither, as the fisher draws and carries the ensnared fish, according as
himself desires. At a word, (...) not the tumults of our sinful desires
breed in us a spiritual deafene^, that we cannot hear the distinct and
piercing sound of the word of God, that does admonish us, Heb. 12.1
To cast away every thing that pr^sseth down, and the sin that hangs so
fast on: as the dwellers by some places of the River N^us in Egypt, Cic. in s^m
Scip.
called Catadupae can hear no sound, because they have gotten a deafenes by
the continual rumbling of the River, that rusheth down from high mountains:
but let us beseech God to open our ears, both inwardly, and outwardly, that we
may abandon ungodliness, learn to do well, and pray unfeignedly unto the Lord,
Psalm. 69.14.15.16
that he would deliver us out of the mire, that we sink not, and that he would
deliver us from them that hate us, and from the deep waters: and that the
water flood may not draw us, nor the deep swallowe us up, nor the pit shut
her mouth upon us: and that the Lord would hear us; (For his loving ^i^dnes is
good;) and turn unto us, according to the multitude of his tender mercies.

Contrarily, to them that hunger and thirst after righteousness; to them that
have taken up the cross of Christ and follow him; to them that sigh under the
burden of iniquity; to them that are desirous to remove hence, and to dwell
with the Lord; to them that love prayer, the word, and all good works; this
speech of the Apostle is to be proposed; Let us not be weary of well doing;
for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.

Have thou begun to renounce sin, and to embrace righteousness? Let not the
old Proverb be verified of thee; 2 Pet. 2.20.21.22
The Dog is returned to his own vomit, and the Sow that was washed to the
wallowing in the mi^e. For if thou, after thou have escaped from the
filthiness of the world, through the acknowledging of the Lord, and of the
Savior Jesus Christ, art yet entangled therein, and overcome; the latter end
is worse then the beginning: for it had been better for thee not to have
acknowledged the way of righteousness, then after thou have acknowledged it,
to turn from the holy commandment given unto thee. As the Scripture does
witness, that Christ should not surcease in the progress of Mediatorship,
Math. 12.20 Luke 1.74 75.
till ^ee brought judgment into victory; that is, till he showed himself
conqueror over all his enemies; so Christ has delivered us out of the hands
of all our enemies, that we should serve him without fear; all the days of
our life, in holiness and righteousness before him. Will thou know then what
is the best way of perseuering? Christ shows, Ioh. 15.^0
when he says; If ye keep my commaudements, ye shall abide in my love; as I
have kept my Fathers commandment, and abide in his love. For it is not the
specious and gay beginning, but the virtuous and firm ending, Mat. 19.30.
that has the recompense: for, many that are first shall be last, and the last
shall be first.

Have thou begun to believe the Gospel, Col. 1.23.
and to profess the faith? Continue grounded in the faith, and be not moved
away from the hope of the Gospel, whereof thou have heard, and which has
been preached unto thee; Ephesians. 2.18 19.
and be thou rooted in the love of God, that Christ may dwell in thine heart by
faith, and thou may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to know the love of Christ,
which passes knowledge, that thou may be fi^led with all fullness of GOD;
and hold fast thy profession, Heb. 4.16
That thou may go bouldly unto the throane of grace, that thou may
receive mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. For he that wauereth,
Iam. 1.6.7.8.
is like a wave of the Sea, tossed of the wind, and carried away; neither let
that man think, that he shall receive any thing of the Lord: a double minded
man is unstable in all his ways.

Have thou begun to pray to the Lord; and can not see thy petitions by and by
accomplished? Pray always, and wax not faint. Call to mind the Parable of
the unjust Judge, Luke 18.4.5.6.7.
whom the importunity of the widdowe overcame and forced to say that though he
feared not God, nor reverenced man; yet because the widow troubled him, he
would do her right, least at last she should come, and make him weary. Hear
(says Christ) what the unrighteous Judge says: Now shall not GOD (the most
righteous Judge) avenge his Elect, which cry day and night unto him, yea,
though he suffer long for them? Call to mind the woman of Canaan, Mat.
15.22.28.
who being a suppliant for her daughter, so long continued crying, Have mercy
on me, O Lord, the Son of David, and so long waited the Lords leisure; till
Jesus answered, O woman, great is thy faith; be it unto the^, as thou desire.
Call to mind the blind men, that would not be stayed by the rebukes of the
multitude, Math. 20.31.
that willed them to hold their peace; but redoubled their cry for mercy,
till they obtained their request. Call to mind our Savior himself, Matt.
26.44. Psalm. 123.2.
how he repeated the same prayer thrice in his agony; to teach us, that we
must pray continually; and that as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of
their masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress; so
our eyes must wait upon the Lord our God, until he have mercy upon us.

Have thou borne many adversities, and crosses, and afflictions? Ecclus. 2.1.2.
etc.
Be constant unto the end. For if thou will come into the service of the Lord,
prepare thy soul to tentation; settle thine heart, and be patient; join thy
self unto him, and depart not away; that thou may be increased at thy last
end; whatsoever comes unto thee, receive it patiently; believe in God, and he
will help thee; order thy way aright, and trust in him; wait for his mercy;
shrink not away from him: consider the old generations, and mark them well;
Was there ever any confounded that put his trust in the Lord? or who has
continued in his fear, and was forsaken? or whom did he ever despise, that
called upon him? For God is gracious and merciful, and forgiueth sins, and
saves in the time of trouble. But woe unto them that have a fearful heart:
woe unto him that is faint hearted, and believes not: woe unto them that have
lost patience: For what will they do, when the Lord shall visit them? We must
not still erspect easy and pleasant proceedings in performing of good works.
When the children of Israel did travel in the wilderness by Gods appointment,
Exodus 17.
sometimes they wanted water, sometimes their enemies set upon them, sometimes
other adversities pressed them: yet at length they were put into the possession
of the land flowing with milk and honey. And when the eleven tribes did fight
against Benjamin, Judge. 20.
by Gods commandment; in two fights they received a great overthrow; but in
the third battle they utterly vanquished Benjamin. Such difficulties does the
Lord now and then cast in the way of the godly, for the greater trial of their
faith and patience. Howbeit this commonly is done by the fraud of the devil,
and the subtlety of his adherents: Genesis 49.17.
for he is as a Serpent by the way, and an Adder by the path, biting the horse
heels, so that the Rider shall fall backward. For as the hunter, when he sees
the beast running into the nett of his own accord, makes no noise, nor yields
forth any shouting; but if he perceive the beast to go a contrary way, he
stops his course, and by fraying forces it to run into the snare: so the
devil, whom he sees to perish willingly, and to pass their time in sloth
and idleness, those he molesteth not; but they that have a diligent regard of
their salvation, and do endeavor to do virtuous and good deeds, those he
troubles and terrifieth from their purpose, that they may be entangled in his
traps, and cease from finishing of godly enterprises. But the faithful that
know Satan's circumuenting enterprises, (as Saint Paul calls them, 2. Cor. 2.11.
) and are acquainted with his practices, must not foreslacke their forwardnes
in the fear of God; but must invoke the aid of the Lord in all adversities
and tribulations; and then they shall find, that as the diligent Physician is
ever attending on his patient; Psalm. 145.18. Basil. in hom. in princip. proverb.
So the Lord is near to all that call upon him; yea, to all that call upon him
in truth: and as the mariners, that are wont to behold the Sun in the day,
and the North star, or some other clear star in the night, do thereby
find out a ready course in the Sea; so if in every tribulation, danger, and
difficulty, we lift up our minds unto God; Psalm. 91.1.3.4.
Because we dwell in the secret of the most high, we shall always abide in the
shadow of the Almighty; surely he will deliver us from the snare of the
hunter, and from the noisome pestilence; he will cover us under his wings, and
we shall be sure under his feathers: his truth shall be our shield and buckler.

Have thou been liberal to the distressed? and do thou shrink from thy
former bountifulness; either for the multitude of the poor; or for the
unthankfulness of the needy; or for that other do so little regard them; or
for that thou accountest it a disparagement to thy worthiness to have care of
the afflicted; or for that thou do not presently see the reward? Yet be not
weary of well doing: 2 Thessalonians. 3.13.
though the Harvest come not by and by; yet in due time it will come; and thou
shall reap in due season; Iam. 1.14.
if thou be not weary of doing well. Blessed is the man, that endures
tentation: for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the
Lord has promised to them that love him

Have thou showed thy faith by many good works; and therefore do thou now
think, that thou may loyter in the way of life? Remember, L^uit 3.9
that as GOD commanded the rumpe also of the beast to be sacrificed; so he
requires the ending also of our life to be spent in his service. Luk 1^.^.8.
It is not enough for the servant to work in the field; he must after he
comes home, attend his Master also at Table; and when he has done all, yet
he does but his duty. Ioh. 8.3.
The true Disciples of Christ must continue in his word: Act. 2.42. Act. 11.23.
Act. 13.43. 1 Cor. 15.58. 1 Cor. 16.13. 1 Timothy 4.16. 2 Timothy 3.14. Heb. 3.12 1
Ioh. 2.24. Jude v. 20
and must continue in the Doctrine of the Apostles; and must with full purpose
of heart continue in the Lord; and must continue in the grace of God; and must
be steadfast, immovable, abundant always in the work of the Lord, forasmuch
as we know, that our labor is not in vain in the Lord; and must watch, stand
fast in the faith, quite themselves like men, and be strong; and must continue
in, and follow the good Doctrine they have received, and which is committed
unto them; and must take heed, least at any time there be in them an evil
heart and unfaithful, to depart away from the living GOD; and must have that
same truth abiding in them, which they have heard from the beginning; and must
edify themselves in their most holy faith, praying in the holy Ghost. The
Libbard takes the pray, not by pursuing and hunting; but by leaping and
skipping; and if he take it not at the third or fourth leaping, he frets with
rage, and falls away, as though he were overcome. Such are they that would
attain to perfection in well doing at one iumping, and would be free from all
crosses and tentations at the first push; and therefore if an impediment come
twice or thrice, they start back from doing good. But we must not leap and
skip in virtuous works, as though Heaven could be obtained at an instant; but
we must run, persevere, and proceed continually in godliness. For as in
Chesse-play, when one draught, either is not made when it ought to be, or else
is otherwise made then it should be, the whole game and gain is lost; so when
one good work is carelessly neglected, or one sin is presumptuously committed,
the whole fruit and reward of righteousness is put in hazard Wherefore let us
so run our race, Ezekiel. 33.12.
that we may obtain; 1 Cor. 9 24.26. 2 Timothy 2.1.3. 2 Pet. 1.1^.12.
and receive the prize: let us not fight, as one that beats the air; but let
us be strong in grace, and fight as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ that we may
receive that incorruptible crown: let us give diligence to make our calling
and election sure; and join together these precious linkes in a chain that
may adorn our souls; namely, with faith, virtue; with virtue, knowledge; with
knowledge, temperance; with temperance, patience; with patience, godliness;
with godliness, brotherly kindness; with brotherly kindness, love; that doing
these things we may never fall; but by this means an entering may be ministered
unto us abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. Amen.

FINIS.

