EPITHALAMIA: OR NVPTIALL POEMS UPON THE MOST BLESSED AND HAPPY MARRIAGE
BETWEEN the High and Mighty Prince FREDERICK the fifth, Count Palatine of the
Rhein, Duke of Bauier, etc.

AND THE MOST VIRTUOUS, GRACIOUS AND THRICE EXCELLENT PRINCESS, ELIZABETH,
SOLE Daughter to our dread Sovereign, JAMES by the grace of God King of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, defender of the Faith, etc.

CELEBRATED AT WHITE HALL the fourteenth of February, 1612.

Written by GEORGE WITHER.



AT LONDON, Imprinted for Edward Merchant, and are to be sold at his shop over
against the Cross in Paul's Churchyeard. 1612.

TO THE ALL-VER TVOVS AND THRICE EXCELLENT PRINCESS, ELIZABETH, SOLE DAVGHTER
TO OUR DREAD SOVEREIGN, JAMES BY THE GRACE OF GOD KING OF GREAT BRITANE,
FRANCE AND IRELAND, etc.

AND WIFE TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, FREDERICK THE FIFTH, COUNT PALATINE
OF THE RHEIN, DVKE OF BAVIER, etc. ELECTOR AND ARCH-SEWER TO THE SACRED ROMAN
EMPIRE, DVRING THE VACANCIE VICAR OF THE SAME, AND KNIGHT OF THE MOST HONORABLE
ORDER OF THE GARTER:

GEORGE WITHER WISHES ALL THE HEALTH, JOYS, HONORS AND FELICITIES OF THIS
WORLD IN THIS LIFE, AND THE PERFECTIONS OF ETERNITY IN THE WORLD TO COME.

To the Christian Readers.
REaders; for that in my book of Satyricall Essays, I have been deemed over
Cynicall; to show, that I am not wholly inclined to that Vain: But indeed
especially, out of the love which in duty I owe to those incomparable Princes,
I have in honor of their Royal Solemnities, Published these short
Epithalamiaes. By which you may perceive, (how ever the world think of me) I
am not of such a Churlish Constitution, but I can afford Virtue her deserved
honor; and have as well an affable look to encourage Honesty; as a stern
frown to cast on Villainy; If the times would suffer me, I could be as
pleasing as others; and perhaps ere long I will make you amends for my former
rigor; Mean while I commit this unto your censures; and bid you farewell.

G. W.

EPITHALAMION.
BRight Northern Star, and great Mineruaes peer,
Sweet Lady of this Day: Great Britans dear.
Lo thy poor Vassal, that was erst so rude,
With his most Rustic Satyrs to intrude,
Once more like a poor Siluan now draws near;
And in thy sacred Presence dares appear.
Oh let not that sweet Bow thy Browe be bent,
To scarre him with a Shaft of discontent.
One look with Anger, nay thy gentlest Frown,
Is twice enough to cast a Greater down.
My Will is ever, never to offend,
These that are good; and what I here entend,
Your* Worth compels me to; For lately grieved,
More then can be expressed, or well believed:
Minding for ever to abandon sport,
And live exilde from places of resort;
Careless of all, I yielding to security,
Thought to shut up my Muse in dark obscurity.
And in content, the better to repose,
A lonely Grove upon a Mountain chose.
East from Caer Winn, midway twixt Arle and Dis,
True Springs, where Britans true Arcadia is.
But ere I entered my intended course,
Great Aeolus began to offer force.
* The boisterous King was grown so mad with rage; He here remembers, and
describes the (...)te Winter which was so exceeding tempestuous and windy.

That all the Earth, was but his furies stage.
Fire, Air, Earth, Sea, were intermixed in one:
Yet Fire, through Water, Earth, and Air shone.
The Sea, as if she meant to whelme them under,
Beat on the Cliffs, and raged more loud then thunder:
And whilst the Vales she withsalt waves did fill,
The Air show'rd Floods, that drencht our highest hill,
And the proud trees, that would no duty know;
Lay ouerturned, twenties in a Row.
Yea every Man for fear, fell to Devotion;
Least the whole I Will should have been drencht in th'Ocea^.
Which I peceiuing coniur'd up my Muse,
The Spirit whose good help I sometime use;
And though I meant to break her rest no more,
I was then feign her aid for to implore.
And by her help indeed, I came to know,
Why, both the Air, and Seas, were troubled so.
For having urged her, that she would unfold
What cause she knew: Thus much at last she told.
Of late (quoth she) there is by powers Divine;
A match concluded, twixt Great Them and Rhine.
Two famous Rivers, equal both to Nile*
The one, the pride of Europes greatest I Will.
The Other disdaining to be closely pent,
Washes a great part, of the Continent.
Yet with abundance* does the Wants supply,
Of the still-thirsting Sea, that is never dry.
And now, these, being not alone endeared,
To mighty Neptune, and his watrie Heard:
But also to the great, and dreadful Jove
With all his sacred Companies above,
Both have assented by their Loves inuiting:
To grace (with their own presence) this Uniting.
Jove called a Summons to the Worlds great wonder;
It Was that we heard of late, which we thought thunder. The reason of the
tempestuous Winter.

A thousand Legions he intends to send them:
Of Cherubins and Angels, to attend them:
And those strong Winds, that did such blustering keep,
Were but the Tritons, sounding in the Deep;
To warn each River, petty Stream and Spring,
Their aid unto their Sovereign to bring.
The Floods and Shewers that came so plenteous down,
And lay entrencht in every Field and Town:
Were but retainers to the Nobler sort,
That owe their Homage at the Watrie Court.
Or else the Streams not pleased with their own store,
To grace the Thames, their Mistress borrowed more.
Exacting for their neighboring Dales and Hills,
But by consent all, naught against their wills.
Yet now since in this stir, are brought to ground
Many fair buildings, many hundreds drowned,
And daily found, of broken Ships great store,
That lie dismembered upon every shore:
With diverse other mischeefes known to all
This is the cause, that those great harms befall.
Whilst others things, in redines did make,
Hells hateful Haggs, from out their prisons brake. The cause of all such
dangers, as fell out during the distemperature of the air.

And spighting at this hopeful match, began
To wreak their wrath, on Air, Earth, Sea and Man*
Some having shapes of Romish shavelings got
Spewd out their venom: and began to plot:
Which way to thwart it: others made their way
With much distraction thorough land and Sea
Extremely raging. But Almighty Jove
Perceaues their Hate, and Envy from above:
He Will check their fury, and in yrons chained,
Their liberty abused, shall be restraind;
He Will shut them up, from coming to molest,
The Meriments of Hymen's holy feast.
Where shall be knit that sacred Gordian knot,
Which in no age to come, shall be forgot.
Which Policy nor Force shall nere vnty,
But must continue to eternity.
Which for the whole Worlds good was fore-decreed,
With Hope expected long; now come indeed.
And of whose future glory, worth, and merit
Much I could speak, with a prophetic spirit.
Thus by my Muses dear assistance, finding
The cause of this disturbance, with more minding
My Countries welfare, then my own content:
And longing for to see this Tales event.
My lonely life I suddenly forsook, He notes the most admirable alteration
of the weather a while before these Nuptials.

And to the Court again, my Journey took.
Mean while I saw the furious Winds were laid;
The risings of the swelling Waters staid.
The Winter, began to change in every thing;
And seemed to borrow mildnes of the Spring.
The Violet and Primerose fresh did grow;
And as in April, trimd both Cops and row.
The City, that I left in mourning clad,
Drouping; as if it would have still bin sad:
I found decked up; in robes so neat, and trim,
Fair Iris, would have looked but stale and dim.
In her best colors; had she there appeard.
The Sorrows of the Court I found well cleerd,
Their woeful habits quite cast off, and tired
In such a glorious fashion; I admired. The glorious preperation for this
solemnity, the state whereof, is here allegorically described.

All her chief Peers and choicest beauties too
In greater pomp, then Mortals use to do;
Wait as attendants; Juno's come to see;
Because she hears that this solemnity
Exceeds fair Hippodamia's, (where the strife
Twixt her, Minerua, and lame Vulcans wife
Did first arise) and with her, leads along;
A noble, stately, and a mighty throng.
Venus, (attended with her rarest features,
Sweet louely-smiling, and hart-mouing creatures,
The very fairest Jewels of her treasure,
Able to move the senseles stones to pleasure*)
Of all her sweetest Saints, has robbed their shrines;
And brings them for the Courtiers Valentines.
Nor does Dame Pallas, from these tryumphs lurk:
Her Noblest wits, she freely sets on work.
Of late, she summond them unto this place,
To do your masks and Reuells, better grace.
Here Meaning the Sea fight, and the taking of the Castle on the water which
was most arteficially performed.
Mars himself to, Clad in Armor bright,
Has shown his fury, in a bloudles fight;
And both on land, and water, sternely dressed,
Acted his bloody Stratagems, in Jest.
Which to the people, frighted by their error;
With seeming wounds and death did ad more terror.
Besides; to give, the greater cause of wonder;
Jove did vouchsafe, a rattling peale of thunder, The fire works he alleges
to those exhalations.

Cometts and Meteors by the stars exhald,
Were from the Midle-region lately called:
And to a place appointed, made repair,
To show their fiery friscolls in the air.
People innumerable do resort;
As if all Europe here would keep one Court.
Yea Hymen in his safferon-coloured weed;
To celebrate his rites is full agreed.
All this I see; which seeing, makes me borrow,
Some of their mirth a while, and lay down sorrow.
And yet not this: but rather the delight,
My heart does take in the much hoped sight,
Of these thy glories, long already due:
And this sweet comfort, that my eyes do view.
Thy happy Bridegroom; Pr: Co: Palatine,
Now thy best friend and truest Valentine.
Upon whose brow, my mind does read the story,
Of mighty fame; and a true future glory.
Me thinks I do foresee already, how
Princes, and Monarchs, at his stirrup bow.
I see him shine in steel. The bloody feilds
Already won; and how his proud foe yields.
God, has ordaind him happiness great store:
And yet in nothing, is he happy more
Then in thy love, (fair Princess) For unless
Heaven, like to Man, be prone to ficklenes:
Thy Fortunes, must be greater in effect,
Then time, makes show of, or men can expect.
Yet, notwithstanding all those goods of fate;
Thy Mind, shall ever be above thy state.
For over, and beside thy proper merit,
Our last Eliza, grants her Noble spirit.
To be redoubled on thee; and your names
Being both one, shall give you both one fames*
Oh blessed thou! and they to whom thou gui'st,
The leave for to attend thee where thou live.
And haples we, that must of force let go,
The matchles treasure, we esteem of so.
But yet, we trust it is for our good, and thine:
Or else thou should not, chang thy Them for Rhyne.
We hope, that this will the uniting prove,
Of Countries, and of nations by your love.
And that from out your blessed loins, shall come;
Another terror, to the Whore of Rome:
And such a stout Achilles as shall make,
Her tottering Walls, and weak foundation shake.
For Thetis-like, thy fortunes do require:
Thy Issue should be greater, then his sire.
But ( gracious Princess) now since thus it fares:
And God so well for you, and us, prepares.
Since he has daign'd such honors, for to do you
And shown himself, so favorable to you.
Since he has changd your sorrows, and your sadness
Into such great, and unexpected gladness.
Oh now remember, for to be at leisure
Sometime to think on him, amidst your pleasure!
Let not these glories of the world deceive you
Nor her vain favors of your self bereave you.
Consider yet, for all this Iollitie,
You Are mortal, and must feel mortality.
And that God can in midst of all your Joys*
Quite dash this pomp, and fill you with annoyes,
Triumphs are fit for Princes; yet we find,
They ought not wholly to take up the mind.
Nor yet to be let past, as things in vain,
For out of all things, wit will knowledge gain.
Music may teach, of difference in degree,
The best tuned Commonweals will framed be.
And that he moves, and lives, with greatest grace;
That unto Time, and Measure, ties his pace.
Then let these things be He declares what use is to be made of these shows
and triumphs, and what meditations the mind may be occupied about when we
behold them.
Emblems, to present.
Your Mind, with a more lasting true content.
When you behold the infinite resort,
The glory and the splendour, of the Court:
What wondrous favors, God does here bequeath you,
How many hundred thousands, are beneath you:
And view with admiration your great bliss,
Then with your self you may imagine this.
It Is but a blast, or transitory shade;
Which in the turning of a hand, may fade.
Honors, which you your self did never win.
And might, (had God bin pleased) another bin.
And think, if shadows have such majesty;
What are the glories of eternity?
Then by this image of a fight on sea,
Wherein you heard the thundering canons plea;
And saw flames, breaking from their Murdering throts;
Which in true skirmish, fling resistles shots.
Your wisdom may (and will no doubt) begin;
To cast what peril a poor Soldier's in.
You will conceive his miseries and cares,
How many dangers, deaths and wounds he shares.
Then though the most passed over, and neglect them
That Rethorick, will move you to respect them.
And if hereafter, you should hap to see
Such Mimick Apes; (that courts disgraces be)
I mean such Chamber-combatants; who never
Wear other helmet, then a hat of Beuer.
Or nere board Pinnace but in silken sail,
And in the steed of boisterous shirts of maile,
Go armed in Cambrick? if that such a Kite,
(I say) should scorn an Egle in your sight:
Your wisdom judge (by this experience) can:
Which has most worth, Hermaphrodite, or Man. * Fire works.

The nights strange * prospects, made to feed the eyes;
With Artfull fyres, mounted in the skies:
Graced with horred claps of sulphury thunders;
May make you mind, Iehouahs greater wonders.
Nor is there any thing, but you may thence
Reap inward gain; as well as please the Sense.
But pardon me (oh fairest) that am bold,
My heart thus freely, plainly, to unfold.
What though I know, you knew all this before:
My love this shows, and that is something more.
Do not, my honest service here disdain,
I am a faithful, though an humble Swain.
I Am none of those, that have the means or place;
With shows of cost to do your Nuptials grace:
But only master, of my own desire,
Am hither come, with others to admire.
I am not of these Heliconian wits;
Whose pleasing strains the Courts know humor fits.
But a poor rural Sheapheard, that for need:
Can make sheep Music, on an Oaten reed.
Yet for my love (I Will this be bold to boast)
It is as much to you, as his that is most:
Which; since I no way else, can now explain,
If you will in midst of all these glories, daigne
To lend your ears unto my Muse so long:
She shall declare it, in a wedding song.
EPITHALAMION.
VALENTINE, good morrow to thee, The Marriage being on Saint Valentines day the
author shows it by beginning with the salutation of a supposed Valentine.

Good I wish, though none I do thee:
I would wait upon thy pleasure,
But I cannot be at leisure.
For I owe this day, as debtor,
To (a thousand times) thy better,
Hymen now will have effected
What has been so long expected:
Them thy Mistress, now unwedded;
Soon must with a Prince be bedded.
If thou wilt see her Virgin ever,
Come, and do it now, or never.
Where art thou, oh fair Aurora?
Call in Uer and Lady Flora.
And you daughters of the Morning,
In your neat'st, and feat'st, adorning:
Clear your foreheads, and be sprightfull;
That this day may seem delightful.
All you Nimphs, that use the Mountains,
Or delight in groves, and fountains;
Shepheardesses, you that dally,
Either upon Hill or valley;
And you daughters of the Bower,
That acknowledge Vestaes power.
Oh you sleep too long; awake ye,
See how Time does overtake ye:
Hark, the Lark is up and sings,
And the house, with echoes ringeth.
Precious hours, why neglect ye,
Whilst affairs, thus expect ye?
Come away, upon my blessing,
The bride-chamber, lies to dressing:
Strew the ways, with leaves of Roses,
Some make garlands, some make poses,
It Is a favor and't may joy you*
That your Mistress will employ you.
Where Is Scuerne.
Sabrina, with her daughters;
That do sport about her waters;
Those that with their locks of Amber, * Wales.

Haunt the fruitful hills of Camber;
We must have to fill the number;
All the Nimphs of Trent and Humber.
Fie; your have, is scarce sufficing,
For the Bride's awake and rising.
Enter beauties, and attend her:
All your helps* and service lend her.
With your quaint'st, and new'st devises:
Trim your Lady, fair Thamisis.
See she is ready: with Joys greet her,
Lads, go bid the Brid-groome meet her.
But from rash approach advise him,
Least a too much Joy surprise him.
None I ere knew yet, that dared:
View an Angel, unprepared.
Now unto the Church she hies her,
Envy bursts, if she espies her.
In her gestures, as she paces,
Are united all the Graces:
Which who sees and has his senses,
Loves, inspight of all defenses.
Oh most true maiestick creature.
Nobles did you note her feature
Felt you not an inward motion,
Tempting Love to yield devotion*
And as you were even desiring.
Something check you, for aspiring*
That Is her Ueriue which still tameth
Loose desires: and bad thoughts blames.
For whilst others were unruly,
She observed Diana truly:
And has by that means, obtained,
Gifts of her that none have gained.
Yon's the Bridgrome do you not spy him?
See how all the Ladies eye him.
Venus his perfection finds,
And no more Adonis minds:
Much of him my Heart deuineth:
On whose brow all Virtue shines.
Two such Creatures Nature would not,
Let one place long keep: she should not:
One she will have, (she cares not whether)
But our Loves can spare her neither.
Therefore ere we will so be spighted;
They in one shall be united.
Natures self, is well contented,
By that means, to be prevented.
And behold, they are retired,
So conioyn'd, as we desired:
Hand in hand, not only fixed,
But their hearts, are intermixed.
Happy they, and we that see it,
For the good of Europe be it.
And hear Heaven my devotion,
Make this Rhyne and Them an Ocean: Tyber is the River which runs by Rome.

That it may with might and wonder,
Whelme the pride of * Tyber under.
Now yon * Hall their persons shroudeth, Whithall.

Whither all this people crowdeth.
There they feasted are with plenty,
Sweet Ambrosia is no deinty.
Grooms quaff Nectar: for there is meeter,
Yea more costly wines, and sweeter.
Young men all, for joy go ring ye,
And your merriest Carolls sing ye.
Here Is of Dam'zells many choices,
Let them tune their sweetest voices.
Fet the Muses too, to cheer them:
They can ravish, all that hear them.
Ladies, it is their Highness pleasures,
For to see you, foot the Measures:
Lovely gestures adds graces,
To your bright, and Angel faces.
Give your active minds the bridle:
Nothing worse, then to be^dle.
UUorthies, your affairs forbear ye,
For the State a while may spare ye:
Time was; that you loved sporting,
Have you quite forgot your Courting?
Joy the heart of Cares be guileth:
Once a year Apollo smileth. Simel. in anno ridet Appol.

Fellow shepherds, how I pray you,
Can your flocks at this time stay you?
Let us, also hie us thither,
Lets lay all our wits together.
And some Pastoral invent them,
For to show the love we meant them.
I my self though meanest stated,
(And in Court now almost hated)
Will knit up my Abuses strip and whipped.
Scourge, and venture
In the midst of them to enter:
For I know, there is no disdaining,
Where I look for entertaining.
See, me thinks the very season, He notes the mildness of the winter which
excepting that the beginning was very windy, was as temperate as the spring.

As if capable of Reason;
Has lain by her native rigor,
The fair Sunbeames have more vigor.
They are Aeols most endeared:
For the Ayre's stilld, and cleared.
Fawnes, and lambs, and kidds do play,
In the honor of this day.
The shrill Blacke-bird, and the Thrushe
Hops about in every bush:
And among the tender twiggs,
Chaunt their sweet harmonious ijgs.
Yea, and moved by this example, Most men are of opinion that this day every
byrd does choose her mate for that year.

They do make each Grove a temple:
Where their time the best way using,
They their Summer loves are choosing.
And unless some Churl do wrong them.
There Is not an od bird, among them.
Yet I heard as I was walking,
Groves and hills by Echoes talking.
Reeds, unto the small brooks whistling;
Whilst they danced, with pretty rushling.
Then for us, to sleep twere pity:
Since dumb creatures are so witty.
But oh Titan, thou do dally,
Hie thee to thy Uesterne valley.
Let this night one hour borrow;
She shall pay't again, to morrow.
And if thou wilt that favor do them,
Send thy sister Phaebe to them.
But she is come, her self unasked: By these he means the 2. Masks, one of
them being presented by the Lords, the other by the Gentry.

And brings * Gods and Heroes masked.
None yet saw, or heard in story,
Such immortal, mortal glory.
View not, without preparation:
Least you faint, in admiration.
Say my Lords, and speak truth barely,
Moved they not exceeding rarely?
Did they not such praises merit,
As if flesh had all bin spirit?
True indeed, yet I must tell them,
There was One did far excel them.
But (alas) this is ill dealing,
Night unawares away is stealing.
Their delay, the poor bed wrongeth,
That for Bride, with Bride groom longs:
And above all other places,
Must be blessed, with their embraces.
Reuellers, then now forbear ye,
And unto your rests prepare ye*
Let Us a while your absence borrow,
Sleep to night, and dance to morrow.
We could well allow your Courting,
But twill hinder, better sporting.
They are gone; and Night all lonely,
Leaves the Bride with Bridegroom only.
Muse now tell; (for thou have power
For to fly thorough wall or tower.)
What contentments their hearts cheareth;
And how lovely she appears.
And yet do not; tell it no man.
Rare conceits may so grow common;
Do not to the Vulgar show them,
(It Is enough that thou do know them.)
Their ill hearts, are but the Center,
Where all misconceauings enter.
But thou Luna that do lightly,
Haunt our downs and forests nightly.
Thou that fauor'st generation,
And art help, to procreation:
See their issue thou so cherish,
I may live, to see it flourish.
And you Planets in whose power,
Does consist, these lives of our;
You that teach us Diuinations,
Help with all your Constellations:
For to frame in Her a creature,
Blessed in Fortune, wit, and Feature.
Lastly; oh you Angels ward them,
Set your sacred Spells to guard them:
Chase away such fears, or terrors,
As not being; seem through errors.
Yea let not a dreams molesting,
Make them start, when they are resting.
But THOU chiefly; most adored;
That should only, be implored.
Thou to whom my meaning tends,
Whether er'e in show, it bends:
Let them rest to night from sorrow
And awake with joy to morrow.
Oh, to my request be heedfull,
Grant them that, and al things needful.
Let not these, my strains of Folly,
Make true prayer be unholy,
But, if I have here offended:
Help, forgive, and see it mended.
Daigne me this. And if my Muses
Hasty issue, she peruses;
Make it unto her seem grateful,
Though to all the World else, hateful.
But how er'e, yet Soul persevere,
Thus to wish her good, for ever.
THus ends the Day, together with my Song;
Oh; may the Joys thereof continue long.
Let Heavens just, all-seeing, sacred power;
Favor this happy Iubile, of your:
And bless you, in your chaste embraces so,
We Britans, may behold before you go.
The hopeful Issue, we shall count so dear
And whom, (unborn) his foes already fear.
Yea I desire, that all your sorrows may;
Never be more, then they have been to day,
Which hoping; For acceptance now I sue,
And humbly, bid your Grace, and Court adue.
I saw the sight, I came for; which I know,
Was more then all, then world beside could show.
But if amongst Apolloes Lays you can,
Be pleased, to lend a gentle ear to Pan:
Or think your Country Shepherd, loves as dear,
As if he were a Courtier, or a Peer:
Then I, that else must to my Cell of pain,
Will joyful, tnrne unto my flock again.
And there, unto my fellow sheapheards tell,
Why you are loved; wherein you do excel:
And when we drive our flocks a field to graze them,
So chaunt your praises, that it shall amaze them:
And think that Fate, has now recald from death,
Their still-lamented, sweet Elizabeth.
For though they see the Court, but now and then
They know desert as well as Greater men:
And honored Fame, in them does live or die;
As well, as in the mouth of Majesty.
But taking granted, what I here entreat:
At heaven for you, my devotions beat,
And though I fear, fate will not suffer me,
To do you service, where your Fortunes be:
How ere my skill, has yet despised seemed,
(And my vnripened wit, been misesteem'd.)
When all this costly Show, away shall flit,
And not one live, that does remember it:
If Enuies trouble, let not to persevere;
I Will find a means, to make it known for ever.
CERTAIN EPIGRAMMES CONCERNING MARRIAGE.
Epigram 1.
It Is said; in Marriage above all the rest
The children of a King find comforts least,
Because without respect of Love, or Hate
They must, and often be, ruled by the State:
But if contented Love; Religions care;
Equality in State, and years declare
A happy Match (as I suppose no less)
Then rare, and great's Elizaes Happiness.
Epigram 2.
GOd was the first that Marriage did ordain,
By making One, two; and two, One again.
Epigram 3.
Soldier; of thee I ask, for thou can best,
Having known sorrow, judge of Joy and Rest.
What greater bliss, then after all thy harms,
To have a wife that is fair, and lawful thine:
And lying imprisoned twix't her luory arms;
There tell, what thou have escaped by powers divine?
How many, round thee, thou have murdered seen;
How often thy soul has been near hand expiring,
How many times thy flesh has wounded been:
Whilst she thy fortune, and thy worth admiring,
With joy of health; and pity of thy pain;
Does weep, and kiss, and kiss, and weep again.
Epigram 4.
Fair Helen having stained her husbands bed,
And mortal hatred twix't two Kingdoms bred,
Had still remaining in her; so much good
That Heroes, for her, lost their dearest blood:
Then; if with all that ill, such worth may last,
Oh what is she worth, that is as fair and chaste!
Epigram 5.
OLd Orpheus, knew a good wives worth so well,
That when his di'd, he followed her to hell:
And for her loss, at the Elizean Grove,
He did not only Ghosts, to pity move:
But the sad Poet breathed his sighs so deep;
It Is said the Devils could not choose but weep.
Epigram 6.
LOng did I wonder, and I wondered much,
Romes Church should from her Clergy take that due,
Thought I why should she that contentment grutch?
What, does she all with continence indue?
Noe; but why then are they debarred that state?
Is she become a foe unto her own?
Does she the members of her body hate?
Or is it for some other cause vnshowne?
Oh yes; they find a woman's lips so dainty;
They tie themselves from one; cause they will have twenty.
Epigram 7.
WOmen, as some men say, unconstant be,
Perhaps a few; and so no doubt are men:
Nay if their scapes, we could so plainly see,
I fear, that soarce there will be one, for ten.
Men, have but their own lusts that tempt to ill;
Women have lusts, and men's allurements to:
Alas, if their strengths cannot curb their will;
What should poor women, that are weaker do?
Oh they had need, be chaste, and look about them,
That strive against lust within, and knaves without them.

