The particular grieuances of those his Majesty's subjects throughout England
and Wales, which lie under the oppression of George Woods Patent for the sole
printing upon Linen cloth.
FIrst, in that the same was obtained upon a false pretense, that he the said
Wood or one Ienkinson (whose inuendon he says, he has bought) was the first
inuenter of this Art; Wood is by trade a Printer of books.
whereas in truth the said Wood is but newly attained to any knowledge therein;
and for Ienkinson, if he had any manner of invention therein at all^, it was
some very small thing about thirty years ago, now out of use, which invention
he has also sold to a great number of persons, for 2 s. 3 s. 5 s. (...) s. 20
s. 40 s. or any money that he could get, and they sold it to others. And he
having made ^is benefit thereof so many years, and in such kind, it cannot now
be taken for a new invention, seeing not only the Art it self, but also the
apprentices and people that have been trained up therein* are exceedingly
increased, so that a great multitude of families both in this Cit ie and
throughout the kingdom, would be impouerished by the continuance of this
Patent, if it should hold.

2. For the validity of the Patent, it was in way of trial by suite of some
Freemen, in the Exchequer; but upon a Reference obtained from his Majesty to
the Lord Chancellor and now Lord Treasurer, upon the false pretense aforesaid,
they were stopped, and not suffered to proceed to trial.

3. The Patent is so general, that it extends in prejudice to all his
Majesty's subjects: for the goods therein prohibited, though they be bought and
sold, paid for, and passed from hand to hand, yet they are forfeited in whose
hands soever.

4. The Patentee may enter into the houses of the Kings subjects, and seize and
carry away and dispose of the goods prohibited. And did execute this his power
upon some before this Parliament.

5. He has imprisoned othersome by color of the said Patent, since the
Parliament began.

6. He pretended to the Drawers of the City, for his more easy obtaining of
the Patent, and to gain their assistance therein, great and good benefit unto
them, which Patent does now utterly beggar them: for he gives but a matter of
7 s. 4 d. for that work which he himself takes 24 s.

7. He has by color of this Patent, entered into some houses, and taken away
goods not contained in the Patent.

8. He has raised the prices of works from 16 s. to 24 s. and by color of
the Patent may still raise at his pleasure.

9. He has given out speeches, that he must raise the prises of work: for
that he does not only pay 10. lib. a year to the King, reserved upon the
Patent, but also 200. lib. a year to some other or others that procured the
Patent.

10. The Patentee makes himself hereupon so strong, that he has affirmed he
will not give three pence to have the Parliament maintain his Patent.

11. He had formerly a Patent, upon pretense the invention was his own,
whereupon was reserved 40 lib. per annum to his Majesty: and by that Patent
none were prohibited to use the Art. Which Patent not serving to his purpose,
he then found out this new pretense (though false) and obtained this Patent,
which is in benefit to him if it should hold, above a hund^^d for one beyond
the other: and yet there is no more reserved upon this unto his ^a^est* then
was upon the other.


