THE TRVE HONOR OF NAVIGATION AND NAVIGATORS: Or, HOLY MEDITATIONS FOR SEAMEN.
Written upon our Savior Christ his Voyage by Sea, MATTHEW. 8.23. etc. Whereunto
are added certain forms of Prayers for Sea travelers, suited to the former
Meditations, upon the several occasions that fall at Sea.

By JOHN WOOD, Doctor in Divinity.

PSALM. 34.17. The righteous cry, and the Lord hears; and delivers them
out of all their troubles.

LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, dwelling in Paternoster row, near the
sign of the golden Cock. 1618.

TO THE HONORABLE AND WORTHY KNIGHT SIR THOMAS SMITH, GOVERNOR OF THE
EAST INDIA COMPANY: To the Right Worshipful Master Maurice Abbot, Deputy;
Master William Harison, Tre^surer; The Committies, and all the rest of the
Honorable and worthy Adventurers of the same Society.
Having for many years together bin an eyewitness of your great care, in
providing all manner of necessaries both for the bodies and souls of those men
that you have sent and employed in your several fleets into the East Indies: I
have longed to express my love for many favors received from you; but had no
other means, but by adding to your great provisions for the Sea, these
Meditations following, fitted especially for Seamen. A work wherein I know
not any man that has gone before me, and therefore I hope the better to be
accepted: In which I have only broken the y^e, and given the onset, to
encourage some more skillfull workman to undertake it in some better fashion;
seeing there is such variety and plenty of heavenly meditations in this
argument, as in no other particular that I know of: And yet amongst the great
multiplicitie of learned works in all other matters, this only has bin
neglected, and not thought of. The substance of these Meditations were purposed
to have been Preached at the setting forth of your last fleet, aboard the
ROYAL JAMES, as a farewell-Sermon (as I had diverse times before, upon the like
occasions, done the like office). But God then otherwise disposing of it: As
our law condemns malefactors that speak not for themselves, to be pressed to
death; so I contrariewise have thought fit, to press this benefactor to
Seamen (as I hope) to a further life: that the things that then escaped the
ears of a few, may now be in the eyes and sight of all that please; and may
not only be a means to them to beguile some idle hours, but teach them in
all places of the world, to make spiritual use to their souls, of all
occurrences that either by Sea or Land they shall meet withal. The great
blessings of Almighty God upon our little Island; since the shaking off the
superstitious Idolatry of the Church of Rome, and the sincere Preaching of the
true Catholic Faith amongst us; as they appear in the uniting of the two
Kingdoms of England and Scotland, and the uniting of the hearts of both the
peoples, having One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism, One God and Father of all:
So by your means and Christian care, in the sending forth of your great
Fleetes unto the furthest parts of the earth, Our Faith is published thorough
the World; and our Land made famous unto the remotest parts thereof: And ye
cannot but thankefully remember and acknowledge, to the honor of our great
God, how he has poured out his blessings more abundantly upon your Fleets,
then upon any of our bordering neighbors. I humbly beseech him not only to
continue, but to increase and multiply his goodness and mercy every day more
and more toward us, maugre the malice of all our enemies. I know that some
secretly (through envy) do repine and murmur at your prosperous success: and
some have publicly in Print taxed and traduced your Trading, laying foul and
scandalous imputations and aspersions upon it, as prejudicial to the State and
Commonwealth: and it were easy for me to show the ridiculous untruth of those
cauils which they object: but that I am therein prevented both by a worthy
Knight in his defense of Trade, Sir Dudley Diggs.
as also by a reverend Divine in his holy Pilgrimage; Mr. Purchase.
unto whose writings I refer them that desire satisfaction. I must needs set
down what I know and see daily, of your great bounty and liberality, to the
honor of God, and your further encouragement to do good: viz. that as God
has greatly increased your store, so ye have not been backward to impart
much, and more then any other Society (that ever I could hear of) to the
supply of the wants of his poor members: your daily relief of poor
Ministers of the Gospel, your charity to Prisoners, to Widows, to Orphans,
and to all well minded poor people that you find to stand in need of your
help, cannot but plead for you in the eyes of God and all good men.

Go on therefore (in Gods name) in your noble designs, and rest ye still upon
his blessing, who (I doubt not) has many more in store for you, and so long as
you conscionably seek to honor his name among the Heathen, and (under him) to
advance the State wherein ye live; will (no doubt) afford you many
comfortable assurances of his love and favor, both to your bodies and souls
here in this life, and crown you with eternal glory with himself, in the
life to come. And thus recommending your selves, your ships, your men, your
goods both abroad and at home to Gods blessed protection; with my daily
Prayers to God for you all, and more specially for that Fleet which is now
shortly to be set forth, I beseech you kindly to accept of this little
Newyeeres gift, and I shall be bound to rest

Ready to do you service, JOHN WOOD.

TO ALL HONEST PROFESSORS and practisers of Navigations, and more specially to
all Nauigators to the East Indies.
NOble Spirits, that dare every hour look death in the face, and run
thorough the difficulties of the vast Ocean! I have in this short Treatise
taught you, how to become truly religious, and thereby to be truly honorable
and courageous: and my purpose in writing these meditations, was to instruct
you, by these few, how to raise unto your selves spiritu^ll and heavenly
meditations, in all other passages of your lives at Sea and land, so as you may
reap the sweetest comforts to your souls and consciences, both in the whole
course of your life, and especially at the hour of death. To this end I have
set down at the end of the book certain forms of prayer and thanksgiving,
fi^ted both to the former meditations in the book, and the most useful
occasions that I could think of. I desire not to tie any man to those set
forms, for, whosoever can in the inward feeling of his own misery and Gods
mercy, pour forth his souls desires according to his sensible feeling ^ither
of Gods judgments in time of danger, or of his gracious promise in the time of
his deliverance, shall certainly find the best assurance of Gods gracious
assistance, by the spirit of adoption dwelling in him, whereby he is bro^ght
^o ^^ie Abba Father. But the forms of prayer by me set down as they are
intended for their help, that for want of knowledge understand not how to
pray, or in the time of fear be so distracted and astonished, that they cannot
utter their minds but confusedly and out of order: so the best men may make
good use of the most of the Prayers, being meditations gathered out of the
book of Psalms: to read over that book again and again, and gather from
thence such profitable meditations as may fitly be applied for comforts upon
all occasions. My request to God for you all is, that you may find as great
comfort in the reading and hearing of these meditations, as I have done in the
writing of them. And my request to you is, that both before your Voyages (while
ye may enjoy the ordinary preaching of the Word) you labor thereby to season
your hearts with grace, that ye do not like Epicures say, Let us eat and
drink, for to morrow we shall die: and that having finished your Voyage, you
neither forget Gods merciful preservation of you, (whilst you have seen many
of your fellows perish before your faces) nor your prom^ses and vows made to
God in your greatest extremitie^: So shall ye be sure to make a good voyage,
which I heartily desire for you at Gods hands: and so commending you to his
sacred pr^tection* I rest

Your true Remembrancer unto God, JOHN WOOD.

HOLY MEDITATIONS FOR SEAMEN.
It is written, MATTHEW. 8.23. And when he was entered into the ship, his
Disciples followed him: And behold, there arose a great tempest in the sea, so
that the ship was covered with waves, but he was asleep. Then his Disciples
came and awoke him; saying, Master, save us we perish: And he said unto them,
Why are you fearful, O ye of little faith? Then he arose and rebuked the winds
and the sea, and so there was a great calm. And the men marvelled, saying,
What man is this, that both the winds and the sea obey him?


IT has ever bin the use and custom of Gods best Saints and dearest children
in their holiest meditations, either of his creatures, or of their own or
others actions, to lift up their minds above their senses, and to make
spi^ituall use to their souls of whatsoever they did see, hear, read, or
do. The heavens (says the sweet singer of Israel) declare the glory of God,
Psalm. 19.1.
and the firmament show forth his handie works. And in another place; Psalm.
8.3.
When I behold thine heavens, even the works of thy fingers, the Moon and the
Stars which thou have ordained. What is man say I, that thou art so mindful
of him, and the son of man, that thou visitest him? And this was the reason
that the Prophets and Apostles, and especially our Savior Christ himself
taught the people so much by way of parable, that the sight of a little child,
nay of the Ox and the Ass, Matthew. 18.2. Esaias 1*3. Ier. 8.7. Prou. ^.6.
nay of the Storke, the Crane, the Tur^le, the Swallow; yea even of the little
Ant, or Emmet, may afford us holy and heavenly meditations, and teach us
Christian and religious duties; that the plowman breaking up his ground, Ier.
4.4.
may be put in mind of the necessity of repentance, thereby to break up the
fallownesse and hardness of his heart: that the husbandman throwing his seed
upon the ground, Matthew. 13.3*
may therein consider the nature of the word of God, the necessity and utility
thereof, and the chief reason why many times it takes no better effect: Mat.
13.25.
that the beholding of tares and weeds in the field, should instruct him of
the state and condition of Gods kingdom in his Church militant: that the
Merchant searching diligently for pearls and precious stones, Matthew. 13.45.
and paying dearly for them, should remember a more precious pearl, to wit,
to have Christ become his, and be content to sell all he has, to get
possession of him; that a poor woman sowing a grain of mustard seed,or
laying her leaven, Mat. 13.31.33.
may be taught therein the nature of the kingdom of heaven.

Master Bradford, an holy Martyr, in the bloody days of Queen Mary, has left
behind him many comfortable meditations, for the particular actions of the
whole day, from the time of our awaking in the morning, to our lying down to
rest at night. There is a spiritual awakeing, Ephesians. 5.14.
and a spiritual light more to be desired then the corporal. Romans 13.11.14.
There is spiritual arising from sin, and clothing of our selves in our
Savior Christ. There is spiritual talking to edification, Ephesians. 4.29. Ephesians.
5.2.
and a spiritual walking in love. There is spiritual meat, and spiritual
drink to be labored for; and there are spiritual works that were ordained
for us to do: our sleep which we: nightly desire, John 6.27. Ephesians. 2.10.1.
Cor. 15.18. Revel. 14.13.
should put us in mind of our death, and our beds of our graves, and the rest
we desire for our bodies, of eternal rest.

But all these may seem to be meditations for men on land: Indeed they^ be
such as belong both to land and sea: and the sea-trauelle^ has here the
advantage, that they have many holy meditations proper to themselves: They that
go down to the sea in ships, and occupiely the great waters* They see the
works of the Lord, Psalm. 107.23.
and his wonders in the deep. And of such sea-meditations fit for seamen I
purpose to discourse. Wherein if any shall tax me, as Hannibal the great
Captain did Phormio the Philosopher, for reading a lecture of martial
discipline before him (my self never having passed the seas, and yet writing
these things for their sakes and use, that are the greatest travelers in the
world); My answer is, that I only purpose to relate the observations of the
ancient Fathers, and such as do arise from the sea-voyage of our Savior
Christ, before propounded, that accordingly all travelers (by sea especially)
may raise unto themselves spiritual meditations, from the several occurrences
that at any time they shall meet withal.

In the Text I observe these two things: The history. The mystery.


The history has these four parts:

First, a sea voyage of our Savior Christ and his Disciples: 1. For our
Savior Christ, He entered into a ship. 2. For his Disciples: His Disciples
followed him.


Secondly, the danger of the voyage, consisting in two 1. A tempest arising,
wherein is to be observed, 1. A note of admiration or attention, Behold. 2.
Secondly, the nature of it in the name, A Tempest. 3. Thirdly, the measure of
it, Great. 4. Fourthly, the place: In the Sea. 5. The effect it wrought: The
ship was covered with waves.
2. In Christ's being asleep: But he was asleep.


1. The occasion in the Disciples, wherein I note, 1. What they did, viz. 1.
They came to him. 2. They awoke him.
2. What they said: Master save us, we perish.
2. The miracle it self wrought by Christ, and in it, 1. A preparation, in a
reproof of his Disciples: Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? 2. The
means: 1. He arose. 2. He rebuked the winds and the sea.
3. The work: There followed a great calm.



1. What they did: The men wondered. 2. What they said: What man is this, that
both winds and sea obey him?


1. The sea is an image of the world. 2. The ship is an image of the true
Church of Christ, militant. 3. The tempest an image of the rage and fury of
heretics, schismatickes, and persecuting tyrants against the Church. 4.
Christ his sleeping, is an image of his death. 5. His arising is an image of
his resurrection. 6. The Calm that followed, is an image, not only of that
peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost, which the Church receives as
the benefits of his resurrection in this life: but also of that eternal rest
and happiness which they receive thereby in the life to come.


Before I come to the handling of the particulars, the whole history does
deliver unto us the truth of a general doctrine, concerning a chief Article
of our Christian faith, of the conjunction of the two Natures, the Humane and
the Divine in one person Christ, to make him a complete and absolute Mediator
and Savior of mankind. In that he entered into a ship, used it as a means to
cross the sea, his ship was subject to the violence of the tempest, and
himself so sound a sleep; all these showed him to be perfect man: and in that
by his own only word, rebuking the Winds and the Sea, there presently
followed a Calm; this showed him to be perfect God. Which point of doctrine is
the sum and ground of the whole Gospel, which does so set forth Christ unto
us, that by it we may firmly believe, that the Word was made Flesh; John
1.14. Gal. 4.4.5.
that When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his son made of a
woman, and made under the Law, That he might redeem them that were under the
Law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. And without controversy,
great is the mystery of godliness, 1. Tim. 3.16.
God manifested in the flesh. To this end the Evangelists in the whole history
of his life and death do purposely intermingle such things, as may show the
truth of both these Natures in one person; As, He was conceived, and so he was
man: Luke 1.35.
but he was conceived of the holy Ghost, as no other man was, and therefore God.
He was borne, and so he was man: Esaias 7.14.
but He was borne of a Virgin, as no other man was, and therefore God. He was
hungry, which showed him to be Man: Mark 11.12. John 6.10.13.
but he fed 5000 with five barley loaves and two fishes, and yet there remained
of the broken meat twelve baskets full, which proved him to be God. He was
thirsty, which showed him to be man: John 19.28. John 4.10.
but he had the water of life to give, of which whosoever drank should never
thirst, and therefore he was God. He was weary, and so a man: John 4.6. Matthew.
11.28. Mat. 22.42.43. John 19.30. John 10.18.
but he had ease to give to all that were laden* and so he was God. He was
David's son, and so a man: but he was David's Lord as he was God. He died as he
was a man: but he raised himself from death by the power of his Godhead. Luke
2.16. Matthew. 2.2.
At his birth he was laid in a cra^ch as a man: but a star in the heaven
shows him to be God. John 19.18.
At his death* though ^e suffered on the cross as a man: Luke 23.43.
yet he made a de^d of Parad^se, as he was God. No marvel therefore if the
Apostle call it a great mystery; for The Ancient ^f dai^s to be borne in time;
Dan. 7.9. Gal. 4.4.
for him, by whom all things were created, to become himself a creature; John
1.3. Ier. 31.22. Ier. 23.24.
for him, whom the Heavens could not contain, to be contained in the womb of
a Virgin; for him, that was equal with God the Father, to take upon him the
form of a servant, to be made like unto men, Phil. 2.7.8. Heb. 4.15. Ephesians. 3
9.
and to be found in the shape of man, yea, to be tempted in like sort as we,
yet without sin. This mystery it pleased God from the begi^ning of the world
to keep hid in himself. And as it was beyond the compass of the devils
knowledge (though he knew much), for he would never have endeavored the fall of
man, Genes. 3.1.
if he had understood the redemption of mankind by Christ to a more happy
estate: so it was not fully revealed to the elect Angels, Ephesians. 3.10.
no, not to the chiefest of them, the Principalities and Powers, until his
manifestation in the flesh, when they were made the first Preachers of it. Luke
2.10.
And though it were in part revealed to the Fathers in the old Testament, both
by the word of promise to Adam presently after his fall, Genes. 3.15. Genes. 12
3. Psalm. 89.36.
and after to Abraham, and to David; as also by many types and shadows; and
lastly by Evangelical prophecies, Esa. 7.14.
that a Virgin should conceive and bear a son, and they should call his name
Emmanuel, that is, God with us. Yet was this revelation made but darkely, John
8.56.
and they saw, and b^l^eued in Christ a far off: so that we say with the
Apostle to our comfort, Heb. 11.13.
At sund^ie times, and in diverse m^nners God spoke in the old time to our
Fathers by the Prophets; Heb. 1.1.
In these last days he has spoken unto us by his Son^e, etc. Hence it comes,
that the devil has ever since labored to stir up devilish minded men to
oppugn this maine article of our faith, Zanch. de operi^us Dei. lib. 4. cap. 2.
so that all heresies are reduced either to those that deny the truth of his
Divinity or of his Humanity, or of the conjunction of both those Natures in
one person, to be our only true Mediator. Some of these heretics granted
him to be God, Samosa^enus.
but not before he was borne of the Virgin Marie, who were confuted by that of
the Evangelist. John 1.1.
In the beginning was the Word, and that Word was with God, and that Word was
God: and for confutation of them, was that clause added in the Nicen Creed;
Bego^t^n of the Father before all worlds. Sabellius.
Some affirmed him to be the same person with God the Father, who were
confuted by his own speech; There is anoth^r that b^ar^th w^nes of me. John
^.3 2.
Some thought him to be a kind of God, A^rius.
but not of the same substance with the Father: who are likewise confuted by
himself, where he says, I and my Father are one. John 10.30.
Some acknowledged the Father and him to be of one substance, Eutiches.
but yet that there was no equality between them, who were confuted by that
of the Apostle; Phil. 2.6.
He ^hought it no robbery to be equal with God. These were the maine Heresies
touching his Godhead. Marcion.
Some again denied him to be man, who are confuted by that of the Apostle;
There is one Mediator between God and man the Man Christ Jesus. 1. Tim. 2.4.
Some thought and taught, Manicheus.
that he had no true, but a fantastical body, who are confuted by himself,
saying; Behold my hands and my feet, Luke 24.39.
handle me and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as ^e see I have.
Some held, that in respect of the manhood, Apollinaris.
he had no soul, but that the body was in animated by the Godhead, who are
confuted, where he says; Matthew. 26.38.
My soul is heavy, even to the death: but his Divinity was not heavy,
neither could it suffer. Lastly, Nestorius.
some deny the conjunction of these two natures in one person, that he was not
perfect God and perfect Man, who were condemned by such proprieties of speech
and phrase in the Scripture, where that is spoken of his Godhead, that belonged
to his Manhood, and that of his Manhood, which is proper to his Godhead, as,
Feed the Church of God, Acts 20.28.
which he has purchased with that his own blood. There is blood attributed
unto God, which he had not, but as he was man. John 3.13.
So on the other side he says; No man ascends up to heaven, but he that has
descended from heaven, that Son of Man which is in heaven. Where that is
ascribed to the Son of Man, namely, to be in heaven, which was proper unto
him as he was God. This article therefore of our faith is the ground of
Christian Religion, and affords many comforts to all Christians: but
especially to Seamen, and those that undertake long voiages amongst Heathens
and Infidels; and I could wish none might be admitted to go, until they be
well grounded therein, which would afford many heavenly meditations.

the last enemy, then to know, that they are in the right faith concerning
their Savior and Redeemer, 1. Cor. 15.26.
that whatsoever shall become of their bodies, they have before provided for
their souls, and so are ready ^o live or die in that faith?

Except the Lord build the house, Psalm. 127.1.
they labor in vain^ that build it: Except the Lord keep the City, the
watchman watches but in vain. It is Christ God and Man, Romans 8.32.
by whom we receive all good.

and therefore will deliver and free them, if it stand with his glory and with
their good.

4 When they come to remote places, and find Infidels that have not heard of
Christ, to remember that they themselves are such by nature, and that they have
deserved no better at Gods hand; nay, they have deserved much worse, because
they have abused Gods blessings, yea, Romans 2.4.
his long suffering and patience that should lead them ^o repentance. And
therefore to consider, of the great love of God toward them, that passing by so
great and huge nations, and leaving them in incredulity, has afforded them
the means of salvation.

5 To meditate, that the best way to make a good voyage indeed, is to labor
by all means possible, to reduce those Infidels, or any of them, to the
profession of the same faith in Christ: there being both Luke 22.32.
a commandment from Christ to do it, and James 5.19. Dan. 12.3.
great promises to them that obey that commandment.

6 That above al they take heed, that leaving Christendom, they forsake not
this faith in Christ, they prove not Apostataes, they make not 1. Tim. 1.19.
shipwreck of faith* and of a good conscience: for such Heb. 6.6.
falling away is the high way to the sin unpardonable against the holy Ghost.
And thus much of the general doctrine, we come now to the particulars of the
history, wherein first ^as observed, a Seavoyage by Christ and his Disciples.
First, of him, He entered into a ship. Where it may be demanded, why Christ
would pass the sea, when he might have staid on land? For the Philosopher
said, Anachar.
that a shipman had but four inches (the thicknes of the board^ of his ship)
betwixt him and death. And it was one o^ ^^e 3 things that Cato in his old age
repented him of, that he had traveled by sea, when he might have gone by land.
It was the charge that Antigonus gave to his sons (having escaped a dangerous
tempest at sea) that they should neither adventure upon any such danger again
themselves, nor forget to advise their posterity after them, to take heed (by
their example) of that which was like to have cost them so dear. Pittac. Mit.
It was the speech of one of the seven wise men of Greece, that Sailers at sea
were neither to be reckoned for live men, nor for dead, but between both. And
in Divinity it may seem (or at least the devil will suggest it) that to
adventure to travel by sea, is a kind of tempting of God. And indeed without
a lawful calling, and using the means which God has appointed to preserve
us, it is as unlawful for to travel by sea, as it is for a man in the time of
the plague, wilfully to run into an infected house, or to thrust himself into
any unnecessary danger. For answer therefore to the former objection, why
Christ would enter into a ship, if he would needs go over the sea, who could
by his word have divided the sea into two parts, that he and his might go
over as upon dry land, Exodus 14.22.
as he did the Read sea for his peoples sake, by the minis^^ry of Moses; or
could have walked, as he did Matthew. 14.29.
another ^^me upon the water, as upon firm ground, yet he rather takes the
ordinary course to enter into a ship and sail over, for these reasons.

Orig.
1 He having after his long Sermon on the Mount, in the three former Chapters,
done diverse great miracles in this Chapter upon the land, as the clensing of a
Leper; the curing of the Centurions servant; the healing of Peter's wives
mother; the ^^sting forth of devils out of many that were possessed with them,
does now (that he may show himself 1. King. 20.23.
not only the God of the Mountains* but of the valleys; not only the G^d of
the Land, but of the Sea) enter into a ship, that thereby he might show his
authority and power on the winds and seas in this miracle.

Cyril.
2 Having done the fo^^er miracles in his Apostles sight only, he thought now to
do a miracle upon themselves, whereof being partakers, they might be more
sensible.

3 Mark. 4.36.3.
He was feign by ^his means to avoid the press of the mult^tude that
followed ^im; and therefore upon such occasions sometime he withdrew himself
into a Mountain, and sometime to the Desert, and sometime to a ship at sea, as
his places of refuge.

4 But principally (as I take it) he entered into a ship, and sailed in it, that
by his example he might both give warrant to those that have a lawful calling,
to adventure th^mselues and their lives at sea, depending upon Gods protection;
as also to show the necessity that his Apostles should be tied unto, to take
that course afterward, when they received commission to Matthew. 28.19.
go preach the Gospel to all Na^ions; which they could not do (especially to
Islanders) but by passing of the sea.

Here then we observe the honor of the Art of Navigations, and of the
professors and practisers thereof, graced (in this place) by the presence and
practice of our Savior Christ, and this miracle wrought by him at sea; for as
we account it none of the least dignities of that honorable estate of
Matrimony, John 2.2.
that Christ adorned and beautified a Marriage with his presence, and first
miracle that he wrought, at Cana in Galile: so must we think it a great honor
to Navigations and Nauigators, that Christ himself vouchsafed to enter into a
ship, and therein to work a greate^ miracle: and certainly the honors of
Nauigators by sea are very great.

For first, howsoever they trade and spend the best part Thales Milet.
great Philosopher, this is the Element of Elements, or the first matter
whereof al b^dies were made; whose opinion in the judgment of Zanch. de op.
dei par. 2. lib. 1. cap. 1.
one of the best Divines of our age, is most agreeable to the truth delivered
by Moses; Genes. 1.2.
That the Spirit of God moved upon the waters: where the word (mou^d) being a
metaphor, ta^en from birds sitting upon eggs to hatch their young, does show,
that God 2. Pet. 3.5.
out o^ those waters, as out of the first matter* did produce all bodies as
well celestial as terrestiall: for the word heavens in original, being a
compound, does signify nothing else, but Rab. Kimchi. (...)
(there water) answerable to that which follows in the history of the
Creation, of the waters beneath and above the firmament: unto which if we shall
add for the dignity of this element, Genesis 3.17.
That the earth was specially cursed for the sin of man: Aug* Tom. 3. page
710.
That in the general destruction of all living creatures in the deluge, the
fishes, the inhabitants of this element, escaped: Mat. 4.13.18.
That our Savior Christ did choose fishermen, for his principal Apostles: That
he ordained this element, as the matter of the Sacrament of baptism: and that
Mat. 3.16.
by his own undertaking this Sacrament in ^his element: He sanctified the
Flood Jordan, and all other waters to the mystical washing away of sin. All
these do show the dignity of this element above the earth.

Psalm. 116.12.
What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits which he has given me?

Thirdly, whereas amongst men the degrees of honor

Fourthly, whereas in all professions, they are most honorable Arithmeticke,
Geometry, Astronomy; and as it is set down as a commendation of Moses, Act.
7.22.
that he was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and therefore
powerful in words, and in deeds: and this wisdom of the Egyptians was in the
Mathematical sciences, especially in Astronomy, whereby they observed, not
only the distinction of the Planets from the fixed stars, but their site or
place, their magnitudes, their conjunctions and oppositions, and their
influences and forces upon bodies beneath the Moon; the ingendring of all
meteors, the cause of the ebbing, and flowing, and saltness of the sea, and
such like: so this cannot but add to the honor of Nauigators, that they not
only examine the truth of former observations, but do daily increase knowledge
in the world, concerning these most excellent speculations.

Fifthly, antiquity has ever been held a true badge of honor, especially in
those arts and professions which were first found out by men famous and
renouned in their times. And this is the fifth honor of Nauigators: for
howsoever profane historians in their histories, do ascribe both the
invention of shipping, and the art of Navigations, to one of themselves, one
Atlas, a Moore, (whom for his skill in Astronomy, the Poets feign to bear up
the heavens with his shoulders) as if he were the first inuentor, and in part a
perfecter of this excellent Art; yet we Christians, (as we read in the
Scripture) do hold, that the first use of shipping, and the Art of Navigations,
came both immediately from God himself; and were revealed to Noah in form of
an Arc, which he was not only Genesis 6.14.15.16.
commanded to make, but had particular directions, both for the matter whereof,
and ^he form or manner, the length, the breadth, the height, the cabbins, the
window, and the several decks, Seeing therefore Navigations has so honorable
an author, of such antiquity, it may not be despised, but highly esteemed.

Act. 17.11.
noble title, given by the holy Ghost to the faithful of Berea. And we see
that God himself has passed his promise, 1. Sam. 2.30.
Those that honor me I will honor. This then is the sixth part of the honor
of Nauigators, that they have the best means to be truly religious and
sincere Christians, without hypocrisy: For howsoever it is true, that the
ordinary means to beget faith, is Romans 10.17.
the word preached ordinarily: which many of these Nauigators do want; yet
(God be thanked) there is care had in those Fleets, that are sent into the East
Indies, for the furnishing of them with honest Ministers to supply that want,
so far as conveniently may be. And as I am persuaded, that Gods blessings
have been the more multiplied upon the Merchants adventurers, for their
Christian and religious care in this point: So I hope that the sense and
feeling of those blessings from God, will cause them, not only to continue
still, but to increase daily in that holy care. But howsoever, the thing, I
aim to show, is, that the men that are sent to those parts, especially the
Commanders, being men of wit and understanding, and having such helps and
means as I know they have, not only of the Bible, which is the chief and
principal, but of the best books that are now written in our own language,
to help daily to increase their knowledge; as they cannot in perusing the
great book of nature (the fabric of the world) by God, but break out into
that holy admiration with the kingly Prophet: Psalm. 104.24.
O Lord, how manifold are thy works, in wisdom have thou made them all, the
earth is full of thy riches! So is the sea great and wide, 25.
therein are things creeping innumerable both small beasts and great. There go
the ships, 26.
yea that great Le^iathan, whom thou have made to play therein: 27.
All th^se wait upon thee, that thou m^y^st give them food^ in due season. And
living in that element, Eccles. 1.7.
from whence all rivers come and return into it again, and yet cannot fill
it, how can they but meditate of him? Prou. 8.29.
Tha^ gave his decree to the sea, that the waters should not pass his command
meant, when he appointed the foundations of the earth. Job 38.8.
That shut up the sea with doors, when it issued and came forth as out of the
womb! That made the clouds as a covering thereof, 9.
and darkness as the swaddling bands thereof: That stablished his commandment
upon it, and set bars and doors: And said, Hitherto shall thou come* 10.
but no further, and here shall it stay thy proud waves. 11.
And if these considerations work not upon their hearts, God speaks by the
Prophet Jeremy, Ier. 5.22.
Fear ye not me (says the Lord) or will ye not be ^fraid at my presence,
which have placed the sands for the bounds of the sea by the perpe^uall decree,
that it cannot pass it; and though the waves ^hereof rage, yet can they not
prevail; though they roar, they cannot pass over it. And yet besides all
these meditations, the Prophet D^uid tells us, that, Psalm. 107.23.
They that go down to the sea in ships, an^ o^cupie by the great waters; they
see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep: 24.
For he commands and raises the stormy wind, and it lifts up the waves
thereof. They mount up to the heaven, 25.
and d^scend to the deep, so that their soul mel^eth for trouble: 26.
27.
They are tossed too and fro, and stagger like a drunken man and all their
cunning is gone, etc. This teaches us, that Nauigators cannot but see and
acknowledge more then other men, the omnipotency, the infiniteness, the
justice, the goodness, and mercy of God, both in the variety of creatures,
exceeding them upon earth, and in the variety of administration of all things,
himself remaining unchangeable; and how can these men then in re^ding good
books (whereof they have plenty) but apply them to their hearts, and so live,
as they should ever be prepared to die?



to show himself to the world, he Mat. 4.13.
for sooke Nazareth, and went and dwelt at Capernaum, which is near the sea,
in the borders of Zabulon and Nepthalim* and not only took pleasure to Verse.
18.
walk by the sea of Galile, and from thence to call Apostles, while they were
casting their nets into the sea to catch fish* and promising to make them
fishers of me: but likewise made choice of a ship, sometime as a pulpit, out of
which he might Luke 5.3.
best instruct and reach the people: and here as a passenger, and as a place to
rest and sleep in* and therein to wo^ke that great miracle that follows in
this story. The use whereof unto all Nauigators is, that this honor done unto
that profession then, does not cease now: but as he was then, bodily and
visibly present in this ship; so he is, as he is God, present in every ship,
in what place of the world soever it be; and with his children, as a special
protector in their societies, assembled in his fear and name, according to his
promise, Mat. 18.20.
Wheresoever two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the
midst of the^: or as he promised to his Apostles when he sent them to preach
to all nations: Mat. 28.20.
Behold, I am with you always to the end of the world. To teach Nauigators when
they enter into their ships, to take Christ along with them, and to be sure to
keep him, not only in their ships, but in their hearts, without whom they can
make no good voyage: for if they think to leave him behind them, or to fly from
him: shall not God find them out? as he did Jonah. Psalm. 139.9.
If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the
sea: even thither shall thine hand lead me, and thy right hand hold me. And
thus much of the first point: Christ entered into a ship.

The second follows, to wit, his company in this His Disciples followed him.
For the Scripture is wont to describe his Disciples by that term of being his
Followers, as of Simon Peter, and Andrew his brother, that he said unto them,
Mat. 4.18.
Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men. And they straight way leaving
their nets, 19.
followed him. 20.
And of James and John the sons of Zebedee, 21.
that were mending their nets, that he called them. And they without tarying,
22.
leaving the ship, and their father, followed him. So of Matthew, Mat. 9.9.
si^ting at the custom, he said unto him, follow me. And he arose and
followed him. It is Christ's own rule to his Disciples; Mat. 16.2^.
If any man will follow me* let him forsake himself, and take up his cross,
and follow me. And it is Peter's profession of himself and his fellows: Mat.
19 27.
Behold we have f^rsaken all and followed thee. And it is our Saviors
censure, Luke 14 27.
Whosoever bears not his cross and comes after me, cannot be my Disciple.
So that it is no maru^ll, if he entering into a ship his Disciples followed
him. For whom should the soldier follow, but his Captain? whom should the
servant follow, but his master? whom should the disciple follow, but his
teacher?

Doct. 1.
This example of the Disciples here, and their obedience in following their
Lord, does teach us, that 1. Cor. 14.33.
God is the God of order, and has made degrees and differences amongst men;
some to rule and govern, some to serve and obey, as well in the Church, as in
the Commonwealth; as well in war as in peace; as well at sea, as at the land;
as well in private houses, as in all public states; yea even in every particular
body: 1. Cor. 12.12.14 15.16. etc.
If all should be head, or any one member, it must needs become a monster. It
was therefore a rebellious conceit and speech of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram,
against Moses and Aaron: Numb. 16.3.
Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation is holy every one of
them, and the Lord is among them: Wherefore then lift ye your selves above the
congregation of the Lord? And we see the fearful judgment of God against
them, That the ground claue asu^der that was under them: Verse. 31.
And the earth opened her mouth and swallow^d them up, 32.
with their families; and all the men that were with Corah, and all their
goods: 33.
So they, and all that they had went down alive into the pit, and the earth
covered them, so they perished from among the congregation. It was the first
tentation, whereby the arch-enemie of mankind, the devil, set upon our great
grandmother Eve, and by it brought sin into the world, to draw her from her
subjection to her creator, by insinuating unto her, that God had no good
meaning toward her and her husband, in Genes. 3 1.
abridging them of their free liberty to eat of all the trees of the garden,
telling her, Genesis 3.5.
that by eating she should be like to God. So does he still suggest unto
inferiors, the hard dealing of their superiors, that by procuring them to
take some course for further liberty, he may bring them to disobedience, which
breeds disorder, and is the high way to utter confusion. For as the fowlers lay
not meat in the shrapes for birds; nor fishers so carefully bait their hooks,
to feed those fowls or fishes fatter, but to catch and make prey of them: so
the devil under these pretenses and fair shows, does aim to bring men to
disobedience and destruction.

Here therefore in this example, of Christ's Disciples following their Master
into the ship, all inferiors are taught a lesson of obedience unto their
superiors, that as the Centurion in this Chapter before, says of himself,
Verse. 9.
that he had soldiers under him; And he says to one go, and he goes, and to
another come, and he comes, and to his servant do this, and he does it. So
all that are under authority, should acknowledge subjection, and be directed
by their superiors.

But specially it is a fit meditation for Seamen, (for whose sake principally
I have written this discourse) who in their ships and Fleets, are a body and a
kind of Commonwealth severed from other men; consisting of diverse orders and
degrees, of which, some are to command and govern, and others (according to
their several places) to obey and take direction: Amongst whom there cannot
come a greater plague, then mutiny and rebellion in the inferior sort, which
has been the overthrow of many voyages and discoueries; and cannot be
otherwise without careful and speedy prevention.

As it is fit therefore that the Commanders in long voyages should have large
Commissions, to repress disorders in this kind: so it is necessary for the
common sort of sailors to be conscionably instructed in their duties of
obedience, which they see practiced and performed by the Apostles and Disciples
of our Savior Christ in this place, toward their Lord and Master.

1. Cor. 11.1.
Follow me, as I follow Christ. And the bounds of obedience (as they are
observed by Divines out of the fifth Commandment, Honor thy father and thy
mother) being comprised in these two:

1. First, that though the superior be never so wicked, yet his lawful
commands are to be obeyed.

2. Secondly, that though he seem never so good, yet if he command others to
do that which is wicked, he is not to be obeyed. In this respect let us
learn with the Apostles, in all things to follow Christ as our chief Lord and
Commander; and so far as any of our superiors shall command nothing contrary
unto Christ, we are bound to obey them; but if they command any wicked or
unlawful thing, our answer is with the Apostles, Act. 4.19.
Whether it be right in the sight of God, ^o obey you rather then God, judge
ye? For our obedience 1. Pet. 2.13.
to all manner ordinance of man, is for the Lords sake. And as Ephesians. 6.1.
children are bound to obey their parents but in the Lord: So ^it. 3.1.
our obedience to principalities and powers, consists in this, to be ready to
every good wo^ke. And yet it is expedient that we be not our own judges, and
censurers of our superiors commands, carping at every light and slight thing;
but rather obey, if it be in our power, though the thing be doubtful: as
Ioab, 2. Sam. 24.4.
though he saw no reason to number the people, yet obeyed David commanding.
For sometimes to an unjust commandment, there may be just obedience. As it
was more then Mat. 17.
Caesar could require of Christ, being free, 26.27.
to pay tribute; yet rather then he would break quietness, he gave it. So we
must part with our own goods to our superiors, rather then break quietness,
according to Saint Augustines rule, vt illum reum facit iniquitas imperandi, me
innoce^tem facit ordo parendi: that is, As he makes himself guilty by unjust
commanding, so I preserve my innocence by orderly obeying. And thus much of the
first general head of the history of Christ his voyage to sea in a ship, and
his Disciples following him.

The second follows, which is the danger of the voyage,

1. First, the arising of a tempest in the Sea, so that the ship was covered
with waves.

2. Secondly, that Christ was asleep: both which put together, gave occasion
to the Disciples both to be in great fear, and to awake and call upon their
Master. Of both these it is the common received opinion of divines, that they
were extraordinary, the tempest being either then raised by our Savior
Christ, and by the power of his Godhead; or at the least foreknowne and
foreseen of him, and his voyage purposely undertaken at that time, to show his
power and command over it. And his sleep being voluntary and of purpose,
thereby bringing his disciples into further danger, and so not only making
trial of their faith, but arming them against future perils.

First, for the tempest and the danger of it. It is first Behold]. Secondly,
the nature of it is comprised in the name here given it [ A tempest]. Thirdly,
the measure of it [ great]. Fourthly, the place of it [ In the sea]. Fifthly,
the effect it wrought [ the ship was covered with waues].

First, Behold and wonder: for is it possible, the wind Psalm. 11.6.
That upon the ungodly God shall rain snares, fire, and brimstone, and stormy
tempest, this is the portion of their cup: but for the Son of God, no sooner
to be put forth to sea, but to be seized thus on by wind and weather, cannot
but work amazement to all that consider it. Behold.

2 Again, Behold and attend diligently: Here is a matter worth your
consideration; for Divines observe of these two wor^s (ecce) and (absit),
Behold, and God forbid; that wheresoever they be found in the Scripture, they
are as Land-markes to seamen; as some Steeple, or Beacon, or high tree, by
which Sailors do shape their course, to arrive safely in their haven, and
escape rocks and sands. Wheresoever we find this word (behold), there is safe
sailing without danger; there is some comfortable doctrine, to direct us to our
haven Heaven, as Esai. 7.14.
Behold, a virgin shall conceive a child; and, John 1.29.
Behold the Lamb of God, etc. But where we find the other word ( God forbid),
there take heed, and fear danger; there is some rock, or sand, or shelfe, to
cast thee, and thy goods, and thy ship away. As, Romans 3.3.4.
What though some did not believe? shall their unbelief make the faith of God
without effect? God forbid. And again: Romans 6.1.
Shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? God forbid: and wheresoever
we find this word used, it is to cross some position of wicked men, and give
us warning to take heed of that. Here then the other word (behold) does
stir and move us to attention, promising not only some strange and
wonderful matter, wherewith the heart of man is naturally affected: but also
some such excellent thing, as every one should desire to see and hear; from
whence these two meditations do arise.

1 First, to consider the hardness of man's heart, which neither Gods promises,
nor threatenings, neither his blessings, nor his judgments can work upon; but
had need of him continually to call upon us, and stir us up.

2 Secondly, the mercy and goodness of God, who not only does great things for
the good of his children, but uses all means, to rouse them up to the due
consideration of what he has done for them, that he may justly expostulate;
Esa. 5.4.
What could I have done any more to my Vineyard, that I have not done unto it?
And thus much of the note of admiration and attention (^ehold).

Secondly, the nature of the danger is set down in the next word, A tempest.
Now a tempest is a violent and furious wind bringing, or at least ^^reatning
danger and hurt wheresoever it comes. And concerning the nature of the wind.
If (with B^za and most of the Greek Fathers), we interpret that speech of our
Savior Christ to Nicodemus: John 3.8.
The wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but
can not tell whence it comes, or whither it goes. It may seem that it is
a secret which God has reserved to himself, and not revealed unto men, what
and whence the winds are. But as learned Zanch^us has well observed that
speech of our Savior, (which the whole current of the Latin Fathers do not
expound of the wind, but of the Spirit of God) if it be to be understood of
wind, is only meant of a concealment of the nature of it, from the vulgar
sort and ordinary men: for the Philosophers by the light of nature, have found
out, that the winds be Meteors of the air, the matter whereof are dry
exhalations, drawn out of the earth by the force of the Sun; which
exhalations, when they come into the middle Region of the air, and are not
only cooled, but beaten back by those thick clouds which they there meet
withal, do not only trouble the air, but are caused to disperse and scatter
themselves; and being hindered by those thick clouds from ascending higher,
and kept by continual ascending of more exhalations from descending downward;
according to the thickness of the clouds with which they meet, they are
driven with some violence from one part of the air unto another, as from East
to the West, and from the North unto the South; even as the rain that falls
upon the earth, when it can neither descend lower, nor yet ascend up again, is
forced to seek a passage, and leaves not till it cause a violent stream or
flood. It is true that a reverend Prelate of our Church has observed,
concerning the original of the winds, Doctor King upon Jonas. L^ct. 4.
that neither with the Painims it must be ascribed to Aeolu^, whom they made
the god of the winds; nor with ignorant men to chance and fortune, which is
nothing but the opinion of fools, that look not to the true causes of things;
nor to Witches and Coniurers, and their compacts with the Devil: it is God
only that is the true efficient cause both of winds, and of all other
Meteors; as the Prophet says, Psalm. 135.7.
He brings up the clouds from the en^s of the earth, and makes the
lightnings with the rain. He draws forth the wind out of his treasures: but
he does ordinarily do all these by secondary means, so that the generation of
the clouds, and of the lightnings, and of the winds, may be found out by them
that search into them.

And hitherto we have discoursed of the natural causes of all winds, which if
they be temperate, do Genesis 3.8.
cool and refresh the earth, and the creatures therein, and are things which
the Seamen desire, and without whose help their ship can make no way, so that
a fresh gale whereby they may sail before the wind, is that which gives them
the best content: but here this wind, is called (...).
a tempest, that is, a violent and furious wind, such an one (as the word in
the original here signifies) as if it get into the hollow parts of the earth,
will make way before it, Psalm. 18.15.
and shake the very foundations of the earth, and make an earthquake, it will
shake, yea, and rent the rocks asunder; and therefore for the measure of it,
it is here called A great tempest; such as whereby the Prophets describe the
fierceness of Gods wrath against sinners; Psalm. 83.14.15
As the fire burns the forest, and as the flame sets the Mountains on
fire: So persecute them with thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy storm^.
And again, Psalm. 50.3.
Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence, a fire shall de^oure before
him, and a mighty tempest shall be moved round about him. So that we may say,
Nah. 1.3.
The Lord has his wa^ in the whirlewind, and in the storm. This made the Wise
man in that sort to denounce the judgments of God against the wicked: Prou.
1.27.
Destruction shall come upon them like a ^^^rl^wind. And it caused the Prophet
David to wish, Psalm. 55.6,
O that I had the wings of a Dove, then would I fly away and re^t. Behold, I
would take my flight far off, and lodge in the wilderness, 7,
8.
He would make haste for my deliverance, from the stormy wind and tempest. By
these phrases of the Scripture, we may gather the nature and condition of this
great tempest.

To which if we add that which is here set down in the fourth place, that it
was in the sea, which is (as a reverent

But we nee^e ^ot seek for amplifications, when in the fifth place the effect
of the storm is set down in the tha^ the sh^p was couere^ with wau^^; that is
that it was so near sinking, that without Christ's ^resen^ help, the Disciples
themselves, that had been brought up at sea (at least some of them) saw no
other way of escape. And seeing (as was said before) the fierceness of Gods
wrath against sinners, is vs^^^ly in the Scripture set down in the terms of
such tempests, no mar^ell if I^nah flying from the presence of God, and from
the execution of the duties of his calling, were thus encountered: but that
Christ himself Luke 2.49.
going about his Fathers business^, and to whom John 4 34.
it was meat and drink to do his will that sent him, and to finish his work:
and for his Disciples, Matthew. 19.27
that left all to follow him* that they should be brought to such extremity of
danger, may seem strange.

For the first meditation therefore arising unto seamen John 4.12.
Art thou gr^ater then our Father Jacob? So say I, Art thou greater or better
then our Savior Christ and his Disciples? we see what estate and condition he
and they were subject unto, let us prepare our selves for the like.

Heb. 2.17.
That it b^ho^^d h^^ in ^l things to b^ ma^e l^ke vnt^ his breth^en, that h^
might be m^rciful, and a faithful High Priest in things concer^i^g God that he
might m^ke rec^n^^liation for ^he sinn^s of the ^e^ple: 18
For in that he suffer^d, and was tempted, he is able to su^cour them that are
^empted. This is an excellent meditation for seamen, in their greatest dangers
by storms or tempests, or any other means, not only to consider, that Christ
himself did undergo the like dangers in the days of his flesh: but the
reason why he did so undertake them, to wit, that he having had experience of
them in himself, might be the more merciful to us, and the readier to make
intercession for us, and as he is God, to help and deliver us. And this
meditation, will breed Christian fortitude and patience, as the Apostle says,
1. Cor. 10.13.
There has no tentation taken you, but such as appertain to man, and God is
faithful, which will not suffer you to be tempted above that you be able: but
will even give the issue with the tentation, that y^e may be able to bear it.

The third meditation, is the extremity of danger that Jacob, though Romans 9
11.13.
God loved him before he was borne: yet we see to what straights he is driven,
before he could enjoy the blessing promised. His brother Genes. 27.41.
Esau threatens to kill him. He is in Ishmaels case, Genes. 21.14.
ca^t forth of his fathers house. For his mother that loved him dearly, Genes.
27.42.
is feign to send him away privately* while his wicked brother stays at home
to hunt at his pleasure. Neither goes he (as his grandfather Genesis 24.^0.11
Abraham's m^n went ^o seek his father a wife) wi^h h^s Cammels, and his
furnitur^: but he is feign to Genes. 28.11.
go alone over Jordan with his staff in his hand, 1^.
and to take up his ^^dging in the op^n field, and make a stone his pillow, 1^
before he had that comfortable vision of the Angels, and God s^e^king to him.
And yet all this comfort may seem to be but a dream: for after this he is
feign to endure painful service in his churlish Uncle L^ba^s house, the space
of twenty years, who as he deceived him of his daughter (whom he had
promised him after seven years service) so Jacob does tell him to his face;
Genes. 31 40.
I was in the day consumed with heat, and with frost in the night, and my
sleep departed from mine eyes. 41
Thus hau^ I been twent^^ years in thine house, and served thee fourteen
ye^res for thy two daughters, and six years for thy sheep, and thou have
changed my wages ^en times. And yet for all this good service, verse. 20.
he was f^ine to steal away from him by Gods command^ment, and was purs^ed by
him, 23
wi^h purpose to have done him hurt* if God himself had not preuen^ed him. 24
Neither did this holy Patriarchs troubles thus end, for Genes* 32.24.
he was after en^ountred by an Angel. And after that Genes. 33.1.
by his brother Esau with four hundred men. Then was he troubled with the
Genes. 34.25.
murder of the Sichemites by his two sons: and after that Genes. 35.16.
with the death of his beloue^ wi^e Rach^l in childbed. And yet more with the
loss of Genes. 37 33.
Joseph his eldest son by her. And lastly, with Genes. 45.11.
enduring two years of famine. No marvel therefore if he styled his whole
life, Genes. 47.9.
the days of his pilgrimage. And his good son Joseph sped little better, who
was Genes. 37.8.
envied by his brethren, threatened to be killed: cast into a pit, 20.24*
drawn forth and sold as a sl^^e to the Ishmaelites, carried by them into
Egypt, and sold to Putaphar: 28.36.
Genesis 39.17.20
falsely accused by the harlot his Mistress, vnius^ly cast into prison: Psalm.
105.^8.
whose feet they h^ld in ^h^ s^ockes and he was la^d in irons. And lastly the
favor he did to the Kings Butler, which was cast in prison, to him, Genes*
40.14.
though he earnestly entreated to be remem^red, was quite forgotten. 23
This then is the state and condition of Gods dearest children, and not to
instance in any more particulars, we may observe it to be his dealing commonly
with his Church: for thus he dea^t with his people the children of Israel,
when (by his mighty power and outstretched arm) he had made the Egyptians
weary of them by those ten several plagues inflicted upon them by the
ministry of Moses* insomuch that Exo. 12.33.41.
they forced them to go away in have, saying* we dye all. And so delivered
them from that slavery and bondage which they had endured four hundred and
thirty years; yet let us consider to what straights they are brought: Exodus 4
2.
They had the Red se^ before them, the mountains on each side, and Phara^h
with a great Host of Horses and Chariots p^rsuing them. 6*7,
So that the people are in despair of any escape, 11,
and therefore say to Moses: Have thou bro^ght us to die in the wilderness,
because there were no graves in Egypt? 12,
Wherefore have thou served us thus, to carry us out of Egypt? Did we not tell
thee this thing in Egypt, saying: Let us be in rest, that we may serve the
Egyptians, for it had been better f^r us to serve the Egyptians* then that we
should d^e in the wilderness: Then, and not till then, was it time for God to
show himself; and therefore Moses does then answer for God: 13,
Fear ye not, stand still and behold the salvation of the Lord, which he will
show to you this day; 14,
for the Egyptians, whom ye have seen this day, ye shall never see again. The
Lord shall fight for you, therefore hold you your peace. And presently he
divided the sea, 21,
so that the Israelites went through the midst of it upon the dry ground, 22,
and the waters were a wall unto them on the ri^ht hand, 28.
and on the left: but Pharaoh, and all his host were d^owned in pursuing and
following them. I have been the longer in this meditation, because it is of
most use for Seamen, that finding it ordinary with God, to have dealt thus
with his best Saints, Heb. 12.3.
they may never faint (be the danger never so great) but wait and expect Gods
leisure for delivery. For God as he knows the best time: so he is the best
obseruer of time; and though the ship be covered with waves: yet Heb. 10.35.
cast not away your confidence. Say with holy I^b: Job 13.15.
Though he ^ill me, I will trust in him: and resolve with the 3. children: Dan.
3.17.
B^hold our God who^ we serve is able to d^li^er us, and when he please, he
will. I would here end this first point, of the danger in respect of the
tempest, but that, (by consideration of that which we find in the other
Evangelists, reporting this history) we find in Saint Mark, that Mar. 4.36.
there were with him other little ships: and yet we find not that those
ships, or any of them were in the like danger; 37.
for this ship was covered with waves, and both Saint Mark, and S. Luke say,
that it was filled with wat^r: Luke 8.23.
and they both use a word for the tempest, which (in the Original) signifies
(...).
A whirlwind, which is a violent and strong wind, descending down right, and
turning and winding round about; so that when such a wind shall light upon such
a ship at sea, it carries it insta^tly round about, and wheels it underneath
the water. So that this word imports, that though the whole sea were troubled,
and so the other ships not free from danger: yet this tempestuous whirlwind
did specially aim at this bottom, in which our Savior and his Disciples
were. And whether this tempest was raised by Christ himself as he was God; or
whether Satan, whom the Apostle calls Ephesians. 2.2.
The prince that rules in the air, was permitted to raise it, as he Job 1.19.
was to raise such another tempest, whereby he smote the four corners of the
house, wherein Jobs children were eating and drinking* and killed them. It is
certain that the end, for which Christ thus suffered this tempest thus
directly to seize upon his ship, was, not only for the trial of their faith,
(which was yet but weak), but also for the confirmation and strengthening
thereof, by that great miracle which he then wrought: To teach all men at sea
and land, to depend upon Gods providence in their greatest dangers, knowing
that Mat. 10.29.
a sparrow c^n^ot fall ^o the ground* nor an hair from their he^ds without
him; 30.
and therefore submitting their wills to his will in their most extremities, to
say with El^, 1. Sam* 3.18.
It is the Lord le^ him do what ^^eme^h him good. And thus much for the first
point, of the danger.

2. We come now to the second point, But he was asl^ep^. When Christ told his
Disciples concerning Lazarus, Ioh. 11.11.
Our friend Laz^rus sleeps, b^t I go to w^^e him. They answer* Lord if he
sleep he shall be s^f^. But Christ spoke there of his death, 11.
by the name of sleep. And here (in as great danger of death, as flesh and
blood can imagine) the Disciples plainly se^, that their m^sters sleeping, is
the greatest cause of their danger; for as Mar^^a says of her brother, Io^.
11.32.
Lord if thou ^a^st been here* my bro^her had not bin d^ad: so might the
Disciples have said, Lord, if ^hou had not slept, we might have prevented
all this danger. Strange it is therefore that ou^ Savior should be so sound
asleep, when his Disciples were so watchful. It was not so with him in
another danger, when indeed he was to die, when withdrawing himself from the
rest, and making choice of his Gal. 2.9.
^hree pillars of the Apostles, Mat. 26.37.
Peter, James, and John* to wa^^h with him ^he ^ight before his passion: 38.
as he could not, or would not sle^pe himself, 40.
so he could not keep them awake, ^ho^gh he warned and charged them again
and again; though he t^l^ them of the danger of that right, that Mat. 26* 31.
^he shepherd should b^ smitten, 41.
and the sh^epe scattered, yet he found, that h^wsoe^er the spirit was willing,
yet the flesh was weak. The one (the spirit) was like a forward dog, that
cannot be holden back from his game: but the flesh was like a curre in his
couples, that will neither go himself, nor suffer his fellow (that is coupled
with him) to go neither: It was fit for them as they were Christians, to be
watchful at all times, but at that time especially it concerned them to be Luke
^6* 8.
as wise in their generation as the children of ^his world, who Mat. 24.43.
if they kn^w certainly at what hour the thief would come, would surely
watch. But they (though forewarned) neither look to ^ndas Ioh. 12 6.
who was a ^heefe; nor to Satan, Io^. 8.44.
who was a murther^r from the b^ginning: for when they should assist their
Master in his greatest agony, they are fast asleep. Alas our Savior Christ
knew, that the danger of this tempest was nothing; and although he took our
nature upon him, that in it he might die, yet he was sure that his Ioh. 7.30.
hour was not yet come: and when it did come, he knew what death he should
die; as he told Nicodemus, Job. 3.14.
As Moses li^t up the serpent in the w^ldernesse, so must ^he son of man be
lift up: yea he told his Disciples directly, Mat. 20.19.
tha^ he must be delivered into the hands of ^he Gen^i^es, to mock, and to
scou^ge, and to crucify him. So that though his contrymen at Nazareth, Luke
4.29.
would have thrown^ him head^o^g from a sleep hill, whereon their town stood.
Though the Jews Ioh. 8.59.
would have stoned him, Luke 13.31.
Herod would ^^ue killed him, and here he be in a great tempest, to all shows
in extremity of danger: yet no marvel if he sleep securely, knowing that no
harm could come to him. And here (not to enter into any philosophical
discourse, concerning the nature and causes, and necessity of sleep) it is
certain, that as Christ thereby gave assurance of the truth of his humanity;
so it was specially for the increasing of the danger to the greatest height,
that thereby there might be 1. Pet. 1.7.
a trial of their faith which is much more precious th^n gold (though tried
with the fire): and that the Disciples might thereby be drawn more earnestly
to call upon him for help and succor: for we have no promise of having
without asking; or opening, without our knocking.

The use then of this is to all Seamen in their greatest dangers, that as
Christ did here, Vs^.
animate and encourage his Disciples, by these extremities, to endure
whatsoever crosses af^erward might fall upon them: So we must know, that
Christ does suffer now al^o his best children many times to come in great
danger, as the Apostle does report of himself: 2. Cor. 1.8.
Brethren, we would not have you ignorant of our affliction, which came unto us
in Asia, how we were pressed out of measure, passing strengt^, so that we
altoge^her doubted even ^f life: 9.
yea we re^eiued the sentence of death in our selves, because we should not
^^u^t in ou^ sel^es, but in God which raises ^he dea^* who delivered us from
so great a ^ea^h, and does ^el^ue^ (...), etc. This is the case of all Gods
children: and howsoever we are apt in our extremities, to think that God is
far from us, that he does not see, nor know, or else would not suffer us to
be in such danger: yet let us comfort our selves with the consideration of this
particular: that Christ (being present with his Disciples, in this great
storm) would yet sleep, as though he regarded it not: And certainly as he
was present with them, as he was man; so he is always present with his
children, as he is God; as he promised Jacob in his vision: Genesis 28.15.
Behold I am with thee, and will keep^ thee whither soever thou go, and will
bring thee back into this land, for I will not forsake thee, till I have
performed that which I have promised thee. So also has he promised, not only
his presence, but his assistance, to all his children in their greatest
necessities; as he speaks in the Psalm: Psalm 91.1.
Who so dwells in the secret of the most high, shall abide in the shadow of
the Almighty. And the issue thereof is set down in the same Psalm: Verse. 15.
I will be with him in trouble, and I will deliver him, and glorify him. He
Mar. 6.48.
that s^w his Disciples troubled in rowing, when the wind was contrary to them
in the fourth watch of the night, and came himself to help them: he sees and
knows our troubles also, and when he sees time will free us from them,
though he seem to us to be asleep, and to have little care of us: for Psalm.
94.9.
He that formed the eye, shall not he see? And though he seem to us to stay
long before he help us, yet he will come quickly, and in convenient time: for
Psalm. 145.9.
his m^rcy is over all his works. And therefore if in showing his judgments,
2. Pet. 3.9.
he be not slack of his promise, as some men count slacknesse: But, Heb.
10.37.
in coming he will come, and will not tarry. Then much more in his promises of
mercy are we patiently to endure and expect the performance, knowing, that Heb.
10.23.
he is faithful that has promised. The conclusion therefore of this part is,
that the resolution of all men (but especially of Seamen) in extremity of
danger, must be that of the Prophet David: Psalm. 46.1.
God is our hope and strength, and help in tr^^bles ready to be found:
Therefore will we not fear though the earth be moved, and though the
mountains fall into the midst of the sea: Though the waters thereof rage and
be troubled, and the mountains shake at the surges of the same. Sela^. And
thus much shall suffice for the second general part: The danger of the voyage.

We come now to the third general head, viz. the miracle They came and awoke
him: And in that they said, Master save us, we p^rish.

First, they came: and it may seem it was high time to come, for they were in
great ieopardy. The winds whistled loud; the sea went high; their ship was full
of water; both passengers and mariners were all at their wits end. Their case
seemed desperate, as may appear both by their cry to him, and his reproof of
them in the next verse: no marvel therefore if they came. It is Christ's own
precept: M^tth. 11.28
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden. And though the best
coming to Christ be spiritually by faith, yet while he lived upon the earth
there was also a bodily coming to him, commended in the Wise men, Matthew. 2.2.
that came from the East to Jerusalem, by the conduct of a star, to see and
worship him, presently after his birth, and Luke 2.12.
commanded to the shepherds, by the ministry of an Angel* and a sign given
them, by which they should find him. And it is noted as a fault in Nicodemus,
that he came to Christ, John 3.2.
but he came by night for fear of the Jews, as not daring to ^uouch his
coming to him. And there is yet an outward coming to Christ required of
Christians, that although he be present in all places, and at all times, as he
is God; yet having set apart certain places and times, to religious duties and
services, our coming to those places, at those times, do declare and testify
to the world, that Matthew. 10.33
we are not ashamed of him before men: but specially in cases of extremity, we
must not only be ready our selves, but stir up and provoke others, not only
to come, but to run unto him for relief and succor. And indeed, whether, or
to whom should they come in their necessities, but to him, as the text
speaks? For as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 73.25.
Whom have I in heaven but thee, and I have desired none in the earth with
thee: 26
My strength fails, and my heart also: But God is the strength of my heart, 27
and my portion for ever: For lo, they that withdraw thems^lues from thee
shall perish; Thou destroyest all them that go a whoring from thee: 28
As for me, it is good for me to draw near to God, therefore have I put my
trust in the Lord God. As therefore when after the comfortable sermon to the
Capernaites, John 6.66.
Many of his Disciples went back, 67
and walked no more wi^h him: And Jesus said to the twelve: 68
Will ye also go away? Peter answered: Lord, to whom shall we go? thou have
the words of eternal life: And we believe and know, 69
that thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God. So in any extremity,
whosoever seeks for help of any other, is deceived. We read in Jonah, that
in that great tempest, when the ship was like to be broken, and the mariners
were sore afraid, that Jonas 1.5.
every man cried unto his several God: that is, either to Neptune, or some of
their sea-gods, as they were held; or else to the gods of their several
countries* And in Popery superstition has brought in such imitation of the
Heathen in this kind; that as they appointed to every several country their
several Saints, to be prayed unto for help, and so in every sickness a
sundry Saint. So they had also their Saints for the sea. Erasmus in a dialogue
which h^ intitles, The Shipwreck, does pretily set down their superstitious
idolatry in this kind: Some praying to the Virgin Mary, terming her the star
of the sea, the Queen of heaven, the Lady of the world, the haven of health:
some praying to the sea it self, pouring oil into it, and bestowing upon it
many sweet phrases, thereby to calm it: some calling upon Saint Nicholas,
Christopher, Vincent* Katharine: Some making vows to the Lady of Walsingham,
and James of Compostella; if they might escape. But the Disciples knew first,
that as the Prophet says, Psalm. 96.5.
All the Gods of the Nations were either devils or idols: (for the word may be
interpreted either way). And for the Saints depart^d, howsoever they knew, that
Noah had been preserved a who^e year in the Arc from the danger of the Flood;
and Exodus 2.10.
Moses had his name given him, for his being saved or drawn^ out of the water;
and Jonah, though he were cast into the sea, yet Jonas 1.17.
God provided a great fish to save him: yet they seek to none of these for
help; for Job 5.1.
to which ^f the Saints should they turn? Esaias 63.16.
Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel knows us not; and therefore they take a
better course here, they come directly to Christ, whom they find able and
willing to help them. But not content with coming, the text adds, They
awoke him.

This is the second part of their action, wherein Ionahs ship, that in Jonas
1.6.
a dangerous tempest, he was not only watchful^, and careful, and painful in
his calling, for the saving of his ship, himself, his men, and goods; but also
would suffer none in the ship to be idle, no not Jonah a passenger, but rouzed
up the sluggard: So though it may seem a b^ld part in the Disciples here, to
trouble and disease their Master; and (in a manner) to use force and violence
toward him and disturb him; yet seeing in ships of all other places, and in
the time of tempests of all other times, the safety of all does depend
especially, upon the careful vigilance of the Commanders; who by their
experience and authority, are able to do more good, then many other ordinary
men, as this example of the Disciples does give warrant unto inferior persons,
if they find their superiors negligent and sleepy, not only dutifully to
advise* but also to provoke and stir them up, craving their aides and
assistance in time of danger; so does it teach the best Commanders, not to
think scorn of good counsel from the meanest of their followers, and as 2.
King. 5.3.
Naaman, h^^kening to the advice of a silly girl* was by that means freed
from his leprosy; so they may by the service of some mean person (if God so
see it good) 1. Cor. 1.27.
who w^r^eth his own purpose many times by very we^^ means, free themselves
and ships, and men from many dangers. But howsoever, the violence and force
here used by the Disciples to their Master (coming by entreaty and prayer to
crave his help) is such, as he cannot but well like and approve of. For
himself tells us, that Matthew. 11.12.
the kingdom of heau^n suffers violen^e, and the violent take it by force.
And if Hosea 12.4.
Jacob meet with an A^gell, or with God himself, offering to wrestle wi^h
him, he must hold hi^ hold fast, and say with him, Genesis 32.26.28
I will not let thee go, except thou bless me, and this shall change his name
to Israel* that is, a preuailer with God. Our Savior telling his Disciples,
Luke 18.1.
That they ought always to pray, and not to wax faint: does confirm it by a
parable of an unrighteous Judge, that neither feared God, nor reuerenc^d man;
who by importunity of a poor widow, was drawn to do her justice. Whereupon
he inferres, Shall not God a^^nge his elect, which day and night cry unto him?
yea, though he suffer long. We read how the poor Cananitish woman is
commended, that would receive no repulse at our Savior Christ's hands, Matthew.
15.22.
neither by his silence, nor by his cross answers, telling her he was not
sent to her, and call^ng her dog: yet she continuing her suite, had her desire
granted, wi^h this commendation; O woman great is thy faith: contrary to the
check given here to the Apostles, O ye of little faith.

Now for the manner of their awaking him, whether the Disciples in coming to
him touched him, as the 1. King. 19.5.
Angel did Eliah, or smote him on the side, as the Acts 12.7.
Angel did Peter, I cannot determine, because the Evangelists do not report
any such thing: I think rather, it was their outcrie in their prayer,
occasioned by their fear, whereby they awoke him: and indeed prayer in it
self is so excellent, that as the word of God is the food of the soul, so
thi^ is the exercise of the soul, for the obtaining, keeping, and increasing
of all spiritual grace. So that as a man cannot keep his body for any long
time in health and strength, unless he use some exercise, yea, though he fill
it with good meat, and feed it most carefully: So although a man do hear the
Word of God every day preached unto him, and so feed his soul with the food
of life, yet unless he do by this spiritual exercise of prayer, draw the
said heavenly food into the several parts of his soul, he shall sensibly
feel his faith, hope, love, patience, and all other spiritual graces, to
decrease by little and little; yea, as ^he exercising of the body, does not
only preserve it in the natural vigor, but also ^ncreaseth the strength of
it, by keeping it from growing fat and foggy, and preserving it from sickness;
so by the daily use of prayer, we shall find, that the Lord will increase in us
all spiritual graces far above our own expectation, or the opinion of any
other. Yea, even in this life hearty and fervent prayer coming from a
faithful man, is health in sickness, riches in poverty, safety in danger,
comfort in adversity, and makes supply of all temporal defects and wants
whatsoever. But above all the seaman (^specially in long voyages) being for
the most part debarred of the spiritual food of his soul (that is, the Word
of God ordinarily preached), should labor to redeem and recover that loss,
both by reading the Word of God, and learned men's works: but specially by
having continual recourse to God in prayer. For it is the end of our preaching
to teach men how to pray, and there is not a more infallible sign of a true
child of God, then the spirit or gift of prayer, whereby a man is made able,
and willing, and ready, to pray aright unto God, as the present occasion does
require. Art thou by distance of place, imprisonment, travel, or otherwise
removed from the ordinary hearing of the Word preached? have daily recourse
unto God by prayer, Dan. 6.10.
three times in a day with Daniel; Psalm. 119.164.
seven times in a day with David; Luke 18.1.
always as Christ teaches, and 1. These. 5.17.
continually, as Saint Paul commands, Offer up this sacrifice morni^g and
evening* and say with the Prophet, Psalm. 141.1.
Let my prayer ascend unto thee as the incense, and the lifting up of my hands
as the evening sacrifice. Let it be thy first and thy last work every day; for
this is Cypr. de orat. dom. Greg. de orat. Aug. ad Prob.
clauis die^, a key to open the day; and it is Sera noctis, a lock to shut up
the night: it is Chrysostom.
Signaculum cibi, that which makes thee look for a blessing on thy meat, thy
prayer, or grace, before and after m^ales, and whatsoever thou go about,
though thou have not time to conceive a prayer in words, yet learn of
Nehemiah, Nehem. 2.4.
to lift up thy heart unto the Lord. Art thou tempted to any evil? pray to God
to give the^ grace and strength to overcome the tentation: and if thou receive
it not at the first, pray with Saint Paul 2. Cor. 12.8.
the second and third time. Have thou given way, and art thou overcome by the
tentation? pray for repentance and faith, that thou may be reconciled unto
God again. Do thou find that thou have deserved Gods judgments, and that
they hang over t^y head for sin? pray that (if it be his will) they may be
turned away from thee. Has God found thee out, and are his judgments upon
thee? rip up thy heart, consider thy former life, confess thy sins unto him,
pray for deliverance, either to remove his judgments, or to lessen them, or to
increase thy strength and patience to bear the^. Again, do thou find any
want of any spiritual grace in thee? James 1.5.
pray to him that is only able and willing to bestow it upon thee. Do thou
find any comfort by any grace already received? pray for the continuance and
increase in it, and for multiplying and increasing of more graces; 2. Pet. 1.5.
Gi^^ al^ diligence to join unto your faith virtue, and with v^^tue k^owl^dge,
and with knowledge temperance* an^ with temperance patience, and with patience
godliness, and with godliness brotherly kindness, and with brotherly kind^esse
lou^. etc. Pray not only for thy self, but for others, both with thee, and
far from thee: Frater si prote solum oras, solus pro te oras; si pro omnibus
ores, omnes pro te orant: Brother (says Saint Augustin^) if thou only pray
for thy self, thou alone prayest for thy self; if thou pray for all men, all
do pray for thee. A man in the remotest parts of the world should not only
remember his friends at home, but his enemies abroad, and pray for all, that
they all may pray for him.

Now for the necessity of this duty of prayer, if we consider Gods
commandment, Psalm. 50.15.
Call upon me in the day of thy trouble. This is all that he requires, and
therefore we say with Naamans servants; 2. King. 5.15.
If the Prophet h^d commanded thee a great thing, would thou not have done
it? how much rather then etc. This commandment of God were a sufficient
reason, by the Matthew. 8.9.
Centurions rule. And Christ speaking of an obedient servant; Luke 17.9.
Does his Master (says he) thank him for doing this.

But secondly, our own wants and necessities do constrain us; for 1. Cor 4.7.
we have nothing of our selves, but what we receive of him; neither have we
any promise of receiving any thing without prayer; Matthew. 7.7.
Ask and you shall have.

Thirdly, our enemies are, first, strong like Luke 11.21.
the strong man armed that holds possession in peace. Secondly, many, even
Ephesians. 6.12.
principalities, powers, worldly governors, princes of darkness, etc.
Thirdly, crafty, for Revel. 2.24.
the devil is a deep politician. And 2. Cor. 2.11.
lest we should be circumuen^ed, we must not be ignorant of his enterprises.
As that sometimes he 2. Cor. 11.14.
transformes himself into an Angel of light. And there is more heed to be
taken of him, when Genes. 3.1.
he comes in the wily serpent, then when he comes with open mouth 1. Pet. 5.8.
roaring like a Lion. We see when he came to tempt our Savior Christ, he comes
(as it we^^) with his Psalter in his hand, and Matthew. 4.7.
scriptum est in his mouth, It is w^itten (says he) as though he had Scripture
for his warrant.

Seeing then God commands us, our necessities compel us, and our enemies are
so strong, so many, and so crafty, and we can have no help but of God, and
no means to obtain help from him, but by prayer, to which he has annexed
his promise, and 1. Cor. 10.13.
he is faithful that has promised. Seeing that which Saint James tells us,
that James 5.16.
the prayer of a righteous man prevails much* is confirmed by examples in
holy Scripture, that no duty has wrought such miracles, not only in the
Elements (as Numb. 16.31.
the opening of the earth to swallow up Corah, Dathan and Abiran, at the prayer
of Moses). And in the waters at his prayer, Exodus 15.25.
not only the mak^ng of bitter waters sweet, but Exodus 14.21.
dividing of the sea in two. And in the air at the prayer of Eliah, James 5.17.
the middle region shut up from rain for ^hree years and six months: and at
his prayer the 2. Kings 1.10.
fire descending to consume the Captains and their fifties): but also in the
Heavens, the Iosh^a 10.12.
Sun to stand still at the prayer of Ioshuah; and the Matthew. 17.21.
strongest devils to be cast out by this and fasting. Yea, seeing this duty
does work upon Exodus 32.10.
God himself, to withhold him from pouring down his i^dgements. All those do
not only excuse the Disciples, but commend them, in coming to their Master to
awake him, and call upon him for help: and do teach all good Christians (by
their example) never to forget, or neglect the performance of this duty.

But we consider further here, the manner of the Disciples coming unto Christ,
by the extremity of danger whereby they were driven, not only presently and
suddenly to call upon him, but with exclamation and outcrie to cry and roar
to him, thereby to re^eiue present help, lest it come too late: for in the
great dangers of fire and water (which two elements are said to have no mercy)
there must be neither dallying, nor delaying, but without present help there
is no hope. As therefore if a man shall see his house on fire, he comes not
coldly and faintly to entreat his neighbors help, and to yield them reasons:
but breaks out into exclamations, Fire, fire! water, water! ladders, ladders!
help, help! we are all undone, etc. So in this place, in this extreme peril
of water, it may well be presumed, that the Disciples being in great fear,
skreeked, and made a pitiful noise to awake their Master. And howsoever the
prayers of the godly are never unseasonable, and are therefore to be used at
all times, and upon all occasions (as was said before), yet certainly they are
never so earnest, so fervent, so hearty, and consequently so effectual, as in
extremity of trouble. This therefore is a principal reason why God does suffer
afflictions in this life to seize upon, and even to be ready to overthrow his
own dearest children. For though many other reasons hereof are given by the
Fathers, as first, Luke 16.25.
To show his justice against sin, of which no man is free in this life.
Secondly, to terrify the wicked; for 1. Pet. 4.17.
If justice begin at the house of God, what shall, etc. Thirdly, to exercise
their patience, Heb. 10.37.
of which they have need: no patience but in afflictions. Fourthly, to make
Romans 8.29.
conformable to the image of his son; for as Christ says of himself; Luke
24.26.
Ought not Christ to suffer these things, and so to enter into glory. So Saint
Paul of his children; 2. Tim. 3.12.
All that will live godly in Christ, must suffer persecution. Fifthly, to weane
them from the world, as the nurse annoints the teate with bitter things.
Sixthly, to make them know, that their disease is not incurable. As the
Physician to a desperate patient, will give leave to eat what he list: but to
him whom he has hope to recover, he denies many things, he must keep diet.
Seventhly, to assure them, Heb. 12.8.
that they are sons not bastards, being partakers of correction. Eighthly, to
stop Satan's mouth, that is ready to say, Job 1.9.
Does Job serve God for naught. Ninthly, to purge us from the dross and
corruption of our natures: for that which the Greg.
flayle is to the Corn, to bring it from the straw; that which the file is to
the iron to take off the rust; that which the fire is to the gold, to purge it
from dross: that is tribulation and affliction to Gods children, to do them
good. Tenthly, but above all other reasons, the last remains, that they may
Psalm. 50.15.
call and cry unto the Lord, renouncing themselves, and resting and relying
upon his protection. This is the reason that the Prophet David desires of God
Psalm. 141.2.
that his prayer may ascend as the incense. For as incense can send up no smoke
or sweet perfume, till it come into the fire. So the prayers of the Saints, do
never ascend so forcibly, as in their fiery trials: Oration sine malis, est
sicut auis sine alis: Prayer until affliction stings, is like a bird without
wings: it cannot raise it self to mount and fly up to heaven: for if we
examine our own hearts, we shall find, that even the best men that pray unto
God ordinarily every day, either publicly with others, or privately by
themselves (which duty is too much neglected by too too many), do while they
are free from troubles, call upon God, but weakly and coldly, and faintly,
rather for fashion and custom, then with any sound and sensible feeling of
their own miseries, H^s 14.3.
they offer the calves of their lips: And Mat. 15.8.
draw near unto God with their mouths, but their hearts are far from him:
and are therefore attended and accompanied with so many wandering imaginations,
and vain and idle thoughts, even in the midst of this holy and religious
duty, that when they have done praying, they had need begin to pray again,
for forgiveness of their negligent and careless carriage therein. But in
affliction when the judgments of God are upon us, and we are thereby brought,
either to the true sense and feeling of our sin, and of ye weight and burden
of it pressing us down to hell, or to be dejected by any extremity of
sickness, or any other danger that may threaten death: this cannot but work
fear and terror: and howsoever many of the wicked, that never had care to
serve God in the days of their peace, are thereby brought either to murmur and
to repine against God, as Exodus 15.24.
the Israelites in the wilderness; or to revile the means, and seek revenge,
as dogs, that bite at the stone that is thrown at them; or fall to open
blasphemy against God, as Julian the Apostata, crying at his death, Niceph.
hist. eccles. lib. 10. cap 34.
Vicisti Galil^e, O Galilean (meaning Christ) Thou have overcome; Or lastly,
fall into despair, and make away themselves, as 2 Samuel 17.23.
Achitophel and Mat. 27.5.
Judas: yet if they be not past all grace and hope, the judgments of God will
work remorse in them. We read of hard-hearted Pharaoh, that at the first
would not acknowledge God, and therefore said to M^ses and Aaron, Exodus 5.2.
Quis est Iehoua, Who is the Lord that I should hear his voice? Yet afterward
though he could not for the hardness of his heart pray himself, yet when the
plagues of God were upon him, he Exodus 8.8.
entreated Moses and Aaron to pray for him. And again, 28.
Go not far away, but pray for me. It is admirable to consider, how the
fear of Gods judgments wrought upon the Ninevites at Ionahs preaching; for
the text says of them, that though they were a Heathen people that knew not
God, and a great people; Jonas 3.3*
for their City was of three days journey, Jonas 4.11.
and there was in it six skor^ thousand that knew not their right hand from
the left. And they had Jonas 3.4.
forty days liberty to bethink themselves before the destruction should come:
yet at one days preaching, of one Prophet, one short Sermon: The men of
Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a fast, I^nas 3.5.
and put on sackcloth from the greatest of them to the least of them; for the
word came to the King of Nineveh, and he arose from his throne, and he laid
his robe from him, and put one sackcloth, and sat in ashes, etc. No marvel
therefore if our Savior say of the men in his time, that Mat. 12.41.
the men of Nineveh shall rise in iudge^ent with this generation, and condemn
it: for they repented at the preaching of Jonah. But much more may it be said
of our generation now: for we are not Heathen as they were, we have heard not
one only, but many Ionahs, not one day, but many days, and years, preaching
and threatening Gods judgments: We have not liberty of forty days granted us,
before we are to expect his judgment except we repent; we have seen and felt
many judgments, both upon our neighbors and our selves, and yet we are so
far from joining together from the greatest to the least, to repent and
humble our selves in prayer and fasting, for the diuerting his judgments, and
to Jonas 3.10.
turn from our evil ways (as they did); that we continue in sin, and daily
multiply our sins, to provoke him to hasten his judgment: yea, many of us (I
fear) may be accounted among those, that the Apostle prophesied of, that in
the last days should be mockers which would walk after their own lusts, and
say 2. Pet. 3.4.5.
Where is the promise of his coming? for since the fathers died* all things
continue alike from the beginning of the Creation. But to all such mockers of
Gods judgments denounced by his Prophets, let that one example of the Jews
(Gods own people) be sufficient; of whom we read, 2* Chro. 36.15.
That the Lord God of their Fathers sent unto them by his messengers, rising up
early, and sending: for he had compassion on his people, and on his
habitation. We see how the good thief in the Gospel, rebuked the other thief
that suffered with him, and railed upon our Savior Christ; Luke 23.40.
Fear thou not God (says he) seeing thou art in the same condemnation. The
fear of which condemnation did so work with him, that in the next verse,
after he had acknowledged his own sin, and Christ's innocence, he entreats
of Christ, Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom: And received
this comfortable promise, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Now if
the fear of Gods judgments work so powerfully upon the wicked to be in some
of them, Prou. 1.^.
the beginning of wisdom; that is (as Saint Augustine compares it) Aug.
as a needle to draw in the thread of the faith and love of God, whereby the
rent is sown up betwixt God and them. How is it possible, but the judgments
of God upon his own Saints, should make them cleave unto him, and call, and
cry, and roar, and never give over, till they have deliverance? and if their
griefs and sorrows be so great, that they cannot express them in words, it
being true of griefs, Le^es loquuntur, ingentes tacen^, that light griefs may
be uttered in words, but extreme griefs do astonish and deprive men of
speech: yet even in the greatest, with Anna, the mother of Samuel, 1. Sam* 1.15.
They do in their troubled spirit pour out their soul before the Lord: or
with Hezekiah, Esa. 38.14.
They chatter as a crane or a swallow, and mourn as a dove. And when we Romans
8.2^.
know not what to pray as we ought; the spirit helps our infirmities, and
makes request for us, with sighs and groans which cannot be expressed. But
he that And thus we see how the devotions in our prayers are quickened and
excited, and stirred up, by the sensible feeling of Gods fatherly corrections,
which all his children are partakers of.

The use whereof unto seamen, (nay their advantage by occasion and necessity)
is, that seeing they spend their lives in continual dangers: so that they may
say with Saint Paul: 2. Cor. 11.26.
In iour^eying often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils of
mine own nation, in perils among the Gentiles, in perils in the City, in
perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils among false
brethren. The more perils they undergo, the oftener they should, Orare nescis?
nauiga, p^ecabere.
and shall repair to God by prayer, in Jesus Christ, seeing he has made two
promises; the one, that Mat. 7.8.
whosoever asks shall receive: and the other, that Ioh. 16.23.
whatsoever ye ask the father in my name, he will give it. If we join these
two that whosoever asks, whatsoever h^ ask, shall be granted, that will
make us like children, in all dangers to run unto our father, and call and cry
to him with assured trust to be delivered. And if we Psalm. 73.28.
cleave fast to God, and have continual recourse unto him; and then most
especially, when we are in most danger: then are we sure, that Romans 8.35.
nothing shall separate us from his love; neither tribulation, nor anguish, nor
persecution, nor famine, nor nakedness, nor perils, 38.
nor sword: No neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. But here may be demanded and objected, Shall any man
whosoever, receive any thing whatsoever he shall ask of God in Christ's name?
To this Saint James makes answer: Iam. 4.3.
Let him not ask ami^se, to consume upon his own lusts. And again; Iam. 1.6.
Let him ask in faith and not waver: for a wavering minded man is like a wave
of the sea: And as our Savior Christ says, Mat. 20.22.
let him know what he asks: expounded by Saint ^ohn, 1. Ioh. 5.14.
If we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us. Not as the these
that Saint Chrysostom speaks of, that going to rob, prayed that he might not
be taken, and was taken so much the sooner: For conclusion of this point, we
observe two things.

1. That it is no certain sign of Gods grace and favor, to have a request
granted at Gods hand. For when the Israelites would needs have flesh; the
Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 78.27.
That he rained flesh upon them as dust, and feathered fowls as the sands of
the sea. And he made it fall in the midst of their camp, 28.
round about their habitations. So they did eat and were filled, 29.
for he gave them their desire: They were not turned from their lusts, 30.
but their meat was yet in their mouths: when the wrath of God came upon them,
31.
and slew the strongest of them, and smote down the chosen in Israel. 1. Sam.
8.22.
So God gave them a King at their request, but in his wrath. And the very
devils sometimes have their request granted, as verse. 32. of this Chapter.

2. It is not a sign of reprobation to have our suit denied; for the sons of
Zebede Mat. 20.23.
are so served: and Paul himself was not heard at the first, ^. Cor. 12.
but was feign to pray three times. God does not grant presently, to make us to
depend upon him the more. For the delaying of desires, does make men the more
earnest, and things easily granted, are lightly esteemed; but he never denies
any thing that stands with his glory, and his Churches good: And thus much of
the occasion of their carnestnesse.

Now for the prayer it self, it is very short, but three words; and I consider
in it three things: first, the title they give him, Master, or Lord. Secondly,
their request, Save us. Thirdly, the reason, We per^sh.

In the first, I observe their humility, in calling him, Lord and Master.

In the second, I observe their weak faith, yet calling to be saved.

In the third, their faint hope, and almost forlorn, We perish.

1 And first for the title or name whereby they call him; The three Evangelists
(which all report this miracle) do all differ therein. For the word here used
by our Evangelist, signifies, (...).
Lord, acknowledging his rule and authority over them. Saint Mark uses a word
which signifies, Mark. 4.38. (...).
Master, or Teacher; signifying that they had left their former trades of life,
to become his Disciples, and depend on him as their master. Saint Luke uses a
third word, which signifies, Luke 8.24. (...).
one that was set over, and had taken care and ch^rge of others: a term given
to shepherds, in regard of their sheep; and to Commanders, both in peace and
war. In the comparing of which words we may conceive, that there was a kind
of confused noise among the Disciples, striving (as it were) by their outcries,
who should wake him first, and who should give him the best title, whereby they
might, not only put him in mind of the duty that belonged to him toward them,
as he was their Lord and Teacher, and Master; but also to show, that they in
this misery depended upon his only help and assistance, to deliver them. And
here (seeing that our Savior Christ approving of these titles, says unto them
in another place: Ioh. 13.13.
Ye call me Master, and Lord, and ye say well, for so I am): I might take just
occasion to speak of names and titles, and show, that as God himself in the
first giving of names, to Genesis 1.5 8.
the day and the night, the heavens, 10.
the earth, and ^he seas. And as Adam afterward in giving particular names Genesis
2.20.
to all the creatures, by Gods commission and appointment, did make their
(...), to be (...), that is, did give them proper names according to their
several proprieties of nature; So it behooves every one, in what place and
calling soever he be plaeed, to consider what name does properly belong to his
place; whether it be of rule and government, or of subjection and obedience,
and to be stirred up by those names, to perform those duties that belong to
their several callings: whether in the Magistracy, or in the Ministry;
whether as a husband, as a father, as a master; and on the other side, whether
as a subject, a scholar, a wife, a child, a servant. That seeing several
duties do belong unto each of these places, and they fitly expressed in the
names given to every one, they may learn to make their names and dispositions
answerable and suitable: that the argument given by the Apostle, preferring
Christ above the Angels, (to wit) Heb. 1.4.
That he was made so much more excellent then the Angels, in as much as he
has obtained a more excellent name then they, might teach all men to study to
excel others in goodness, as they are advanced to higher places, and receive
more honorable names: but the especial thing that I observe in these titles,
is the humility of the Disciples, acknowledging themselves to be his vassals,
his scholars and servants, that being now in extreme misery, do rely only on
his mercy and goodness for their deliverance, that they may seem to say with
the Prophet: Psalm. 123.2.
Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their Masters, and as
the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistrisse; so our eyes wait upon the
Lord our God, until he have mercy upon us. Now for the virtue of humility: as
pride it was not only the first sin, both in Esa. 14.14. Jude, verse. 6.
the Angels, and Genesis 3.5.
in man, but was, and is, the mother and root of all sin, and the bane and
poison of all virtue: So humility it was the first lesson taught to Adam after
his fall; Genesis 3.19.
Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return. And it was the principal
lesson that our Savior taught his Disciples; both by precept, Mat. 11.29.
Learn of me, that I am meek and humble of heart: and by his own example;
Ioh. 13.15.
Behold I have given you an example. And by demonstration, setting a little
child in the midst of them, and telling them, Mat. 18*3.
Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye cannot enter into
the kingdom of heaven. But as this virtue is necessary for all Christians, at
all times, so is it most necessary in prayer of all other things, as may
appear in the prayers of the Luke 18.
Pharisie and Publican; where the pride of the Pharisie overthrew all the good
deeds that he boasted of: and the humble confession of the Publican made him to
go away more justified: And indeed in the duty of prayer, whether we
consider: 1. God, and his excellency, his majesty, his omnipotency, and other
attributes: 2. Our own corruption, our weaknessa, our wickedness, even of the
best men, in their best actions, that even Esa. 64.6.
our righteousness is as a filthy and polluted cloth: That our best works
are fitly compared to stars, which have a little light, but not of
themselves, but from the Sun: and that light may be discerned in the night
and dark; but when the Sun arises does not appear. So our works, if we
compare them with the works of the wicked, Ephesians. 5.11.
the works of darkness, they show somewhat; but compared with the Mal. 4.2.
Son of righteousness* (from whom we receive all the light we have) they
vanish and are nothing. I say, if we either consider God to whom we pray, or
our selves; we cannot but in all humility acknowledge our selves to be but
Genesis 18.27.
dust and ashes; to be Basile.
nothing, nor nothing worth: to be Homer. Epictet.
base, wretched, miserable, contemptible: as the Heathen have confessed, not to
be worthy to look up to heaven, nor to tread upon the earth, nor to call
upon his name, considering 1. Ioh. 3.20.
our consciences do accuse us, and he is greater then our conscience, Psalm.
7.9.
he tries the heart and the raines. He has found, Genesis 6.5.
that the cogitations of the thoughts of our hearts are only evil
cont^nually: Psa^. 51.5.
that we were conceived and borne in sin. 2. Cor. 3.5.
that we have not power of our selves, as of our selves, to think a good
thought: How then can we dream or imagine, but to have Psalm. 109.7.
our prayer turned into sin; and in stead of Genesis 27.12.
a blessing, to receive a curse? if we present not our selves and our prayers
unto him in humility, acknowledging him our Lord, our Father, and Master; and
therefore denying and renouncing our selves, and resting upon him; who as a
Lord and Master is able; and as a tutor and teacher is willing to deliver us in
his good time. And so much for the term given, Lord or Master.

The second follows, that is, the request, in these words, Save us. The sense
whereof is plain, that the Disciples when they came to Jesus, that is the
Savior of the world, when they cry unto him, save us; do not speak of
eternal salvation of their bodies and souls: but only of the saving of their
lives from that imminent danger wherein they now are; being ready to be
drowned as they thought. And indeed this life is very sweet: and as the devil
said of Job, Job 2.4.
Skin for skin, all that a man has will he give for his life. Aristot.
The Philosopher can tell us, that death is of all terrible things the most
terrible: and Christians do account of 1. Cor. 15.26.
death as their last enemy: and we know how unwelcome such an enemy is to
any, that spares no man, and has a Heb. 9.27.
statute for it, that all must become his subjects. They know also that Romans
6.21.
death is the reward of sin, and consequently, 2. Cor. 5.10.
that after death must come a judgment, when as every man must receive the
things that he has done in the flesh, according to that he has done, be it
good or evil. As for this life, they know it to be a blessing of God, and the
prolonging thereof promised to the obseruers of the 5. Commandment. Whereas
judgments are denounced to the wicked, Psalm. 55.23.
they shall not live half their days. So that if Psalm 116.15.
the death of Gods Saints be precious in his sight: and Psalm. 91.11.
He has given his Angels charge over them, to keep them in all their ways,
that they dash not their foot against a stone: no marvel if they call to
Christ, for the saving of their lives. But on the other side if life be so
sweet, and death so bitter, how comes it to pass, that the godly many times
desire death? not only in impatiency under the cross, as Job Job 3.3.
cursing the day of his birth: and Eliah being persecuted by Iezabel, 1. King.
19.4.
that he desired to die, and said: It is enough, O Lord, take my soul* for I
am no better then my fathers: And the Prophet Jonah, after the Lord had spared
the city of Nineueh, prays; Ioh. 4*3.
Now therefore, O Lord, take I beseech thee my life from me, for it is better
for me to die then to live: But even in a Christian resolution, the Apostle
Paul says, Phil. 1.23.
I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: and old Simeon prays, Luke
2.29.
Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word. To
this we answer; that for Job, and Eliah, and Jonah, they showed themselves to
be men, subject to passion, and are not therein to be imitated and followed by
us: and for Saint Paul, and Simeon, and all holy Martyrs, that have in their
desire to be freed from sin, and to be with Christ, (waiting Gods leisure,
when it may best stand with his glory, and with their good) been desirous to
die, that is a thing that we should labor and long for, 2. Cor. 5.4.
not to be unclothed, but to be clothed upon: that is, not to be weary of this
life, for any crosses or afflictions in it: but to have Christian resolution,
patiently to endure all, that God shall think fit to lay upon us. But our hope
of a better life, (with which we cannot be clothed, till we be unclothed of
this) makes us desire, when God sees it good, to make us weary of the
pleasures and delights of this life, which are vain and transitory in
comparison of the other, which are eternal. I conclude therefore that it is
not only lawful and convenient, but necessary for a man in extreme danger of
death, to call upon God for deliverance from the danger; so that he refer his
will to Gods will, and be resolved of a better life, if it please God to take
away this. Every Christian, though weak, is willing to live, Note.
and patient to die, as God pleases: but the strong Christian is patient to
live, and willing to die; for being assured of the mortality of the soul that
it dies not, and of the resurrection of the body: he knows that Revel. 14.13.
They are blessed that die in the Lord, they rest from their labors; and being
wearied with the great burden of his sins, he desires that rest. But here
in these words, Save us, we have before observed, the faith of the Disciples,
acknowledging his power to save them, and expecting it though very faintly. It
was their faith, whereby they thought he was able to save them; but the
weakness of their faith, that they imagined he could not save them, except he
were awake. And no marvel if their faith were yet weak, (for the confirmation
whereof this miracle was chiefly wrought) being young scholars, fresh water
soldiers, newly entertained by our Savior Christ, and not fit to be sent forth
yet into the world as may appear in the tenth Chapter of this Gospel.

Much more fearful seems to be the case of Saint Peter, who having seen this
miracle, and in it the command that our Savior had over the winds and sea; and
having received commission as a chief Apostle, not only Mat. 10.
to preach the Gospel, Mat. 14.25.
but himself to work miracles, does yet after all this, at another time being
at the sea, and our Savior Christ not with them, and the ship tossed on the
sea with waves, and a contrary wind; when first he and the rest were afraid of
Christ walking upon the sea, crying out for fear that he had been a spirit:
and Christ had so comforted them, that Peter desired to walk upon the water to
meet him, and had warrant from his Master so to do, and accordingly walked
upon the water: yet the text says, Mat. 14.30.
That when he saw a mighty wind, he was afraid, and as he began to sink, he
cried, saying, Master save me: So immediately Jesus stret^hed forth his hand
and caught him, and said unto him* O thou of little faith, wherefore did thou
doubt? If therefore Saint Peter, after many more experiences and trials of his
Masters power, and after commission received from Christ, did not so
venterously desire to walk upon the water, as cowardly stagger in his faith at
the sight of a great wind, his Lord and Master being so nigh him and awake;
though it cannot excuse, yet it may lessen somewhat the fault and weakness in
the Disciples faith in this place, that may seem to be in greater danger, and
their Master asleep.

For the use of this point, I say with the Apostle. 1. Cor. 10.11.
All these things came to them for ensamples, and were written to admonish us,
upon whom the ends of the world are come. Our Savior Christ would teach them,
that they were but men, and so weak and feeble in themselves, that they ought
both to acknowledge their weakness, and labor continually to increase their
strength: but therein not to trust to themselves, but to depend upon him, and
say with the man in the Gospel, Mark. 9.24.
Lord I believe, help my unbelief. And if the case were so with them, that
were specially called out of the world by our Savior Christ, and enjoyed his
presence, let us take heed, that we arrogate not too much unto our selves, and
whatsoever measure of grace we have received, remember the Counsel of the
Apostle: Romans 11.20.
Be not high-minded but fear. I write this the rather, because that which I
find in S. Chrysostom. Chrysostom. de Resurrec.
concerning sailors and seamen in long voyages, that a tempest to them is
nothing, they have seen and felt and ouerliued so many tempests, that they are
grown familiar with them. They are as old beaten soldiers that fear neither
blows nor bullets, and as David, because 1. Sa. 17.34.35.
he had killed a Lion and a Bear persuaded himself that he could kill Goliath;
So they having been in as great dangers in other voyages as may be, have now
(they think) such resolution, that they cannot fear to meetwith death it
self. But take heed thy resolutions be truly grounded in Christ, lest it prove
presumption. Be not too rash, nor foole-hardy under the name of courage (better
called curre-rage); but know that thou art a man, and thy faith in God only
makes thee truly courageous: rest therefore in his protection, and strive by
all means to increase and strengthen thy faith; cry with the Apostles, Luke
17.5.
Lord increase our faith, and then neither storm, nor tempest, nor Matthew. 7.25.
rain, nor wind, nor floods, shall hurt thee: for though thou be in a moving
house, yet thou art builded upon the true rock^, against which Matthew. 16.18.
the gates of hell shall not prevail. But of the small measure of the
Disciples faith, and the wants in it, more in the next verse Christ's reproofa.

We come now to the third and last point of their prayer, the reason, We
perish. Wherein was observed their faint, and almost forlorn hope of
deliverance from their present danger: for they say not, we shall perish, or we
are like to perish: but in the present, We perish. As if they should have said;
We have hitherto waited and expected in hope, that the tempest would have
ouerblowne: we were loath to trouble and awake you so long as the danger was not
desperate; but now the tempest continues, the ship is full of water, and is
ready to sink, even at this instant; we have only time left to tell thee in a
word we perish. It appears by this in what pitiful perplexity they break
out into this complaint. The Prophet David indeuoring to express the great
danger of the people of God, and Gods mercy in delivering them, does make
choice of this comparison whereby to set it forth; Psalm. 124.1.
If the Lord had not been on our side (may Israel now say), 2.
If the Lord had not been on our side, when men rose up against us, They had
swallowed us up quick, 3.
when their wrath was kindled against us; Then the waters had drowned us, and
the stream had gone over our soul: 4.
Then had the swelling waters gone over our soul. As if the greatest danger
that could befall men in this world could not be greater, then to be swallowed
up quick, to be drowned and overwhelmed with water. But let the danger be
never so great: a good Christian must be sure to retain hope, as Heb. 6.19.
the anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast, as the Apostle speaks, which
laying fast hold upon Christ, can never be moved: for as the body lives
spirando by breathing, so the soul lives sperando by hoping, and as expirare
to leave to breathe, is the death of the body; so desperare to despair and
leave to hope* is the most miserable estate of the soul. The Heathen man can
say, Dum spiro spero, that is, while I breathe I hope. But the Christian goes
further, and says, Dum expiro spero, when I leave to breathe I hope still.
Holy Job tells us, Job. 27.8.
that the hypocrite has no hope if God take away his soul: but of himself
he is confident, Job 13*15.
Though the Lo^d kill me ^et will I trust in him* And so speaks Solomon, The
righteous has hope in his death. And again, Prou. 24.14.
There will be an end, and thy hope shall not be cut off. How comes it then to
pass, that the Disciples here are so dismayed at the danger of death at the
most? Orig. in diverse. bom. 7.
Orig^n writing on this place makes answer by way of dialogue, first speaking
thus to the Disciples* How can you possibly fear danger, that have the Savior
of the world aboard you? you have life with you, and are you afeard of death?
are ye afraid of a tempest, that have the Maker and Creator of tempest with
you? Dare you awaken him, as if he could not deliver you while he slept? To
this he makes answer in the Disciples names; We are weak and young Christians
yet; our tendern^sse makes us tremble; we have not yet seen Christ crucified,
nor been confirmed by his passion, and resurrection, and ascending into heaven,
nor by his sending, and the descending of the holy Ghost upon us; therefore we
are weak* and hear that reproof^ of our Lord, O ye of little faith, which we
willingly bear and s^ffer. Thus far Origin. But to leave both him and them.

The use that we are to make unto our selves, is to be warned by them, never
to forsake our hold for any danger, be it never so great: but Heb. 10.23.
to keep the profession of our hope without wavering, for he is faithful
that has promised. And let us be assured, that there is no depth of danger
either outward to the body, or inward to the soul so great, but if we sing
with the Prophet David, a De profu^dis as he did, with a true heart, and cry,
Psalm. 130.1.
Out of the depth have I cried unto thee O Lord: Lord hear my prayer* etc. If
when all other helps fail* we reserve the anchor of hope, to cast forth upon
the Lord Christ, he will not leave us, nor fail us, nor forsake us, but our
greatest crosses shall be our greatest comforts upon our deliverance, whether
he see good to do it by life or death: for Phil. 1.21.
Christ is our life, and death is to us advantage. And seeing seamen do, or
should determine before they ship themselves, to see every day* death before
their eyes, they ought to arm themselves with Christian resolution, depending
upon Gods providence, without which a hair shall not fall from their heads, so
to encounter the greatest difficulties, by this that they know their hope to
be in Christ, and 1. Cor. 15.19.
if it were only in this life, then were Christians of all other the most
miserable: but now they are so far from perishing, that John 3.16.
God so loved the world, that he ga^e his only begotten son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have life everlasting*

Hitherto we have seen the occasions of the miracle, Christ being fast
asleep, and by reason of the extreme danger, now newly awaked by the cry of
his Disciples. It remains that we come to the miracle, and the means whereby
it was wrought (to wit) his word only, rebuking the winds and the sea. But yet
our Savior makes no such haste, but that first he reprehends his Disciples and
^aith, Why are you fearful, O ye of little ^aith? And yet some writing upon
this place, do think it to be no reprehension; but rather, that before he
will calm the sea, he does only strengthen, and encourage his disciples in
their faith and hope, which was yet very weak, and rid them of their fear and
fainting. And (if we do so understand it) the meaning is, that as in the Genes.
15.12. Judge. 6.12. Luke 1.30. Luke 2.10.
apparitions of Angels to holy men and women bot^ in the old and new Testament,
they were stricken ordinarily with such fear, that they could not deliver
their messages, till they had rid the^ from that fear, and therefore began
their speeches so; Fear not, or Be not afraid. Or as our Savior does himself
afterward to his Disciples at sea, when they were Matthew. 14.26.
troubled, and cried out for fear, thinking him to be a spirit. He says to
them, Be of good comfort: It is I, be not afraid. So according to this
interpretation, it should be a speech, to raise up their dejected hearts and
spirits, and to relieve and comfort them. And if we understand the meaning in
this sense, then we learn here, the difference betwixt this, and other of
Christ's miracles; for that in them he cured the bodily diseases, of the
leprosy, paulsey, blindness, deafness, lamenes: but in this he cured the
inward afflictions of the mind, in immoderate grief, fear, fainting, and
distrust of his mercy; which are far greater then bodily sicknesses. And
herein he teaches us, that though their faith was very weak, Mat. 12.20.
that he does not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax, but
comfort and nourish, and cherish the least desires of goodness in his Saints
and children. And in that he does this before he work the miracle, he not
only shows, that he has more care of their souls then of their bodies: but
withal teaches them (and in them all Christians) to be principally careful
for the health of their souls, without which they are Ephesians. 2.1.
dead spiritually while they are alive.

But I take it rather (as the current both of the ancient Fathers and new
Writers do agree) to be a reprehension or reproof of the Disciples,
containing, first, a question, Why are ye fearful? Secondly, an answer, O ye
of little faith. The question may seem strange; for how should they not be
fearful, that saw the danger of present death before their eyes, as they
verily thought? They were men subject to passions, and imminent perils cannot
but produce the passion of fear, they must be either Stoics or stocks that
are not moved with such apparent danger. But it was not their fear, but the
excessive measure thereof that our Savior reprehends; and therefore Saint
Mark renders it so, Mark. 4.40.
Why are you so fearful? that is, though the danger be never so great, yet
you ought not thus to be faint-hearted and dismayed; you might call upon me,
but not with such exclamations; you might awake me, but not so overcome with
passion, as if you were in despair of help; your extreme fear and want of
faith does you more harm, then either the winds or the ^eaes: Why are you so
feareful^? Now to let pass the nature and necessity of fear in general, and
to hold me to the text. It was necessary at this time for them to fear. For
without it there would have been little occasion, and small use of the miracle
following; neither could it have wrought such impression in them as it did.
Neither are Christians to behold Gods judgments but with fear. Amos 3.8.
The Lion has roared, who will not be afraid. And Moses at the giving of the
Law with lightnings and thunders said, Heb. 12.21.
^ fear and quake, much more the people, of whom Deuteronomy. 5.29.
God says, O that there were such an heart in them, to fear me always. Now
howsoever the Scripture tells us, that Luke 1.74.
Christ has delivered us from the hands of our enemies, that we being
delivered, may serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness before
him, all the days of our life. And again; Romans 8.15.
That we have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again, but we have
received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father. And so Saint
John; 1. John 4.18.
There is no f^are in love, but perfect love casts out fear. In which
respect our Savior gives this charge; Luke 12.32.
Fear not little flock: for it is your fathers pleasure to give you a
kingdom. Yet these and all such places, as they are to be understood of a
servile and ^lauish fear, not of that filial and childlike fear, whereby
children stand in awe of their parents, and dare not offend them, especially
while they are young, for fear of correction, yea, for fear of disinheriting:
so as Solomon says; Eccles. 3.1
There is a time for all things, there is a time in Gods children for servile
fear, and that is in their first beginning of their repentance and conversion
unto God. For no man can truly repent, until the Spirit of God by the shrill
trumpet of the Law, and the punishments due unto the breakers of the law
contained in that one sentence; Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal. 3.10.
Curs^d is every man that conti^ueth not in all things that are written in the
book of the Law, to do them: which is a fearful sentence if we observe the
words, that they are not only miserable and wretched, but accursed; not only
some or many, but every one; not only that does not begin, but that does not
continue, and constantly persevere unto the end; not only in some points of
the Law, but in all things written in the book of the Law; not only to affect
and desire, but to do them. This (I say) is a fearful sentence, and until
it have rowzed up the ^inners drowzie conscience, and both set before his eyes
his manifold breaches and transgressions of Gods commandments, and presented
him with the fearful spectacle of eternal death and condemnation, due unto
him therefore: so that the poor sinner holding up his hand (as it were) at the
bar of Gods judgment seat, being selfe-conuicted and condemned, does (in a
manner) find himself in hell, feeling the terrors of God fighting against him,
that he is feign to cry out Rom* 7.24.
Miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me? Til then there is no place for
repentance, nor no way for faith, to apprehend and lay hold of the sweet and
comfortable promises of God in Jesus Christ. And though where faith and love
are entertained (after our conversion) according to the measure of grace which
we receive in the^, this servile fear of hell and condemnation, be expelled
and cast out, as S. John speaks: yet seeing we can have no perfection in any
grace in this life, and Gods best children do still carry with them
concupiscence, the body of sin, and as they are daily subject to infirmities,
so many times fall into gross ^innes. As a leaking ship had need of
continual pumping; and a beggars rotten coat of continual patching; ^o our
lives have need of continual repenting, which cannot be without the beholding
of Gods judgments with fear: and therefore as the Prophet wills us, to
Psalm. 2.11.
serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice in ^rembling. So the Apostle advises us,
Phil. 2.12.
To work out our salvation in fear and trembling. And as Saint Peter and
Saint Jude do propound the judgments of God against 2. Pet. 2.4.5.6 Iud verse.
6.7.
the Angels, against the old World* against Sodom and Gomorrha* because (as
the Poet says) Oderunt peccare mali formidine poenae, that is, Evil men
abstai^e from doing evil for fear of punishment. And Saint Augustine; Si non
potes propter amorem i^stitiae, fac propter timorem poenae: If thou can not
abstain from sin for love to righteousness, yet do it for fear of
punishment. So the fear of punishment breeds abstinence from sin; and that
abstinence a will and desire to do good; from thence a delight and pleasure in
goodness. And thus Gods best children do make good use of that fear, that
proceeds from the meditation of his judgments, as a bridle to restrain them
from sin, and a spur to set them forward in the service of God. It was
therefore the excess of fear that our Savior here reproved in his Disciples,
that they were so discouraged and dismayed, that they were even in a manner past
hope of deliverance, notwithstanding his presence. The fear of death is
natural, and so far from being sin, that our Savior Christ himself had the
sense thereof, when before his Passion Saint Matthew reports, Mat. 26.37.
that he began to be sorrowful, and grievously troubled. And S. Mark says,
Mark. 14.33.
He began to be troubled, and in great heaviness: which the Apostle expounds
thus; Heb. 5.7.
That in the days of his flesh he did offer up prayers and supplications with
strong crying and tears, unto him that was able to save him from death, and
was also heard in that which he feared: and if this were the case Luke 23.31.
of the green tree, what can we expect of the withered. If Christ himself were
so affected with the sense of death, no marvel though his Apostles now in the
time of their minority, do cry out with the Prophet, Psalm. 55.4.5.
Mine heart trembles within me, and the terrors of death are fallen upon me;
Fear and trembling are come upon me, and a horrible fear has covered me. And
again, Psa. 88.15.16
I am afflicted and at the point of death, from my youth I suffer thy terrors,
doubting of my life. Thine indignation goes over me, and thy fear has cut me
off. So that our Savior does here not simply reprove them for their fear, but
for the exceeding measure thereof, proceeding from their want of faith: as
himself witnesses in the words, following: O ye of little faith: wherein he
answers to the question before propounded by himself, and shows, that in
stead of their exclamation before (we perish), they should rather have said
with the Apostle, 2. Cor. 4.8.9.
We are afflicted on every side, yet not in distress: we are in doubt, but yet
despair not: we are persecuted, but not forsaken* cast down, but we perish
not. Now the question is, what faith it is, the want whereof our Savior does
here charge the Disciples withal: and I understand it, not of justifying faith,
but of the faith of working miracles, that they believed not in Christ, that he
was able miraculously to deliver them out of the danger, though it were never
so great. For as to work a miracle, there is faith required, as Christ speaks
to them afterward: Mat. 17.20.
Verily I say unto you, if ye had faith as much as a grain of mustard seed,
ye shall say to this mountain, remove hence to yonder place, and it shall
remove, and nothing shall be impossible unto you. So must there be faith in the^
upon whom the miracle is wrought: and therefore when the father of the child
that was possessed, said to Christ: Mar. 9.22.23.
If thou can do any thing, help us, and have compassion on us: he answers
him: If thou can believe, all things are possible to him that believes* and
therefore that which our Evangelist says of Nazareth where our Savior was
brought up, Mat. 13.58.
That he did not many great works there for their vnbeleefes sake. S. Mark
expresses thus: Mar. 6.5.7.
He could not there do any great works, save that he laid his hands upon a f^w
sick folk, and healed them. And he marvelled at their unbelief: for as faith
Mar. 5.30.
can draw virtue from Christ unawares for the working of miracles, And Luke 7.9.
make Christ wonder; So infidelity and unbelief does not only eclipse and
darken, but also let and hinder, the powerful working of Gods grace, from
doing us any good, either to our bodies or our souls. And therefore S. August.
does fitly compare faith, to the mouth of a vessel, whereby the sweet liquor of
Gods grace is poured in; and infidelity to a cover or stopple, that hinders the
entrance of any such liquor. So yt the meditation of this point is that of the
Apostle: Heb. 3.12.
Take heed brethren, lest at any time there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief, to depart away from the living God: but exhort one another daily,
while it is called to day, lest ye be hardened through the deceitfulness of
sin. Let no man say in his extremity with the wicked; Psalm. 10.11.
Tush, God has forgotten, he hides away his face and will neu^r see: or with
Jobs wife: Job 2.9.
Curse God and die. But let us rather as the Apostle wills us, Heb. 10.23.
hold the profession of our faith without wavering. Heb. 10.35.
Let us not cast away our confidence, which has great recompense of reward.
Let us, Heb. 12.1.
being compassed with a great cloud of witnesses, cast away every thing that
presses down, and the sin that hangs so fast on, let us run with patience
the race that is set before us, looking to Jesus, the author and finisher of
our faith, etc. And whereas miracles are ceased, and therefore in that kind no
such faith required of us: yet our true justifying faith (which is proper to
Gods children) shall give us Romans 5.1.
such peace with God, and peace in conscience, that we shall be Prou. 28.1.
as bold as Lions, and not fear any perils, nor death it self: 1. Cor. 15.55.
whose sting is now taken aw^y by Christ: but as the fishes are fresh in the
salt waters, so are we free from hurt in the greatest perils; and as the
Apostle says, Romans 8.37.
be more then conquerors. And thus much of Christ's reproof of his Disciples.

Now follows the miracle it self, wherein I observe these particulars:
first, the time, Then: secondly, the manner, He arose. Thirdly, the means, He
rebuked the winds and the sea. Lastly, the work, There was a great calm.

And first for the time: we see that howsoever our Savior Christ has hitherto
carried himself like a mere man, and lay still, as if he neglected the
danger, wherein both he and his Disciples were: yet now he will abide no
longer, it is time, and high time that he show himself to be God, and give
them deliverance. To teach all men in extremity of danger, as to fly to God by
pra^er, and depend upon his help: so not to set or prescribe him a time, but
to wait and expect his leisure; knowing, that as he best understands the most
seasonable times; so he will not ouerslip one minute, when he sees it may most
make for his glory, and his childrens good. Divines do impute it for a great
fault unto Judith 7.30.
Ozias, and the Bethulians, that would limit their expectation of deliverance
at Gods hand, to five days, and if they had not help by that time, 31.
then to wait on God no longer, but to deliver their City into the hand of the
enemy. But certainly Christians, as in all their necessities, they refer
themselves to Gods mercies; so likewise they refer the time to him when he
sees best: and therefore Christ in the working of his miracles, would not be
advised by his mother; for when she told him at the marriage in Cana of Galile,
Ioh. 2.3.4.
They have no wine; his answer is, Woman, what have I to do with thee? Mine
hour is not yet come. As if he should have said; Mother, I know that thou
desire that I should miraculously supply the want of wine whereof thou
speak, and my purpose and meaning is so to do; but I know my time best when
to do it, and I will perform it in his due time: and so it may be said of this
miracle, that till now his hour or or time wherein to do it was not come: but
now all things being fitted and brought to an head: as we see in diseases many
times, Vbi desinit medicus incipit Deus: that is, When the Physicians give over
their patients for desperate, God will show his power to cure them. So when the
Disciples were brought past all hope of life, (except by way of miracle) Then,
and not till then, the text says, He arose: which is the second part in the
miracle, containing the manner. Now for this arising of Christ, the Prophet
David, in the person of God, may seem to describe it. Psalm. 12.5.
Now for the oppression of the needy (says he) and for the sighs of the
poor: I will up says the Lord, and set at liberty him whom the wicked has
snared* And as the Psalmist says in another place, Psalm. 68.1.2.
If God arise, his enemies shall be scattered, they also that hate him, shall
fly before him: As the smoke vanishes, so shall thou drive them away: and as
the wax melts before the fire, so shall the wicked perish at the presence of
God: which Psalm Athanasius called flagellum diaboli, the scourge of the
devil: as if the recital of it were able to make the devils in hell quake.
The Prophet David does therefore in his greatest crosses and distresses repose
his chi^fest hope in Gods arising: and to that end serve all those short
eiaculations (as the Fathers call them) or piercing prayers, Psalm. 3.7.
O Lord arise, help me my God: and again, Psalm. 7.6.
Arise O Lord in thy wrath, and lift up thy self against the rage of mine
enemies, and awake for me, etc. And in another place, Psalm. 9.19.
Up Lord, let no man prevail. And again, Psalm. 17.13.
Up Lord, disappoint him, cast him down. In all which places, and the like,
(which are very ordinary in the book of Psalms) the Prophet does call upon
God, as if he were asleep, and had need to awake and arise. Indeed Eliah does
by an holy Ironie, m^cke the Prophets of Baal with their God: 1. King. 18.27.
It may be (says he) that he sleeps and must be awaked: But our Prophet
tells us of our God, Psalm. 121.4.
That he that keeps Israel does neither slumber nor sleep: he does not so
much as slumber, much less sleep; but he does seem to be many times as
careless of his Church, suffering it to run into extreme danger, as if he
were asleep, and to be awaked and called up, by the supplication of his
distressed children. But here our Savior (as we have showed before) was truly
asleep as he was man (though he could not sleep as he was God); and being
awakened, though he could have wrought the miracle and lain still; yet to
show his readiness to do his Disciples good, and his authority over the
winds and seas, He arose. Thereby both giving exceeding comfort to the dejected
spirits of his Disciples, when they see him so yare and ready to bestirre
himself for their sakes; and in showing himself to the winds and the sea,
not only as the commander, but the creator of them: daring (as it were) the
one to blow, or the other rage and swell against him any longer: and thus he
does show his power and authority over them, which will be more fully expressed
in the words following, containing the means of the miracle by his word only:
He rebuked the wind and the sea: which was the

In which words we observe, that Christ does not in this miracle as in the
raising of Lazarus, Ioh. 11.41.
betake himself to prayer to his Father; nor use any other means whereby to
effect it, but only by his bare word, commanding these insensible creatures to
be quiet; and Saint Mark sets down his words: Mar. 4.39.
Peace and be still. So that herein he shows and proves himself to be God:
according to that of the Prophet David, Psalm. 135.6.
Whatsoever pleased the Lord, that did he in heaven and in earth, in the sea,
and in all the depths. And again, Psalm. 89 9.
Thou rulest the raging of the sea, when the waves thereof arise, thou stillest
them. And in another place: Psalm. 93* 4.
The waves of the sea are mar^ellous, through the noise of many waters, yet the
Lord on high is more mighty. From which places, and other such like, I gather,
that the sea (especially being troubled by winds and storms) is an unruly
creature, not to be controlled or kept under but by God only. It is true that
Moses, Exodus 14.21.
by stretching out his hand on the red sea, diuid^d the waters: but the text
tells us in the same place, that Moses did it not by his own power: For the
Lord caused the sea to run back by a strong East wind all the night, and made
the sea dry land. Josh. 3.18.19.
The waters of Jordan gave way also to the feet of ^he Priests, and were
divided, till all the people went over upon dry land. And the same 1. King.
2.8.14.
Jordan was divided by the striking of it with Eliahs cloak; both by Eliah him
self, and by Elisha. But of these miracles we may well say with the Prophet,
Psalm. 114.5.7.
What ailed thee, O thou sea, that thou fl^ddest, and thou Jordan that thou
wast turned back* And we may answer with him, The earth trembled at the
presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob. For all men that
have received power from God to work miracles, must confess of themselves, as
Peter and John after the curing of the cripple that lay at the gate of the
Temple, called Beautiful: Act. 3.12.
Ye men of Isra^l, why marvel ye ^t this? or why look ye so steadfastly on
us? as though by our own power or Godliness we had made this man go. 13.
The God of Abraham Isaac and Jacob, the God of your fathers, has glorifi^d
his son Jesus, whom ye betrayed, 16.
etc. And a little after: And his name has made this man sound, whom ye see
and know, through faith in his name: And the faith which is by him, has given
him perfect health in his whole body, in the presence of you all. So Paul and
Barnabas, upon the like miracle wrought by them upon another cripple at Lystra,
when the people and Priests would have honored them as Gods; Act. 14.14.15
rent their clothes, and ran among the people, crying and saying, O men, why
do you these things? we are even men subject to the like passions that ye be;
and pr^ach unto you that ye should turn from these vain things unto the
living God, which made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them are etc.
Now then as no man can work any miracle but as an instrument, by whose hand
and ministry God works whatsoever he pleases in all places: so much less
can any coniurers, or sorcerers, or witches, or the devil himself, work any
miracle: for though the Pharisees blasphemously charge our Savior Christ in
his working of miracles, Mat. 12.24.
that he casts out devils by the power of Beelzebub the chief of the devils:
yet it is certain, that the devil, though he has power to do many things
which are wonderful to ignorant men (that understand not the causes of things,
and 2. Cor. 2.11.
seek not into the depth of his subtilties), yet he had never power to work
any miracle: for the greatest extent of the devils power, is either in
Illusions, or true works. By Illusions he may Exodus 7.11.
d^ceiue the senses of men, either by casting a mist before the eyes of men; or
by tempering, or rather distempering of the humors in the eyes. For true
works, he may Job 1.^9.
move winds and thunder, not to create them, but the matter being before, he
is able to stir them up; he is able to Exodus 7.22.
infect the creatures, as the rivers, and the fishes in it: he is able to take
1. Sam. 28.14.
the shape of a man being dead: yea 2. Cor. 11.14.
to present himself like an Angel of light. He can Mat. 13.19.
corrupt the understanding, by taking away the seed of Gods word, that is
sown, out of our remembrance. He can 1. These. 2.18.
hinder the preaching of the word in Gods Ministers. He can blind the mind of
man, 2. These. ^.9.
by signs and lying wonders: he can 1. Sam. 19.10.
work^ outrageous affections in men* as in Saul, and in Mar. 9*22.
those that we read were possessed in the Gospel, as in the 18. verse of this
Chapter. And lastly, he 1. King. 22.22.
can be a lying spirit in the mouths of false prophets, to deceive wicked
men* to bring them to their end; as in the case of Achab, pe^swading him to go
fight against Ramoth in Gilead. But all this power of the devil is confined
and limited within two bounds: the first* that he is able to do nothing Job
1.12.
Job, in 1. Sam. 16.14.
Saul, in 1. King. 22.22.
^hab; and in the end of this chapter, that the devils could not enter into the
herd of swine, until they had gotten leave of our Savior Christ. The second
is, that they can do nothing, but that mole corporis, by any hinderance of
Wisd. 9.15.
a body corruptible, to press down their soul; and by their long experience
of the causes and effects in nature, they may know and foretell some natural
things to come: but their knowledge is joined with much ignorance; they
understood not how God did work the salvation of his elect in the fall of
Adam, and in Christ: they were not sure when Christ came into the world, that
it was he: they know not the thoughts of men's hearts, but only by their
outward actions they judge of their inward inclinations: For Ier. 7.10.
God only is the searcher of the heart and raines; and though as Gods ape, he
do strive to imitate his miracles, yet could he never work any true miracle:
as the raising of the dead; the staying of the course of the Sun: the causing
of women that are past children and barren, to conceive: A Virgin to bear a
son: the preserving of men from burning, being in a ho^e fiery furnace: or,
the calming of the sea from tempest, as it is in this place. The which argument
I have handled the more at large, because of a strange opinion of many men both
at sea and land, concerning the power of the devil in this matter, especially
of winds and tempests. For ordinarily, if any tempestuous weather do arise, it
is presently ascribed to the devil; and men say, that there are some coniurers
abroad: and I have heard some travelers avouch, that in Lapland, any man may
for money buy what wind he please, at a witches hand to serve his turn, and
make use of when he list. For answer whereunto I say, that I never find in
the Scriptures, that the devil has any power either to create a body, or
destroy a body, or transform any body; as of a man into a beast: and therefore
the winds, the lightnings, the thunders, the tempests, and all other meteors,
they are the creatures of God, as I have showed before, in the description of
the nature of the winds and tempests: Page 24.
so that the devil is not the first cause of any of them; but they being
engendered in the middle region of the air, and the devil being, as the
Apostle says, Ephesians. 2.2.
the prince that rules in the air: he can, when God will use his service,
and gives him permission, hurrie those winds together, and raise tempests, as
a secondarie means both at land and sea, both for a judgment and punishment
of the wicked, and for the trial of the faith, patience, hope, and dependence
of Gods children upon him: who know, that a Mat. 10.30.
hair shall not fall from their heads without his providence: and therefore
where the devil does most rage they receive the greatest comfort. As therefore
the enchanters of Pharaoh, striving by their lying wonders to imitate the
miracles wrought by God, by the hands of Moses and Aaron, were feign at the
last, (even in a most vile creature, to wit, lice) constrained to confess,
Exodus 8.19.
that it was the finger of God. So much more should al Christians in the
sensible feeling of any of Gods judgments, and the serious meditation of them,
confess with old Ely, 1. Sam. 3.18.
It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good: and with Hezekias, 2. King.
20.19.
The word of the Lord which thou have spoken is good. Far be it therefore
from them, to run with Saul in their extremities, 1. Sam. 28.7.
to a witch to ask counsel of the devil; against which sort of people, Exodus
22.18.
the Law of God is plain, Deuteronomy. 18.10.11
that they should be put to death. But let them know, that whatsoever power the
devil falsely ascribes to himself, as, Luke 4.6.
that all kingdoms of the earth, and the glory of them are delivered to him,
and are at his disposing: or whatsoever power the Scriptures ascribe Mat. 25.41.
to him and his Angels; as that the Apostle calls them Ephesians. 6.12.
principalities, powers, etc. yet as was said before, his power is restrained
and limited by God. And though as Luke 11.21.
a strong man armed he has taken possession of all men by nature now
corrupted, yet Christ is stronger then he, that takes from him the things in
which he trusts and divides the spoils. To which the Prophet Esaias alluding
says, Esai. 27.1.
In that day the Lord with his sore, and great, and mighty sword shall visit
Leuiathan, that piercing Serpent, even Leuiathan that crooked Serpent; and he
shall slay the Dragon that is in the Sea. And that speech of the Prophet
Zachary, Zach. 3.2.
The Lord reprove thee Satan, shows the power of Christ above his. And
himself showing his victory over the devil, says John 16.31.
Now shall the prince of the world be cast out. And he not only expressed his
power against Satan in word, but in deed; both casting out of devils out of the
possessed himself, and giving power and authority to his Apostles and
Disciples to do it also. Therefore do the Apostles, 2. Pet. 2.4.
Saint Peter, and Jude 6. verse*
Saint Jude tell us, that the devils are kept in chains, as Christ's captives,
and cannot stir to do harm, further then he shall give them leave. And
howsoever it is comfort enough to all Gods children, Psalm. 91.11.
That he (...) given his holy Angels charge over them to keep them, to pitch
their tents about them, Revel. 12.7.8.
to fight for them, and being stronger then the d^uels to overcome them. So
that if they look to God by the eye of faith, 2. Ki. 6.16.17.
they shall see as Elisha showed his servant, that there are more with them then
against them, for they are compassed about with horses and chariots of fire, to
defend them from all hurt, and to destroy their enemies. Yet they have a
further comfort in God, who is always present with them; and therefore say with
the Apostle, Romans 8.31.
If God be with us, who can be against us? Or with the Prophet David, Psalm.
23.1.4.
The Lord is my shepherd, therefore I shall want nothing; yea, though I walk
through the vall^y of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil* for thou art
with me, thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me. And thus we see, that God
has only absolute power in himself Psalm. 136.4.
to work miracles, and so that Christ in the working of this miracle by his
word, only commanding the winds and the sea, does thereby show himself to be
God, by whose word as Psalm. 33.9. Psalm. 148.5.
all things at the first were created of nothing so now al things and actions
not only of men, but of all other creatures, yea, even of the devils
themselves are ordered and directed; to teach all good Christians, in their
greatest crosses not to be dismayed or discouraged, seeing they have God at
hand, who has promised to help them, and to whose word all the creatures must
yield subjection and obedience, as it follows in the next words, the last
thing considered in the miracle, There was a great calm.

This is the work it self, containing the obedience of these unruly Creatures
to the word of Christ, that as the Centurion says to him before in this
Chapter, Matthew. 8.8.
But speak the word only* and my servant shall be healed: so here the word no
sooner spoken, but a great Calm followed. By which we see the truth of that
delivered by the Prophet; Psalm. 147.15.
He sends forth his commandem^nt upon the earth, and his word runs very
swiftly. And a game in the same Psalm; 19.
He sends out his Ice like morsels, 20.
who can abide the cold thereof? He sends out his word and mel^eth them; he
ca^s^^h the wind to blow* and the waters to flow. So that as his word can raise
a tempest; Psalm. 107.25.
At his word the stormy wind arises, and lifts up the wau^s of the sea: Or
as the Prophet Ieremi^ speaks; Ier. 10.13.
He gives by his voice the multitude of waters in the heaven* and he causes
the clouds to ascend from the earth; he tur^eth lightnings to rain, and
brings forth the winds out of his treasures: So at his word (as they that
came to apprehend him, John 18.6.
went backwards and fell to the ground). So (I say) all the creatures must
yield obedience, and do his will, as the sea and wind do in this place. No
marvel therefore, if the Apostle do call the afflictions that befall the
children of God in this life 2. Cor. 4.17.
light, and but for a moment: for we may say of them, as was said of Julian,
Nubecula est, cito transibit; It is but a little cloud, that will soon be
blown over* for Psalm. 30.5.
Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning. After the
storm there will come a calm, and though Job 41.22.
Leuiathan do make the d^pth boil as a pot, and the sea like a pot of
ointment, yet our trust is in Gods word, as the Prophet speaks, Psalm. 65.7.
He appeaseth the noise of the seaes, and the noise of the w^ues thereof.

The use whereof to all men both at sea and land, is to consider the obedience
of these disordered creatures, to the word and command of their Lord and
Master, and to compare it to their own disobedience, upon whom neither the
word of God, nor his promises, nor his threatenings, nor his blessings, nor his
judgments, can work so much, as his bare word did here on these insensible
things. The Prophet Jeremy to draw the Jews to obedience unto God, does
propound the example of the Rechabites by Gods commandment, and applies it
thus; Ier. 35.14.
^he commandment of Ionadab the son of Recha^, that he commanded his sons,
that they should drink no wine, is surely kept, for unto this day they drink
none, but obey their fathers commandment. 15.
Notwithstanding I have spoken vnt^ you, r^sing early and speaking, but you
would not obey me. I have sent also unto you all my servants the prophets,
rising up early, and sending them, saying, Return now every man from his evil
way, and amend your works, etc. but you would not obey m^* Now if the
obedience of the Rechabites to their father, should be so great an argument to
move the Jews to obedience unto God; how much more may the example of these
rough seas and stormy tempests, being calmed at the word of our Savior Christ
only, be a greater means (if we truly meditate upon it) both to consider how
many words of his, in the mouths and writings of his Ministers, have bin in
vain unto us in former times, and to put us in mind of our duty of obedience,
that we be not worse then other creatures, which are ready to obey and do his
will, as it appears in this place? And surely the word of God which is so
powerful in other creatures, should be of as great command in man: for the
Apostle tells us, that Heb. 4.14.
the word of God is lively and mighty in operation, and sharper then any two
edged sword, and enters through, even to the dividing asunder of the soul and
the spirit, and of the joints, and the marrow, and is a discerner of the
thoughts, and of the intents of the heart. And this word will produce a work;
for so says the Prophet in the person of God, Esa. 55.10^
Surely as the rain comes down, and the snow from heaven, and returns not
thither, but waters the earth, and makes it to bring forth and bud; and that
it may give seed to the sower, and bread unto him that eats: 11.
So shall my word be that goes out of my mouth, it shall not return unto me
void, but it shall accomplish that which I will, and it shall prosper in the
thing whereto I sent it. It is true, that if we examine the working of this
word in men, it has not many times that success, to be Romans 1.16.
the power of God unto salvation, and the ^. Cor. 2.16.
savor of life unto life: but if it fail of that, it is the savor of death
unto death, unto them that perish: Heb. 6.7.8.
for the earth (says the Apostle) which drinks in the rain that comes often
upon it, and brings forth herbs meet for them, by whom it is dressed,
receives blessing of God: but that which bears thorns and briers, is
reproved, and is near unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. And (to apply
this unto the text) the Prophet tells us, Esa. 57.20.21.
That the wicked are like the raging sea that cannot rest, whose waters cas^ up
mire and dirt. There is no peace (says my God) unto the wicked. That is, they
are continually troubled with storms and tempests; for their exorbitant
passions and affections, be as violent and contrary winds distracting them, on
the one side to wanton lust, and on the other to hatred and malice; sometime
feeding them with vain hopes, and sometimes renting and tearing them with
desperate fears. So that these and all other passions of the mind are fitly
termed perturbations, that corrupt the judgment, and seduce the will, causing
wicked men never to be at rest and quiet. And the chief end of the word of
God, preached, or read, is to quiet and calm these tempests of the soul, to
moderate the violence of these furious passions and perturbations of the mind.

The use whereof to all men, but specially to Seamen, when they see storms
and tempests, and their ship in danger, is, to consider their souls, and the
spiritual danger they are in by these outrageous winds, that sometime their
ship or heart is driven a shore, and sticks fast in the mire and dirt of lust
and uncleanness; which (I hear) has been the wrack of many a poor soul in
his travels, and sometime they are driven into the gulf of intemperance,
whereby they are swallowed up quick, for want of calming that passion of their
greedy appetite and desire; sometime they are driven upon the rock of
desperate profaneness, swearing and cursing, and blaspheming God, until the
ship of their soul be quasht in pieces; and sometime on the sands of
self-love and self-conceit, which passions and all other so long as they be
inordinate, does drive their ship dangerously they know not whether. Saint
Augustine writing upon that in the Psalm, Psalm. 55.8.
He would make haste for my deliverance from the stormy wind and tempest,
shows both the cause and the remedy, of all such tempests arising in thy
heart and mind; Aug. t^m. 8* in loc.
Forte nauis tua ideo turbatur, quia Christus in te dormit, etc. Happily (says
he) thy ship is troubled, because Christ is asleep in thee. The ship in which
Christ sailed with his Disciples was sore troubled and in danger: but the
reason wa^, Christ was asleep; when his Disciples awaked him, ^e rebuked the
winds and the sea, and there followed a Calm. Thy heart and mind are therefore
perhaps worthily troubled because Christ in whom thou have ^eleeued ^s not
awake in thee: thou suffer many perturbations, because thou have forgotten
Christ his Passion and suffering for thee. Recover thy faith in him, call upon
him, awake him, and ^e will arise and rebuke the storm, and give thee a Calm.
The cause then of all thy tempests in thy soul is, that thou suffer Christ
to sleep in thee; the remedy against them is to awake him, and call upon him
for help and deliverance. Does the tentation to lust and uncleanness seize
upon thee as a tempest? say unto thy soul, I am a Christian, and have given my
name to Christ, and am a member of his Mystical body; 1. Cor. 6.15.
Shall I then take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an
harlot? God forbid. Thus do thou rouse up Christ by thy spiritual meditation,
the storm will blow over, and a Calm follow. And as in this, so in all other
tentations if thou repair to Christ, his word will be as powerful to give
thee peace and quiet, as it was here to appease the fury of the winds and
waves. Thus much shall suffice of the third general part of the history, (to
wit) the miracle.



First, They marvelled. Secondly, They acknowledged, What man is this, that
both the Winds and Sea obey him.

that are here said to marvel and wonder. Our Evangelist calls them [ the
men]; and Saint Mark and Saint Luke [they among themselues]; and seeing Saint
Mark says, There were also with him other little ships. It is plain, that
both the Disciples, and all the rest that were the beholders marueled; for the
Disciples (as was showed before) were yet but young beginners, raw fresh water
soldiers, and are reproved before for their little faith, and therefore they
as well as the rest, could not choose but wonder. The Prophet Esaias speaking of
the birth of Christ says, that they shall Es^y 9.6.
call his name wonderful. And as the due consideration of his birth could not
but move amazement and astonishment to men and Angels, to see a new thing in
the world, The Word made Flesh, God and Man in one person* Ier. 31.22.
a Virgin and a Mother in one. So the miracles that he wrought, such as neu^r
any man did, could not but work admiration in those that saw them. We say
therefore with the Prophet, Esaias 29.9.
Stay your selves, and wonder: and with another Prophet, Hab. 1.4.
Behold among the Heathen, and regard, and wonder, and marvel. For all
miracles are marvelous and wondrous works. It is therefore an ordinary thing
that attended the miracles of Christ, that his Disciples and the people wondered.

The second thing therefore is rather to be considered, that is their
confession; What man is this, etc. Saint John writing his Gospel last of all
the Evangelists, purposing thereby to confute Cerinthus and other heretics
that denied the Divinity of Christ; after he had proved it by his essence and
eternity. Secondly, by his Creation and preservation of all things, does set
down certain excellent Sermons and notable miracles wrought by Christ, and
omitted by the other Evangelists, and at last he concludes. John 20.31.
These things are written that ye may beleeu^* that Jesus is that Christ that
son of God, and that in believing ye might have life through his name? John
1.49.
thus wrought one strange miracle with Nathanael: Rabbi, thou art the son of
God. And in the blind man that was cured and instructed by him, who said, John
9.38.
Lord I believe, and worsh^pped him. And in another miracle at the sea, Mat.
14.33.
They tha^ were in the ship came and worshipped him, saying, Of a truth thou
art the son of God. And at his death, Mat. 27.54.
the Centurion, when he saw what was done, and they that were with him saw the
Earthquake, they feared greatly, saying, Truly this man was the Son of God.
All these (brought unto it by Christ's miracles), made that good confession
concerning his Divinity, which when Saint Peter made, saying, Mat. 16.16.17.18.
Thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God. Our Savior told him, That
flesh and blood had not revealed it unto him, but his Father which is in
heaven. And further: That upon this rock (or true confession of him) he would
build his Church, and the gates of hell should not prevail against it. Now
howsoever the beholders of this miracle proceed not so far in their
confession and acknowledgement, yet they are in a good way, and do in a manner
confess as much, when they propound it by way of question: Who is this that
both the winds and the sea obey him? For it is as much as if they had said; It
is impossible that he should be but a mere man, that has these unruly
creatures at command, to check and control at his pleasure. As therefore
Christ himself in the next Chapter, in another miracle upon one that was sick
of the Palsy, when he had first told him; Mat. 9.2.3.
Son be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee. And certain of the
Scribes said within themselves, This man blasphemeth. And Saint Mark adds
their reason, Mark 2.7.
Who can forgive sins but God only? That he might show himself to be God
indeed, and so to have power to forgive sins, Mat. 9.6.
does command him to arise, take up his bed, and go unto his own house. And
so thoroughly curing the man by his word, does manifestly prove himself to be
God, and to have power as well in the one, as in the other. So in this place,
though they give him the term of a man, yet enquiring what man, and so
acknowledging him more then a man, by the work that he has wrought, in
commanding the winds and seaes, they do in a sort confess him to be God.

For conclusion therefore of the History, the meditation rising to seamen from
hence is this, that as in the undertaking of their voyages, they must (if they
have any hope to make a good and prosperous voyage) begin at Christ, and be
careful and sure to take him along with them: that is, to examine the
lawfulness of their callings and professions, either as seamen, or as
Merchants and Factors, to do service unto God, and to the state wherein they
live, committing themselves to that vast element the sea, and depending upon
Gods protection and defense, and so expecting a blessing from him in all their
honest labors; so must they prepare themselves before hand, (especially in
long voyages, and amongst Infidels) for many disasters and counterbuffes, not
only of wind and weather, (which our Savior Christ's ship was subject to in
his short voyage) but of many other dangers, which cannot possibly be avoided;
and if Christ seem to be asleep, in not affoording them present help, by
their earnest and hearty prayers to awake and stir him up, by faith believing
his omnipotent power, and by hope expecting and waiting his leisure, submitting
their wills to his will, and ready as well at sea, as at land, and as well by
death as by life, to give him praise and glory. And thus much shall suffice for
this history of Christ's voyage, and the meditations thence arising.

But I have yet a further task in the second general whom they trust) to be
asleep, as if he regarded not their danger; but if they waken him by their
devout prayers, he will arise quickly, and not only make all their enemies to
vanish, and secure the ship; but never leave them nor forsake them, till he
have brought them to heaven, the haven where they would be. This voyage cannot
be performed by factors and servants, but every Christian man and woman must
undertake it in their own persons. For Abak* 2.4.
^ustus ex fide sua vi^it, in fide sua mori^ur: that is, the godly man does
live and die, does begin, and continue, and make an end of this voyage
according to his own faith. In this voyage: 1. The sea is an image of the
world. 2. The ship an image of the true Church of Christ. 3. The tempest an
image of the rage and fury of heretics and schismatickes, and persecuting
tyrants against the Church. 4. Christ his sleeping an image of his death. 5.
His arising an image of his resurrection, whereby he subdued all his and our
enemies. And 6. The calm that followed, is an image, both of the peace of
conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost, the first fruits of the spirit which the
Church receives, as the benefits by his death and resurrection in this life;
as also of that eternal rest in the life to come, (whereof the other is but a
pledge and earnest) when the godly shall be partakers of such joys, as 1. Cor.
2.9.
the eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, nor c^n possibly enter into
the heart of man to conceive.

For the first, the whole current of the fathers tell us that the sea is an
image of the world many ways.

1. First, the sea has his name of bitterness: Isidor. lib. 13. cap. 14.
Propt^rea mare appella^um, quod eius aquae sun^ amarae: The sea has his name,
Mare in the Latin, of the Latin word, amarum, which signifies bitter,
because the waters thereof are bitter. The sea is very bitter, notwithstanding
to the fishes that live and are nourished in it, it sauoureth sweetly: So the
world is very bitter, ye^ to worldly men delighting in the fleshly lusts
thereof, it seems sweet: and though at first it seem but 2. Sam. 2.14.26.
as a sport or play: yet as Abne^ says to Ioab: Know thou not that i^ will
be bitterness in the l^tt^r e^d? For like a subtle serpent, it has a sting
in the tail, and insinuates and winds it self into us for to hurt us. And
though worldly men flatter themselves, and say as Agag to Samuel, 1. Sam.
15.32.33.
Truly the bitterness of death is p^ssed: yet they are as much deceived as
Agag was, as may appear in Samuels answer in that place. It is the
distemperate taste of worldly men, that makes the pleasures of the world seem
so sweet unto them; but if ever God effectually call them, and they come to
the true relish of them; they will say with Naomi the mother of Ruth: Ruth
1.20.
Call m^ no more Naomi or beautiful, but call me Mara, that is, bitter, for
the Almighty has given me much bitterness: For the greatest pleasures of this
world are like Exodus 15.23.24
the waters of Marah, whereof the Israelites (Gods people) could not drink for
the bitterness thereof. The waters of the sea of the world, are like those
waters which Saint John saw by vision, Revel. 8.11.
into which fell a great star, named wormwood, and the waters became
wormwood, and many men died of the waters, because they were bitter. Let men
therefore fear the curse denounced by the Prophet, Esa. 5.20.
Woe be to them which make sour sweet, and sweet sour; which call eui^l good,
and good evil; which make darkness light, and light darkness. For it were
easy to show of 1. Ioh. 2.16.
all the things in the world, (as Saint John reckons them up) the lust of the
flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life, (that is), the unlawful
desire of worldly pleasure, treasure; and honor; that they be all the bitter
waters of the sea of the world: And it may be said of them al, as the Wise man
says of the first: Prou. 5.3.4.
The lips of a strange woman drop as the honey comb, and her mouth is more soft
then oil: But the end of her is bitter as wormwood, and sharp as a two edged
sword. And that we may see the bitterness of these waters, in this sweet
sin of uncleanness, (as the world is not ashamed to call it) and thereby to
judge of the rest. First, Solomon tells us, that it is a punishment in it self,
for such as God is angry withal: Pr^u. 22.14.
The mouth (says he) of strange women is as a de^pe pit: He with whom the Lord
is angry shall fall therein. It is therefore a sign of Gods anger toward us,
when he suffers us to fall into it. Secondly, it brings men to infamy,
reproach, dishonor: Prou. 6.33.
He shall find a wound, and dishonor, and his reproach shall never be done
away. Thirdly, it brings beggary with it: Prou. 6.26.
for because of the whorish woman a man is brought to a morsel of bread.
Fourthly, it brings filthy and loathsome diseases on a man, even P^ou. 12.4.
rottennes^^ to his bones. Fifthly, it destroys Prou. 6 32.
not only his understanding, but his soul also. Sixthly, it Job 31.12.
is as a fire that will pursue and follow, not only him, but his increase, to
their utter d^struction. Seventhly, the Apostle makes it as Romans 1.24.
a punishment of Idolatry, to be given over to these unclean lusts. Let men
therefore take heed of these bitter waters; and if either they be afraid of
the anger of God, or their own infamy, or the wasting of their estates, or of
the rotting of their bodies, or the destroying of their souls, o^ the undoing
of their posterity; let them take heed of that which (if they look) they may
find, has cost other men so dear, and given them sharp and bitter sauce to
their sweet meat; knowing what a poysonfull hook lies under that pleasing
bait to betray them. The same may be said of the rest of the vices that
ouerflow the world; as pride, covetousness, intemperance in diet, murmuring,
envy, hatred, disobedience to authority; they are all the bitter waters of the
world: The wo^ld is a sea: The sea is bitter, The world is bitter.

Gregory observed, all the actions of our life are but remedia taedij when we
are weary of one thing, we seek for relief of the contrary: when we are
weary of fasting, we eat; and being weary of eating, we fast; when w^e are
weary of waking, we sleep; and being weary of sleeping, we wake: In nothing
we continue at one stay; and as the day succeedes the night, and the night the
day, so variety and contrariety must give content in all our actions. The use
whereof is, to teach us to observe in the world, and our selves living in the
world, the mutability and change of all things under the Sun; God only being
unchangeable. The Angels in heaven, and man in Paradise were subject to change,
as they found by miserable experience: Iam 1.17.
In God only is no change, nor shad^w of change: but 1. Ioh. 2.16.
the world passes, and the concupisc^nce there^f. As the sea therefore is
inconstant, so is the world inconstant.

Thirdly, the sea is full of dangers, sometime by contrary sometime by Pirates,
sometime by entising mermaids and sirens, sometime by rocks, sometime by
quicksands, and many other ways. The world is a sea of dangers, yea has more
dangers the^ the sea. 1. It has such contrary winds* that Christ's ship, (his
Church) is feign with Saint Paul's ship, to cast ancor* lest it be driven back
in her course to heaven. 2. It is full of py^ats, that watch their opportunity
to take and make prize of the rich commodities wherewith she is laden, Act.
27.29.
to rob and spoil her of that 1. Pet. 1.7.
most precious faith, which is much more precious then gold that perishes: yea
to deprive her of 2. Pet. 1.4.
those mos^ great and precious promis^s which they that sail in her have, to
be partakers of the diu^ne nature: yea to pillage her of the benefit of 1. Pet.
1.19.
that most precious blood of Christ, of much more value then gold and silver,
and precious stones* 3. This sea of ye world has her M^rmaids and Sirens,
entising lusts, and fleshly pleasures, alluring men to forsake the ship of
Christ's Church, with 2. Tim. 4.10.
De^as, and wilfully to leap into this sea to their utter destruction. 4. It
is full of ^ockes on both sides, presumption of Gods mercy on the one side,
making men bold and fool-hardie, to adventure upon any dangerous sin be it
never so great: and on the other side, desperation of Gods mercy after sin,
to make the ship split and sink suddenly. And when we have escaped all these
dangers, when we have even descried land, and think we have made our port; yet
if we take not the direction of our good pilot, to steer a right course and
keep the deep channel, there are such quicksands, that we may soon run
aground, if not to loss of ship and goods, that it may be verified of us,
procella ^nti, in portu naufragi, that we rid out the storm, and perish in the
haven: which if ever it fall out, 2. Pet. 2.21.
it had been better for us never to have known and begun the way to heaven: at
least we shall recover our port, after so great danger, with so great loss, as
we shall have good cause to repent our careless negligence: The sea then is
full of dangers: The sea of this world has more dangers.

Dan. 7.3.4.5.6.7.
Daniel in a vision saw the four winds of the heaven strive upon the great
sea: And four great beasts came up from the sea, one diverse from another: the
first a Lion with Eagles wings: the second a Bear that had three ribs in his
mou^h, between his teeth: The third like a Leopard, which had upon his back
four wings of a foul, and had also four heads: The fourth was fearful and
terrible, and very strong, and had iron teeth, and had ten horns. But the sea
of the world has more monsters: 1. Cor. 15.32.
beasts after the manner of ^en: monstrous men, that are rather to be accounted
for beasts then men: some as Esaias 59.5.
full of poison as serpents: some as Psalm 18.13.
full of rage as roaring Lions: some as Psalm. 80.13.
blood-thirstie as wild bears and boares: some as Mat. 10.16.
ra^ening after their pray as wolves: some as Luke 13.32*
wily and crafty to beguile as foxes: some as Mat. 25.33.
full of lust as goats: some taking as much pleasure in their filthy sins, 2.
Pet 2.22.
as swine to wallow in the mi^e: some Mat. 3.7.
generations of vipers, that eat themselves forth of their mothers belly: as
if some enchanting Circe in the world, had by her cup of forcerie metamorphized
and transformed men so much, that Diogenes might well go at noone day into the
market, with a lantern and candle light, to look a man amongst men, and lose
his labor: The Prophet David tells us, that Psalm. 49.20.
Man being in honor had no understanding, but is like unto the beasts that
perish. And certainly all beastly minded men and women, are monsters in nature:
Some having as many heads as they have noisome lusts, whereby they are led and
directed: Some as many horns as they have means and opportunities to do
mischief: Some having two tongues, as all flatterers and slanderers: Some
having swords in their lips, as all railers, reuilers, and ill-tongued persons:
Prou. 30.14.
There is a generation whose teeth are as swords, and their jaws as knives, to
eat up the afflicted out of the earth, and the poor from among men. Of who^
the Prophet David speaks thus, Psalm. 57.4.
Their teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword: and
again, Psalm. 59.7.
Behold they brag in their talk, and swords are in their lips. Some carry two
faces, as all liars and dissemblers. Some are great giants, as all proud men.
Some are crook-backed, as all rich covetous worldlings, for whom it is as Mat.
19.24.
impossi^le to come to heaven, as for a cammell to go through the eye of a
needle. So generally all men, Romans 6.19.
that give their members servants of uncleanness and iniquity, to commit
iniquity, are monsters, whereof the world is so full, as of Atheists,
Idolaters, blasphemers, swearers, drunkards, or as the Apostle reckons them
up, Romans 1.30.
Backbiters, haters of God, doers of wrong, proud, boasters, inuentors of
evil, disobedient to parents, couenant-bre^k^rs, without natural affection,
such as cannot be appeas^d, merciless: that I must conclude this point: As the
sea is full of monsters: So is this sea of the world more full.

Fifthly, the sea has many devouring fishes, the great Amos 8.6.
They grind the faces of the poor, they swallow vy the needy: yea, Amo^ 2 6.
Mat. ^8.28.
They sell the righteous for silver; and the poor for shoes: Genesis 37.24.26
they take their poor fellow-seruan^s by the throat (as our Savior speaks in
the parable) and say: pay that thou owe. In this sea as in the other, might
ouercomes right. For here we may many times see great malefactors sitting in
judgment, and giving sentence of death ( as Genesis 37.24.26
Judah was like to have done, and confesses it) against them that are more
righteous th^n themselves. Here Anach^rsis may see Solons laws like to
cob-webs, which hold the little flies, but the great flies break through. Here
Socrates may laugh to see petty thieves trust up at the gallows, and great
thieves without punishment, ride up and down in state and pomp. Here
Heracl^tus may weep, to see virtuous men despised, and virtue trampled under
foot; if they speak the truth conscionably from their hearts: and vicious men
extolled, for clawing and flattering great men, against their conscience. And
if good men live in this sea, it must be as ^onas in the whales belly, which he
calls Jonas 2.2.
the belly of hell. For good men have not only their purgatory, but their
hell in this world: while with 2. Pet. 2.8.
just Lot, their righteous soul is v^xed from day to day, with the unlawful
deeds of filthy lust. So that the great fishes do not make their pray more
upon the small ones in the sea; then wicked men in their greatness, do v^on
poor silly wretches in the sea of the world.

1. Pet. 2.11.
as strang^rs and ^ilgrims: Heb. 13.14.
they have here no abiding City, but they loo^e for one to come. And 2. Cor.
5.1.
they know when the earthly house of this their tabernacle is dissolved, they
have an everlasting habitation in the heavens: and therefore like to seamen,
they use the world, as seamen use the sea, as a way or place of passage to go
through; never more joyful then when their voyage is ended by death, and they
brought into their right port or haven, that they may leave their ship the
Church Militant, and go ashore into the land of the living, the Church
Triumphant in heaven.

To conclude this point, and not to pass it any further in the things wherein
the sea is a true resemblance of the world, as the vastness both of the one
and of the other, and that the sea casts up her dead unto the shore, and so
the world casts up those that are dead unto it, 1. Cor. 4.13.
as the filth of the world, and the off-scowring of all things, 1. Cor. 4.9.
to make them a gasing stock unto the world, and to the Angels, and to men, and
such like things wherein the sea, and the world are alike. We see, that as the
sea is bitter, inconstant, full of dangers, full of monsters, full of devouring
fishes, and no place to settle and abide in: so likewise is the world in all
these respects; to teach all men so to use the world, as seamen use the sea;
who in respect of the conditions and dangers before spoken of, do continually
stand upon their guard; and watch day and night, and specially in the night,
lest they should be suddenly overtaken. It is fit for all Christians to be as
careful, and rather more for their souls then for their bodies, the loss
being much greater if they should miscary: for Matthew. 16.26.
what shall it profit a man to win all the world, and to lose his soul? or
what shall he give for a recompense for his soul? And the danger greater,
wherefore Christ charge us, Matthew. 10.28.
Fear not them that can kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but
fear him, which is able to destroy both soul and bo^y in hell. And we having
so many commandments and charges in these regards, to Matthew. 26.41
Watch and pray* lest we fall i^to tentation; 1. Pet. 5.8.
to be sober and watch, because the devil goes about like a roaring Lion,
seeking whom he may devour. Let not Luke 16.8.
the children of the world be wiser in their generation then we. But though we
be upon the land, yet let us think our selves to be at sea, seeing this world
is to us as a sea: and let them that are at sea, compare the world and the sea
together, and be as careful and watchful to prevent the dangers of the
world, as the dangers of the other sea, or else there will be small comfort, in
making never so speedy, prosperous and gainefull a voyage, when their bodies
shall return safe home, and their souls be drowned by the way, in the gulf
of the worlds pleasures. And thus we see the sea is an image of the world.

Chrysostom upon this place: It is not to be doubted (says he) but this ship
was a figure of the Church, according to which exposition the holy Ghost
speaks by Solomon. Prou. 31.14.
She is like a ship of Merchants which fetches her goods from far: that is
the Church which the Apostles sailing in, and the Lord guiding it; the Spirit
of God blowing on them with a fresh gale, does run through the sea of the
world by the preaching of the Gospel, carrying in it the rich and inestimable
i^well of Christ's blood, the price paid by him for the redemption of all
mankind. In which words of Saint Chrysostom agreeing with the current of all
writers, we observe another honor of Navigations: for as we account it a great
honor to the holy estate of matrimony, that Christ, in the conjunction of the
man and the woman, would mystically signify and represent the spiritual
marriage and union betwixt himself and his Church; Ephesians. 5.32.
so may we not idly ouerpasse the honor done here to Navigations, that our
Savior did make the ship here (as he 1. Pet. 3.20.
did Noah's Arc before) a figure of his Church, by which all Christians might
learn of travelers by sea, how to pass through the sea of the world.

And certainly a ship may be the true resemblance of the Church of Christ in
many respects.

Church of Christ is close, and shut up toward the world the sea; but open
upwards toward God; for Phil. 3.20.
our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior, even
the Lord Jesus Christ.

Secondly, in the form, a ship is made a Head and a Iudaea, and in the middle
when Christ came it spread abroad by the Ministry of the Apostles and their
successors: but in the end of the world it shall again be narrow: for Luke
18.8.
Think you when the Son of man comes, that he shall find faith in the earth?

Thirdly, a ship that intends to make a long voyage, fea^e of God, to keep it
upright; That her Mast is the Cross of Christ; That her Sails are the Faith
of Christians; That her Rigging consists in appl^cation of the examples of the
Saints that have gone before us; That her victualing is the John 6.27.
Flesh and blood of Christ, which will never perish, bu^ ^ndure to life
everlasting; That her Ordinance are the thre^tnings of Gods Law, thundering out
death to all malefactors; That her Lading is Good works; according to which
every man shall make his voyage; That Sin is to heavy a burden, able to sink
^he ship, as in the case of Jonah: and that hypocritical and pharisaic^ll
works, with opinion of merit* must all be heaued ouer-board; That the riches
of this world can neither be carried with us to our haven that is heaven; and
if they could, yet there they are no current Merchandise; That the helm to
guide this ship is a good conscience; And the compass whereby to direct our
course, is the holy Scriptures; That the wind that carries us along, is John
3.8.
the inspiration of the holy Ghost; That Christian Magistrates and Ministers
are Commanders and Offic^rs in this ship; and all true Christians are painful
sayl^rs to be ruled and directed by them; That Christ is our Mal. 4.2.
Su^ne of right^ousnesse, by true observation of whom we shall never fail of
a right course in our voyage; And that hope is our anchor, not only in all
perils and dangers in the voyage, but at our end, and in our end, bringing us
safe on land into our haven.

1. Pet. 3.20.
Noah and his s^nnes, and their wives that entered into the Arc, which was a
figure of the Church: So in the matter of the soul, no man may think that he
can pass through the sea of the world to heaven, except Mark. 16.16.
by baptism^ he enter into th^s ship of Christ, and be made 1. Co. ^2.13.27
a memb^r of his Church; Neither does the baptism consist in outward water, 1.
Pet. 3.21.
that puts away the filth of the flesh; but in a confident demanding, which a
good conscience makes to God.

of the ship into the sea, or be thrown ouer-board, without present help, he
must needs miscarry and die; so, extra ecclesiam nulla salus; there is no
salvation to be looked for out of this ship of the Church: and if any 1. John.
2.19.
either by schism do forsake the Church; 1.1. Cor. 5.7.
or be thrown out by the censure of excommunication; as Saint Paul says of
the incestuous person, purge out the old leaven: except such a one by
repentance be received back again into the Church, there is no hope of
salvation for him.

Lastly, as there is great danger in keeping dead bodies 1. Cor. 5.6.
A little leaven will sower the whole lump; and a scabbed sheep will infect a
whole flock. And therefore all such as Revel. 3.1.
have a name to live* but are dead: that is; Tit. 1.16.
that profess they know God, but by works deny him, and are abominable and
disobedient* and unto every good work reprobate* are not to be kept in the ship
of Christ, but to be cast into the sea of the world (to which they belong) as a
prey to the devouring fishes, that are there ready to swallow them. And thus
we see how this ship is an image of Christ's true Church, passing the sea of
the world.

Thirdly, the tempest is an image of the rage and fury Amb. in Luc. 8.
procellas spiritualis nequitiae, the storms of spiritual wickedness: as
Saint Ambrose calls them: or Cyp. de bono patientiae.
proce^^as mundi, the tempests of the world, as Saint Cyprian styles them. The
heretics on the one side (as S. Paul speaks of Hymenaeus and Alexander) 1.
Tim. 1.19.
having themselu^s made shipwreck of faith, and of a good conscience, will
labor (according to the example of the devil their master) to draw others
into the same destruction. And Schismatics on the other side, will so rent and
tear the sides of the Church, that it will be full of leakes, and draw in so
much water, as may bring it in danger of drowning: and Tyrants will raise such
bitter persecutions, that (like the Dragon in the Revelation of Saint John)
Revel. 12.4.
they will be ready to devour the Churches children, as soon as she is
delivered. And these all rore, and rage, and storm against the poor Church of
Christ. Christ had never his Church upon earth, but the devil had wicked men
to raise storms against it. There was a Genes. 4 8.
Caine to persecute Abel from the beginning: Genes. 10.9.
a Nimrod of the offspring of Came, a mighty hunter, and persecutor of the
Church: there was an Gal 4.29.
Ishmael to persecute Isaac in Abraham's house, though he were the father of the
faithful: and an Genesis 25.22.
Esau that began to wrestle and spurn at Jacob in his mothers womb; and after
Genes. 27.41.
threatens to kill him, expecting only the time of his fathers death. We
read how Genes, 37.20.
Joseph was persecu^ed by his own brethren; and the Exodus 3.7.
Israelites by Pharaoh in Egypt. And afterward even in the land of Promise, the
Judges 3.5.
Israelites dwelt among the Canaanites, the Hittites, and the Ammorites, and
the Perizites, and the Hiuites, and the Iebuzites, all cruel enemies and
persecutors of Gods Church. What should I speak of Judges 4.2.
Iabin and Sisera* of the Madianites, and the Philistims, and the rest of them?
for not only Act. 4.27.
Herod and Pilat are joined in a league to persecute Christ: but as the Prophet
complains, Ps. 83.6.7.8.
The tabernacle of Edom, and the Ishmaelites, Moab and the Agarims, Gebal and
Ammon, and Amaleck, the Philistims, with the inhabitants of Tyrus: Ashur also
is joined unto them, they have been an arm to the children of Lot. And if we
should make a catalogue of storms and tempests raised by heretics and
schismatikes against Christ his ship in the Primative Church, and the
persecutions of it, by the Roman Emperors, Quis talia fando temperet a
la^hrymis (as the Poet says); they could hardly be either written or read, or
spoken, or heard of, without tear^s. For that which the Apostle says of the
times before Christ, and their cruelty against the Church, to wit, Heb.
11.35.36, 37, 38.
That they were racked and would not be delivered, that they might receive a
better resurrection: and others were tried by mockings, and scourgings, yea
moreover by bonds and prisonment. They were stoned; they were hewne asunder;
they were tempted; they were slain with the sword; they wandered up and down
in sheep skins, and goats skins, being destitute, afflicted and
tormented: whom the world was not worthy of. All these (I say) may seem to be
but little clouds, threatening somewhat, but soon blown over, in respect of the
new devised savage cruelties of the Roman Emperors; and the tempestuous
storms raised up from time to time, for the utter overthrow and ruin of this
poor ship of Christ his Church; that they might set up their pillars ob
deletos Christianos, as if they had utterly rooted out all Christians and
Christianity: for the ten persecutions raised against this ship of Christ, by
those wicked Tyrants, Nero, Domitian, Traian, Antoninus Verus, Seuerus,
Maximinus* Decius, Valerianus, Aurelianus, and Dioclesian, were such great
storms, that as Raban^s says of the first of them, Some were slain with the
sword, some s^ourged with whips, some stabd with forkes of iron. Some fastened
to the cross or gibbet, some drowned i^ the sea, some had their skins pluck^
over their e^res, some their tongues cut out, some stoned to death, some killed
with cold, some starued with hunger, some their hand^ cut off, and dismembered,
and left naked* etc. So Saint Augustine says of the Christians to them all;
Aug. de ciuit Dei. lib. 22. c. 6.
They were in bonds and imprisonments; they were slain, they were tortured,
they were beaten with cudgels. They were burned* they were torn in pieces, and
yet they multiplied. Saint Jerome says, Hieron. Epist. ad Chromat. and
Heliodor.
that there was no day in the whole year, unto which the number of five
thousand and Martyrs might not be ascribed, except only the first day of
Ia^uary. Eusebius writes of Neroes persecution of the Church, that Eusebius. hist.
eccles. lib. 2. cap. 26.
in his time a man might see Cities lie full of dead ^^dies, the old lying
together with the young, and the dead bodies of women cast out into the open
streets, without reverence to their sex. This may serve for a taste of the
tempests raised against this ship of Christ in the times of these persecuting
tyrants.

But the storms raised by Arrius the heretic, and his followers in good
Constan^^ns time, were as much, if not more dangerous: of which Saint Ierom
complains, Dialog. cont. Luciferianos.
Ingem^it orbis Christianus and miratur se subito factum esse Arrianum: That
the Christian world did lament and wonder, how upon the sudden they were al
bec^me Arians* And certainly heretics have as furiously assailed the Church,
as ever did Tyrants.

But when Heresy and Tyranny met together in 2. These. 2.3.
the Man of sin, the Pope of Rome, especially when Platin. in vit. Bonifacij
3.
Boniface the third, by the means of Phocas, that execrable murderer, that by
treason and conspiracy (being but a common soldier) did betray and put to
death his Lord and Master Mauritius the Emperor, having first slain his
Empress, and his three sons before his face, and by this traitrous villainy
aspired to the Empire; when Boniface (I say) by this persidious Wretches means
had gotten to be proclaimed, The Head of the Vni^e^sall Church, then and from
that time Revel. 20.7.
Satan being let loose, the poor Church or ship of Christ went to wrack,
which was about six hundred and thirteen years after the birth of Christ.
Since that time we may truly say; his arms are a ravening wolf; his sentence
burn, burn, burn; his saying, Let us lay wait for blood; his head is
blasphemy; his shield tyranny; his breast injury; his eyes fire; his girdle
fornication; his breath poison; his tongue, the sting of death; his feet,
ready to shed innocent blood; his sword, violence; his cross, persecution; his
pardons, iniquity; his triple Crown, presumption; his keys, ambition; and
all his doings, abomination. I write this the rather, because that Revel. 3.9.
Sinagogue of Satan do boast, and brag, and challenge to themselves, that they
are this ship of Christ, and that out of their ship, there is no salvation;
that Protestants are heretics that raise up storms and tempests against this
ship. I confess the time was (to wit, in the times of the forenamed
persecuting Tyrants) that the Church of Rome had her part in Christ's ship, and
many of her Bishops were holy Martyrs, and all those storms raised by those
tyrants, might happily fill the ship with water, but could not sink it. But
Esaias. 1.21.
how is the faithful city become an harlo^? For when Constantine the Great,
gave not only peace to the Church, but endowed it with worldly promotions; they
shutting up their vpper-decks to heauen-ward, and opening leakes beneath to the
sea of the world, thinking they could never have enough of that bitter water,
except they had the whole sea and world at their command. From that time, Rome
is no longer a ship, but a sea for that proud Bishop to sit in (though he
falsely term it the sea Apostolic) and from that sea have risen more tempests
against Christ's ship, then from the persecuting tyrants, that we may justly say
of Rome, as the Prophet said of Nineveh; Nah. 3.1.
O bl^udy city, it is full of lies, and robbery, the prey departs not, etc.
for this Revel. 17.5.6.
Whore of Babylon is drunken with the blood of Saints, and with the blood of
the Martyrs of Jesus. Let their own Authors speak for them; Ioh. Villan.
hist. Florent. 11.
John the twenty two did persecute the poor Christians of Armenia, and hired
the Saracens to war upon them, because they would not acknowledge his
authority. A strange expense of the goods of the Church (as they call
themselves) to hire infidels to cut the throats of Christians, and to invade
Christendom. In the days of Queen Marie (says the same Author) the Papists
procured the slaughter of millions of Christians in France, Flanders, and other
places: and in that time how many poor Christians were butchered and burned
here in England? Natalis a Popish Writer says, that Not. hist. li. 24.
threescore thousand H^gonites were mur^ered in the Massacre of France. An.
1572. and therefore he calls that execution cru^ll, and bitter. The Pope in his
charity with his Cardinals hearing of it, rejoiced, went a Procession, sang Te
Deum, and gave a Iubile. Plat. in vit. eius.
Paul the second is reported* by diverse torments to have vexed diverse godly and
learned men, for very small causes. Plat. in vit. eius.
Alexander the sixth would put men to death for every light word spoken against
him. Budeus calls Julius the second, Budaeus de ass.
Sanguinarium cleri magistrum; that is, A bloody Master of his Clergy. When
Charles the Emperor was setting forward against the Turk (the common enemy of
Christians) Cardinal Poole (an English Popish traitor) was sent to him from the
Pope: and in an oration (extant in print) did persuade him to turn his forces
from the Turk, against Henry the eight, as worse then any Turk. I need not
speak of the Popes Bulls, and tempestuous thunderbolts, sent out against
Christian Princes, to set them together by the ears, and sometimes stirring up
the subjects against their Princes, and sometime own son against the father.
The Bull of Pius Quintus roaring thus against Queen Elizabeth (of happy
memory); Iubemus vt contra Reginam Angliae subditi arma capessant: We will and
command that the Queen of Englands subjects do rise up in arms against her.
Neither need we to seek far to find, that the Jesuits (his dearest
darlings) are the fierbrands of all Kingdoms and States in Christendom (to
go no further); and that they are both contriuers and patrons of the greatest
conspiracies and treasons that ever were hatched in the world. The Spanish
invasion of England intended in the year 1588, with their Invincible Navy (as
they termed it); and the Gunpowder treason, intended against the
Parliament House, and the Estates of the land that were there to be assembled
(a plot so horrible, as if all the devils in hell had conspired to join in
consultation with them) can never be forgotten: for by this they thought to
raise at once such thunder, and lightning and storm and tempest, if not from
above, yet from hell it self, as should certainly drown this poor vessel,
and ship of Christ, Flectere si nequeam superos, Acheronta mouebo.
the Church of England. And for all this, they are not ashamed to arrogate the
title to themselves of the ship of Christ, the Catholic Church; and in their
mouths and writings to exclaim against us as heretics, and to complain of
bitter persecution, as though we raised storms and tempests against them. But,
Quis tulerit Gracchum de sediti^ne loquentem? Who can endure Gracchus a
traitor, to plead against treason? or Verres a thief, to plead against
theft? or the Pope and his followers to complain of persecution? We have here
no cruel Spanish Inquisition to ^ift them out; neither have we made any
Massacres of them. Since the receiving of the Gospel, no Papist ever suffered
death, or loss of lands for his mere conscience (except he made it conscience
not to commit or assent to treason); and for our selves we say with Saint Paul,
Acts 24.14.
We confess that (after the way which they call heresy) so worship we the God
of our fathers* believing all things which are written in the Law and the
Prophets: And have hope toward God, 15
that the resurrection of the dead, which they themselves also look for, shall
be both of just and unjust. And this shall suffice for the tempests and
storms, which the ship of Christ, that is his Church, must continually look
for, while it passes through the sea of the world.

Fourthly, Christ his sleeping is an image of his death, John 13.27.
therefore he entered into Judas, to tempt him for covetousness of thirty
silver pieces to betray his Master, and stirred up by all means he could John
11.53.
the Scribes and Pharisees to conspire his death, and Mat. 27.23.
the people to be so earnest with Pilate; Acts 4.27.
and Pilate and Herod to give consent unto it: for this death of his, was 1.
Cor. 54.23.
not only a stumbling block to the Jews, and to the Gentiles foolishnes: but
his own Disciples could not abide to hear of it before; and therefore when
Christ foretold it, saying, Mat. 16.21.22
that he must go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the Elders and High
Priests, and Scribes, and be slain, and be raised up the next day. Peter took
him aside to rebuke him, saying, Master* pity thy self, this shall not be to
thee. And when his time and hour was come, Mat. 26.56.
they all forsook him and fled. And indeed it was so strange a thing, that he
should sleep this sleep, and die himself, that came to save others from
death, Mat. 27.51.52
that the earth trembled, the Sun was darkened, the graves opened, Mat. 27.45.
the Veil of the Temple rent in twain: and the Centurion confessed, Aut Deus
naturae patitur, aut mundi machina diss^luetur: that is, Either the God of
Nature s^ffereth, or the frame of the whole world shall have an end. And when
he was dead, the devil thought he would keep him fast enough, and therefore he
caused the high Priests and Pharisees Mat. 27.62. Verse. 66.
to call him a deceiuer, because he had foretold his resurrection; and to
hinder that, they get commission from Pilat, and lay a great stone on the mouth
of the sepulcher, and seal up the stone, Verse. 64. Verse. 66.
and watch not only him for rising, but his disciples also from stealing him
away, which they made their greatest fear; and therefore the text says, that
they made their watch sure (as they thought). But it is no marvel if his
enemies thought they had him sure when he was dead, and buried, and such a
watch to keep them in his grave; when his bestfriends, his own Disciples and
Apostles (notwithstanding all that he had told him while he was alive with
them), yet were so dismayed at this his dead sleep, or sleep of death; that
they do not as in the former history call upon him to awake him; nay, they are
past hope of any good from him, as those two Disciples tell him that were
traveling to Emaus; Luke 24.21.
Nos sperabamus, We hoped, or trusted (that is) while he was yet living, it had
been he that should have delivered* Isra^l: as if they should have said, Now
that he is dead, our hope and trust is gone. And all the Apostles, when they
heard the report of his awaking and arising, by the women that were certified
thereof by Angels, yet Luk* 24.11.
esteemed no better of it, then of an old wives tale, or a fable. And when al
^^e rest had seen him* and spoken with him, yet Saint Thomas still
incredulous, told the rest, John. 20.25.
Except I see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the
print of the nails, I will not believe. And therefore he was feign to Mark.
16.14.
cast in their teeth, their unbelief, and hardness of heart. We see then into
what excess of fear this sleep of Christ, did cast the Church; as if now the
ship must needs sink, without hope of recovery: and yet as there was a
necessity of this sleep of death in him, as he himself says, Luke 24.26.
Ought not Christ to suffer th^se things? So the Apostle gives the reason,
Heb. 2.14.
That by death he might destroy him that had the power of death, the diu^l; and
that he might del^uer al them, that for fear of death were al their life time
subject to bondage; that he might say with the Prophet, H^sh 13.14.
O death I will be thy death, or with the Apostle, 1. Cor. 15* 54.
Death is swallowed up in victory. And therefore the night before he died, he
did institute the Sacrament of his Supper, and told them, Mat. 26.16.28
This is my body which is broken for you: This is my blood which is shed for
you; of which the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 11.24.25.26.
So often as you eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye show forth the Lords
death until he come. And thus we see the correspondence of Christ's sleeping
in the ship, and his death and burial, and the likeness of the danger, and
fear of the Church both in the one and in the other.

Fifthly, the arising of Christ, in the extremity of the Ephesians. 4.8.
leading captivity captive, and destroying all his, and his Churches enemies:
that now we may truly say of this Mal. 4.2.
our Sun^e of righteousness, as the Prophet speaks of the Sun in the
firmament; Psalm. 19.5.
He comes for^h as a bridegrom^ out of his chamber, and rejoices as a
mighty man, to run his race. This is an article of our faith, as necessarily
to be believed as the former, without which (as the Apo^stle speaks), 1. Cor.
15.14.
All our preaching is vain, and your faith also is vai^. And yet it is so hard
a matter to believe it, that not only the Athenians Acts 17.32.
mocked Saint Paul for preaching it, and Festus told him (though he heard him
well enough till he came to that point), Acts 26 24.
Paul thou art besides thy self, much learning has made thee mad. But the
Apostles themselves (as was touched before) could hardly be brought to believe
it. And the Prophet foretelling it, does by way of dialogue, bring in the
Church wondering (even when they saw him) who it should be, as suspecting him to
be some Edomite, or enemy, that should raise some further storm: Esaias 63.1.
Who is this (says the Church) that comes from Edom, in red garments from
Bosra? He is all glorious in his apparel, and walks in his great strength.
And when Christ had made answer; 2.
I speak righteo^sne^^e, and am mighty to save. The Church replies; Wherefore
is thine apparel red* and thy garments like to him that treads in the
wine press? To which he answers; 3.
I have trodden the wine press alone, and of all other, there is none with me.
By which dialogue, we see in what fear the Church was of him (coming from
among their enemies, the grave and hell; and in their enemies bloody colors),
that he had been one of their enemies, and came to do them hurt: they thought
it unlikely that it could be Christ, that was so despitefully handled but three
days before, that was shorn and naked, ( Matthew. 26.35.
they deuidi^g his ^arments* and casting lots upon his vesture) and flayne, and
slain, and buried, should now so soon return in such pomp and triumph. An
admirable sudden change, that he that but three days before was Revel. 5.12.
ag^us ^ccisus, a lamb slain, should now return Revel. 5.^.
Leo de tribu Judah victor, The conquering Lion of the Tribe of Judah: that he
that was so lately Esaias 53.7.
Christus ouis, As a sheep led to the slaughter, and as a lamb dumb before
the shearer* not opening his mouth should now be Psalm. 60.8. Psalm. 108.9.
Christus ouans, Christ coming in triumph from the midst of his enemies,
casting his shoo off over Edom, that is, trampling and 1. Cor. 15.25.
trea^ing all his enemies under his feet: not only a^ the Apostle expresses
it, Col. 2.^5.
triumphing over the^ all in his pers^n: but also having Revel. 1.18.
been de^^, is now alive, and has brought with him the keys of death, and the
grave, to give life to our bodies; and the keys of hell, to give life unto our
souls, in which respect the Apostle tells us, that he 2. Tim. 1 10.
has brought with him not only life, but immortality. This was the Lords
doing, Psalm. 118.23.
and could not but be marvelous in the Churches eyes. And yet this was not
only necessary to be so, but impossible to be otherwise: for so Saint Peter
tells us, Acts 2.24.
That God had raised him up, and loosed the sorrows of death, because it was
impossible that he should be holden of it. For David says concerning him,
Psalm. 16.8.
I beheld the Lord always before me, for he is at my right hand, that I should
not be shaken; 9.
Therefore did my heart rejoice, and my tongue was glad, my flesh also does
rest in hope: for thou will not leave my soul in hell, 10.
neither will thou suffer thine holy o^e to see corruption, etc. This article
therefore of our faith, being the greatest comfort unto Christians, and yet so
hard to be believed, that Saint Augustine says; Creed resurrectionem and esto
Christianus; Believe this point of the resurrection, and thou can not but be
a Christian, has had as many, if not more confirmations of it, then any other.
The Law says, Deuteronomy. 19.15.
That in the mouth of two or three witnesses, every matter shall be
stablished: but in this we have many more; for, first, Mat. 28.5.6. Mark 16 6.
Luke 24.7. John ^0.12.
the Angels give their testimony, recorded by all the four Evangelists; He is
risen, he is not here. Secondly, Mat. 27.52.53
the Saints that rose with him, and appeared to many, to confirm his
resurrection. Thirdly, Mat. 28.11.
the very soldiers themselves that were set to watch him, and to keep him
from rising do confess it, though Mat. 28.7.
af^erward they were hired by the high Priests to tell an untruth. Fourthly,
John 20.17.
Marie Magdalen and other devout women, sent by the Angels, and by Christ
himself, to certify the Apostles, that he was risen. Fifthly, the two
Disciples that met him, as they were traveling to Emaus; Luke 24.33, 34.35.
that made haste to return to Jerusalem, and certify the Apostles thereof.
Sixthly, the Apostles, though they doubted at the first (of which S. Augustine
says, Dubitabant ill^, ne dos dubitaremus; that is, they doubted, that we
might be out of doubt), yet after are Luke 24.48.
made eyewitnesses, and eare-witness^s, and may say with S. John, 1. John
1.1.3.
That which we have heard, which we have seen with these our eyes, which we
have looked upon, and these hands of ours have handled of that word of life:
that, I say, which we have s^ene and heard, declare we unto you. Seventhly and
lastly, those 1. Cor. 15.6.
five hundred witnesses which saw him at once, as Saint Paul speaks, may
serve to assure us. We see then the resemblance that this his resurrection from
the dead (to secure his Church from all the dangers and perils, that by his
death it was brought unto), has to his arising from sleep in the ship, and
showing his power and authority over the winds and seas. For as in the miracle
wrought in the history, he proved himself to be God that had power to command
his creatures at his pleasure: So much more in this his arising from death to
life, and that so quickly within three days, and in the conquest that he made
over death and the grave, and over the devil and hell, he shows not only
his divine power, but his tender care for his Church, being compassed here by a
sea of dangers, that they may thereby not only believe the resurrection of
their bodies in the end of the world, but in this life Romans 6.4.
die to sin, and live to righteousness; and Re^el. 20.6.
having their part in the first resurrection, they are free from all danger of
the second death. And let this suffice for the fifth observation.

rest and quiet, which they that are in the Church of Christ Mat. 11.29.
do find in their souls and consciences here in this life, and of that Ier.
6.16.
eternal rest and quiet without fear of any storms, which they shall have in
heaven, whereof the peace of conscience which we here enjoy is a pledge and
earnest. Both these do depend upon the resurrection of Christ (before spoken
of) as the fruit thereof to us.

The first benefit that a Christian does find by believing Christ's
resurrection, and meditating upon it, is the peace of conscience, that is,
peace with God, peace with the creatures, peace with other men, and peace with
himself. God in the first Creation of the world, did set and settle all things
in order and quietness. The Elements were to serve and nourish the Plants, and
the Plants to serve the Beasts, and the Beasts to serve Man, and Man to serve
God. Before sin there was no disorder or disquietnesse of any creature toward
another, but a general quiet Calm through the whole world. And therefore God
may well be called the Heb. 13.20.
God of peace; and peace may be as well styled, Phil. 4 7.
the ^eace of God. But man by sin breaking the peace with God, as the Prophet
speaks; Esa. 59.2.
Your iniquities have separated betwixt God and you, and your sins have hid
his face from you: consequently the creatures being thereby Romans 8.20.
made subject to vanity; there arose storms and tempests, troubles and
oppositions from all the creatures; for the earth being Genes. 3.17.18
cursed for man's sake* brought forth thorns and thistles: Genes. 3.24.
the Angels stood with a blade of a sword shaken, to keep him from the tree of
life. Genes. 7.11.
the water destroyed all the race of mankind by an universal Flood, except
only those eight that entered into the Arc: The Genes. 6.6.7.
spirit of God was grieved: And God the Father said, It repents me that I
have made man, I will destroy him from the earth. Thus then these tempests
being raised against man, from God and his creatures by man's sin, Romans 7.23.
and man having thereby a war within himself in his own conscience
condemning him, there was no calming of these tempests, nor no peace to be
made, but only by Christ, who as he is truly termed Esa. 9.6.
the Prince of peace, so likewise the Apostle calls him Ephesians. 2.13.14 15.16.
our peace, who has not only made peace be^wixt God and us, but has also
preached peace to all, whether I^wes or Gentiles. This then is the great Calm
that Christ brought into the world, to reconcile all man's enemies. That the
water that before destroyed the world, should in him by the Sacrament of
Baptism become Tit. 3.5.
Lauacrum regenerationis, the La^er of our new birth, whereby we are entered
into Gods Church. That the earth instead of thorns and thistles, should bring
forth bread and wine, which in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper do not only
represent, but exhibit spiritually to ^he faithful receiver, the body and
blood of Christ unto salvation. That a whole quire of Angels in stead of swords
in their hands, should have Luke 2.14.
a song of pe^ce in their mouths: That the Spirit of God should descend Mat. 3
17.
in the likeness of a mild Dove: And God the Father acknowledge himself (by a
voice from heaven) to be in Christ well pleased with mankind. This (I say) is
that great Calm wrought by Christ, whereby God, and the Angels, and the
creatures are reconciled unto man; and man is at peace with his own
conscience, that we may say with the Apostle; 2. Cor. 5.17.
If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature, old things are passed away,
Behold, all things are become new. And therefore our Savior Christ, when he sent
forth his Apostles to preach, yea, and his seventy disciples also, charged them
to begin at that, Luke 10.5.6.
Into what soever h^^se ye e^ter, first say, Peace be to this house; And if the
Son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon him; if not, it shall ^urne
to you again. And when he was to leave them, he left behind him this legacy,
John 14.27.
My peace I leave with you. But specially after his resurrection, his first
salutation repeated again and again, John 20.19.21.26.
Peace be unto you: that we may say with Saint Bernard, Miseros nos! quos non
penetrat pax toties repetita: that it is a miserable thing for us, if we had
rather continue out the storm, then be in a calm sea; which made Saint Paul
begin his Epistles with Grace, mercy and peace from God the Father, and from
our Lord Jesus Christ; and conclude them with ^he peace of God, which passes
all understanding, keep your hearts and minds; that we may say with Saint
Bernard: Domine pacem volo, pacem desidero, nil amplius; Lord, I wish and
desire peace only, and nothing ^lse.

And yet all this peace and calm which we can receive in this world, is but a
pledge and earnest of the perfect and complete Calm and quiet which the
Christian by faith believes, and by hope expects in the world to come, when
Revel. 14.13.
he shall rest from his l^bours, and 2. Tim. 4.8.
receive the Crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall
give at that day to all that love his appearing. Now rest and quiet is the
only end of all labor: Genes. 2 1, 2.
God himself when he h^d f^nished his work of Creation in six days he
rested the seventh day, and sanctified it. And Christ when he had finished the
work of our redemption by a painful and troublesome life and death in this
world, was then Mark 16.19.
received up in^o heaven, to sit at ^he right hand of God the F^th^r. It has
pleased God not only to ordain and appoint the night for man to take his rest
in, as well as the day to labor and travel in; but also to appoint a seventh
day for a day of rest from bodily labors. And Canaan the land of Promise,
where Gods people were to rest after their bondage in Egypt, and troublesome
passage through the wilderness, was a type and figure of that rest and quiet,
which God has provided in heaven for his children, after their deliverance
from the bondage of Satan, and troublesome passage through the wilderness of
this world, as the Apostle proves at large; Heb. 4.3,
For we (says he) which have believed, do enter in^o rest, etc. And in the
next verse, For he spoke in a certain place of the seventh day in this wise: 4,
And God did rest the seventh day from all his works: 5.
And in this place again; If they shall enter into my rest. And a little after
he says, Heb. 4.8,
If Jesus (that ^s Joshua) had given them rest, then would he not after this
have spoken of another day; There remains therefore a re^^ to ^he people of
God: 9,
For he that has entered into his rest, ha^h also ceased from his own^ works,
as God did from his: 10*
let us study therefore to en^er into that rest, etc. By all which the Apostle
does prove, that all the peace and rest which we can attain unto in this life,
should put us in mind, and prepare us, for the eternal peace and rest in the
life to come; that when the time of our dissolution comes, we may be ready to
say with old Simeon; Luke 2.29.
Lord now let thou thy servant depart part in peace. The year of Jubilee,
or rejoicing which God ordained to be every fiftieth year, Leuit. 25.10, 11.12.
wh^r^in the whole land was to rest, and liberty to be proclaimed to all the
inhabitants, and they were neither to sow, nor to reap, nor gather grapes,
etc. was a type also of this great calm, and eternal rest, purchased to all
Gods people, by the death and resurrection of Christ. And (to conclude) this
eternal rest is that, which al good Christians should long and look for,
seeing the Apostle tells us, Romans 8.19.
That the fervent desir^ of the creature waits, when the sons of God shall
be revealed; 20,
Because the creature is subject unto vanity, not of it own will, but by
reason of him that has subdued it under hope: 21,
Because the creature also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption,
into the glorius liberty of the sons of God: 22,
For we know that every crea^ure groaneth with us also, and trau^lleth in pain
together unto his present. 23.
And not only the creature, but we also which have the first fruits of the
Spirit, even we do sigh in our selves, waiting for the adoption, even the
redemption of our body. Seeing then Saint John tells us, 1. John 3.2.
Dearly beloved, we are now the sons of God: but yet it is not made manifest
what we shall be. And we know that when he shall be made manifest, we shall be
like him, for we shall see him as he is. Seeing this world is as the sea, as
bitter, as inconstant, as full of dangers, as full of monsters, as full of
devouring fishes, as the sea is, and no place for us to rest and abide in; and
yet we must pass through it before we can come to heaven: seeing there is no
hope, except we can be assured that we are in Christ's ship (his Church) and
being in it, we must look for storms and tempests, either outward by
persecution, or inward by heretics and schismatics. Let us no way dismay our
selves, though Christ our Savior died, and seemed asleep, as not regarding our
miseries; for he is arisen, and has commanded the winds and seaes; he has
captiued and subdued all our spiritual enemies, and assured us of eternal and
everlasting life. Let every one therefore that reads or hears this
Treatise, learn of the Apostle: Tit. 2.1^.13.
To deny ungodliness and wordly lusts, and to walk soberly, and righteously,
and godly in this present world: Looking for that blessed hope, and appearing
of that glory of that mighty God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ. And so I
conclude this Treatise, as Saint John does his Revelation, (which is the
conclusion of the whole Bible) He which testifies these things says, Revel.
22.20.
Surely I com^ quickly: Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus. 21.
The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.

FINIS.
PRAYERS FOR SEA-TRAVELLERS UPON SEVERAL OCCASIONS, suited to the former
meditations in this Treatise.
A Prayer to prepare Nauigators by Sea to true Christian resolution in the
undertaking any long Voyage among Infidels.
MOST mighty and glorious God, the earth is thine, Psalm. 24.^.
and all that therein is, the world and they that dwell therein. For thou have
founded it upon the seaes, 2.
and established it upon the Floods. And though the heaven, Deuteronomy. 10.14.
and the heaven of heavens be thine, and the earth with all that therein is;
15.
yet thou have set thy delight upon our fathers, and made choice of us their
seed to be thy people. Thou have, in the darkness of ignorance, Psalm.
119.105.
and error ouer-spreading the world, given us thy word to b^ a lantern to our
feet, and a light unto our paths: thou have not only given us thy Law to
teach us what to do; but thy Gospel also to teach us what to believe, to
bring us to everlasting life. And seeing the sum of it all, is to know thee
to be the only very God, John 17.3. John 1.18.
and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. And no man has seen thee at any time,
but that only begotten son which is in thy bosom he has declared thee:
Heb. 1.3.
who is the brightness of the glory, and the ingraued form of thy person,
bearing up all things by his mighty word: Phil. 2.6.
who being in the form of God, and thinking it no robbery to be equal with
thee: yet made himself of no reputation, 7.
and took on him the form of a servant, and was made like unto men, and found
in shape as a man: Gal. 4.4.
And when the fulness of time was come, was made of a woman, 5.
and made under the law, to redeem us that were under the law, that we might
receive the adoption of sons. And seeing O Lord thou have given thy spirit
unto all thy children, Romans 8.16.
to testify unto their spirits that they are thy sons: And hereby we know
thy spirit, 1. John 4.2.
that every spirit, that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is
of God: we most humbly and heartily entreat thy majesty, that being now by
our professions called to leave our native country, where thy Gospel is truly
and sincerely preached, (by which means, and by effectual working of thy
spirit, we have had faith in thee, and thy son Jesus Christ, and in thy holy
spirit, one God in three persons, begotten in our hearts) and being to travel
through the great dangers of the vast and wide sea, into the remote parts of
the world amongst the heathen that do not know thee, nor call upon thy name:
it may please thee so to increase, and daily confirm that faith in thy son
Jesus Christ, which we undertook at our first being received into thy Church
by the Sacrament of Baptism, that we may ever acknowledge him, to be perfect
God and perfect man in one person, and thereby to be our only advocate,
Mediator, and intercessor, to thee for us: Give us grace we beseech thee, in
our daily dangerous travels by sea with Christian courage and resolution to be
always ready (according to thy good will and pleasure) to live and dye in
this faith: Let us not trust either in the goodness or strength of our ships,
or in provisions of things necessary made by those which set us forth; nor in
the skill and valor of our Commanders, nor in any other outward means: but
let us acknowledge all these things to proceed from thy goodness, and
evermore depend upon thy blessing upon the means in our use of them, not for
any merit of ours, but for thy Son Jesus Christ his sake. In all our troubles
and extremities, let us by faith have recourse to our Lord and Savior Jesus,
being assured he is God, and therefore can; and Man* and therefore will deliver
us, if it stand with thy glory, and our good. And if it please thee to bring us
amongst either Infidels or Idolaters, grant that we may not communicate with
them in their sins, but consider thy great goodness toward us (who are by
nature no better then they, and have deserved worse at thy hands, in abusing
thy long suffering and patience) that thou passing by so many, and so great and
populous Nations, and leaving them in their incredulity and unbelief, have
reueiled thy self, and thy will unto us, and made us professors of the same,
even to the farthest ends of the world. Grant us therefore good Lord, that we
may not stain our holy Christian profession, by any unchristian conversation,
to make thy name which we call upon, to be blasphemed or ill spoken off
amongst the Heathen: but that we may conscionably endeavor to reduce so many of
them as we can possibly, to the embracing of the same Christian faith which we
profess; and to that end may be earnest with thee by our devout prayers, to
give a blessing to our endeavors, by enlightening their understandings, and
opening their hearts, and inflaming their affections and desires, that so thy
name may be more and more known upon earth, and thy saving health among all
Nations. And lastly (O Lord) we entreat thee that leaving Christendom, we
may hold fast our Christian faith; that we be not Apostataes and back-sliders
to make shipwreck of faith, and of a good conscience, but may hold the
profession of our hope without wa^ering, from the beginning to the end of this
voyage. And thus commending our selves to thy holy protection, we beg these
things at thy hands, and whatsoever else thou know to be necessary or fit
for us, in thy Son Jesus Christ his name, and in that form which he himself
has taught us in his Gospel, saying, Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for the conscionable warranting of Nauigators to undertake long
Voyages by Sea.
WE do not presume (most gracious God and loving Father in thy Son Jesus
Christ) to adventure upon the great dangers, which we make account to have
continually before our eyes in our travels by Sea: trusting either in our own
skill, or in the means prepared and provided for us, to save us from those
dangers: but in thy blessings which thou have graciously promised, upon our
lawful labors and endeavors in our honest callings and professions. For
howsoever by our callings we are drawn to lead a great part of our lives in
another element, then other men ordinarily do; yet seeing that element is
nothing inferior to the earth, which was chiefly made subject to thy curse
for man's sin: so that though once thou did by this element for the sin of
man drown all the world, except eight persons saved in the Arc, yet thou then
promisedst never to destroy it so again, and to that end did set thy
Rainbow in the cloud to assure men thereof. And seeing thou have made this
Element, the matter of the Sacrament of Baptism. And thy Son Jesus Christ by
undertaking this Sacrament in this Element, has sanctified all waters used in
this Sacrament to signify the mystical washing away of sin; seeing it h^th
ple^s^d thee to reveal more in this latter age of the world concerning this
art of Navigations then to our forefathers, and do daily bring to light more
certain means to give men further knowledge and experience therein; seeing by
thy blessing upon Navigations and Nauigators the greatest dangers and
difficulties in the world are run through and overcome: and our little Island
of England, where thy Gospel is truly preached and thy name called upon, is
made famous to the remotest parts of the world. Seeing the knowledge of the
Mathematical sciences (which for their certentie, standing upon
demonstrations, and for their excellency making observations of the heavens and
celestial bodies and their motions and influences have the precedence before
other humane learning) is by this art daily more and more increased. Seeing
thou thy self (O Lord God) wast the first author of this Art; instructing thy
servant Noah to build an Arc for the saving of himself, his famely, and the
rest of the creatures, from the waters of the great Flood. Seeing thou do
daily in our travels by sea, afford us more means and helps to devout and
heavenly meditations, then to other ordinary men. Seeing that by this Art which
we profess and practice, the commerce and trade betwixt Nation and Nation is
preserved and maintained, and the knowledge of thy saving truth carried into
those parts of the earth which formerly have not known thee. And seeing the
sea through which we pass is an image of the world, and the ship in which we
^aile is an image of thy Church: and the whole course of our life at sea may
teach us, spiritually how to behave our selves in thy ^eruice. Lastly, seeing
thy Son our Savior while he lived upon the earth, did vouchsafe not only to
approve and allow our profession, but to honor it in his own person by
entering into a ship, and therein working a great miracle at sea, and thereby
give certain ^estimony and assurance of his Divinity and Godhead. Grant that
we may no way in this our intended voyage dishonor this our profession, which
thou have so many ways graced, but may acknowledge thee to be the God of the
sea as well as of the land; and may depend and rely upon thy protection and
defense, at all times and in all places; that the beholding of the waters, may
put us in mind of the solemn vow and promise and profession, which was
undertaken for us, by our Sureties, in this element, at our first admission
into thy visible Church, when we received the Sacrament of baptism; that by
thy blessing we may daily increase in the knowledge of those things that
belong unto our profession, and chearefully run through the difficulties and
dangers of our voyage, and may raise spiritual comforts to our hearts from all
blessings and crosses that may befall us; and above all that we may be sure to
take thy Son our Savior Christ along with us in our ship and whole fleet,
and have him always present with us; not only as he is generally (as God)
present in all places: but as he has specially promised his merciful and
helping presence, where two or three are gathered together in his name; that we
may not suffer him to sleep in us, but by our devout prayers so awake him,
that we may so begin, continue, and end this our now intended voyage, that
withal our souls may continually be sailing, to our true port and haven which
is heaven. Grant us these things, O merciful Father, and whatsoever else is
necessary for us in our whole voyage, not for any merits of ours, but for thy
Son Jesus Christ his sake, in whose name we call upon thee further, as he
has taught us in his Gospel, saying, Our Father, etc.

A Morning Prayer.
WE give thee humble and hearty thanks (most merciful Father in thy Son
Jesus Christ) for thy gracious preservation of us this night passed from all
the perils and dangers whereunto we were subject, giving us quiet rest and
sleep for the refreshing of our bodies before wearied, and bringing us to the
comfortable joy of the light of this day: we beseech thee; that the beholding
of this corporal light (which was the first of thy creatures, and which before
rested in thy self, and wherein thou seemedst to take such delight, Genes. 1.3.
that thou did add to the light created the first day, those excellent
celestial bodies of the Sun, 14.
and Moon, and Stars the fourth day) may cause us to lift up our hearts
spiritually to discearne thee, 1. John 1.5.
that art light, and in whom is no darkness, that not only do as the
light, disperse the beams of thy goodness over all the world, whereby thou
chearest and comfortest all things living: but also beholdest all things and
actions of the world, which are naked and conspicuous in thy sight, Heb. 4.13.
and dispellest and scatterest all thick clouds and dark mists of ignorance,
infidelity, and error, and show unto thy children the right way to heaven,
preserving them from stumbling, slipping, and dangerous falling in that way.
Grant us therefore that in thy light, Psalm. 36.9. John 1.4.
we may see light. And seeing thy Son Jesus Christ, is the true life and
light of men, 9.
that enlighteneth every man that comes into the world; who when the natural
light of rectified reason (which thou gave unto man in his creation) was by
sin extinguished and put out, did supply the defect thereof, by a better
light, the light of faith, whereby thy children do understand the mysteries of
the kingdom of heaven. Matthew. 13.11.
O Lord make us every day more and more partakers of this light. Enlighten our
vnderstand^ngs by thy blessed Spirit, and our hearts by the light of faith,
Ephesians. 5.8.
and our affections by thy Word; that we being na^urally darkness, may be
light in thee, and may shine as lights in a froward and perverse generation;
Phil. 2.15.
and may let our light so shine before men, that they may see our good works,
Matthew. 5.16.
and glorify thee our Father in heaven. And seeing the night of our ignorance
is passed, Romans 13.12. Tit. 2.11.
and the day is at hand, and thy grace, which brings salvation to all thy
faithful, has appeared, teaching us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts,
and to walk soberly, and justly, and godly in this present world. Grant us thy
grace whereby we may cast off the works of darkness, and put on the armor
of light, and walk as children of the light, that thy Son being come a light
into the world, John 3.19.
we may not love darkness more then light, because our works are evil: but Lord
let the light of thy countenance shine upon us, Psalm. 4.7.
that the light of faith which we receive of thee in this life, may make us
live in expectation of thy light of glory in the life to come, being by thee
made meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light. Col. 1.12.
And now Lord we humbly entreat thy fatherly protection of our bodies and
souls from all dangers both outward and inward this day; give us grace to make
spiritual use to our souls, of all the actions and occurrences therein; make
us conscionably careful not to offend thee, either in thought, word, or deed,
and prosper we beseech thee, whatsoever we undertake in thy fear, that we
may chearefully go on in the several works of our places and callings, 2.
Pet. 10.
so as we may seal up our election by good works, and work out our salvation
in fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12.
that whenever this miserable and sinful life of ours shall be ended, we
may rest and reign with thee in glory, through the merits of thy dear Son
Jesus Christ, in whose name we further call upon thee, as he has taught us,
saying, Our Father, etc.

An Evening Prayer.
WE present ou^ ^^lues again before thee (most merciful Father) acknowledging
and confessing against our selves our manifold sins which we have daily
multiplied against thy Majesty, and against our own consciences, from the
beginning of our days, and even this day now passed. We confess (O Lord) that
we were at first conceived and borne in sin, and that from that original
corruption, there have ever since proceeded so many wicked and ungodly
thoughts; words and works, that if thou examine what we have done amiss, we
were not able to abide it, or to answer one of a thousand of our actions: for
even our best works (our prayers) are accompanied with so many imperfections
of wandering imaginations, that when we have done praying, we had need to pray
unto thee again to forgive the scapes, and negligences and ignorances of them.
We confess further (O Lord God) that in respect of our sins we are not
worthy to look up to heaven, or to call upon thy name: for we have justly
deserved not only to be deprived of all thy good blessings, both concerning
this and a better life, which hitherto by thy mercies we have enjoyed, and
which we more fully expect hereafter by thy gracious promise, but also we have
deserved, and do daily deserve thy wrath and indignation to be poured down
upon us, upon our bodies and souls in this life, and in the life to come, if
thou should enter into judgment with us. But there is mercy with the (O
Lord) that thou may be feared. And we appeal therefore from thy severe
justice against sin unto thy tender mercies in thine own Son, in whom we
know thou art well pleased. We humbly beseech thee for his sake to be
merciful unto ^s, to pardon and to forgive us all our sins, to wash them
away in his blood, to bury them in his death and passion, so as they may never
be imputed to us, either in this life to the terror and affrighting of our
consciences, or in the world to come to our utter condemnation. Good Lord give
us every day more and more, the true sight of our sins, the true sense and
feeling of them, and of thy great judgments hanging over our heads in respect
of them: Give us a true sorrow and hearty repentance for all our sins past,
and a full resolution in the residue of our lives to be more wary and
circumspect over all our words and actions, that we may not only strive to
abstain from sin, but avoid those occasions which we have formerly found to
have drawn us thereunto. And now Lord seeing the night is come upon us* and
has not only deprived us of the light of the Sun, but has also brought with
it darkness and terrors, fearful to our weak natures: yet we still depend
upon thy holy protection; Psalm. 74.16. Psalm. 18.11.
for as the day is thine, so the night is thine. Thou have made darkness thy
secret place, and thy pauillion round about thee, even darkness of waters and
clouds of the air; and yet the darkness hides not from thee, Psalm. 139.12.
but the night shines as the day, the darkness and the light to thee are
both alike. Preserve us therefore we humbly beseech thee from the perils and
dangers of this night following, give our bodies rest and sleep, and let our
souls continually watch for the time when our Lord Jesus Christ shall come for
our full deliverance out of this mortal life. O Lord the sleep we now
desire, is an image of death, while our senses being thereby bound up from the
performance of their functions and operations, we lie still (as dead men) not
able to see, or hear, or do any thing. Let our beds therefore put us in mind
of our graves; and the rest which we desire for our wearied bodies, put us in
mind of the true rest and quiet both of body and soul, which thou have
provided for thy children after this life e^ded. And as we are not afraid (the
day being past, and the night now come) to adventure upon sleep, hoping to be
awaked the next morning, and to rise again, and go about our labors. So (O
Lord) when the time of our dissolution shall come by any kind of death. Let us
be so prepared for it (certainly believing the immortality of the soul, and
the resurrection of the body) that we may not be afraid of it, knowing it to
be but a longer sleep of our bodies, till they be awakened and raised by thy
trumpet at the last day. And whereas (O Lord) in our passage by ship through
the sea, we dare not adventure (in respect of the many dangers therein) to
sleep all at once, but to keep continual watch; yet O Lord we must needs
confess, that except thou preserve and keep us, the watchmen watch but in
vain. Do thou therefore (O Lord) watch over our watch, and over us, while we
are asleep, and make us as watchful and careful for our souls, as we are
for our bodies. And so we commend our selves waking and sleeping into thy
protection and defense; craving all things necessary for us, or for any of thy
children at thy hands for thy Son Jesus Christ his sake: in whose name we
conclude our prayers as he has taught us, saying, Our Father, etc,

A Prayer for Seamen in a Tempest.
MOST mighty God, thou art wonderful in all thy works, and fearful, and
terrible in thy judgments. Let it not seem strange unto us, that the sea is
thus troubled, and that the storms and tempests do thus compass us, and that
both we and our ship are brought thereby into great danger. Thou have threatened
(O God) to rain down upon the ungodly, snares, Psalm. 11.6.
and fire and brimstone, and stormy tempest, as the portion of their cup. And
we must needs confess, that we have many ways sinned fearfully against
thee, and do daily so run on in sin, that we justly deserve thy fierce
wrath, and the greatest measure of thine indignation. Besides (O Lord) we
read in the Scripture, not only that the Prophet Jonah when he fled from thy
presence, Ion. 1.4.5.
and the place whither thou sentest him, had his ship in great ieopardy, by
that great wind and mighty tempest, which thou sentest after him into the sea.
But that thy holy Apostle Paul also had his ship wherein he sailed, Acts
27.18.19.20.
so seized upon by an exceeding tempest, that neither Sun nor Stars
appeared in many days, so that there was no hope of life left him, and those
that sailed with him, until thou by thy holy Angel had given him comfort.
But above all (O Lord) when we read and hear, that thy Son our Savior
Christ himself (when he took our nature upon him, and became Man for our
redemption) being at sea with his Disciples was set upon by so great a tempest
at sea, that his ship was covered with waves, and his Disciples in great fear.
How can we (O Lord) look to be freed from such danger, but by thine only
help? Psalm. 18.4.5.
The sorrows of death compass us, and the floods of wickedness make us
afraid. The sorrows of the grave do compass us about, and the snares of
death have overtaken us. Psalm. 18.11.
Thou make darkness thy secret place, and thy pauillion round about, even
darkness of waters and clouds of the air. At the brightness of thy
presence the clouds pass, 12,
hailestones and coals of fire. Thou have thundered in the heavens, and given
out thy voice. 13,
14,
Thou sendest out thine arrows, and encreasest lightnings upon us. The
channells of thy waters are seen, 15.
and the foundations of the world are discovered at thy rebuking (O Lord), at
the blasting of the breath of thy nostrils. Psalm. 88.6.7.
Thou have laid us in the lowest pit, in darkness and in the deep. Thine
indignation lies upon us, and thou have vexed us with all thy waves. All this
is come upon us, Psalm. 44.17.
yet do we not forget thee, nor deal falsely concerning thy covenant. 18.
Our heart is not turned back, neither are our steps gone out of thy paths.
19.
Although thou have smitten us down, into the place of Dragons, and covered us
with the shadow of death; yet thou Lord art our rock, Psalm. 18.2.
and our fortress ^o deliver us, our God and our strength, in thee will we
trust; our shield, the horn also of our salvation and our refuge. Whom have we
in heaven bu^ thee? Psalm. 73.25.26.
and we desire nothing in the earth with thee. Ou^ flesh fails, and our heart
also: But thou art the strength of our hearts, and our portion for ever. We
know (O Lord) that if thou please, thou can presently by thy word still the
rage and fury of these winds and seas, and deliver us from all dangers: but we
submit our selves to thy good will and pleasure; we depend upon thy fatherly
goodness to dispose of us as thou please. Give us patience (good Lord) in
these our afflictions, to abide and wait both thy pleasure and leisure. Give
us faith to lay hold upon thy promises made unto us in thy Son Jesus Christ.
And grant us that by hope we may expect the performance of them when thou see
good. O Lord we know that we owe a death unto thee, and we know not how soon
thou will require it at our hands; prepare us therefore now for it, and let us
not be dismayed at any peril that may threaten it. Give us grace to use all
good means, and neglect no opportunity which thou offerest unto us for our
preservation. But let our trust be in thy blessing upon our weak endeavors;
for thou art our hope, and strength, Psalm. 46.1.
and help in troubles ready to be found. Therefore will we not fear, though
the earth be moved, and though the mountains fall into the midst of the sea:
though the waters thereof rage and be troubled, and the mountains shake at the
surges of the same. Into thy hands therefore we commend our bodies and souls,
and whatsoever we have, and desire so to live and die in thy service, that
whenever death shall come, we may be partakers of everlasting life purchased
for us by the death of thy Son Jesus Christ. In whose name we call further
upon thee, as he has taught us. Our Father, etc.

A Thanksgiving to God after deliverance from a Tempest.
GRat^ous God and loving Father, as our necessities have enforced us, according
to thy commandment to Psalm. 50.15.
call upon thee in the time of our trouble; so grant us now being delivered
from it, by our giving thanks unto thee to glorify thy holy name. Psalm. 65.5.
O thou the hope of all the ends of the earth, and of them that are far in
the sea. Psalm. 95.5.
The sea is thine, and thou made it, thy hand prepared the dry land. Psalm.
77.19.
Thy way is in the sea, and thy paths in the deep waters, and thy foote-steps
are not known. Psalm. 104.24.
O Lord, how manifold are thy works, in wisdom have thou made them all, the
earth is full of thy riches? 25.
So is the sea great and wide, for therein are things creeping innumerable,
both small beasts and great. 26.
There go the ships, yea, that Leuiathan which thou have made to play therein.
27.
All these wait upon thee, that thou may give them meat in due season. 28.
Thou give it to them, and they gather it, thou openest thy hand, and they
are filled with good things. But if thou hide thy face they are troubled; 29.
if thou take away their breath, 30.
they die. Again, if thou send forth thy Spirit, they are created, and thou
renuest the face of the earth. Psalm. 93.3.
The floods have lifted up, O Lord, the floods have lifted up their voice; 4.
the floods have lift up their waves, the waves of the sea are marvelous,
through the noise of many waters, yet thou Lord on high art more mighty. Psalm.
107.24.
We have seen thy works in the sea, and thy wonders in the deep. 25.
For thou did command and raise the stormy wind, 26.
and liftedst up the waves thereof. Our ship has mounted up toward heaven, and
descended again to the deep, 27.
so that our soul melted for trouble. We were tossed to and fro, and staggered
like drunken men, and all our cunning was gone. 28.
Then we cried to thee in our trouble, and thou deliueredst us out of our
distress. 29.
Thou have turned the storm into a calm, so that the waves thereof are still.
Psalm. 89.9.
Thou rulest the raging of the sea, when as the waves thereof arise, thou
stillest them. Psalm. 68.22.
Thou have (according to thy promise) brought us again from the depth of the
sea. Psalm. 65.7.
Thou appeasest the noise of the seas, and the noise of the waves thereof.
Psalm. 69.34.
Let heaven and earth praise thee therefore, the sea, and all that moves
therein. Esa. 24.14.
Let us rejoice from the sea; yea, let us depend upon thy might and mercy, in
thy time Psalm. 107.30.
to bring us to the haven where we would be. 31.
Let us confess before thee thy loving kindness, and thy wonderful works
before the sons of men. Psalm. 51.15.
Open our lips O Lord, that our mouths may speak thy praise: Ier. 31.35.
which breakest the sea when the waves thereof rore, thy name is the Lord of
hosts. Psalm. 135.6.
Whatsoever it pleased thee thou have done, in heaven, and in earth, and in the
sea, and in all the depths. Psalm. 71.8.
Let our mouths therefore be filled with praise, and with thy glory every
day. Psalm. 34.1.
Let thy praise be in our mouths continually, and Esa. 52.10.
Let us sing unto thee a new song, and thy praise from the end of the earth.
Let us never forget thy mercies and loving kindness to us miserable sinners:
but seeing we have nothing else to render unto thee for all thy benefits,
accept this our sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, and teach us evermore to
ascribe and give unto thee O Father, with thy Son and the holy Ghost, all
honor, glory, power, might, and majesty from this time forth and for ever.
Amen.

A Prayer before a Fight at Sea.
O Lord God of Hosts, thou art the God of peace and the God of war, we
confess that without thee we can have no true peace, nor make any just war.
Grant us therefore first to be at peace with thee, and at peace with our own
consciences, that so we may undertake in thy name, the fight now intended
against thine and our enemies. O Lord we acknowledge, that our sins have
separated between thee and us, and that in respect of our iniquities, thou
may justly make our enemies thy rod and scourge to correct us, yea, even as a
fire to consume and devour us. Thou have many times suffered thine own people
when they have sinned against thee with an high hand, and not humbled
themselves before thee, but trusted to their own strength, to become a prey
unto wicked and ungodly men, that have risen up against them. But Lord we
confess our manifold sins, and that thereby we have justly deserved thy
judgments, we repent us of our former lives, and resolve by thy gracious
assistance to live and die in thy fear and faith. And now Lord, Psalm. 83.2.3.
Lo thine enemies make a tumult, and they that hate thee have lift up their
head. They have taken counsel against thy people, and consulted against thy
secret ones. They have said, Come and let us cut them off from being a people
and let the name of Israel be no more in remembrance. Look down therefore O
Lord from heaven, and behold their wicked imaginations against us. Confound
their malicious and mischievous policies, give us courage and true Christian
resolution to withstand the rage and fury of these idolaters, and fight for us,
as thou art wont to do for thy children. Psalm. 144.1.
Teach our hands to war and our fingers to fight. Psalm. 58.11.
Let thy power and might, in thy merciful preservation of us be known among
the Heathen, that they may confess; Psalm. 58.11.
Doubtless there is a God that judges the world. Let not these wicked men
triumph over us, neither deliver us as a prey unto their teeth. It is thy mercy
(O Lord) that bath affoorded us many excellent provisions of warlike means, to
defend our selves, and to make them (if thou please to give a blessing) to fall
into the same pit which they have dug for us. But our trust is not in these
secondary means, but in thy mercies. Psalm. 20.7.
Some put their trust in chariots, and some in horses, but we will trust in
thy name. Psalm. 33.17.
A horse is a vain thing to save a man, and so are all other means without
thee. Let the right of our cause fighting for thee against thine and our
enemies, put such life, and spirit, and courage into us, that we may be
resolved to live and die thy servants, and let us so rely upon thy protection,
that we neglect no means which thou have given us for our preservation, but
may manfully in our greatest extremities show our Christian resolutions, not to
fear bodily death, which is every day before our eyes, being assured of
everlasting life hereafter, purchased by the death and passion of thy Son Jesus
Christ: Psalm. 79.13.
So we thy people and sheep of thy pasture, shall learn daily to praise and
glorify thy holy name for all thy mercies which we receive at thy hands here
in this life, and publish them in the great Congregation, if thou give us safe
return into our native Country; yea, we shall declare them unto the ages to
come, and desire in all places to acknowledge, that 1. Chro. 29.11.
greatness, and power, and glory, and victory, and praise are thine, for ever
and ever. And thus submitting our selves to thy good will and pleasure, and
depending upon thy gracious protection, we commit and commend our souls, and
bodies, and endeavors, in this dangerous fight, to thy mercy in thy Son Jesus
Christ, praying further unto thee as he has taught us: Our Father which art
in heaven, etc.

A Thanksgiving after Victory.
O Psalm. 140.7.
Lord God, the strength of our salvation, thou have covered our heads in the
day of battle: Psalm. 124.2.
If thou Lord had not been on our sides when men rose up against us, they had
swallowed us up quick when their wrath was kindled against us: 3*
Then the waters had drowned us, 4.
and the stream had gone over our soul. Then had the swelling waters gone
over our soul. 5.
Praised be the Lord which has not given us over as a prey unto their teeth. 6.
7.
Our soul is escaped even as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers, the snare
is broken, and we are delivered. Let us not therefore forget to offer ye Psalm.
50.14.
sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving unto thee the true God, y^ have delivered
us from the hands of our enemies; and let the holy examples of thy servants,
Exodus 1 5.1.20.
Moses, and Miriam, and Judge. 5.1.
Baruch, and Deborah, and the Prophet David in their Psalms of thanksgiving for
their victories and deliverance from their enemies: incite and provoke us to
Psalm. 146.2.
praise thy name as long as we live, yea, as long as we have any being. Psalm.
18.35.
Thou have given us the shield of thy salvation, and thy right hand has staid
us, and thy loving kindness has caused us to increase. Psalm. 18.39.
For thou have girded us with strength to battle. Them that rose against us,
thou have subdued under us. Psalm. 18.46.
Let the Lord live, and blessed be our strength, 47.
and the God of our salvation be exalted. It is God that gives us power to
avenge us, and subdueth the people unto us* 48.
O our deliverer from our enemies, even thou have set us up from them that rose
against us: thou have delivered us from the cruel men. 49.
Therefore will we praise thee O Lord among the nations, and will sing unto thy
name. Psalm. 34.1.
We will always give thanks unto thee, and thy praise shall be in our mouth
continually, and our tongues shall utter thy righteousness, and thy praise
every day. Psalm. 35.28.
Thou have put into our mouths a new song of praise unto thee our God. Psalm.
40.3.
Many shall see and fear, 4.
and shall trust in the Lord. Blessed is the man that makes the Lord his
trust, and regards not the proud, 5.
and such as turn aside to lies. O Lord our God thou have made thy wonderful
works so many, that none can count in order to thee thy thoughts toward us.
We would declare and speak of them, but they are more then we are able to
express. Psalm. 46*9.
Thou make war to cease unto the ends of the world* thou breakest the bow,
and cuttest the spear, and burnest the chariots in the fire. Let us therefore
be still, and know that thou art God, and wilt be exalted among the Heathen,
and wilt be exalted in the earth: Thou Lord of hosts art with us; thou God of
Jacob art our refuge. Let us therefore rejoice and be glad in thee, and tell
and sing of thy greatness: Psalm. 72.17.
Thy name shall be for ever, thy name shall endure as long as the Sun; All
Nations shall bless thee, and be blessed in thee. Blessed be the Lord God,
even the God 18.
of Israel, which only does wondrous things. And blessed be his glorious name
for ever, and let all the earth be filled with his glory: Amen, Amen.

A Prayer in the time of Famine and Dearth.
O Lord our God, Leuit. 26.26.
thou have broken the staff of our bread, and taken away the strength thereof,
whereby it should nourish us; Ezech. 4.16.17.
we eat our bread by weight, and with care, and drink our water by measure,
and with astonishment, because our bread and water fail, we are astonished one
with another: But thou have taught us, that Deuteronomy. 8.3.
Man lives not by bread only, but by every word yt proceeds out of thy
mouth. We know therefore that howsoever thou have appointed Psalm. 104.14.15.
bread, and meat, and drink, as the ordinary means to maintain life; yet it
is thy blessing upon those means whereby we are preserved, and as it is easy
with thee, to 2. King. 7.1.
turn penury and scarcity, into plenty and abundance, beyond the expectation
of men: so thou can give a blessing to 1. King. 17.14.
a little meal in a bartell, and a little oil in a cruse, to continue and not
wast, till thy servants are relieved. And though thou have threatened the
judgment of Famine, as a punishment to wicked men, yet we know that thy
dearest children, the holy Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, have all of
them been tried thereby, and yet after been relieved by thee. And seeing the
Scripture teaches us, that Psalm. 33.18.
thy eye O Lord is upon them that fear thee, and that trust in thy mercy: 19.
To deliver their souls from death, and preserve them from famine: And that
our Savior Jesus Christ has not only charged us, Mat. 6.25.
not to cark and care for our selves as the Heathen: 26.
What we shall eat, 32.
or drink, but to depend upon thy providence which feedest the fowls of the
air, 33.
and know that we have need of these things; but also has promised, that
they that seek the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, shall have all
these things ministered unto them. Teach us to rely upon thy providence (O
Lord) and to know, that when all outward means fail us, yet thou art still
the same God, faithful in thy promises, and thy mercies cannot fail. Thou
can suddenly (by means unknown to us) supply our wants; thou can make a
little stretch far, and can proportion our appetites to our store. Give us
grace therefore to make use of this cross, when we see the great care taken
for our provision, before we undertook the voyage, cannot help us, that it may
cause us both to wait thy leisure, and expect supply in thy good time; and
submit our selves unto thee, without murmuring, grudging or repining at thee,
and without mutining or falling out among our selves: And if it please thee to
supply our necessities, grant that we may thankfully acknowledge thy mercies
therein, and keep our selves in so sober a diet, that we may both avoid the
sins of surfeiting and drunkenness, and may specially be stirred up Mat. 5.6.
to hunger and thirst after righteousness, and the spiritual meat and drink
of our souls, ^oh. 6.27.
which shall endure unto everlasting life: which now and ever we desire to be
so careful of, that howsoever it please thee to dispose of our bodies, and the
food belonging unto them; we may know that 1. Cor. 6.13.
meat was made for the belly, and the belly for meat, but thou shall destroy
them both: but this Ioh. 6.35.
bread of life, and Ioh. 4.14.
water of life, shall last and never fail us, but even in death, bring us to
everlasting life, purchased for us by the death of thy Son Jesus Christ: in
whose name and words we crave the supply of all our wants in that form which
he has prescribed, saying: Our Father which art, etc.

A Prayer being arrived at a Port among Infidels.
O Lord it is thy goodness and mercy that has brought us safe through the
many dangers of Sea unto this place: where we are to enter yet into more
dangers, being to trade and converse with such, as neither know thee nor fear
thee, and therefore can neither love thee, nor us that are professors of thy
great name. We humbly entreat thee therefore to continue thy fatherly
protection over us, that we make not our selves a prey unto them: Watch thou
over us (O Lord) and give us grace so to watch over our selves, that we may
not any ways so misbehaue our selves, that thy Gospel, which we profess, may
by our means be evil spoken of amongst them. Let the fear of thee cause us
to examine all our ways, to be directed both in our words and deeds by thy
will: Let us take heed, that having endured some wants at Sea, and coming now
to fresh victuals, we abuse not thy good creatures, by wasting and consuming
them in intemperance in meat or drink, by which many before us have shortened
their days: neither let us give way unto our fleshly lusts, which besot the
wisest that take pleasure in them: But grant us the sober use of thy good
blessings, with thanksgiving unto thee that art the only giver of them. Give us
grace daily to call upon thee in whom only we trust, and let us strive to
live in love and peace together, forbearing and forgiving one another, if any
occasions of quarrel and discord arise amongst us. Make us true and trusty
unto those that have employed us hither, and have provided carefully for the
supply of our wants, and have put us in trust with the managing of their
business: And let our whole carriage and conversation both toward them, and
toward our selves, and toward the Heathen, (while we live among them) be such,
as may relish of true Christianity and godliness, as may win us favor in
this peoples eyes, and may give satisfaction at our return home (if it please
thee to deal so mercifully with us) both to the Adventurers that sent us
forth, and more specially to our own consciences, that in all our actions we
have set thy fear before our eyes, and depended upon thy blessing on our
honest endeavors. Let us not be overtaken with the sins of covetousness or
pride; but both detest all filthy lucre, knowing it cannot profit us to win
all the world and lose our own souls: and that the more blessings thou
bestowest upon us, the more humble hearted we ought to be, and so to carry
our selves. Let us strive by all means to win and draw these Heathen to faith
in thy name, and to that end let us deal faithfully and truly with them, so as
we may give no scandal unto our profession. And teach us so to acknowledge
thy goodness and mercy toward us, that we may ever be ready to publish and
declare it unto others, and depending still upon thee (not for any merits of
ours, but for thy Son our Savior Jesus Christ his sake) may ascribe unto
thee all honor, praise, and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

