THE HYMNS AND SONGS OF THE CHVRCH; Divided into two parts.

The first part comprehends the Canonical Hymns, and such parcels of Holy
Scripture, as may properly be sung, with some other ancient Songs and Creeds.

The second part consists of Spiritual Songs, appropriated to the several
Times and Occasions obserueable in the Church of England.

Translated and Composed, BY G. W.

LONDON Printed by the Assigns of GEORGE WITHER. Cum Priuilegio Regis Regali.

TO THE HIGH AND Mighty Prince, JAMES, by the Grace of God, King of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc: Grace, Mercy and
Peace, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
THese Hymns (Dread Soueraign) having diverse ways received life from your
MAJESTY, (as well as that approbation which the Church allows) are now
imprinted according to your Royal Privilege, to come abroad under your
Gracious Protection. And what I delivered unto your Princely view at several
times, I here present again, incorporated into one Volume. The first Part
whereof, comprehends those Canonical Hymns, which were written, and left for
our instruction, by the Holy Ghost. And those are not only plainly and
briefly expressed in Lyrick verse: but by their short Prefaces, properly
applied also to the Churches particular occasions in these times. Insomuch,
that (howeuer some neglect them as impertinent) it is thereby apparent, that
they appertain no less to us, then unto those, in whose times they were first
composed. And (if the conjecture of many good and learned men deceive them not)
the later Part, containing Spiritual Songs, appropriated to the several times
and occasions obseruable in the Church of England (together with brief
Arguments, declaring the purpose of those Observations) shall become a means
both of increasing Knowledge, and Christian Conformity within your Dominions:
Which, no doubt, your MAJESTY wisely foresawe, when you pleased to grant and
command, that these Hymns should be annexed to all Psalme-bookes in English
Meeter. And I hope, you shall thereby increase both the honor of God, and of
your MAJESTY. For, these Hymns, and the knowledge which they offer, could no
other way, with such certainety, and so little inconvenience, be conveyed to
the common people, as by that means which your MAJESTY has graciously
provided.

And now (maugre their malice, who labor to disparage and suppress these
Helps to Devotion) they shall, I trust, have free scope to work that effect
which is desired; and to which end, I was encouraged to translate and compose
them. For, how meanly soever some men may think of this Endeavor; I trust the
success shall make it appear, that the Spirit of God was the first moouer of
the work. Wherein, as I have endeavored to make my Expressions such as may not
be contemptible to men of best understandings: So I have also labored to suit
them to the nature of the Subject, and the common Peoples capacities, without
regard of catching the vain blasts of Opinion. The same also has been the
aim of Master Orlando Gibbons (your MAJESTY'S servant, and one of the
Gentlemen of your Honorable Chapel) in fitting them with tunes. For, he has
chosen to make his music agreeable to the matter, and what the common
apprehension can best admit; rather then to the curious Fancies of the Time:
Which path both of us could more easily have trodden. Not caring therefore, what
any of those shall censure, who are more apt to control, then to consider; I
commit this to Gods blessing and Your favorable Protection: Humbly beseeching
your MAJESTY, to accept of these our Endeavors; and praying God to sanctify
both us and this Work to his glory: Wishing also (most unfeignedly) everlasting
consolations to your MAJESTY, for those temporal Comforts you have vouchsafed
me, and that felicity here, which may advance your happiness in the life to
come. Amen.

Your MAJESTY'S most Loyal Subject, GEORGE WITHER.

THE FIRST PART OF The HYMNS and SONGS of the CHVRCH, containing those which
are translated out of the Canonical Scripture, together with such other Hymns
and Creeds, as have anciently been sung in the Church of ENGLAND.
The Preface.
Plainly false is their Supposition, who conc^iue that the Hymns, Songs and
Elegies of the Old Testament are impert^ment to these later Ages of the Church.
For, neither the Actions, nor writings of the Ancient Israelites, which are
recorded by the Holy Spirit, were permitted to be done, or written for their
own sakes, so much as that they might be profitable to warn and instruct us
of the latter Times; according to Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 10. And indeed, so much
is not only testified by that Apostle in the place before recited, and
throughout the Epistle to the Hebrews; but the very names of those Persons and
Places, mentioned in these Hymns and Songs, do manifest it, and far better
express the nature of that which they mystically point out, then of what they
are literally applied unto; as those who will look into their proper
significations shall apparently discover. That therefore these parcels of
Holy-Scripture (which are for the most part Me^ter in their Original tongue)
may be the better remembered, to the glory of God; and the oftener repeated, to
those ends for which they were written. They are here disposed into
Lyrick-Verse; and do make the First part of this Book: Which Book is called,
The Hymns and Songs of the Church; not for that I would have it thought part
of the Churches Liturgy; but because they are made in the person of all the
Faithful, and do (for the most part) treat of those things which concern the
whole Catholic Church.

The first Song of Moses. Exodus 13.
THis Song was composed and sung, to praise the LORD, for the Israelites
miraculous pas^age through the Red Sea, and for their delivery from those
Egyptians, who were there drowned. It may (and should also) be sung in the
Christian Congregations, or by their particular members, both with respect to
the Historical and Mystical senses thereof. Historically, in commemoration of
that particular Deliverance, which God had so long ago, and so wondrously
vouchsafed to his persecuted and afflicted Church. Mystically, in
acknowledgement of our own powerful Deliverance from the bondage of those
spiri^uall Adversaries, whereof those were the Types. For, Pharaoh (signifying
vengeance) typified Our great Enemy, who with his host of Temptations,
A^flictions, etc. pursues us in our passage to the spiritual Canaan. The
Red Sea represented our Baptism, 1 Cor. 10.2. By the Dukes and Princes of E^om
(mentioned in this Song) are prefigured those Powers and Friends of the
kingdom of Dark^nesse, which are, or shall be, molested at the news of our
Regeneration. And therefore, this Hymn may very properly be used after the
Administration of Baptism.

The first Song.
^ NOw shall the praises of the LORD ^ be sung; For, he a most renowned
Triumph^ ^ won: Both Horse and Man into the Sea^ ^ he flung: And them
together there has overthrown.^ ^ The LORD is He, whose strength^ ^ does make
me strong; And he is my salvation,^ ^ and my Song: My GOD, for whom I will^ ^ a
house prepare; My Fathers GOD, whose^ ^ praise I will declare.^

2
Well kno^es the LORD, to war what does pertain;
The LORD-Almighty is his glorious Name:
^e Pharaohs Charrets, and his armed Train,
Amid the Sea or'ewhelming, overcame:
Those of his Army, that were most renoun'd,
^e has together in the Red Sea drowned;
The Deepes, a covering over them were thrown,
And to the bottom sunk they like a stone.
3
LORD, by thy power thy Right hand famous grows:
Thy Right hand, LORD, thy Foe destroyed has:
Thy Glory thy Opposers overthrows;
And stubble-like, consumes them in thy wrath.
A blast but from thy nostrils forth did go,
And up together did the waters flow;
Yea, rolled up on heaps; the liquid Flood
Amid the Sea, as if congealed, stood.
4
I will pursue them (their Pursuer cried)
I will or'etake them, and the spoil enjoy:
My lust upon them shall be satisfied:
With sword vnsheath'd my hand shall them destroy.
Then from thy breath a gale of wind was sent;
The billows of the Sea quite over them went:
And they the mighty waters suncke into,
Even as a weighty piece of Lead will do.
5
LORD, who like thee among the GODS is there!
In holiness so glorious who may be!
Whose praises so exceeding dreadful are!
In doing wonders, who can equal thee!
Thy glorious Right hand thou on high did rear,
And in the earth they quickly swallowed were.
But thou in mercy on-ward have conua^d
Thy People, whose redemption thou have paid.
6
Them by thy strength thou have bin pleas^d to bear
Unto a holy Dwelling place of thine:
The Nations at report thereof shall fear;
And grieve shall they that dwell in Palestine.
On Edoms Princes shall amazement fall:
The mighty men of Moab tremble shall;
And such as in the land of Cana'n dwell
Shall pine away, of this when they hear tell.
7
They shall be ceazed with a dreadful fear:
Sto^e-quiet thy Right hand shall make them be*
Till passed over, LORD, thy People are;
Till those pass over, that were bought by thee.
For, thou shall make the^ to thy Hill repair,
And plant them there (oh LORD) where thou art heir:
Even there, where thou thy Dwelling have prepared;
That Holy place which thine own hands have reared.
8
The LORD shall ever and for ever reign.
(His Sovereignty shall never have an end)
For, when as Pharoh did into the Maine
With Charrets and with horsemen down descend,
The LORD did back again the Sea recall,
And with those waters ouerwhelm'd them all.
But, through the very inmost of the same,
The seed of Israel safe and dry-shod came.
The second Song of Moses. Deuteronomy. 23.
THis Song was given by God himself, to be taught the Jews, that it might
remain as a witness against them when they should forget his benefits. For,
it appears, the divine wisdom knew, that when the Law would be lost, or
forgotten, a Song might be remembered to posterity. In this Hymn (Heaven and
Earth being c^lled to witness) the Pr^phet makes first a narration of the
Jews perverseness, and then delivers prophetically three principal things;
wherein diverse other particulars are considerable. The first is a Praediction
of the Jews Idolatry, with the punishments of it. The second is their h^tred
to Christ, with their Abiection. And the last, is of the calling of the
Gentiles. We therefore, that have by faith and experience seen the success of
what is herein foretold, ought to sing it often, in remembrance of Gods Justice
and Mercy. And (seeing we are all apt enough to become as forgetful of our
Redeemers favor as they) we should by the repetition hereof, seek so to
stir up our considerations, that (as Saint Paul counsels) we might the
better meditate the goodness and severity of God, etc. For, if he has not
spared the natural branches, Let us take heed, as the same Apostle advises.
Romans 11.24.

Song. 2.
Sing this as the first Song.
TO what I speak an ear ye Heavens lend,
And hear, thou Earth, what words I utter will.
Like drops of Rain, my Speeches shall descend,
And as the Dew, my Doctrine shall distill:
Like to the smaller Rain on tender flowers;
And as upon the grass the greater showers.
For, I the LORDS great Name will publish now;
That so our GOD may praised be of you.
2
He is that Rock, whose works perfection are:
For, all his ways with judgment guided be.
A GOD of truth, from all wrong-doing clear:
A truly just, and righteous-one is he;
Though they themselves defiled unlike his sons.
And are a crooked race of froward-ones.
Oh mad and foolish Nation! why do thou
Thy self unto the LORD so thanklesse show?
3
Thy Father and Redeemer is not he?
Has he not made, and now confirmed thee fast?
Oh call to mind the days that older be,
And weigh the years of many ages past.
For, if thou ask thy Father, he will tell,
Thy Elders also, can inform thee well,
How, he (the highest) did Adams sons divide,
And shares for every Family provide;
4
And how the Nations Bounds he did prepare,
In number with the Sons of Israel.
For, in his People had the LORD his share,
And Jacob for his part allotted fell:
Whom finding in a place possessed of none,
(A Desert va^^, untilled and unknown)
He taught them there; he led them far and nigh,
And kept them as the Apple of his eye.
5
Even as an Eagle, to provoke her young.
About her nest does houer here and there,
Spread forth her wings to train her birds along,
And sometime on her back^ her yonglings bear:
Right so, the LORD conducted them alone,
When for his aid Strange god with him was none.
Them on the High-lands of the earth he set,
Where they the plenties of the field might eat.
6
For them he made the Rock with Honey flow:
He drayned oil from stones, and them did feed
With milk of Sh^epe, with butter of the Cow,
With Goats, fat Lambs, and Rams of Bashan breed.
The finest of the wheat he made their food;
And of the Grape they drunk the purest blood*
But, herewithall unthankful Israel
So fat became, he kicked with his heel.
7
Grown ^at, and ^ith their grossness couerd over.
Their God, their Maker, they did soon forsake:
Their Rock of health regarded was no more:
But with Strange gods him jealous they did make*
To move his wrath, they hateful things deuiz'd:
To Devils in his stead they sacrifiz'd:
To Gods unknown, that new invented we^e,
And such* as their Forefathers did not fear.
8
They minded not the Rock who them begat,
But quite forgot the God, that ^orm'd them has:
Which when the L^R^ perceived, it made him ^ate
His Sons and Daughters, moving him to wrath.
To mark their end, said he, I Will hide my face:
For, they are faithless Sons, of froward race:
My wrath, with what is not a GOD, they move,
And my displeasure with their follies prove.
9
And I, by those that are no People, yet
Their ^rathfull jealousy will move for this;
And by a foolish Nation make them fret.
For, in my wrath a fire inflamed is;
And down to Hell the earth consume it shall,
Even to the Mountains bottoms, fruit and all*
In heaps upon them mischiefs will I throw;
And shoot mine arrows till I have no more.
10
With hunger parched and consum^d with heat,
I will enforce them to a bitter end:
The teeth of Beasts upon them will I set,
And will the poisonous dust-fed Serpent send.
The sword without, and fear within, shall s^ay
Ma^ds, yongmen, babes, and him whose hair is gray*
Yea, I had vow^d to spread the^ here and there,
Men might forget, that such a people were.
11
But this the Foe compe'ld me to delay;
Lest tha^ their adversaries (prouder grown)
Should ^when they heard it) thus presume to say;
This, not the LORD, but our high hand has done.
For, in this People no discretion is;
Nor can their dullness reach to judge of this.
Oh had they wisdom this to comprehend!
That so they might bethink them of their end.
12
How should one make a thousand run away,
Or two men put ten thousand to the foil;
Except their Rock had sold them for a pray,
And that the LORD had closed them up the while?
For, though our Foes themselves the Judges were,
Their God they cannot with our GOD compare:
But, they have vines like those that Sodom yields,
And such as are within Gomorrha fields.
13
They bear the Grapes of gall upon their vine:
Extremely bitter are their clusters all:
Yea, made of Dragons venom is their wine,
And of the cruel Aspes, infectious gall.
And can this (ever) be forgot of me!
Or not be sealed where my treasures be?
Sure, mine is vengeance; and I will repay:
Their feet shall slide at their appointed day.
14
Their time of Ruin near at hand is come:
Those things that shall befall them have will make.
For, then the LORD shall give his People doom,
And on his Servants kind compassion take:
When he perceiues their strength bereft and gone,
And that in prison they are left alone;
Where a^e their Gods become? he then shall say;
Their Rock on whom affiance they did lay?
15
Who ate the fartest of their Sacrifice?
Who of their Drinke-oblations drank the wine?
Let those unto their succor now arise,
And under their protection them enshrine.
Behold, consider now, that I am He,
And that there is no other God with me:
I kill and make alive: I wound, I cure;
And there is none can from my hand assure.
16
For, up to heaven on high my hand I rear.
And (as I ^^ue for ever) this I say;
When I my shining sword to whet prepare,
And shall my hand to acting vengeance lay,
I will not c^ase till I my foes requite,
And am aueng d on all that bear me spite:
But, in their blood, which I shall make to flow,
Will steep mine arrows, till they drunken grow.
17
My sword shall eat the flesh and blood of those
Who shall be either slain or brought in thra^l,
When I begin this vengeance on my Foes.
Sing therefore, wi^h his People, Nations all.
For, he his Servants blood with blood will pay,
And due auengement on his Foes will lay.
But, to his Land compassion he will show;
And on his People mercy shall bestow.
The Song of Deborah and Barak. Judges. 5.
THis Hymn was composed to glorify God for the great overthrow given to
Sisera: who coming armed with many hundred Chare^s of Iron against the poor
oppressed Israelites (when they had not a sword or spear among forty thou^and
of them) was nevertheless miraculously discomfited: to show the unbelieving
people, that the LORD only is the God of b^ttles; and, that he is both able,
an^ does often, deliver his CHVRCH without the ordinary means. By the
repetition hereof, we praise God, in commemorating one of the great
Deliuerance^ heretofore vouchsafed to his Church. And in these times of fear
and wavering, we may also by this memorable example of God's providence,
strengthen our faith, which is many times weakened by the outward power,
prosperity, or vain boastings of the Churches Adversaries: Who shall
(doubtless) be at last shamefully ruined (according to the Prophetical
imprecation concluding this Song) notwithstanding their many likelihoods of
prevailing. Yea, the^, perhaps, shall that destruction come on them, to Gods
greater Glory, when our estate seems to be most desperate.

Song. 3.
^ SIng praises Israel to the LORD, that thee^ ^ avenged so: When to the fight
with free accord,^ ^ The people forth did go. You Kings give care;^ ^ you
Princes hear, while to the LORD I raise^ ^ my voice aloud, and sing to GOD,
(the LORD ^ of Israel) praise.^

2
When thou departedst, LORD, from Seir,
When thou leftst Edom f^eld,
Earth shook, the heavens dropped there,
The clouds did water yield.
LORD, at thy sight
A trembling fright
Upon the Mountains fell:
Eu^n at thy look
Mount-Sinai shook,
LORD GOD of Israel.
3
Not long ago in Shamghar's days,
Old Anath's valiant Son;
And late, in Iael's time; the ways
Frequented were of none:
The passengers
Were wanderers
In crooked paths unknown:
And none durst dwell
Through Israel,
But in a walled Town.
4
Until I Deborah arose
(Who rose a mother there)
In Israel when new Gods they chose,
That filled their gates with war.
And they had there
Nor shield nor spear
In their possession, then;
To arme^ for fight)
One Israelite,
Mong forty thousand men.
5
To those that Isr'els Captains are
My heart does much incline;
To those, I mean, that willing were:
Oh LORD the praise be thine.
Sing ye for this,
Whose use it is
To ride on Asses gray;
All ye that yet
In Middin sit,
Or travel by the way.
6
The place where they their water drew,
From Archers now is clear.
The (...) uprightness they shall show,
And ^is just dealing there.
The Hamlets all,
Through Israel shall
His righteousness record:
And down unto
The Gates shall go
Th People of the LORD.
7
Arise oh Deborah arise:
Ri^e, ri^e, and sing a Song.
Abinoam's son, oh Barak rise:
Thy Captives lead along.
Their Prince all,
By him made thrall
To the Suruiuor be.
To triumph on
The Mighty one,
The LORD vouchsafed me.
8
A root, from out of Ephraim
Gain'st Amalek arose:
And (of the people) next to him
The Beniamites were those.
From Machir (where
Good Leaders are)
Came well experienced men:
And they came down
From Zabulon
That handle well the Pen.
9
Along with Deborah did go
The Lords of Isachar;
With Isachar, even Barak too,
Was one among them there.
He forth was sent,
And marching went
On foot the lower-way.
For Reuben (where
Divisions were^
Right thought-full hearts had they.
10
The blea^ing of the flocks to hear.
Oh wherefore did thou stay r
For Reuben (where divisions were)
Right thought-full hearts had they*
But, why did they
Of Gilead stay
On Iordans other side?
And wherefore than,
Did thou oh Dan,
Within thy Tents abide?
11
Among his harbors, lurking by
The seaside, Asher lay.
But, Zabulun and Nephthali
Kept not themselves away.
They people are,
Who fearelesse dare
Their lives to death expose;
And did not yield
The hilly-field,
Though Kings did them oppose.
12
With them the Cananitish Kings
At Tana'ch fought that day,
Close by Megiddo's water-springs;
Yet bore no Prize away.
For lo, the Stars
Fought in their Spheres:
Against Sisera fought they.
And some (by force)
The watercourse
Of Kishon, swept away.
13
Even Kishon River, which was long
A famous Torrent known.
Oh thou my soul! oh thou, the strong,
Have bravely trodden down.
Their Horse (whose pace
So lofty was)
Their hoofes with prancing wound;
Those of the Strong,
That kicked and flung,
And fiercely beat the ground.
14
A heavy curse on Meroz lay:
Cursed be her dwellers all.
The Angel of the LORD does say,
That City curse you shall.
And, therefore, this
Accursing is:
They came not to the fight,
To help the LORD,
(To help the LORD)
Against the Men of Might.
15
But, blessed be Iael, Heber's spouse
The Kenite; blessed be she,
More then all women are, of those
That use in Tents to be.
To him did she
Give milk, when he
Did water only wish;
And butter set
For him to eat,
Upon a lordly dish.
16
She, in her left hand took a nail.
And raised up in the Right
A workemans hammer; wherewithal
She Sisera did smite.
His head she took
When she had struck
His pierced Temples through.
He fell withal:
And in the fall,
He at her feet did bow.
17
He at her feet did bow his head;
Fell down, and life forlooke.
Mean while his longing Mother did
From out her window look:
Thus, c^ying at
The Lattice grate,
Why stays his Chariot so
From hasting home?
Oh! wherefore come
His Chariot wheels so slow?
18
As thus she spoke, her Ladies wise
To her an answer gave.
Yea, to herself, her self replies;
Sure, sped (says she) they have:
And all this while
They part the spoil;
A Damsel, one or twaie,
Each homeward bears,
And Sisera shares
A party-colored Pray.
19
Of needle-worke, both sides of it
In diverse colors, are:
Even such as does his neck befit
That uses Spoils to wear.
So LORD still so,
Thy foes over throw:
But, who in thee delight,
Oh! le^ them be
Sunne-like, when he
Ascends in his might.
The Song of Hannah. 1. Sam. 2.1.
HAnnah the wife of Elkanah, being bar^en (and therefore vpbraided and vexed by
Pe^innah her hu^bands other wife) prayed unto the Lord for a Son. And having
obtained him, glorified God in this Song, for delivering her from the contempt
of her aduer^ary. By Hannah (which signifies Grace or Gracious) was the Church
of Christ ^epresented: And by Peninnah (signifying despised or forsaken) was
figured the Jewish Synagogue. This Song therefore, is to be understood as a
mystical Prophecy of that Abiection of the Jews and calling of the Gentiles,
which was fulfilled upon the birth of Jesus Christ, our true Samuel: at whose
conception the blessed Virgin Mary, in her Magnificat, acknowledged the
verifying of many particulars foretold in this Song; even almost in the same
words. In memorial therefore of these Mysteries, we ought to sing this Hymn:
to comfort us also, against the pride and arrogancy of those, who, by reason
of their multitudes, shall scorn, and vpbraid the true Church, as mother only
of a few poor and obscure children. And we may use it likewise to praise God
for that fruitfulness which he has given to our Holy mother; who has lately
had many children advanced to be Kings, and to sit on the most eminent thrones
of Glory in the earth, according to this Prophetical Song.

Song. 4.
^ NOw in the LORD my heart does pleasure take:^ ^ My ho^ne is in the LORD
advanced high.^ ^ And to my Foes an answer I will make;^ ^ Because in his
salvation joyed am I.^ ^ Like him, there is not any holy-One:^ ^ And other LORD
beside him, there is none:^

2
Nor like our God another God is there.
So proudly vaunt not then, as heretofore;
But, let your tongues from henceforth now forbear*
All vain presuming words, for evermore.
For why? the LORD is God who all things knows,
And does each purpose to his end dispose.
3
Now broken is their bow, that once were stout:
And girt with vigor they that stumbled are.
The Full, themselves for bread have hired out:
Which now they need not do, that hungry were.
The Barren-wombe, does seven children own:
And she, that once had many, weak is grown.
4
The LORD does slay; and he reuiues the slain.
He to the grave does bring; and back he bears.
The LORD makes poor; and rich he makes again.
He throws down: and up on high he reares.
He from the dust, and from the dunghill brings
The Beggar, and the poor, to sit with Kings.
5
He reares them to inherit Glories throne.
For why? the LORD'S the Earth's vpholders are:
The world has he erected thereupon.
He to the footing of his Saints has care.
But, dumb in darkness, Sinners shall remain:
For in their strength, shall men be strong in vain.
6
The LORD will to destruction bring them all,
(Even every one) that shall with him contend.
From out of heaven he thunder on them shall,
And judge the world unto the farthest end.
With strength and power, his King he will supply,
And raise the Horn of his Anointed, high.
The Lamentation of David, over Saul, and Jonathan his son, 2. Sam. 1.1^.
IN this fune^all Elegy David bewaileth the Death of Saul and Jonathan: from
whence these observations may be collected. First, that the slaughter of a
valiant Prince is an outward blemish, and just cause of sorrow in the State.
Secondly that the insulting of an adversary is not the least affliction.
Thirdly, that the Mountains of Gilboa are accursed to this day: For, by Gilb^^
(which is interpreted slippery or inconstant) is mystically understood that
irresolution or despair, by which men fall into the power of their spiritual
adversary. Fourthly, we hence may learn to commemorate those things which ^re
^ra^e-worthy even in our enemy. Lastly it shows us that wise and good men
may tender o^e friend more affectionately then another; and that it misbeseemes
them not to bewail their death. This is to be ^ung historically for our
instruction in the particulars before mentioned. And may be observed as a
pattern for our funeral Poemes.

Song. 5.
^ THy beauty, Israel, is gone; slain in the Places^ ^ high is he: The Mighty
now are overthrown.^ ^ Oh, thus how comes it to be!^

Let not this news their streets throughout,
In Gath, or Askalon, be told
For fear Philistia's daughters flout:
Lest vaunt th'vncircumcized should.
2
On you, hereafter, let no dew
You Mountains of Gilboa, fall.
Let there be neither showers on you,
Nor fields that breed an offering shall.
For, there with shame, away was thrown
The Target of the strong (alas)
The shield of Saul, even as of one
That neu'r with oil anointed was.
3
Nor from their blood that slaughtered lay,
Nor from the fart of strong-men slain;
Came Jonathan his bow away,
Nor drew forth Saul his sword in vain*
In life time, they were lovely fair;
In death they undivided are.
More swift then Eagles of the air,
And stronger they, then Lions were.
4
Weep Isrel's daughters, weep for Saul,
Who you with skarlet has arayd;
Who clothed you with Pleasures all,
And on your garments gold has laid.
How comes it, he that mighty was,
The foil in battle does sustain!
Thou Jonathan, oh thou (alas)
Upon thy Places-high were slain.
5
And, much distressed is my heart,
My brother Jonathan, for thee,
My very deare-delight thou were,
And wondrous was thy love to me.
So wondrous, it surpassed far
The love of women (every way.)
Oh, how the Mighty fallen are!
How warlike Instruments, decay!
David's Thanksgiving. 1. Chro. 29.10.
KIng David having by persuasions and his own^ liberal example, stirred up the
people to a bou^tifull Benevolence toward the building of Gods house* praised
him for that willing and cheereful free-offrin^* And in this Thanksgiving, we
observe this method. Fir^^* he acknowledges Gods Blessedness, Greatness,
Pow^^, Glory, Victory, Majesty, Bounty, with the like: and confesses in
general that Honor, Riches, Strength, wi^^ all other good things are at the
Almighties disposing. Secondly, he therefore prayseth the Lord; and
acknowledges also, that his, and the peoples willingness (...) give, came not
of themselves; but was Gods ow^^ proper gift (as well as that which they had
given.) La^^ly, He prays for the continuance of Gods blessin^ both upon their
purposes and endeauours: and, th^^ their Benevolence may be disposed to that
End for which it was given. This Song, may be very properly used, whenever
among us, there has been any free an^ liberal contributions to good and
pious Ends. An^ to fit the same the better to such purposes; the Person^* and
some few circumstances, are a little changed (...) this Translation.

Song. 6.
Sing this as the fifth Song.
OH LORD our everlasting GOD,
Bliss, Greatness, Power, and Praise is thine.
With thee, have Conquests their abode,
And glorious Majesty divine.
All things that earth and heaven afford,
Thou at thine own disposing have.
To thee belongs the Kingdom, LORD,
And thou, for head, over all art plac^t.
2
Thou wealth, and Honor do command,
To thee, made subject all things be:
Both strength and power, are in thine hand,
To be disposed as pleases thee.
And now, to thee our God therefore;
A Song of thankfulness we frame.
(That what we owe, we may restore)
And glorify, thy glorious Name.
3
But, what, or who are we (alas)
That we in giving are so free!
Thine own before, our Offring'was,
And all we have, we have from thee.
For, we are Ghuests, and Strangers here,
As were our Fathers in thy sight:
Our days but shadow-like appear,
And suddenly they take their flight.
4
This offering, LORD our GOD, which thus
We for thy Name sake have bestowne,
Derived was, from thee, to us;
And that we give, is all thine own.
Oh GOD, thou proou'st the heart, we know,
And do affect uprightness there.
With gladness, therefore, we bestow
What we have freely offered here.
5
Still thus (Oh LORD our GOD) incline
Their meanings, who thy people be.
And ever, let the hearts of thine
Be thus prepared unto Thee.
Yea, give us perfect hearts, we pray,
That we thy p^ecepts err not from.
And grant, our Contribution may
An honor to thy Name become.
The Prayer of Nehemiah. Nehem. 1.5.
NEhemiah, determining (as the story shows) to move Artaxerxes for the
repair of the City and house of the Lord, first made this prayer. Wherein
having acknowledged the Majesty, Justice, and Mercy of God, he confesses the
haynousnes^e of his and his peoples sins; desires forgiveness; entreats
for the peoples deliverance from captivity; and requesteth h^ may find favor
in the sight of the King his Master. Now, we who by regeneration are the sons
of Israel (and such as in a spiritual sense, may be said also, to be dispersed
among the heathen, as often ^s we are carried captive by the heathenish
con^upiscences and vanities of the world) even we may in a litterall sense make
use of this excellent form of confession, before our several Petitions. And
doubtles^e a faithful using o^ these the Holy Ghosts ow^e words (with
remembrance of the h^ppie success they her^tofore had) will much strengthen
and increase the hope, confidence, and comfort of him that prays. Who
changing the two last lines only, may appropriate it to any nec^ssity. For
example, if it be to be sung before labor, conclud^ it thus; And be thou
pleased, O LORD* to bless; Our Labors with a good success If before a
journey, thus; And LORD all dangers keep us from; Both go^^g forth, and
coming home. If before a battle thus; And be thou pleased, in the fight, To
make us victors by thy might. If in the time of famine, thus; And, LORD
vouchsafe thou, in this need, Our souls and bodies both to feed. If before a
Sermon, etc. thus; And grant, that we, LORD, in thy fear, May to our profit
speak and hear. And the like, as occasion requires.

Song. 7.
Sing this as the 9. Song.
LORD GOD of Heaven, who only art
The mighty God, and full of fear;
Who never promise* breaker were,
But ever showing mercy there
Where men affection bear to thee,
And of thy Laws obseruers be.
2
Give ear, and open thine eyes, I pray,
That heard thy seruan^s suit may be,
Made in thy presence night and day,
For Isreal's Seed, that serves thee:
For Isreal's seed, who (I confess)
Against thee grievously transgress.
3
I, and my Fathers house did sin,
Corrupted all our actions be:
And disrespectiue we have bin
Of Statutes, Judgments, and Decree;
Of those, which to retain so fast,
Thy servant Moses charged thou have.
4
Oh yet, remember thou, I pray,
These words, which thou did heretofore
Unto thy servant Moses say.
If ere (said thou) they vex me more,
I will disperse them every where,
Among the Nations here and there.
5
But, if to me they shall convert,
To do those things my Law contain;
Though spread to Heavens extremest part,
I would collect them thence again,
And bring them there to make repose,
Where I to place my Name have chose.
6
Now, these thy People are (of right)
Thy servants, who to thee belong;
Whom thou have purchased by thy Might,
And by thine Arm exceeding strong:
Oh! let thine ear, Lord, I thee pray,
Attentive be to what I say.
7
The prayer of thy servant hear;
Oh, hear thy servants when they pray,
(Who willing are thy Name to fear)
Thy servant prosper thou to day:
And be thou pleased to grant that he
May favored in thy presence be.
The Song of King Lemuel. Prou 31.10.
THis Song is Alphabeticall in the original. It contains an admirable
description of a good Wife: And these three things are here principally
considerable; the advantage her Husband receives by her; the commendable
virtues she has in her self; And the reward th^^ follows her. Her Husbands
advantages are these: A quiet heartfree from jealousy or distrust of her; a
ric^ estate without oppressing others; and place of hono^^ in the
Commonwealth. Her virtues are, Industry, Pr^uidence, Cheerfulness, Courage,
and Vnweariednesse in providing for, and disposing of her temporal affairs:
Moreover continual love to her Husband; liberality to the poor; government of
her tongue; and heedfulnesse to those courses her household takes. Her reward is
this: Her Husband is confident in her; she shall have comfort of her labors;
her posterity shall bless her; her Husband shall praise her above other women:
she shall be honored in life, and have joy at her death. It is indeed, an
excellent Marriage-Song, fit to be used at the solemnizing of those Rites. For
it ministers instruction becoming that occasion. Yea perhaps, the Music of
it would stir up good affections also (where unpleasing discords are now
heard) if it were often sung in private Families.

Song. VIII.
Sing this as the sixth Song.
WHo finds a Woman good and wise,
A gemme more worth then Pearls has got;
Her Husbands heart on her relies:
To live by spoil he needs not.
His comfort all his life is she.
No wrong she willingly will do:
For Wool and Flax her searches be:
And cheerful hands she puts thereto.
2
The Merchant-ship resembling right,
Her food she from a far does fet.
E're day she wakes, that give she might
Her maids their task, her household meat.
A field she viewes, and that she buys;
Her hand does plant a vineyard there,
Her loins with courage up she ties;
Her Arms with vigor strengthened are.
3
If in her work she profit feel,
By night her Candle goes not out:
She puts her finger to the wheel,
Her hand the spindle twirles about.
To such as poor and needy are,
Her hand (yea, both hands) reaches she:
The Winter none of hers does fear,
For, double cloth d her household be.
4
She Mantles makes, wrought by hand*
And silk and purple clothing gets:
Among the Rulers of the Land
(Known in the Gate) her Husband sits.
For sale, fine Linen weaueth she,
And ^irdles to the Merchant se^ds:
Renown and strength her clothings be,
And joy her later time, attends.
5
She speaks discreetly when she talks;
The law of Grace her tongue has learn^d:
She heeds the way her household walks,
And feeds not on bread vn-eatn^d.
Her Children ris^, and blessed her call:
Her Husband thus applaudeth her;
Oh! thou have far surpast them all,
Though many Daughters thriuing are.
6
Deceitful Favor quickly wears,
And Beauty suddenly decays:
But, if the LORD she truly fear^s
That Woman well deserves praise.
The fruit her handy work obtaines,
Without repining grant her that;
And yield her what her labor gains,
To do her honor in the Gate,
THE SONG OF SONGS.
The Preface.
SVch is the mercy of God, that he takes advantage even of our natural
affections, to beget in our souls an apprehension of his love, and of the
mysteries which tend to our true happiness; so, fitting his divine expressions
to the several inclinations of men, that means might be provided to win
some of all. For, otherwhile he does it by comparing the same to the glories
of a temporal Kingdom, to win such as are most desirous of honors.
Sometime he illustrates it by Treasures, Gold, and precious Stones, etc. the
better to allure such as are tempted with things of that nature. And diverse
other ways also, as appears throughout the Book of God. But in this Song of
Solomon (wherein is mystically expressed the mutual affection betwixt Christ
and his Church, with the chief passages thereof throughout all Ages from Abel
to the last Judgment; at which time their blessed marriage shall be fully
consu^mated) he does most mouing^y impart unto us, the rau^shing contentments
of the diuine-Loue; by comparing it to that delight which is conceived in the
strongest, the commonest, the most pleasing, the most natural and the most
commendable of our Affections. And doubtless, it powerfully prevails to the
enflaming of their spiritual Love, who seek rightly to understand and apply
the mysteries and expressions herein contained. Let no man therefore presume to
sing, or repeat, in a carnal sense, what is here spiritually intended; upon
pain of Gods heavy indignation. Nor let the wisdom of flesh and blood
vainly neglect Gods favor, in offering this for the comfort of such as will
rightly apply the same; because some Atheists and Sensual men, shall perhaps
turn this grace of God into wa^to^nesse, to their own condemnation.

The first Canticle.
IN this Canticle, is first expressed that longing which the whole Catholic
Church had for the embraces of her Redeemer, (from the time of Abel, till his
first coming) with her acknowledgement of his rauishing Excellencies; her
desire to be drawn after him; and her confession of that joyful happiness
which will arise from his favors. Secondly, the particular Church of the
Gentiles is brought in, entreating an vndespised vn^on with the Synagogue of
the Jews, both confessing and excusing her blemishes. Thirdly, the whole
Catholike-Church is again introduced, as desiring to be fed and guided by her
beloved Shepherd. Fourthly, her Petition is most graciously answered, and she
directed to follow the steps of the holy Patriarchs and Prophets. Finally,
Christ sets forth the power and rich graces of his Spouse, with what other
ornaments he will prepare for her. This Canticle w^ may sing to the stirring
up of our spiritual Love; having first seriously meditated th^se things: to
wit; That desire we ought to have in our souls to be joined to Christ; the
excellency of his perfections; the backwardness of our humane Nature to
entertain his love; the deformity and damage we sustain till we be received
into the communion of Saints; the readiness of Christ to receive and direct
us; the pleasure he will take in our love; and the provision he will make for
the further beautifying of our souls.

Song. 9.
^ COme kiss me with those lips of thine; For,^ ^ better are thy Loves then
wine. And, as the^ ^ powered Ointments be, Such is the savor of^ ^ thy Name:
And, for the sweetness of the same,^ ^ The Virgins are in love with thee.^

2
Begin but thou to draw me on,
And th^n, we after Thee will run.
Oh, King, thy Chambers bring me to:
So, we in thee delight shall find,
And more then ^ine thy Love will mind;
And love thee as the Righteous do.
3
And Daughters of Jerusalem,
I pray you do not me contemn,
Because that black I now appear.
For, I as lovely am (I know)
As Kedar Tents (appear in show)
Or Solomon his Curtains are.
4
Though black I am, regard it not:
It is but Sunne-burne I have got;
Whereof my Mothers Sons were cause:
Their Uineyard keeper me they made,
(Through envy which to me they had)
So, mine own Uine neglected was.
5
Thou, whom my soul does best affect,
U^^o thy pastures me direct,
Where thou at Noone art stretched along:
For, why should I be straggling spide
Like her that loves to turn aside,
Thy fellow^shepheards flocks among?
6
Oh fairest of all Woman kind!
(If him thou know not where to find)
Go where the paths of Cattle are:
Their tract of footsteps stray not from,
Till to the Shepherd Tents thou come,
And feed thy tender Kidlings there.
7
My Love, thou art of greater force,
Then Pharaoh's troops of Cha^ret-hor^e.
Thy cheeks and neck, made lovely be
With rows of stone, and many a chain:
And, we gold-borders will ordain,
Beset with silver studs* for thee.
The second Canticle.
THis Song seems to set forth the mystery of Christ his Incarnation, whereby
the Churches first Petition (mentioned in the former Canticle) is accomplished.
And herein, these particulars appear to be mystically expressed. His Birth and
repose between the two Testaments, with his sweet and sanctifying operations.
Secondly, the Churches acknowledgment of her Redeemers beauty, innocence, and
delightfulness; with how pleasant and incorruptible an habitation, is prepared
for those Lovers; and what excellent privileges she has by his favor.
Thirdly, Christ and his Church do (as two Lovers) interchangeably prefer one
another before all others, by way of comparison. Fourthly, the Spouses
spiritual loue-sicke passions are expressed. And lastly (she having declared
how she is enclosed in his embraces) there is warning given that their sweet
union be not disturbed. This Canticle may be properly sung upon the Feast of
Christ's Nati^ity, or at any other time; we having first prepared our selves by
a fruitful meditating the particular mysteries of the Song.

Song. 10.
Sing this as the ninth Song.
WHile that the King was at repast,
My Spikenard his perfumings cast;
And twixt my breasts reposed my Dear:
My Love, who is as sweet to me
As Myrrh^ or Camphire bund^es be,
Which at Engaddi Uineyards are.
2
Lo, thou art fair; lo, thou my Love
Art fair, and eyed like the Dove:
Thou fair, and pleasant art my Dear.
And lo, our Bed with flowers is strow'd:
Our House is beam^d with Cedar-wood;
And of the Fur our Rafters are.
3
I am the Rose that Sharon yields,
The Rose and Lilly of the fields,
And flower of all the Dales below.
My Love among the Daughters shows,
As when a sweet and beauteous Rose
Amid her bush of thorns does grow.
4
Among the Sons, such is my Dear,
As does an Apple Tree appear,
Within a shrubby Forest placed.
I sat me downn beneath his shade,
(Whereto a great desire I had)
And sweet his fruit was to my taste.
5
Me, to his banquet-house he bare,
Even where his wine-prouisions are:
And there his Love my banner was.
With Flagons me from fainting stay:
With Apples comfort me, I pray;
For I am sick of Love (alas.)
6
My head with his left hand he stayed:
His right hand over me he laid.
And by the Hearts and Roes (said he)
You Daughters of Jerusalem
Stir not (for you I charge by them)
Nor wake my Love till pleased she be.
The third Canticle.
BY contemplating this Canticle, we may be mystically informed of Christ's
calling his Church in the Apostles, and of her estate in the beginning of
Christianity, when he went from place to place (as a Hynde over the Mountains)
to further the work of our Redemption; wooing his Disciples (and in them his
Church) to follow him, by showing his Divinity a little and a little (as it
were) through the Grate, and from behind the Wall of his Humanity. Moreover,
the spring-like season of the Gospel, after the cloudy and winter-like time
under the Law, is here set forth. And then the Church having petitioned that
the Curtains of the Ceremonial Law might be so drawn away, as that she may
both hear and see her Beloved in his vnuailed perfections; she requesteth
also, that the sly enemies of his Vineyard may be destroyed. She rejoices
likewise in their mutual loves; and prays him that whilst the day of Grace
lasts, she may on all occasions enjoy his speedy Consolations. Lastly, the
Church confesses how blindly she sought Christ during the Night of the Law;
how diligently (and through what afflictions) she searched after him; how at
length she found him; where also, and with what affections she entertained him:
And so concludes, as in the former Canticle. It ought therefore to be sung with
Reverence, and consideration of the Mysteries therein contained.

Song. XI.
Sing this as the fifth Song.
I Hear my Love: and him I see
Come leaping by the Mountains there.
Lo, over the Hillockes trippeth He;
And Roe, or Stag-like, does appear.
L^e, from behind the wall he pries:
Now, at the window-grate is he.
Now speaks my Dear, and says, arise
My Love, my Fair, and come with me.
2
Lo, Winter's past, and com^e the Spring,
The Rain is gone, the Weather clear:
The season wooes the Birds to sing:
And on the Earth the flowers appear.
The Turtle croweth in our Field:
Young Figs the Fig Tree down does weigh:
The blossomed Uines a savor yield,
Rise Love, my Fair, and come away.
3
My Dove, that art obscured, where
The Rocks dark stairs do thee infold:
Thy voice, (thy sweet voice) let me hear,
And Thee (that lovely sight) behold.
Those Foxes cubs the Uines that mar,
Go take us, whilst the Grapes be young:
My Loves am I; and mine^s my Dear,
Who feeds the ^illy flowers among.
4
While break of Day, when shades depart,
Return my Well-beloued One;
Even as a Roe, or lusty Heart,
That does on Bether Mountains run.
For him, that to my soul is dear,
Within my bed, by night I sought:
I sought; but him I found not there*
Thus therefore, with my self I thought:
5
I le rise, and round the City wend,
Through Lanes, and open ways I Will go,
That I my soules-delight may find.
So there I sought, and mist him too.
The Citty-watch, me lighted on;
Them asked I for my soules-delight:
And somewhat past them being gone,
My soules-beloued found I straight.
6
Whom there in my embrace I caught:
And him forsook I not, till he
Into my Mothers house I brought,
Her Chamber who conceived me.
You Daughters of Ie^usalem,
Surre not (by field-bred Hearts and Roes;
For you I do adiute by them)
Nor wake my Love till she dispose.
The fourth Canticle.
HEre, the Royal Prophet first sings Christ his going forth to preach the
Gospel; metaphorically expressing it (and as it were) by way of ^dmira^^o^, at
the excellent manner thereof. Next he mentions his Couch (or resting place)
meaning either the Church, or else that Bed of his Humanity which the Holy
Fathers and Pastors of the Church (as her valiant Champions) defended by the
Sword of Gods Word, against Infidels, Heretics, and all the Powers and
Terrors of the Kingdom of Darkness Then he mystically describes that
Palace, Throne, or abiding place of Christ, together with the Glory of it, as
well in regard of the precious matter of each several part, as in respect of
the form and ^eautie of the whole Fabri^ke. And lastly, he exhort^th (...) the
Faithful (under the name of the Daughters of Syon) to contemplate seriously,
the excellent Glory of Christ, when (by his Incarnation) the Deity was
espoused to the Humanity. In singing this we are to meditate in what security
and glorious contentment we shall enjoy the embraces of our Redeemer; seeing
his Bed and place for entertainment of the Daughters of Jerusalem (that is the
Souls of the Faithful) is so excellently built and furnished, as this
Allegory implies.

Song. 12.
Sing this as the fifth Song.
What Is he that from the Desert, there,
Does like those smoaky pillars come,
Which from the Incense, and the Myr^he,
And, all the Merchant-spices fume?
His bed (which lo is Solomon's)
Threescore stout men about it stand:
They are of Isreal's valiant Ones;
And all of them with Swords in hand.
2
All those are men expert in fight:
And each one on his thigh does wear
A Sword; that terrors of the night
May be forbid from coming there.
King Solomon a goodly place
With trees of Libanon did rear:
Each Pillar of it Silver was;
And Gold, the bases of them were.
3
With purple covered he the same:
And all the pauement (thoroughout.)
Oh Daughters of Jerusalem,
For you, which Charity is wrought.
Come Syon daughter^, come away:
And crowned with his Diadem
King Solomon behold you may.
That crown, his Mother set on him,
When he a married man was made,
And in his heart contentment had.
The fifth Canticle.
THat loveliness which is found in the most beautiful body, endowed with the
riches of the mind, and adorned with the goods of Fortune (being of all objects
the most powerful over humane affections.) The Holy Ghost in this Song of
Songs, has thereby mystically expressed the Churches estate in her several
Ages: That so it might the better work into our souls an apprehension both of
those excellent perfections Christ has bestowed on his Church; and the better
inform us also of that unspeakable affection which he bears unto her. And
it seems (the Metaphors in this Allegory being expounded) that the state of
the Church in her several members is here described; with her Lovers affection
showed toward her, about the time of the Gospels entrance; even when our
blessed Savior was abiding on the earth. But the explanation of each several
Metaphor will be too large for this place* Nor will every Capacity reach unto
the particular application of them. It may suffice therefore, ifsuch do (by an
implicit Faith) sing these Mysteries with a general application of them to
Christ and his Church; believing themselves members of that Spouse; And that
Jesus Christ is he, who in this Song professes an entire affection, not only
to the whole Mystical body of the faithful, but even to every member of it in
particular.

Song. 13.
^ OH my Love, how comely now, and how^ ^ beautiful art thou! Thou of
Doue-like eyes apaire,^ ^ shining have within thy hair: And thy loc^^^ ^ like
Kidlings be, which from Gilead hill we see.^

2
Like those Ewes thy Teeth do show,
Which in rows from washing go;
When among them there is none
Twinlesse, nor a barren-one.
And thy Lips are of a red;
Like the Rosy-colored thread.
3
Speech becoming thee thou have.
Underneath thy Tresses placed
Are thy Temples (matchless fair)
Which o're-shadow'd with thy hair:
Like Pomgranats do appear,
When they cut asunder are.
4
To that Fort, thy Necke's compared,
Which with Bulwarks David reared.
Where a thousand sheilds are hung;
All the Targets of the Strong.
Breasts, thou have like twinned Roes,
Feeding where the Lilly grows.
5
While day break, and shades are gone,
To the Mountains I will ru^ne:
To that hill whence Myrrh does come,
And to that of Libanum.
Thou my Love, all beauty art,
Spotlesse-faire in every part.
6
Come my Spouse from Libanum:
Come with me from Libanum.
From Amana turn thy sight,
Shenir's top, and Hermons height;
From the dens of Lions fell,
And the hills, where Leopards dwell.
7
Thou, my Sister, thou art she,
Of my heart that robs me,
Thou my Spo^se* oh thou art she
Of my heart that robs me,
With one of thine eyes aspect,
And with one lock of thy neck.
8
Sister* and espoused-peere,
Those thy Breasts how fair they are!
Better be those Dugs of thine
Then the most deli^ious wine:
And, thine oyntment^ odours are
Sweeter then all spices far.
9
Love, thy Lip^ drop sweetness, so
As the Combs of honey do.
Thou have underneath thy Tongue,
Honey mixed with milk among.
And thy Robes do sent, as well
As the Frankincense does smell.
10
Thou, my Sister and espoused,
Art a Garden, fast enclosd;
Walled-Spring, a Fountain sealed;
And the plants thy Orchard yield,
Are of the Pomegranat-tree,
With those fruits that pleasant be.
11
Camphire, there, with Nard does grow,
Nard, commixt with Crocus too,
Calamus, and Cynamom,
With all trees of Libanum;
Sweetest Alo^s and Myrrh,
And all spice that precious are.
12
All the Gardens every where,
Take their first beginning there.
There, the precious Fountain lies,
Whence all liuing-waters rise:
Even all those Streams that come
Running down from Libanum.
The sixth Canticle.
IN this Canticle is mystically set forth the death and pas^ion of Jesus
Christ; from whence all the Sacramen^s and spiritual graces bestowed on the
Church took their beginning First; Christ desires that by the blowing of
those two contrary winds, the Charitable will of God, and the malitiou^ will of
his Adversaries, the work of our redemption might be wrought. To which purpose
the Church also adds her request. Secondly, Christ shows, that he has
accomplished his own, with the Churches desire therein: and (expressing the
fulfilling of his Bitter-sweet-passion) inuiteth all the faithful to come and
take benefit thereof. Thirdly, here is wondrous moouingly intimated, both our
Redeemers watchfulness to secure us (even while he slept in the grave) and
those Loue-passages of his, wherewith he came to woo us in his humane nature
(as it were a lover knocking and calling at his Beloueds window) in the
darke-night of his Passion, and vnheeded Afflictions. Lastly, here is described
the Churches readiness to open to her Beloved; with that love distemperatu^e
which appeared in her, when the women and the Disciples misled him in the
grave; and when, through fear of the high Priests, they were for a time
dispoiled of their Robe and veil of Faith. This Canticle may properly be sung
in commemoration of our Redeemers sufferings; And of his Spouses fear and
sorrow before his Resurrection.

Song. 14.
^ ARise thou North-win^e from the North,^ ^ And from the South, thou
South-winde blow,^ ^ Upon my Garden breathe ye forth, That so my^ ^ Spices
(there that grow,) From thence abundantly^ ^ may flow. And to thy Garden come
my^ ^ Dear, To eat thy fruits of pleasure there.^

2
My Sister and espoused-peere,
Unto my Garden I am come;
My Spice I gathered, with my Myrrh,
I ate my honey in the Comb,
And drunk my wine with milk among.
Come Friends and best-belou'd of me;
Come eat, and drink, and merry be.
3
I slept, but yet my heart did wake.
It is my Love I knocking hear.
It was his voice: and thus he spoke;
Come open unto me my Dear,
My Love, my Dove, my spotlesse-peere.
For, with the deaw my head is dight:
My locks with droppings of the night.
4
Lo, I have now undressed me;
Why should I clothe me as before?
And since my feet clean washed be,
Why should I soil them any more?
Then through the creuice of the door
Appeared the hand of my Beloved;
And toward him, my ^^art was moved.
5
I rose unto my Love to open,
And from my hands distilled Myrrh:
Pure Myrrh did from my fingers drop,
Upon the handles of the Bar.
But then departed was my Dear.
When by his voice I knew 'twas he,
My heart was like to faint in me.
6
I sought; but seen he could not be.
I cal^d but heard no answer sound.
The Citty-watchmen met with me,
As they were walking of the Round,
And gave me stripes that made a wound:
Yea, they that watch and ward the wall,
Even, they have took away my veil.
The seventh Canticle.
HEre is allegorically expressed the Majesty, power, and excellency of Christ;
and is the effect of that which was Euangelically ^ung of him after his
Resurr^ction, and Ascensio^. First, the Bride is introduced ad^uring the
faith^^^ Israelites, that when they have attained the knowledge of Christ her
Spouse, they should profess and teach him to the rest of their Members.
Secondly, those who lon^ to find him, desire again of the Church, to know the
excellencies of that Beloved of hers: and (by doubling the question) seem to
imply a twofold Excellency. Thirdly, the Church speedily answers those tha^
enquire after her Spouse; and (by describing his excellency in his ten
principal Members) mystically notif^^eth his ten-fold spiritual perfection:
whereupon to insist, were not here convenient. Lastly, the faithf^^ crave the
Churches direction to help her find him ou^* and receive her gracious answer
to that purpose.

Song. 15.
Sing this as the 13. Song.
OH! ^f him you happen on,
Who is my Beloued-One,
Daughters of Jerusalem;
I adjure you, seriously,
To inform him, how that I
Sick am grown of love, for him.
2
Fairest of all women, tell
How thy Lover does excel,
More then other Lovers do.
Thy Beloved, what is he
More then other Lovers be,
That thou do adjure us so?
3
He, in whom I so delight,
Is the purest red and white:
Of ten thousands chief is he.
Like fine gold, his head does show,
Whereon curled Locks do grow;
And a Rauen-blacke they be.
4
Like the milky Doves that bide
By the Rivers, He is Eyed:
Full, and fitly set they are.
Cheeks like spicy-beds has he;
Or like flowers that fairest be.
Lips, like Lillies, dropping Myrrh.
5
Hands, like rings of gold, beset
With the precious Chrysolet.
Bellied, like white Iuorie
Wrought about with Saphir's rich.
Legs like Marble-Pillers, which
Set on golden Bases be.
6
Faced like Libanus is He.
Goodly, as the Cedar-tree;
Sweetness breathing out of him.
He is lovely, every where.
This my Friend is, this my Dear,
Daughters of Jerusalem.
7
Oh thou Fairest (every way)
Of all women! whither may
Thy Beloved turned be?
Tell us whither he is gone,
Who is thy Beloued-one,
That we seek him may with Thee?
8
To his Garden went my Dear,
To the beds of spices there;
Where he Feeds, and Lillies gets.
I, my Loves am, and (alone)
Mine, is my Beloued-one,
Who among the Lyllies eats.
The eight Canticle.
HErein is contained a continuation of the Praises of the Bride, and of that
ardent affection expressed by her B^loued in the fifth Canticle: yet, it is no
unnecessary repetition. For, it seems to have respect to the Churches estate,
and the passages between her and Christ in another Age; even when the Gentiles
began to be called and united unto the Church of the Jews, according to what
is desired in the first Canticle. And therefore, she is here compared to
Tyrzah and Jerusalem for loveliness. Her glorious increase, her singular
purity, her extraordinary applause, the splendour of her Majesty, and the
powrefulnesse of her Authority is here also described. Moreover, the fears
and hindrances sustained in her first persecutions are here Mystically shown.
And, Lastly, they who through fear or obstinacy are separated from her, are
called to return, in regard of her apparent power. This, we may sing to
remember us of those graces God has bestowed on his Church. To comfort our
souls also, with that dearenes^e which Christ expres^eth toward her, of whom
we are members. And on diverse other occasions, according as he that uses it,
has capacity to understand and apply the same.

Song. 16.
Sing this as the 13. Song.
Beautiful art thou my Dear:
Thou as lovely art, as are
Tirzah or Jerusalem
(As the beautiful'st of them)
And as much thou make afraid,
As armed Troops with flaggs displaid.
2
Turn away those eyes of thine*
Do not fix them so, on mine:
For, there beam forth (from thy sight,)
Sweets, that overcome me quite:
And, thy Locks, like kidlings be,
Which from Gilead hill we see.
3
Like those Ewes thy Teeth do show
Which in rows from washing go,
When among them there is none
Twinlesse nor a barren-one.
And (within thy locks) thy Brows
Like the cut- Pomegranat shows.
4
There are with her sixty Queens;
There are eighty Concubines:
And, the Dam'sels, they possess,
Are in number number-lesse:
But, my Dove is all alone,
And an vndefiled-one.
5
She Is her Mothers only Dear;
And, her joy that her did bear.
When the Daughters her surueyd,
That she blessed was, they said:
She was praised of the Queens,
And among the Concubines.
6
Who is she (when forth she goes)
That so like the Morning shows?
Beautiful, as is the Moon,
Purely bright as is the Sun;
And appearing full of dread,
Like an Host with ensigns spread?
7
To the Nut-yard down went I;
(And the Uales increase to spy)
To behold the Uine-buds come,
And to see Pomegranats bloome:
But, the Princes Charrets did
Uexe me so, I naught could heed.
8
Turn, oh turn, thou Shulamite,
Turn, oh turn thee to our sight.
What I pray is that, which you
In the ^hulamite would view,
But that (to appearance) she
Shows like Troops that armed be?
The ninth Canticle.
SOlomon in the first part of this Canticle, commending the Churches universal
beauty in her several parts, is understood to have respect to that time after
the Conversion from Paganism, wherein she was endowed and made lovely by the
variety of those Offices, States, and Degrees, into which her members were for
orders sake distinguished; as well as by the addition of those ^ther Graces
formally received. Which States and Degrees are here Mystically understood by
the parts of a beautiful Woman: (as does excellently appear, the Allegory
being particularly expounded.) The second part of this Hymn expres^eth the
mutual interchange of affections between the Bridegroom and his Bride; and
those sweet contentments they enjoy in each others Loves. Lastly, here is set
forth both the Churches desire to be freed from those persecutions, which
hinder her open, and full fruition of her beloved; and mention is here made
also, of those public and undisturbed embraces, which they shall at length
enjoy. The first part hereof we ought so to sing, that it may remember us to
shun their blindness who discern not the beauty of Order and Degrees in the
Church. The second part puts us in mind, that she is the treasure^^e both of
those graces which cause contentment within our selves, and make us acceptable
to God. By the last part we may apprehend the comfort that will follow, when we
desire that the open profession of Christ may be granted, merely for the love
of him.

Song. 17.
Sing this as the ninth Song.
THou Daughter of the Royal Line,
How comely are those Feet of thine,
When their beseeming Shoes they wear*
The curious knitting of thy Thighs,
Is like the costly Gemi^es of prize,
Which wrought by skillful workmen are.
2
Thy Navel, is a Goblet round,
Where Liquor evermore is found.
Thy fair and fruitful Belly shows
As does a goodly heap of Wheat
With Lillies round about beset;
And thy two Breasts like twinned Roes.
3
Thy Neck, like some white Tower does rise.
Like Heshbon Fish-pooles, are thine Eyes*
Which near the Gate Bath-rabbim lie.
Thy Nose (which thee does wel-become)
Is like the Tower of Libanum,
That, on Damascus has an eye.
4
Thy Head like Scarlet does appear:
The Hair* thereof, like purple are:
And in those Threads the King is bound.
Oh Love! how wondrous far art Thou!
How perfect do thy pleasures show!
And, how thy Joys in them abound!
5
Thou Statur'd art in Palme-tree-wise.
Thy Breasts like Clusters do arise.
I said, into this Palm I Will go;
My hold shall on her branches be:
And those thy Breasts shall be to me
Like clusters that on Uines do grow.
6
Thy Nostrils savor shall as well
As newly-gathered fruits do smell.
Thy Speech shall also relish so,
As purest wine, that for my Deal
Is ^itting drin^e, and able were,
To cause an old man's lips to go.
7
I, my Beloued's am; And, he
Has his affection set on me:
Come well-beloued, come away,
Into the Fields, let us walk along;
And there the Villages among,
Even in the Country we will stay.
8
We to the Vines betimes will go,
And see if they do spring or no;
Or, if the tender Grapes appear:
We will, moreover go, and see,
If the Pomegranats blossomed be:
And I my Love will give thee ^here.
9
Sweet smells the Mandrakes do afford:
And we within our Gates, are stored,
Of all things that delightful be.
Yea, whether new or old they are,
Prepared they be for my Dear:
And I have laid them up for thee.
10
Would, as my Brother, thou might be,
That sucked my Mothers breast with me:
Oh would it were no otherwise!
In public then I thee would meet.
And give thee kisses in the street;
And none there is should thee despise.
11
Then I my self would for thee come,
And bring thee to my Mothers home:
Thou likewise should instruct me there.
And wine that is commixt with Spice,
(Sweet wine of the Pomgranat juice)
I would for thee to drink prepare.
12
My Head with his left hand he stayed;
His right hand over me he laid,
And (being so embraced by him)
Said he, I charge you, not disease
Nor wake my Love until she please,
You Daughters of Jerusalem.
The tenth Canticle.
IN this last part of Solomon's Song, he first sings that sweet peace, and
extraordinary prosperity vouchsafed unto the Church after her great
persecutions: and expresses it by putting the question who she was that came
out of the wilderness leaning on her Beloved. Secondly, he introduces Christ
putting the humane Nature in remembrance, from what estate he had raised it;
and requiring the dearest of our affections in regard of the ardency,
vnqu^nc^ablenesse, and inestim^ble value of his love. Thirdly, h^uing remembered
the Church of the affection due to him, Christ teaches her the charitable care
she ought to have of others; and that she being brought into his favor and
protection, should seek the preferment of her younger Sister also; even the
people who have not yet the breasts of Gods two Testaments to nourish their
souls. Fourthly, the Churches true Solomon or Peacemaker (meaning Jesus
Christ) having a Vineyard in Baal-hammon (that is) wheresoever there are
p^^ple; Herein is declared, the reward of such as are profitably employed in
that Vineyard. And lastly, the confirmation of Christ's marriage upon the Hills
of Spice (meaning Heaven) is hastened. In singing this Canticle, we ought to
meditate what estate God has raised us from; what love he has vouchsafed;
what our charity should be to others; what we should mind concerning this
life; and what desire we should have to the comforts of the world to come.

Song. 18.
^ Who Is this, that leaning on her Friend,^ ^ Does from the Wilderness ascend?
Mind how^ ^ I raised thee, Even where thy Mother thee conceived,^ ^ where she
that brought th^e forth conceived,^ ^ beneath an Apple Tree.^

2
Me in thy heart engraven bear,
And Seale-like on thy hand^wrist wear:
For Love is strong as Death.
Fierce as the Grave is Jealousy:
The coals thereof do burning lie;
And furious flames it has.
3
Much Water, cannot cool Loves flame:
No floods have power to quench the same.
For Love so high is priz^d;
That, who to buy it would assay,
Though all his wealth he gave away,
it would be all despised.
4
We have A Sister scarcely grown,
For she is such a little one,
That yet no Breasts has she.
What thing shall we now undertake,
To do for this our Sisters sake,
If spoken for she be?
5
If, that a wall she do appear,
We Tu^ret^ upon her will rear,
And Palaces of Plate:
And then with boords of Cedar-t^ee
Enclose, and fence her in, will we,
If that she be a Gate.
6
A wall already built I am:
And now my Breasts upon the same
Do Turret-like arise.
Since when, as one that finds rest,
(And, is of settled peace possessed)
I seemed in his eyes.
7
A Vineyard has King Solomon,
This Uineyard is at Baal-hamon,
Which he to Keepers put:
And every one that therein wrought,
A thousand siluer-pieces brought,
And gave him for the fruit.
8
My Vineyard which belongs to me,
Even I my self do ouersee.
To thee, oh Solomon,
A thousand-fold does appertain:
And, those that keep the same, shall gain
Two hundredfold for one.
9
Thou, whose abode the Gardens are,
(Thy Fellows unto thee give ear)
Cause me to hear thy voice:
And let my Love as swiftly go,
As does a Heart or nimble Roe,
Upon the Hills of Spice.
The first Song of Esaias. Esa. 5.
IN this Song the Prophet, singing of Christ and hi^ Vineyard, first shows,
that notwithstanding his labo^ bestowed in fencing and manuring thereof, it
brough^ forth sour grapes. Secondly, he summoneth their Consciences whom he
covertly vprayded, to be Iu^^ges of Gods great love and their vnprofitablene^^
Thirdly, he shows, both how he intends to de^^ with his Vineyard, and who they
are whom he pointe^ out in this Parable. Now, seeing it has befallen t^^ Jews
according to this Prophetical Hymn, we are (...) make a twofold use, in
singing it. First, thereby (...) memorize the Mercy and Justice of God; both
wh^^^ are manifested in this Song: his Mercy in forew^^^ning, his Justice in
punishing even his own peop^^ Secondly, we are so to medi^ate thereon, that we
(...) be warned to consider what favors God has vouc^safed us, and what
fruits we ought to bring forth; le^ he leave us also, to be spoiled of our
Adversaries. For in this Parable the holy Spirit speaks unto eue^^
Congregation who abuses his favors. And doub^^lesse, all such (as it has
fallen out in Antioch, Laodi^^^ and many other particular Churches) shall be
depriu^ of Gods protection, of the dewes of his holy spir^^ and of the sweet
showers of his word, to be left (...) thorns and briars, the fruit of their
own natural Corruptions.

Song. 19.
Sing this as the 14. Song.
A Song of him, whom I love best,
And of his Vineyard, sing I will.
A Vineyard, once my Love possessed,
Well-seated on a fruitful hill:
He kept it close-immured still:
The earth, from stones he did refine;
And set it with the choicest vine.
2
He in the midst a Fort did rear;
I win-presse therein also wrought:
But, when he looked it Grapes should bear,
Those Grapes were wilde-ones that it brought.
Jerusalem, come speak thy thought;
And you of Judah Judges be,
Betwixt my vineyard here, and me.
3
Unto my Uineyard what could more
Performed be, then I have done?
Yet, looking it should Grapes have bore,
Save wilde-ones, it afforded none:
But go to, (let it now alone)
Resolved I am to show you too,
What with my vineyard I will do^*
4
The Hedge I will remove from thence,
That what so will, devour it may:
I do one will break the Walled-fence,
And through it make a trodden way.
Yea, all of it I wast will lay.
To dig or dress it, none shall care:
But, thorns and briars it shall bear.
5
The Clouds I also will compel,
That there no rain descend for this.
For lo, the house of Israel
The Lord of Armies Vineyard is:
And, Judah is that Plant of his;
That Pleasant one, who forth has brought
Oppression, when he Judgment sought.
He, seeking Justice; found therein,
In lieu thereof, a Crying^sinne.
The 2. Song of Esaias. Esa. 12.
ISaiah having a little before prophesied of the In^^^nation of Jesus Christ,
and the excellency of his kingdom, does in this Hymn praise him for his
Mercy; and fore^^owes the Church also, what her Song should be in that day of
her Redemption. The principal co^ten^s hereof are these: A Confession of Gods
mercy; A prediction concerning the Sacrament of Baptism, and an exhortation to
a joyful Thanksgiving. This Song the Church should still sing to the honor of
Ies^^ Christ for our Redemption. Yea, in regard the Proph^^ (foreseeing the
good Cause we should have to make use thereof) has prophesied it should be the
Church^ Hymn, it seems not improper to be used on those days which are
solemnized in memorial of our Saviors Nativity; Or whenever we shall be
mooue^ to praise God in memorizing the gra^i^us Comfo^^ promised us by his
Prophets, and fulfilled by his own coming. And to fit the same the better to
that p^^^pose, I have changed the Person, and the Time, in th^^ Translation.

Song. 20.
^ LOrd* I will s^^g to Thee, for thou displeased^ ^ wast: And yet with-drewest
thy wrath from^ ^ me, And sent me comfort have.^

Thou art my health, on whom
A fearelesse Trust, I lay.
For thou oh Lord, thou art become
My Strength, my Song, my Stay.
2
And with rejoicing now,
Sweet waters we convey
Forth of those Springs, whence Life does flow:
And, thus, we therefore say,
Oh, sing unto the Lord:
His Name and works proclaim:
Yea, to the People, bear record,
That glorious is his Name.
3
Unto the Lord, oh sing;
For, wonders he has done:
And many a renowned thing,
Which through the earth is known*
Oh sing aloud, all ye,
On Sion hill that dwell!
For, lo, thy Holy-one in thee,
Is great, oh Israel.
The third Song of Esaias. Esaias 26.
Esaias composed this Song to comfort the Israelites in their ca^tiuity: to
strengthen their patience in Affliction: and settle their confidence on the
promises of God. First, it remembers them that Gods protection being every
where as available as a defenced City, they ought always to rely on the
firm peace which that affords. Secondly, he shows that the pride of Sin
shall be overthrown; and that the faithful a^e resolved to fl^e unto their
Redeemer, and await his pleasure in their chastis^ments. Thirdly, he sings
the utter desolation of Tyrants; the increase of the Church; her afflictions;
her deliverance; and the resurrection from death through Christ. Lastly, the
Faithful are exhorted to attend patiently on the Lord their Savior, who will
come shortly to judgment, and take account for the blood of his Saints. This
Song is made in the person of the Church, and may be sung, to comfort and
confirm us in all our chastisements and persecutions: by bringing to our
consideration, the short time of our endurance, and the certainty of our
Redeemers coming. It may be used also to praise God both for his Justice and
Mercy.

Song. 21.
Sing this as the 3. Song.
A City now we have obtained,
Where strong Defenses are:
And, God Salvation has ordained*
For Walls, and Bulwarks there.
The Gates thereof, wide open Ye,
That such as justly do,
(And those that Truth's obseruers be)
May enter thereinto.
2
There, thou in peace wilt keep them sure
Whose thoughts well grounded be;
In peace, that ever shall endure,
Because they trusted Thee.
For ever, therefore, on the Lord,
Without distrust, depend.
For, in the Lord, the eternal Lord,
Is strength that has no end.
3
He makes the lofty City yield,
And her proud Dwellers bow:
He lay^s it level with the f^eld,
Eu^n with the dust below.
Their feet that are in want and care,
Their feet thereon shall tread:
Their way is right that righteous are,
And thou their path do heed.
4
Upon thy course of Judgments, we
Oh LORD, attending were:
And to record thy Name and Thee,
Our souls desirous are.
On Thee, our minds with strong desire
Are fixed in the night:
And after thee our hearts enquire
Before the morning light.
5
For, when thy righteous Judgments are
Upon the earth discerned;
By those that do inhabit there,
Uprightness shall be learned.
Yet, Sinners for no terror will
Just dealing understand:
But in their sins continue still.
Amid the Holy Land.
6
To seek the glory of the LORD,
They vn-regardfull be.
And thy aduanced-hand, Oh LORD,
They will not daigne to see.
But they shall see, and see with shame,
That bear thy People spite:
Yea, from thy Foes shall come a flame,
Which will devour them quite.
7
Then, LORD, for us thou will procure,
That we in peace may be;
Because that every work of our,
Is wrought for us, by Thee.
And LORD our GOD* though we are brought
To other Lords in thrall;
Of thee alone shall be our thought,
Upon thy Name to call.
8
They are deceast, and never shall
Renewed life obtain:
They dye, and shall not rise at all.
To tyrannize again.
For thou did visit them therefore,
And wide dispersed them have;
That so their Fame for evermore,
May wholly be defaced.
9
But Lord, encreast thy People are,
Encreast they are by thee;
And thou art glorifi^d as far,
As earths wide limits be.
For Lord, in their distresses, when
Thy rod on them was laid;
They unto thee did hasten then,
And without ceasing praid.
10
As one with child is paind, when as
Her throws of bearing be;
And cries in pangu^s (before thy face)
Oh LORD, so fared we.
We have conceived, and for a birth
Of wind have pained binn.
The world's unsafe, and still on earth,
They thrive that dwell therein.
11
Thy Dead shall live and rise again,
With my dead-Body shall.
Oh you, that in the dust remain,
Awake and sing you, all!
For, as the deaw does herbs renew,
That buried seemed before:
So, earth shall through thy heavenly deaw
Her Dead alive restore.
12
My People to thy Chambers fare:
Shut close the door to thee;
And stay a while (a moment there)
Till past the Fury be.
For lo, the Lord does now arise;
He comes from his place,
To punish their impieties,
Who now the world possess.
13
The earth that blood discover shall,
Which is in her concealed:
And bring to light those murders all,
Which yet are vnreueal'd.
The Prayer of Hezekiah. Esaias 37.15.
IN this Prayer, Hezekiah having first acknowledged Gods Majesty and almighty
power, desires him, both to hear and consider his Adversaries blasphemy. Then
(to manifest the necessity of his present assistance) urges the power his foe
had obtained over such as served not the true God. And as it seems,
impo^tunes deliverance, not so much in regard of his own safety, as that the
Blasphemer, and all the world might know the difference between the Lords
power, and the arrogant bragges of men. This Song may be used whenever the
Turk, or any other great Adversary (prevailing against false Worshippers)
shall thereupon grow insolent, and threaten Gods Church also: as if in
despite of him, he had formerly prevailed by his own strength. For the name
of Sen^^^herib may be mystically applied to any such enemy. We may use this
Hymn also, against those secret Blasphemies, which the Devil whispers unto
our souls; or, when by temptations he seeks to driu^ us to despair, by
laying before us how many others he has destroyed, who seemed to have been in
as good assurance as we. For, he is indeed, that mystical Assyrian Prince,
who has overthrown who^e Countries and Nations, with their Gods, in whom they
trusted. Such as are these, Temporal power, Riches, Superstitious worship,
Carnal wisdom, Idols, etc. which being but the works of men (and yet trusted
in as Gods) he has power to destroy them.

Song. 22.
^ O Lord of Hoasts and God of Israel! Thou,^ ^ who between the Cherubins do
dwell; Of^ ^ all the world thou only art the King, And^ ^ heaven and earth,
unto their form did bring.^

2
LORD bow thine ear; to hear attentive be.
Lift up thine eyes, and daigne oh LORD, to set
What words Sennacherib has cast abroad;
And his proud Message to the living GOD.
3
LORD, true it is, that Lands and Kingdoms all,
Are to the King of Ashur brought in thrall:
Yea, he their Gods, into the fire has thrown:
For, Gods they were not; but of wood and stone.
4
Man's work they were, and men destroi'd them have.
Us therefore from his power vouchsafe to save
That all the Kingdoms of the world may see
That thou art GOD, that only thou art he.
Hezekiah's Thanksgiving. Esa. 38.10.
HEzekiah having been sick and recovered, made this Song of Thanksgiving;
And sets forth the mercy of God, by considering these particulars. The time
of his Age; the fears of his soul; the rooting out of his posterity; the
violence of his disease; and the forgiveness of his sins, added to the
restoring of his health. Then (seeming to have entered into a serious
consideration of all this) he confesses who are most bound to praise God; and
voweth this Deliverance to everlasting memory. This Song may be used after
deliverance from temporal sickness. But in the principal sense, it is a
special Thanksgiving for that cure which Jesus Christ wrought upon the humane
nature, being in danger of everlasting perdition. For Hezekiah which signifies
helped of the Lord, typ^fieth Mankind laboring under the sickness of sin
and death. Isaiah who brought the medicine that cured him, (and is interpreted)
the salvation of the Lord, figured our blessed Redeemer, by whom the humane
nat^^e is restored; and whose sending into the world was mystically showed by
the Miracle of the Suns retrogradation. To praise God for that mystery
therefore (the Circumstances being well considered) this Hymn seems very
proper. And doubtless for this cause it was partly preserved for these our
times, and ought often and heartily to be sung to that purpose.

Song. 23.
Sing this as the fourth Song.
WHen I supposed my time was at an end,
Thus, to my self, I did my self bemo^^^
Now to the Gates of hell I must descend;
For all the remnant of my years are gone.
The Lord* said I) where now the living be,
Nor man on earth, shall I for ever see.
2
As when a Sheapheard has removed his Tent,
Or as a weauers shuttle slips away;
Right so, my Dwelling, and my Years, were spent:
And so, my sickness did my Life decay.
Each day, ere night, my death expected I;
And every night, ere morning, thought to dye.
3
For, He so Lyon-like my bones did break,
That I scarce thought to live another day.
A noise I did like Cranes or Swallowe^ make:
And as the Turtle, I lamenting lay.
Then with vplifted eyelids, thus I spoke;
Oh Lord, on me oppressed, mercy take.
4
What shall I say? he did his promise give;
And as he promised he performed it.
And therefore, I will never whilst I live,
Those bitter passions of my soul forget:
Yea, those that live, and those unborn, shall know
What life and rest thou did on me bestow.
4
My former Pleasures, Sorrows were become:
But, in that love, which to my soul thou have,
The Grave, that all deuours, thou kep^st me from;
And did my errors all behind the^ cast.
For, nor the Grave, nor Death can honor Thee;
Nor hope they for thy Truth that buried be.
5
Oh! he that lives; that lives as I do now:
Even he it is that shall thy praise declare.
Thy Truth the Father to his Seed shall show.
And how, thou me, oh Lord, have daing'd to spare.
Yea Lord, for this, I will throughout my days
Make music in thy house; unto thy praise.
The Lamentations of Jeremy.
As useful as any part of the old Testament, for these present times (^igh
fallen asleep in security) are these Elegiacall Odes: For, they bring many
things to our consideration. (...), what we may and should lament for.
Secondly, how careful we ought to be of the Commonwealths prosperity;
because, if that go to ruin, the particular Church therein cherished, must
needs be afflicted also; and Gods worship hin^red. Thirdly, they teach us,
that the overthrow of Kingdoms and Empires, follows the abuse and n^glect of
Religion; and that (Sin being the only cause thereof) we ought to endure
our chastisements without murmuring against God. Fourthly, they warn us, not
to abuse Gods merciful long-suffering. Fifthly, they perswa^e us to commiserate
and pray for the Church, and our brethren in calamity; and not to despise them
in their humiliations. Sixthly, they learn us not to judge the truth of
Professions, by those afflictions God lays upon particular Churches, seeing
the Jewish Religion was the Truth; and those Idolaters, who led them into
Captivity. Seventhly, they show us, that neither the Antiquity, Strength, Fame,
or formal Sanctity of any place (^onor Gods former respect thereunto) shall
privilege it from destruction, if it continue in abusing his Grace. And
lastly, they (as it were limiting our sorrows) mind us to cast our ^^es on the
mercies of God: and to make such use of his chastisements, as may turn our
Lamentations into Songs of Joy.

Lament. 1.
THis Elegy, first bewaileth in general terms, that calamity and
destruction of Judah and Jerusalem, which is afte^wards more particularly
mentioned. Secondly, it makes a confession of their manifold sins committed;
and is full of many pa^sionate and penitential complaints, Justifying the Lord
in his Judgments, and confessing the vanity of humane Consolations. Lastly,
it contains a short prayer for Gods mercy, and a divine prediction of those
Judgments which will fall on them, by whom his people have been afflicted.
This Elegy may be sung, whenever any general Calamity falls on the
Commonwealth in which we live; we having first considered and applied the
particular Circumstances, as there shall be cause. We may sing it also
Hystorically, to memorize the Justice of God, and the miserable desolations of
Judah and Jerusalem, recorded for our example.

Song. 24.
^ HOw sad and solitary now (alas,) Is that^ ^ well-peopled City come to be!
Which once^ ^ so great among the Nations was, And oh how^ ^ widdow-like
appears she! She rule of all the^ ^ Provinces has had, And now her self is^
^ tributary made.^

2
All night she makes such excessive moan,
That down her cheeks a flood of tears does flow
And yet, among her Lovers there is none,
That consolation does on her bestow.
For they that once her Lover did appear,
Now turned foes, and faithless to her are.
3
Now Judah in captivity complains,
That (others) heretofore so much oppressed.
For her false service, she her self remains
Among those Heathens, where she finds no rest.
And apprehended in a Strait, is she,
By those that persecuters of her be.
4
The very ways of Sion do lament.
The Gates thereof their loneliness deplore:
Because that no man comes to frequent
Her solemn Festiualls as heretofore.
Her Priests do sigh; her tender Virgins be
Uncomfortable left, and so is She.
5
Her Adversaries are become her Chiefes:
On high exalted, those that hate her are:
And God has brought upon her all those griefs,
Because so many her transgressions were.
Her Children driven from her by the Foe,
Before him, into loathed thraldom go.
6
From Sions-Daughter (once without compare)
Now all her matchless loveliness is gone.
And like those chased Hearts her Princes fare,
Who seek for pasture and can find out none.
So (of their strength deprived, and fainting nigh)
Before their ab^er foes, they feebly fly.
7
Jerusalem now thinks upon her crimes;
And calls to mind (amid her present woes)
The pleasure she enjoyed in former times,
Till first she was surprised by her foes:
And how (when they perceived her forlorn)
They at her holy Sabbaths made a scorn.
8
Ierusalems transgressions many were;
And therefore is it she disdained lies:
Those, who in former time have honored her;
Her baseness now behold, and her despise:
Yea, she her self does sit bewailing this;
And of her self her self ashamed is.
9
Her own uncleanness in her Skirt she bore;
Not then believing what her end would be.
This great destruction falls on her therefore:
And none to help or comfort her has she.
Oh, heed thou Lord, and pity thou my woes,
For I am triumph't-ouer by my foes.
10
Her Foe has touched with his polluted hand,
Her things that Sacred were, before her face:
And, they whose entrance thou did countermand,
Intruded have into her Holy-place:
Those; that were not so much approved by thee,
As, of thy Congregation held to be.
11
Her People, do with sighs, and sorrows, get
That little bread which for ^eleefe they have.
And, give away their precious things for meat,
So to procure wherewith their life to save.
Oh Lord consider this; and ponder Thou,
How vile, and how detected I am now.
12
No pity, in you Passengers is there?
Your eyes oh somewhat hitherward incline;
And mark, if ever any grief there were
Or sorrow that did equal this of mine:
This, which the Lord on me inflicted has,
Upon the day of his incensed wrath.
13
He from above, a Flame has hurled down;
That kindles in my bones prevailing fire.
A Net, he over both my feet has thrown;
By which, I am compelled to retire.
And he has made me a ^orsaken-one,
To sit, and weep out all the day alone.
14
The heavy yoke of my Transgressions, now,
His hand has wreathed, and upon me laid;
Beneath the same my tired neck does bow:
And all my strength is totally decayed.
For, me to those, the LORD has given over,
Whose hands will hold me fast for evermore.
15
The LORD has trampled underneath their feet,
Even all the mighty, in the midst of me.
A great Assembly he has caused to meet,
That all my ablest men might slaughtred be.
And Judah's Uirgin-daughter treads upon,
As in a wine press Grapes are trodden on.
16
For this (alas) thus weep I; and mine eyes,
Mine eyes drop water thus; because that He,
On whose assistance, my sad soul relies,
In my distress is far away from me.
Even while, (because of my prevailing Foe,)
My Children are compelled from me to go.
17
In vain has Syon stretched forth her hand;
For, none unto her succor draws nigh:
Because, the LORD has given in command,
That Jacobs Foes should round about her lie.
And poor Jerusalem among them there;
Like some def^led woman does appear.
18
The LORD is justified, nay-the-lesse,
Because I did not his commands obey.
All Nations therefore, hear my heaviness,
And heed it (for your warning) you I pray.
For, into thraldom (through my follies) be
My Virgins, and my Young Men, borne from me.
19
Upon my Lovers I have cried out,
But, they my groundless hopes deceived all.
I for my reu'rend Priests inquired about;
I, also, did upon mine Elders call:
But in the City, up the ghost they gave,
As they were seeking meat their lives to save.
20
Oh LORD, take pity now on my distress:
For lo my soul distempered is in me.
My heart is overcome with heaviness;
Because I have so much offended thee.
Thy Sword abroad my ruin does become.
And Death does also threaten me at home.
21
And of my sad complaints my Foes have heard:
But to afford me comfort there is none.
My troubles have at full to them appeared;
Yet they are joyful that thou so have done.
But, thou will bring the Time set down by Thee;
And then in sorrow they shall equal me.
22
Then, shall those foul Offenses they have wrought,
Before thy presence be remembered all:
And whatso'ere my Sins on me have brought,
(For their Transgressions) upon them shall fall.
For, so my sighings multiplied be;
That therewithal, my heart is faint in me.
Lament. 2.
IN this Elegy, the Prophet uses a very patheticall exordium, the better to
awaken the peoples consideration; and to make them the more sensible of their
horrible calamity. Which he first illustrateth in general terms, by comparing
their estate to the miserable condition of one fallen from the glory of heaven,
to the lowest earth: and in mentioning, their being deprived of that glorious
Temporal and Ecclesiastical Government, which they formerly enjoyed.
Afterward, he descends to particulars; as the destruction of their Palaces,
Forts, Temple, Walls, and Gates: the profaning of their Saboths, Feasts,
Rites, etc. the suspending of their Laws, Priests, Prophets: The slaughter of
young men, and Virgins, olde-men, and Children, with the famine and reproaches
they sustained, etc. All which acknowledging to be the just Judgments of God,
he advises them not to harken to the delusions of their false Prophets, but
to return unto the LORD by tears and hearty repentance. For the use and
application, see what has been said, before the former Elegy.

Song. 25.
Sing this as the 24. Song.
HOw dark, and how be-clowded (in his wrath)
The LORD has caused Syon to appear!
How Isr'els beauty he obscured has!
As if thrown down from Heaven to Earth he were.
Oh! why is his displeasure grown so hot?
And why has he his Footstool so forgot?
2
The LORD all Syons dwellings has laid wast;
And, in so doing, he no sparing made:
For in his anger to the ground he cast,
The strongest Holds that Iudah's-Daughter had.
Them, and their Kingdom, he to ground does send;
And all the Princes of it does suspend.
3
When at the highest his displeasure was,
From Is^^el all his horn of strength he broke.
And from before his adversaries face,
His Right Hand (that restrained him) he took.
Yea, he in Jacob kindled such a flame,
As, round about, has quite consumed the same.
4
His Bow he as an adversary bent,
And by his Right Hand he did plainly show,
He drew it with an enemies intent:
For all that were the fairest Marks he slew.
In Syons Tabernacle this was done;
Even there the fire of his displeasure shone.
5
The LORD himself is he that was the foe,
By him is Isr^el thus to ruin gone.
His Palaces, he ouerturned so:
And he, his Holds of strength has overthrown:
Even he it is, from whom it does arise,
That Isr^els Daughter thus lamenting lies.
6
His Tabernacle Garden-like that was,
The LORD with violence has took away.
He has destroyed his Assembling-place:
And there nor Feasts nor Sabbaths now have they:
No, not in Syon. For in his fierce wrath,
He both their King and Priests rejected has.
7
The LORD his holy Altar does forgo;
His Sanctuary he has quite despiz'd.
Yea, by his mere assistance has our Foe,
The Bulwarks of our Palaces surpised.
And in the LORDS own House, rude Noyses are
As loud, as heretofore his Praises were.
8
The LORD his thought did purposely incline,
The walls of Syon should be overthrown.
To that intent he stretched forth his ^ine,
And drew not back his hand till they were down.
And so, the Turrets with the bruised Wall,
Did both together to destruction fall.
9
Her Gates in heaps of earth obscured are;
The Bars of them in pieces broke has he:
Her King, and those that once her Princes were,
Now borne away among the Gentiles be.
The Law is lost, and they no Prophet have,
That from the LORD a vision does receive.
10
In silence, seated on the lowly ground,
The Senators of Syons-Daughter are:
With Ashes, they their careful heads have crowned,
And mourning Sackcloth girded on them wear.
Yea, on the earth in a distressed-wise,
Ierusalem^s young Uirgins fix their eyes.
11
And, for because my People suffer this,
Mine eyes with much lamenting dimmed grow:
Each part within me out of quiet is.
And on the ground my Liver forth I throw;
When as mine Eyes with so sad Objects meet;
As Babes half dead, and sprawling in the street.
12
For, to their Mothers called they for meat.
Oh where shall we have meat and drink! they cry.
And in the City, while they food entreat,
They swoune, like them that deadly-wounded lie.
And some of them, their souls did breath away,
As in the Mothers bosom, starved they lay.
13
Jerusalem! for thee what can I say?
Or unto what may thou resembled be?
Oh! whereunto that comfort thee I may,
Thou Syon^-Daughter, shall I liken thee?
For, as the Seas, so great thy Breaches are:
And to repair them then; Ah, who is there!
14
Thou, by thy Prophets have deluded bin:
And foolish Uisions they for thee have sought.
For, they reueiled not, to thee thy Sin,
To turn away the thraldom it has brought.
But, lying Prophecies they sought for thee;
Which of thy sad exile, the causes be.
15
And those, thou Daughter of Jerusalem
That on occasions pass along this way,
With clapping hands, and hissings, thee contemn^:
And, nodding at Thee, thus in scorn they say:
Is this the City, men did once behight
The flower of Beauty, and the worlds Delight?
16
Thy Adversaries, (every one of them)
Their mouths have opened at thee, to thy shame.
They hiss, and gnash at Thee, Jerusalem;
We; we (say they) have quite destroyed the sam^:
This, is that day has long expected been;
Now comes it, and we the same have seen.
17
But, this the Lord decreed, and brought to pass,
He, to make good that word which once he spoke,
(And that which long ago determined was)
Has hurled down, and did no pity take.
He; thus has made thee scorned of thy Foe;
And, raised the Horn of them that hate thee so.
18
Oh wall of Syons-Daughter, cry amain,
Even to the Lord set forth a hearty Cry:
Down like a River, cause thy tears to rain,
And, let them neither day nor night be dry.
Seek neither sleep, thy body to suffice;
Nor slumber, for the Apples of thine eyes.
19
At night and when the watch is new begun;
Then rise, and to the Lord Almighty Cry.
Before him, let thy Heart like water run;
And lift thou up to him thy hands, on high.
Even for those hunger-starued Babes of thine,
That in the Corners of the streets do pine.
20
And thou oh Lord; Oh be thou pleased to see,
And think on whom, thy Judgments thou have thrown.
Shall women fed with their own issue be,
And Children, that a span are scarcely grown?
Shall thus, thy Priests and Prophets, Lord, be slain,
As in thy Sanctuary they remain?
21
Nor youth, nor Age, is from the slaughter free;
For, in the streets, lie Young, and Old, and all.
My Uirgines and my yong-men, murdered be;
Even both, beneath the sword, together fall.
Thou, in thy day of wrath, such hauock made;
That in devouring thou no pity had.
22
Thou, round about have called my feared Foes,
As if that summoned to some feast they were:
Who in thy day of wrath, did round enclose,
And shut me so, that none escaped are.
Yea, those that hate me, them consumed have,
To whom, I nourishment, and breeding gave.
Lament. 3.
HEre the Prophet Jeremy, having contemplated his own afflictions with the
destruction of Judah and Jerusalem, seems by that material Object to have
raised his apprehension higher, and by the spirit of Prophecy both to foresee
the particular sufferings of Ies^^ Christ, and to become sensible also of those
great afflictions which the Church Militant (his mystical body) should be
exercised withal. And in this most passionate Elegy, either in his own person
bewaileth it, or else personates Jesus Christ, the head of that Mystical body,
taking upon himself those punishments; with that hea^y burden of Gods wrath,
and that unspeakable sorrow which mankind had otherwise been overwhelmed
withal. In brief, this Elegy contains an expression of Gods heavy Anger for
our sin; the severity and bitterness of his Judgments; the greatness of
his mercies; the hope and patience of the faithful in all Afflictions; The
unwillingness of God to punish; The hearty repentance of his people; And a
Prophetical imprecation concerning the enemies of the spiritual Jerusalem.
This may be sung, to move and stir us up with a feeling of our Redeemers
passion: To remember us of our miserable condition through sin: To move us
to repentance: and to comfort and instruct us amidd our afflictions.

Song. 26.
Sing this as the 24. Song.
I Am the Man who (scourged in thy wrath)
Have in all sorrows thoroughly tired been:
Into obscurity, he ^ed me has;
He brought me thither, where no light is seen:
And so adverse himself to me he shows,
That all the day his hand does me oppose.
2
My Flesh and Skin with age, He tired out.
He bruiz'd my bones, as they had broken bin.
He with a Wall enclosed me about.
With cares and labors he has shut me in.
And me to such a place of darkness led,
As those are in, that before ever dead.
3
He shut me where I found no passage out,
And there my heavy Chains upon me laid.
Moreover, though I loudly cried out,
He took no heed at all for what I prayed:
My Way with hewed stones he stopped has*
And left me wandering in a winding Path.
4
He was to me like some way-lying Bear.
Or as a Lion that does lurk unseen.
My course he hindering, me in pieces tear,
Till I quite ruined, and laid waste had been.
His Bow he bended, and that being bent*
I, was the mark at which his Arrow went.
5
His Arrows from his Quiver forth he caught,
And through my very R^ines he made them pass.
Even mine own people set me then at naught;
And, all the day; their sporting song I was.
From him, my fill of bitterness I had;
And, me, with Wormwood likewise, drunk he mad^*
6
With stones, my teeth he all to pieces brake;
He, Dust and Ashes over me has strowne;
All rest, he from my weary soul did take,
As if, contentment I had never none*
And then, I cried; Oh! I am undone;
All my dependence on the Lord is gone.
7
Oh mind thou my afflictions, and my care;
My miseries, my wormwood, and my gall:
For, they still fresh in my remembrance are,
And down in me my humbled soul does fall.
I, this forget not; And when this I mind,
Some help again, I do begin to find.
8
It is thy mercy Lord, that we now be;
For, had thy pity failed, not one had lived.
The Faithfulness is great, that is in Thee,
And every morning it is new revived.
And Lord such claim my soul unto thee lay^^*
That she will ever trust in thee, she says.
9
For, thou art kind to those that wait thy will;
And, to their souls that after thee attend.
Good therefore is it, that in quiet still,
We hope that safety, which thou Lord wilt send.
And happy he, that timely does enure,
His youthful neck the burden to endure.
10
He down will sit alone, and nothing say;
But, since it is cast upon him, bear it out.
(Yea, though his mouth upon the dust they lay)
And while there may be hope, will not mis-dou^^*
His Cheek to him that smites, offers He;
And is content, though he reviled be.
11
For, sure is he (what ever does befall)
The LORD will not forsake for evermore:
But that he having punished, pity shall,
Because he many mercies has in store.
For, God in plaguing, take no pleasure can;
Nor willingly afflicts any man.
12
The LORD delights not to trample down,
Those men that here on earth enthralled are:
Or that a Righteous man should be o'rethrowne,
When he before the Highest does appear.
Nor is the LORD well-pleased in the sight,
When he beholds the Wrong, subvert the Right.
13
Let no man mutter then, as if he thought
Some things were done in spite of GODS decree:
For, all things at his word to pass are brought
That either for our good, or evil be.
Why then lives man, such murmurs to begin?
Oh! let him rather murmr at his Sin.
14
Our own lewd courses, let us search and try,
We may to thee again, oh LORD, conuart.
To GOD, that dwells in the Heavens on high,
Let us (oh let us) lift both hand and heart.
For, we have sinned; we rebellious were:
And therefore was it, that thou did not spare.
15
For this (with wrath o're-shaddow'd) thou have chas't,
And slaughter made of us, without remorse.
Thy self obscured with a clowd thou have;
That so our Prayers might have no recourse.
And lo, among the Heathen-People, we
As outcasts, and off-^cowrings reckoned be.
16
Our Adversaries all (and every where)
Themselves with open mouth against us set;
On us, is fa^ne a terror, and a snare,
Where ruin has with desolation met:
And for the Daughter of my Peoples cares,
Mine eyes does cast forth Rivulets of tears.
17
Mine eyes perpetually were overflowed:
And yet there is no ceasing of my Tears.
For, if the LO^D in mercy look not down,
That from the Heavens he may behold my cares;
They will not stint. But for my Peoples sake,
Mine eyes will weep until my heart does break.
18
As when a Bird is chased too and fro,
My foes pursued me, when cause was none.
Into the Dungeon they my life did throw,
And there they rolled over me a stone.
The waters likewise, ouer^low'd me quite:
And then, me thought, I perished outright.
19
Yet, on thy Name oh LORD, I cal'ed there,
(Even when in that low Dungeon I did lie)
Whence thou were pleased my complaint to hear,
Not sleighting me, when I did sighing cry.
That very day I called, thou drew'st near,
And said unto me, that I should not fear.
20
Thou LORD, my Soul maintainest in her right.
My Life by thee alone, redeemed was.
Thou have oh LORD, observed my despite.
Uouchsafe thy Judgment also, in my cause.
For, all the grudge they bear me, thou have seen.
And all their plots (...) have against me been.
21
Thou heard'st what ^landers they against me laid,
And all those mischiefs they deuiz'd for me.
Thou notest what their Lips of me have said;
Even what their daily closest whisperings be:
And how, when ere they rise, or down do lie,
Their Song, and Subject of their mirth am I.
22
But LORD, thou shall reward and pay them all,
That meed, their Actions merit to receive*
Thy heavy maiediction ceaze them shall:
Even this, sad hearts they shall for ever have.
And by thy wrath pursude they shall be driven,
Till they are chased out, from under Heaven.
Lament. 4.
AS in the two first Elegies, the Prophet here begins by way of exclamation,
and most passionately sets forth the cause of his complaining, by a threefold
explication. First, by expressing the Dignity, Sex, and Age of the persons
miserably perishing in this calamity: as, Princes, Priests, Men, Women, and
Children. Secondly, by paralelling their estate with that of brute Creatures;
and their punishment with Sodoms. Thirdly, by showing the horrible effects
which followed this Calamity; as the Nobility being driven to cloth themselves
from the dunghill, and Women to feed on their own Children, etc. After this,
he shows what are the causes of all that misery which he bewaileth.
Secondly, declares the vanity of relying on temporal consolations. Thirdly,
sets forth the power and fierceness of the Churches Adversaries. Fourthly,
prophecieth that even Christ was to suffer the fury of their malice, before
Gods wrath could be ap^^^sed. And lastly, assured that the Church shall be at
length delivered, and (...) enemies rewarded according to their wickedness.
T^^ Song may be sung to set before our eyes, the severity (...) Gods wrath
against sin, to win us to repentan^^ and to comfort us upon our conuersions.

Song. 27.
Sing this as the 5. Song.
HOw dim the Gold does now appear!
(That Gold, which once so brightly shone)
About the City, here and there,
The Sanctuary-Stones art thrown.
The Sons of Syon, late compared,
To Gold, (the richest in esteem)
Like Potsheards, are without regard,
And base as earthen vessels seem.
2
The Monsters of the Sea have care
The breasts unto their young to give:
But crueller my people are;
And Estridge-like in Deserts live.
With thirst the Sucklings tongues are dry;
And to their parched roofes they clea^e.
For bread young Children also cry;
But none at all they can receive.
3
Those that were used to dainty fare,
Now in the streets half starued lie.
And they that once did Scarlet wear,
Now dunghill rags about them tie.
Yea, greater plagues my Peoples crime,
Has brought on them, then Sodoms were.
For, that was sunk in little time,
And no prolonged death was there.
4
Her Nazarites, whose whiteness was
More pure then either milk or snow;
Whose ruddinesse did Rubies pass;
Whose veins did like the Saphir show:
Now blacker then the Cole are grown;
And in the streets unknown are they:
Their flesh is clung unto the bone,
And like a stick is dried away.
5
Such therefore as the sword has slain,
Are far in better Case then those;
Who death for want of food sustain,
Whilst in the fruitful field it grows.
For when my people were distressed,
Even women (that should pity take)
With their own hands their Children dressed,
That so their h^nger they might s^ake.
6
The LORD accomplished has his wrath;
His fierce displeasure forth is powrd;
A fire on Sion set he has,
Which even her groundwork has devoured;
When there was neither earthly King;
Nor, through the whole world, one of all
Thought any Foe to pass could bring,
That thus Jerusalem should fall.
7
But this has happened for the guilt
Of those that have her Prophets bin,
And those her wicked Priests, that spilt
The blood of Innocents therein.
Along the streets they s^umbling went;
(The blindness of these men was such.)
And, so with blood they were be-sprent,
That no man would their Garments touch,
8
Depart, depart; (^twas therefore sed)
From these pollutions get ye far.
So, wandering to the Heathen, fled,
And said, there was no biding there.
And them the LORD has now in wrath
Exilde, and made despi^ed live:
Yea, sent their Priests and Elders has,
Where none does honor to them give.
9
And, as for us, our eyes decayed,
With watching vain Releefes, we have:
Cause, we expect a Nations aid,
That is unable us to save.
For, at our heels so close they be,
We dare not in the streets appear.
Our end we therefore, coming see,
And know our rooting-out is near.
10
Our Persecutors follow on,
As swift as Aegles of the Sky.
They over the Mountains make us run;
And in the Deserts, for us lie.
Yea, they have Christ (our life) betrayed,
And caused him in their pits to fall.
(Even him) beneath whose shade, we sa^^*
We live among the ^eathen shall.
11
O Edom, in the land of Huz,
(Though yet over us triumph thou may)
Thou shall receive this Cup from us;
Be drunk, and hurl thy clothes away.
For, when thy punishments for sins,
Accomplished oh Syon be;
To visit Edom he begins;
And public make her shame, will be.
Lament. 5.
IN this Elegy, the Prophet prays unto the Lord to remember and consider his
peoples afflictions, acknowledging before him their miseries, and presenting
them unto him, as destressed Orphans, widows, and Captives (by such
humiliation) ^o win his compassion. He moves him also, by repetition of
the miserable ruin they werefallen into: by the noble Possessions and
Digni^ies they had lost; by the base Condition of those under whose tyranny
they were brought: And by the generality of their Calamity, from which no
s^x^, age, nor degree, escaped. Then (ingenuously confessing their sin to be
the just Cause of all this) glorifieth God, and concludes this Petitionary
Ode, with desiring that he would both give them grace to repent, and restore
them to that peace which they formerly enjoyed. This Elegiacall Song, we may
sing unto God in the behalf of many particular Churches, even in these Times;
especially if we consider that mystical bondage which the Devil has brought
them into; and apply these Complaints to those spiritual Calamities, which
have befallen them for their sins.

Song. 28.
Sing this as the fifth Song.
OH mind thou LORD, our sad distress*
Behold, and think on our reproach.
Our houses, Strangers do possess;
And on our heritage encroach.
Our Mothers for their Husbands grieve,
And of our Fathers rob^d are we;
Yea, money we compelled to give
For our own wood and water, be.
2
In persecution we remain,
Where endless labor tire us does;
And, we to serve for bread are feign,
To Egypt and to Ashur both.
Our Fathers err^d, and being gone,
The burden of their sin we bear:
Even Slaves the rule over us have wone;
And none to set us free is there.
3
For bread our lives we hazard in
The perils, which the Deserts threat;
And like an Oven is our skin,
Both soil^d and parcht for want of meat.
In Sion Wives defiled were;
Deflowred were the Virgins young,
(Through Judah's Cities every where)
And Princes by their hands were hung.
4
Her Elders disrespected stood:
Her Young Men, they for ^ rinding took*
Her Children fell beneath the wood,
And Ma^istrates the Gates forsook.
Their Music, young men have forborne:
Rejoicing in their hearts is none:
To mourning does our dancing turn;
And from our head the Crown is gone.
5
Alas that ever we did sin!
For, therefore feels our heart these cares:
For that our eyes have dimmed been;
And thus the Hill of Syon fares.
Such desolation there is seen,
That now the Foxes play thereon:
But thou for ever LORD have been;
And without ending is thy Chrone*
6
Oh, why are we forgotten thus?
So long time wherefore absent art?
Convert thy self, oh LORD, to us;
And we to thee shall soon conuart.
Renew, oh LORD, those Ages past,
In which thy favor we have seen.
For, we extremely are debas't,
And bitter has thine anger been.
The Prayer of Daniel. Dan. 9.4.
THe Prophet Daniel, in this Prayer beseeches God to be merciful unto his
people in Captivity; And these four things are principally considerable
therein. First, an acknowledgement of Gods Power, Justice, and Mercy, with a
confession, that from the highest to the lowest they had broken his
Commandments, and were therefore justly punished. Secondly, it is confessed
that as their punishment is that which they deserved; so it is also the same
that was foretold should come upon the^. Thirdly, he beseeches that God for
his own mercies sake, and the sake of his Messiah, would (nevertheless) ^e
merciful unto them; as well in r^g^rd he had heretofore gotten glory by
delivering them; as in respect they were his own elected people, and were
already become a repro^ch unto their Neighbors This may be sung whenever any
of those judgments are powered out on the Commonwealth, which the Prophets
have threatened for sin; or in our particular afflictions, we having first
applied it by our Meditations.

Song. 29.
Sing this as the 22. Song.
LORD GOD Almighty, great, and full of fear,
Who always art from breach of promise free,
And never falling to have mercy there,
Where they observe thy laws and honor Thee:
We have transgressed, and amiss have done;
We disobedient and rebellious were.
For, from thy Precepts we astray are gone;
And we departed from thy Judgments are.
2
We did thy Servants Prophecies withstand,
Who to our Dukes, our Kings, and Fathers came;
When they to all the People of the Land,
Proclaimed forth their message in thy Name.
In thee oh LORD, all righteousness appears,
But public shame to us does appertain;
Even as with them of Judah now it fares,
And those that in Jerusalem remain:
3
Yea, as to Israel now it does befall;
Throughout those Lands in which they scatt'red be,
For that their great Transgression, wherewithal
They have transgressed, and offended Thee.
To Us, our Kings, our Dukes, and Fathers, does
Disgrace pertain (oh LORD) for angring Thee:
Yet, mercy, LORD our GOD, and pardon both,
To Thee belong, though we rebellious be.
4
We, did (indeed) peruersly disobey
Thy voice (oh LORD our GOD) and would not heart,
To keep those Laws thou did before us lay,
By those thy Servants, who thy Prophets were.
Even all that of the race of Isra'el be,
Against thy Law, have grievously mis-done:
And that they might not listen unto thee,
They backward from thy voice oh LORD, are gone.
5
On them therefore, that Curse, and Oath descended,
Which in the Law of Moses written was;
(The Servant of that God whom we offended)
And now his speeches he has brought to pass.
On us, and on our Judges, he does bring
That Plague, wherewith he threatened us and them.
For, under Heaven was never such a thing,
As now is feign upon Jerusalem.
6
As Moses written-Law does bear record,
Now all this mischief upon them is brought.
And yet we prayed not before the LORD,
That leaving Sin, we might his Truth be taught.
For which respect, the LORD in wait has laid,
That he, on us inflict this Mischief, might.
And since his holy Word we disobeyd.
In all his doings he remains upright.
7
But now, oh LORD our GOD, who from the Land
Of cruel Egypt, brought thy People have;
And by the power of thy Almighty hand,
Atchieu'd a Name, which to this day does last:
Though we have sinned in committing ill,
Yet LORD by that pure Righteousness in thee,
From thy Jerusalem, thy Holy-hill,
Oh! let thy wrathful anger turned be.
8
For, through the guilt of our displeasing sin,
And for our Fathers faults; Jerusalem,
(Thy chosen people) has despised bin:
And are the scorn of all that neighbor them.
Now therefore to thy Servants prayer incline:
Hear thou his suite, oh GOD, and let thy face,
(Even for the LORDS dear sake) vouchsafe to shine
Upon thy (now forsaken) Holy place.
9
Thine ears incline thou (oh my God) and hear:
Lift up thine eyes, and us, oh look upon;
Us, who forsaken with thy City are;
That City, where thy Name is called on.
For, we upon our selves presume not thus.
Before thy presence our request to make*
For ought that righteous can be found in us;
But for thy great and tender Mercies sake.
10
LORD hear (forgive oh LORD) and weigh the same*
Oh LORD perform it, and no more defer,
For thine own sake, my GOD; For by thy Name,
Thy City and thy People called are.
The Prayer of Jonah. Jonah 2.
Jonah flying from God, and being preserved in a Fishes belly, when he was cast
into the Sea; made this prayer to praise God for delivering him in so great an
extreamitie. And the principal things remarkable therein are these. First,
the place where he prayed. Secondly, the terrible danger that enclosed him.
Thirdly, the despair he was nigh falling into. Fourthly, Gods mercy, with the
Prophets timely application thereof, and the comfort it infused into him.
Fifthly, the occasio^^ drawing men into such perils. Sixthly, the vow made upon
his deliverance, and the reason of that vow. This burial of Jonas in the
Fishes belly, and his deliverance from thence, was a type of the burial and
Resurrection of our blessed Savior, Matthew. 12.4. This Prayer therefore we
ought, not only to sing hystorically, to memorize this wondrous work of God;
but to praise him also for the Resurrection of Christ, and raising mankind
from that fearful and bottomless gulf of perdition, wherein it lay
swallowed up, without possibility of redeeming it self.

Song. 30.
Sing this as the 24 Song.
IN my distress to thee I cri^de, oh LORD;
And thou were pleased my complaint to hear:
Out from the bowels of the Grave I roared;
And to my voice thou did incline thine care:
For, I amid the raging Sea was cast;
And to the bottom there thou plung^d me have.
2
The Floods did round about me Circles make:
Thy waves and Billows ouer-flow'd me quite;
And then unto my self (alas) I said,
I am for evermore deprived thy sight:
Yet once again thou pleased art, that I
Should to thy holy Temple lift mine eye.
3
Even to my Soul the waters closed me had:
O're-swallow'd by the Deepes I fast was pent:
About my head the weeds a wreath had made:
Unto the Mountains bottomes down I went;
And so, that forth again I could not get,
The Earth an everlasting Bar had set.
4
Then thou, oh LORD my GOD; then thou were he,
That from corruption did my Life defend.
For, when my Soul was like to faint in me,
Thou thither did into my thought descend.
And LORD, my prayer thence to thee I sent,
Which upward to thy holy Temple went.
5
Those who believe in vain and foolish lies,
Despisers of their own good safety be.
But, I will offer up the Sacrifice
Of singing praises, with my voice, to thee.
And I will that perform, which vowed I have:
For, unto thee belongs it, LORD, to save.
The Prayer of Habakuk. Habak. 3.
IN this Petitiona^y and Prophetical Hymn, the Deliverer of mankind, is first
prayed for. Secondly, the glorious Majesty of his coming is described by
excellent Allegories, and by Allusions to former deliverances, vouchsafed to
the Jews. Thirdly, here is foretold, the overthrow of Antichrist; who shall
be destroyed by the Brightness of our Saviors coming. Fourthly, here is set
forth the state of the latter times. Fifthly, he expresses the joy, confidence,
and safety of the Elect of God, even amid those terrors that shall awayt upon
their R^deemers coming. This Song is to be sung hystorically, in commemoration
of the Churches deliverance by the first coming of Jesus Christ. And
prophetically, to comfort us concerning that perfect Delivery, as^ured at his
second coming. For, though the Prophet had some respect to the Jews temporal
deliverance, that he might comfort the Church in those Times. Yet the
Holy Ghost had principal regard to the spiritual deliverance of his
spiritual Kingdom, the holy Catholicke-Church. And to her, and her enemies
do the Names (of the Churches enemies) here mentioned, very properly agree.
Nay, Cushan, signifying dark, black, or cloudy; And Midian which is
interpreted, Condemnation, or Judgment; better suite unto the Nature of those
spiritual Adversaries, whom they p^efigured, then to those People who were
literally so called. For, none are so fitly termed People of Darkness, or of
Condemnation, as the members of Antichrist, and the spiritual Babylon.

Song. 31.
^ LORD, thy answer I did hear, And I^ ^ grew therewith afear'd. When the
Times at^ ^ fullest are, Let thy Work be then declared.^ ^ When the Time,
LORD, full does grow, Then^ ^ in Anger, Mercy show.^

2
God Almighty, he came down;
Down he came from Theman-ward:
And the matchless Holy-one,
From Mount Paran forth appeared,
Heaven ore-spreading with his Rays,
And Earth filling with his praise.
3
Sunne-like was his glorious Light:
From his Side there did appear
Beaming Rays that shined bright;
And his Power he shrouded there:
Plagues before his face he sent:
At his Feet hot Coals there went*
4
Where he stood he measure took
Of the Earth, and view^d it well:
Nations vanished at his look;
Ancient Hills to powder fell:
Mountains old cast lower were:
For, his ways eternal are.
5
Cushan Tents I saw diseased,
And the Midian Curtains quake.
Have the Floods, Lord, thee displeased?
Did the Floods thee angry make?
Was it else the Sea that has
Thus provoked thee to wrath?
6
For, thou rod'st thy Horses there,
And thy sauing-Charrets through:
Thou did make thy ^ow appear;
And thou did perform thy Uowe:
Yea, thine Oath and Promise past
(To the Tribes) fulfilled have.
7
Through the Earth thou riftes did make.
And the Rivers there did flow:
Mountains, seeing thee, did shake;
And away the Floods did go.
From the Deep a voice was heard;
And his hands on high he reared.
8
Both the Sun and Moon made stay,
And remoou'd not in their Spheres:
By thine Arrows light went they,
By thy brightly shining Spears:
Thou in wrath the Land did crush,
And in rage the Nations thresh.
9
For thy Peoples safe relief,
With thy Christ for aid wentst thou:
Thou have also pierced the Chief
Of the sinful Household through;
And displayed them, till made bare
From the Foot to Neck they were.
10
Thou, with Iauelines of their own,
Did their Armies Leader strike.
For, against me they came down,
To devour me, wherle-winde like.
And they joy in nothing more,
Then unseen to spoil the Poor.
11
Through the Sea thou madst a way,
And did ride thy Horses there,
Where great heaps of water lay.
I, the news thereof did hear:
And the voice my bowels shook;
Yea, my lips a qui^'ring took.
12
Rottenness my bones possessed:
Trembling fear possessed me,
I that troublous day might rest.
For, when his approches be
Onward to the People made,
His strong Troops will them invade.
13
Bloomelesse shall the Fig Tree be:
And the Vine no fruit shall yield:
Fade shall, then, the Olive tree:
Meat shall none be, in the Field.
Neither in the Fold, or S^all,
Flock or Heard continue shall.
14
Yet, the LORD my joy shall be:
And, in him I will delight:
In my GOD that saves me;
GOD the LORD, my only might,
Who, my feet so guides, that I
Hinde-like, pace my Places-high.
THE HYMNS OF THE New Testament.
THese five that next follow, are the Hymns of the New Testament. Between
which, and the Songs of the Old Testament, there is great difference. For, the
Songs of the Old Testament were either thank^sgiuings for temporal benefits,
typifying and signifying future Benefits touching our Redemption: Or else,
Hymns prophetically foreshewing those Mysteries which were to be accomplished
at the coming of Christ. But, these Evangelical Songs were composed, not for
temporal, but for spiritual things, promised and figured by those temporal
Benefits, mentioned in the Old Testament, and perfectly fulfilled in the New.
Therefore, these Evangelical Hymns are more excellent then such as are
merely Prophetical; In regard, the Possession is to be preferred before the
Hope; and the End, before the Means of obtaining it.

Magnificat. Luke 1.46.
THE blessed Virgin Mary being saluted by the Angel Gabriel, and having by the
Holy Ghost conceived our Redeemer Jesus Christ in her womb; was made fruitful
also, in her Soul, by the ouershaddowing of that Holy Spirit: and thereupon,
brought sorth this Evangelical and Prophetical Hymn. Wherein, three things
are principally obserueable. First, she praises God for his particular mercies
and favor toward her. Secondly, she glorifies God for the general benefit of
our Redemption. Thirdly, she Magnifies God for the particular grace vouchsafed
unto the seed of Israel, according to what was promised to Abraham. This is the
first Evangelical Song. And was indicted by the holy Ghost, not only to be the
Blessed Virgins Thanksgiving; but to be sung by the whole Catholic Church
(whom she typically personated) to praise God for our Redemption and
Exaltation. And therefore, it is worthily inserted into the Liturgy, that it
may be perpetually, and reverently sung.

Song. 32.
Sing this as the 3. Song.
THat magnifi'de the LORD may be,
My Soul now undertakes;
And in the God that saves me,
My Spirit merry-makes.
For, he vouchsafed has to view
His Handmaides poor degree.
And lo, All Ages that ensue,
Shall blessed reckon me.
2
Great things for me The Almighty does,
And holy is his Name:
From Age to Age he mercy shows
On such as fear the same.
He, by his Arm declared his might:
And this to pass has brought,
That now the Proud are put to flight,
By what their hearts have thought.
3
The Mighty plucking from their Seat;
The Poor he placed there:
And for the hungry takes the meat
From such, as weal^hy are.
But, minding Mercy, he has showed
His servant Israel grace:
As he to our Forefathers vowed;
To Abraham, and his Race.
Benedictus Luke 1.68.
ZAchary the Priest, being (upon the birth of (...) Son) inspired with the
knowledge of our (...) Incarnation; sung the second Evangelical Hymn: In
which, two things are especially considerable. First, he blesses God, because
through the coming of Christ, all the promises made unto the Patriarchs and
Prophets were fulfilled, for the salvation of his people. Secondly, he
declares the Office and duty of his own son, who was sent before to
prepare the way of the Lord. This Song, the Church has worthily inserted into
the Liturgy also, and we ought therefore to sing it reverently in memorial of
our Saviors incarnation; and to praise God for the fulfilling of his promises,
and that Evangelical preparation, which he vouchsafed, by sending his
Fore^runner.

Song. 33.
Sing this as the 3. Song.
Blessed be the GOD of Israel:
For, he has People bought,
And in his servant Dauid's house
Has great salvation wrought;
As by his Prophets, he foretold,
Since Time began to be;
That from our Foes we might be safe,
And from our Haters free.
2
That he might show our Fathers grace
And bear in mind the same,
Which by an Oath he vowed unto
Our Father Abraham;
That from our Adversaries freed,
We serve him fearelesse might,
In righteousness, and holiness,
Our ^^fe-time in his sight.
3
And (of the highest) thee, oh Child!
The ^rophet I declare,
Before the LORD his face to go;
His coming to prepare;
To teach his People, how they shall
That safety come to know,
Which by remission of their sins,
He does on them bestow.
4
For it is through the tender Love
Of GOD alone, where by
That Dayspring has to visit us,
Descended from on high;
To light them who in darkness sit,
(And in Deaths shade abide)
And in the blessed way of Pea^e
Their wandering feet to guide.
T^^ Song of Angels. Luke 2.13.
THis is the third Evangelical Song mentioned in the New Testament; and it was
sung by a quire of Angels (at the birth of our blessed Savior Jesus Christ)
whose re^o^cing shall be m^de complete by the redemption of m^nkinde. In this
Song they first glorify God; and then proclaim that happy ^ea^^ and
^econciliation which his Sons Nativity should bring unto the world, Rejoicing
therein, and in that unspeakable good-wi^^ and dear- Communion which was
thereby established between the Go head, the Manhood, and Them. We therefore
ought to join with them in this Song, and sing it often, to praise God, and
quicken Faith and Charity in our selves.

Song. 34.
^ THus Angels sung, and thus sing we; To GOD^ ^ on high all glory be: Let him
on Earth his^ ^ Peace bestow, And unto men his favor show.^

Nunc Dimittis. Luke ^.29.
THe fourth Evangelical Hymn is this of Simeon; who being in expectation of
the coming of the Messiah (which according to Daniels 70. weeks was in those
days to be accomplished) it was revealed unto him, that he should no^^ye till
he had seen Christ: And, accordingly he coming into the Temple by the spirits
instigation (when he was presented there as the Law commanded) both beheld, and
embraced his Redeemer. In this Song therefore he glorifieth God, for the
fulfilling of his promise made unto him; And joyfully confesses Jesus Christ
before all the People. In repeating this Hymn, we ought also to confess our
Redeemer. For Simeon was, as it were, the Churches speaker; and has for us
expressed that thankful Joy, wherewithal we should be filled, when God
enlightens^vs with the knowledge and spiritual vision of our Savior.

Song. 35.
Sing this as the ^. Song.
GRant now in peace, (that by thy leave)
I may depart, oh LORD:
For, thy Salvation seen I have,
According to thy word.
That which prepared was by Thee,
Before all Peoples sight,
Thy Isreal's renown to be,
And to the Gentiles light.
The Song of Moses and the Lamb. Revel. 15.3.
THe fifth and last Song recorded in the New Testament is this, called by S.
John, The Song of Moses and the Lamb; being indeed the effect of that triumph
Song, which the Saints, and blessed Martyrs shall sing unto the honor of that
Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world, when they have gotten
the victory over Antichrist. This Hy^^e the members of the true Church may sing
to Gods g^^^y, and the increase of their own comfort, when they perceive the
power of the Almighty any way manifested upon that Adversary. It may be
repeated also, amid our greatest persecution^, to strengthen our Faith, and
remember us, that whatsoever we suffer, there will come a day, wherein we shall
have cause to make use of this Hymn with a perfect rejoicing.

Song. 36.
Sing this as the 13. Song.
OH thou LORD, thou GOD of might;
(Who do all things work aright)
Whatsoever is done by thee,
Great, and wondrous proves to be:
2
True thy ways are, and direct,
Holy King of Saints elect.
And (oh therefore) who is there,
That of thee retains no fear?
3
Who is there that shall deny,
Thy great Name to glorify*
For thou, LORD, and thou alone:
Art the perfect Holy-one:
4
In thy presence Nations all
shall to adoration fall.
For thy Iudgement^ now appear
Unto all men what they are.
Here end the Hymns of the New Testament.
The X Commandments Exodus 20.
ALthough the Decalogue be not originally in verse, yet among us it has been
heretofore usually sung: Because therefore it may be a means to present these
Precepts somewhat the oftener to remembrance, make them the more frequently
repeated, and stir up those who sing and hear them, to the better
performance of their duties; They are here also inserted, and fitted to be sung.

Song. 37.
Sing this as the 4. Song.
THe great Almighty spoke; And thus said he;
I am the LORD thy GOD; And I alone
From cruel Ae^ypts thraldom set thee free:
And other G^DS but Me thou shall have none.
Have mercy LORD, and so our hearts incline,
That we may keep this blessed Law of thine.
Thou shall not make an Image, to adore,
Of ought on earth above it, or below:
A Carved Work thou shall not ^^w before;
Nor any worship on the same ^estowe.
For, I thy GOD, a Jealous GOD am known;
And on their Seed the Fathers sins correct;
Until the third, and fourth Descent be gone:
But them I always love, that me affect.
Have mercy LORD, and so our hearts incline,
That we may keep this blessed Law of thine.
The Name of GOD thou never shall abuse,
By Swearing, or repeating it in vain:
For, him that does his Name profanely use,
The LORD will as a guiltie-one arraigne.
Have mercy LORD, and so our hearts incline,
That we may kee^e this blessed Law of thine.
To keep the Sabbath holy, bear in mind.
Six days thine own affairs apply thou to:
The Seau'nth is GODS own day for rest assigned,
And thou no kind of work therein shall do.
Thou, nor thy Child, thy Servants, nor the Beast;
Nor he that Guest-wise with thee does abide:
For, after six days labor GOD did rest:
And therefore he that day has sanctifi'de.
Have mercy LORD, and so our hearts incline,
That we may keep this blessed Law of thine.
See, that unto thy Parents thou do give
Such honor, as the Child by duty owes,
That thou a long and blessed life may live
Within the Land, the LORD thy GOD bestows.
Have mercy LORD, and so our hearts incline,
That we may keep this blessed Law of thine.
Thou shall be wary, that thou no man slay:
Thou shall from all Adultery be clear:
Thou shall not Steal another good away:
Nor witnesse-false against thy Neighbor bear.
Have mercy LORD, and so our hearts incline,
That we may keep this blessed Law of thine.
With what is thine remaining well apaid:
Thou shall not cover what thy Neighbors is,
His House, nor Wife, his Servant, Man, nor Maid,
His Ox, nor Ass, nor any thing of his.
Thy mercy Lord, thy mercy let us have,
And in our hearts these Laws of thine engraue.
The Lords Prayer. Mat. 6.7.
THe Lords Prayer has been aunciently, and usually sung also; and to that
purpose was heretofore both translated and paraphrased in verse; which way of
expression (howsoever some weak Judgments have condemned it) does no whit
disparage or mis-beseeme a Prayer. For, David made many prayers in verse^ And,
indeed, measured words were first devised and used to express the praises of
God, and petitions made to him. Yea, those are the ancient and proper subjects
of Poesy, as appears throughout the Sacred writ, and in the first humane
Antiquities. Verse, the^fore, dishonors not divine Subjects; but those men do
profane and dishonor Verse, who abuse it on vain and mere profane
expressions. The scope and use of this prayer is so frequently treated of, that
I think I shall not need to insist thereon in this place.

Song. 38.
Sing this as the 3. Song.
OUr Father which in heaven art;
We sanctify thy Name:
Thy Kingdom come: Thy will be done
In heaven and earth the same:
Give us this day our Daily bread:
And us Forgive thou so;
As we on them that us offend,
Forgiveness do bestow:
Into Temptation lead us not;
But us from evil free.
For, thine the Kingdom, power, and praise,
Is, and shall ever be.
The Apostles Creed.
THe effect and use of this Creed is so generally taught, that this Preface
need not be enlarged: And as touching the singing and versifying of it, that
which is said in the Preface to the Lords Prayer may serve for both.

Song. 39.
IN God the Father I believe;
Who made all Creatures by his word;
And true belief I likewise have
In Jesus Christ, his Son, our LORD:
Who by the Holy Ghost conceived,
Was of the Uirgine Mary borne:
Who meekely Pilat's wrongs recei'ud,
And crucified was with scorn.
2
Who Di'de, and in the Grave has lain:
Who did the lowest Pit descend:
Who on the third day rose again,
And up to Heaven did ascend.
Who at his Fathers right hand there,
Now throaned sits; and thence shall come,
To take his seat of Judgment here*
And give both quick, and dead their doom.
3
I in the Holy Ghost believe,
The holy Church-Catholike too,
(And that the Saints Communion have,)
Undoubtedly believe I do.
I well assured am likewise,
A pardon for my s^nnes to gain;
And that my Flesh from death shall rise,
And everlasting life obtain.
A Funeral Song.
THe first Stanza of this Song is taken out of S. John^ Gospel Cap. 11. Ver.
25.26. The second Stanza, Job 19.25, 26, 27. The third Stanza, 1 Timothy 6.7. and
Job 1.21. The last Stanza, Reu. 14.13. And in the order of Burial appointed by
the Church of England, it is appointed to be sung or read, as the Minister
pleases: That therefore it may be the more conveniently used either way,
according to the Churches appointment, it is here turned into Lyricke Verse. It
was ordained to comfort the Living, by putting them in mind of the
Resurrection, and of the happiness of those, who dye in the faith of Christ
Jesus.

Song. 40.
Sing this as the 9. Song.
I Am the Life (the LORD thus says)
The Resurrection is through me;
And whoso'ere in me has faith,
Shall live, yea though now dead he be^
And he for ever shall not dye,
That living does on me rely.
2
That my Redeemer lives I ween,
And that at last I raised shall be
From earth, and, covered with my skin
In this my flesh, my GOD shall see.
Yea, with these eyes, and these alone,
Even I my GOD shall look upon.
3
Into the world we naked come,
And naked back again we go:
The LORD our wealth receive we from,
And he does take it from us too:
The LORD both wills, and works the same;
And blessed therefore be his Name.
4
From Heaven there came a voice to me,
And this it wil'd me to record;
The Dead from henceforth blessed be,
The Dead that dies in the LORD:
The Spirit thus does likewise say;
For, from their Works at rest are they.
The Song of the three Children.
THis Song has been anciently used in the Liturgy of the Church, as
profitable to the stirring up of D^uotion, and for the praise of God. For, it
earnestly calls upon all creatures, to set forth the glory of their Creator,
even Angels, Spirits, and reasonable Creatures, with those also that are
unreasonable, and insensible. And this speaking to things without Life, is not
to ^ntimate that they are capable of such like exhortations; but rather, that
upon consideration of the obedience which Beasts, and insensible Creatures
continue toward God, according to the law imposed at their Creation; men might
be provoked to remember the honor and praise, which they ought to ascribe unto
their Almighty Creator, as well as all his other Creatures.

Song. 41.
Sing this as the 9. Song.
OH all you Creatures of the LORD;
You Angels of the God most high;
You Heavens, with what you do afford;
And Waters all above the sky:
Bless ye the LORD, him praise, adore,
And magnify him evermore.
2
Of God you everlasting Powers,
Sun, Moon, and Stars, so bright that show;
You soking Deawes, you dropping Showers;
And all you Winds of God that blow:
Bless ye the LORD, him praise, adore,
And magnify him evermore.
3
Thou Fire, and what does heat contain;
Cold Winter, and thou Summer fair;
You blustering Storms of Hail, and Rain;
And thou the Frost-congealing- Air:
Bless ye the LORD, him praise, adore,
And magnify him evermore.
4
Oh praise him both you Ice and Snow;
You Nights and Days, do you the same,
With what or Dark or Light does show;
You Clouds, and every shining Flame:
Bless ye the LORD, him praise, adore,
And magnify him evermore.
5
Thou Earth, you Mountains, and you Hills,
And whatsoever thereon grows;
You Fountains, Rivers, Springs, and Rills;
You Seas, and all that ebbes, or flows:
Bless ye the LORD, him praise, adore,
And magnify him evermore.
6
You Whales, and all the Water yields;
You of the Feathered airy-breed;
You Beasts and Cattle of the fields;
And you that are of humane seed:
Bless ye the LORD, him praise, adore,
And magnify him evermore.
7
Let Israel the LORD confess;
So let his Priests, that in him trust;
Him let his Servants also bless;
Yea, Souls and Spirits of the Just:
Bless ye the LORD, him praise, adore,
And magnify him evermore.
8
You blessed Saints, his praises tell*
And you that are of humble heart,
With Ananias, Misael;
And Azarias (bearing part)
Bless you the LORD, him praise adore,
And magnify him evermore.
The Song of S. Ambrose, or Te Deum.
THis Song, commonly called Te Deum, or the Song of S. Ambrose, was repeated at
the baptizing of S. Augustine: And (as it is recorded) was composed at that
very time by those two Reverend Fathers, answering one another, as it were by
immediate inspiration. It is one of the most ancient Hymns of the Christian
Church, excellently praising and confessing the blessed Trinity: and therefor
is daily and worthily made use of in our Liturgy, and reckoned among the
Sacred Hymns.

Song. 42.
Sing this as the 44. Song.
WE praise Thee GOD, we knowledge Thee,
To be the LORD, for evermore:
And the eternal Father we,
Throughout the earth, do thee adore:
All Angels, with all powers within
The compass of the heavens high;
Both Cherubin, and Seraphin,
To Thee perpetually do cry.
2
Oh holy, holy, holy-one;
Thou LORD, and GOD of Sabbath art;
Whose praise, and Majesty alone
Fills heaven and earth, in every part:
The glorious Troop Apostolic;
The Prophets worthy Company;
The Ma^tyrs army-royall eke
Are those, whom thou art praised by.
3
Thou through the holy Church art known,
The Father of unbounded power:
Thy worthy, true, and only Son:
The Holy Ghost the Comfortour:
Of Glory thou, oh Christ, art King;
The Father's Son, for evermore;
Who men from endless Death to bring,
The Virgins womb did not abhor.
4
When Conqueror of Death thou were,
Heaven to the Faithful openedst thou;
And in the Fathers glory art
At Gods right hand enthroned now:
Whence we believe, that thou shall come,
To judge us in the day of wrath.
Oh, therefore help thy Servants, whom
Thy precious blood Redeemed has.
5
Them with those Saints do Thou record,
That gain eternal glory may*
Thine Heritage, and People LORD,
Save, bless, guide, and advance for aye:
By us thou daily praised have been;
And we will praise Thee without end.
Oh, keep us, LORD, this day from sin*
And let thy mercy us defend.
6
Thy mercy, LORD, let us receive,
As we our trust repose in thee:
Oh LORD, in thee I trusted have;
Confounded never let me be.
Athanasius Creed, or Quicunque vult.
THis Creed was composed by Athanasius (after the wicked heresy of Arrius had
spread it self through the world) that so the faith of the Catholic Church,
concerning the Mystery of the blessed Trinity, might be the better understood,
and professed, to the overthrow and preventing of Arrianisme, or the like
heresies. And to the same purpose it is appointed to be said or sung upon
certain days of the year in the Church of England.

Song. 43.
Sing this as the 3. Song.
THose that will saved be must hold,
The true Catholic Faith,
And keep it wholly, if they would
Escape eternal death.
Which Faith a Trinity adores
In One; and One in Three:
So, as the Substance being one,
Distinct the Persons be.
2
One Person of the Father is,
Another of the Son;
Another of the Holy Ghost,
And yet their Godhead one:
Alike in glory; and in their
Eternity as much:
For, as the Father, both the Son,
And Holy Ghost is such.
3
The Father uncreate, and so
The Son, and Spirit be:
The Father he is Infinite;
The other two as He.
The Father an Eternal is,
Eternal is the Son:
So is the Holy Ghost; yet, these
Eternally but One.
4
Nor say we there are Infinites,
Or uncreated Three.
For, there can but one Infinite,
Or uncreated be.
So Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
All three Almighties are;
And yet not three Almighties tho,
But only One is there.
5
The Father likewise GOD and LORD;
And GOD and LORD the Son;
And GOD and LORD the Holy Ghost,
Yet GOD and LORD but One.
For though each Person by himself,
We GOD and LORD confess:
Yet Christian Faith forbids that we
Three GODS or LORDS profess.
6
The Father nor begot, nor made;
Begot, (not made) the Son;
Made, nor begot, the Holy Ghost,
But a Proceeding-One.
One Father, not three Fathers then;
One only Son, not three;
One Holy Ghost we do confess,
And that no more they be.
7
And less, or greater then the rest,
This Trinity has none;
But they both Coeternall be,
And equal every one.
He therefore that will saved be,
(As we have said before)
Must One in Three, and Three in One,
Believe, and still adore.
8
That Jesus Christ incarnate was,
He must believe with this
And how that both the Son of GOD,
And GOD and Man (...) is*
GOD, of his Fathers substance pure,
Begot ere Time was made:
Man of his Mothers substance borne,
When Time his fullness had.
9
Both perfect God, and perfect Man,
In Soul, and flesh, as we:
The ^athers equal being God:
Is Man, beneath is ^e.
Though God and Man; yet but one Christ:
And ^o dispose it so,
The Godhead was not turn^d to flesh,
But Manhood took thereto.
10
The Substance vn-confus^d; He one
In Person does subsist:
As Soul and Body make one Man;
So God, and Man is Christ:
Who suffered, and went down to Hell,
That we might saved be;
The third day he arose again,
And Heau^n ascended he.
11
At God the Fathers right hand, there
He (...); and at the Doom,
He to adiudge both quick and dead,
From thence again shall come.
Then all men with their flesh shall rise,
And he account require.
Well-doers into bliss shall go,
The Bad to endless F^re.
Veni Creator.
TH^s is a very a^ci^nt Hymn composed in Latin (...), and c^mmo^ly called
Veni Cr^ator; because those are the first words of it. By the Cannons of our
Church it is commanded to be said or sung at the Consecration of Bishops, and
at the Ordination of Ministers, etc. It is therefore here translated sill^^le
for syllable, and in the same kind of measure which it has in the Latin.

Song. 44.
^ COme Holy Ghost, the Maker, come; Take in^ ^ the souls of thine thy place;
Thou whom our^ ^ hearts had being from, Oh, fill them with thy^ ^ heavenly
grace. Thou art that Comfort from^ ^ above, The Highest does by gift impart;
Thou*^ ^ spring of Life, a fire of Love, And the annointing^ ^ Spirit art:^

2
Thou in thy Gifts art manifold,
GODS right hand finger thou art, LORD
The Fathers promise made of old;
Our tongues enriching by the Word.
Oh! give our blinded Senses Light;
Shed Love into each heart of our,
And grant the ^odies feeble-plight,
May be enabled, by thy power.
3
Far from us drive away the Foe,
And let a speedy Peace ensue:
Our Leader also be, that so
We eu^ry danger may eschew.
Let us be taught the blessed Creed
Of ^ather, and of Son, by Thee:
And how from both thou do proceed,
That our belief it still may be.
To Thee, the Father, and the Son;
(Whom past, and present Times adore)
The One in Three, and Three in One,
All glory be for evermore.
Here ends the first part of the Hymns, and Songs of the Church.
THE SECOND PART of the HYMNS and Songs of the CHVRCH, appropriated to the
several Times and Occasions, most obseruable in the Church of ENGLAND.
EVery thing has his season, says the Preacher, Eccl. 3. And Saint Paul
advises, that all things should be done Honestly, in Order, and to
Edification. 1. Cor. 14 Which Counsel the Church religeously ^e^ding (and h^w
by observation of Times, and other circumstances, the memories and capacities
of weak people were the better assisted;) It was provided, that there should
be An^uall Commemorations of the principal Mysteries of our redemption: And
certain particular days we^e de^^cated to that purpose; as nigh as might be
gessed (for the most part) upon those very seesons of the year, in which the
several M^steries were accomplished. And, in^eede, this is not that heath^n^sh
or Idolatrous heeding of Time^, reprehended in Isa^ah 47. Nor such a Jewish or
superstitious obse^uation of Days, and Mouths, and Times, an^ Years, as is
reproved by S Paul. Gal. 4. Nor a ^^lciation f^r idleness, contrary to the
fourth Commandment: But a Christian and warrantable Observation, profitably
ordained, that things might be done in order, that the understanding might be
the better ed^fied: that the memory might be the oftener refreshed; and that the
Devotion might be the more stirred up.

It is true* that we ought to watch every hour: But if the Church had not by
her authority appointed set days and hou^es to keep us aw^ke in, some of us,
would h^^^ly wat^h one hour. And therefore, those who have zeal according to
knowledge, do not only religiously observe ^he Churches appointed Times; but
do by her example voluntarily also appoint unto themselves certain days, an^
hours of the day for Christian exercises. Neither can any m^n suppose this
commendable observation of Feas^s, (neither burdensome by multitude, nor
superstitious by in^it^tion) to b^ an abridgement of Christian liberty, who, as
he ought to do, believes, that the Service of God is perfect freedom. We
persuade not, that one day is more holy then anoth^r in his own nature: But
admonish that those be reuere^tly and Christianly observed, which are upon so
good ground, and with prudent moderation dedicated to the worship of God. For,
it cannot be denied, that even those who are but coldly aff^cted to the
Churches ordinances in this kind, do nevertheless often apprehend the
mystery of Christ's Nativity and Passion, upon the days of commemorating them,
much mo^e feelingly th^n at other times; and that they forget also some other
mysteries altogether, until they are remembered of them by the distinction, and
observation of times used in the Church

These things considered; an^ because there be many, w^^ through ignorance
rather then obstina^y, have neglected the Churches ordinance in this point,
here are added (to those Songs of the Church, which were either taken out of
the Canonical Scripture, or anciently in use) certain other spiritual Songs
and Hymns appropriated to those Days and Occasions which are most obseruable
throughout the year. And before each several Hymn is prefixed a brief
Preface also to declare their use, and the purpose of each Commemoration. That
such, who have heretofore through ignorance contemned the Churches discipline
therein, might behave themselves more reverently hereafter, and learn not to
speak evil of those things they understand not.

Aduent Sunday.
THe Aduent is that for Christmas, which John Baptist was to Christ (^uen a
forerunner for Preparation:) And it is called the Aduent (which signifies
Coming) because the Church did usually from that time until the Nativity
commemorate the several commings of Christ, and instruct the people concerning
them. Which Commings are these* and the like: His Conception, by which he came
into the Virgins womb: His Nativity, by which he came (as it were) further
into the world: His coming to Preach in his own Person: His coming by his
Ministers: His coming to Jerusalem: The coming of the Holy Ghost: His
spiritual coming which he vouchsafes into the heart of every Regenerate
Christian: And finally, that last coming of his, which shall be unto
Judgment, etc. All which Commings are comprehended in these three; his coming
to men, into men, and against men; to men, by his Incarnation; into men, by
Grace; against men, to Judgment.

Song. 45.
Sing this as the 9. Song.
WHen Jesus Christ incarnate was,
To be our Brother then came He:
When into us he comes by grace,
Then his beloved Spouse are we:
When he from Heaven descends again,
To be our Judge returns he then.
2
And then despair will those confound,
Tha^ his first commings naught regard;
And those, who till the Trumpet sound*
Consume their Leasures vnprepard:
Cursed be those pleasures cry they may,
Which drove the thought of this away.
3
The Jews abiected yet remain,
That his first Aduent heeded not;
And those five Virgins knocked in vain,
Who to provide them oil forgot:
But safe and blessed those men are,
Who for his commings do prepare.
4
O let us therefore watch and pray,
His times of visiting to know,
And live so furnished, that we may
With him unto his wedding go:
Yea, though at midnight he should call,
Let us be ready, Lamps, and all.
5
And so provide before that Feast,
Which Christ his coming next does mind,
That He to come, and be a Guest
Within our hearts, may pleasure find;
And we bid welcome with good cheer
That Coming, which so many fear.
6
Oh come, LORD Jesus, come away;
(Yea, though the world it shall deter)
Oh let thy Kingdom come we pray,
Whose coming most too much defer:
And grant us thereof such foresight,
It come not like a Thief by night.
Christmas day.
THis Day is worthily dedicated to be observed, in remembrance of the blessed
Nativity of our Redeemer Jesus Christ: At which time it pleased the Almighty
Father, to send his only be gotten Son into the world for our sakes; and by
an unspeakable union to join in one person God and Man, without confusion of
Natures, or possibility of separation. To express therefore our
thankfulness, and the joy we ought to have in this love of GOD; there has
been anciently, and is yet continued in England (above other Countries) a
neighbourly and plenti^ull hospitality in inuiting, an^ (without inuitation)
receiving unto our well furnished Tables our Tennants, Neighbors, Friends, and
Strangers; to the honor of our Nation, and increase of amity and free-hearted
kindness among us. But, most of all, to the refreshing of the bowels of the
Poor, being the most Christian use of such F^stiuals* Which charitable and
good English ^ustome has of late been seasonably re-aduanced by his Majesty's
gracious care, in commanding our Nobility and Gentry to repai^e (especially at
such times) to their Country Mansions.

Song. 46.
^ A Son the Night before this blessed Morn,^ ^ A troop of Angels unto
Shepherds told,^ ^ Where in a Stable he was poorly borne,^ ^ Whom nor the
earth, nor Heaven of heavens can^ ^ hold. Through Bethlem rung this news at^ ^
their return; Yea, Angels sung, that GOD^ ^ WITH US was borne: And they made^
^ mirth, because we should not mourn.^ CHORUS.^ His love therefore, oh! let us
all confess; and to^ ^ the Sons of men his works express.^

2
This favor Christ vouchsafed for our sake:
To buy us Throanes He in a Manger lay;
Our weakness took, tha^ we his strength might take,
And was disrobed that he might us array:
Our flesh he wore,
Our sin to wear away:
Our curse he bore,
That we escape it may;
And wep^ for us, that we might sing for aye.
His love therefore, oh! let us all confess;
And to the Sons of men his works express.
Song. 47. Another for Christmas day.
Sing this as the 46. Song.
A Song of joy unto the LORD we sing,
And publish forth the favors he has shown:
We sing his praise, from whom all joy does spring,
And tell abroad the wonders he has done;
For such were never since the world begun.
His love therefore, oh! let us all confes^e;
And to the sons of men his works express.
2
As on this Day the Son of God was borne:
The blessed Word was then incarnate made;
The LORD, to be a servant held no scorn;
The Godhead was with humane nature clad;
And flesh a throne above all Angels had.
His love therefore, etc.
3
Our sin and sorrows on himself ^e took,
On us his bliss and goodness to bestow:
To visit Earth, he Heaven a while forsook:
And to advance us high, descended low;
But with the sinful Angels dealt not so.
His love therefore, etc.
4
A Maid conceived, whom Man had never known:
The Fleece was moistened where no rain had been:
A Virgin she remains that had a Son:
The Bush did flame that still remained green;
And this befell, when GOD with us was seen.
His love therefore, etc.
5
For sinful men all this to pass was brought,
As, long before, the Prophets had forespoke:
So, he that first our shame and ruin wrought,
Once bruz^d our heel, but now his Head is broke:
And he has made us whole, who gave that stroke.
His love therefore, etc.
6
The Lamb has played devouring wolves among.
The Morning star of Jacob does appear.
From Ies^^s root our tree of life is sprung,
And all Gods words (in him) fulfilled are:
Yet, we are slack his prayles to declare.
His love therefore, etc.
Circumcision, or Newyeares-Day.
THe Church solemnizeth this Day, commonly called Newyeares-Day, in memorial
of our Saviors Circumcision; that remembering, how when he was but eight d^yes
old he began to smart and shed his blood for us, we might praise him for the
same: and that with due thankfulness considering how easy a Sacrament he
has left us (in sleed of that bloody-one, which the Law enjoined) we might be
provoked to bring forth the fruits of Regeneration.

Song. 48.
Sing this as the 44 Song.
THis Day thy flesh, oh Christ, did bleed,
Marked by the Circumcision-knife;
because the Law for man's misdeed,
Required that earnest of thy life.
Those drops diuin'de that shower of blood,
Which in thine Agony began:
And that great shower foreshewd the flood,
Which from thy side the next day ran.
2
Then, through that milder Sacrament,
Succeeding this, thy grace inspire;
Yea, let thy smart make us repent,
And circumcized hearts desire.
For, he that either is baptized,
Or circumciz'd in flesh alone,
Is but as an vncircumciz'd,
Or as an vnbaptized-one.
3
The year anew we now begin,
And outward gifts received have we;
Renew us also LORD within,
And make us new-yeares-gifts for thee:
Yea, let us with the passed year,
Our old affections cast away;
That we new-creatures may appear,
And to redeem the Time assay.
Twelfe-day, or the Epiphanie.
TWelfeday, otherwise called the Epiphany, or the day of Manifestation, is
celebrated by the Church to the praise of God; and in memorial of that blessed
and admirable discovery of our Saviors birth, which was vouchsafed unto the
Gentiles shortly after it came to pass. For as the Shepherds of the Jews
were warned thereof, and directed to the place by an Angel from Heaven. So the
Magi^ of the Gentiles received the same particular notice of it by a Star in
the East, that both Jews and Gentiles might be left inexcusable, if they came
not to his worship. This day is observed also in commemoration of our Saviors
Baptism, and of his first miracle in Canaan, by which he was likewise
manifested to be the Son of God.

Song. 49.
Sing this as the 9. Song.
THat so thy blessed birth, oh Christ,
Might through the world be spread about,
Thy Star appeared in the East,
Whereby the Gentiles found thee out;
And offering thee Myrrh* Incense, Gold,
Thy threefold Office did unfold.
2
Sweet Jesus, let that Star of thine,
Thy Grace, which guides to find out thee,
Within our hearts for ever shine,
That thou of us found out may be:
And thou shall be our King therefore,
Our Priest, and Prophet evermore.
3
Tears that from true repentance drop,
Instead of Myrrh present will we:
For Incense we will offer up
Our Prayers, and Praises unto Thee;
And bring for ^old each pious-deed,
Which does from sauing-faith proceed.
4
And as those Wisemen never went,
To visit Herod any more:
So, finding thee, we will repent
Our courses follow^d heretofore;
And, that we homeward may retire,
The Way by Thee we will enquire.
The Purification of S. Marie the Virgin.
ACcording to the time appointed in the Law of Moses, the blessed Virgin S.
Marie reckoned the days of Purification, which were to be observed after the
birth of a male Child; And then, as the Law commanded, presented both her
Son, and her appointed Offering in the Temple. Partly therefore in
commemoration of that her true obedience to the Law; and partly to memorize
that presentation of our Redeemer (which was performed by his blessed Mother at
her Purification) this Anniuersary is worthily observed.

Song. 50.
Sing this as the 9. Song.
NO doubt but she that had the grace,
Thee in her womb, oh Christ, to bear,
And did all woman-kinde surpass,
Was hallowed by thy being there;
And where the fruit so holy was,
The Birth could no pollution cause.
2
Yet in obedience to thy Law,
Her purifying-Rites were done,
That we might learn to stand in awe,
How from thine ordinance we run:
For, if we disobedient be,
Unpuri^^ed Souls have we.
3
Oh keep us, LORD, from thinking vain,
What by thy word thou shall command,
Let us be sparing to complain,
On what we do not understand;
And guide thy Church, that she may still,
Command according to thy will.
4
Uouchsafe, that with one ioynt-consent,
We may thy praises ever sing;
Preserve thy seamelesse-Robe vnrent,
For which so many, Lots do fling;
And grant that being purifide
From sin, we may in love abide.
5
Moreover, as thy Mother went,
(That holy and thrice-blessed Maid)
Thee in thy Temple to present,
With perfect humane flesh arrayd:
So, let us offered up to Thee,
Replenisht with thy spirit be.
6
Yea, let thy Church our Mother dear,
(Within whose womb newborn we be)
Before thee at her time appear,
To give her Children up to Thee;
And take for purified things
Her, and that offering which she brings.
The first day of Lent.
THe observation of Lent is a profitable institution of the Church, not
abridging the Christian liberty of meats, but intended for a means to help to
set the spirit at liberty from the flesh. And therefore this Fast consists
not altogether in a formal forbearance of this or that food, but in a true
mortification of the body: For abstinence from flesh only (wherein also we
ought to be obedient to the higher Powers,) more tends to the increase of
plenty and well-ordering things in the Commonwealth, then to a spiritual
Discipline. Because it is apparent we may ouer-pamper our selves as well with
what is permitted as with what is forbidden; this commendable observation
(which every man ought to observe so far forth as he shall be able, and his
spiritual necessity requires) was appointed; partly to commemorate our
Saviors miraculous f^sting, whereby he satisfied for the gluttony of our first
Parents; and (at this season) partly to cool our wanton blood, which at this
time of the year is aptest to be e^flamed with evil concupiscences; and
partly also* to prepare us the better both to meditate the passion of our
Savior, which is always commemorated about the end of Lent, and to fit us to
receive the blessed Sacrament of his Last Supper, to our greater comfort.

Song. 51.
Sing this as the.44 Song.
THy wondrous Fastin^ to record,
And our rebellious flesh to tame,
A holy Fast to thee, oh LORD,
We have intended in thy Name:
Oh sanctify it, we thee pray,
That we may thereby honor Thee;
And so dispose us, that it may
To our advantage al^o be.
2
Let us not grudgingly abstain,
Nor secretly the gluttons play;
Nor openly for glory vain,
Thy Churches ordinance obey:
But let us fast, as thou have taught,
Thy Rule observing in each part,
With such intentions as we ought,
And with true singleness of heart.
3
So thou shall our Devotions bless,
And make this holy Discipline;
A means that longing to suppress,
Which keeps our Will so cross to thine:
And though our stricktest fastings fail
To purchase of themselves thy grace;
Yet, they to make for our avail,
(By thy deseruings) shall have place.
4
True Fasting helpful often has been,
The wanton flesh to mortify;
But takes not off the guilt of sin,
Nor can we merit ought thereby:
It is thine Abstinence, or none,
Which merit favor for us must;
For, when our glorioust works are done,
We perish, if in them we trust.
The Annuntiation of Marie.
THe Church has dedicated this Day, to memorize the Annuntiation of the
blessed Virgin S. Marie, who was about this time of the year saluted by the
Angel Gabriel; and we ought to sanctify it with praising God for that
inexpressible Mystery of our Saviors Conception, which was the happy news
the holy Angel brought unto his Mother. Nothing in the world is more worthy to
be spoken of then this Favor, and yet nothing more unspeakable.

Song. 52.
Sing this as the 44. Song.
OUr hearts, oh blessed GOD, incline,
Thy true affection to embrace;
And that humility of thi^^,
Which for our sakes vouchsafed was,
Thy Goodness teach us to put on,
As with our Nature thou were clad;
And so to mind what thou have done,
That we may praise thee, and be glad.
2
For, thou not only held'st it meet,
To send an Angel from above,
An humble Maid on earth to greet,
And bring the Message of thy Love:
But laying (as it were) aside,
Those Glories none can comprehend,
(Nor any mortal eyes abide)
Into her womb thou did descend.
3
Bestow thou also thy respect
On our despis'de and low degree;
And LORD, oh, do not us neglect,
Though worthy of contempt we be:
But through thy Messengers prepare,
And hallow so our hearts we pray,
That thou conceived being there,
The fruits of faith bring forth we may.
Palme-Sunday.
PAlme-Sunday is so called, by reason it was upon that day, in which Jesus
riding to Jerusalem (according to the Prophets) the people strewed the way for
him with their Garments, and the branches of the Palm Tree. And, indeed, it
was in a manner the day of proclaiming him King, as the Friday following was
the day of his Coronation. Worthily therefore is it commemorated: And many
excellent mysteries are thereby brought to remembrance, which, but for this
Anniuersary, most would forget, and many, perhaps, never come to know.

Song. 53.
Sing this as the 3. Song.
WHen Jesus to Jerusalem,
(And there to suffer) rode,
The people all the way for him
With Palm and Garments strowde:
And though he did f^^l meekely ^ide,
And poorly on an Ass,
Hosanna to the King they cride,
As he along did pass.
2
His glory, and his royal right,
Even by a power divine)
As if in wordly pompes despite,
Through poverty did shine;
And though the greater sort did frown,
He exerciz^d his power,
Till he himself did lay it down,
At his appointed hour.
3
Possession of his House he got,
The Merchants thence expelled;
And, though the Priests were mad thereat,
His Lectures there he held.
Oh! how should any be so dull,
To doubt who this might be?
When they did things so wonderful,
And works so mighty see.
4
LORD, when to us thou drawest nigh,
Instruct us thee to know;
And to receive thee joyfully,
How mean so ere in show:
Yea, though the rich and worldly-wise,
When we thy praises sing,
Both Thee, and us, therefore despise,
Be thou approved our King.
Thursday before Easter.
AS upon this Day our blessed Savior, eating the Passover with his Disciples,
instituted the blessed Sacrament of his Last Supper. Afterward he washed their
feet; prayed for them, and for the faithful generation; instructed them;
confuted them; warned them of what should come to pass, both concerning
themselves, and his own death and resurrection; promised to send them a
Comforter, and expressed many other excellent things for the confirmation of
their faith. Then departing to a Garden, he praying, fell into his most bitter
Agony, which having overcome, he was that night betrayed, and forsaken of all
his Disciples. In commemoration of which passages the Church holds this yearly
Assembly, that our pious affections toward our Redeemer may be stirred up, to
his glory, and our comfort.

Song. 54.
Sing this as the 9. Song.
A Holy Sacrament this Day
To us thou did, oh LORD, bequeath;
That by the same preserve we may,
A blessed memorial of thy Death;
Whereof, oh, let us so partake,
We may with Thee one body make.
2
Thy Holy-Supper being done,
(The last which thou vouchsafedst here)
By Thee the feet of every one
Of thy Disciples washed were;
To which Humility of thine,
Our hauty minds do thou incline.
3
The rest of that Day thou did use,
To pray, to comfort, and advise:
None might (when thou were gone) abuse
Thy Friends, or make of them a prize;
Yet, when thy pleasure thou had said,
By one of thine thou were betrayed.
4
And lo, that night they all did fly,
Who sat so kindly by thy side;
Even he, that for thy love would dye,
With oaths, and curses, thee denide;
Which to thy soul more nigh did go,
Then all the wrongs thy Foes could do.
5
Sweet Jesus teach us to conceive,
How near unto thy heart it struck,
When thy Beloved thee did leave,
And thou did back upon him look;
We may hereafter nigh thee keep,
And for our past denials weep.
6
Yea, let each passage of this Day.
Within our hearts be graven so,
That mind them we for ever may
And still thy promise trust unto:
So our affections shall to thee,
In life, and death unchanged be.
Friday before Easter.
THis Day we commemorate the insufferable Passion of Jesus Christ, our blessed
Redeemer; who was at this season of the year despightfully crucified by
Pilate, and the Jews. Every day we ought seriously to think upon it by our
selves: But this day we ought to meet about it in the public Assemblies, that
we might provoke each other to compunction of heart; to renew the memory of
it; and to move those that have not yet taken notice thereof, to come along
with us to hear the story of his vnmatchlesse sorrow, who for the love of us
took upon himself those punishments which our wickedness deserned.

Song. 55.
Sing this as the 24 Song.
YOu that like heedlesse Strangers pass along,
As if naught here concerned you to day;
Draw nigh, and hear the saddest Passion song,
That ever you did meet with in your way:
So sad a Story never was told before,
Nor shall there be she like for evermore.
2
The greatest King that ever wore a Crown,
More then the basest Vassaile was abus'de;
The truest Lover that was ever known,
By them he loved was most unkindly vs'de:
And ^e that lived from all transgressions clear,
Was plagued for all the sins that ever were.
3
Even They, in pity of whose fall he wept,
W^ought for his ruin, whilst he sought their good;
And watchet for him, when they should have slept,
That they might quench their malice in his blood:
Yet (when their bonds from him he could have thrown)
To save their lives he daign^d to lose his own.
4
Those, in whose hearts compassion should have been,
Insulted o^re his poor afflicted soul;
And those that nothing ill in him had seen,
(As guilty) him accus d of treason soul:
Nay, him (that never had one idle thought)
They for blaspheming unto Judgment brought.
5
Where, some to ask him vain demands begin;
And some to make a sport with him devise:
Some at his answers and behavior grin;
And some do spit their filth into his eyes:
Some give him blows, some mock, and some revile;
And he (good heart) sits quiet all the while.
6
Oh, that, where such a throng of men should be,
No heart was found so gentle to relent!
And that so good and meek a Lamb as He,
Should be so vs^de, and yet no tear be spent!
Sure, when once malice ^^ls the heart of man,
Nor stone, nor steel can be so hardened than.
7
For, after this, his clothes from him they stripped,
And then, as if some Slave this LORD had been,
With cruel rods and scourges him they whipped,
Till wounds were over all his body seen:
In purple clad, and crowned too with thorn,
They set him forth, and honored him in scorn.
8
And, when they saw him in so sad a plight,
As might have made a flintie heart to bleed,
They not a whit recanted at the sight;
But in their hellish fury did proceed:
Away with him; Away with him they said;
And Crucify him, Crucify him, Cryde.
9
A Cross of wood, that huge, and heavy was,
Upon his bloody shoulders next they lay;
Which onward to his Execution-place
He carryd, till he fainted in the way:
And, when he thither weak and tired came;
To give him rest they nayld him to the same.
10
Oh! could we but the thousand part relate,
Of those Afflictions, which they made him bear,
Our hearts with passion would dissolve thereat,
And we should sit and weep for ever here;
Nor should we glad again hereafter be,
But that we hope in glory him to see.
11
For, while upon the Cross he payned hung,
And was with soul tormentings also grieved;
(Far more, then can be told by any tongue,
Or in the hearts of mortals be conceau'd)
Those, for whose sake he underwent such pain,
Reioyc'd thereat, and held him in disdain.
12
One offered to him vinegar, and gall:
A second did his pious works deride:
To dicing for his Robes did others fall;
And many mocked him when to GOD he cried.
Yet, he as they his pain still more procured,
Still loved, and for their good the more endured.
13
But, though his matchless Love immortal were,
It was a mortal Body he had on,
That could no more then mortal Bodies bear;
Their malice therefore did prevail thereon:
And lo, their utmost fury having tri'de,
This Lamb of God gave up the ghost, and died.
14
Whose Death, though cruel unrelenting Man
Could view, without bewailing, or affright;
The Sun grew dark, the Earth to quake began,
The Temple-vaile did rend asunder quite:
Yea, hardest Rocks there wi^h in pieces brake,
And graves did open, and the Dead awake.
15
Oh therefore, let us all that present be,
This Innocent with moved souls embrace;
For, this was our Redeemer, this was he,
Who thus for our unkindness used was:
Even He, the cursed Jews and Pilate slew,
Is he alone, of whom all this is true.
16
Our sins of spite were part of those that day,
Whose cruel whips and thorns did make him smart;
Our Lusts were those that tyr'de him in the way;
Our want of love was that which pierced his heart:
And still when we forget, or slight his pain,
We crucify and torture him again.
Easter day.
THis Day is solemnized in memorial of our Saviors blessed Resurrection from
the dead; upon which (as the members with their head) the Church began her
triumph over Sin, Death, and the Devil: And has therefore appointed, that
to record this mystery, and to stir up thankful reioycings in our hearts,
there should be an annual Commemoration thereof; That we might in charitable
Feasts and Christian glee, express the joy of our hearts to the glory of God,
to the comfort of our brethren, to the increase of charity one toward another,
and to the confirmation of a true joy in our selves.

Song. 56.
Sing this as the 44. Song.
THis is the Day the LORD has made,
And therein joyful we will be;
For, from the black infernal shade,
In triumph back return'de is He:
The snares of Satan, and of Death,
He has victoriously undone,
And fast in chains he bound them has,
His triumph to attend upon.
2
The Grave, which all men did detest,
And held a dungeon full of fear,
Is now become a Bed of rest,
And no such terrors find we there.
For, Jesus Christ has took away
The horror of that loathed Pit;
Even ever since that glorious day,
In which himself came out of it.
3
His Mockings, and his bitter smarts,
He to our praise and ease does turn,
And all things to our joy conuarts,
Which he with heavy heart has borne:
His broken flesh is now our food,
His blood he shed, is ever since,
That drink, which does our souls most good,
And that which shall our foulness cleanse.
4
Those wo^nds so deep, and torn so wide,
As in a Rock our shelters are*
And that they pierced through his side,
Is made a Doue-hole for his Dear;
Yea, now we know, as was foretold,
His flesh did no corruption le^;
And that Hell wanted strength to hold
So strong, and one so blessed as He.
5
Oh let us praise his Name therefore,
(Who thus the vpperhand has woune)
For, we had else, for evermore,
Been lost, and utterly undone:
Whereas this Favor dot^ allow,
That we with boldness thus may sing;
Oh Hell, where is thy conquest now?
And thou (oh Death) where is thy sting?
Ascension day.
AFter Jesus Christ was risen from the dead, and had many times showed himself
unto his Disciples, he was lifted from among them, and they beheld him
^scending up into heaven, till a cloud took him out of their sight: In memory
of which Ascension, and to praise God for so exalting the humane Nature to his
own glory, and our adu^ntage; the Church worthily celebrated this Day, and
has commended the observation thereof to her Children.

Song. 57.
Sing this as the 3. Song.
TO GOD, with heart and cheerful voice,
A Triumph-Song we sing;
And with true thankful hearts rejoice,
In our Almighty King;
Yea, to his glory we record,
(Who were but dust and clay)
What honor he did us afford,
On his Ascending day.
2
The Humane Nature, which of late,
Beneath the Angels was;
Now raised from that meaner state,
Above them has a place.
And at man's feet all Creatures bow,
Which through the whole world be;
For, at GODS right hand throaned now,
In glory sits He.
3
Our LORD, and Brother, who has on
Such flesh, as this we wear;
Before us unto heaven is gone,
To get us places there:
Captivity was captiu^d then,
And he does from above
Send ghostly presents down to men,
For tokens of his love.
4
Each Door and everlasting Gate,
To him has lifted bin;
And in a glorious wise thereat,
Our King is entered in.
Whom if to follow we regard,
With ease we safely may;
For he has all the means prepared,
And made an open way.
5
Then follow, follow on a pace,
And let us not forgo
Our Captain, till we win the place,
That he has scalde unto:
And for his honor, let our voice
A shoute so hearty make,
The Heau^ns may at our mirth rejoice,
And Earth, and Hell may shake.
Pentecost, or Whitsunday.
AFter our Savior was ascended, the fiftieth day of his Resurrection, and just
at the Jews Feast of Pentecost, the Holy Ghost (our promised Comforter) was
sent down upon the Disciples assembled in Jerusalem, appearing in a visible
form, and miraculously filling them with all manner of spiritual gifts, and
knowledge, tending to the divine work they had in hand: Whereby, they being
formerly weak, and simple men, were immediately enabled to resist all the
powers of the kingdom of Darkness, and to lay those strong foundations, upon
which the Catholic Church now stands, both to the Glory of GOD, and our
safety. In remembrance therefore of that great miraculous mystery this Day is
solemnized.

Song. 58.
Sing this as the 3. Song.
EXceeding faithful in thy word,
And just in all thy ways,
We do acknowledge thee, oh LORD,
And therefore give thee praise:
For, as thy promise thou did pass,
(Before thou went away)
Sent down thy Holy-Spirit was,
At his appointed day.
2
While thy Disciples in thy Name,
Together did retire,
The Holy Ghost upon them came,
In Cloven tongues of fire,
That in their calling they might be
Confirmed from above,
As thou were, when he came on thee,
Descending like a Dove.
3
Whereby those men that simple were,
And fearful till that hour.
Had knowledge at an instant there,
And boldness armed with power,
Receiving gifts so manifold,
That (since the world begun)
A wonder seldom has been told,
That could exceed this one.
4
Now also, blessed Spirit, come;
Unto our Souls appear.
And of thy Graces shower thou some
On this Assembly here:
To us thy Doue-like meekness ^^nd,
That humble we may be,
And on thy silver wings ascend,
Our Savior Christ to see.
5
Oh, let thy Cloven tongues, we pray.
So rest on us again,
That both thy truth confess we may,
And teach it other men.
Moreover, let thy heavenly ^ire
(Enflamed from above)
Burn up in us each vain desire,
And warm our hearts with love.
6
Uouchsafe thou likewise to bestow
On us thy sacred Peace,
We stronger may in union grow,
And in debates decrease:
Which ^^ace though many yet contemn,
Reformed let them be,
That we may (LORD) have part in them,
And they have part in thee.
Trinity Sunday.
AFter Arrius, and other heret^^kes had bro^ched their damnable fancies,
whereby the faith of many concerning the mystery of the blessed Trinity was
s^aken, diverse good men labored in the rooting out of those p^stilent
opinions: And it was agreed upon by the Church, that some particular Sunday in
the year should be dedicated to the memory of the holy Trinity, and called
Trinitie-Sunday, that the Name might give the people ^ccasion to enquire after
the Mystery And moreover, (that the Pastor of each several Congregation might
be yearly remembered to treat thereof, as necessity required) certain portions
of the holy Scripture, proper to that end, were appointed to be read publicly
that Day. In some Countries they observed this Institution on the Sunday next
before the Aduent; and in other places the Sunday following Whitsunday, as in
the Church of England.

Song. 59.
Sing this as the 9. Song.
THose, oh, thrice holy Three in one,
Who ^e^ke thy Nature to explain,
By rules to humane Reason known,
Shall find their labor all in vain;
And in a shell they may intend,
The Sea, as well, to comprehend.
2
What therefore no man can conceive,
Let us not curious be to know;
But, when thou bid^st us to believe,
Let us obey, Let Reason go:
Faith's objects true, and surer be,
Then those that Reasons eyes do see.
3
Yet, as by looking on the Sun,
(Though to his substance we are blind)
And by the course we see him run,
Some Notions we of him may find:
So, what thy Brightness does conceal,
Thy word, and works in part reveal.
4
Most glorious Essence, we confess
In Thee (whom by our faith we view)
Three Persons, neither more nor less,
Whose workings them distinctly show:
And sure we are, those persons Three
Make but one GOD, and thou art He.
5
The Sun a Motion has we know,
Which Motion does beget us Light;
The Heat proceeds from those two,
And each does proper acts delight:
The Motion draws out Time a line,
The Heat does warm, the Light does shine.
6
Yet, though this Motion* Light, and Hea^e,
Distinctly by themselves we take;
Each in the other has his seat,
And but one Sun we see they make:
For what^o^ere the One will do,
He works it with the other two.
7
So, in the Godhead there is knit
A wondrous threefold True-loue-knot,
And perfect Union fastens it,
Though flesh and blood perceive it not;
And what each Person does alone,
By all the Trinity is done.
8
Their Work they jointly do pursue,
Though they their Offices divide;
And each one by himself has due
His proper Attributes beside:
But one in Substance they are still,
In Virtue one, and one in Will.
9
Eternal all the Persons be,
And yet ^ternall there^s but One;
So likewise Infinite all three,
Yet Infinite but One alone:
And neither Person aught does miss,
That of the God-heads essence is,
10
In Unity and Trinity,
Thus, oh Creator, we adore
Thy euer-praised Deity,
And thee confess for evermore,
One Father, one begotten Son,
One Holy Ghost, in Godhead one.
Sunday in general.
Sunday is our natural appellation, the Sabbath the Hebrew term, and the
Lords day the Christian Name, whereby we entitle Gods Seventh day; and (if
wilful affectation be avoided) either Name is allowable. It is a portion of
Time sanctified by God, immediately after the Worlds creation, and by the
divine Law dedicated to be perpetually observed to the honor of our Creator:
And though some things accidentally pertinent to the observation thereof, have
bee^e changed; yet that which is essential thereunto is for ever immutable Our
Savior has by his Resurrection hallowed for us that which we now obse^ue
instead of the Jewish Sabbath; which being the day whereon he rested in the
Grave, the observation thereof, and of all other Jewish Ceremonies was buried
with him: because they were to continue but till the accomplishment of those
things whereof they were Types. This is that day wherein our Redeemer began (as
it were) his Eternal rest, after he had finished the work of our Reparation
and conquered death, the last that was to be destroyed. This Day we ought
therefore to sanctify, according to Gods first institution: Not Iewishly, that
is, by a strict or mere outward abstaining from the servile works of the body
only, according to the letter: But Christianly; to wit, in spirit and truth,
both inwardly, and outwardly, so recreating our bodies and souls, that we may
with a sanctified pleasure, (and as much as may be without weariness) spend
that day to the glory of God, according to his command, and the Churches
direction; even to the use of bodily labors and exercises, whenever (without
respect to sensual, or covetous ends) a rectified conscience shall persuade
us, that the honor of God, the charity we owe to our Neighbors, or an unfeigned
necessity requires them to be done.

Song. 60.
Sing this as the 44. Song.
SIx days, oh LORD, the world to make,
And set all Creatures in array,
Was all the lea^ure thou would take,
And then did^st rest the seventh day:
That day thou therefor hallowed have,
And ri^htly, by a law divine
(Which till the end of time shall last)
The seventh part of Time is thine.
2
Then, teach us willingly to give
The tribute of our days to Thee;
By whom we new both move, and live,
And have attain^d to what we be.
For, of that Rest, which by thy Word
Thou have been pleased to enjoin,
The profit all is ours* oh L^R^,
And but the praise alone is thine.
3
Oh, therefore let us not consent,
To rob thee of thy Sabbath day;
Nor rest with carnal Rest content,
But sanctify it all w^ may*
Yea, grant that we from sinful strife,
And all those works thou do detest,
May keep a Sabbath all our life,
And enter thy Eternal rest.
S. Andrews day.
THe holy Church celebrateth this day to glorify God for that favor which he
vouchs^fed unto her by the calling and ministry of blessed Andrew his Apostle;
and, that by the remembrance of his readiness to follo^, and preach Christ,
both the honorable and Christian memorial, due to an Apostle, might be
preserved, and we stirred up al^o to the imitation of his forwardness in our
several callings, advancing Gods honor and Gospel: In which general sense
every the meanest Christian has a kind of Apostleship, to build up (not only
in himself, but in others also) the Temple of the living God, and to increase
and establish the kingdom of Christ.

Song. 61.
Sing this as the 44. Song.
AS blessed Andrew on a day,
By fishing did his living earne,
Christ cam^, and called him away,
That he to fish for men might learn;
And no delay thereat he made,
Nor questions framed of his intent,
But quite forsaking all he had,
Along with him, that called, he went.
2
Oh, that we could so ready be,
To follow Christ when he does call!
And that we could forsake, as he,
Those N^ts, that we are snared withal:
Or would this Fisherman of men,
(Who set by all he had so light)
By his obedience showed then,
(And his example) win us might.
3
But Precepts and Examples fail,
Till thou thy grace, LORD, add thereto;
Oh grant it, and we shall prevail,
In whatso'ere thou bidd'st us do:
Yea, we shall then that bliss conceive,
Which in thy service we may find;
And for thy sake be glad to leave
Our Nets, and all we have behind.
S. Thomas day.
THis Day was set apart by the Church, that it might be sanctified to the
praise of God for his holy Apostle S. Thomas, by whose preaching the Christian
generation was multiplied: and that we might strengthen the belief we have of
our Saviors undeniable Resurrection, by taking an yearly occasion to refresh
our memories with that part of the Evangelical sto^ie, which mentions both
this Apostles doubting, and the confirmation of his faith by a sensible
demonstration.

Song. 62.
Sing this as the 9. Song.
WHen Christ was risen from the dead,
And Thomas of the same was told,
He would not credit it, he sed,
Though he himself should him^ behold,
Till he his wounded hands had eyde,
And th^ust his fingers in his side.
2
Which trial he did undertake,
And Christ his frailty did permit,
By his distrusting sure to make
Such others, as might doubt of it:
So we had right, and he no wrong;
For by his weakness both are strong.
3
Oh blessed GOD, how wise thou art!
And how confoundest thou thy Foes!
Who their temptations do conuart,
To work those ends which they oppose:
When Satan seeks our faith to shake,
The firmer he the same does make.
4
Thus whatso'ere he tempts us to,
His disadvantage let it be;
Yea, make those very sins we do,
The means to bring us nearer thee:
Yet let us not to ill consent,
Though colored with a good intent.
S. Stephens day.
STephen was one of the seven Deacons, mentioned Acts 6. and the first Martyr
of Jesus Christ; whose Truth having powerfully maintained by dispute, he
constantly sealed it with his blood. The Church therefore has appointed this
Anniuersarie in remembrance thereof, that so God might perpetually be glorified
for the same; and the story of his Martyrdom the oftne^ mentioned, to the
encouragement and direction of other men in their Trials.

Song. 63.
Sing this as the 4 Song.
LORD, with what zeal did thy first Martyr breath
Thy blessed Truth, to such as him withstood!
With what stout mind embraced he his death!
A holy witness sealing with his blood!
The praise is thine, that him so strong did make,
And blessed is he, that dyed for thy sake.
2
Unquenched love in him appeared to be,
When for his murderous Foes he did entreat:
A piercing eye made bright by faith had he;
For he beheld thee in thy Glory set;
And so unmoved his pa^ience he did keep,
He di^de, as if he had but feign as^eepe.
3
Our lukewarm hearts with his hot Zeal inflame,
So Constant, and so Loving* let us be;
So let us living glorify thy Name;
So let us dying ^i^e our eyes on Thee:
And ^hen the ^leepe of Death shall us o^retake,
With him to life eternal us awake.
S. John the Evangelist.
THis Day is celebrated by the Church, to praise God for his blessed
Evangelist, and beloved Disciple Saint John, who has been an admirable
instrument of his glory, and the Churches instruction; For, the Mystery of the
sacred Trinity, and the Divinity of Christ, is by him most plainly expressed in
his writings, among many other great Mysteries and excellent Doctrines
concerning our Redemption; for which we are bound particularly to honor God,
and worthily stirred up thereunto by this annual Commemoration.

Song. 64.
Sing this as the 44. Song.
TEach us by his example, LORD,
For whom we honor thee to Day,
And grant his witness of thy Word,
Thy Church enlighten ever may:
And, as beloved, oh Christ, he was,
And therefore leaned on thy breast;
So let us also in thy grace,
And on thy sacred bosom rest.
2
Into us breath that Life divine,
Whose Testimony he intends;
About us cause thy Light to shine,
That which no Da^knesse comprehends:
And let that euer-blessed Word,
Which all things did create of naught,
Anew create us now, oh LORD,
Whose ruin sin has almost wrought.
3
Thy holy Faith we do profess,
Us to thy Fellowship receive;
Our Sins ^e heartily confess,
Thy Pardon therefore let us have:
And, as to us thy Servant gives,
Occasion thus to honor Thee*
So also let our words and lives,
As lights and guides, to others be.
Innocents Day.
KIng Herod understanding that a king of the Jews was borne in Bethlem-Iuda;
(and fearing that by him he might be dispossessed) he murdered all the young
infants of that Circuit, in hope among them to have slain Jesus Christ: But he
was ^ent into Egypt by Gods special ap^ointment, and so the Ty^ants fury
proved vain. In hono^r therefore of the Almighties providence, the Church
celebrateth this Day; To put us in mind also, how vainly the Devil and his
members rage against Gods decree; and, that the cruel slaughter of those poor
Infants may never be forgotten; Which, in a large sense, may be called a
Marty^dome; As in the generality of the cause (being for Christ) and in the
passion of the body* though not in the intention of the mind: And so in proper
sense does S. Stephen hold still the place of the first Captain of that Band.

Song. 65.
Sing this as the 44. Song. 1
THat rage whereof the Psalm does say,
Why are the G^ntiles grown so mad?
Appeard in part upon that day,
When Herod slain the Infants had;
Yet (as it says they stormd in vain;
(Though many Innocents they slew)
For, Christ they purposd to have slain,
Who all their Counsels overthrew.
2
Thus still vouchsafe thou to res^raine
All Tyrants, LORD, pursuing Thee;
Thus, let our vast desires be slain;
That thou may living in us be:
So, whilst we shall enjoy our breath,
We of thy love our Songs will frame;
And with those Innocents, our death
Shall also glorify thy Name.
3
In Type those Many di^de for One;
That One for many more was slain:
And what they felt in Act alone,
He did in will, and Act sustain.
LORD grant, that what thou have decreed.
In Will, and Act, we may fulfill;
And, though we reach not to the Deed,
From us, oh GOD, accept the Will.
The conversion of S. Paul.
SAint Paul, as appears, Acts 9. having been a great persecutor of the
Christian faith before his conversion, was extraordinarily called to embrace
the same profession; even as he proceeded in a Journey purposely undertaken to
suppress the Truth: And so, of a Woolfe became afterward a Pastor, and the
most laborious Preacher of Jesus Christ: Which mercy of GOD that we may still
remember it to the praise of his name, and our own comfort, the Church has
appointed an yearly Commemoration thereof.

Song. 66.
Sing this as the 44. Song.
A Blessed Conue^sion, and a strange,
Was that, when Saul a Paul became;
And, LORD, for making such a change,
We praise and glorify thy Name:
For whilst he went from place to place,
To persecute thy Truth and Thee;
(And running to perdition was)
By powerful grace called back was he.
2
When from thy Truth we go astray.
(Or wrong it through our blinded zeal)
Oh come, and stop us in the way,
And then thy Will to us reu^ale;
That Brightness show us from above,
Which proves the sensual eyesight blind;
And from our eyes those Scales remove,
That hinder us thy way to find.
3
And as thy blessed servant Paul,
When he a Convert once became,
Exceeded thy Apostle^ all,
In painful preaching of thy Name:
So grant that those who have in Sin
Exceeded others heretofore,
The start of them in Faith may win,
Love, serve, and honor thee the more.
S. Matthias.
MAtthias was the Disciple which was chosen in the roo^e of Judas Iscariot; And
his anniuersary is commanded to be observed, that it might give us continual
occasion to praise God for his Justice and Favor: For his Justice showed in
discoue^ing, and not sparing Judas the traytou^, abusing his Apostleship. For
his Favor, declared in elec^ing Matthias a faithful Pastor of the Church.
Moreover, the remembrance of diverse other Mysteries are renewed by the
observation of this Day. And by taking occasion to read publicly the Story
of Judas his Apostacy, men are that day put in mind, to consider what
Judgments hang over their heads, who shall abuse the divine callings, etc.

Song. 67.
^ WHen one among the Twelve there was,^ ^ That did thy Grace abuse; Thou
left^st him,^ ^ LORD, and in his place, did just Matthias choose:^

So, if a Traitor do remain
Within thy Church to day;
To grant him true repentance daigne;
Or cast him out, we pray.
2
Though horned like the Lamb he show,
Or Sheepe-like clad he be,
Let us his Dragon language know,
And Wooluish nature see;
Yea, cause the Lo^ to fall on those,
The charge of thine to take,
That shall their Actions well dispose,
And conscience of them make.
3
Let us moreover mind his fall,
Whose room Matthias got;
So to believe, and fear withal,
That we forsake thee not:
For, Titles, be they never so high,
Or great, or sacred Place,
Can no man's Person sanctify,
Without thy special grace.
Saint Marks Day.
SAint Mark, being one of the four blessed Evangelists, by whose pen the
Gospel of Jesus Christ was recorded; this day is purposely appointed, to
praise God for those glad tidings he brought, and that we might honor him
also with such a Christian Memorial, as becomes the Ambassador of so great
a King as our Redeemer: Which civil honor, due to the Saints of God, it is
hoped none will deny them; nor conceive such Institutions superstitious, or to
have been purposed to an Idolatrous end.

Song. 68.
Sing this as the 44. Song.
FOr those blessed Penmen of thy Word,
Who have thy holy Gospel writ,
We praise and honor Thee, oh LORD,
And our belief we build on it:
Those happy Tidings which it brings,
With joyful hearts we do embrace,
And prize, above all other things,
That precious Token of thy grace.
2
To purchase what we hope thereby,
Our utmost wealth we will bestow;
Yea, we our pleasures will deny,
And let our lives, and honors go:
And, whomsoe're it comes from,
No other Gospel we will hear;
No, though an Angel down should come
From heaven, we would not give him ear.
3
Our Resolutions, LORD, ar^ such,
But in performance ^eake are we;
And the Deceauers craft is much;
Our Second therefore, thou must be:
So we assuredly shall know,
When any Doctrines we receive,
If they agreeing be, or no,
To those, which we professed have.
S. Philip and Jacob.
THis Day is celebrated to the honor of God, and the Christian memorial of
the two blessed Apostles, Philip and Jacob: At which time the Church takes
occasion to offer to our remembrance such Mysteries, as Christ delivered unto
them, that we might the oftener consider them, receive fu^ther instruction
concerning them, and praise God, both for such his favors, and for those
instruments of his glory.

Song. 69.
Sing this as the 3. Song.
TO thy Apostles thou have taught,
What they, oh Christ, should do;
And those things which believe they ought,
Of thee they learned to:
And that which thou to them have shown,
Has been disposed thus;
They unto others made it known,
And those have told it us.
2
With them we do confess and say,
(What shall not be denide)
Thou art the Truth, the Life, the Way,
And we in thee will bide:
By thee the Father we have known,
Whom thou descendedst from;
And unto him, by thee alone,
We have our hope to come,
3
For, thou to Philip did impart,
(Which our belief shall be)
That thou within the Father art,
And, that he is in Thee;
And saydst, what ever in thy Name
We should with faith require,
Thou would give ear unto the same,
And grant us our desire.
4
Of thee, oh LORD, we therefore crave,
(Which thou will daigne, we know)
The good Belief which now we have,
We never may forgo;
And that thy sacred Truth, which we
Thy Word have learned from,
From Age to Age derived may be,
Until thy Kingdom come.
S. Barnabas day.
THis Day is solemnized in commemoration of Saint Barnabas, a faithful
Disciple of Jesus Christ; and to honor God for the benefit vouchsafed to the
Church by his Ministry: For he was a good man, full of the Holy Ghost, and of
faith, as S. Luke testifies, Acts 11.24. He was also by the Holy Ghosts
immediate appointment (together with Paul) separated for the Ministry of the
Gospel, and confirmed in the Apostleship by the laying on of hands. Acts 13.2.

Song. 70.
Sing this as the 44. Song.
THy gifts and graces manifold,
To many men thou, LORD, have lent;
Both now, and in the days of old,
To teach them faith, and to repent:
Thy Prophets thou did first ordain,
And they as Legates did appear;
Then came thy self, and in thy Train,
Apostles for attendants were.
2
For Leg^ir, when thou went^st away,
The Holy Ghost thou did appoint;
And here, Successions, till this day,
Remain of those he did annoint;
Yea, thou have likewise so ordain^d,
That to make good what those have taught*
An Army-Royall was maintained
Of Martyrs, who thy Battles fought.
3
For those, and Him for whom we thus
Are met, to praise thy Name to day,
We give thee thanks, as they for us,
That should come after them, did pray;
And by this duty we declare,
Our Faith assures, that they and we,
(In Times divided though we are)
Have one Communion still with Thee.
S. John Baptist.
John, called the Baptist, was he (as Christ himself testifies) who was
promised to be sent before him to prepare his way, Luke 7.27. and by his
Preaching and Baptism the People were accordingly prepared to receive him that
was to follow. He was the true expected Elias, and slain by Herod, for
reproving the Incest which the said Herod committed in taking his Brothers
wife: That we might praise God therefore for this Forerunner of our Savior
(and by his example remember to provide for his entertainment) the Church has
set apart this Day.

Song. 71.
Sing this as the 9. Song.
BEcause the world might not pretend,
It knew not of thy Comming-day,
Thou did, oh Christ, before thee send
A Crier, to prepare thy way:
Thy Kingdom was the Bliss he brought*
Repentance was the Way he taught.
2
And, that his Voice might not alone
Inform us what we should believe,
His Life declared what must be done,
If Thee we purpose to receive:
His Li^e our pattern therefore make,
That we the Course he took, may take.
3
Let us not gad to Pleasures Court,
With fruitless Toys to feed the mind;
Nor to that Wilderness resort,
Where Reeds are shaken with the wind:
But tread the Path he trod before,
That both a Prophet was, and more.
4
Clad in repentant Cloth of Hair,
Let us, oh Christ, (to seek out Thee)
To those forsaken- Walks repair,
Which of so few frequented be;
And true Repentance so intend,
That we our courses may amend.
5
Let us hereafter feed upon
The Honey of thy Word divine;
Let us the Worlds entisement shun,
Her Drugs, and her bewitching Wine;
And on our loins (so loose that are)
The Leather-belt of Temperance wear.
6
Thus from thy Crier let us learn,
For thee, sweet Jesus, to prepare,
And others of their sins to warn,
How-euer for the same we fare:
So thou to Us, and we to Thee
Shall when thou come welcome be.
S. Peter's day.
WE observe this Day to the honor of God, and to the pious memory of his
blessed Apostle S. Peter, that we may be thereby put in mind to be thankful
for those continuing favors received by his ministry; That Pastors also may
make him their pattern in discharging the charge Christ commits unto them;
That by considering his weakness we may all learn not to presume on our own
strength; And that by his christian example we may be taught to bewail our
escapes with bitter tears of true Repentance.

Song. 72.
Sing this as the 3. Song.
HOw watchful need we to become,
And how devoutly pray,
That thee, oh LORD, we fall not from,
Upon our Tryall-day?
For, if thy great Apostle said,
He would not thee deny,
Whom he that very Night denayd,
On what shall we rely?
2
For of our selves we cannot leave
One pleasure for thy sake;
No, not one virtuous thought conceive,
Till us thou able make:
Nay, we not only Thee deny,
When persecutions be;
But, or forget, or from Thee ^lie,
When peace attends on Thee.
3
Oh! let those Prayers us avail,
Thou did for Peter daigne,
That when our Foe shall us assail*
His labor may be vain;
Yea, cast on us those powerful eyes,
That moved him to lament,
We may bemoane with bitter cries
Our Follies, and repent.
4
And grant, that such as Him succeed,
For Pastors of thy fold,
Thy Sheep, and Lambs may guide and feed,
As thou appoint'st they should,
By his example speaking what
They ought in truth to say,
And in their lives confirming that
They teach them to obey.
S. James his day.
THis Day we praise God for his blessed Apostle Saint James, the son of
Zebedeus, who was one of those two that desired of Christ they might sit at his
right hand, and at his left, in his kingdom, as the Gospel for the D^y
declares: And by occasion of that ignorant petition (proceeding from their
carnal weakenes^e) Christ taught both them, and the rest of the Apostles, and
all other Christians also, what Greatness best becomes his Followers; and
that we are to taste the Cup of his Passion, before we can be glorified with
him: So this holy Apostle did; For he was slain by Herod, as it is declared in
the Epistle appointed for the Day.

Song. 73.
Sing this as the 44. Song.
HE that his Father had forsook,
And followed Christ at his commands,
By humane frailty ouertooke,
For Place and vain preferment stands.
Till by his Master he was taught,
Of what he rather should have care;
How indiscreetly he had sought,
And what his Servants honors are.
2
Whereby we find how much ado,
The best men have this world to leave;
How, when they wealth and Friends forgo,
Ambitious a^mes to them will cleave:
And sure this Angell-sinne aspires,
In such men chiefly to reside,
That have exilde those brute desires,
Which in the vulgar sort abide.
3
To thee oh GOD, we therefore pray,
The humbl^ mind in us may dwell;
And cha^me that Fiend of Pride away,
Which would thy Graces quite expel:
But, of all other th^se men keep,
From this delusion of the ^oe,
Who are the Shepherds of thy sheep,
And should each good example show.
4
For, such as still pursuing be
That Grea^nesse, which the world respects,
Their servile baseness neither see,
Nor feel thy Spirits rare effects:
And doubtless, they, who most of all
Descend to serve both Thee, and thine,
Are those, who in thy Kingdom shall
In Seat^ of greatest glory shine.
S. Bartholomew.
THis Day is consecrated to the honor of God, and the pious memory of his
blessed Apostle S. Bartholomew, that (as appears in the Epistle appointed for
the Day) we might take occasion to praise our Redeemer, for those many wonders
which were wrought by his Apostles, to the great increase of the Christian
Faith, and open confusion of the Churches Adversaries.

Song. 74.
Sing this as the 9. Song.
EXceeding gracious favors, LORD,
To thy Apostles have thou ^howne;
And many wonders by thy Word,
And in thy Name* by them were done:
The Blind did see, the Dumb could talk,
The Deaf did hear, the Lame did walk:
2
They all diseases took away,
The dead to life they did restore;
Foul Spirits dispossessed they,
And Preached the Gospel to the poor:
The Church grew strong, thy Faith grew plain,
Their Foes grew mad, and mad in vain.
3
Oh! let their works for ever be
An honor to thy glorious Name;
And by thy power vouchsafe that we,
(Whom sin makes deaf, blind, dumb, and lame)
May hear thy word* and see thy Light,
And speak thy Truth, and walk aright.
4
Each deadly sickness of the soul,
Let thy Apostles doctrines cure:
Let them expel those Spirits foul,
Which makes us loathsome and impure,
That we the life of Faith may gain,
Who long time dead in sin have lain.
S. Matthew.
S. Matthew, otherwise called Leui, was a Publican, that is, a Custome-Gatherer:
From which course of life (being hateful in those Countries) he was called to
the Apostleship, and became also one of the four Evangelists. To his religious
memory therefore, and to honor God* for the favor vouchsafed (both to him
and us) by his Ministry, this Day is observed by the Churches Authority.

Song. 75.
Sing this as the 44. Song.
WHy should unchristian censures pass
On men, or that which they profess?
A Publican Saint Matthew was,
Yet GODS beloved ne're-the-lesse,
And was elected one of Christ's
Apostles, and Evangelists:
2
For, GOD does not a whit respect
Profession, Person, or degree;
But makes choice of his elect,
From every sort of men that be,
That none might of his love despair,
But all men unto him repair.
3
For those, oh let us therefore pray,
Who seem uncalled to remain;
Not shunning them, as cast away,
GODS favor never to obtain:
For some a while neglected are,
To stir in us more loving care.
4
And for our selves, let us desire,
That we our Avarice may shun,
When GOD our service shall require,
As this Evangelist has done,
And spend the remnant of our days,
In setting forth our Makers praise.
S. Michael, and all Angels.
THis Day we glo^ifie God for the victory S. Michael, and his Angels obtained
over the Dragon, and his Angels: Whereby the Church is freed from being
prevailed against by the furious attempts, or malicious accusations of the
Devil. This Commemoration is appointed also, to mind us thankfully to
acknowledge Gods mercy toward us, in the daily ministry of his Angels, who are
said to pitch their Tents about his Children, and to defend them from the
tem^tations and mischievous practices of evil Spirits, watching every moment
for advantage to destroy them: Which, if we oftener considered, and how there
be armies of Angels and Devils, night and day fighting for us, and round about
us, we would become more careful how we grieved those good Spirits, (who
attend us for our safety) to the rejoicing of them that seek our destruction.
By S. Michael, who was Prince of the good Angels (and termed by S Jude an
Arch-Angell) some understand Jesus Christ: For he is indeed the principal
Messenger, or Angel of our salvation, and the chief of the Princes, as holy
Daniel called him; yea, to him alone this Name Michael (which signifies, who
is like God) does most properly appertain, seeing he only is the perfect
image of his Father.

Song. 76.
Sing this as the 44. Song.
TO praise, oh GOD, and honor thee,
For all thy glorious Triumphs won,
Assembled here this Day are we,
And to declare thy Favors done:
Thou took'st that great Archangels part,
With whom in Heaven the Dragon fought,
And that good Armies Friend thou were,
That cast Him, and his Angels out:
2
Whereby we now in safety are,
Our dangers all secured from;
For to increase thy glory here,
Thy Kingdom with great power is come:
And we need stand in dread no more,
Of that enraged Fiends despite,
Who, in thy presence heretofore,
Accused us both day and night.
3
In honor of thy blessed Name,
This Hymn of thanks we therefore sing;
And to thine everlasting fame,
Through Heau^n thine endless praise shall ring:
We praise thee for thy proper might,
And, LORD, for all those Angels to,
Who in thy Battles came to fight,
Or have been sent thy will to do.
4
For, many of that glorious Troop,
To bring us Messages from Thee,
From Heaven vouchsafed have to stoop,
And clad in humane shape to be;
Yea, we believe they watch and ward,
About our persons evermore,
From evil Spirit^ us to guard;
And we return thee praise therefore.
S. Luke.
THis Day we memorize the benefit the Church received by the blessed Evangelist
S. Luke, a Physician both for soul and body, and the first Ecclesiastical
Historiographer: For he was Author, not only of that Gospel which bears
his Name; but also of that Book called the Acts of the Apostles, and an
Eyewitness of most part of that which he has written, remaining a constant
companion of S. Paul in his tribulations. Worthily therefore ought we to honor
him with a Christian memorial, and praise God for the grace vouchsafed us by
his means.

Song. 77.
Sing this as the 44. Song.
IF those Physicians honored be,
That do the bodies health procure;
Then worthy double praise is He,
Who can both soul and body cure.
In life time both ways Luke excelled,
And those Receipts has also left,
Which many soule-sicke Patients heald,
Since from the world he was bereft.
2
And to his honor this beside,
A blessed Witness has declared,
That constant he did still abide,
When others from the Truth were scared:
For which the glory, LORD, be thine;
For of thy grace those gifts had he,
And thou his Actions did incline,
Our profit, and his good to be.
3
By his example therefore, LORD,
Uphold us, that we fall not from
The true profession of thy Word,
Nor by this world be overcome;
And let his wholesome doctrine heal
That leprous sickness of the soul,
Which more and more would on her steal,
And make her languish and grow foul.
Simon and Jude, Apostles.
THis Day is dedicated to the praise of God, and the pious memory of the two
blessed Apostles of Jesus Christ, Simon called Zelotes, or the Cananite, and
Jude the brother of James. And in this solemnity we are among other things,
principally put in mind of that love which Christ commands to be continued
among us, and of that heed we ought to have unto our abiding in that state of
grace, whereunto God has called us, as appears in the Epistle and Gospel
appointed for the day.

Song. 78.
Sing this as the 3. Song.
NO outward mark we have to know,
Who thine, oh Christ, may be,
Until a Christian Love does show,
Who appertains to Thee:
For, knowledge may be reached unto
And formal Justice gained*
But, till each other love we do,
Both Faith and Works are faign'd.
2
Lou^ is the sum of those commands,
Which thou with thine do leave;
And for a mark on them it stands,
Which never can deceive:
For when our knowledge Folly turns,
When Shows no show retain,
And Zeal it self to nothing burns;
Then Love shall still remain.
3
By this were thy Apostles knit,
And joined so in one,
Their True-loue-knot could never yet
Be broken, nor undone.
Oh let us, LORD, received be
Into that sacred knot,
And One become with them and thee,
That sin undo us not.
4
Yea, lest when we thy grace possess,
We fall again away,
Or turn it into wantonness,
Assist thou us, we pray:
And, that we may the better find,
What heed there should be learned,
Let us the fall of Angels mind,
As blessed Jude has warned.
All Saints day.
THis Day the Church has appointed, that, to the praise of God, and our
comfort, we should commemorate that excellent Mystery of the Communion of
Saints, (which is one of the twelve Articles of Christian belief:) And that
(considering how admirably the divine wisdom has knit all his elect into one
body for their more perfect enjoying, both of his love, and the love of one
another) we might he^e receive a taste of the pleasure we shall have in the
full fruition of that felicity, and be stirred up also to such mutual love and
unity as ought to be betwixt us in this life. This is the last Saints day in
the Ecclesiast^ck Circuit of the year, generally obseruable by the ancient
ordinance of the Church; And it seems to have a mystery in it; showing, that
when the Circle of time is come about, we shall in one everlasting holy day
honor that blessed Communion and mystical Body, which shall be made perfect,
when all those (whom we have memorized apart) are united into One; that is,
when the Father, the Son, the Holy Ghost, the Angels, and all the holy Elect
of God shall be incorporated together into a joyful, unspeakable, and
inseparable Union in the Kingdom of Heaven; which the Almighty hasten, Amen.

Song. 79.
Sing this as the 9. Song.
NO Bliss can so contenting prove*
As universal Love to gain,
Could we with full requiting Love,
All men's affections entertain:
But such a Love, the heart of man,
Nor well-containe, nor merit can.
2
For though to all we might be dear,
(Which cannot in this life befall)
We discontented should appear,
Because we had not hearts for all:
That we might all men love, as we
Beloved would of all men be.
3
For Love in loving joys as much,
As Love for loving to obtain;
Yea, ^oue vnfaign'd is likewise such,
It cannot part it self in twain:
The Riuals friendship soon is gone,
And Love divided loves none.
4
Which causes that with Passions pained,
So many men on earth we see;
And had not GOD a means ordained,
This discontent in Heau^n would be:
For all the Saints would jealous prove,
Of GO^S, and of each others Love.
5
But he whose, wisdom has contrived
His Glory, with their full Contents,
Has from himself to them derived
This Favor (which that strife preuents)
One Body all his Saints ^e makes,
And for his Spouse this one he takes.
6
So, each one of them shall obtain
Full Love from All, returning to
Full Love to All of them again,
As members of one Body do:
None ^ealous, but all striving how
Most Love to others to allow.
7
For, as the Soul is All in All,
And All through every Member to;
Love in that Body Mystical
Is as the Soul, and ^ils it so;
Uniting them to GOD as near,
As to each other they are dear.
8
Yea, what they want to entertain
Such ouerflowing Love as his,
He will supply, and likewise daigne
What for his full Delight they miss,
That he may all his Love employ,
And they return his fill of Joy.
9
The seed of this Content was sown,
When GOD the spacious world did frame,
And ever since the same has grown,
To be an honor to his Name;
And when his Saints are sealed all,
This Mystery unseal he shall.
10
Meanewhile (as we in Landscape view
Fields, Rivers, Cities, Woods, and Seas,
And (though but little they can show)
Do therewithal our fancies please;)
Let Contemplation Maps contriue,
To show us where we shall arrive.
11
And though our hearts too shallow be,
That blessed Communion to conceive,
Of which we shall in Heaven be free,
Let us on Earth together cleave:
For those, who keep in union here,
Shall know by faith what will be there.
12
Where all those Angels we admired,
With every Saint since time begun,
(Whose sight and love we have desired)
Shall be with us conioyn'd in One;
And We and They and They and We,
To GOD himself espoused be.
13
Oh happy wedding* where the Guests,
The Bride and Bridegroom shall be one;
Where Songs, Emb^aces, Triumphs, Feasts,
And Joys of Love are never done:
But thrice accursed are those that miss
Their Garment when this Wedding is.
14
Sweet Jesus, sealed, and clad therefore,
For that great meeting let us be,
(Where People, Tongues, and kinreds, more
Then can be told, attend on Thee)
To make those shoutes of Joy and praise,
Which to thine honor they shall raise.
Rogation week.
THis is called Rogation week^, being so termed by A^tiquity ^ Rogando, from
the public Supplications. ^or then the L^tany which is full of humble
Petitions and e^t^ea^ies, was with solemn Procession usually repeated; because
there be about that se^son, most occasions of pu^^ike Prayer, in reg^rd Princes
go then forth to batt^ile; the F^uites and hope of plenty are in the^r (...);
the Ay^e is most subject to contagions and Infections; and there is most
laboring and trauail^^g, both by Land, and Sea also, from that time of the
year for^a^d. Which laud^ble custom (though it be lately much decayed, and in
some Countries abused from the right end, and mingled with superstitious
Ce^emonies) is in many places orderly retained, according as the Church of
England approves it: And we yearly make use also of those Processions, to
keep knowledge of the true Bounds of our several Parishes, for avoiding of
strife. And those Perambulations were yearly appointed likewise, that, viewing
Gods yearly blessing upon the ^rasse, the Co^ne, and other fruits of the
Earth, we might be the more provoked to praise him.

Song. 80.
Sing this as the 44. Song.
IT was thy pleasure, LORD, to say,
That whatsoever in thy Name
We prayed for, as we ought to pray,
Thou would vouchsafe to grant the same.
Oh, therefore we beseech thee now,
To these our Prayers, which we make,
Thy gracious ear in favor bow,
And grant them for thy mercies sake.
2
Let not the Seasons of this year,
(As they their Courses do observe)
Engender those Contagions here,
Which our transgressions do deserve:
Let not the Summer worms impair
Those bloomings of the Earth we see;
Nor Blastin^s, or distempered Ay^e
Destroy those Fruits that hopeful be.
3
Domesticke Brawles expel thou far,
And be thou pleas^d our Coast to guard,
The dreadful ^ounds of in-brought War,
Within our Confines be not heard:
Continue also here thy word,
And make us thankful (we thee pray)
The Pestilence, Dearth, and the Sword
Have been so long withheld away.
4
And, as we heedfully observe
The certain limits of our Grounds,
And outward quiet to preserve,
About them walk our yearly Rounds:
So let us also have a care,
Our souls possessions, LORD, to know,
That no encroachments on us there,
Be gained by our subtle ^oe.
5
What pleasant Groves, what goodly Fields!
How fruitful ^ils, and Dales have we!
How sweet an Air our Climate yields!
How ^^oar^d with Flocks, and Herds are we!
How Milk* and Honey does o reflowe!
How clear and wholesome are our Springs!
How safe from ravenous Beasts we go!
And oh, how free from Poysnous things!
6
For these, and for our Grass, our Corn;
For all that springs from Blade, or Bo^gh;
For all those blessings that adorn
Or Wood or Field this Kingdom through:
For all of these, thy praise we sing,
And humbly (LORD) entreat thee too,
That Fruit to thee we forth may bring,
As unto Us thy Creatures do.
7
So, in the sweet refreshing shade
Of thy Protection sitting down,
Those gracious Favors we have had,
Relate we will to thy renown;
Yea, other men, when we are gone,
Shall for thy mercies honor Thee,
And famous make what thou have done,
To such as after them shall be.
S. George his Day.
THis may be called the Court Holy Day; for with us it is solemnized upon
command, in the Court-royall of the Majesty of Great Britain only, or in the
Families of those Knights of the Order, who are constrained to b^e absent from
the solemnity there held, which is usually on the day anciently dedicated to
George the Martyr. Nevertheless, we believe not that it was he whom they
anciently chose to be the Patron of the forenamed Order: For the relation of
him who delivered the Lady from the Dragon is only a Christian Allegory,
invented to set forth the better the Churches deliverance. Jesus Christ is the
true S. George, and our English ^utelary Saint; Even he that comes armed upon
the White Horse, Reu. 19.11 The Dragon he overthrows is the Beast mentioned
in the some Chapter, and called (a little before) the Dragon with seven heads
and ten horns: The Lady he delivers is that woman whom the Dragon persecutes,
Reu. 12. And to the honor of him I conceive the most honorable Order of S.
George to be continued, and this Day consecr^ted. Nor is there any irreuerence
in imposing this Name on our Redeemer; for George signifies a Husbandman,
which is a Name or Attribute that even Christ applied to his Father, John 15.2.
My Father (says he) (...), is the George, or the Husbandman. And indeed, very
properly may this Nation call GOD their George or Husbandman: For he has (as
it were) mo^ed this Island with the Sea, walled it with natural Bulwarks,
built Towers in it, planted his truth here, weeded, dressed, and replenished it
like a Garden; and, in a word, every way done the part of a good Husbandman
thereon. Howsoever therefore the first occasion of this Days great solemnity
seem but mean (as the beginnings of many noble inventions were) yet I
conceive that Institution to have been ordained to weighty and Christian
purposes: Even to oblige the Peers of this Kingdom by the new and strict
bands of an honorable Order, to imitate their Patrons care over his Vineyard,
to remember them, that they are the Band-Royall, to whom the Guard thereof is
committed, to stir up in them virtuous emulations, and to show them how to
make use of their temporal dignities to the glory of God. For, beside many
other re^^^end Officers, there belongs a Prelate also to these Sole^nities: And
me thinks, we should not imagine, that the Founder of it (being a Christian
Prince, assisted by a wise and religious Counsel) would have so profaned the
most excellent dignity of the Church, as to make it wait on Ceremonies
ordained for ostentation, or some other vain ends. More discreetly they deal
who apprehend the contrary, and are not in danger of this sentence; Evil to
him that evil thinks.

Song. 81.
Sing this as the 3. Song.
ALl praise and glory that we may,
Ascribe we, LORD, to Thee,
From whom the triumphs of this Day,
And all our glories be:
For of it self, nor East, nor West,
Does Honor ebb or flow;
But as to Thee it seems best,
Preferments to bestow:
2
Thou art, oh Christ, that valiant Knight,
Whose Order we profess,
And that Saint George, who often does fight
For England in distress:
The Dragon thou o'rethrew'st is He,
That would thy Church devour,
And that fair Lady (LORD) is she,
Thou sauest from his power.
3
Thou like a Husbandman prepared
Our Fields, yea sown them have;
And, Knight-like with a warlike guard,
From spoil enclosed them fast.
Oh daigne, that those, who in a Band
More strict then heretofore,
Are for this Vineyard bound to stand,
May watch it now the more:
4
Yea grant, since they elected are,
New Orders to put on,
And sacred Hirogliphickes wear
Of thy great Conquest won,
That those (when they forget) may tell,
Why those of them are worn,
And inwardly inform as well,
As outwardly adorn;
5
That so their Christian-Knighthood may
No Pagan^Order seem;
Nor they their Meetings pass away,
As things of vain esteem;
And, that we may our triumphs all
To thy renown apply,
Who art that Saint, on whom we call,
When we Saint George do cry.
For public Deliverances.
GOd has vouchsafed unto this Kingdom many public deliverances, which ought
never to be forgotten; but rather should be celebrated by Us, as the days
Purim by the Israelites, Hester 9.26. Especially that of the fifth of November;
for the celebration whereof there is a Statute enacted: And it is hoped we
shall never neglect, or be ashamed to praise God for that Delivery, according
to provision made to that purpose. For that, and the like occasions therefore
this Hymn is composed.

Song. 82.
Sing this as the 9. Song.
WIth Israel we may truly say,
If on our side GOD had not been,
Our Foes had made of us their pray,
And we this Light had never seen:
The Pit was dug, the snare was said,
And we with ease had been betrayed.
2
But they that hate us undertook
A Plot they could not bring to pass;
For, he that all does ouerlooke,
Prevented what intended was:
We found the Pit, and escaped the Gin,
And saw their Makers caught therein.
3
The means of help was not our own,
But from the LORD alone it came;
(A favor undeserved shown)
And therefore let us praise his Name:
Oh, praise his Name; for it was He,
That broke the Net, and set us free.
4
Unto his honor let us sing,
And Stories of his Mercy tell;
With praises let our Temples ring,
And on our Lips thanksgiving dwell:
Yea, let us not his love forget,
While Sun, or Moon does rise or set.
5
Let us redeem again the Times,
Let us begin to live anew,
And not revive those heinous crimes,
That dangers past so near us drew;
Lest he that did his hand revoke,
Return it with a double stroke.
6
A true Repentance takes delight
To mind GODS Favors heretofore;
So, when his mercies men recite,
It makes a true Repentance more:
And where those virtues do increase,
They are the certain signs of Peace.
7
But where increasing Sins we see,
And to such dullness men are grown,
That slighted those Protections be,
Which GOD in former time has shown,
It shall betoken to that ^and
Some Desolation near at hand.
8
Our hearts, oh, never harden so,
Nor let thine Anger so return;
But with desire thy will to do,
For our offenses let us mourn:
And mind to praise (even tears among)
Thy Mercies in a joyful Song.
For the Communion.
We have a custom among us, that, during the time of administering the blessed
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, there is some Psalm or Hymn sung, the better
to keep the thoughts of the Communicants from wandering after vain objects:
This Song therefore (expressing a true thankfulness, together with what ought
to be our faith concerning that Mystery, in such manner as the vulgar capacity
may be capable thereof) is offered up to their devotion, who shall please to
receive it.

Song. 83.
Sing this as the 3. Song.
THat favor, LORD, which of thy grace
We do receive to day,
Is greater then our merit was,
And more then praise we may:
For, of all things that can be told,
That which least comfort has
Is more, then e're deserve we could,
Except it were thy wrath:
2
Yet we, not only have obtained
This worlds best gifts of thee;
But thou thy flesh have also daign'd,
Our Food of Life to be:
For which, since we no mends can make,
(And thou requir'st no more)
The Cup of saving health we take,
And praise thy Name therefore.
3
Oh teach us rightly to receive,
What thou do here bestow;
And learn us truly to conceive,
What we are bound to know,
That such as cannot wade the deep
Of thy vnfathom'd Word,
May by thy grace safe courses keep
Along the shallow Ford.
4
This Mystery, we must confess,
Our reach does far exceed,
And some of our weak Faiths are less
Then grains of Mustard-^eed:
Oh therefore, LORD, increase it so,
We fruit may bear to Thee,
And that implicit faith may grow,
Explicit faith to be.
5
With hands we see not, as with Eyes:
Eyes think not as the Heart;
But each retains what does suffize,
To act his proper part:
And in the Body while it bides,
The meanest Member shares
That bliss, which to the best betides,
And as the same it fares:
6
So, if in union unto thee
United we remain,
The Faith of those that stronger be,
The weaker shall sustain:
Our Christian Love shall that supply,
Which we in knowledge miss,
And humble thoughts shall mount us hie,
Even to eternal bliss.
7
Oh pardon all those heinous crimes,
Whereof we guilty are;
To serve thee more in future times,
Our hearts do thou prepare;
And make thou gracious in thy sight,
Both us, and this we do,
That thou therein may take delight,
And we have love thereto.
8
No new Oblation we devise,
For sins preferred to be;
Propitiatory sacrifice
Was made at full by Thee:
The Sacrifice of Thanks is that,
And all that thou do crave,
And we our s^lues are part of what
We sacrificed have.
9
We do no gross Realities
Of Flesh in this conceive;
Or, that their proper qualities
The ^read or Wine do leave:
Yet, in this holy Eucharist,
We (by a means divine)
Know we are fed with thee, oh Christ,
Receiving Bread and Wine.
10
And though the outward Elements
For signs acknowledged be,
We cannot say thy Sacraments,
Things only signal be:
Because, who e're thereof partakes,
In those this power it has;
It either them thy Members makes,
Or slaves of Sin and Death.
11
Nor unto those do we incline,
(But from them are estranged)
Who yield the form of Bread and Wine,
Yet think the Substance changed:
For we believe each Element
Is what it seems indeed,
Although that in thy Sacrament,
Therewith on thee we feed.
12
Thy Real-presence we auowe,
And know it so divine,
That carnal Reason knows not how,
That presence to define:
For, when thy Flesh we feed on thus,
(Though strange it do appear)
Both we in thee and thou in us,
Even at one instant are.
13
No marvel many troubled were,
This Secret to unfold;
For Mysteries Faiths obects are,
Not things at pleasure told.
And he that would by Reason sound,
What Faiths deep reach conceaues*
May both himself and them confound,
To whom his Rules he leaves.
14
Let us therefore our Faith erect,
On what thy Word does say,
And hold their knowledge in suspect,
That new Foundations lay:
For, such full many a grievous Rend
Within thy Church have left;
And by thy peaceful Sacrament,
The world of Peace bereft:
15
Yea, what thy pledge and seal of Love,
Was first ordained to be
Does great and hateful Quarrels move,
Where wrangling spirits be:
And many men have lost their blood,
(Who did thy Name profess)
Because they hardly understood
What others would express.
16
Oh, let us not hereafter so,
About mere words contend,
The while our crafty common Foe,
Procures on us his end:
But if in Essence we agree,
Let all with Love assay,
A help unto: he weak to be,
And for each other pray.
17
Love is that blessed Cymment, LORD,
Which must us re-vnite;
In bitter speeches, f^re and sword,
It never took delight:
The Weapons those of Malice are,
And they themselu^s beguile,
Who dream, that such ordained were
Thy Church to reconcile.
18
Love brought us hither and that Love
Pers^^ad^s us to implore,
That thou all Christians hearts would move,
To seek it more and more;
And that Self will no more bewitch
Our minds with foul debate;
Nor fill us with that malice, which
Disturbes a quiet state:
19
But this especially we crave,
That perfect Peace may be
Mong those that disagreed have,
In show of love to thee;
That they with us, and we with them,
May Christian Peace retain,
And both in new Jerusalem
With thee for ever reign.
20
No longer let ambit^ous Ends,
Blind Zeal, or cankred Spite,
Those Churche^ keep from being friends,
Whom Love should fast unite:
But let thy glory shine among
Those Candlestickes, we pray,
We may behold what has so long
Exil^d thy Peace away:
21
That those, who (heeding not thy word)
Expect an earthly Power,
And vainly think, some temp'rall Sword
Shall Antichrist devour;
That those may know, thy weapons are
No such, as they do faigne,
And that it is no carnal war,
Which we must entertain.
22
Confessors, Martyrs, Preachers strike
The Blows, that gain this Field:
Thanks, Prayre, Instructions, and the like,
Those weapons are they weild:
Long-suffering, Patience, Prudent-care,
Must be the Court-of-Guard;
And Faith and Innocence are
Instead of Walls prepared.
23
For these (no question) may as well
Great Babel overthrow,
As Ierichoes large Bulwarks fell,
When men did Rams-hornes blow:
Which could we credit, we should cease
All bloody plots to lay,
And to suppose, Gods holy peace
Should come the Devils way.
24
LORD, let that flesh, and blood of thine,
Which fed us has to day,
Our hearts to thy True-loue incline,
And drive ill thoughts away:
Let us remember what thou have
For our mere love endur^de*
Even, when of us despis'de thou wast,
And we thy death procur'de:
25
And with each other, for thy sake,
So truly let us bear,
Our patience may us dearer make,
When reconciled we are:
So, when our courses finished be,
We shall ascend above
Sun, Moon, and Stars, to live with Thee,
That art the God of Love.
Ember week.
THe Ember weeks are four Fasts, anciently solemnized at the four principal
Seasons of the year, and by an Institu^ion appointed to be observed for
diverse good purposes. First, to humble our selves by Fasting and Prayer, that
God might, upon our humiliation, be moved to grant us the blessings belonging
to those seasons. Secondly, that it might please God to strengthen our
Constitutions, against the distemperatures occasioned by the several humors
predominate at those Times, to the endangering of our bodily healths. Thirdly,
that we might be remembered to dedicate a part of every season to Gods glory.
And lastly, that there might be a public Fasting and Prayers made for those
(according to the Apost^es use) who by the laying on of hands were to be
confirmed in the Ministry of the Gospel: For the Sunday next after ^hese
Fasts is the time ordinarily appointed for the ordination of such as are called
to those Offices.

Song. 84.
Sing this as the 9. Song.
THou do from every season, LORD,
To profit us, advantage take,
And at their fittest Times afford
Thy Blessings for thy mercy sake:
At Winter, Summer, Fall, or Spring,
We furnished are of every thing.
2
A part therefore from each of these,
With one consent reserved have we,
In Prayer and Fasting to appease
That wrath our sins have moved in thee,
And that thou may not for our crimes,
Destroy the blessings of the Times.
3
Oh grant, that our Devotions may
With true sincerenesse be performed,
And that our lives, not for a day,
But may for ever be reformed:
Lest we remain as fast in sin,
As if we neu'r had fasting been.
4
Our Constitution^ temper so,
Those Humors, which this season rain,
May not have power to overthrow
That health, which yet we do retain:
Else, through that weakness which it brings,
LORD, make us strong in better things.
5
And, since thy holy Church appoints
These times, thy Workmen forth to send,
And those for Pastors now anoynts,
Who on thy ^olde are to attend;
Bless thou, where they who (should ordain)
With Pray^e and Fasting hands have lain.
6
Oh, bless them, euer-blessed LORD,
Whom for thy work the Church does choose;
Instruct them by thy sacred Word,
And with thy spirit them infuse,
That live, and teach aright they may,
And we their teaching well obey,
These that follow are thankesgiuings for public benefits. For seasonable
weather.
IT is our duty to give God thanks, and praise him, both publicly, and
privately for all his mercies; especially, for such as tend to the general
good. And therefore the Church has in her Lithurgie ordained set forms of
Thanksgiving for such ends: In imitation whereof these following Hymns are
composed, that we might the oftener, and with more delight exercise this duty,
which is most properly done in Song: And thereby also the forms of
Thanksgiving are much the more easily learned of the common people, to be sung
of them amid their labors. This, that next follows, is a thanksgiving for
seasonable weather; ^y means whereof we enjoying the blessings of the earth,
ought at all times to praise God for the same.

Song. 85.
Sing this as the 3. Song.
LORD, should the Sun, the Clouds, the Wind,
The Air, and Seasons be
To us so froward, and unkind,
As we are false to Thee;
All fruits would quite a way be burned,
Or lie in water drowned,
Or blasted be, or ouerturn'd,
Or chilled on the ground.
2
But, from our duty though we swerve,
Thou still do mercy show,
And daigne thy Creatures to preserve,
That men might thankful grow;
Yea, though from day to day we sin,
And thy displeasure gain,
No sooner we to cry begin,
But pity we obtain.
3
The weather now thou changed have,
That put us late to fear,
And when our hopes were almost past,
Then comfort did appear.
The Heaven the Earths Complaints has heard;
They reconciled be,
And thou such weather have prepared,
As we desired of thee:
4
For which with lifted hands and eyes,
To thee we do repay
The due, and willing sacrifize
Of giving thanks to day;
Because, such Offerings we should not
To render thee be slow;
Nor let that mercy be forgot,
Which thou art pleased to show.
For Plenty.
PLenty is the cure of Famine, and a blessing which, above all other, we labor
and travail for; yet, when we have obtained the same, it makes us many times
so wanton instead of being thankful, that we forget not only Gods mercy in
that, but abuse all other benefits. To put us therefore in mind of our duty,
and to express the better a continual thankfulness to the Almighty, this
Hymn is composed.

Song. 86.
Sing this as the 3. Song.
HOw often, and in how many crimes,
Thee Jealous have we made?
And, blessed GOD, how many times
Have we forgiveness had?
If we with tears to bed at night
For our transgressions go,
To us thou do, by morning-light,
Some comfort daigne to show.
2
This pleasant Land, which for our sin
Was lately barren made,
Her fruitfulness does new begin,
And we are therefore glad:
We for those Creatures thankful be,
Which thou bestowest, LORD,
And for that Plenty honor Thee,
Which thou do now afford.
3
Oh, let us therewith in excess
Not wallow like to Swine;
Nor into graceless wantonness
Convert this grace of thine;
But so revive our feebled powers,
And so refresh the poor,
That thou may crown this Land of ours,
With plenties evermore.
For Peace.
PEace is the Nurse of Plenty, and the means of so many other blessings, both
public and private, that God can never be sufficiently praised for it; yet
instead of glorifying him, men most commonly abuse it to the dishonor of God,
and their ruin. This Hymn therefore is composed, that it may give occasion to
us more often to meditate Gods mercy, and to glorify his Name, who above all
other Nations have tasted the sweetness of this benefit.

Song. 87.
Sing this as the 3. Song.
SO cause us, LORD, to think upon
Those blessings we possess,
That what is for our safety done,
We truly may confess:
For we, whose Fields, in time forepast,
Most bloody war did stain,
(Whilst Fire and Sword does others wast)
In safety now remain.
2
No armed troops the Ploughman fears;
No shot our Walls o'returne*
No Temple shakes about our ears;
No Village here does burn;
No Father hears his pretty Child
In vain for succor cry;
Nor Husband sees his Wife defiled,
Whil^st he half dead does lie.
3
Dear GOD, vouchsafe to pity those,
In this distress that be,
They, to protect them from their Foes,
May have a Friend of Thee:
For, by thy Friendship we obtain
These gladsome peaceful days,
And (somewhat to return again)
We thus do sing thy praise.
4
We praise thee for that inward Peace,
And for that outward Rest,
Wherewith unto our Joys increase,
This Kingdom thou have blessed:
Oh, never take the same away,
But let it still endure;
And grant (oh LORD) it make us may
More thankful, not Secure.
For Victory.
Our God is the Lord of Hosts, and the God of Battles: whenever therefore we
have gotten the upper hand over our enemies, we ought not to glory in our own
strength, Policy, or Valor, but to ascribe the glory of it to him only, and
return him public thanks for making us victorious over our enemies: And this
Hymn serves to help their devotion, who are willing to perform that duty.

Song. 88.
Sing this as the 44. Song.
WE love thee, LORD, we praise thy Name,
Who, by thy great Almighty arm,
Have kept us from the spoil, and shame
Of those, that sought our causeless harm:
Thou art our Life, or Triumph-Song,
The Joy and Comfort of our heart;
To thee all praises do belong,
And thou the LORD of Armies art.
2
We must confess it is thy power,
That made us Masters of the Field;
Thou art our B^lwarke and our Tower,
Our ^ocke of refuge, and our Shield:
Thou taught'st our hands and Arms to fight;
With vigor thou did gird us round;
Thou made our Foes to take their flight,
And thou did b^ate them to the ground.
3
With fury came our armed Foes,
To blood and slaughter fiercely bent,
And perils round did us enclose,
By whatsoever way we went,
That had not thou our Captain been,
(To lead us on, and off again)
We on the place had dead been seen,
Or masked in blood and wounds had lain.
4
This Song we therefore sing to Thee,
And pray, that thou for evermore
Would our Protector daigne to be,
As at this time* and heretofore;
That thy continual favor shown,
May cause us more to Thee incline,
And make it through the world be known,
That such as are our Foes, are thine.
For deliverance from a public Sickness.
THe Pestilence, and other public sicknesses are those Arrows of the Almighty
wherewith he punishes public transgressions: This Hymn therefore is to
praise him, when he shall vnslack the Bow which was bent against us; and the
longer he withholds his hand, the more constantly ought we to continue our
public Thanksgiuings; for when we forget to persevere in praising God for his
mercies past, we usually revive those sins that will renew his Judgments.

Song. 89.
Sing this as the 9. Song.
WHen thou would, LORD, afflict a Land,
Or scourge thy People that offend,
To put in pra^^ise thy command,
Thy Creatures all on thee attend;
And thou, to execute thy Word,
Have Famine, Sickness, Fire, and Sword.
2
And here among us, for our sin,
A sore Disease has lately reigned,
Whose fury so vnstayd has bin,
It could by nothing be restrained;
But overthrew both weak and strong,
And took away both old and young.
3
To thee our cries we therefore sent,
Thy wonted Pity, LORD, to prove;
Our wicked ways we did repent,
Thy Visitation to remove;
And thou thine Angel did command,
To stay his wrath-inflicting hand.
4
For which thy love, in thankful wise,
Both hearts and hands to thee we raise,
And in the stead of former cries,
Do sing thee now a Song of Praise;
By whom the favor yet we have,
To escape the neuer-filled Grave.
For the Kings day.
THe first day of KINGS Reign, has been anciently observed in most
Kingdoms: And with us that custom is worthily retained; partly, for civil
ends; and partly, that the people might assemble together, to praise God for
the benefit the Commonwealth receives by the Prince; To pray for his
preservation also, and to desire a blessing upon him and his Government: To
which purpose this Song is composed.

Song. 90.
Sing this as the 3. Song.
WHen (LORD) we call to mind those things,
That should be sought of Thee,
Remembering that the hearts of Kings
At thy disposing be,
And how of all those blessings, which
Are outwardly possessed,
To make a Kingdom safe and rich,
Good Princes are the best;
2
We thus are moved to sing thy praise,
For Him thou daigned have,
And humbly beg, that all our days
Thy care of us may last.
Oh, bless our King, and let him reign,
In peaceful safety long,
The Faith's Defender to remain,
And shield the Truth from wrong.
3
With awful Love, and loving Dread,
Let us observe him, LORD,
And, as the Members with their Head,
In Christian peace accord:
And fill him with such royal care,
To cherish us for this;
As if his heart did feel we are
Some living parts of his.
4
Let neither Party struggle from
That duty should be shown,
Lest each to other plagues become,
And both be overthrown:
For, over a disobedient Land
Thou do a Tyrant set;
And those, that Tyrant-like command,
Have still with Rebels met.
5
Oh, never let so sad a doom
Upon these Kingdoms fall;
And to assure it may not come*
Our sins forgive us all:
Yea, let the Parties innocent
Some damage rather share,
Then, by unchristian discontent,
A double curse to bear.
6
Make us (that placed are below,
Our callings to apply)
Not ouer-curious be to know,
What he intends on high:
But, teach him justly to command,
Us rightly to obey;
So, both shall safe together stand,
And doubts shall fly away.
7
When hearts of Kings we pry into,
Our own we do beguile,
And what we ought our selves to do,
We leave undone the while:
Whereas, if each man would attend
The way he has to live,
And all the rest to thee commend,
Then all should better thrive.
8
Oh, make us, LORD, disposed thus,
And our dread Sovereign save;
Bless us in him, and him in us,
We both may blessings have;
That many years for him we may
This Song devoutly sing,
And mark it for a happy day,
When he became our King.
Here ends the Hymns, and Songs of the Church.
A Table of the Hymns and Songs, contained both in the first and second part
of this Book; the first number declaring the Song, the second the Page.
Hymns found in the Books of Moses, and in the other Books of holy
Scripture, called Hagiographa.
Song. Page. 1 THe first Song of Moses. 3 2 The second Song of Moses. 7 3 The
Song of Deborah, etc. 11 4 The Song of Hannah. 19 5 The Lamentation of David.
21 6 David's thanksgiving. 24 7 Nehemiahs Prayer. 27 8 The Song of Lemuel. 29
The Song of Solomon, divided into ten Canti^les.
9 The first Canticle. 33 10 The second Canticle. 35 11 The third Canticle. 37
12 The fourth Canticle. 40 13 The fifth Canticle. 42 14 The sixth Canticle. 46 15
The seventh Canticle. 48 16 The eight Canticle. 51 17 The ninth Canticle. 54
18 The tenth Canticle. 57
The Hymns found in the Books of the Prophets, with the Lamentations of
Jeremy.
19 The first Song of Esaias. 60 20 The second Song of Esaias. 62 21 The third Song
of Esaias. 64 22 The Prayer of Hezekiah. 69 23 Hezekiahs thanksgiving. 78 24 The
first Lamentation of Jeremy. 73 25 The second Lamentation. 79 26 The third
Lamentation. 85 27 The fourth Lamentation. 98 28 The fifth Lamentation. 93 29
The Prayer of Daniel. 96 30 The Prayer of Jonah. 99 31 The Prayer of Habakuk.
101
The Hymns of the New Testament.
32 The Song of our Lady, or Magnificat. 106 33 The Song of Zachary, or
Benedictus. 107 34 The Song of Angels. 109 35 The Song of Simeon. 110 36 The
Song of the Lamb. 111
The rest that make up the first Part are these.
37 The ten Commmandements. 112 38 The Lords Prayer. 114 39 The Apostles
Creed. 115 40 A Funeral Song. 116 41 The Song of the three Children. 118 42
The Song of S. Ambrose. 120 43 The Creed of Athanasius. 122 44 Come Holy Ghost,
or Veni Creator. 125
The second Part of the HYMNS and Songs of the Church. Spiritual Songs,
appropriated to those Times, in which are commemorated the principal Mysteries
of Christian RELIGION.
Song. Page. 45 The Song for Aduent. 130 46 For Christmas. 132 47 Another for
Christmas. 135 48 For the Circumcision. 136 49 For Twelfe-day. 138 50 For the
Purification. 139 51 The first day of Len^. 141 52 The Annuntiation. 143 53
Palme-Sunday. 144 54 Thursday before Easter. 145 55 Good Friday. 147 56 Easter
day. 151 57 Ascension day. 153 58 Whitsunday. 154 59 Trinity Sunday. 157 60
Sunday. 160
Spiritual Songs appropriated to the Saints days, most obseruable throughout
the year.
61 For S. Andrews day. 161 62 For S. Thomas day. 162 63 S. Steuens day. 163
64 S. John the Evangelist. 165 65 Innocents day. 166 66 The Conversion of S.
Paul. 168 67 S* Matthias day. 169 68 S. Marks day. 171 69 S. Philip and Jacobs
day. 172 70 S. Barnabas day. 173 71 S. John Baptists day. 175 72 S. Peter's day.
176 73 S. James day. 178 74 S. Bartholomewes day. 179 75 S. Mathewes day. 181
76 S. Michaels day. 182 77 S. Lukes day. 184 78 Simon and Iudes day. 185 79 All
Saints day. 186
Spiritual Songs fitted for other Solemnities, and to praise God for public
Benefits.
80 For Rogation week. 190 81 S. George his day. 194 82 For public
Deliverances. 196 83 For the Communion. 198 84 For Ember weeks. 204 85 For
seasonable weather. 206 86 For Plenty. 208 87 For Peace. 209 88 For Victory.
211 89 For Deliverance from public Sickness. 212 90 For the King. 213
The Authors Hymn.
GReat Almighty, GOD of Heaven,
Honor, praise, and glory be
Now, and still hereafter given,
For thy blessings daigned me:
Who have granted and prepared,
More then can be well declared.
By thy mercy thou did raise me,
From below the pits of clay;
Thou have taught my lips to praise thee,
Where thy love confess I may:
And those blessed hopes do leave me,
Whereof no man can bereave me.
By thy grace, those passions, troubles,
And those wants that me oppressed;
Have appear^d as water-bubbles,
Or as dreams, and things in jest:
For (thy leisure still attending)
I with pleasure saw their ending.
Those afflictions, and those terrors,
Which to others grim appear,
Did but show me where my errors,
And my imperfections were:
But distrustful could not make me
Of thy love; nor fright, nor shake me.
When in public to defame me,
A design was brought to pass,
On their heads that meant to shame me,
Their own malice turned was;
And that day, most grace was shown me,
Which they thought should have undone me.
Therefore, as thy blessed Psalmist,
When he saw, his wars had end,
(And his days were at the calmest)
Psalms and Hymns of praises pend:
So, my rest by thee enjoyed,
To thy praise I have employed.
Yea, remembering what I vowed,
When enclosed from all but thee,
I thy presence was allowed,
While the world neglected me:
This, my Muse has took upon her,
That she might advance thine honor.
LORD, accept my poor endeavor,
And assist thy servant so,
In good Studies to persevere,
That more fruitful he may grow:
And become thereby the meeker;
Not his own vain Glory seeker.
Grant my frailties and my folly,
(And those daily Sins I do;)
May not make this Work unholy,
Nor a blemish bring thereto:
But, let all my faults committed,
With compassion be remitted.
Those base hopes that would possess m^;
And, those thoughts of vain repute,
Which do now and then oppress me,
Do not, LORD, to me impute:
And, though part they will not from me,
Let them never overcome me.
Till this present, from obsceannesse,
Thou, oh LORD, have kept my Pen,
And my Uerse abhorred uncleanness,
Though it vain were, now, and then:
My loose thoughts it never enflamed:
But, I thereby them have tamed.
Still withold me from delighting
That, which thine may mis-beseeme;
And from every kind of Writing,
Whereby this may loose esteem,
That I may with Faith and Reason,
Every future Uolume season.
Oh, preserve me from committing
Aught that^s hainously amiss;
From all speeches him unfitting,
That has been employ^d on this:
Yea, as much as may be daigned,
Keep my very Thoughts unstained.
That these Helps unto Devotion,
May no scandal have at all,
LORD, I make to thee this motion,
For their sakes that use them shall:
Of the world I am not fearful,
Nor of mine own glory careful.
Whilst thy favors thou do daigne me,
I despise the worlds respect,
And most comforts entertain me,
When I suffer most neglect:
Yea, I then am best rewarded,
When I seem the least regarded.
For (oh) when I mind my Savior,
And how many a spightfull tongue,
Sland'red his most pure behavior,
And his pious't works did wrong:
I contented am, and care not,
Though my life, Detraction spare not*
Therefore, when that I shall blamed,
Or with cause, or causlesse be;
So thy Truth be not defamed,
Fall what can befall on me:
Let my fame of none be friended,
So thy Saints be not offended.
That is most my fear (oh Father)
Thy assistance therefore send;
And, oh let me perish, rather
Then thy little ones offend:
Let my life some honor do thee,
Or by death return me to thee.
For, thy praise I wish, and love it;
And (oh) let my end be shame,
If for mine own sake, I covet
Either life, or death, or fame:
So it may be to thy glory,
Let Detraction write my story.
But to thee which way aua^ling,
Can my shame or honor be?
Truth shall ever be prevailing,
Whatsoever is thought of me:
Thou naught loosest through my folly,
Nor gain'st ought by the most holy.
And I know, that whosoever
Has thy glory in esteem,
Will accept this good endeavor,
Whatsoever the Workman seem,
Let (oh therefore) be fulfilled,
That which thou (oh LORD) have willed.
And when I with Isreal's Singer,
To these Songs of Faith, shall learn,
Thy ten-stringed Law to finger,
And that Music to discern:
Lift me to that Angell-quire,
Whereunto thy Saints aspire.
FINIS.
To the Reader.
THat such as have skill and are delighted with music, may have the more
variety, to stir up the soon cloyed affections, these Hymns are fitted
with many new tunes; nevertheless all (but some few of them) may be sung to
such tunes as have been heretofore in use; For the benefit therefore of those
who have no experience in Music, I have here set down which Songs they be;
and to what old tunes they may be sung.

To the tune of the 1.2.3. and of an hundred other Psalms may be sung. Song
the 3.21.32.33.35.38.43.53.57.58.67.69.72.78.81.83.85.86.87.90.

To the tune of the 51.100.125. Psalms and the ten Commandments, etc. may be
sung Song the 5.6.8.11.12.27.28.34.42.44.48.51.52.56.60.61.64.65.66.68
70.73.76.77.80.88.

To the tune of the 112.127. Psalms and the Lords Prayer, etc. may be sung,
Song the 7.40.41.45.49.50.54.59 62.71.74.75.79.82.84.89.

To the tune of the 113. Psalm may be sung. Song the 9.10.17.

To the tune of the 25. Psalm may be sung, Song the 20.

To the tune of the 124. Psalm may be sung, Song the 47.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 2, in the Title of the Song, read Exodus 15. p. 6. in the Title of the
Song, read Deuteronomy. 32. pa. 40. li. 26 read the pauement of it, li. 43. read
with Charity, pa. 42. in the direction, for Thy, read Underneath, pa 67. li.
18. for alive read to life, pa. 110. li. 17. read to the Gentiles, pa. 138.
in the direction, for And read The, pa. 145. li. 17. for confuted read
comforted.


