THE ORDERS LAWS AND ANCIENT CUSTOMS OF SWANNS.

Caused to be Printed by IONN WITHERINGS Esquire, Master and Governor of the
Royal game of Swans and Signets, throughout England.

depiction of swan

London Printed by August. Mathewes. 1632.

The Kings Mark.
swan mark

The Queens Mark.
swan mark

The Prince his Mark.
swan mark

The Princes her mark
swan mark

The Kings stay Swanns.
swan mark

The Duchy of Landcaster.
swan mark

swan mark

swan mark

blank swan mark

blank swan mark

blank swan mark

blank swan mark

blank swan mark

blank swan mark

blank swan mark

To the Worshipful JOHN VVITHERINGS Esquire, chief Master and Governor of
the Royal game of Swanns and Signets, throughout the Kingdom of England.
SIR.
YOur deputy Master Loggins, hearing that I had some ancient notes of the
Customs and Orders concerning Swanns, desired me that you might have a sight
of them, which I have sent you; together with certain Presidents or forms of
Commissions for keeping Swanheards Courts, and Copies of ancient Patents, which
I received of a very honest gentleman Master Edward Clerk of Lincolnes Inn
Esquire, Father to Sir Edward Clerk one of the Masters of the Chauncery. These
he delivered me about 18. years ago at what time Sir Lawrence Tanfeeld late
Lord Chief Baron, and my self had a deputation from Sir William Androwes, of
that walk, which Master Loggins now has from you. Master Clerk was before
me, but as I remember he told me he had his deputation from my Lord of
Buckhurst, and not from Sir James Mervin. Howsoever, the titles are truly by
me transcribed, as I received them written with his own hand. There are
Orders also Printed; and yet somewhat differing from these, which Orders were
made at one particular Court long ago. And at a Court holden at Burford in the
county of Oxon about 15. years ago by the said Sir Lawrence Tanfeeld and
others, some new Orders were made; which Sir Laurence Tanfeeld said were
Warrantable by the Commission, and lawful to be made, where and when they were
fit and necessary for the preservation of Swannes. Yet so that those particular
Orders may be altered upon occasion: But the ancient Customs contained under
the name of Orders may not. There has been so little care taken for
preserving and publishing these ancient Customs, that they are not of all
Gamsters known. And your deputies commonly send their servants among us, who
as they are more or less covetous, so do they impose more or less upon us:
And when we that are the ancient gamsters oppose them, we have some
contention. You shall therefore (Sir) do well, if comparing these with your
other notes, you find them to serve generally for England, as well as for our
river of Thames: That you give to all your Deputies, and to all Commissioners
copies, that so all gamsters may know the certain Customs which are to be
kept: And so I bid you heartily Farewell.

Your Loving friend John D'oyly.
From Alborne in Wiltshire, this 26th of January, 1631.
THese Orders, according to Master Doyly his direction, I have examined and
compared with some other Orders which are now in print; and have been observed
and used in some parts of this Kingdom: but I find anciently used these Laws
Customs and Orders in most parts of this Kingdom, and not much differing from
those Orders now Printed, in matter of substance, but only in form. As also I
find a Commission used for the preservation of the Royal game of Swanns and
Signets directed to Noblemen, Knights, and Gentlemen, for the enquiring of
abuses committed contrary to these Laudable Orders and Customs, and the
offenses to punish according to their several qualities, and have caused these
Orders to be printed that thereby better knowledge may be taken of them by
every deputy Master of the Game.

JOHN WITHERINGS.

THE LAWS ORDERS and customs for Swans, taken forth of a book which the
Lord of Buckhurst delivered to Edward Clerk of Lincolnes Inn Esquier, to
peruse, An. Eliz. 26. On the backside of which book: It was thus entitled
Taken out of an ancient book remaining with Master Hambden, sometimes Master
of the Swannes.
FIRST, If any person does possess any Game of Swannes, that may not dispend
five Marks a year of Freehold (except the son of the King) the Swannes of
every such person are forfeit to the King 22. Edward 4.

2. If any person possess any Game of Swannes, and has not paid his fine for
the same: his Game of Swans is to be seized for the King, till his fine be
paid. Which fine is Six shillings eight pence, and no man is to pay it more
then once during his life.

3. But if any person having no Mark allowed him, have one or more Swannes
given him, or have any Land-bird sign marked: he may keep them in the common
River till the next Vpping time (without fine) paying the Commons and other
charges for the Vpping.

4. If any Person having Swannes, either within Franchises or without be
attainted, his Swannes are forfeit to the King only, and not to any other
person whatsoever.

5, Also all Swannes that are clear of Bill, without mark or sign mark, are
the Kings only, whether they be pinioned or flying Swannes.

6. Also all stray Swannes which no man can challenge by his Mark, those are
the Kings only. And they are to be seized for the King, and marked on the
leg, but are not to be carried away the firsty ear.

7. In all Common streams and private waters when Cignets are taken up, the
owner of the Cob must choose the first Cignet, and the Pen the next, and so in
order. But if there be three, then the owner of the Grass where they breed,
must have the third, for the spoil of his Grass: and must pay to the King
Twelve pence for the same Land-bird, saving in such places where of ancient
custom they pay less, or more.

8. If an Heiry be ledd with one Swanne only, the half of those Cignets shall
be seized for the King, till proof be made whose the Swanne was that is away;
but are not to be carried away that year.

9. The Master of the Game, or his Deputy shall yearly come at the usual
days of marking Swannes in that stream (on pain of loosing his Fees during
his absence) And he shall keep a Roll or standard book, containing all the
usual marks of that stream. He shall also keep a Register book of the
number of every man's Swannes, and the place where they are vpt. And shall
likewise bring the book of the last year. For which every Gamster is to give
him yearly, Four pence.

10. Also the Master of the Game, or his Deputy, is to have a penny for vpping
every white Swanne, and two pence for every Cignet, and shall have his dinner
and supper, and hay or grass for his Horse discharged by the Gamsters every
Vpping day, except in such streams where by ancient custom other composition
is used.

11. If any man desire the Master of the Game to enter any note in his book
(other then the notes due to be written as aforesaid) or to take any note out
of his book under his hand, he is to pay for the same iiii. d.

12 If any marked Swanne be vnpinioned, and thereby do or may fly, the Owner
of that Swanne is to pay Foure-pence. And if any man take any flying Swanne or
Cignet, he must bring the same to the Master of the Game or his Deputy, and
take for his pains 8. d. on pain of Forty shillings.

13 It is ordained that no person shall lay lepes, set any Nets, or Dragge
within the Common streams or Rivers upon the day time from the Feast of the
^nuention of the Cross unto the Feast of Lamas, upon pain so often as they be
found so offending to forfeite 20. s.

14 If any Swanne be found double marked, imbezeled, or by unskillfulness put
out of right mark, the Master of the Game is to choose five Gamsters (such as
are indifferent) to judge who has right to that Swanne. And he to whom the
Swanne shall be adjudged, shall pay Foure-pence for registring the said
imbezeled or wrong mark. But if those five, or the greater number of them do
no^ adiudge the said Swanne to one of the Gamsters, then the Swanne is due to
the King.

15 The usual days for vpping of Swannes are not to be altered without
consent of the greater number of Gamsters of that stream, and that by
Proclamation made in all market Towns near the said stream.

16 No person shall go on marking without the Master of the game, or his
Deputy be present upon pain to forfeit Fourtie-shillings. But if by sickness
or other occasion, he be absent at the usual Vpping days, the company may
go on, so that some sworn Gamster keep the Register book, and receive all
the dues, and deliver them to him at his coming.

17 If any person do imbezele, raze, or alter, the mark of any Swanne, to the
loss or hindering of any man's game, he shall suffer one years imprisonment,
and be fined Three pounds six shillings, eight pence, and for ever be disabled
to be a Gamster.

18 And to the end that in Vpping-time no Swanne be imbezeld, it is ordained,
that no man draw blood of any swanne, till the Master of the Game, or his
Deputy have viewed the said swanne, and declared whose the swanne is.

19 No swanne (other then Cleerebild) is to be marked for the King on the
beak, but only on the leg. For two marks on the beak are unlawful.

20 The Master of the Game may presently sell or carry away all swannes that are
Cleerebild, imbezeled (as aforesaid) and all swannes forfeit for want of
Freehold, or by attaint of the Owner.

21 And yet neither the Master of the Game, nor any other Gamster may take away
any swanne which is in brood with any other man's, or which is coupled, and
has a walk, without the others consent, for breaking the brood.

22 It is ordained that Commons, that is to say, dinner and supper is to be
paid daily by every Banker or Commoner, whether he be present or absent. But
if he be absent, the Master of the Game is to lay it out for him (as likewise
all other dues) till their next meeting or Vpping. But the said Commons shall
not exceed above Twelue-pence a man. And if the Company will spend more, they
are to pay the overplus, by the Poll.

23 To the end that diet may be had at a reasonable rate, and likewise
lodging: the place of taking both, is to be chosen by the greater number of the
Co^moners.

24 If any person be found carrying a Swan-hooke within forty lugg of any
stream, saving on the Vpping days, and not accompanied with two swan-herdes,
he shall forfeit Thirteene-shillings four pence. But upon the Vpping days,
every Gamster that caryeth not a Hook (except such Gentlemen as for pleasure
go to see their own game) shall forfeit eight pence a day, the one half to
be for the Master of the Game, the other half for the company.

25 No person shall take up any Swanne or Cignet marked or unmarked, unless it
be done in the presence of two other swan-herdes, and that by allowance of the
Master of the Game, or his Deputy, for which allowance he is to pay
Foure-pence upon pain to forfeite Forty shillings.

26 If any swan-herdes depart before he have made even with the Master of the
Game, for all dues, he is to forfeite Twelve pence: For which, as for all
dues, the Master of the Game, or his Deputy, may distreine the game: and at the
next Vpping may pay himself by distraining and sale of the Game, rendering to
the party the overplus.

27 If there be any person or persons, that has Swannes, that do heirie upon
any of their Rivers, or several waters; and afterward come to the common water
or River, they shall pay a Land-bird to the King, and be obedient to all
Swan-lawes: For diverse such persons do use collusion to defraude the King of
his Right.

28 If any person shall take away the egg or eggs of any swanne: Every such
Offender shall be imprisoned a year and a day; and shall pay Thirteen
shillings Four pence for every Egg so taken away. Whereof half to the King,
and half to the Owner of the swan. 11. of Henry 7.

29 If any person do drive away any Swanne breeding or providing to breed, be
it on his own ground, or on any other man's: he shall be fined 13. s. 4 d. and
shall suffer one years imprisonment. 11. of Henry 7.

30 If any Dog shall drive any Swanne away from her nest; the Owner of such
Dog shall forfeite Thirteen shillings four pence. But if any Dog shall
kill any old Swanne; the Owner of such Dog shall forfeite to the King
Fouretie shillings. Whether he be there or not.

31 If any person shall hunt any Ducks, or any other chase in the water with
any Dog or Dogs in fence time; (that is, from the feast of Easter till
Lammas Eve) he shall pay for every offense, six shillings eight pence.

32 It is ordained that if any person does set any Snares or any manner of
Nets, Lime, or Engines, to take Bittorns or Swannes, from the Feast of Easter,
to the Sunday after Lammas day: He or they to forfeite to the Kings Majesty
for every time so setting, 6. s. 8. d.

33 If there be any wears upon the Rivers, not having grates before them,
whereby the Swannes and Cignets may be defended from drowning: the Owner of
such Wear shall forfeite to the King thirteen shillings four pence.

34 All Fishermen are to assist the Master of the Game or his Deputy, in the
execution of their office on the Vpping days, with their boats at the upper
end of their several waters, upon pain of ten shillings for every default.
For which service the Master of the Game shall cause the accustomed Fees to be
paid to the said Fishermen.

35 Lastly, If there be any other Misdemeanour, or Offense committed, or done
by any Owner of any Game, Swan-heard, or other person whatsoever, contrary to
any Law, ancient Custom, or usage heretofore used and allowed, and not before
herein particularly mentioned or expressed, you shall present the same Offense,
that reformation may be had, and the Offenders punished, according to the
quantity and quality of the several Offenses,

AT every Swan-heards court, all Offenses committed by breach of these orders,
are to be enquired of.

Note that the Swan-heard for the Duchy of Lancaster is to observe, and see
observed, all these orders in his circuit, and to receive the Fees belonging
to the Kings Swan heard.

Note, that in all for feitures to the King, a fourth part is due to him that
gives information of the offense.

Note that none is to go as a Swan-vpper, but those who are sworn, if Courts
be often kept.

FINIS.
God save the King.

