FAIRE-VIRTVE, THE MISTRESS OF PHIL'ARETE. Written by George Wither.

Catul. Carm. xv* -- nihil veremur
Istos, qui inplatea, mod^ huc, modo illuc
I^ re pretereunt sua occupati.
LONDON, Printed for John Grismand. M.DC.XXII.

THE STATIONER TO THE READER.
THis, being one of the Authors first Poems, was composed many years agone;
and unknown to him, gotten out of his custody by an acquaintance of his. And
coming lately to my hands without a Name, it was thought to have so much
resemblance of the Maker, that many, upon the first sight, undertook to guess
who was Author of it: And, persuaded that it was likely also, to become
profitable both to them, and me.

Whereupon, I got it authorized, according to Order: intending to publish it,
without further inquiry. But, attaining by chance a more perfect knowledge to
whom it most properly belonged: I thought it fitting to acquaint him
therewithal. And did so; desiring also, both his good will to publish the
same, and leave to pass it under his Name. Both which, I found him very
unwilling to permit; least the seeming lightness of such a Subject, might
somewhat disparage, the more serious Studies, which he has since undertaken.

Yet, doubting (this being got out of his Custod^^) some imperfecter Coppies
might hereafter be scattered abroad in writing, or, be unknown to him,
imprinted: He was pleased (upon my importunities) to condescend that it might
be published, without his Name. And his words were these.

When (said he) I first composed it, I well liked thereof; and it well enough
became my years: but now, I neither like, nor dislike it. That (therefore) it
should be di^ulged, I desire not: and whether it be, or whether (if it happen
so) it be approved or no, I care not. For this I am sure of: howsoever it be
valued; it is worth as much as I prize it at: likely it is also to be as
beneficial to the World, as the World has been to me; and will be more then
those who like it not, ever deserved at my hands.

These were his speeches: And (if you looked for a Prologue; thus much he
wished me to tell you, in stead thereof: because (as he said) he himself had
somewhat else to do. Yet, (to acknowledge the truth) I was so earnest with
him, that, as busy as he would seem to be, I got him to write this Epistle
for me: And have thereunto set my Name. Which, he wished me to confess: Partly,
to avoid the occasion of belying my Invention; and partly, because he thought
some of you would suppose so much.

I entreated him, to explain his meaning, in certain obscure passages. But,
he told me, how that were to take away the employment of his Interpreters:
Whereas, he would purposely, leave somewhat remaining doubtful, to see what
Sir POLITIC WOVLDBEE, and his Companions could pick out of it.

I desired him also, to set down, to what good purposes, this Poem would
serve. But his Reply was: How, that would be well enough found out, in the
perusing, by all such as had honest understandings: and they who are not so
provided; he hopes will not read it. More, I could not get from him.

Whether therefore, this MISTRESS OF PHIL'ARETE, be really a Woman, shaddowed
under the name of VIRTVE: or VIRTVE only, whose loveliness is represented by
the Beauty of an excellent Woman: Or, whether it mean both together; I cannot
tell you. But, thus much I dare promise for your money: that, here, you shall
find familiarly expressed, both such Beauties as young men, are most entangled
withal; and and the excellency also of such, as are most worthy their
affection. That, seeing both impa^tially set forth, by him that was capable of
both, they might the better settle their love on the best.

Hereby also, those Women, who desire to be truly beloved, may know what
makes them, so to be. And, seek to acquire those accomplishments of the Mind,
which may endeare them, when the sweetest Features of a beautiful Face, shall
be converted into Deformities. And, here is described, that Loveliness of
theirs, which is the principal object of wanton affection, to no worse end:
but, that those, who would never have looked on this Poem (if Virtue and
Goodness, had been therein, no otherwise represented, then as they are
objects of the Soul) might, where they expected the satisfaction of their
sensuality only; meet with that also, which would insinaute into them, an
apprehension of more reasonable, and most excellent perfections. Yea, whereas,
the common opinion of Youth has been; that, only old men, and such as are
unable, or past delighting in a bodily loveliness, are those who are best
capable of the Minds perfections: And, that they do therefore so much
prefer them before the other; because their Age, or stupiditie has deprived
them of being sensible what pleasures they yield. Though, this be the vulger
error; yet, here it shall appear, that he, who was able to conceive the most
excellent pleasingnesse, which could be apprehended in a Corporal Beauty;
found it (even when he was most enamored with it) far short of that
inexpressible sweetness, which he discovered in a virtuous and well-tempered
Disposition. And if this be not worth your money, keep it.

JOHN MARRIOT.

PHIL'ARETE TO HIS MISTRESS.
Hail, thou fairest of all Creatures,
Upon whom the Sun does shine:
Model of all rarest Features,
And perfections most divine.
Thrice All-haile: And blessed be,
Those, that love, and honor thee.
Of thy worth, this rural Story,
Thy unworthy Swain has pend:
And, to thy ne're-ending glory,
These plain Numbers does commend.
Which, ensuing Times shall warble,
When it is lost, that is writ in Marble.
Though thy praise, and high deseruings
Cannot all, be here expressed:
Yet, my love, and true-obseruings,
Someway, ought to be professed.
And, where greatest love we see,
Highest things attempted be.
By thy Beauty, I have gained,
To behold, the best perfections:
By thy Love, I have obtained,
To enjoy the best affections.
And my tongue, to sing thy praise;
Love, and Beauty, thus does raise.
What, although in rusticke shadows,
I, a Shepherds breeding had?
And, confined to these Meadows;
So, in home-spunn Russet clad?
Such as I, have now and then,
Dared as much, as greater men.
Though a stranger to the Muses,
Young, obscured, and despised:
Yet, such Art, thy Love infuses,
That, I thus, have Poetiz'd.
Read; and be content to see,
Thy admyred Power in me.
And, oh grant, thou Sweetest Beauty,
(Wherewith ever Earth was graced)
That this Trophee of my Duty,
May with Favor be embraced:
And disdain not, in these Rymes,
To be sung, to Aftertimes.
Let those doters on Apollo,
That adore the Muses, so,
(And, like Geese, each other follow)
See, what Love alone, can do.
For, in Loue-layes; Grove, and Field;
Nor to Schools, nor Courts will yield.
On this Glass, of thy perfection,
If that any Women pry;
Let them thereby take direction,
To adorn themselves thereby.
And, if ought amiss they view,
Let them dress themselves anew.
Young Men, shall by this, acquainted
With the truest Beauties grow:
So, the Counterfeit, or painted,
They may shun, when them they know.
But, the Way, all will not find:
For, some eyes have, yet are blind.
Thee, entirely, I have loved,
So, thy Sweetness, on me wrought;
Yet, thy Beauty never moved,
Ill temptations, in my thought.
But, still did thy Beauties Ray;
Sun-like, drive those Foggs away.
Those, that MISTRESSES are named,
And for that, suspected be;
Shall not need to be ashamed,
If they pattern take by thee.
Neither shall their SERVANTS fear,
Favors, openly to wear.
Thou, to no man favor dainest,
But what is fitting to bestow;
Neither, Servants entertainest,
That can ever wanton grow.
For, the more they look on thee;
Their Desires still bettered be.
This, thy Picture, therefore, show I
Naked unto every eye.
Yet, no fear of Rival know I,
Neither touch of Jealousy.
For, the more make love to thee;
I, the more shall pleased be.
I, am no Italian Lover,
That will mewe thee in a Iayle;
But, thy Beauty I discover,
English-like, without a veil.
If, thou may be won away;
Win and wear thee, he that may.
Yet, in this, thou may believe me;
(So indifferent though I seem)
Death with tortures, would not grieve me,
More, then loss of thy esteem.
For, if VIRTVE me forsake;
All, a scorn of me will make.
Then, as I on Thee relying,
Do no changing, fear in Thee:
So, by my defects supplying,
From all changing, keep thou me.
That, unmatched we may prove
Thou, for Beauty; I, for Love.
Then, while their Loves, are forgotten,
Who to Pride, and Lust were slaves;
And, their Mistresses quite rotten,
Lie unthought on, in their graves.
Kings and Queens (in their despite)
Shall, to mind us, take delight.
FAIRE-VIRTVE: OR, THE MISTRESS OF PHIL'ARETE.
TWo pretty Rills do meet, and meeting make
Within one valley, a large silver lake:
About whose banks the fertile mountains stood,
In ages passed bravely crowned with wood;
Which lending Cold-sweet-shadowes, gave it grace,
To be accounted Cynthia's Bathing place.
And from her father Neptunes brackish Court,
Fair Thetis thither often would resort,
Attended by the Fishes of the Sea,
Which in those sweeter waters came to plea.
There, would the daughter of the Sea-God diue;
And thither came the Land-Nymphs every Eve,
To wait upon her: bringing for her brows,
Rich garlands of sweet flowers, and Beechy boughs.
For, pleasant was that Poole; and near it, then,
Was neither rotten Mersh, nor boggy Fen.
It was nor ouergrowne with boystrou^ Sedge,
Nor grew there rudely then along the edge,
A bending Willow, nor a pricky Bush,
Nor broadleafd Flag, nor Reed, nor knotty Rush.
But here, well ordered was a grove with Bowers:
There grassy plots set round about with Flowers.
Here, you might (through the water) see the land,
Appear, strowd over with white or yellow sand.
^onn, deeper was it; and the wind by whiffes.
Would make it rise, and wash the little cliffes,
On which, often pluming sat (vnfrighted than)
The gagling Wild goose, and the snow-white Swan:
With all those flocks of Fowls, which to this day,
Upon those quiet waters breed, and play.
For, though those excellences wanting be,
Which once it had; it is the same, that we
By Transposition name the Ford of Arle.
And out of which along a Chalky Marle)
That River trils, whose waters wash the Fort,
In which brave Arthur kept his royal Court.
North-east (not far from this great Poole) there lies
A tract of Beechy mountains, that arise
With leasurely-ascending to such height,
As from their tops the warlike I Will of Wight.
You in the Oceans bosom may epsy,
Though near two hundred furlongs thence it lie.
The pleasant way, as up those hills you clime,
Is strewed over, with Mariarome, and Thyme.
Which grows unset. The hedge-rowes do not want
The Cowslip, violet, Primrose, nor a plant,
That freshly sents: as Birch both green and tall;
Low Sallowes, on whose bloomings Bees do fall.
Fair Woodbinds which, about the hedges twine;
Smooth Priuet, and the sharpesweete Eglantine.
With many more, whose lea^es and blossoms fair,
The Earth addorne, and often perfumes the air.
When you unto the highest do attain;
An intermixture both of Wood and Plain,
You shall behold: which (though aloft it lie)
Has downs for sheep, and fields for husbandry*
So much (at least) as little needs more,
If not enough to merchandise their store.
In every Row has Nature planted there,
Some banquet, for the hungry passenger.
For here, the Haste-nut and Filbird grows;
There Bulloes, and little further Sloes.
On this hand, stands a fair weilding-tree;
On that, large thickets of black Cherries be.
The shrubbie fields, are Raspice Orchards there,
The new fel'd woods, like Strabery-gardens are:
And, had the King of Rivers blessed those hills
With some small number of such pretty Rills
As flow elsewhere, Arcadia had not seen
A sweeter plot of Earth then this had been.
For what offense this Place was scanted so
Of springing waters, no record does show:
Nor have they old tradition left, that tells;
But till this day, at fifty fathom Wels
The Shepherds drink. And strange it was to hear
Of any Swain that ever lived there,
Who either in a Pastorall-Ode had skill,
Or knew to set his fingers to a quill.
For, rude they were who there inhabited,
And to a dull contentment being bred,
They no such art esteemed, nor took much heed
Of any thing, the world without them did.
Even there; and in the least frequented place
Of all these mountains, is a little space
Of pleasant ground hemd in with dropping trees,
And those so thick, that Phoebus scarcely sees
The earth they grow on once in all the year,
Nor what is done among the shadows there.
Along those lovely paths (where never came
Report of Pan, or of Apollo's name,
Nor rumor of the Muses till of late)
Some Nymphs were wandering: and by chance, or Fate
Upon a Laund arrived, where they met
The little flock of Pastor Philaret.
They, were a troop of Beauties known well nigh
Through all the Plains of happy Britany.
A Shepherds lad was he, obscure and young,
Who (being first that ever there had sung)
In homely Verse, expressed Country loves;
And only told them to the Beechy groves:
As if to sound his name he never meant,
Beyond the compass that his Sheep-walke went.
They saw not him; nor them perceived he:
For, in the branches of a Maple-tree
He shrouded sat, and taught the hollow hill
To Echo forth the Music of his quill:
Whose tatling voice redoubled so the sound,
That where he was conceald, they quickly found.
And there, they heard him sing a Mad^igall;
That soon betrayed his cunning to them all.
Full rude it was no doubt, but such a Song,
Those rusticke, and obscured shades among,
Was never heard (they say) by any care;
Until his Muses had inspired him there.
Though mean and plain, his Country habit seemd,
Yet by his Song the Ladies rightly deemd,
That either he had travailed abroad,
Where Swains of better knowledge make abode.
Or else, that some brave Nymph who used that Grove,
Had dained to enrich him, with her love.
Approaching nearer, therefore, to this Swain,
They him saluted; and he, them again:
In such good fashion, as well seemd to be
According to their state and his degree.
Which greetings, being passed; and much chat,
Concerning him, the place, with this and that;
He, to an Arbor does those beauties bring;
Where, he them prays to sit, they him to sing:
And to express that untaught Country Art,
In setting forth the Mistress of his heart;
Which they ore^eard him practice, when unseen,
He thought no ear had witness of it been.
At first (as much unable) he refusd;
And seemed willing to have been excusde,
From such a task. For, tr^st me Nimphs (quoth he)
I would not purposely uncivil be,
Nor churlish in denying what you crave;
But, as I hope Great Pan my flock will save,
I rather wish, that I might heard of none,
Enjoy my Music, by my self alone:
Or, that the murmers of some little Flood
(Joined with the friendly Echoes of the wood)
Might be th'impartial^ Vmpires of my wit,
Then vent it, where the worla might hear of it.
And doubtless, I had sung less loud while-ere,
Had I but thought of any such so near.
Not that I either wish obscurifide,
Her matchless Beanty; or desire to hide
Her sweet perfections. For, by Love I swear,
The utmost happiness I aim at here,
It but to compass worth enough to raise
A high-built Trophee equal with her praise.
Which ( fairest Ladies) I shall hope in vain:
For, I was meanly bred on yonder Plain.
And, though I can well prove my Blood to be
Derived from no ignoble Stems to me:
Yet Fate and Time them so obscured and crossed,
That with their Fortunes their esteem is lost.
And whatsoere repute I strive to win,
Now, from my self alone, it must begin.
For, I have nor estate, nor friends, nor fame,
To purchase either credit to my name,
Or gain a good Opinion; though I do
Ascend the height I shall aspire unto.
If any of those virtues yet I have,
Which honor to my Predecessors gave,
There Is all that is left me. And though some contemn^
Such needy Jewels; yet it was for them,
My Faire-one did my humble suit affect,
And dayned my aduenturous love respect.
And by their help, I passage hope to make
Through such poor things as I dare undertake.
But, you may say; what goodly thing alas!
Can my despised meannesse bring to pass?
Or what great Monument of honor raise
To Virtue, in these Vice abounding days?
In which (a thousand times) more honor finds,
Ignoble gotten means, then noble minds?
Indeed, the world affoordeth small reward
For honest minds; and therefore her regard
I seek not after: neither do I care,
If I have bliss, how others think I fare.
For, so my thoughts have rest, it yrkes not me,
Though none but I, do know how blessed they be.
Here therefore, in these groves and hidden plains,
I pleased sit alone; and many strains
I carroll to my self, these hills among:
Where no man comes to interrupt my Song.
Whereas, if my rude lays make known I should,
Beyond their home; perhaps, some Carpers would
(Because they have not heard from whence we be)
Traduce, abuse, and scoff both them and me.
For, if our great and learned Shepherds (who
Are graced with wit, and fame, and favors to,)
With much ado, escape vncensurd may;
What hopes have I to pass vnscoft I pray,
Who yet unto the Muses am unknown?
And live vnhonoured, here among mine own?
A gadding humor seldom takes me,
To range out further then yonn mountains be:
Nor has applausiue Rumor borne my name
Upon the spreading wings of sounding Fame.
Nor can I think (fair Nymphs) that you resort
For other purpose, then to make a sport
At that simplicity which shall appear
Among the rude vntutor'd Shepherds here.
I know that you my Noble Mistress ween
At best, a homely Milk-maid on the Green;
Or some such Country Less, as tasked stays
At servile labor until Holy days.
For, poor men's virtues so neglected grow,
And are now prized at a rate so low,
As it is impossible, You should be brought,
To let it with belief possess your thought,
That any Nymph whose love might worthy be;
Would daigne to cast respective eyes on me.
You see I live, possessing none of those
Gay things, with which the world enamored grows.
To woo a Courtly Beauty, I have neither
Rings, Bracelets, Jewels, nor a Scarf, nor Feather.
I use no double dyed Cloth to wear;
No Scrip embroydered richly do I bear:
No silken Belt, nor Sheephooke laid with pearls,
To win me favor from the Shepherds Girls.
No place of office, or Command I keep,
But this my little Flock of homely sheep.
And in a word; the sum of all my pelf
Is this; I am the Master of my self.
No doubt; in Courts of Princes you have been,
And all the pleasures of the Palace seen.
There, you beheld brave Courtly passages,
Between Heroes and their Mistresses.
You, there perhaps (in presence of the King)
Have heard his learned Bards and Poets sing.
And what contentment then, can wood, or field,
To please your curious understandings yield?
I know, you walked hither, but to prove,
What silly Shepherds do conceive of love:
Or to make trial how our simpleness
Can passions force, or Beauties power express:
And when you are departed, you will joy,
To laugh, or descant on the Shepherds boy.
But yet (I vow) if all the Art I had
Could any more esteem, or glory add
To her unmatched worth; I would not weigh
What you intended. Prithee lad, quoth they,
Distrustful of our Courtsie do not seem.
Her Nobleness can never want esteem;
Nor thy concealed Measures be disgraced,
Though in a meaner person they were placed:
If thy too-modestly reserved Quill,
But reach that height, which we suppose it will.
Thy meannesse or obscurenesse cannot wrong,
The Nymph thou shall eternize in thy Song.
For, as it higher reares thy glory, that
A noble Mistress thou have aimed at:
So, more unto her honor it will prove,
That whilst deceauing shadows others move,
Her constant eyes, could pass unmoved by,
The subtle times bewitching bravery;
And those obscured virtues love in thee,
That with despised meannesse clouded be.
Now then, for her sweet sake, whose Beauteous eye,
Has filled thy soul with heavenly Poesy,
Sing in her praise some new inspired strain:
And, if within our power there shall remain,
A favor to be done may pleasure thee:
A^ke, and obtain it whatsoere it be.
Fair Ladies quoth the lad, such words as those,
Compel me can^ and, therewithal he rose;
Returned them thanks, obeisance made, and than,
Down sat again, and thus to sing began.
YOU, that at a blush can tell,
Where the best perfections dwell;
And the substance can conjecture,
By a shadow, or a Picture:
Come, and try, if you by this;
Know my Mistress, who she is.
For, though I am far unable
Here to match Apelles table,
Or draw Zeuxes, cunning Lines,
Who, so painted Bacchus Vines,
That the hungry Byrds did muster,
Round the counterfeited Cluster.
Though, I vaunt not to inherit,
Petrarchs, yet vnequal'd spirit;
Nor to quaffe the sacred Well,
Half so deep as Astrophill:
Though, the much commended Celi^,
Lovely Laura, Stella, Delia,
(Who in former times excelled)
Live in Lines vnparaled;
Making us believe 'twere much,
Earth should yield another such.
Yet, assisted but by Nature,
I assay to paint a Creatnre
Whose rare worth, in future years,
Shall be praysd, as much as theirs.
Nor let any think amiss,
That I have presumed this:
For, a gentle Nymph is she,
And has often honored me.
She Is, a noble spark of light,
In each part so exquisit,
Had she in times passed been,
They had made her, beauties Queen.
Then, shall cowardly despair,
Let the most unblemished fair,
For default of some poor Art
(Which her favor may impart)
And the sweetest Beauty fade,
That was ever borne or made?
Shall, of all the fair ones, she
Only so unhappy be;
As to live in such a Time,
In so rude, so dull a Clime,
Where no spirit can ascend
High enough, to apprehend
Her vnprized excellence,
Which lies hid from common sense?
Never shall a stain so vile,
Blemish this, our Peets I Will.
I my self, will rather run,
And seek out for Helicon.
I, will wash, and make me clean,
In the waves of Hyppocrene:
And in spite of Fortunes bars,
Climb the Hill that braues the stars.
Where, if I can get no Muse
That will any skill infuse,
(Or my just attempt prefer)
I will make a Muse of Her:
Whose kind heat shall soon distill,
Art, into my ruder quill.
By her favor, I will gain
Help, to reach so rare a Strain:
That the learned Hills shall wonder,
How the untaught valleys under,
Met with Raptures so divine,
Without knowledge of the NINE.
I, that am a Shepherds Swain,
Piping on the lowly plain,
And no other Music can,
Then what learned I have of Pan.
I, who never sung the Lays,
That deserve Apollo's bays,
Hope not only, here to frame,
Measures, which shall keep Her name,
From the spite of wasting Times;
But (enshrined in sacred Rimes)
Place her, where her form divine,
Shall to after ages shine:
And without respect of Odds,
Vye renown with Demy-Gods.
Then, whilst of her praise I sing,
Harken Valley, Grove and Spring;
Listen to me sacred Fountains,
Solitary Rocks, and Mountains:
Satyrs, and you wanton Elues,
That do nightly sport your selves.
Shepherds, you that on the Reed,
Whistle while your lambs do feed:
Aged Woods, and Floods, that know,
What has been long times ago.
Your more serious Notes among,
Hear, how I can in my Song,
Set a N^mphs perfection forth:
And, when you have heard her worth;
Say, if such another Less,
Ever known to mortal was.
Listen Lordlings; you that most,
Of your outward honors boast.
And you Gallants; that think scorn,
We to lowly fortunes borne,
Should attain to any graces,
Where, you look for sweet embraces.
See, if all those vanities,
Whereon your affection lies.
Or the Titles, or the power,
By your Fathers virtues your,
Can your Mistresses enshrine,
In such state, as I will mine:
Who am forced, to importune
Favors, in despite of Fortune.
Beauties listen; chiefly you,
That yet know not Virtues due.
You, that think there are no sports,
Nor no honors but in Courts.
(Though of thousands there lives not
Two, but dye and are forgot:)
See, if any Palace yields
Ought more glorious, then the Fields.
And consider well, if we
May not as high-flying be
In our thoughts, as you that sing
In the Chambers of a King.
See; if our contented minds,
Whom Ambition never blinds:
(We, that clad in homespun gray,
On our own sweet Meadows play)
Cannot honor (if we please)
Where we list as well as these.
Or as well of worth approve;
Or with equal passions love.
See, if beauties may not touch
Our soone-louing hearts as much:
Or our services effect
Favors, with as true respect
In your good conceits to rise,
As our painted Butterflies.
And you Fairest give her room,
When your Sexes pride does come:
For that Subject of my song,
I inuoke these Groves among,
To be witness of the Lays,
Which I carroll in her praise.
And because she soon will see,
If my Measures faulty be;
Whilst I chaunt them, let each Rhyme
Keep a well proportioned time:
And with strains that are divine,
Meet her thoughts in every line.
Let each accent there, present
To her Soul a new content;
And, with rauishings so ceaze her,
She may feel the height of pleasure.
You enchanting spells, that lie,
Lurking in sweet Poesy:
(And to none else will appear,
But to those that worthy are)
Make Her know there is a power
Ruling in these Charms of your;
That transcends (a thousand heights)
Ordinary men's delights:
And can leave within her breast,
Pleasures, not to be expressed.
Let her linger, on each strain,
As if she would heare't again;
And were loath to part from thence,
Till she had the quintessence,
Out of each conceit she meets,
And had stord her, with those sweets.
Make her, by your Art to see:
I, that am her Swain, was he,
Unto whom all beauties here,
Were alike, and equal dear.
That I could of freedom boast,
And of favors with the most:
Yet, now (nothing more affecting)
Sing of Her, the rest neglecting.
Make her heart, with full Compassion,
Judge the merit of true passion;
And, as much my love prefer,
As I strive to honor Her.
Lastly; you, that will (I know)
Hear me, wh'ere you should or no.
You, that seek to turn all Flowers,
By your breathes infectious powers,
Into such rank loathsome weeds,
As your dunghill nature breeds.
Let your hearts be chaste, or here
Come not, till you purge them clear.
Mark; and mark then, what is worst:
For, what ere it seem at first;
If you bring a modest mind,
You shall naught immodest find.
But, if any too severe,
Happ to lend a partial ear;
Or, out of his blindness yawne,
Such a word, as Oh profane:
Let him know thus much from me,
If here is ought profane, it is he;
Who applies these excellences,
Only to the touch of senses:
And, dimm sighted, cannot see,
Where the soul of this, may be.
Yet, that no offense may grow,
It Is their choice, to stay, or go.
Or, if any for despite,
Rather comes, then for delight:
For his presence I Will not pray,
Nor his absence: come he may.
Critticks shall admitted be,
Though I know they will carpe at me.
For I neither fear nor care,
What in this, their censures are.
If the Verse here used, be
Their dislike; it likes me.
If my Method they deride,
Let them know, Love is not tide
In his free Discourse, to choose
Such strict rules-as Arts-men use.
These may prate of Love; but they,
Know him not: for He will play
From the matter, now and then,
Off and on, and off again.
If this Prologue tedious seem,
Or the rest too long they deem:
Let them know, my love they win,
Though they go ere I begin,
Just as if they should attend me,
Till the last, and there commend me.
For, I will for no man's pleasure
Change a Syllable or measure:
Neither for their praises add
Ought to mend what they think bad:
Since it never was my fashion,
To make work of Recreation.
Pedants shall not tie my strains,
To our Antique Poets veins;
As if we, in latter days,
Knew to love, but not to praise.
Being borne as free as these,
I will sing, as I shall please;
Who, as well new paths may run,
As the best before have done.
I disdain to make my Song,
For their pleasures short or long.
If I please I Will end it here:
If I list I Will sing this year.
And, though none regard of it,
By my self I pleased can sit,
And, with that contentment cheer me*
As if half the world did hear me.
But because I am assured,
All are either so coniured,
As they will my Song attend,
With the patience of a friend;
Or (at least) take note, that I
Care not much: now willingly
I these goodly Colors lay,
Wind, nor Rain, shall we are away.
But retain their purest glass,
When the Statues made of brass,
For some Princes more renown,
Shall be wholly overthrown:
Or (consumed with cankred rust)
Lie neglected in the dust.
And my Reason gives direction,
(When I sing of such perfection)
First, those beauties to declare,
Which (though hers) without her are.
To advance her fame, I find,
Those are of a triple kind.
Privileges she has store,
At her birth, since, and before.
From before her birth, the fame,
She of high discents may claim;
(Whose wel-gotten honors, may
Her deserving more display)
For, from heavenly race she springs,
And from high and mighty Kings.
At her birth; she was by Fate
In those Parents fortunate,
Whose estates and virtues stood,
Answerable to their Blood.
Then, the Nation, Time, and Place,
To the rest may add some grace.
For the People, with the Clime,
And the fashions of the time;
(In all which she has been blessed,
By enjoying them at best)
Do not only mend the features,
But often times make better natures.
Whereas, those who hap not so,
Both deformed, and ruder grow.
In these Climes, and latter days,
To deserve sweet Beauties praise,
(Where so many females dwell,
That each seems to excel)
In more glory twenty fold,
Then it was in days of old,
When our ordinary Fair ones
Might have been esteemed rare ones;
And have made a subject fit,
For their brauest Poets wit.
Little P^ush-lights, or a spark,
Shines fairly in the dark:
And, to him occasion gives
That from sight of lesser lives
To adore it: yet the Ray
Of one Torch will take away
All the light of twenty more,
That shined very well before.
So, those petty Beauties, which
Made the times before us rich;
Though but sparkles seemd a flame,
Which has been increast by Fame,
And their true affections, who
Better never lived to know.
Whereas, her if they had seen,
She had sure adored been,
And ta^ght Ages past, to sing
Sweeter in their Sonneting.
Such a Ray, so clear, so bright,
Had out-shined all the light,
Of a thousand such as theirs,
Who were then esteemed Stars;
And would have enlightened, near
Half the worlds wide Hemisphere.
She is fairest, that may pass
For a fair one, where the Less
Trips it on the Country green,
That may equal Spartas Queen.
Where (in every street you see)
Throngs of Nymphs and Ladies be,
That a^ fair enough to move
Angels; and enamour love.
She must matchless features bring
That now mooues a Muse to sing,
When as one small Province may
Show more Beauties in a day,
Then the half of Europe could,
Breed them in an age of old.
Such is she, and such a lot
Has her rare perfection got.
Since her birth; to make the coulor
Of so true a Beauty fuller;
And to give a better grace
To that sweetness in the face:
She, has all the furthrance had,
Noble educations add.
And not only knows all,
Which our Ladies, Courtship call,
With those knowledges, that do
Grace her sex, and suit thereto:
But she has attaind to find,
(What is rare with womankind)
Excellencies, whereby she
May in soul delighted be;
And reap more contentment, than
One of twenty thousand can.
By this means, has bettered bin,
All without her, and within.
For, it has by adding Arts,
To addorne her native parts,
Raised to a noble flame,
(Which shall lighten forth her fame)
Those dear sparks of sacred fire,
Which the Muses did inspire
At her birth: that she complete,
Might with them befit a seat.
But, perhaps I do amise,
To insist so long on this.
These, are superficial things;
And but slender shaddowings,
To the work I have in hand.
Neither can you understand,
What her excellence may be,
Till her self desrib'd you see.
Nor can mine, or any penn,
Paint her half so lovely then,
As she is indeed. For, here
Might those Deities appear,
Which young Paris viewed, at will,
Naked, upon Ida hill;
That I from those three might take,
All their beauties One to make
(Those, no question well compact,
Would have made up one exact)
Something yet, we miss of might,
To express her sweetness right,
Juno's majesty would fit;
Venus beauty, Pallas wit:
Might have brought to pattern hers,
In some showed particulers.
But, they never can express,
Her whole frame or worthiness:
With those excellences, which
Make both soul, and body rich.
Pallas sometimes was untoward,
Venus wanton, Juno froward:
Yea, all three infected were,
With such faults as women are.
And, though falsely Deifi'd,
Fraileties had, which she will deride.
By herself, must therefore she,
Or by nothing pattern'd, be.
And I hope to paynt her so,
By her self; that you shall know,
I have served no common Dame,
Of mean worth, or vulger fame,
But a Nymph that is fairer than,
Pen, or Pencill, portrait can.
And to morrow if you stray,
Back again this uncouth way:
I my simple art will show:
But, the time preuents me now.
For, except at yonder glade,
All the Laund is under shade.
That, before these Ewes be told,
Those my Weathers in the fold,
Ten young Wainlings driven down
To the well beneath the Town;
And my Lambkins changed from
Brom leaze, to the Mead at home:
Twill be far in night: and so,
I shall make my father woe
For my stay, and be in fear
Some what is mischanced here.
On your way, I Will therefore bring you,
And a Song or two I Will sing you,
Such as I (half in despair)
Made when first I wooed my Fair:
Whereunto my Boy shall play,
That my voice assist, it may.
COme my Muse, if thou disdain,
All my comforts are bereft me;
No delight does now remain,
I nor friend, nor flock have left me,
They are fcattered on the plain.
(Men, alas) are too severe,
And make scoffs at Lovers Fortunes;
Women, hearted like the Bear,
That regards not who importunes,
But, does all in pieces tear.
If I should my sorrows show
Unto Rivers, Springs, or Fountains,
They are senseless of my woe;
So are groves, and rocks, and mountains.
Then, oh whither shall I go?
Means of harbor me to shield
From despair; Ah, know you any?
For, nor City, Grange, nor Field
(Though they lend content to many)
Unto me, can comfort yield.
I have wept and sighed to.
For compassion to make trial:
Yea, done all that words can do,
Yet hane nothing but denial.
What way is there then to woo?
Shall I swear, protest, and vow?
So have I done most extremely.
Should I die? I know not how.
For, from all attempts unseemly,
Love, and Virtue, keeps me now.
I have heard that Time preuailes;
But I fear me it is a fable.
Time, and all endeavor fails;
To bear more, my heart's unable,
Yet none cares what it ails.
Lines, to some have op't the door,
And got entrance for affection.
Words well spoken, much implore
By the Gestures good direction:
But a Look does ten times more.
It Is the Eye that only reads,
To the heart, loves deepest Lectures.
By a moving look it pleads,
More then common sense conjectures:
And, a way to pity leads.
This, I knowing did observe,
(both by Words, and Looks complaining)
Yet, for pity I may starve:
There Is no hope of my obtaining;
Till I better can deserve.
Yea, and he that thinks to win
By desert, may be deceived.
For, they who have worthiest bin,
Of their right have been bereaved,
And a Groom admitted in.
Wherefore Muse, to thee I call;
Thou (since nothing else auailes me)
Must redeem me from my thrall.
If thy sweet enchauntment fails me,
Then adue, love, life, and all.
2.
TEll me my heart, what Thoughts these pantings move?
My Thoughts of LOVE.
What Flames are these, that set thee so on fire?
Flames of DESIRE.
What Means have thou, contentments flower to crop?
No Means but HOPE.
Yet let us feed on Hope, and Hope the best.
For, they amid their griefs are something blessed;
Whose Thoughts, and Flames, and Means, have such free scope,
They may at once, both LOVE, DESIRE, and HOPE.
But say; what Fruit will love at last obtain?
Fruitless DISDAIN.
What will those Hopes prove, which yet seem so fair?
Hopeless DESPAIR.
What End shall run those passions out of breath?
An endless DEATH.
Oh can there be such cruelty in Love?
And does my Fortune so ungentle prove,
She will no Fruit, nor Hope, nor End bequeath,
But cruellest DISDAIN, DESPAIR, and DEATH?
Then what new Study shall I now apply?
Study to DIE.
How might I end my Care, and dye content?
Care to REPENT.
And what good Thoughts may make my end more holy?
Think on thy FOLLY.
Yes, so I will; and since my Fate can give
No Hope, but ever without Hope to live.
My Studies, Cares, and Thoughts, i will all apply.
To weigh my FOLLY well, REPENT and DIE.
3.
SAD Eyes what do you ayle
To be thus ill disposed?
Why does your sleeping fail,
Now all men's else are closed?
Wast I, that nere did bow
In any servile duty;
And will you make me, now,
A slave to Love and Beauty?
What though thy Mistress smile,
And in her love affects thee?
Let not her eye beguile,
I fear she disrespects thee.
Do not poor heart depend
On those vain thoughts that fill thee;
They Will fail thee in the end,
So must thy passions kill thee.
What hopes have I, that she
will hold her favors ever;
When so few women be,
That constant can persevere?
What ere she do protest,
When Fortunes do deceive me;
Then she, with all the rest,
I fear, alas! will leave me.
Whilst youth, and strength remains,
With art that may commend her;
Perhaps, she naught disdaines,
Her servant should attend her.
But, it is one to ten,
If crosses overtake me;
She will not know me, then,
But scorn, and so forsake me.
Shall then in earnest truth,
My careful eyes observe her?
Shall I consurne my youth,
And short my time to serve her?
Shall I, beyond my strength,
Let passions torments prove me,
To hear her say, at length,
Away, I cannot love thee?
Oh, rather let me dye,
Whilst I thus gentle find her;
Twere worse then death, if I,
Should find she proves vnkinder.
One frown (though but in jest)
Or one unkindness, fained,
Would rob me of more rest,
Then ere could be regained.
But, in her eyes I find,
Such signs of pity moving;
She cannot be unkind:
Nor err, nor fail in loving.
And, on her forehead, this,
Seems written to relieve me;
My heart no joy shall miss,
That Love, or She, can give me.
Which if I find, I vow,
My service shall persevere:
The same that I am now,
I will continue ever.
No others high degree,
Nor beauteous look shall change me.
My Love shall constant be,
And no estate estrange me.
When other noble Dames
By greater men attended;
Shall with their Lives, and Names,
Have all their glories ended;
With fairest Queens shall she,
Sit sharing equal glory:
And Times to come, shall be,
Delighted with our Story.
In spite of others hates,
More honor I will do her,
Then those, that with Estates,
And helps of Fortune woo her.
Yea, that true worth I spy,
Though Monarchs strove to grace it,
They should not reach more hie,
Then I dare hope to place it.
And though I never vaunt,
What favors are possessed,
Much less content I wan,
Then if they were expressed.
Let others make their mirth,
To blab each kiss, or toying;
I know no bliss on earth,
Like, seeret Love enjoying.
And this shall be the worst,
Of all that can betide me;
If I, like some accursed,
Should find my hopes deride me:
My Cares will not be long,
I know which way to mend them;
I Will think who did the wrong,
Sigh, break my heart, and end them.
Hail fair Beauties, and again,
Hail to all your goodly train.
What I promisd yesterday,
If it please you, hear ye may:
For, now once begun have I,
Sing I will, though none were by.
And, though freely on I run,
Yet confused paths to shun,
First, that part shall be disclosed,
That's of Elements composed.
There, the two unequal pair,
Water, Fire, Earth and Air.
(Each one suting a Complexion,)
Have so cunning a Commixtion;
As they, in proportion sweet,
With the rarest temper meet.
Either, in as much as needs,
So as neither, ought exceeds.
This pure substance, is the same,
Which the Body we do name.
Were that, of immortal stuff;
It Is resin'd and pure enough,
To be called a Soul: for sure,
Many Souls are not so pure.
I (that with a serious look
Note of this rare Moddel took)
Find, that Nature in their places,
So well couched all the Graces,
As the Curioust eyes that be,
Can nor blot, nor blemish see.
Like a Pine it grows straight,
Reaching an approved height:
And has all the choice perfections,
That inflame the best affections.
In the motion of each part,
Nature seems to strive with Art,
Which her gestures most shall bless,
With the gifts of Pleasingnesse.
When she sits; me, thinks, I see,
How all virtues fixed be,
In a frame; whose constant mould,
Will the same unchanged hold.
If you note her when she moves,
Cytherea drawn with doves:
May come learn such winning motions,
As will gain to loves devotions,
More then all her painted wiles;
Such as tears, or sighs, or smiles.
Some, whose bodies want true graces,
Have sweet features in their faces:
Others, that do miss them there,
Lovely are some other where,
And to our desires do fit,
In behavior, or in wit:
Or some inward worth appearing,
To the soul, the soul endearing:
But, in her your eye may find,
All that's good in Womankind.
What in others we prefer,
Are but sundry parts of her:
Who, most perfect, does present,
What might one, and all content.
Yea, he that in love still ranges,
And each day, or howrly changes;
(Had he judgment but to know,
What perfection in her grow)
There would find the spring of store,
Swear a faith, and change no more.
Neither in the total frame,
Is she only void of blame;
But, each part suruei'd a sunder,
Might beget both love and wonder.
If you dare to look so high,
Or behold such majesty;
Lift your wondering eyes, and see,
Whether ought can bettered be.
There Is her Hair, with which Love angles,
And beholdes eyes intangles.
For, in those fair curled snares,
They are hampred unawares:
And compeld to swear a duty,
To her sweet inthrauling beauty.
In my mind, it is the most fair,
That was ever called hair,
Somewhat brighter then a brown,
And her Tresses wauing down,
At full length, and so dispread:
Mantles her from foot to head.
If you saw her Arched Brow,
Tell me pray, what Art knows how
To have made it in a line,
More exact, or more divine.
Beauty there may be diseri'd,
In the height of all her pride,
It Is a meanly rising plain,
Whose pure white has many a vain,
Interlacing like the springs,
In the earths enamilings.
If the tale be not a toy,
Of the little winged Boy;
When he means to strike a heart,
Thence, he throws the fatal dart:
Which of wounds still makes a pair,
One of Love, one of Despair.
Round her visage: or so near,
To a roundnes does appear,
That no more of length it takes,
Then what best proportion makes.
Short her Chinne is; and yet so,
As it is just long enough:
Louelines, does seem to glory,
In that Cyrcling Promontory.
Pretty moving features skip,
Twixt that hillocke and the lip:
If you note her, but the while
She is pleased to speak, o^ smile.
And her Lips (that show no dulnes)
Full are, in the meanest fulness:
Those, the leaves be, whose unfolding,
Brings sweet pleasures to beholding:
For, such pearls they do disclose,
Both the Indies match not those:
Yet, are so in order placed,
As their whiteness is more graced.
Each part is so well disposed,
And her dainty mouth composed,
So, as there is no distortion,
Misbeseemes that sweet proportion.
When her Iuorie Teeth she buries,
Twixt her two enticing cherries,
There appears such pleasures hidden,
As might tempt what were forbidden.
If you look again the whiles,
She does part those lips in smiles:
It Is as when a flash of light,
Breaks from heaven to glad the night.
Other parts my pencill crave,
But those lips I cannot leave;
For (me thinks) I should go,
And forsake those Cherries so.
There Is a kind of excellence,
Holds me from departing hence.
I would tell you what it were,
But my cunning fails me there.
They are like in their discloses,
To the mornings dewie roses:
That beside the name of fair,
Cast perfumes that sweet the Air.
Melting-soft her kisses be,
And had I, now, two or three;
(More inspired, by their touch)
I had praisd them twice as much.
But sweet Muses mark ye how,
Her fair eyes do check me now,
That I seemed to pass them so:
And their praises over go:
And yet blame me not, that I
Would so feign have past them by.
For, I feared to have seen them,
Least there were some danger in them.
Yet, such gentle looks they lend,
As might make her foe, a friend;
And by their allurings move,
All beholders, unto love.
Such a power is also there,
As will keep those thoughts in fear;
And command enough I saw,
To hold impudence in awe.
There, may he that knows to love,
Read contents, which are above,
Their ignoble aims, who know
Nothing, that so high does grow.
Whilst she me beholding is,
My heart dares not think amiss:
For, her sight most peircing clear,
Seems to see, what is written there.
Those bright Eyes, that with their light,
Often times have blessed my sight,
And in turning thence their shining,
Left me in sad darkness pining:
Are the rarest, loueliest gray.
And do cast forth such a ray;
As the man, that black prefers,
More would like this gray of hers.
When their matchles beams she shrouds,
It Is like Cynthia hid in Clouds.
If again she show them light,
It Is like morning after night.
And, it is worthy well beholding,
With how many a pretty folding,
Her sweet eye lids grace that fair,
Meanly fringed with beaming hair:
Whereby, neatly ouerspread,
Those bright lamps are shaddowed.
Twixt the Eyes, no hollow place,
Wrinkle nor indecent space,
Disproportions her in ought;
Though by Envy, faults were sought.
On those Eyebrows never yet,
Did disdainefull scowling sit.
Love and Goodness gotten thither,
Sit on equal thrones together;
And do throw just scorn on them,
That their government contemn.
Then (almost obscured) appears
Those her Iewell-gracing Ears,
Whose own Beauties more adome,
Then the richest Pearl that is worn
By the proudest Persian Dames,
Or the best that Nature frames.
There, the voice (in loves Meanders
Those their pretty cirklings, wanders:
Whose rare turnings will admit,
No rude speech to enter it.
Stretching from mount Forhead lies,
Beauties Cape betwixt her eyes.
Which two Chrystall-passing lakes,
Loves delightful Isthmus makes;
Neither more nor less extending,
Then most meriteth commending.
Those, in whom that part has been,
Best deserving praises seen:
Or, (surueid without affection)
Came the nearest to perfection.
Would scarce handsome ones appear,
If with her compared they were.
For, it is so much excelling,
That it passes means of telling.
On the either side of this,
Loves most lovely Prospect is.
Those her smiling Cheeks, whose color
Comprehends true Beauty fuller,
Then the curioust mixtures can,
That are made by art of Man.
It is Beauties Garden plot,
Where, as in a True-loue-knot,
So, the Snowy Lilly grows,
Mixed with the Crimson Rose,
That, as friends they joined be.
Yet, they seem to disagree,
Whether of the two shall reign;
And the Lillies often obtain
Greatest sway, unless a blush
Help the Roses at a push.
Hollow fallings, none there are;
There Is no wrinkle, there is no scar:
Only there is a little Mole,
Which from Venus cheek was stole.
If it were a thing in Nature,
Possible, that any Creature,
Might decaying life repair
Only by the help of Air:
There were no such Salve for death,
As the balm of her sweet breath.
Or, if any humane power,
Might detain the Soul an hour,
From the flesh to dust bequeathing,
It would linger on her breathing:
And be half in mind, that there;
More then mortal pleasures were.
And whose fortune were so fair,
As to draw so sweet an air,
Would no doubt, let slighted lie,
The perfumes of Arabie.
For the English Eglantine,
Does through envy of her, pine.
Violets, and Roses to;
Fears that she will them undo.
And, it seems that in her breast,
Is composed the Ph^nix nest.
But, descend a while mine eye.
See, if polisht Iuory,
Or the finest sleeced flocks,
Or the whitest Albi^n Rocks;
For comparisons may stand,
To express that snowy hand.
When she draws it from her glove,
It has virtue to remove,
Or dispersed; if there be ought,
Cloudeth the beholders thought.
If that palm but touches your,
You shall feel a secret power
Cheer your heart; and glad it more,
Though it droopt with grief before.
Through the veins, disposed true
Crimson, yields a Saphir hue:
Which adds grace, and more delight,
By embracing with the white.
Smooth, and moist, and soft, and tender,
Are her palms; the fingers slender;
Tipped with mollified Pearl.
And if that transformed Girl,
Whose much cunning, made her dare,
With loves daughter to compare,
Had that hand worn; maugre spite,
She had shamed the Goddess quite.
For, there is in every part,
Nature perfecter then Art.
These, were joined to those Arms,
That were never made for harms:
But, possess the sweetest graces,
That may apt them for embraces.
Like the Silver streams they be,
Which from some high hill we see
Clipping in a goodly Vale,
That grows proud of such a thrall.
Neither Alabaster Rocks,
Pearl strowd-shores, nor Cotswold flocks,
Nor the Mountains tipped with Snow,
Nor the Milk-white Swannes of Po,
Can appear so fair to me,
As her spotless shoulders be.
They are like some work of state,
Covered with the richest plate:
And a presence have, that strike
With devotions, Goddes-like.
Twixt those shoulders (meanly spread)
To support that Globe-like head,
Rises up her Neck; wherein,
Beauty seems to begin
To disclose it self, in more
Tempting manner then before.
How, therein she does excel,
(Though I would) I cannot tell:
For, I naught on earth epsy,
That I may express it by.
There, should Lovers as in duty,
Hang rich Trophes up to Beauty.
It Is proportioned to a height,
That is even with delight.
Yet, it is a great deal higher,
Then to answer base desire.
Where the Neck has end, begins
That smooth path, where loves close ginns
Are thick placed to inthrall,
Such, as that way straggle shall.
There, a pleasing passage lies,
Far beyond the sight of eyes:
And much more delight contains,
Then the old Elizian plains.
Whatsoever others say,
There Is alone the Milkie-way;
That to beauties walks does go,
Which, if others came to know;
In possessing their delight,
They should never reach the height,
Of the pleasures which I share,
Whilst that those debarred are.
Yet (unspoken of) there rests,
Her two twinlike lovely Breasts,
Whose round-rising, pretty panting
I would tell, but art is wanting.
Words can never well declare,
Her fair sweet perfections there:
For, would measures give me leave,
To express what I conceive,
I do know I should go near,
Half to ravish all that hear.
And, but that I learn to season,
What I apprehend with Reason,
It had made my Passions weight,
Sincke me through my own conceit,
There I find so large a measure,
Of an unexpressed pleasure;
That my heart, through strong surmize,
In a pleasing fainting lies.
He that there may rest to prove,
Softer finds those beds of love,
Then the Cotton ripest grown;
Or fine pillowes of such down,
As in time of Molting, fanns,
From the breasts of silver Swannes.
Those two sisters are a pair
Smoth alike, like soft, like fair;
If together they be vewed.
Yet if they a part be showed,
That you touch, or see, seems smother;
Softer, fairer, then the other.
That the Color may delight,
So much red as makes the white,
Purer seem, is shed among:
And then, here, and there, along,
Runs a Saphire-Mine, whose blew
Shaddowd, makes so brave a show
On those lilly mounts, as tho,
Beauties simples there did grow.
In the vale, twixt either hill,
Lies Desire in ambush still;
And surprizeth every eye,
Which does that way dare to pry.
There, is sure the twy-top Hill,
Where the Poets, learn their skill.
That's Parnassus where the Muses,
Chaste, and wise Minerua uses.
Her two Cherrilets are those,
Whence the pleasantst Nectar flows:
And no fruits ere equaled these,
Fetched from the Hesperides.
Once, as Cynthir's games she Chased,
And for Air, left half vn^ased,
Her light summer-robe of green,
(Beauties safe, but slender skreene)
Unawares, I partly spide,
That fair Lilly field vnhid,
Which you may her Belly name;
Yet, nor she, nor I, to blame.
For, it was but what mine eye,
Might behold with modesty.
It Is a fair and matchless Plain,
Where unknown Delights remain,
It Is the storehouse wherein, Pleasure,
Hides the richest of her treasure.
Which, true Modesty (in ward)
Keeps with a continual guard,
Of such Virtues; as she is sure,
No corruption can allure.
There they say (for mind it well)
I do this by hearesay, tell,
Grows her Navel which does seem,
Like some Jewel of esteem:
With so wondrous cunning wrought,
That an injury it is thought:
Such a beauty, with the rest,
(Should unknown) be vnexprest.
Some what else there is, that's hidden;
Which to name I am forbidden:
Neither have I ever pried,
After that should be unspied.
Never shall my Maiden-Muse,
So her self, and me abuse,
As to sing what I may fear,
Will offend the Choicest ear.
Though I know, if none be by,
But true friends to Modesty;
I might name each part at will,
And yet no man's thought be ill.
Yet, for fear loose hearers may,
Judge amiss, if more I say:
I Will descend to shunn all blame,
To the Pillars of this Frame.
Where, though I nere aimd so high,
As her dainty youthful Thigh;
(Whose rare softnes, smothnes, fulness,
Being known, would teach my dulnes
Such a strain, as might be fit,
Some brave Tuscan Poets wit)
Once a saucy bush I spide,
Pluck her silken skirts aside;
So discovered unto me,
All those beauties to the knee.
And, before the thorns entanglings,
Had let go the Silver spanglings,
I perceiud the curious knitting,
Of those joints were well be fitting;
Such a Noble piece of work:
Among whose turnings, seemed to lurk,
Much to entertain the sight,
With new objects of delight.
Then the Leg for shape as rare,
Will admit of no compare.
Straight it is; the Anckle lean,
Full the Calfe, but in the mean:
And the slender Foot does fit,
So each way to suit with it,
As she nothing less excells
Therein, then in all things else.
Yea from Head to Foot, her feature,
Shows her an unblemished Creature:
In whom love with reason, might,
Finds so matchless a Delight.
That more cannot be acquired,
Nor, a greater bliss desired.
Yet if you will rest an hour,
Under yonder shady bower:
I, anon my Muse will raise
To a higher pitch of praise.
But a while with Raspice-berries,
Strawberries, ripe Pears, and Cherries,
(Such as these our Groves do bear)
We will cool our palats there.
And those homely Cates among,
Now and then, a Past' rall Song,
Shall my Lad, here, sing, and play:
Such, as you had yesterday.
1
A Lad whose faith will constant prove,
And never know an end:
Late by an over sight in love,
Displeased his dearest friend.
For which, incensed she did retake,
The favors which he wore;
And said, he never for her sake,
Should wear, or see them more.
The grief whereof, how near i^ ^ent,
And how unkindly took;
Was figured by the discontent,
Appearing in his look.
At first, he could not silence break,
(So heavy sorrow lay)
But when his sighs gave way to speak,
Thus, sadly did he say.
My only Dear; and with that speech,
Not able to sustain,
The floods of grief at sorrows breach;
He paused awhile again.
At length (nigh fainting) did express,
These words, with much ado;
Oh dear! let not my loves excess.
Me, and my love undo.
She, little moved with his pain,
His much distraction eyde;
And changing love, into disdain,
Thus (still unkind) replide:
Forbear to urge one kindness more,
Unless you long to see,
The good respect you had before,
At once all lost in me.
With that, dismayed, his suit he ceast,
And, down his head he hung:
And, as his Reasons strength decreast,
His passion grew more strong.
But, seeing she did flight his moan
(With Willow Garlands wreathed)
He sat him down, and all alone,
This sad complaint he breahb'd.
Oh Heavens! Quoth he, Why do we spend,
Endeauours thus in vain;
Since what the Fates do fore-intend,
They never change again?
Nor Faith, nor Love, nor true Desert,
Nor all that man can do,
Can win him place within her heart,
That is not borne theret^.
Why do I fondly waste my youth,
In secret sighs, and tears?
Why to preserve a spotless truth,
Taste I, so many cares?
For, women that no worth respect,
Do so ungentle prove;
That some shall wi^ne by their neglect,
What others lose with love.
Those, that have set the best at naught,
And no man could enjoy;
At last, by some base Gull are caught,
And gotten with a toy.
Yea, they that spend an ages light,
Their favors to obtain;
For one unwilling over sight,
May loose them all again.
How glad, and feign, alas would I,
For her have underwent,
The greatest care, ere she should try,
The smallest discontent?
Yet she, that may my life command,
And does those passions know,
Denies me a poor demand,
In height of all my wo^.
Oh, if the Noblest of her time,
And best beloved of me;
Could for so poor, so slight a crime,
So void of pity be.
Sure, had it been some common one,
Whose patience I had tried;
No wonder I had been undone,
Or vnforgiuen di'de.
A thousand lives I would have laid,
So well I once believed,
She would have dain'd to lend me aid,
If she had seen me gree^'d.
But now, I live to see the day,
Where I presumed so;
I neither dare for pity pray,
Nor tell her of my woe.
Yet, let not poor despised heart,
Her worth ought questioned be;
Had thou not failed in desert,
She had not failed thee.
But least perhaps, they flout thy moan,
That should esteem thee dear;
Go, make it by thy self alone,
Where none may come to hear.
Still keep thy forhead crowned with smiles,
What passion ere thou try;
That none may laugh at thee the whiles,
Thou discontented lie.
And let no wrong, by change distaine
A Love so truly fair:
But rather, never hope again,
And thou shall never despair.
2
ORetyr'd by cruel passions that oppress me,
With heart nigh broken, Time no hope would give me
Upon my bed I laid me down to rest me;
And gentle sleep, I wo^ed to relieve me.
But oh alas! I found that on the morrow
My sleeping Joys, brought forth my waking Sorrow.
For lo, a dream I had so full of pleasure,
That to possess, what to embrace I seemed,
Could not effect my Joy in higher measure,
Then now it grieves me, that I have but dreamed.
Oh let my dreams be sighs and tears hereafter:
So, I that sleeping weep, may wake in laughter.
Feign would I tell, how much that shadow pleased me;
But tongue and pen, want words, and art in telling.
Yet, this lle say, to show what horror seazd me;
(When I was robbed of bliss, so much excelling)
Might all my dreams be suchj; oh let me never
Awake again: but sleep, and dream for ever.
For, when I waking saw my self deceived,
And what an inward Hell it had procured,
To find my self of all my hopes bereaved,
It brought on passions not to be endured:
And, knew I; next night had such dreams in keeping,
I Would make my eyes, forswear, for ever sleeping.
3
YOu woody Hills, you Dales, you Groves,
You Floods, and every Spring,
You Creatures come, whom nothing moves,
And hear a Shepherd sing.
For, to Heroes, Nymphs, and Swains,
I long have made ^y moan:
Yet, what my mournful Verse contains,
Is understood of none.
In Song, APOLLO gave me skill;
Their love, his Sisters daine.
With those, that haunt Pernassus hill,
I friendship entertain.
Yet, this is all in vain to me,
So haplessely I fare,
As those things which my glory be,
My cause of ruin, are.
For, Love has kindled in my breast,
His never quenched fire:
And I, who often have expressed,
What other men desire,
(Because I could so diue into,
The depth of others moan)
Now, I my own affliction show,
I heeded am, of none.
Often have the Nymphs of greatest worth,
Made suit my Songs to hear.
As often (when I have sighed forth,
Such notes as saddest were)
Alas! said they, poor gentle heart,
Who ere that Shepherd be:
But, none of them suspects my smart,
nor thinks, it means me.
When I have reached so high a strain,
Of passion in my Song;
That they, have seen the tears toraine
And trill my cheek along:
Instead of sigh, or weeping eye,
To sympathize with me;
Oh, were he once in love, they cry,
How moving would he be?
Oh pity me, you Powers above,
And take my skill away:
Or, let my hearers think I love,
And feign not what I say.
For, if I could disclose the smart,
Which I unknown do bear;
Each line would make them sighs impart,
And every word, a tear.
Had I a Mistress, some do think,
She should revealed be;
And I would favors wear, or drink
Her Health upon my Knee.
Alas poor fools! they aim awry,
Their fancy flags too low:
Could they my loves rare course epsy,
They would amazed grow.
But, let nor Nymph nor Swain conceive,
My tongue shall ever tell,
Who of this rest, does me bereave;
Or where I am not well.
But, if you sighing me epsy,
Where rarest features be;
Mark, where I fix a weeping eye,
And swear you, There is she.
Yet, ere my eyes betray me shall,
I Will swell, and burst with pain:
And, for each drop they would let fall,
My heart shall bleed me twain.
For, since my soul more sorrow bears,
Then common Lovers know;
I scorn, my passions should like theirs,
A common humor show.
Ear, never heard of, heretofore,
Of any Love like mine.
Nor shall there be for evermore,
Affection so divine.
And, that to feign it, none may try,
When I dissolved must be;
The first I am, it lived by,
And die it shall, with me.
BOY, h'a done; for now my brain
Is inspired afresh again,
And new Raptures pressing are,
To be sung in praise of her:
Whose fair Picture lies nigh,
Quite vnuail'd to every eye.
No small favor has it been,
That such Beauty might be seen:
Therefore, ever may they rue it,
Who with evil eyes shall view it.
Yea, what ancient stories tell,
Once to rude Acteon fell,
(When with evil thoughts, he stood
Eyeing Cynthia in the Flood)
May that fatal horned curse,
Light upon them; or a worse.
But (what ever others be)
Lest some fault be found in me,
If imperfect this remain;
I will ouer-trym't again.
Therefore, turn where we begun:
And now all is ouerrunne.
Mark, if every thing expressed,
Suit not so unto the rest,
As if Nature would prefer,
All perfections, unto her.
Wherefore seems it strange to any,
That they daily see so many,
Who were else most perfect Creatures,
In some one part, want true features?
Since, from all the fairest that live,
Nature took the best, to give
Her pefection in each part.
I, alone, except her heart;
For, among all womankind.
Such as hers, is hard to find.
If you truly note her Face,
You shall find it has a grace,
Neither wanton, nor ore serious;
Nor too yielding, nor imperious:
But, with such a feature blessed,
It is that, which pleases best:
And delight's each seu'rall eye,
That affects with modesty.
Lowliness, has in her look,
Equal place with Greatness took.
And, if Beauty (any where)
Claims Prerogatives, it is there.
For, at once, thus much twill do;
Threat, command, persuade, and woo.
In her Speech there is not found,
Any harsh, unpleasing sound.
But a well beseeming power;
Neither higher, neither lower,
Then will suit with her perfection,
It Is the Loadstone of Affection.
And, that man, whose judging eyes,
Could well sound such mysteries,
Would in love, make her, his choice;
Though he did but hear her voice.
For, such accents, breath not, whence
Beauty keeps Non-residence.
Never word of hers, I hear,
But it is Music to mine ear:
And, much more contentment brings,
Then the sweetly-touched strings,
Of the pleasing Lute, whose strains,
Ravish hearers when it plains.
Raised by her Discourse, I fly,
In contented thoughts so high,
That I pass the common measures,
Of the dulled Senses pleasures:
And, leave far below my flight,
Vulger pitches of delight.
If She smile, and merry be;
All about her, are as she.
For, each looker on, takes part
Of the joy that is in her heart.
If She grieve, or you but spy,
Sadness peeping through her eye;
Such a grace it seems to borrow,
That you will fall in love with sorrow:
And abhor the name of Mirth,
As the hatefulst thing on earth.
Should I see her shed a tear,
My poor eyes would melt, I fear.
For, much more in Hers appears,
Then in other women's tears:
And her look, did never feign
Sorrow, where there was no pain.
Seldom has she been espide
So impatient as to chi^e:
For, if any see her so,
They Will in love with anger grow.
Sigh, or speak, o^ smile, or talk,
Sing, or weep, or sit, or walk,
Every thing that she does do,
Decent is, and lovely too.
Each part that you shall behold,
Has within it self inrold,
What you could desire to see,
(Or your heart conceive to be)
Yet if from that part your eye,
Moving shall another spy:
There you see as much or more,
Then you thought to praise before.
While the eye surueyes it, you
Will imagine that her Brow
Has all beauty; when her Cheek,
You behold, it is as like
To be deemed fairest too.
(So much there can Beauty do)
Look but thence upon her eye,
And you wonder by and by,
How there may be any where,
So much worthy praise as there.
Yet, if you survey her Breast,
Then as freely you will protest,
That in them perfection is;
Though (I know) that one poor kiss,
From her tempting Lips, would then,
Make all that forsworn again.
For, the self same moving grace,
Is at once in every place.
She, her Beauty never foyles,
With your ointments, waters, oils,
Nor no loathsome Fucus settles,
Mixed with Jewish fasting spetles.
Fair by Nature, being borne,
She does borrowed beauty seorne.
Who so kisses her, needs fear
No unwholesome varnish there.
For, from thence he only sips,
The pure Nectar, of her lips.
And at once with these he closes,
Melting Rubies, Cherries, Roses.
Then, in her behavior, she
Strives but her self to be.
Keeping such a decent state,
As (indeed) she seems to hate
Precious leisure should be spent,
In abused Complement.
Though she knows what other do,
(And can all their Courtship toe)
She, is not in so ill case,
As to need their borrowed grace.
Her Discourses sweetened are,
With a kind of artlesse care,
That expresses greater Art,
Then affected words imp^rt.
So, her gestures (being none,
But that freeness which alone,
Suits the braveness of her mind)
Make, her, of her self, to find,
Postures more becoming far,
Then the mere acquired, are.
If you mark, when for her pleasure,
She vouchsafes to foot a Measure,
Though, with others skill, she pace,
There Is a sweet delightful grace,
In her self; which does prefer,
Art, beyond that Art, in her.
Neither needs she beat her wit,
To devise what dressings fit.
Her complexion, and her feature,
So beholding are to Nature;
If she in the Fashions go,
All the reason she does so,
Is; because she would not err,
In appearing singular.
Doubtless, not for any thought,
That 'twill perfect her, in ought.
Many a dainty-seeming Dame,
Is in native Beauties lame.
Some, are graced by their Tyres,
As their Quoifs, their Hats, their Wyres.
One, a Ruff does best become;
Falling-Bands much altreth some.
And their favors, often, we see,
Changed as their dressings be.
Which, her Beauty never fears:
For, it graceth all she wears.
If ye note her Tire to day,
That, does suit her best, you will say.
Mark, what she next morn does wear;
That, becomes her best, you will swear.
Yea, as often as her you see;
Such new graces, still there be:
As, she ever seems graced,
Most by that, she wears last.
Though, it be the same wore,
But the very day before.
When she takes her Tyers about her,
(Never half so rich without her)
At the putting on of them,
You may liken every Iem,
To those lamps, which at a play,
Are set up to light the day.
For, their l^sture adds no more,
To what Titan gave before;
Neither does their pretty gleamings,
Hinder ought, his greater beamings.
And yet (which is strange to me)
When those costly deckings be,
Laid away; there seems descrid,
Beauties, which those Vailes did hide.
And, she looke^, as does the Moon,
Past some Clowd through which she shone:
O^, some Jewel Watch, whose Case,
Set with Diamonds, seems to grace
What it does contain within (...)
Till the curious work be seen,
Then; it is found, that costly shrining;
Did but hinder tothers shining.
If you chance to be in place,
When her Mantle she does grace;
You would presently protest,
Irish dressings were the best.
If again she lay it down,
While you view her in a gown:
And how those her dainty limbs,
That close-bodied garment trims.
You would swear, and swear again:
She appeared loueliest then.
But, if she so truly fair,
Should untie her shining hair,
And at length, that treasure shed;
Jove's endured Gammed,
Neither Cythereas Joy,
Nor the sweet selfe-louing Boy,
(Who in beauty did surpass)
Nor the fairest that ever was:
Could, to take you prisoner bring,
Looks so sweetly conquering.
She, excells her, whom Appollo,
Once with weeping eyes did follow.
Or that Nymph, who shut in Towers,
Was beguild with golden showers;
Yea, and She, whose love was wont,
To swime ore the Hellispont.
For her sake (though in attire,
Fittest to inflame desire)
Seemed not half so fair to be,
Nor so lovely, as is she.
For, the man whose happy eye,
Viewes her in full Majesty:
Knows, she has a power that mooues,
More then does the Queen of Loves,
When she uses all her power,
To inflame her Paramour.
And, sometime I do admire,
All men burn not with desire.
Nay, I muse her servants are not
Pleading love; but oh they dare not.
And, I therefore wonder, why
They do not grow sick, and die.
Sure they would do so, but that
By the ordinance of Fate,
There is some concealed thing,
So, each gazer limiting;
He can see no more of merit,
Then beseemes his worth, and spirit.
For, in her a Grace there shines,
That o're-daring thoughts confines;
Making worthless men despair,
To be loved of one so fair.
Yea, the Destinies agree,
Some good judgments blind should be,
And not gain the power of knowing
Those rare Beauties in her growing.
Reason does as much imply:
For, if every judging eye,
(Which beholds her) should there,
Find what excellencies are:
All, overcome by those perfections,
Would be captive to affections.
So, in happiness unblessed;
She, for Lovers, should not rest.
This, well heeding, think upon:
And, if there be any one,
Who allows not the worth,
Which my Muse has painted forth;
Hold it no defect in her;
But, that he is ordaind to err.
Or, if any female wight,
Should detract from this I write,
She, I yield, may show her wit,
But disparage her no whit.
For, on earth few women be,
That from Enuies touch are free.
And, who ever, Envy knew,
Yield those honors that were due?
Though sometime my Song I raise,
To unused heights of praise,
(And break forth as I shall please.
Into strange Hyperboles)
It Is to show, Conceit has found,
Worth, beyond expressions bound.
Though, her breath I do compare,
To the sweet'st perfumes that are;
Or, her Eyes that are so bright,
To the mornings cheerful light.
Yet, I do it not so much,
To infer that she is such;
As to show, that being blessed,
With what merrits name of best,
She appears more fair to me,
Then all Creatures else that be.
Her true beauty leaves behind,
Apprehensions in my mind,
Of more sweetness then all Art,
Or inventions can impart.
Thoughts, too deep to be expressed,
And too strong to be suppressed.
Which, often raises my conceits,
To so vnbeleeued heights;
That (I fear) some shallow brain,
Thinks my Muses do but feign.
Sure, he wrongs them if he do:
For, could I have reached to
So like Strains, as these you see;
Had there been no such as She?
Is it possible that I,
Who scarce heard of Poesy;
Should a meare Idea raise,
To as true a pitch of praise,
As the learned Poets could,
Now, or in the times of old;
All those reall-beauties bring,
Honored by their Sonneting?
(Having Arts, and favors to,
More to encourage what they do)
No; if I had never seen,
Such a beauty; I had been
Piping in the Country shades,
To the homely Dary-maides:
For a Country Fiddlers fees;
Clouted cream, and bread and cheese.
I no skill in Numbers had,
More then every Shepherds Lad,
Till She taught me, Strains that were,
Pleasing to her gentle ear.
Her fair splendour, and her worth,
From obscurenes, drew me forth.
And, because I had no Muse,
She her self daignd to infuse
All the skill, by which I clime,
To these praises in my Ryme.
Which, if she had pleased to add,
To that Art sweet Drayton had,
Or that happy Swain that shall
Sing Britanias Pastoral;
Or to theirs, whose Verse set forth
Rosalind, and Stella's worth;
They had doubled all their skill,
Gained on Apollos Hill:
And, as much more set her forth,
As IN me short of them in worth.
They, had unto heights aspired,
Might have justly been admired;
And, in such brave Strains had moved,
As of all had been approved.
I, must praise her as I may;
Which I do mine own rude way:
Sometime setting forth her glories,
By unheard of Allegories.
Think not, tho, my Muse now sings,
Mere absurd, or fained things.
If to gold I like her Hair,
Or, to Stars, her Eyes so fair:
Though I praise her Skin by snow,
Or, by Pearls, her double-Row:
It Is, that you might gather thence,
Her unmatched excellence.
Eyes, as fair (for eyes) has she
As stars fair, for stars may be.
And, each part as fair does show,
In it kind, as white in Snow.
It Is no grace to her at all,
If her Hair I Sunne-beames call:
For, were there a power in Art,
So to pourtrait every part,
All men might those beauties see,
As they do appear to me.
I would scorn to make compare
With the glorioust things that are.
Naught I ere saw, fair enough,
But the Hair, the hair to show.
Yet, some think him ouerbold,
That compares it but to Gold.
He, from Reason seems to err,
Who commending of his Dear,
Gives her Lips the Rubies hue,
Or by Pearls her Teeth does show.
But what Pearls, what Rubies can,
Seem so lovely fair, to man,
As her Lips whom he does love,
When in sweet discourse they move?
Or her louelier Teeth the while,
She does bless him with a smile.
Stars indeed, fair Creatures be:
Yet, amongst us, where is he,
Joys not more the while he lies,
Sunning in his Mistress Eyes,
Then in all the glimmering light,
Of a starrie winters night?
Him to flatter, most suppose,
That preferrs before the Rose
Or the Lillies (while they grow)
Or the flakes of new-falne suow;
Her complextion whom he loves:
And yet, this my Muse approves.
For, in such a beauty, meets
Unexpressed moving sweets;
That, (the like unto them) no man,
Ever saw but in a Woman.
Look on Moon, on Stars, on Sun,
All Gods Creatures overrun.
See, if all of them presents,
To your mind, such sweet contents:
Or, if you from them can take,
Ought that may a beauty make,
Shall one half so pleasing prove,
As is Hers, whom you do love.
For indeed, if there had been
Other mortal Beauties seen,
Objects for the love of man,
Vain was their creation than.
Yea, if this could well be granted,
Adam might his Eve have wanted.
But a woman is the Creature,
Whose proportion with our nature
Best agrees; and whose perfections,
Sympathize with our affections:
And not only finds our Senses,
Pleasure in their excellencies.
But our Reason also knows,
Sweetness in them, that outgoes
Humane wit to comprehend,
Much more, truly, to commend.
Note, the Beauty of any Eye;
And, if ought you praise it by,
Leave such passion in your mind,
Let my Reasons eye be blind.
Mark, if ever red or white,
Any where, gave such delight,
As when they have taken place,
In a worthy woman's sace.
He that so much has not noted,
Will not: or is grown besotted.
Such as Lovers are, conceive,
What impressions Beauty leave;
And those Hearts, that fire have took,
By a loue-enflaming look:
Those, believe, what here I say;
And, suppose not that I stray,
In a word, by setting forth
Any praise beyond true worth.
And yet, wherefore should I care,
What another Censures are,
Since I know her to be such,
As no praise can be too much?
All that see her, will agree,
In the self same mind with me;
If their wit be worth the having,
Or their Judgment merit craving.
And the man that kens her not,
Speaks, at best, he knows not what:
So, his Envy, or good will.
Neither does her good, nor ill.
Then, Fools cauils I disdain,
And, call back my Muse again,
To decipher out the rest.
For, I have too long digrest.
This is She, in whom there meets,
All variety of sweets.
An Epitomie, of all,
That on earth we Fair may call.
Nay, yet more I dare aver:
He that is possessed of her,
Shall at once all pleasure find,
That is reapt from Womankind.
Oh, what man would further range,
That in one might find such change?
What dull eye such worth can see,
And not sworn a Lover be?
Or, from whence was he, could prove,
Such a Monster in his love;
As, in thought, to use amiss,
Such vnequald worth as this?
Pity 'twere that such a Creature,
Phenix-like, for matchless feature,
Should so suffer; or be blamed,
With what now the Times are shamed.
Beauty (unto me divine)
Makes my honest thoughts incline,
Unto better things, then that,
Which the Vulgar aymeth at.
And, I vow, I grieve to see,
Any Fair, and false to be:
Or, when I sweet pleasures find,
Matched with a defiled mind.
But (above all others) Her,
So much does my soul prefer;
That to Him whose ill desire,
Should so nurse a lawless Fire,
As to tempt, to that, which might
Dim her sacred Virtues light;
I could wish that he might die
Ere he did it; though 't were I.
For, if She should hap to stray,
All this Beauty would away:
And not her alone undo,
But kill him, that praised her to.
But, I know her Maker will
Keep her vnd^^tained still:
That ensuing Ages may
Pattern out, by her the way
To all goodness. And if Fate
That appoints all things a Date
Hear me would; I Would wish that She
Might for aye preserved be.
And that neither wasting Cares,
Neither all-consuming Years,
Might, from what she is, estrange her,
Or in mind, or body change her.
For, oh why should envious Time,
Perpetrate so vile a Crime,
As to waste, or wrong, or stain,
What shall never be matched again?
Much I Hope, it shall not be:
For, if Love deceive not me,
To that height of Fair she grows,
Age, or Sickness (Beauties foes)
Cannot so much wrong it there,
But enough there will appear,
Ever worthy to be loved:
And, that heart shall more be moved,
(Where there is a judging eye)
With those prints it does epsy,
Of her beauty wronged by Time,
Then by others, in their prime.
One advantage she has more,
That adds grace to all before.
It is this; her Beauties fame,
Has not done her honor shame.
For, where Beauty we do find,
Envy still is so unkind,
That, although their Virtues are
Such, as pass their Beauies far;
Yet on Slanders rocks they be
Shipwrackt oftentimes, we see:
And are subject to the wrongs,
Of a thousand spightfull tongues,
When the greatest fault they had,
Was, that some would make them bad;
And not finding them for action,
Sought for vengeance, by detraction.
But her beauty sure no tongue,
Is so villainous to wrong.
Never did the Iealoust ear,
Any muttering rumor hear,
That might cause the least suspects,
Of indifferent defects.
And (which somewhat stranger is)
They, whose slanders few can miss,
(Though set on by evil will,
And habituated ill)
Nothing can of her invent,
Whence to frame disparagement.
Which, if we respect the Crimes,
Of these loose injurious times;
Does not only truly prove,
Great discretion in her love:
And, that she has lived upright,
In each iealouse tongues dispight.
But, it must be understood,
That her private thoughts are good.
Yea, it is an apparent sign,
That her beauty is Divine:
And, that Angels have a care,
Men's polluting tongues should spare
To defile, what God has given,
To be dear to Earth, and Heaven.
Tell me you that hear me now;
Is there any one of you,
Wants feeling of affection?
Or that loves not such perfection?
Can there be so dull an ear,
As of so much worth to hear;
And not seriously incline,
To this Saint-like friend of mine?
If there be; the fault does lie,
In my artlesse Poesy.
For, If I could reach the Strain,
Which me thinks I might obtain;
Or, but make my Measures fly,
Equal with my fantasy;
I would not permit an ear,
To attend vnrauisht here;
If, but so much fence it knew,
As the blocks, that Orphe^s drew.
Think on this description, well,
And, your noblest Ladies tell;
Which of you (that worth can see)
This my Mistress would not be?
You brave English, who have run,
From the rising of the Sun:
Till in traveling you found,
Where he does conclude his Round.
You, that have the beauties seen,
Which in farthest Lands have been;
And sur^eid the fair resorts,
Of the French and Spanish Courts:
(With the best that Fame renownes,
In the rich Trans-Alpine Towns)
Do not with our brainelesse Fry,
(That admire each nouelty)
Wrong your Countries fame in ought.
But, here freely speak your thought;
And I durst presume you will swear,
She Is not matched any where.
Gallants, you that would so feign,
Nymphs and Ladies loves obtain.
You, that strive to serve and please,
Fairest Queens and Empresses.
Tell me this, and tell me right;
If you would not (so you might)
Leave them all dispis'd to prove,
What contents are in her love?
Could your Fathers ever tell,
Of a Nymph did more excel?
Or has any story told,
Of the like, in times of old?
Dido was not such a one.
Nor the Trojans Paragone.
Though they so much favor found,
As to have their honors crowned,
By the best of Poets penns,
Ever known before, or since.
For, had Dido been so fair,
Old Anchises noble heir;
Jove's command had disobaid:
And with her in Carthage staid:
Where, he would have quite forswore,
Seeing the Lauinian Shore.
Or, had Laedas Daughter been,
(When she was the Spartan Queen)
Equal with this louely-one,
Menelaus had never gone,
From her sight so far away,
As to leave her for a pray;
And his room, to be possessed,
By her wanton Phrigian guest.
But, least yet among you, some,
Think she may behind these, come:
Stay a little more, and here me:
In another strain I Will rear me.
I Will vnmasque a beauty, now,
Which to kiss, the Gods may bow.
And so feelingly did move,
That your souls shall fall in love.
I have yet, the best behind;
Her most fair, vnequald, Mind.
This, that I have here expressed,
Is but that, which vailes the rest.
An incomparable shrine,
Of a Beauty more divine.
Whereof, ere I farther speak,
Off again, my Song I Will break.
And, if you among the Roses,
(Which, yo^ quickset hedge incloses)
Will with plucking flowers, beguile
Tedious-seeming Time awhile;
Till I step to yonder Green,
(Whence the sheep so plain are seen)
I, will be returned, ere
You an hour have stayed there.
And, excuse me now, I pray,
Though I rudely go away.
For, Affairs I have to do:
Which, unless I look into;
I may sing out Summer here,
Like the idle Grasshopper,
And at Winter, hide my head,
Or else fast, till I am dead.
Yet if Rusticke Past'rall Measures,
Can ought add unto your pleasures;
I will leave you some of those,
Which, it pleased me to compose,
When dispairing fits were over;
And I made a happy Lover,
Exercisd my loving passion,
In an other kind of fashion,
Then to utter, I devised,
When I feared to be despised.
Those; shall lie in gage for me,
Till I back returned be.
And, in writing; here, you have them:
Either Sing, or Read, or leave them.
Sonnet 1.
ADmire not Shepherds Boy,
Why I my Pipe forbear;
My sorrows, and my joy,
Beyond expression are.
Though others may,
In Songs display
Their passions, when they woo:
Yet, mine do fly,
A pitch too high,
For words to reach unto.
If such weak thoughts as those,
With others fancies move;
Or, if my breast did close,
But common Strains of Love:
Or passions store,
Learnd me no more,
To feel then others do:
I Would paint my cares,
As black as theirs,
And teach my Lines to woo.
But oh! thrice happy ye,
Whose mean conceit is dull;
You from those thoughts are free,
That stuff my breast so full:
My loves excess,
Lets to express,
What Songs are used to:
And my delights,
Take such high flights,
My Joys will me undo.
I have a Love that is fair,
Rich, Wise, and Nobly borne;
She Is true Perfections heir,
Holds naught but Vice in scorn.
A heart to find,
More chaste, more kind,
Our Plains afford no more.
Of her degree,
No blab I Will be,
For doubt, some Prince should woo.
And yet I do not fear,
(Though she my meannesse knows)
The Willow Branch to wear,
No, nor the yellow hose.
For, if great Jove,
Should sue for love,
She would not me forgo
Resort I may,
By night or day.
Which brauer, dare not do.
You Gallants, borne to pelf,
To Lands, to Titles store;
I Am borne but to my Self,
Nor do I care for more.
Add to your earth,
Wealth, Honors, Birth,
And all you can thereto;
You cannot prove,
That height of Love,
Which, I in meannesse do.
Great Men have helps to gain,
Those favors they implore;
Which, though I win with pain,
I find my joys the more.
Each Clown may rise,
And climb the Skies,
When he has found a Staire:
But joy to him,
That dares to climb,
And has no help, but air.
Some say, that Love repents,
Where Fortunes disagree;
I know the highest contents,
From low beginnings be.
My love's unfeigned,
To her that daignd,
From Greatness, stoop thereto.
She loves, cause I,
So mean, dar'dtrie,
Her better worth to woo.
And yet although much joy,
My Fortune seems to bless;
It Is mixed with more annoy,
Then I shall ere express:
For, with much pain
Did I obtain,
The Iem I Will nere forgo:
Which, yet I dare
Nor show, nor wear;
And that breeds all my woe.
But fie, my foolish tongue,
How loosely now it goes!
First, let my Knell be rung,
Ere I do more disclose.
Mounts thoughts on high;
Cease words, for why:
My meaning to divine:
To those I leave,
That can conceive,
So brave a Love as mine.
And now, no more I Will sing,
Among my fellow Swains:
Nor Groves, nor Hills shall ring,
With Echoes of my plains.
My Measures be,
Confused (you see)
And will not suit thereto:
Cause, I have more,
Brave thoughts in flore,
Then words can reach unto.
Sonnet. 2.
HEnce away, you Sirens, leave me,
And unclasp your wanton Arms;
Sugared words shall never deceive me,
(Though thou prove a thousand Charms)
Fie, fie, forbear;
No common snare,
Could ever my affection chain:
Your painted baits,
And poor deceits,
Are all bestowed on me, in vain.
I Am no flaue, to such as you be;
Neither shall a snowy Breast,
Wanton Eye, or Lip of Ruby,
Ever robb me, of my rest.
Go, go, display,
Your Beauties ray,
To some ore-soone enamored Swain.
Those common wiles,
Of sighs and smiles;
Are all bestowed on me, in vain.
I have elsewhere, vowed a duty;
Turn away thy tempting eyes.
Show not me, a naked Beauty,
Those Impostures, I despise.
My Spirit lothes,
Where gaudy clothes,
And fained Oaths, may love obtain.
I love Her so,
Whose look, swears No;
That, all your labors will be vain.
Can he prize the tainted Posies,
Which on every breast are worn;
That may pluck the spotless Roses,
From their neuer-touched Thorn?
I can go rest,
On her sweet Breast;
That is the pride of Cynthia's train.
Then hold your tongues,
Your Mermaid Songs,
Are all bestowed on me in vain.
He Is a fool, that basely dallies,
Where each Peasant mates with him.
Shall I haunt the thronged Valleys,
Whilst there is noble Hills to climb?
No, no; though Clownes
Are skar'd with frowns,
I know the best can but disdain:
And those I Will prove;
So shall your Love
Be all bestowed, on me in vain.
Yet, I would not daigne embraces,
With the greatest-fairest She,
If another shared those graces,
Which had been bestowed on Me.
I gave that One,
My Love, where none,
Shall come to robb me of my gain.
Your fickle Hearts
Makes Tears, and Arts,
And all, bestowed on me in vain.
I do scorn, to vow a Duty,
Where each lustful Lad may woo.
Give me Her, whose Sun-like Beauty,
Buzzards dare not soar unto.
She, she it is,
Affoords that Bliss,
For which, I would refuse no pain.
But such as you,
Fond fools adue;
You seek to captive me in vain.
Proud she seemed in the beginning,
And disdaind my looking on:
But, that coy one in the winning,
Proves a true one being won.
What ere betide,
She Will nere divide,
The favor she to me shall daigne.
But, your fond love,
Will fickle prove:
And all that trust in you, are vain.
Therefore know, when I enjoy One,
(And for love employ my breath)
She I Court shall be a Coy one,
Though I win her with my death.
A favor there,
Few aim at dare.
And if perhaps, some Lover plain,
She is not won,
Nor I undone,
By placing of my love in vain.
Leave me then, you Sirens leave me;
Seek no more to work my harms:
Crafty wiles cannot deceive me;
Who am proof against your Charms.
You labor may,
To lead astray,
The heart, that constant shall remain:
And I the while,
Will sit and smile,
To see you spend your time in vain.
Sonnet 3.
WHen Philomela with her strains,
The Spring had welcomed in;
And Flora, to bestrow the Plains,
With Daysies did begin:
My Love, and I (on whom suspicious eyes,
Had set a thousand spies)
To cosen Argos strove;
And seen of none,
We got alone,
Into a shady Gr^^e.
On every Bush, the Eglantine,
with leaves perfumed hung.
The Primrose, made the ^edge-rowes fine,
The woods, of Music rung.
The Earth, the Air, and all things did conspire
To raise contentment higher.
That, had I come to woo:
Nor means of grace,
Nor time, nor place;
Were wanting thereunto.
With hand in hand, alone we walked,
And often each other ^y^e:
Of Love, and passions past, we (...),
Which our poor hearts had tried.
Our souls, infused into each other were:
And, what may be her care,
Did my more sorrow breed.
One mind we bore;
One Faith we swore:
And both in one agreed.
Her dainty Palm, I gently pressed,
And with her Lips I played.
My Cheek, upon her panting Breast,
And on her Neck I laid.
And yet, we had no sense of wanton lust:
Nor, did we then mistrust,
The poison in the sweet.
Our Bodies wrought
So close, we thought,
Because our Souls should meet.
With pleasant toil, we breathles grew;
And kissed in warmer blood:
Upon her Lips, the (...),
Like drops on Roses stood;
And on those (...);
Whose sweets; were such to me,
Them could I not (...)
No, not to feast,
On Venus (...);
Whence Streams of sweetness flow.
But, kissing and embracing, we
So long together lay;
Her touches all inflamed me,
And I began to stray.
My hands, presumed so far, they were too bold.
My tongue, unwisely told
How much my heart was changed.
And Virtue quite,
Was put to flight,
Or, for the time estranged.
Oh! what are we, if in our strength,
We over boldly trust?
The strongest forts, will yield at length,
And so our Virtues must.
In Me, no force of Reason had preuaild;
If she had also faild.
But ere I further straid,
She sighing kissed,
My naked wrist;
And thus, in tears she said.
Sweet heart (quoth she) if in thy breast,
Those Virtues real be,
Which hitherto thou have professed,
And I believed in thee:
Thy Self, and Me, oh seek not to abuse.
Whilst Thee I thus refuse,
In hotter flames I fry:
Yet, let us not,
Our true love spot,
Oh, rather let me die.
For, if thy heart should fall from good,
What would become of mine?
As strong a passion, stirs my blood,
As can distemper thine.
Yet, in my breast this rage I smoother would,
Though it consume me should;
And, my desires contain:
For, where we see,
Such breaches be,
They seldom stop again.
Are we the two, that have so long,
Each others loves embraced?
And never did Affection wrong,
Nor think a thought unchaste?
And shall, oh, shall we now, our matchless Iay,
For one poor touch destroy?
And all content forgo?
Oh no, my Dear,
Sweet heart, forbear;
I will not loose thee so.
For, should we do a deed so base,
(As it can never be)
I could no more have seen thy face,
Nor would thou look on me.
I should of all our passions gr^w ashamed;
And blush when thou art named,
Yea (though thou constant were)
I being naught,
A jealous thought,
Would still torment my heart.
What goodly thing do we obtain,
If I consent to thee?
Rare joys we loose, and what we gain,
But common pleasures be:
Yea, those (some say) who are to lust enclind,
Drive Love out of the mind;
And so much Reason miss:
That they admire,
What kind of fire,
A chaste affection is.
No vulgar bliss, I aimed at,
When first I heard thee woo:
I Will never prize a man for that,
Which every Groom can do.
If that be love; the basest men that be,
Do love as well as we.
Who, if we bear us well,
Do pass them then,
As Angels, men,
In glory do excel.
Whilst thus she spoke, a cruel Band
Of Passions ceazd my Soul:
And, what one seemed to command,
Another did control.
Twixt Good, and Ill, I did divided lie,
But, as I raised mine eye,
In her me thought I saw,
Those virtues shine,
Whose rays divine,
First gave Desire, a Law.
With that, I felt the blush of shame,
Into my cheek return,
And Love, did with a chaster flame,
Within my Bosom burn.
My Soul, her light of Reason had renewed;
And by those Beams I viewed,
How slily Lust ensnares:
And all the fires,
Of ill Desires,
I quenched with my Tears.
Go Wantons now, and flout at this,
My coldness, if you list;
Vain fools, you never knew the bliss,
That does in Love consist.
You sigh, and weep, and labor to enjoy;
A Shade, a Dream, a Toy.
Poor Folly you pursue,
And are unblessed,
Since every beast,
In pleasure equals you.
You never took so rich content,
In all your wanton play,
As this to me has pleasure lent,,
That Chaste she went away.
For as some sins, which me committed have;
Sharp stings behind them leeue.
Whereby we vexed are:
So, ill suppressed,
Begets rest,
And peace, without compare.
But least this Conquest slight you make,
Which on my self I won;
Twelve labors, I will undertake,
With Jove's victorious Son,
Er'e I, will such another brunt endure.
For, had Diana pure,
Thus tempted been to sin;
That Queen of Night,
(With her chaste light,)
Had scarce, a Maiden binne.
OH! how honored are my Songs,
Graced by your melodious tongues?
And how pleasing do they seem,
Now your voices Carroll them?
Were not, yet, that task to do,
Which my word inioynes me to,
I should beg of you, to hear,
What your own inventions were.
But, (before I ought will crave)
What I promisd, you shall have.
And, as I on mortal Creatures,
Called, to view her bodies features;
Showing how, to make the Senses,
Apprehend her excellences.
Now; I speak of no worse subject,
Then a Souls, and Reasons object:
(And relate a Beauties glories,
Fitting heavenly Auditories)
Therefore, whilst I sit and sing,
Hemme me Angels, in a Ring.
Come ye Spirits, which have eyes,
That can gaze on Deityes:
And vnclog'd, with brutish senses,
Comprehend such excellences.
Or, if any mortal ear,
Would be granted leave to hear,
(And find profit with delight,
In what now, I shall indite)
Let him first be sure, to season
A prepared heart with reason:
And, with Judgment, drawing nigh,
Lay all fond affections by.
So, through all her vailings, He
Shall the Soul of beauty see.
But, avoid you earth-bred Wights,
Cloid with sensual appetites.
On bafe objects glut your eyes,
Till your starueling pleasure dies.
Feed your ears, with such delights,
As may match you gross conceits;
For, within your muddie brain,
These, you never can contain.
Think not, you, who by the sense,
Only judge of excellence;
(Or do all contentment place,
In the beauty of a face)
That these higher thoughts of our,
Soar so base a pitch as your.
I can give, as well as you,
Outward Beauties all their due:
I can most contentments see,
That in love, or women be.
Though I dote not on the features,
Of our daintiest female creatures;
(Nor, was ere so void of shames,
As to play their lawless games)
I more prize a snowye Hand,
Then the gold on Tagus strand:
And a dainty Lip before,
All the greatest Monarcks store.
Yea, from these I reap as true,
And as large contents as you.
Yet, to them I am not tide.
I have rarer sweets espide;
(Wider prospects of true pleasure)
Then your curbed thoughts can measure.
In her Soul, my Soul descries,
Objects, that may feed her eyes.
And the beauty of her mind,
Shows my Reason where to find,
All my former pleasure doubled.
Neither with such passion troubled;
As wherewith it often was crossed:
Nor so easy to be lost.
I, that ravished lay, wel-nigh,
By the luster of her eye:
And, had almost sworn affection,
To the fore expressed perfection;
As if nothing had been higher,
Whereunto I might aspire.
Now, have found, by seeking nearer,
Inward worth; that shining clearer;
(By a sweet and secret moving)
Draws me to a dearer loving.
And, whilst I that love conceive,
Such impressions it does leave,
In the Intellectiue part;
As, defaceth from my heart,
Every thought of those delights,
Which allure base appetits.
And, my mind so much imploies,
In contemplating, those joys,
Which, a purer sight, does find,
In the beauty of her Mind:
That, I so thereon am set,
As (me thinks) I could forget,
All her sweetest outward graces:
Though I lay in her embraces.
But, some thinking with a smile,
What, they would have done the while:
Now suppose my words are such,
As exceed my power too much.
For, all those, our Wantons hold,
Void of Vigor, dull, and cold:
Or (at best) but fools, whose flame,
Makes not way unto their shame.
Though at length with grief they see
They the fools do prove to be.
These, the body so much minded,
That their Reason ouer-blinded,
By the pleasures of the Sense,
Hides from them that excellence;
And that sweetness, whose true worth,
I am here to blazon forth.
It Is not; it is not, those rare graces,
That do lurk in women's faces.
It Is not, a displayed perfection,
Youthful eyes, nor clear complexion;
Nor a skin, smooth-satten like,
Nor a dainty Rosy cheek,
That to wantonness can move,
Such as virtuously do love.
Beauty, rather gently draws
Wild Desires, to Reasons Laws;
And often frights men from that sin,
They had else transgressed in:
Through a sweet amazement, stroke,
From an ouer-ruling look.
Beauty, never tempts men
To lasciuiousnes; but when
Careless Idleness has brought
Wicked longings into thought.
Nor does youth, or heat of blood,
Make men prove what is not good.
Nor the strength, of which they vaunt.
It Is the strength, and power they want,
And the baseness of the Mind,
Makes their bruit desires enclind,
To pursue those vain delights,
Which affect their Appetites.
And so blinded do they grow,
(Who are overtaken so)
As their dulnes cannot see,
Nor believe that better be.
Some, have blood as hot as their,
Whose affections loosest are;
Bodies that require no art,
To supply weak Natures part.
Youth they have; and, sure, might to,
Boast of what, some (shameless do)
Yet, their Minds that aim more high,
(Then those baser pleasures lie)
Taught by Virtue can suppress,
All attempts of wantonness.
And such powerful motives frame,
To extinguish Passions flame;
That (by Reasons good direction)
Quallifying loose affection;
They Will in midst of Beauties fires,
Walk vnscorcht of ill Desires.
Yet, no such, as stupid shame,
Keeps from actions worthy blame.
But, in all so truly Man,
That their apprehensions can,
Prize the bodies utmost worth:
And, find many pleasures forth,
In those Beauties; more then You,
That abuse them, ever knew.
But, perhaps her outward grace,
Here discrib'd, has taken such place,
In some ore-enamourd breast,
And so much his heart possessed,
As He thinks it passes telling,
How she may be more excelling:
Or what worth, I can prefer,
To be more admired in Her.
Therefore, now I will be brief,
To prevent that misbeliefe.
And, if there be present here,
Any one, whose nicer ear:
Taskes my Measures, as offending,
In too seriously commending
What affects the Sense; or may,
Iniure Virtue any way.
Let them know; it is understood,
That if they were truly good,
It could never breed offense,
That I showed the excellence,
With the power of God and Nature,
In the beauty of his Creature.
They from thence would rather raise,
Cause, to meditate his praise:
And thus think; How fair must He,
That has made this Faire-one be!
That; was my proposed End.
And, to make them more attend
Unto this; so much excelling,
As it passes means of telling.
But at worst; if any Strain,
Makes your Memories retain,
Sparks of such a banefull fire,
As may kindle ill desire:
This, that follows after, shall
Not alone extinguish all;
But, even make you blush with shame,
That your thoughts were so to blame.
Yet, I know when I have done,
(In respect of that bright Sun,
Whose inestimable light
I would blazon to your sight)
These, ensuing flashes, are,
As to Cynthia's beams a Star;
Or, a petty Comets ray,
To the glorious Eye of Day.
For, what power of words or Art,
Can her worth at full impart?
Or, what is there, may be found,
Placed within the Senses bound;
That can paint those sweets to me,
Which the Eyes of Love do see?
Or the Beauties of that Mind,
Which her body has enshrined.
Can I think, the Guide of Heaven,
Has so bountifully given,
Outward features, cause he meant,
To have made less excellent,
Her divine part? Or suppose,
Beauty, Goodness does oppose;
Like those fools, who do despair,
To find any Good and Fair?
Rather; There I seek a mind,
Most excelling, where I find
God has to the body lent,
Most-beseeming Ornament.
But, though he that did inspire
First, the true Promethean fire,
In each several soul did place
Equal Excellence and Grace,
As some think; yet have not they
Equal Beauties every way.
For, they more or less appear,
As the outward Organs are:
Following much the temp'rature,
Of the Body, gross or pure.
And I do believe it true,
That, as we the Body view:
Nearer to perfection grow;
So, the Soul her self does show:
Others more, and more excelling,
In her power; as in her dwelling.
For, that pureness gives way,
Better to disclose each Ray,
To the Dull conceit of man,
Then a grosser substance can.
Thus, through spotless Crystal, we
May the Days full glory see;
When, if clearest Sunbeames pass,
Through a foul polluted glass:
So discollerd, the'il appear;
As those Stains they shone through, were.
Let no Critticke cavil then,
If I dare affirm again;
That her Minds perfections are,
Fairer then her Body's far;
And, I need not prove it by,
Axioms of Philosophy,
Since no proof can better be,
Then their rare effect in me.
For, while other men complaining,
Tell their Mistresses disdaining:
Free from care, I write a story,
Only of her worth and glory.
While most Lovers pining sit,
(Robbed of liberty and wit)
Vassaling themselves with shame,
To some proud imperious Dame:
Or, in Songs their Fate bewailing,
Show the world their faithles failing.
I, enwreath'd with boughs of Myrtle,
Fare like the beloved Turtle.
Yea while most, are most untoward,
Peevish, vain, inconstant, froward.
While their best contentments bring,
Naught but after-sorrowing.
She, those childish humors slighting,
Has conditions so delighting,
And does so my bliss endeavor,
As my joy increases ever.
By her actions I can see,
That her Passions so agree,
Unto Reason; as they err,
Seldom, to distemper her.
Lone she can (and does) but so,
As she will not overthrow,
Loves content by any folly,
Or, by deeds that are unholy.
Dotingly, she nere affects;
Neither willingly neglects
Honest love: But means does find,
With discretion to be kind.
It Is nor thundering Phrase, nor Oaths,
Honors, wealth, nor painted Clothes,
That can her good liking gain,
If no other worth remain.
Never took her heart, delight
In your Court-Hermaphrodite,
Or such frothy Gallants, as
For the Times Heroes pass.
Such; who (still in love) do all
Fair, and Sweet, and Lady call.
And where e're they hap to stray,
Either prate the rest away;
Or, of all discourse to seek,
Shuffle in at Cent, or Gleek.
Goodness more delights her, than
All their Mask of Folly can.
Fond, she hates to appear;
Though she hold her friend as dear,
As her part of life unspent:
Or, the best of her content.
If the heat of youthful fires,
Warm her blood with those desires,
Which are by the course of Nature,
Stird in every perfect Creature:
As those Passions kindle, so
Does Heavens grace, and Reason grow
Abler, to suppress in her
Those rebellions; and they stir,
Never more affection, then
One good thought allayes again.
I could say, so chaste is she,
As the new-blowne Roses be.
Or, the drifts of Snow, that none
Ever touched, or looked upon.
But, that were not worth a Fly,
Seeing so much Chastity,
Old Pigmalion Picture had:
Yea, those Eunuchs borne or made,
Never to know Desire; might say,
She deserved no more then they.
Whereas, whilst their worth proceeds
From such wants, as they must needs,
Be unmoved (cause Nature framed
No affections to be tamed)
Through her dainty Limbs, are spread,
Vigor, heat, and freely shed,
Life blood into every vain;
Till they fill, and swell again:
And no doubt they strive to force,
Way, in some forbidden Course.
Which, by Grace she still resists;
And so Courbs within their lists,
Those Desires: that she is chaster,
Then if she had none to master.
Malice, never lets she in:
Neither hates she ought, but sin.
Envy, if she could admit,
There Is no means to nourish it:
For, her gentle heart is pleased,
When she knows another eased.
And there is none, who ever got
That perfection, she has not.
So, that no cause is there, why
She should any one envy.
Mildly angry she will appear,
That the baser Rout may fear;
Through presumption to misdoe.
Yet, she often faines that to.
But let wrong be whatsoever,
She gives way to Choler, never.
If she e're of Vengeante thought,
It Was nor life, nor blood was sought;
But (at most) some prayer to move,
Justice for abused Love:
Or, that Fate would pay again,
Loves neglectors with disdain.
If she ever craved of Fate,
To obtain a higher State;
(Or ambitiously were given)
Sure, it was but to climb to heaven.
Pride, is from her heart as far,
As the Poles in distance are.
For, her worth, nor all this praise,
Can her humble spirit raise,
Less to prize me, then before;
Or her self, to value more.
Were she Vain; she might allege,
Twere her Sexes privilege.
But, she is such; as (doubtless) no man
Knows less folly, in a woman.
To prevent a being Idle,
Sometime, with her curious Needle,
(Though it be her meanest glory)
She so limnes an Antique Story,
As Minerua (would she take it)
Might her richest Sample make it.
Other while, again, she rather
Labors, with delight to gather
Knowledge from such learned Writs,
As are left by famous Wits.
Where, She chiefly seeks to know,
God; Her self; and what we owe,
To our Neighbor: since with these,
Come all needful Knowledges.
She, with Adam, never will
Long to learn both Good and Ill;
But, her state well vndestood,
Rests her self, content with Good.
Avarice, abhors she,
As the lothsom'st things that be:
Since she knows it is an ill,
That does ripest virtue kill.
And, where ere it comes to rest,
(Though in some strict Matrons breast)
Be she never so seeming just,
I Will no shows of Goodness trust.
For, if you but gold can bring;
Such, are hired to any thing.
If you think she Jealous be;
You are wide: For, credit me,
Her strong'st Iealousies, naught are,
Other then an honest care,
Of her friends. And, most can tell,
Who so wants that, loves not well.
Though some little fear she shows,
It Is no more then love allows:
So the passion do not move her,
Till she grieve, or wrong her lover.
She may think He may do ill;
Though, she will not believe he will.
Nor, can such a harmless thought,
Blemish true affection ought:
Rather, when as else it would,
Through security grow cold.
This her Passion, keeping measure,
Strengthens Love, and sweetens Pleasure.
Cruelty, her soul detests;
For, within her Bosom rests,
Noblest Pity; vsherd by,
An vnequall'd Courtesy.
And, is grieved at good men's moan,
As the grief were all her own.
Just she is; so just, that I
Know she would not wrong a Fly;
Or, oppress the meanest thing,
To be Mistress to a King.
If our Painters would include,
Temperance, and Fortitude,
In one Picture; She would fit,
For the nonce to pattern it.
Patient, as the Lamb is she.
Harmless, as the Turtles be.
Yea, so largely stored, with all
Which we Mortals Goodness call;
That, if ever Virtue were,
Or may be, incarnate here;
This is she, whose praises, I
Offer to Eternity.
She Is no Image trimd about,
Fair within, and foul without:
But a Iemm that does appear,
Like the Diamond, every where,
Sparkling rays of Beauty forth;
All of such unblemished worth,
That were possible, your eye
Might her inmost thoughts epsy,
And behold the dimmest part,
Of the luster in her heart.
It would find that Center pass,
What the Superficies was.
And, that every angle there,
Like a Diamonds inside were.
For, although that Excellence
Pass the piercingst Eye of Sense;
By their operations we,
Guess at things that hidden be.
So (beyond our common reach)
Wise men can by Reason teach,
What the influences been,
Of a Planet, when unseen;
Or the Beauty of a Star,
That does shine above us far.
So, by that wide-beaming Light,
Wherewith Titan Courts our sight,
By his clothing of the Earth;
By the wondrous, various Birth,
Of new Creatures, yearly bred
Through his heat; and nourished:
And by many Virtues more
(Which our Senses reach unto)
We conclude; they are not all,
Which make fair that goodly Ball.
Though she prize her honor more,
Then the far-fetcht precious store
Of the rich Molucchi, or
All the wealth was traffickt for,
Since our Vessels, passage knew
Unto Mexico, Peru:
Or those spacious Kingdoms, which
Make the proud Iberians rich.
It Is not that uncertain blast,
Keeps my Mistress Good, or Chaste.
She, that but for honors sake,
Does of ill a Conscience make;
(More in fear what Rumor says,
Then in love to virtuous ways)
Though she seemed more civil than,
You have seen a Courtezan,
For an honor: And cries Oh fie,
At each show of vanity.
Though she censure all that be,
Not so foolish coy as she.
Though she with the Roman Dame
Kill her self, to purchase fame.
She would prostitute become,
To the meanest basest Groom;
If so closely they may do it,
As the world should never know it.
So at best those women prove,
That for honor; virtue love.
Give me her, that Goodness chooses
For it own sake: And refuses
To have greatest honors gained,
With her secret conscience stained.
Give me her, that would be poor;
Die disgraced; nay, thought a whore;
And each Times reproach become,
Till the general day of Doom:
Rather then consent to act
Pleasing Sin, though by the fact,
(With esteem of virtuous) she
Might the German Empress be.
Such my Mistress is; and naught
Shall have power to change her thought.
Pleasures cannot tempt her eye,
On their Bayts to glance awry.
For their good she still esteems,
As it is; not as it seems:
And, she takes no comfort in
Sweetest pleasure, sowr'd with Sin.
By her self, she has such care,
That her actions decent are.
For, were she in secret hid,
None might see her what she did.
She would do, as if for spies,
Every wall were stuck with eyes.
And be chary of her honor,
Cause the heavens do look upon her.
And, oh what had power to move,
Flames of Lust, or wanton love,
So far, to disparage us,
If we all, were minded thus?
These, are Beauties that shall last,
When the Crimson blood shall wast;
And the shining Hair wax gray:
Or with age be worn away.
These, yield pleasures, such as might,
Be remembered with delight;
When we gasp our latest breath,
On the loathed bed of death.
Though discreetly speak she can,
She Will be silent, rather than
Talk while others may be heard.
As if she did hate, or feared,
Their Condition; who will force
All, to wait on their Discourse.
Reason has on her bestowed
More of knowledge, then she owed
To that Sex: and Grace with it,
Does aright her Practice fit.
Yet, has Fate so framed her,
As she may at sometime, err:
But, if ere her judgment stray,
It Is that other women may,
Those much-pleasing Beauties see,
Which in yielding Natures be.
For, since no perfection can
Here on earth be found in Man,
There Is more good in free submissions,
Then there is ill in our transgressions.
Should you hear her, once, contend,
In discoursing, to defend
(As she can) a doubtful Cause:
She such strong Positions draws
From known Truths; and does apply,
Reasons with such Majesty:
As if she did undertake,
From some Oracle to speak.
And you could not think, what might
Breed more love, or more delight.
Yet, if you should mark again,
Her discreet behavior, when
She finds Reason to repent
Some wrong-pleaded Argument.
She so temperatly lets all
Her mis-held opinions fall;
And, can with such Mildness bow:
As 'twill more enamour you,
Then her knowledge. For, there are
Pleasing sweets without compare
In such yeeldings; which do prove,
Wit, Humility, and Love.
Yea, by those mistakings; you
Her Condition so shall know,
(And the nature of her mind,
So undoubtedly shall find)
As will make her, more endeared,
Then if she had never erred.
Farther; that she naught may miss,
Which worth praise in woman, is:
This, unto the rest I add.
If I wound, or sickness, had;
None should for my curing run.
(No not to Appollo's son)
She, so well, the Virtue knows,
Of each needful Herb that grows;
And so fitly, can apply,
Salues to every Malady:
That, if she, no succor gave me,
Twere no means of Art, could save me.
Should my Soul oppressed lie,
(Sunk with grief and sorrow nigh)
She has balm for minds distressed;
And could ease my pained breast.
She so well knows how to season,
Passionate discourse with Reason;
And knows how to sweeten it,
Both with so much love and wit;
That, it shall prepare the Sense.
To give way with less offense.
For, grieved minds, can ill abide,
Counsel churlishly applide:
Which, instead of comfortings;
Desperation, often brings.
But, hark Nymphs: me thinks, I hear
Music, sounding in mine ear.
It Is a Lute: And he is the best
For a Voice, in all the West,
That does touch it. And the Swain,
I would have you hear so feign,
That my Song, forbear will I,
To attend his melody.
Hither comes he, day by day,
In these Groves to sing, and play,
And, in yonn close Arbor, He
Sits now, expecting me.
He, so bashful is; that mute
Will his Tougne be, and his Lute,
Should he happen to epsy
This, unlooked for Company.
If you, therefore list to hear him,
Let Us with silence walk more near him.
Twill be worth your pains (believe me)
(If a Voice, content may give ye)
And, await you shall not long;
For, He now beginns a Song.
Sonnet. 1.
WHat is the cause, when elsewhere I resort,
I have my Gestures, and Discourse more free?
And (if I please) can any Beauty Court,
Yet stand so dull, and so demure by thee?
Why are my speeches broken, whilst I talk?
Why do I fear almost thy hand to touch?
Why dare I not embrace thee as we walk,
Since, with the greatest Nymphs I Have dared as much?
Ah! know that none of those I e're affected;
And therefore, used a careless Courtship there:
Because, I neither their Disdain respected,
Nor recon'd them, or their embraces dear.
But, loving Thee; my Love has found content;
And rich delights, in things indifferent.
Sonnet. 2.
WHy Covet I, thy blessed eyes to see;
Whose sweet aspect, may cheer the saddest mind?
Why, when our bodies must divided be,
Can I no hour of rest, or pleasure find?
Why do I sleeping start, and waking moan,
To find, that of my dreamed Hopes I miss?
Why, do I often contemplate alone,
Of such a thing as thy Perfection is?
And wherefore, when we meet, does Passion stop
My speechles Tongue, and leave me in a panting?
Why, does my heart o'rechargd with fear and hope
(In spite of Reason) almost droop to fainting?
Because, in Me thy excellencies moving,
Have drawn me to an Excellence in loving.
Sonnet. 3
Fair, since thy Virtues my affections move,
And I have vowed, my purpose is to join,
(In an eternal Band of chastest Love)
Our Souls, to make a Marriage most divine.
Why (thou may think) then, seems he to prize,
An outward Beauties fading how so much?
Why, does he read such Lectures in mine eyes?
And often strive my tender palm to touch?
Oh pardon my presuming: For I swear,
My Love is soyled, with no lustful spot:
Thy Souls perfections, through those vailes appear,
And I half faint, that I embrace them not.
No foul Desires, does make thy touches sweet:
But, my Soul strives, with thy Soul to meet.
Sonnet 4.
SHall I wasting in Despair,
Dye because a Woman's fair?
Or make pale my cheeks with care,
Cause another Rosy are?
Be she fairer then the Day,
Or the Flowery Meads in May;
If She be not so to me,
What care I how fair she be.
Should my heart be grieud or pined,
Cause I see a Woman kind?
Or a well disposed Nature,
Joined with a lovely Feature?
Be she meeker, kinder, than
Turtle-Doue, or Pelican:
If she be not so to me,
What care I, how kind she be.
Shall a Woman's Virtues move,
Me, to perish for her love?
Or, her well-deseruing known,
Make me quite forget mine own?
Be she with that Goodness blessed,
Which may gain her, name of Best:
If she be not such to me,
What care I, how good she be.
Cause her Fortune seems too high,
Shall I play the fool, and dye?
Those that bear a Noble mind,
Where they want of Riches find,
Think, what with them, they would do,
That without them, dare to woo.
And, unless that mind I see,
What care I, though Great she be.
Great, or Good, or Kind, or Fair,
I will never the more despair,
If She love me, this believe;
I will die, er'e she shall grieve.
If she slight me, when I woo;
I can scorn, and let her go.
For, if she be not for me,
What care I, for whom she be.
Sonnet 5.
I Wandered out, awhile agone,
And went I know not whither:
But, there do Beauties many a one,
Resort, and meet together.
And Cupids power will there be shown,
If ever you come thither.
For, like two Suns, two Beauties bright,
I shining saw together.
And, tempted by their double light,
My eyes I fixed on either:
Till both at once, so thral'd my sight,
I loved, and knew not whether.
Such equal sweet Venus gave,
That I preferred not either.
And when for love, I thought to crave,
I knew not well of whether.
For, one while, This, I wished to have,
And then, I That, had leifer.
A Lover of the curioust Eye,
Might have been pleased in either.
And so, I must confess, might I,
Had they not been together.
Now, both must love, or both deny,
In one, enjoy I neither.
But yet at last I escaped the smart,
I feared, at coming hither.
For, seeing my divided heart,
I choosing, knew not whether.
Love angry grew, and did depart;
And now, I care for neither.
SEe; these Trees so ill did hide us,
That the Shepherd has espide us:
And (as jealous of his cunning)
All in have away is running.
To entreat him back again,
Would be labor spent in vain.
You may therefore, now, betake ye
To the Music I can make ye;
Who, do purpose my Invention,
Shall pursue my first Intention.
For, in Her (whose worth I tell)
Many excellences dwell,
Yet vnmention'd: whose perfections
Worthy are of best affections.
That, which is so rare to find,
Both in Man, and Womankind:
That; whose absence Love defaceth,
And both Sexes more disgraceth,
Then the spite of furrowed Age,
Sicknesses, or Sorrows rage:
That Is the Jewel so divine,
Which does on her Forehead shine.
And, therewith endowed is She,
In an excellent degree.
CONSTANCY (I mean) the purest
Of all Beauties; and the surest.
For, who e're does that possess,
Has an endless Loveliness.
All Afflictions, Labors, Crosses,
All our Dangers, Wounds, and losses,
Games of Pleasure, we can make,
For that matchless Woman's sake;
In whose breast that Virtue bideth:
And we joy what e're betideth.
Most dejected Hearts it gladdeth:
Twenty thousand glories adds
Unto Beauties brightest Ray:
And, preserues it from decay.
It Is the Salt, that is made to season,
Beauty, for the use of Reason.
It Is the Vernish, and the Oyling,
Keeps her Colors fresh, from spoiling.
It Is an Excellence, whereby
Age, though joined with Poverty,
Has more dear Affection won,
Then fresh Youth, and Wealth have done.
It Is a Loveliness, endearing
Beauties, scarce worth note, appearing;
Whilst a fairer fickle Dame,
Nothing gains, but scorn and shame.
Further; it is a Beauty, such
As I can nor praise too much,
Nor frame Measures, to express.
No; nor any man, unless
He, who (more then all men crossed)
Finds it in that Woman lost;
On whose Faith, he would have pawnd
Life, and all he could command.
Such a Man may by that Miss
Make us know how dear it is;
When, o're-charg'd with Grief, he shall
Sigh, and break his heart withal.
This is that Perfection, which
In her favor makes me rich.
All whose Beauties (named before)
Else, would but torment me more:
And, in having this, I find,
(What e're haps) a quiet mind:
Yea, it is that, which I do prize,
Far above her Lips, her Eyes:
Or, that general Beauty, whence
Shines each several Excellence.
For, alas! what gaind has he,
Who may clip the fairest She
(That the name of Woman bears)
If, unhappily, he fears,
Any others Worth, may win,
What he thought his own had bin?
Him, Base-minded deem I should,
Who (although he were in Hold,
Wrapped in chains) would not disdain,
Love with her to entertain
That both daughter to a Peer,
And most rich and lovely were;
When a brainelesse Gull shall dare,
In her, favors with him share:
Or, the Action of a Player,
Robb him of a Hope so fair.
This, I dread not: For, I know,
Strained gestures, painted show,
Shameless boastings, borrowed Jests,
Female Looks, gay-plumed Crests,
Vows nor protestations vain,
(Wherewith fools are made so vain)
Move her can; save to contemn,
Or perhaps, to laugh at them.
Neither can I doubt, or fear,
Time shall either change or wear
This her Virtue: Or, impair
That which makes her Soul, so fair.
In which Trust, great Comforts are,
Which, the fear of loss, would mar.
Nor has this my rare Hope stood,
So much, in her being good;
(With her love to blessed Things)
As in her acknowledgings,
From a higher Power to have them;
And her love, to Him, that gave them.
For, although to have a mind
Naturally to Good inclined,
(And to love it) would assure
Reason, that it might endure.
Yet (since Man was first unjust)
There Is no warrant for such Trust.
Virtues, that most wonder winn,
Would converted be to Sin;
If their flourishings began,
From no better Root, then Man.
Our best Virtues, when they are
Of themselves, we may compare,
To the beauty of a Flower,
That is blasted in an hour:
And, which growing to be fuller,
Turns into some loathed Color.
But, those being freely given,
And confirmed in us from Heaven;
Have a promise on them past:
And for evermore shall last;
Diamond-like, their luster clearing,
More and more, by use and wearing.
But, if this rare Worth I praise,
Should by Fates permission, raise
Passions in some gentle Breast,
That distemper may his rest;
(And be Author of such Treason,
As might nigh endanger Reason)
Or, enforce his tongue to crave,
What another man must have.
Mark, in such a Straight as this,
How discreet her dealing is.
She, is nothing of their humors,
Who, their honor build on Rumors,
And, had rather private sporting,
Then allow of open courting:
Nor of theirs, that would seem holy,
By diuulging others folly.
Farther is she from their guise,
That delight to Tyrannize,
Or make boastings, in espying,
Others for their favors dying.
She, a spirit does possess
So repleat with Nobleness,
That, if she be there beloved,
Where she ought not to be moved,
Equally, to love again:
She, does so well entertain
That affection; as there is none
Can suppose it, ill bestowne.
From deluding, she is free:
From disdain, as far is she:
And so feelingly bears part,
Of what pains another heart;
That no curse, of scorned duty,
Shall draw vengeance on her Beauty.
Rather, with so tender fear,
Of her Honor, and their care,
She is touched; that neither shall,
Wrong unto her self, befall;
(By the favor she does show)
Nor will she neglect them so;
As may just occafion give,
Any way to make them grieve.
Hope, she will not let them see,
Least they should presuming be;
And aspire to that, which none,
Ever must enjoy but One.
From Despair, she keeps them to;
Fearing, they might hap to do,
Either through Loves indiscretions,
(Or much over stirred passions)
What, might with their hurt and shame,
Into question call her name.
And a scandal on her bring,
Who is just in every thing.
She has marked how others run;
And by them has learned to shun,
Both their fault, who (ouerwise)
Err, by being too precise:
And their folly that over kind,
Are to all complaints inclind.
For, her wit has found the way,
How a while to hold them play;
And, that in conu^nience shun,
Whereinto, both seem to run;
By allowing them a scope,
Just betwixt Despair, and Hope.
Where confined, and reaching neither*
They do take a part in either:
Till, long living in suspense,
(Tired by her indifference)
Time, at last, their Passion wears;
Passions wearing, Reason cleares;
Reason gives their Judgment light;
Judgment brings all to right.
So, their Hope appearing vain,
They become themselves again.
And, with high applauses, fit,
For such Virtue, with such Wit;
They, that service, only profer,
She may take, and they may offer.
Yet, this course she never proves;
Save with those, whose virtuous Loves*
Use the noblest means of gaining,
Favors, worthy the obtaining.
And, if such should chance to err,
(Either against themselves, or her)
In some ouer-sights, when they,
Are through Passion led astray.
She, so well man's frailty knows,
With the Darts that Beauty throws;
As she will not adding terror,
Break the heart for one poor error.
Rather (if still good they be)
Twenty remedies has she,
Gently to apply, where Sense
Has invaded Reasons Fence;
And, without or wound, or scarre,
Turns to Peace, a lawless War.
But, to those whose baser fires,
Breath out smoke of such desires,
As may dimm with vnpure steames,
Any part of Beauties beams.
She, will daigne no milder way,
Those foul burnings to allay;
Save, with such extreme neglect,
As shall work her wished effect.
And, to use so sharp a cure,
She Is not often constrained sure.
Cause, upon her forhead, still
Goodness sits, so feared of Ill.
That the scorn, and high disdaines,
Where with all she entertaines,
Those loathed glaunces; gives ending,
To such flamings in the tynding:
That their cooled Hopes, needs must
Freeze Desires, in heat of Lust.
It Is a power that never lies,
In the fairest immodest eyes.
Wantons; it is not your sweet eyings,
Forced Passions, fained Dyings,
Gestures temptings, Tears beguilings,
Dancings, Singings, Kissings, Smilings;
Nor those painted sweets, with which,
You unwary men bewitch:
(All united, nor asunder)
That can compass such a wonder.
Or, to winn you love preuailes,
Where her moving Virtues, fails.
Beauties, it is not all those Features,
Placed in the fairest Creatures;
Though their best they should discover,
That can tempt from Her, a Lover.
It Is not, those soft-snowie Breasts,
Where Love rockt in pleasure, rests;
(And by their continual motions,
Draws hearts to vain devotions)
Nor the Nectar that we sip
From a hony-dropping Lip:
Nor those Eyes, whence Beauties Lances,
Wound the heart, with wanton glances:
Nor, those sought Delights, that lie
In Loves hidden Treasury*
That, can liking gain, where she,
Will the best beloved be.
For, should those who think they may,
Draw my love from her away;
Bring forth all their female Graces,
Wrapped me, in their close embraces;
Practice all the Art they may;
Weep, or sing, or kiss, or pray,
And with sighs and looks come woe me,
When they soonest may undo me:
One poor thought of Her, would arm me
So, as Circe could not harm me.
Since beside those Excellences,
Wherewith, others please the Senses;
She, whom I have prised so,
Yields delights, for Reason to.
Who could Dote on thing so common,
As mere outward handsome Woman?
Those halfe-beauties, only win
Fools, to let affection in.
Vulger wits, from Reason shaken,
Are with such impostures taken:
And, with all their Art in Love,
Wantons, can but Wantons move.
But, when unto those, are Ioind;
Those things which adorn the Mind:
None, their excellences see,
But they straight enthralled be.
Fools, and wisemen, worst and best,
Subject are to Loves Arrest.
For, when Virtue wooes a Lover,
She Is an unresisted moouer:
That will have no kind of Nay,
And in Love brooks no delay.
She, can make the Sensual Wights,
To restrain their Appetites.
And, (her beauty when they see)
Spite of Vice, in Love to be:
Yea (although themselves be bad)
Praise the good they never had.
She, has to her service brought,
Those, that Her, have set at naught;
And can fair enough appear,
To inflame the most seueare.
She, has often allured out,
The religiously devout,
From their Cloisters, and their Vows*
To embrace what She allows:
And, to such contentments come,
As blind zeal had bard them from.
While (her laws misunderstood)
They did ill for love of Good.
Where I find true worth to be,
Sweetest are their lips to me:
And embraces tempt me to,
More then outward Beauties do.
That my firm belief is this:
If ever I do amiss;
Seeming-Good, the bayt will lay,
That to ill shall me betray:
Since, where shows of Goodness are,
I am often emboldned there,
Freedoms so permit, and use;
Which, I elsewhere do refuse:
For because I think they mean,
To allow no deed unclean.
Yet, where two, love Virtue shall,
Both at once, they seldom fall.
For, when one has thoughts of ill,
The Other helps e^ile them still.
My fair Virtues power is this.
And, that power the Beauty is,
Which does make Her, here expressed,
Equally both Fair, and Blessed.
This, was that contenting Grace,
Which affection made me place,
With so dear respect, that never
Can it fail; but, last for ever.
This; a Servant made me sworn,
Who before time, held in scorn,
To yield Vassilage, or Duty,
Though, unto the Queen of Beauty.
Yet, that I her Servant am,
It shall more be to my fame;
Then to own these Woods and Downs:
Or be Lord of fifty Towns.
And my Mistress to be deemed,
Shall more honor be esteemed;
Then those Titles to acquire,
Which most women, most desire.
Yea, when you a woman shall,
Countess, or a Duchess call;
That respect it shall not move,
Neither gain her half such love,
As to say, Lo, this is she,
That supposed is to be,
Mistress to PHIL^ARETE.
And, that lovely Nymph, which he,
In a Pastoral Poem famed,
And FAIRE-VIRTVE, there has named.
Yea, some Ladies (ten to one)
If not many (now unknown)
Will be very well apaid,
When by chance, She hears it said
She, that Faire-one is; whom I,
Here have praised, concealedly.
And, though now this Ages pride,
May so brave a Hope deride.
Yet, when all their Glories pass
As the thiug that never was;
(And on Monuments appear,
That, they ere had breathing here)
Who envy it: She shall thrive
In her Fame* And honored live,
Whilst Great-Bri^taines Shepherds, sing
English, in their Sonnetting.
And, who ere in future days,
Shall bestow the utmost praise,
On his Love; that any Man,
Attribute to Creature can.
Twill be this; that he has dared,
His, and Mine to have compared.
Oh! what stars did shine on me,
When her Eyes I first did see?
And how good was their aspect,
When we first did both affect?
For, I never since to changing
Was enclind, or thought of ranging.
Me, so often my Fancy drew,
Here and there, that I nere knew
Where to place Desire, before,
So, that range it might no more.
But, as he that passes by,
Where in all her iollitie,
Floras riches in a row,
Does in seemly order grow:
And a thousand Flowers stand,
Bending as to kiss his hand;
Out of which delightful store,
One he may take; and no more.
Long he pausing, doubts whether,
Of those fair ones he should gather.
First, the Primrose Courts his eyes;
Then, the Cowslip he espies;
Next, the Pansey seems to woo him;
Then, Carnations bow unto him:
Which, whilst that enamored Swain
From the stalk intends to strain,
(As half fearing to be seen)
Prettily her leaves between
Peepes the Violet: pale, to see,
That her Virtues slighted be.
Which, so much his liking winnes,
That, to ceaze her, he begins.
Yet, before he stoopt so low,
He, his wanton eye did throw
On a Stemm that grew more high,
And the Rose did there epsy:
Who, beside her precious sent
(To procure his eyes content)
Did display her goodly Breast;
Where he found at full expressed,
All the Good, that Nature showers
On a thousand other Flowers.
Wherewith he, affected, takes it;
His beloved Flower he makes it.
And, without desire of more,
Walks through all, he saw before.
So, I wandering, but erewhile,
Through the Garden of this I Will,
Saw rich Beauties (I confess)
And in number, numberless.
Yea, so differing lovely to,
That, I had a world to do,
Ere I could set up my rest,
Where to choose; and choose the best.
One I saw, whose Hair excelled,
On another Brow there dwelled,
Such a Majesty: it seemed,
She, was best to be esteemed.
This, had with her Speeches won me,
That, with Silence, had undone me.
On her Lips, the Graces hung;
The Other, charmed me with her tongue.
In her Eyes, a third did bear,
That, which did anew ensnare.
Then a fourth did fairer show;
Yet, wherein I did not know.
Only this perceived I,
Somewhat pleased my Fantasy.
Now, the Wealth I most esteemed;
Honor then, I better deemed.
Next, the love of Beauty ceazd me,
And, then Virtue better pleased me.
Juno's love, I naught esteemed,
Whilst a Venus fairer seemed.
Nay, both could not Me suffice;
Whilst a Pallas was more wise.
Though I found enough in One,
To content, if still alone.
Amarillis, I did woo;
And I courted Phillis to.
Daphne, for her love I chose;
Cloris for that Damask Rose,
In her Cheek, I held as dear;
Yea, a thousand lik^, welneere.
And, in love with altogether,
Feared the enjoying either;
Cause, to be of one possessed,
Barred the hope of all the rest.
Thus I fondly fared, till Fate,
Which (I must confess in that
Did a greater favor to me,
Then the world can malice do me)
Showed to me that matchless Flower,
Subject for this Song of our.
Whose perfection, having eied,
Reason instantly espied;
That, Desire (which ranged abroad)
There, would find a Period.
And no marvel, if it might:
For, it there has all delight;
And in her has Nature placed,
What each several fair one graced.
Nor am I, alone delighted,
With those Graces all united;
Which the Senses eye, does find,
Scattered, throughout Womankind.
But, my Reason finds perfections,
To inflame my Souls affections.
Yea, such virtues she possesses,
As with firmest pleasures blesses:
And keeps sound, that Beauties state,
Which would else grow ruinate.
In this Flower, are sweets such store;
I shall never, wish for more.
Nor be tempted out to stray,
For the fairest Budds in May.
Let who lift (for me) advance,
The admired Flowers of France,
Let who will; praise, and behold,
The reserved Marigold.
Let the sweet breath't Violet, now,
Unto whom she pleases, bow.
And the fairest Lilly, spread
Where she will, her golden head.
I have such a Flower to wear,
That for those I do not care.
Never shall my Fancy range,
Nor once think again of change:
Never will I; (never more)
Grieve, or sigh, as heretofore:
Nor within the Lodgings lie,
Of Despair, or Jealousy.
Let the young and happy Swains,
Playing on the Britan Plains:
Court vnblamd, their Sheepherdesses.
And with their gold-curled Tresses;
Toy vncensur'd; until I
Grutch at their prosperity.
Let all Times; both Present, Past,
And the Age, that shall be last,
Vaunt the Beauties they bring forth.
I have found in One, such worth:
That (content) I neither care,
What the best before me were:
Nor desire to live, and see,
Who shall Fair hereafter be.
For, I know the hand of Nature,
Will not make a fairer Creature.
Which, because succeeding Days,
Shall confess; and add their praise,
In approving, what my tongue,
Ere they had their being, sung.
Once again, come lend an ear,
And, a Rapture you shall hear,
(Though I taste no Thespian Spring)
Will amaze you, whilst I sing.
I do feel new Strains inspiring,
And to such brave heights aspiring,
That my Muse will touch a Key,
Higher, then you heard to day.
I have Beauties to unfold,
That deserve a Penn of Gold.
Sweets, that never dreamed of were.
Things unknown: and such, as Ear
Never heard a Measure sound;
Since the Sun first ran his Round.
When Apelles limbed to life,
Loathed Vulcans lovely wife.
With such Beauties, he did trim,
Each sweet Feature, and each Limb*
And, so curiously did place,
Every well-becomming Grace.
That it was said, e're he could draw
Such a Piece; he naked saw
Many women in their Prime,
And the fairest of that Time.
From all which, he parts did take,
Which aright disposed, make
Perfect Beauty. So, when you
Know, what I have yet to show:
It will seem to pass so far,
Those things which expressed are.
That, you will suppose I Have been
Priuiledg'd; where I have seen,
All the Good, that is spread in parts,
Through a thousand women's hearts.
(With their fairest conditions lie,
Bare, without Hypocrisy)
And, that I, have took from thence,
Each dispersed Excellence.
To express Her, who has gained
More, then ever One obtained.
And yet soft, (I fear) in vain,
I have boasted such a Strain.
Apprehensions ever are
Greater, then expression far.
And, my stryuing to disclose
What I know; has made me lose
My Inventions better part:
And, my Hopes exceed my Art.
Speak I can; yet think I more,
Words compared with Thoughts, are poor.
And I find, had I begun,
Such a Strain; it would be done,
When we number all the sands,
Washed ore perjured Goodwins lands.
For, of things, I should indite;
Which, I know, are infinite.
I do yield, my Thoughts did clime,
Far above the power of Ryme:
And no wonder, it is so;
Since, there is no Art can show;
Red in Roses, white in Snow;
Nor express how they do grow.
Yea, since Bird, Beast, Stone, and Tree,
(That inferior Creatures be)
Beauties have, which we confess,
Lines unable to express:
They more hardly can enroule,
Those, that do adorn a Soul.
But, suppose my Measures could,
Reach the height, I thought they would.
Now, relate, I would not tho;
What did swell within me so.
For, if I should all discrie,
You would know as much as I:
And those Clownes, the Muses hate,
Would of things above them prate.
Or, with their profaning eyes,
Come to view those Mysteries,
Whereof, (since they disesteem'd them)
Heaven, has unworthy deemd them.
And beside; It seems to me,
That your ears nigh tired be.
^ perceive; the fire that charmeth,
And inspireth me; scarce warmeth
Your chill hearts. Nay sure; were I
Melted into Poesy,
^ should not a Measure hit,
Though Apollo promted it)
Which should able be to leave,
That in you, which I conceive.
You are cold; and here I may
Wast my vital heat away,
E're you will be moved so much,
As to feel one perfect touch
Of those Swee^s, which yet concealed
Swell my breast, to be revealed.
Now, my Words, I therefore cease:
That, my mounting Thoughts, in peace,
May alone, those pleasures share,
Whereof, Lines unworthy are.
And so, you an end do see
Of my Song; though long it be.
NO sooner had the Shepherd Philaret,
To this Description his last period set:
But, instantly, descending from a Wood,
(Which, on a rising ground, adjoining stood)
A troop of Satyrs to the view of all,
Came dancing of a new-deuised Brall.
The Measures they did pase, by Him, were taught the
Who, to so rare a gentleness had brought them,
That he, had learnd their rudeness an observing,
Of such respect unto the well-deseruing,
As they became to no men else a terror,
But such, as did persist in wilful error:
And they, the Ladies made no whit affeard,
Though since that time they some great men have scard.
Their Dance, the W^ipping of Abuse they named;
And, though the Shepherd since that, has bin blamed,
Yet, now it is daily seen in every town;
And there is no Countrey-Dance that's better known:
Nor, that has gained a greater commendation,
Amongst those that love an honest recreation.
This Scene presented; from a Grove was heard,
A set of Viols; and, there was prepared
A Country Banquet, which this Shepherd made,
To entertain the Ladies, in the shade.
And it is supposd, his Song prolonged was
Of purpose, that it might be brought to pass.
^o well it was performd, that each one deemed,
The Banquet might the City have beseem'd.
Yet, better was their Welcome then their Fare:
Which they perceived, and the merrier were.
One Beauty tho, there sat amongst the rest;
That looked as sad, as if her heart oppressed
With Love had been. Whom Philaret beholding,
^it so demurely, and her Arms enfolding.
Lady (quoth he) am I, or this poor cheer,
^he cause that you so melancholy are?
^or, if the Object of your thoughts be higher,
^t fits nor me to know them; nor enquire.
(...) if from me it comes, that offends,
^ seek the Cause, that I may make amends.
Kind Swain (said she) it is nor so, nor so.
No fault in you, nor in your Cheer I know.
Nor do I think there is a Thought in me;
That can too worthy of your knowledge be.
Nor have I, many a day, more pleasure had,
Then here I find; though I have seemed sad.
My heart, is sometime heavy, when I smile;
And when I grieve, I often sing the while.
Nor is it sadness, that does me possess,
But, rather, musing with much seriousness,
Upon that multitude of sighs and tears;
With those innumerable doubts and fears:
Through which, you passed* ere you could acquire*
A settled Hope of gaining your Desire.
For, you dar^d love a Nymph, so great, and fair,
As might have brought a Prince unto Despair.
And sure, the excellency of your Passions,
Did then produce as excellent expressions.
If therefore, Me, the suit may well become;
And, if to you it be not wearisome:
In name of all these Ladies, I entreat,
That, one of those sad Strains you would repeat,
Which you composd; when greatest discontent
Vnsought-for help, to your Invention lent.
Fair Nymph (said Philarer) I will do so.
For, though your Shepherd, does no Courtship know
He has Humanity. And, what is in me
To do you Service, may commanded be.
So, taking down a Lute, that near him hung,
He gaue't his Boy, who played; whilst this, he sung.
Ah me!
Am I the Swain,
That late from sorrow free,
Did all the cares on earth disdain?
And still untouched, as at some safer Games,
Played with the burning coals of Love, and Beautis flames?
Wast I, could diue, and sound each passions secret depth at will;
And, from those huge ouerwhelmings, rise, by help of Reason still?
And am I now, oh heavens! for trying this in vain,
So sunk, that I shall never rise again?
Then let Despair, set Sorrows string,
For Strains that dolefulst be.
And I will sing,
Ah me.
But why,
Oh fatal Time!
Do thou constrain that I,
Should perish, in my youths sweet prime?
I, but a while ago (you cruel Powers)
Inspight of Fortune, cropped contentme^ts sweetest flowers.
And yet, vnscorned, serve a gentle Nymph, the fairest She,
That ever was beloved of Man, or Eyes did ever see.
Yea, one, whose tender heart, would rue for my distress;
Yet I, poor I; must perish nay-the less.
And (which much more augme^ts my care)
Vnmoaned I must dye:
And, no man er'e,
Kn^w why.
Thy leave,
My dying Song,
Yet take, ere grief bereave,
The breath which I enjoy too long.
Tell thou that Fair-one this; my soul prefers,
Her love above my life, and that I died hers:
And let Him be, for evermore, to her remembrance dear,
Who loved the very thought of Her, whilst he remained here.
And now, farewell thou Place, of my unhappy birth;
Where once I breathd the sweetest air on earth.
Since me, my wonted joys forsake;
And all my trust deceive:
Of all, I take
My leave.
Farewell,
Sweet Groves to you:
You Hills, that highest dwell;
And all you humble Vales, adue.
You wanton Brooks, and solitary Rocks,
My dear companions all, and you, my tender flocks.
Forevvell my Pipe, and all these pleasing Songs, whose moving strains
Delighted once the fairest Nymphs, that dance upon the Plains.
You Discontents (whose deep, and over deadly smart,
Have, without pity, broke the truest heart)
Sighs, Tears, and every sad annoy,
That erst did with me dwell,
And all others Joy,
Farewell.
Adue,
Fair Shepherdesses:
Let Garlands of sad Yewe,
Adorn your dainty golden Tresses.
I, that loud you; and often with my Quill,
Made music that delighted Fountain Grove, and Hill:
I, whom you loved so; and with a sweet and chaste embrace,
(Yea, with a thousand rarer favors) would vouchsaf to grace.
I, now must leave you all alone, of Love to plain:
And never Pipe, nor never Sing again.
I must, for evermore, be gone;
And therefore, bid I you,
And every one,
Adue.
I dye!
For oh, I feel
Deaths horrors, drawing nie;
And all this frame of Nature, reele.
My hopeless heart, dispairing of relief,
Sinks underneath the heavy weight of saddest grief.
Which, has so ruthles torn, so rackt, (o torturd' every vain;
All comfort comes too late, to have it ever cured again.
My swimming head, begins to dance Deaths giddy round.
A shuddering chilnes does each sense confound:
Benumbed, is my cold-sweating brow;
A dimnesse shuts my eye;
And now, oh now,
I die.
SO mouingly, these Lines He did express,
And, to a Tune so full of heaviness,
As if indeed, his purpose had bin past,
To live no longer then the Song did last.
Which in the Nymphs, such tender passion bred.
That some of them, did tears of pity shed.
This, she perceiving, who first craud the Song;
Shepherd she said; although it be no wrong,
Nor grief to you, those passions to recall,
Which heretofore you have been paind withal,
But Comforts rather; since they now, are over,
And you (it seems) an enjoying Lover.
Yet, some young Nymphs among us I do see,
Who so much moved with your passions be:
That if, my aim, I taken have aright,
Their thoughts will hardly, let them sleep to night.
I dare not therefore, beg of you again,
To sing another of the selfsame Strain:
For fear, it breed within them, more unrest,
Then women's weaknesses, can well digest.
Yet, in your Measures, such content you have;
That, one Song more I will presume to crave.
And, if your Memory preserues of those,
Which you of your Affections did compose,
Before you saw this Mistress: Let us hear,
What kind of passions, then, within you were.
To which request, he instantly obaid;
And, this ensuing Song, both sung and played.
Sonnet. 2.
YOu gentle Nymphs, that on these meadows play
And often relate the loves of Shepherds young:
Come, sit you down; for, if you please to stay,
Now may you hear an uncouth Passion sung.
A Lad there is, and I am that poor Groom;
That fallen in love, and cannot tell with whom.
Oh do not smile at sorrow as a Jest;
With others cares good Natures moved be:
And, I should weep, if you had my unrest.
Then, at my grief, how, can you merry be?
Ah, where is tender pity now become?
I am in love, and cannot tell with whom.
I, that have often the rarest features viewd,
And Beauty in her best perfection seen:
I, that have laughed at them that Love pursude*
And ever free, from such affections been.
Lo now at last, so cruel is my doom;
I am in love, and cannot tell with whom.
My heart is full nigh bursting with desire,
Yet cannot find from whence these longings flow:
My breast does burn, but she that lights the fire,
I never saw, nor can I come to know.
So great a bliss my fortune keeps my from.
That though I dearly love; I know not who^.
Ere I had twice four Springs, renewed seen,
The force of Beauty I began to prove;
And, ere I nine years old, had fully been,
It taught me how to frame a Song of Love.
And, little thought I, this day should have come,
Before that I to love, had found out whom.
For, on my Chinn, the mossy down you see,
And, in my veins, well-heated blood does glow:
Of Summers I have seen twice three times three,
And, fast, my youthful time away does go.
That much I fear, I aged shall become:
And still complain; I love I know not whom.
Oh! why had I, a heart bestowed on me,
To cherish dear affections, so enclind?
Since, I am so unhappy borne to be
No Object, for so true a Love to find.
When I am dead, it will be mist of some:
Yet, now I live; I love, I know not whom.
I, to a thousand beauteous Nymphs am known;
A hundred Ladies favors do I wear:
I, with as many, half in love am grown;
Yet none of them (I find) can be my Dear.
Me thinks, I have a Mistress, yet to come;
Which makes me sing; I love I know not whom
There lives no Swain does stronger passion prove,
For her, whom most he couets to possess;
Then does my heart, that being full of Love,
Knows not to whom, it may the same profess.
For, he that is despisd, has sorrow, some:
But he has more; that loves, and knows not whom*
Knew I my Love, as many others do,
To some one object might my thoughts be bent:
So, they divided should not wandering go,
Until the Souls united force be spent.
As his, that seeks, and never finds a Home:
Such is my rest; that love, and know not whom.
Those, whom the frowns of jealous friends divide,
May live to meet, and descant on their woe:
And he, has gaind a Lady for his Bride,
That durst not woe her Maid, a while ago.
But oh! what end unto my Hopes can come?
That am in love, and cannot tell with whom.
Poor Collin, grieves that he was late disdaind:
And Cloris, does for Willy's absence pine.
Sad Thirsis, weeps, for his sick Phaebe paind.
But, all their sorrows cannot equal mine.
A greater care alas, on me is come:
I am in love, and cannot tell with whom.
Narcissus-like, did I affect my shade;
Some shadow yet, I had, to dote upon.
Or, did I love, some Image of the dead,
Whose substance had not breathed long agone;
I might despair, and so an end would come;
B^t, oh, I love! and cannot tell you whom.
Once in a Dream, me thought, my Love I viewed;
But, never waking, could her face behold:
And doubtless, that Resemblance was but showed,
That more, my tired heart torment it should.
For, since that time, more grieved I am become;
And more in love; I cannot tell with whom.
When on my bed at night, to rest I lie,
My watchful eyes, with tears bedew my cheek:
And then, oh would it once were day, I cry;
Yet when it comes, I am as far to seek.
For, who can tell, though all the earth he rome;
Or when, or where, to find he knows not whom?
Oh! if she be among the beauteous trains,
Of all you Nymphs, that haunt the silver ^ills;
Or, if you know her, Ladies of the Plains,
Or you, that have your Bowers, on the Hills.
Tell if you can, who will my love become:
Or I shall die, and never know for whom.
THe Ladies smiled often, when this they heard,
Because the Passion strange to them appeard.
And stranger was it; since, by his expression,
(As well as by his own unfeigned confession)
It seemed true. But, having sung it out:
And seeing, scarcely manners, they it thought
To urge him farther, Thus to them he spoke.
Fair Ladies: for as much as doubt you make
To re-command me: Of mine own accord,
Another Strain, I freely will afford.
It shall not be of Love; nor any Song,
Which to the praise of Beauty does belong.
But, that hereafter, when you hence are gone,
Your Shepherd may be sometime thought upon.
To show you also, what content the Field,
And lovely Grove, to honest Minds may yield.
That you my humble Fate, may not despise;
When you return unto your braueries.
And not suppose, that in these homely Bowers,
I hugg my Fortune, cause I know not yours.
Such Lines I Will sing, as were composd, by me,
When some proud Courtiers, where I hap't to be,
Did (like themselves) of their own glories prate;
As in contempt, of my more happy state.
And these they be. --
Sonnet.
LOrdly Gallants, tell me this,
(Though my safe content you weigh not)
In your Greatness what one bliss,
Have you gained, that I enjoy not?
You have Honors, you have Wealth,
I have Peace, and I have Health:
All the day, I merry make,
And, at night, no care I take.
Bound to none, my Fortunes be;
This, or that man's fall, I fear not:
Him I love, that loves me;
For the rest, a pin I care not.
You are sad, when others chafe,
And grow merry as they laugh;
I, that hate it, and am free,
Laugh and weep, as pleases me.
You may boast of favors shown,
Where your service is applied*
But, my pleasures are mine own,
And to no man's humors tied.
You often flatter, soothe, and feign,
I, such baseness do disdain:
And to none, be slave I would,
Though my fetters might be gold.
By great Titles, some believe,
Highest honors are attained;
And yet Kings have power to give,
To their Fools, what these have gained.
Where they favor, there they may,
All their Names of Honor lay:
But, I look not, raised to be,
Till mine own wing, carry me.
Seek to raise your Titles higher,
They are Toys not worth my sorrow:
Those that we to day admire,
Prove the Ages scorn to morrow.
Take your Honors; let me find,
Virtue, in a freeborn Mind:
This, the greatest Kings that be,
Cannot give, nor take from me.
Though I vainly do not vaunt,
Large demesnes, to feed my pleasure:
I have favors where you want,
That would buy respect with treasure.
You have lands lie here, and there;
But my wealth is every where:
And, this, adds to my store:
Fortune, cannot make me poor.
Say, you purchase with your pelf,
Some respect, where you importune.
Those may love me for my self,
That regard you for your Fortune.
Rich, or borne of high degree,
Fools, as well as you may be:
But, that ^eace, in which I live,
No Descent, nor Wealth can give.
If you boast, that you may gain,
The respect of high-borne Beauties:
Know, I never wooed in vain,
Nor preferred scorned Duties.
She I love, has all delight;
Rosie-red, with Lillie-white:
And, who er'e your Mistress be,
Flesh and Blood as good as She.
Note, of Me, was never took,
For my Woman-like perfections:
But, so like a man, I look,
It has gaind me best Affections.
For my love, as many showers
Have been wept, as have for yours.
And, yet none does me condemn
For Abuse, or scorning them.
Though of Dainties, you have store,
To delight a choyser Pallat:
Yet your taste is pleased no more,
Then is mine in one poor Sallat.
You to please your Senses, feed;
But, I eat, good Blood to breed.
And am most delighted than,
When I spend it like a man.
Though you Lord it over me,
You in vain thereof have braued:
For, those Lusts my Servants be,
Whereunto your minds are slaued.
To your selves you wise appear:
But alas, deceived you are.
You do foolish me esteem,
And are that, which I do seem.
When your faults I open lay,
You are moved, and madd with vexing;
But, you never could do or say,
Ought to drive me to perplexing.
Therefore, my despised power
Greater is, by far, then your.
And, what er'e you think of me,
In your minds, you poorer be.
You are pleased, more or less,
As men well or ill report you;
And, show discontentednesse,
When the Times forbear to court you.
That, in which my pleasures be,
No man can divide from me.
And, my Care, it adds not to
What-so, others say, or do.
Be not proud, because you view,
You by thousands are attended:
For alas, it is not You,
But your Fortune, tha's be-friended.
Where I show of love have go^,
Such a danger fear I not.
Since, they naught can seek of me;
But, for love, beloved to be.
When your Hearts have every thing,
You, are pleasantly disposed:
But, I can both laugh and sing,
Though my Foes have me enclosed.
Yea, when dangers ^oe do hemm,
I delight in scorning them,
More then you, in your renown;
Or a King can in his Crown.
You do bravely domineere,
Whilst the Sun upon you shines.
Yet, if any storm appear,
Basely then, your mind declineth.
But, or shine, or rain, or Blow,
I, my Resolutions know.
Living, Dying, Thrall, or Free,
At one height my Mind shall be.
When in thraldom, I have lain,
Me, not worth your thought you prized.
But, your malice was in vain,
For, your favors, I despised.
And, how ere you value me,
I, with praise, shall thought on be;
When the world esteems you not,
And your Names shall be forgot.
In these thoughts my riches are,
Now, though poor or mean you deem me;
I am pleased, and do not care,
How the Times, or you esteem me.
For, these Toys that make you gay,
Are but Play-games for a day.
And, when Nature craves her due;
I, as brave shall be, as you,
HEre Philaret did give his Song an ending,
To which the Nymphs, so seriously attending,
About him sat; as if they had supposed,
He still had somewhat more, to be disclosed.
And, well they knew not; whether did belong,
Most praise unto the Shepherd, or his Song.
For, though (they must confess) they often hear,
Those Lays, which much more deeply learned are:
Yet, when they well considerd of the Place,
With how unlikely (in their thought) it was,
To give them hope of hearing such a Strain;
Or, that so young, and so obscure a Swain,
Should, such a matchless Beauties favor get,
And know her worth so well, to sing of it.
They wondered at it. And some thus surmizd,
That He a greater man was, so disguisd:
Or else, that She, whom he so much had praisd
Some Goddess was: that those his Measures raisd,
Of purpose, to that rare-attained height,
In Enui's and presuming Art's despite.
But, whilst they musing, with themselves, bethought
Which way, out of this Shepherd to have wrought,
What Nymph this Fair-one was; and where she lived.
Lo, at that very instant there arrived
Three men, that by their Habits Courtiers seemd:
For (though obscure) by some he is esteemd
Among the greatest: who do not contemn
In his retired walks, to visit him.
And there they taste those pleasures of the mind,
Which they, can nor in Court, nor City find.
Some news or message, these new guests had brought him,
And, to make have away (it seems) besought him.
For, instantly he rose: And that his nurture,
Might not be taxed by a rude departure,
Himself excusing, he those Nymphs did pray:
His noble Friends might bring them on their way:
Who, as it seems (he said) were therefore come;
That they might wait upon them to their home.
So, with their favor, he departed thence:
And (as they thought) to meet her Excellence,
Of whom he sung. Yet many deem that this,
But an Idea of a MISTRESS is.
Because to none, he yet had daind the telling,
Her proper Name; nor shown her place of Dwelling.
When he was gone: a Lady from among
Those Nymphs; took up his Lute, and sung this Song.
The Nymphs Song.
GEntle Swain, good speed befall thee;
And in Love still prosper thou:
Fu^ure Times shall happy call thee,
Though, thou lie neglected, now.
Virtues Lovers, shall commend thee;
And perpetual Fame, attend thee.
Happy are these woody Mountains,
In whose shad dowes thou do hide:
And as happy, are those Fountains,
By whose murmures thou do bide.
For, Contents are here excelling;
More, then in a Princes dwelling.
These thy Flocks do clothing bring thee,
And thy food, out of the Fields:
Pretty Songs, the Birds do sing thee;
Sweet perfumes the Meddowe yields:
And, what more is worth the seeing?
Heaven and Earth thy prospect being?
None comes hither, who denies thee,
Thy Contentments (for despite)
Neither any that enuies thee,
That, wherein thou do delight.
But, all happy things are meant thee?
And what ever may content thee.
Thy Affection Reason measures;
And distempers none it feeds:
Still, so harmless are thy pleasures,
That no others grief it breeds.
And, if night, beget thee sorrow;
Seldom stays it, till the morrow.
Why do foolish men so vainly,
Seek contentment in their store?
Since they may perceive so plainly,
Thou art rich, in being poor?
And that they are vexed about it;
Whilst thou merry art without it.
Why are idle brains devising,
How high Titles may be gaind?
Since, by those poor toys despising,
Thou have higher things obtaind?
For the man who scorns to crave them,
Greater is, then they that have them.
If all men could taste that sweetness,
Thou do in thy meanness know;
Kings would be to seek, where Greatness,
And their honors to bestow.
For, it such content would breed them;
As they would not think they need them.
And, if those who so aspiring,
To the Court-preferments be;
Knew how worthy the desiring;
Those things are, enjoyed by thee.
Wealth and Titles, would hereafter:
Subjects be, for scorn and laughter.
He that Courtly styles affected,
Should a May-Lords honor have.
He that heaps of wealth collected,
Should be counted as a slave.
And the man with few'st things cumbred,
With the Noblest should be numbered.
Thou, their folly have descerned,
That neglect thy mind, and thee;
And to sight them, thou have learned,
Of what Title er'e they be.
That; no more with thee, obtains;
Then with them, thy meannes gains.
All their Riches, Honors, Pleasures;
Poor unworthy trifles seem;
(If compared with thy Treasures)
And, do merit no esteem.
For, they true contents provide thee;
And from them can none divide thee.
Whether thralled, or exiled;
Whether poor or rich thou be:
Whether praised, or reviled;
Not a rush, it is to thee.
This, nor that, thy rest does win thee:
But, the mind, which is within thee.
Then, oh why, so madly dote we,
On those things, that us ore-lode?
Why, no more, their vainness note we;
But still make of them a God?
For, alas! they still deceive us;
And, in greatest need they leave us.
Therefore, have the Fates provided,
Well (thou happy Swain) for thee:
That may, here, so far divided,
From the worlds distractions be.
Thee, distemper let them never;
But, in peace continue ever.
In these lonely Groves, enjoy thou,
That contentment here begun:
And, thy hours, so pleased, employ thou,
Till the latest glass be run.
From a Fortune so assured:
By no temptings be allured.
Much good do it them with their glories,
Who in Courts of Princes dwell.
We have read in Antique stories,
How some rose, and how they fell.
And it is worthy well the heeding;
There Is like End, where is like proceeding.
Be thou; still, in thy affection,
To thy Noble Mistress, true:
Let her (neuer-matcht) perfection,
Be the same, unto thy view.
And, let never other Beauty,
Make thee fail, in Love, or Duty.
For, if thou shall not estranged
From thy Course professed, ^e.
But remain for aye unchanged;
Nothing shall have power on thee.
Those that slight thee now, shall love thee,
And, in spite of spite, approve thee.
So those Virtues now neglected,
To be more esteemed; will come:
Yea, those Toys so much affected,
Many shall be wooed from.
And, the golden Age (deplored)
Shall, by some, be thought restored.
THus sang the Nymph: so rarely-well inspired,
That all the hearers, her brave Strains admired.
And, as I heard, by some that there attended,
When this her Song was finished, all was ended.
A Postscript.
IF any Carpe, for that, my younger^ Times,
Brought forth such idle fruit, as these slight Rymes,
It is no matter; so they do not swear,
That they, so ill employed, never were.
Whilst their Desires (perhaps) they looselier spent;
I gave my heats of Youth, this better vent.
And, often by writing thus, the blood have tamed;
Which some, with reading wanton Lay* enflamed.
Nor care I, though their Censure some have past,
Because my Songs exceed the Fiddlers Last.
For, do they think, that I will make my Measures,
The longer, or the shorter, for their pleasures?
Or may me, or Curtolize my free Invention;
Because, Fools weary are, of their attention.
No; let them know, who do their length contemn,
I make to please my self, and not for them.
A Miscelany of Epigrams, Sonnets, Epitaphs, and such other Verses, as were
found written, with the Poem, aforegoing.
Of the Invention of the nine Muses.
THe Acts of Ages past, does Clio write.
The Tragoedie's, Melpomenes delight.
Thalia, is with Comedies contented.
E^terpe, first, the Shepherds Pipe invented.
Terpsicore, does Song, and Lute apply.
Dancing Er^to found Geometry.
Calliop^, on loving Verses dwells.
The secrets of the Stars, Urania tells.
Polymnia, with choice words, the speech does trim.
And great Apollo shares with all of them.
Those thrice three Feminines* we Mases call;
But that one Masculine is worth them all.
Of the Labors of Hercules.
FIrst, he the strong Nemean Lion slew:
The many-headed Hydra next ore-threw.
The Eremanthian Bore he thirdly foyles:
Then of his golden Horns the Stagge he spoils.
The foul Stymphalian Birds he fifthly frayd:
Next, he the Queen of Amazons ore-swayd*
Then clensd Aegeas Stalls, with filth so full:
And eighthly, tamed the untamed Bull.
He slew proud Diomedes with his Horses.
From triple Gerio^ his rich Heard he forces.
He slew the Dragon for the fruit of gold:
And made black Cerber^^ the day behold.
These were his twelve stout Labors. And they say,
With fifty Virgins in one night he lay.
If true it be, it is thought he labourd more
In that one act, then in the twelve before.
Being (...) by a Gentleman in his Dining-roome, where was nothing but a Map of
England to entertain him, he thus turned it into Verse.
Fair England in the bosom of the Seas,
Amid her two and fifty Provinces,
Sits like a glorious Empress; whose rich Throne,
Great Nymphs of honor come to wayt upon.
First, in the height of bravery appears
Kent, East and South, and Middle-Saxon Shires:
Next, Surry* Barkshire, and Southampton get,
With Dorcet, Wilton, and rich Sommerset.
Then Deuon, with the Cornish Promontory:
Gloucester and VVorster, fair Sabrinas glory.
Then Salope, Suffolk, Northfolke large and fair,
Oxford and Cambridge, that thrice learned pair.
Then Lincoln, Darby, Yorkshire, Nottingham,
Northamption, Warwick, Stafford, Buckingham.
Chester and Lancaster (with Herds well stord)
Huntingdon, Hartford, Rutland, Hereford.
Then Princely Durham, Bedford, Leister, and
Northumber, Cumber and cold Westmerland.
Brave English shires; with whom loved equally
Welsh Munmouth, Rad^or, and Mountgomery,
Add all the glory (to her T^aine) they can:
So does Glamorgan, Breckn^^, Cardigan,
Caernaruan, Denbigh, (...)- Shire,
With Anglesey (which ore the sea does rear
Her^ lofty head And with the first, though last,
Flint, Pembrooke and Carmarthen might be pla^^.
For all of these (unto their power) maintain
Their Mistrisse England with a royal Train.
Yea, for Supporters at each hand, has she
The VVight and Man, that two brave Islands be.
From these, I to the Scottish Nymphs had iorny'd,
But that my Friend was back again returned,
Who having kindly brought me to his home,
Alone did leave me in his Dining Rome:
Where I was feign (and glad I had the hap)
To beg an entertainment of his Map.
An Epitaph upon the Right Virtuous Lady, the Lady SCOTT.
LEt none suppose this Relic of the Just,
as here wrapped up, to perish in the dust.
No, like best (...), her time she fully stood:
Then being grown in Faith, and ripe in Good;
(With steadfast hope, that she another day,
Should rise with Christ) with Death here down she lay.
And, that each part, which Her, in life had graced,
Preserved might be, and meet again at last:
The Poor, the Worl^, the Heavens, and the Grave:
Her Alms, her Praise, her Soul, her Body have.
An Epitaph upon a Woman, and her Child, buried together in the same Grave.
BEneath this Marble Stone does lie,
^he Subject of Deaths Tyranny.
A Mother: who in this close Tomb,
Sleeps with the issue of her womb.
Though cruelly enclinde was he;
And with the fruit shook down the Tree.
Yet was his cruelty in vain.
For, Tree, and Fruit, shall spring again.
A Christmas Carroll.
SO, now is come our ioyfulst Feast;
Let every man be jolly.
Each Room, with Yuie leaves is dressed,
And every Post, with Holly.
Though some Churles at our mirth repine,
Round your forheads Garlands twine,
Drown sorrow in a Cup of Wine.
And let us all be merry.
Now, all our Neighbors Chimneys smoke,
And Christmas blocks are burning;
The, Ouens, they with bakt meats choke,
And all their Spits are turning.
Without the door, let sorrow lie:
And, if for cold, it hap to die,
We Will bury't in a Christmas Pie.
And evermore be merry.
Now, every Lad is wondrous trimm,
And no man minds his Labor.
Our Lasses have provided them,
A Bag-pipe, and a Tabor.
Young men, and Mayds, and Girls and Boys,
Ciue life, to one ano^ hers Joys:
And, you anon shall by their noise,
Perceive that they are merry.
Rank Misers now, do sparing shun:
Their Hall of Music sounds:
And, Dogs, thence with whole shoulders run,
So, all things there abounds.
The Countrey-folke, themselves advance;
For Crowdy-Mutton's come out of France:
And Jack shall pipe, and Iyll shall dance,
And all the Town be merry.
Ned Swash has fetched his Bands from pawn,
And all his best Apparel.
Brisk Nell has bought a Ruff of Lawne,
With droppings of the Barrel.
And those that hardly all the year
Had Bread to eat, or Rags to wear,
Will have both Clothes, and dainty fare:
And all the day be merry.
Now poor men to the Justices,
With Capons make their arrants,
And if they hap to fail of these,
They plague them with their Warrants.
But now they feed them with good cheer,
And what they want, they take in Beer:
For, Christmas comes but once a year:
And then they shall be merry.
Good Farmours, in the Country, nurse
The poor, that else were undone.
Some Landlords, spend their money worse,
On Lust, and Pride at London.
There, the Roysters they do play;
Drabb and Dice their Landt away,
Which may be ours, another day:
And therefore lets be merry.
The Clyent now his suit forbeares,
The Prisoners heart is eased.
The Debtor drinks away his cares,
And, for the time is pleased.
Though others Purses be more fat,
Why should we pine or grieve at that?
Hang sorrow, care will kill a Cat.
And therefore lets be merry.
Hark, how the Wagges, abroad do call
Each other forth to rambling.
Anon, you will see them in the Hall,
For Nutts, and Apples scambling.
Hark, how the Roofes with laughters sound!
Annon they will think the house goes round:
For, they the Sellars depth have found.
And, there they will be merry.
The Wenches with their Wassell-Bowles,
About the Streets are singing:
The Boys are come to catch the Owls,
The Wild-mare, in is bringing.
Our Kitchin-Boy has broke his Box,
And, to the dealing of the Ox,
Our honest neighbors come by flocks,
And, here, they will be merry.
Now Kings and Queens, poor Sheep-cotes have,
And mate with every body:
The honest, now, may play the knave,
And wise men play at Noddy.
Some Youths will now a Mumming go;
Some others play at Rowland-hoe,
And, twenty other Gameboyes more:
Because they will be merry.
Then wherefore in these merry days,
Should we I pray, be duller?
No; let us sing some Roundelayes,
To make our mirth the fuller.
And, wh^lest thus inspired we sing,
Let all the Streets with echoes ring:
Woods, and Hills, and every thing,
Bear witness we are merry.
An Epitaph upon the Porter of a PRISON.
HEre lie the bones of him, that was of late,
A Churlish Porter of a Prison gate.
Death many an evening at his lodging knocked,
But could not take him, for the door was locked:
Yet at a Tavern late one night he found him,
And getting him, into the seller, drowned him.
On which, the world (that still the worst is thinking)
Reports abroad, that he was killed with drinking:
Yet let no Prisoner, whether Thief or Debtor
Rejoice, as if his fortune were the better;
Their sorrows likely to be nere the shorter,
The Warden lives, though death has took the Porter.
A Sennet upon a stolen Kiss.
NOw gentle sleep, has closed up those eyes,
Which waking, kept my boldest thoughts in awe:
And f^eeaccesse unto that sweet lip, lies,
From whence I long the rosy breath to draw.
Me think^s no wrong it were, if I should steal
From those two melting Rubies, one poor kiss:
None sees the theft, that would the thief reveal,
Nor rob I her of ought, which she can miss:
Nay, should I twenty kisses take away,
There would be little sign I had done so:
Why then should I this robbery delay?
Oh! she may wake, and therewith angry grow.
Well, if she do, I Will back restore that one,
And twenty hundred thousand more for lone.
An Epitaph upon Abram Good^fellow, a common Alehouse-hunter.
BEware, thou look not who here under lies,
Unless thou long to weep away thine eyes.
This man (as sorrowful report does tell us)
Was, when he lived, the Prince of all Goodfellows.
That day he did, it cannot be belieu'd,
How out of reason, all the Alewiues grieved,
And what abominable lamentation
They made at Black-boy, and at Salutation;
They hold and cride, and ever more among,
This was the burden of their woeful Song:
Well, go thy ways, thy like has never been,
Nor shall thy match again be ever seen:
For out of doubt now thou art dead and gone,
There Is many a Tap house will be quite undone,
And Death by taking thee, did them more skath,
Then yet the Alehouse protect done them has.
Lo, such a one but yesterday was he,
But now he much is alterd, you do see.
Since he came hither, he has left his riot,
Yea, changed both his company and diet,
And now so civil lies; that to your thinking,
He neither for an Alehouse cares, nor drinking.
An Epitaph upon a Gentlewoman, who had foretold the Time of her death.
HEr, who beneath this stone, consuming lies,
For many Virtues we might memorize.
But, most of all, the praise deserves she,
In making of her Words, and Deeds agree.
For, she so truly kept the Word she spoke,
As that with Death, she promise would not break.
I shall (quoth she) be dead, before the midd
Of such a Month. And, as she said, she did.
An Epitaph, on a Child, Son to Sir W. H. Knight.
HEre lies, within a Cabinet of stone,
The dear remainder of a Prety-one.
Who did in wit, his years so far out-passe,
His parents Wonder, and their Joy he was.
And, by his face, you might have deemed him,
To be on earth some heavenly Cheruh^m.
Six years with life he labored. Then deceast,
To keep the Sabbath of eternal rest.
So; that, which many thousand able men,
Are laboring for, till threescore years and ten.
This blessed Child attained to, er'e seven;
And, now enioyes it with the Saints of Heaven.
A Song.
NOw Young Man, thy days and thy glories appear,
Like Sunshine and blossoms in Spring of the year.
Thy vigor of body, thy spirits, thy wit,
Are perfect, and sound, and untroubled yet.
Now then, oh, now then, if safety thou love.
Mind thou, oh mind thou, thy Maker above.
Mispend not a morning, so excellent clear;
Never (for ever) was happiness nere.
Thy noone-tyde of life has but little delight,
And sorrows on sorrows will follow at night.
Now then, oh, now then, etc.
Mind thou, oh mind thou, etc.
That Strength, and those Beauties that grace thee to day,
To morrow, may perish, and vanish away.
Thy Wealth, or thy Pleasures, or Friends that now be,
May waste, or deceive, or be traitors to thee.
Now then, oh now then, etc.
Mind thou, oh mind thou, etc.
Thy joints are yet nimble, thy sinnewes vnslacke.
And marrow unwasted, does strengthen thy back.
Thy Youth from diseases preserves the brain;
And blood with free passage, plumps enury vain.
Now then, oh now then, etc.
Mind thou, oh mind thou, etc.
But (trust me) it will not for ever be so;
Those Arms that are mighty, shall feebler grow.
And those Legs, so proudly supporting thee, now,
With Age, or Diseases, will stagger and bow.
Now then, oh now then, etc.
Mind thou, oh mind thou, etc.
Then, all those rare Features, now graceful in thee;
Shall (plough'd with Times furrows) quite ruined be.
And they, who admired, and loved thee so much,
Shall loath, or forget thou had ever been such.
Now then, oh now then, etc.
Mind thou, oh mind thou, etc.
Those tresses of Hair, which thy youth do adorn,
Will look like the Meads in a Winterly morn.
And, where red and white intermixed did grow,
Dull palenesse, a dea^ly complexion will show.
Now then, oh now then, etc.
Mind thou, oh mind thou, etc.
That Forhead imperious, whereon we now view,
A smoothness, and whiteness enameld with blew;
Will loose that perfection, which Touth now maintains,
And change it for hollownesse, wrinckles, and stains.
Now then, oh now then, etc.
Mind thou; oh mind thou, etc.
Those Ears, thou with Music did often entertain,
And charm with so many a delicate Strain;
May miss of those pleasures, wherewith they are fed,
And never hear Song more, when youth is once fled.
Now then, oh now then, etc.
Mind thou, oh mind thou, etc.
Those Eyes, which so many, so much did admire,
And with strange affections set thousands on fire:
Shut up in that darkness, which Age will constrain,
Shall never see mortal; no, never again.
Now then, oh now then, etc.
Mind thou, oh mind thou, etc.
Those Lips, whereon Beauty, so fully discloses,
The color and sweetness of Rubies, and Roses;
Instead of that hue, will gastlinesse wear,
And none shall believe, what perfection was there.
Now then, oh now then, etc.
Thy Teeth, that stood firmly, like Pearls in a row,
Shall rotten, and scatterd disorderly grow:
The Mouth, whose proportion earths-wonder was thought,
Shall robbed of that sweetness, be prized at naught.
Now then, oh now then, etc.
That Gate, and those Gestures, that win thee such grace,
Will turn to a feeble and staggering pace.
And thou, that over mountains ranst nimbly to day;
Shall stumble at every rubb in the way.
Now then, oh now then, etc.
Mind then, oh mind then, etc.
By these imperfections* old age will prevail,
Thy marrow, thy sinews, and spirits will fail.
And nothing is left thee, when those are once spent,
To give* or thy self; or another, content.
Now then, oh now then, etc.
Mind thou, oh mind thou, etc.
Those Fancies that lull thee, with Dreams of delight,
Will trouble thy quiet, the comfortless night,
And thou, that now sleep thy troubles away,
Shall hear, how each Cockrell gives warning of day.
Now then, oh now then, etc.
Mind thou, oh mind thou, etc.
Then, Thou, that art yet unto thousands so dear,
Of all shall despisd, or neglected appear.
Which, when thou perceiust (though now pleasant it be)
Thy life will be grievous and loathsome to thee.
Now then, oh now then, etc.
Mind thou, oh mind thou, etc.
That lust, which thy youth can so hardly forgo,
Will leave thee; and leave thee, repentance, and woe.
And then, in thy ^olly no joy thou can have,
Nor hope other rest, then a comfortless grau^.
Now then, oh now then, etc.
Mind thou, oh mind thou, etc.
For, next shall thy Breath be quite taken away,
Thy Flesh turned to dust, and that dust turned to clay:
And, those thou have loved, and share of thy store,
Shall leave thee, forget thee, and mind thee no more.
Now then, oh, now then, etc.
Mind thou, oh mind thou, etc.
And yet, if in time thou remember not this,
The slenderest part of thy sorrow it is:
Thy Soul to a torture, more fearful shall wend,
Has ever, and ever, and never an end.
Now then, oh, now then, if safety thou love.
Mind thou, oh mind thou, thy Maker above.
A Dream.
WHen bright Phoebus at his rest,
Was reposed in the West,
And the cherefull daylight gone,
Drew unwelcome darkness on;
Night, her blackness, wrapped about me,
And, within, 'twas as without me.
Therefore, on my tumbled bed,
Down I laid my troubled head:
Where, mine eyes inured to care,
Seldom vsd to slumbring were.
Yet, or' etyr'd of late, with weeping;
Then, by chance, they fell a sleeping.
But, such Visions me diseased,
As in vain, that sleep I ceaz'd:
For, I sleeping Fancies had,
Which, yet waking, make me sad.
Some, can sleep away their sorrow;
But, mine doubles, every morrow.
Walking to a pleasant Grove,
(Where, I vsd to think of Love)
I, me thought, a place did view,
Wherein Flora's riches grew.
Primerose, Hyacinth, and Lillies,
Cowslips, Vy'lets, Daffodillies.
There, a Fountain, close beside,
I, a matchless Beauty spide.
So she lay, as if she slept:
But, much grief, her waking kept.
And, she had no softer pillow,
Then the hard root of a Willow.
Down her Cheeks, the tears did flow,
(Which a grieved heart did show)
Her fair eyes, the earth beholding,
And, her arms themselves enfolding;
She, her passion to betoken,
Sighed, as if her heart were broken.
So much grief, me thought she showed,
That my sorrow it renewed:
But, when nearer her I went,
It encreast my discontent.
For a gentle Nymph she proved,
Who, me (long unknown) had loved.
Straight, on me she fixed her look;
Which, a deep impression took.
And, of all that live (quoth she)
Thou art welcommest o me.
Then (misdoubting to be blamed)
Thus, she spoke, as half ashamed.
Thee, unknown, I long affected,
And, as long, in vain expected.
For, I had a hopeful thought,
Thou would crave, what others sought;
And I, for thy sake, have stayed,
Many wanton Springs, a Maid.
Still, when any wooed me,
They renewd, the thought of thee:
And, in hope thou would have tried
Their Affections, I denide.
But, a Lover, forced upon me,
By my Friends, has now undone me.
What, I waking dared not show,
In a Dream, thou now do know:
But, to better my estate;
Now, alas, it is too late.
And, I both awake, and sleeping,
Now, consume my Youth in weeping.
Somewhat then, I would have said;
But, replyings were denayd.
For, me thought, when speak I would,
Not a word bring forth I could,
And, as I a kiss was taking;
That I lost to, by awaking.
Certain Verses written to his loving Friend, upon his departure.
SWift Time, that will by no entreaty stay,
Is now gone by, and summons me away.
And, what my grief, denies my tongue to do,
My true affection drives my pen unto.
Dear Heart; that day, and that sad hour is come,
In which, thy face I must be banished from:
And go to live, where (peradventure) we
Hereafter must, for aye, divided be.
For, twixt our bodies, which now close are met,
A thousand Hills and Valleys shall be set:
A thousand Groves, a thousand weeping Springs,
And many thousand other envious things,
Which, when we are departed, keep us may,
From coming nearer, till our dying day.
So these our hands, which thus each other touch,
Shall never after this time do so much.
Nor shall these eyes, which yet themselves delight,
(with mutual gazing on each other light)
Be ever raised up again, so near,
To view each other in their proper sphere.
Nor ere again, through those their Crystal orbs,
Read what sad passion, our poor hearts disturbs.
Which when we think upon, we scarce contain,
Their swelling Floud-gates; but a pearly rain
Drops from those plenteous Springs: and forth are sent
From those sad dungeons, where our hearts are pent,
So many sighs; that, in our parting, now,
A storm of Passions we must venture through.
Whose fury, I would stay to see ore-past
Before I went, in spite of all my have,
But that, I view some tokens, which foretell,
That by delay, the Floods will high swell;
And, whilst to be divided, we are loath,
With some worse peril, ouerwhelme us both.
Oh! rather let us wisely undergo
A sorrow, that will daily lesser grow*
Then venture on a pleasing mischief, which
Will unawares, our honest hearts bewitch:
And bring us to such pass (at last) that we
Shall nere perceive it, till undone we be.
I find your love; and so the same approve,
That I shall ever love you, for that love.
And, am so covetous of such dear pelf,
That, for it, I could give away my self.
And yet, I rather would go pine, and die,
For want thereof; then live till you, or I,
Should give, or take, one dram of that delight
Which is another; and so, mar outright
Our most unstained affection: which, has yet
No inclination unto ill, in it.
Nay (though it more insufferable were)
I would, even that just liberty forbear
Which honest friendship is allowed to take:
If I perceived, it me unapt did make,
To master my affections: or to go
On those affairs, that Reason calls me to.
Those Parents that discreet in loving be,
When on their newborn child a Wen they see,
Which may (perchance) in aftertime, disgrace
The sweet proportion of a lovely face:
(Although it wound their souls to hear the moon,
And see the tortures of their pretty one)
To weep a little, rather are content,
Whilst he endures the Surgeons Instrument;
Then suffer that soul blemish there, to spread;
Until his face be quite disfigured.
So, we betwixt whose souls, there is begot
That sweet Babe, Friendship; must beware, no spot
Through our indulgent indiscretion grow,
That may the beauty of our love ore-throw:
Let Us rather bear a little discontent;
And learn of Reason, those things to prevent
Which mar affection. That our friendship may
Wax firmer, and more lovely every Day.
There is, indeed, to gentle hearts, no smarting,
That is more torment to them, then departing
From those they love. And doubtless, if that we
Were so united, as the married be;
Our bodies at our par^^re, would be so,
As if each of them (...) a ^oule forgo.
But, in our flesh; we are, and must remain
Perpetual strangers: and our selves contain
From that embrace, which marriage love allows:
Or else, I iniure virtue; you, your vows.
And, for a short unworthy pleasure, mar
Those rich contentments, which eternal are.
Of which, I am in hope, that, always we
Should in each others presence guiltless be.
But in our absence (sure I am) we shall
Not only still be innocent of all,
That simple folly, and that ouer-sight,
To which, our many frailties tempt us might:
But, by this means shall also escape the blot,
Wherewith i^ toungs our names would seek to spot.
Which if you fear, and would avoid the wrongs
That may befall you by malicious tongues,
Then seek my absence: for I have in that
Unto my friends, been too unfortunate:
Yet, as I love faire-virtue, there is no man
Ere heard me boast the favors of a woman
To her dishonor; neither (by my soul)
Was I ere guilty of an Act so foul,
As some imagine. Neither do I know
That woman yet, with whom I might be so;
For never kindnesses to me were showed,
Which I dared think, for evil end bestowed.
Nor ever, to this present hour, did I
Turn friendship, favor, opportunity;
(Or ought vouchsaft me) thereby to acquire
Those wicked ends which (...) do desire.
For, whenever lust begun to flame,
It was extinguished, by true love, and shame.
But, what would this my innocence prevail,
When your fair Name, (...) should assail?
And how abhord should I hereafter be,
If you should suffer infamy by me?
You fear it not one half so much you say,
As you are loath I should depart away:
And hap what will, you think to be content,
Whilst I am here; and you still innocent.
Indeed, those friends approve I not, which may
By every slanderous tongue be talked away:
But yet, I like not him that will not strive,
As much as in him lies, free to live,
From giving just occasions of offense:
For, else he vainly braggs of innocence.
And so do we, unless, that without blame
We purpose with our love, to keep our fame.
Then, let us pleased part; and though the dearenes
Of our affection, couets both a nearenes
In mind and body; let us willingly
Beget a Virtue of necessity.
And, since we must compelled be to live,
By time and place divided; let us strive
In the despite of time and distance, so
That love of virtue may more perfect grow:
And that this separation, we lament,
May make our meeting fuller of content.
Betwixt our bodies (this I Will not deny)
There is a dear respective sympathy;
Which makes us mutually both joy, and grieve
As there is cause. And farther, I believe,
That our contentment is imperfect, till
They have each other in possession still:
But, that which in us two, I Love, dare name,
Is twixt our Souls; and such a powerful flame,
As nothing shall extinguish nor obsure,
Whilst their eternal substance, does endure:
No, not our absence; nor that mighty space,
Betwixt my home, and your abiding place.
For, ere your Eyes, my eyes had ever seen;
When many thousand furlongs lay between,
Our unknown bodies: And before that you
Had seen my face, or thought the same to view,
You most entirely loved me (you say)
Which shows our souls had then found out the way,
To know each other: And unseen of us,
To make our bodies meet unthought of, thus.
Then; much less now, shall hill, or dale, or grove,
Or, that great tract of ground which must remove
My body from you: there, my soul confine,
To keep it back from yours: or yours from mine.
Nay, being more aquainted then they were,
And active spirits, that can any where
Within a moment meet. They to and fro,
Will every minute to each other go
And, we shall love, with that dear love, wherein
Will neither be offense, nor cause of sin.
Yea, whereas carnal love, is ever colder,
As youth decays; and as the flesh grows older:
And, when the body is dissolved, must
Be buried with oblivion in the dust.
We, then shall dearer grow: and this our love,
Which now imperfect is, shall perfect prove.
For, there is no mortal power can rob true Friends,
Of that which noblest Amity attends.
Nor any separation that is able,
To make the virtuous Lovers miserable.
Since, when disasters threaten most deiection,
Their, Goodness makes strongest their affection.
And, that which works in others loves, denial;
In them, more noble makes it, by the trial.
It Is true; that when we part, we know not whether
These bodies shall, for ever, meet together;
As you have said. Yet, wherefore should we grieve,
Since, we a better meeting do believe?
If we did also know, that when we die,
This love, should perish everlastingly.
And that we must as brutish creatures do,
Lose with our bodies, all our dearnesse to:
Our separation, then, a sorrow were,
Which mortal heart had never power to bear.
And we should faint and die, to think upon
The passions would be felt, when I were gone.
But, seeing in the soul, our love is placed;
And (seeing) souls of death shall never taste:
No Death can end our love. Nay; when we dye,
Our souls (that now in chains and fettters lie)
Shall meet more freely, to partake that joy,
Compard to which, our friendship's but a toy.
And, for each bitterness, in this our love,
We shall a thousand sweet contentments prove.
Mean while; we, that (together living) may
Through humane weaknesses be led astray:
(And unawares, make that affection foul,
Which virtue yet keeps blameless in the soul)
By Absence shall preserved be, as clean,
As to be kept (in our best thoughts) we mean.
And, in our Prayers for each other, shall
Give, and receive more kindnesses, then all
The world can yield us. And, when other men
Whose love is carnal, are tormented, when
Death calls them hence: because they robbed be
Of all their hope (for evermore) to see
The object of their Love: we shall avoid,
That bitter anguish wherewith they are cloyd.
And, whensoer'e it happens, thou, or I,
Shall feel the time approaching us to dye;
It shall not grieve us at our latest breath,
To mind each other on the bed of death:
(Because of any oversight, or sin,
Whereof we guilty in our souls have bin)
Nor will death fear us, cause we shall perceive
That these contentments, which we had not leave
To take now we are living; shall be gaind,
When our imprisoned souls shall be vnchaind.
Nay rather wish to dye, we might possess
The sweet fruition of that happiness,
Which we shall then receive, in the perfection
Of Him, that is the fullness of Affection.
If Time prevented not, I had in store
To comfort thee, so many Reasons more,
That thou would leave to grieve; although we should
Each others persons never more behold.
But, there is hope. And then, that know you may,
True Friends can in their absence find the way.
To compass their contentments, whom they love:
You shall ere long, the power it has, approve.
Mean while, you still are dear: yea, live or dye,
My soul shall love you everlastingly.
And howsoere, there seem such cause of sorrow;
Yet, those that part, and think to meet to morrow,
Death may divide to night; And, as before,
Their Fear was less, their Grief will be the more.
Since therefore, whether far I live, or nigh,
There is in meeting an uncertainty.
Let us, for that which surest is, provide.
Part like those Friends, whom nothing can divide:
And, since we Lovers first became, that we,
Might to our power each others comfort be:
Let Us not the sweetness of our love destroy;
But, turn these weepings into tears of joy.
On which condition, I do give thee, this;
To be both Mine, and Sorrows parting-kisse.
PHIL'ARETE.

FINIS.
The Stationers Postscript.
THere be three or four Songs in this Poem aforegoing, which were stolen
from the Author, and heretofore impertinently imprinted in an imperfect and
erroneous Copy, foolishly entitled His Works; which the Stationer has there
falsely affirmed to be Corrected and Augmented for his own Advantage; and
without the said Authors knowledge, or respect to his credit. If therefore you
have seen them formerly in those counterfeit Impressions, let it not be
offensive that you find them again in their proper places; and in the Poem
to which they appertain.

Vale. I. M.

