WOODALLS VIATICVM: The pathway to the Surgions Chest. CONTAINING CHIRVRGICALL
INSTRVCTIONS For the younger sort of Surgions now employed in the service of His
MAJESTY for the intended relief of ROCHELL. And Composed by John Woodall, one
of the present Masters or Governors of the Company of Barber Surgions LONDON.
Intended chiefly for the better Curing of Wounds made by Gun-shott.

Published by Authority:

Omnia Terrenae per vices sunt Alienae. August 11. 1628.


Imprinted at London. 1628.

THE PREFACE.
LOving Brethren, for as much as these times do rather menace War then
Peace, men of our calling should be ready ad omne quare, for our King and
Country. We and our Country have been long happy in peace, and now it seems
the times presage the contrary. Wherefore from the wise heathen Philosopher,
let us all learn as follows, Iam tua res agitur pare cum proximus ardet. I
desire in brief, to let you know, that our Company were commanded by
Authority, to provide sixteen of the best Surgions at this time to be had for
his Majesty's special service, such as are men most expert in the healing of
wounds made with Gun-shott. And generally, for the most part, I know many of us
that would be esteemed good Surgions, being put to it, at the first will be
somewhat to seek therein, how much more then our young men. Wherefore the
matter of providing, preparing, and fitting his Majesty's service, being by his
Highness referred to our Corporation. And our Company having for the time
deputed my self to the work. I am tied in conscience to do somewhat, though
I confess, it be little to the better inabling and encouraging our younger men
unto their duties in that point. But before my entrance thereunto, I could in
my duty do no less then to acquaint you with those especial favors which
it has pleased our gracious King to bestow upon our Corporation in particular,
above and beyond his ever-blessed Ancestors, for our encouragement, to enable
us the more chearefully to serve him First, his Highness has been pleased to
augment the monthly wages of each Surgion and Surgions-mate in his
Sea-service, almost to a third penny. He has also been graciously pleased to
give as free a benevolence to the Surgions in all his Sea-services, which never
was given them before, as follows, viz. to all Surgions that serve in his
Highness own Ships, I mean toward the furnishing of the Surgions Chests, for
each of them xl. Unto each Merchants Ship, employed in his service vl. And to
each New Castle Ship iijl. And nevertheless, his Highness is well pleased that
the Surgions may demand and take by the head of all men that are in pay in any
of his Ships ijd. of each man by the month, as they did before. And for the
Surgions in his Land-service at present, he allows each Surgeon ijs. vjd. the
day, which is iijl. xvs. the month, and to each mate iijl. a month: And
moreover, provideth, and gives to each Surgion appointed to 250. men a
Surgeons Chest of xvijl. vallew, and over and above a Magazin or store-chest of
xlviijl. vallew, for to supply and furnish upon all wants. His Highness has
further been well pleased to give authority unto the Masters and Governors of
our Society, for to have the making, compounding, fitting, and ordering of all
the Medicines, as well Physicals Chirurgicall; together with all other
provisions belonging to the Surgions Chest, he has referred to the Masters and
Governors of our Society. These favors and privileges our Corporation have
received from his Highness, together with his gracious favor and grant unto us
of a new Charter, wherein he has likewise graciously been pleased to promise
to confirm all our privileges formerly granted unto us, and to give us
diverse new privileges for the better subsistence of our Corporation in future
times.

And now having acquainted you with his Majesty's favors unto our Corporation,
it follows in my duty that I should acquaint the younger sort of Surgions
with the use of the Surgions Chest, I mean the particular medicines therein
contained, and that in some methodicall manner, were it not that time hastens
me to an end before I begin, yet nevertheless I have strained of time to lend
the younger sort a word or two for a Viaticum, not to all as a teacher, but as
a loving Remembrancer to the elder, which I pray you to peruse, and use as you
have occasion. And so in Gods name without painting of phrases, or collecting
of great Authors, my method you may know by the plainness of the style, and
my method is no other then the old beaten pathway of all Surgions, wherein
each Artist ought to be understanding: And if any Artist by forgetfulness
err, I desire but to inform his memory, and crave his charitable acceptance.
And for the younger sort, I know it is charity to show them, for they have
need, and ought to desire and seek knowledge, according to an old doctrine of
that sweet Lilly in his Grammar rules, viz.

Qui dubitat, qui sepe rogat mea dicta tenebit.
Is qui nil dubitat, nil capit inde boni.
I knowing you could not have the learned advise of the grave Doctors at hand
to advise you, made me presume I confess somewhat beyond my scope: Wherefore
in want of the aforesaid helps, consult with good Authors in their wants, with
the Surgions mate, and this poor Extempore.

Vale.
A HELP TO THE SVRGIONS Chest.
The first dressing of Wounds made with Gun-shott.
AFter extraction of unnatural things forced into the wounds with the Bullet,
which ought with all circumspection, care and possible ease to the patient to
be effected, for fear of hurting the offended Arteries, Veins, Nerves, etc.
As also such fractured bones greater or less, broken by force of the Bullet be
taken out. I say of all such of them as may without danger of life and limme be
removed. For the first dressing, Draw not fractured bones out at first without
Caution.
wherein note, that a fractured bone, though wholly divided from the greater
fixed part thereof, is not as by a general rule always to be cut or forced
out at the first dressing, except it does apparently endanger a Gangrena, or
other fearful accidents, by pricking of Nerves, and the like, but you should
do well rather to forbear such bones for the first dressing at the least and
furthest, until either nature or other just Tarry if you may until nature
help.
reasons in the true art of healing offer the work, and to the dressing as
follows. In the more simple sort of Gunshot wounds, as follows. I mean in
wounds where no Gangrena may be expected, neither Fiux nor Furtiue Hemorage may
be feared, dress the Patient either with artificial Balm, or Oleum
bipericonis Balm in the Chest.
cum gummis, and de Aperisi, oleum Cattellorum, or Arceus Linament, or one of
these, and apply it warm, and somewhat warmer then the patient would willingly
suffer it, and cover the wound with an Emp: of Mellilot, Stipt: Paracelsi,
Minium, or any Emplasters fitting.
other according to art, namely, according to the temper of the grief, with
convenient bandage, I mean due legature, and so proceed in Gods name as in
all contused wounds is most convenient to the end of the work, I mean first
to supperate and digest, Order in Curing.
then to mundifie them, then to incarne, and so on to sigillate or siccatrise
with due respect, if occasion be, to temper and fit the body by good regiment.

Only in Gunshot wounds almost in all dressings the spirit of Wine does well
with some of the afore-sayd Spirit of w^^^
Balmes, until the wound be well mundefied at the least.

But in wounds where great danger of Gangrena is Dressing of great wound.
to be feared, the Surgion has nothing more safe for the first dressing then
Vng: Aegiptiaticum, and a little spirit of Wine, somewhat to warm, put in upon
soft lynt or fine towe, pledgents, or by a Serringe to be carried in at first
into the bottom of the wound, which done, with some good astringent defensatiue
medicine and fit bandage, let it be bound up. And if the Surgion be not forced
thereunto, let not the wound be opened again until forty-eight hours be past.

Then at the next dressing, if Fluxes hinder not, Second dressing.
have ready (if it may be) white Wine and Honey for a fomentation, or fair
water and mell for necessity if better cannot be had, and with a little Aqua
vitae added if you think fit, and with the Stupes very warm, foment the
wounded part a pretty space. Then apply unto the wound if the Flux be stayed
one of the forenamed Balmes warm, or with the ordinary digestive of Terebinth,
Vitallorum, Ovorum, etc. And cover it with an Emp: and embrocate, the part
about which Ol: Rosarum, Camom: Anethi: or the like, and bind it up, and after
dress the wound but once a day without urgent necessity. But fail not to
Time of dressing.
dress it once every day and more, if the Surgion see cause. But I hold it
fit, that the Surgion leave off Ol: hipericon cum gummis, for that it has
Oleum Terebinth therein, and may be too quick: And rathor use Arteus Linament,
Oleum Catullorum, or some digestive of your own practice, until perfect
digestion. And if accidents chance not, the Surgions method may be to proceed
as in all contused wounds. Only let the Surgion make use of pure Aqua vitae,
or rather spirit of Wine, as is said, with the Egiptiaticum, where he finds
not a just cause to the contrary.

Cautions, Advises, and Instructions for the younger sort of Surgions in wounds
of Gun-shott.
Conceal from the Patient the great danger of the wound, except just cause
urge to acquaint him with it.

Fomentations are very good medicines in wounds Fomentation.
with Gun-shott, but foment not at any time, except you can have fire at hand,
and let ever your fomentation be very warm applied.

Foment not too long at any one time, neither use it but upon urgent occasions.

Embrocate often if no Gangrena be at hand, whether Embracation.
you have fire or not.

Let all your Vehickes for your Medicines, as Tents, Dorsells, Plegents, etc.
be soft and pleasing to your patient, as much as may be, and cramme not the
wound too full.

If you can come to the work enlarge not, otherwise Enlarging of wounds.
do it warily, observing that you do it not to thwart any member, neither any
Vein, Artery, Nerve, or Muscle.

No wound of Gun-shott can be said to be a simple Gun-shott wounds ever
compound.
wound, neither ever was there any Artist that could truly say, that he healed
any Gun-shott-wound by the first intension of unition, without due supperation.
For the composition of Gun-shott-wounds are ever real, and very substantial,
witness the poor patient, where Fibers, Nerves, Membrances, Veins, Arteries,
et quid non, suffer together, so that such wounds in their recency resemble
Ulcers rather then wounds. And the difference of these from other contused
Differonce (...) contused wounds.
wounds, is that other contused wounds for the most part suffer but by way of
contusion only, and these by contusion and delaceration, if not fraction of
bones, etc. and thereby all the whole member suffers together, and the parts
adjacent in the highest degree.

If discoloring, blistering, or other apparent shows Beware a Gangrena
of a Gangrena appear, give the patient a Diaphoreticke Cordial, then
scarifie gently at the first, and deeply afterward, as cause shall urge, and
have ready a Lixiuims, made of water and ashes, to the height of an ordinary
ley, that Women use to drive Bucks with: And put a reasonable quantity of
common Salt into it, and when it is cleared, if you have herbs, as Scordium,
Wormwood, Centaney, Hipericon, Camomill, Mellilot, or the like, or Lupines,
make use of them, according to Art, it will be much the better, if not, use it
without, and apply it very warm with Stupes often shifted and wrong out: and
if that cannot be had, use Salt water rather then want a medicine. Aqua vitae
is also precious in all Lixiuims against Gangreanes. But you may not boil the
Aqua vitae, but put it in when you will use your medicine. You may never in any
case boil Aqua vitae without error; For the spirits will evaporate, and the
virtue rests in them.

Observe in great lacerated wounds, as follows, viz. If you find by the
wound that the one half of the member be taken away, there is no hope to save
on the rest. But you are rather to make present Amputation, for that the rest
is contused, and must therefore Just cause of Amputation.
admit, by consagument some loss of substance by supperation, and then the
remaining part can do no service to the body, but will endanger the life of
the patient, and be a hinderance. Nay, I dare say, if but half of any member
be taken away, with the fracture of the bone, it is impossible to save it on to
do service. If you have Hemoragie, I mean bleeding or weeping of Veins or
Arteries in your work, search for that Vein or that Artery that bleedeth. If
you cannot make legature, which seldom or never you can in Gun-shott-wounds,
then apply to the end of the Vein an actual Cautery, a small one will serve,
but apply it very hott, and not all over the wound, only to that Vein if you
can which bleedeth; you may if the Flux be not great, use burning hott
Egiptiaoum upon Lynt dipped and neately brought to the place, and then well
boulstered, But a small actual Cautery is safer. Or the Surgion may use strong
restrictiue Actual Cautery Restrictiue powder.
powder, adding thereunto burnt Vitrioll a little, or burnt Alum, and
Precipitate mixed makes a strong Esker: and often restrains a great Flux
applied thereon.

But take heed of an old received error of unwise Observe at old error.
Practitioners, whose use is to cramme the wound full of Bole, or restringent
powder, or some other stuff, and then thrust in Plegeants, or Dorsells, into
each corner of the wound, yea sometimes forgetting to take all out, yet
thinking they have done all workemenlike, not considering the harm that often
ensues thereby. I dare say, that in contused wounds of Gun-shott, they force
and draw a Gangrena, if not death thereby, by but thening nature, by
obstructing the parts, and grieving the patient. It is a safe and fair way at
the first dressing ever to strive to join together the parts of all incised
wounds, and unite the wounded parts, if it may be, with this cuation to order
that fit breathing be left to evacuate the peccant humors, then to apply apt
and fit astringent medicaments outwardly over all together, with apt and due
ligature, and by that course to stay a Flux. But in contused and lacerated
wounds of Gun-shott, the Surgion has nto that benefit, but must trust to other
helps not so ready, namely, as is said in the lesser wounds, to very warm
Balmes, astringent, defensatiues, and good ligature, and in greater wounds to
Causticke Medicaments, Cauteries, and forcible helps.

But in the Surgion his careful desire to restrain A Caveat.
Fluxes, let him ever beware of hard binding as much as is possible, which is
also a common dangerous error, and certainly draws on evil accidents, as
Flegmon, Gangrena, etc.

Also on the other side, over-slacke binding is as bade; due, comely, and
smooth ligature, with the due composing the parts wounded with soft and smooth
boulstering, greatly honors the Artist, and cures the Patient almost as
much as the medicine.

Observe also, that you put never one Causticke or Eskaroticke Medicine after
another too son, namely, not until the first Eskar: has been gone at the
least three days. If in a contused wound of Gun-shott any slough or putrified
part, as of the head, of the Muscle and Artery, or Vein, or the like appear
in the wound, which needs an Eskaroticke Medicine. And the Surgion do desire
to cleanse that part, strive to use your Causticke Medicine, namely, your hott
Egiptiacum, or a Cautery if you can apply it only on that place, and not all
over the wound.

For you are to consider, that as too much gleeting, Over-drying Medicines
dangerous.
weeping, or expense of humiditie from wounds of Gun-shott is dangerous many
ways; so too much use of drying Medicaments in wounds made with Gun-shott, is
no less dangerous by stopping the pores, repelling the peccant humors by
reason of the contusion collected, being choked in the wound, aptly endanger a
Gangrena, and all other deadly accidents, incident thereunto.

Now a word or two in want of the grave Physician, Advice tou^^ing the gen^rall
regimen^ of wounded men.
how the young Surgion may in part demean himself being put to it, for the
more happy performance of the cures made with Gunshot, which are very much
regulated, by the government of the Patient touching his Diet; as also in the
careful keeping his body Diet.
in temper from much costiuenesse; and also to stay inordinate fluxes, thereby
to prevent accidents, as feauors, etc. And further also to meet with an help
to cure evil accidents when they happen: to the effecting whereof good diet
and other fitting helps are to be wished, might attend valiant men which fight
for their countries defense; which failing much with Soldiers, there the
Surgions must take it as they can have it and make use in necessity of what the
Surgions Chest affords: viz. if the Patient before his wound had not a loose
body, let the Surgion give him a Suppository or Glister, and if he seem
disposed to a feauor Suppository or Glist.
though he has bleed by his wound, yet if his strength be answerable, open a
vein on the contrary side of his grief: but purge him not being wounded,
without very just cause, rather keep him by gentle means, to have the benefit
of nature, either by Glister, or Suppository. If he be distempered with heat,
make him a Barley-water: viz. water two gallons, Barley six ounces, Liquirise
one ounce, or juice of Liquirise two dragmes: boil it gently a little, then
cast away the first waters, if water be plentiful, else not; and boil it in
fresh waters till one third part be spent: and being boiled and clarified to
the said decoction, add some few drops of oil of Vitrioll, to make it
somewhat sour in taste, but not too much, but if to this six grains of
Confectio Alkermis, with one spoonefull of Rosewater were added, the drink
would be much the more grateful in taste, and more prefitable. I conceive it
will be needless to urge a course for a sparing diet, for I fear gluttony
will not be their sin.

But if fulness of body be a hinderance, the Surgion has means to euacuate,
as for a vomit by Stibium, the A vomit.
infusion of six or eight grains, if such be fitting in able bodies by
laxatiues; as Conf. Hamech. six dragmes for a dose, Diaphenicon or
Diacatholicon the dose to an able body is a full ounce. The pills in the
inuoyce of this pill.
Chest upon their several occasions one dragme is a dose of any one sort of
them; of Pull. Sanctus may be given two dragmes, of Pull. Artheticus one
dragme. If Cordialls be required, the Surgion has in his Chest to provoke rest
in feauors, several ones, as more particular; there is Diascordium which he
may give to the full of two dragmes for a dose, to a strong body, either in
wine or water as he please, or in a bolus or lump of it self.

Also he has Laudanum, which he may safely give Use of Laudanum.
three or four grains to assuage pain in painful wounds, to give rest in
feauors, to stay fluxes, and in diverse other cases, being used with judgment,
and provided that the party which takes it be not costiue: Likewise in
fluxes of the belly often accompanied with crude nautiousnesse of the Stomach,
as also against venomous or pestelentiall infection of the blood, there is in
the Chest Phyloniu^ Persicum, of which the patient may take from one scruple to
half a dragme, and to one dragme safely in a reasonable body: and this is a
safe medicine which causes rest, and corroborateth the stomach and mightily
prevails to stay a flux of the belly, and does also correct venomous and
malign humors, and is therefore very fit to be used in fluxes that be
contagious or pestelentiall, after some fitting euacuation if occasion so be.
What I here write it is of mine own practice, you may take it on my word for
truth, for you shall find it to be so, if with due caution you make right use
of them. These there cordials swage pain, (viz. Diascordium, Laudanum (...)
and Phylonium) or either cool or contemporate the blood.

The Surgions Chest contains also diverse Cordial Of Cor^^^^^ generall^
medicines which may be profitably administered each upon due occasion, viz.

Conf. Alkermis either given alone or to aromatize any purgative or Cordial
medicine from 4. grayns to a scrupell for a dose.

Aqua Celestis, and Cinnamon water to refresh the spirits, half a spoonefull,
or one spoonefull for a dose and so of spirit of wine, and also Aqua Vitae made
of wine, which so much as it contains of the spirit of wine, is, quasi
spiritus vitae.

Also the Surgions Chest has against contagion Against Plague (...) of the Air.
and the Plague Mithredate, There. Londinensis, Diatesseron, Elec. de ouo; as
also Diascordium, Conf. Alkermis, and Laudanum mentioned; all these being
proper for Pestelentiall occasions, the uses and virtues of which I would
touch, though but in a word: And for example, if the Surgions desire a Cordial
to be made to cause rest, it is made either of Laudanum to 3. graynes as it is
said, or Diascordium to 2. dragmes, or Philonium to one dragme mentioned; and
Note, that Laudinum (...)
is best to be taken in a pill, because of his ungrateful taste, and Philonium
in a bolus, or lump for the like reason; and so also may Diascordium be used
well, and especially in War; where neither the advice of the learned Physician,
nor the help of the Apothecaries shop is at hand; but if the Surgion be
occasioned, and that he would have Diascordium given in a Potion, then let him
take of Diascordium 2 dragmes, of White Wine, or fair Water 3. ounces or 4. of
Sir. Violarum half an ounce. Conf. Alkermis 8. grains, Oleum vitrioll gutt.
4. and let the Patient incline himself to rest.

Also if a Cordial to comfort the spirits be required, then the foresaid
Cinnamon water, Aqua Celestis, or Cordial. comfortiue.
Aqua vitae, of wine is at hand without mixture or addition, or with some
addition, half a spoonefull or a spoonefull for a dose.

If against malignitie of the blood, or any Pestilentiall Contagion feared;
then the patient may take as follows: Re. Diatessaron 2. dragmes, Mithridate
1. dragme, Elect. de ouo half a dragme, desolue or mix A Cordial
Diaphoreticon.
them together; and take it in White Wine, Clarret, or Sack, or in Cardus, or
fair water for need, of any of these to the quantity of 4. ounces, and sweat
thereupon, and if the Contagion be fierce, the patient may reiterate such a
sweating medicine each 4. hours safely for three times. These or any of these
other Cordialls may be given in other waters, and other mixtures, according to
the discretion of the Surgion, the time, place, and different occasion
considered, and for need in a bolus or lump: likewise Mithridate, or
Andromaches Treakel, a drame or 2. drams in White Wine, in Cardus water, or in
beer or water for a need, may safely be taken for a Cordial or in a bolus.

Also Theriaca Diatessaron, three dragmes for a dose, taken either as it is in
a bolus or lump, to be swallowed For torsions or gripings of the stomach or
bowels
down, is an excellent Cordial to provoke sweat, to remove Torsions,
Stitches, or gripings of the stomach, or lower belly, or any pains therein;
also it resists putrifactious and pestilentiall vapors, and is the most
ancients Treacle of all other: my self have had very much, true, and good
experience of it, and would trust my life upon it, before the 2. asoresaid
Alexifarmicks and the Land. Treacle, in the like manner is to be used and is a
very good Cordial.

El. de Ouo, is also of it self a sure good Cordial, a Scruple, I mean 20.
graynes thereof in a bolus, or in wine given, it resists pestilentiall
venom, and refreshes the spirits, and either alone, or as is aforesaid mixed
with other Cordial Electuaries is also a true A Cordial.
Cordial: for it comfort the heart, provoke sweat, and by the poores of
the skin, expels poysenous vapors.

Cons. rosarum, is used to resresh and strengthen the stomach, either alone,
or if you intend to cool and contemperate the blood; add a few drops of
oil A contemperatiue Cordial.
of Vitrioll to a little thereof, and if to warm the stomach, mix
Mithridate, or Treacle one part, and cons. Roses 2. parts, and give it in a
bolus.

Cons. Barbar. you should keep either to mix with Of Cooling Iulaps.
your cooling, barley waters, or Iulaps to refresh the appetite, and the
apalled spirits in feauors, or sometimes to give a little of it in a bolus, to
give a relish to the mouth, to cause appetite in feauors and nautious
distempers.

There is also in the Chest Oximell Simplex which I use in the Surgions Chest,
in want of Sir. Diamoron, or rather being nothing inferior for lotions in
Virtue of Oximell.
the mouth and throat orderly used, as also for the other virtues, it has
exceeding Diamoron, as namely outwardly in the asswaging tumors and pains,
this is a singular medicine, and also in Hernia humoralis, (...)
tumors of the testicles, it excels, if it be mixed with a Cathaplasme of
bean meal, boiled in beer with a little oil of Elders or Roses, and a
little wax, so that the whole quantity of the Cathaplasme being by guess 2.
pound, if so, then put about 6. or 7. ounces of Oximell thereunto, and boil it
to a body, and it is an admirable good medicine, for it discusseth, and safely
repelleth such tumors in their increase, with the help of Phlybothomine and a
vomit where the patient is strong, which tumors by error of the Surgion will
otherwise come to supperation and prove fistulaes incurable, but he that will
cure such tumors, must have an artificial sacketrusse, and be sure that the
grief be truly and easily borne up at all times of the whole cure: and
Oximell inwardly administered, purges the stomach and intrals, opens
obstructions, and yet without any manifest sign of heat, and thereby helps
much in feauours engendered of gross Phlegm.

Of Lotions generally used in the Surgions Chest, the most common is of
sanatiue herbs made in the summer, with water or wine, and honey; but at Sea
if a lauatiue or washing Lotion, in need be required, fair Lotion at Sea for
a need.
water, with as much allumne therein, as will make it tart, and so much honey
as will give it a grateful taste, and there is a Lotion: Or if in the diseases
of the Scurfie, a Lotion be required, then use Coper as instead of allumne, or
sometimes Vng. Aegyptiacum, for ulcers of the mouth or throat, the grieved
part touched hot may suffice.

And to wash and cool the mouth in feauours, I often take fair water 4.
ounces, of Rose Water half a spoonefull, a little sirrup, Sugar, or mell for a
need, and a few drops of Wine-vinegar or Oximell a little, or oil of Vintrioll
a few drops.

I have been taxed, that my proportion has not sufficient contained therein
for wounds with Gunshot, but if any please to look into the particulars, and
well consider them, he will find that the whole scope of the Surgions Chest,
is of purpose contrived to that end, and that there is not any one medicine
therein, but upon the maine or upon the by, tends that way; for a wound of
Gunshot at the first view, represents a A true description of a wound with
Gunshot at the lust view.
wound, an ulcer, a fistula: Yea and sometimes a fracture and a dislocation,
and by Accedents calls to it a feauour, an impostume, a gangrenne, and quid
non; yea without Gods mercy joined to the great care of the discreet Surgion,
death follows.

Judge then if ought be in a Surgions Chest, which in such a wound upon some
occasion be not fit.

And for an Instance, the Chest contains, for the Medicines ready for the
first intention curatiue of wounds by burnings of Gunpowder.
first intention curatiue of Burnings with Gunpowder. Vng. Populeon. 3. lb
Album. 1. lb Triapharmacon. 2. lb Diaponpholigos, lb ss. Mellsaponis 4. lb
oleum lini. 4. lb Ceruse. 3. lb Mell-depurat. 3. lb the weight of all this
amounts unto 20. lb and a half, being al directly fitting; for the first
Intention, namely for taking out of the fire; and yet the Chest has diverse
other helps as a Linament made of Minium or Diacalsithios, and oil either of
Linseede oil, or of Roses.

And for all the rest as is said of wounds of Gunshot, so I say of Ulcers made
by Gunshot, the whole scope of all the Sanatiue medicines in the Chest,
according to their several intention and times suit fitly to finish the cures,
and wherein the rest wants; there is a Magazine Chest, stored with the like
medicines, to the A Magazine Chest.
value of 48. lb. to supply each Surgions wants; but says some others, the
proportion is very much wanting of of restrictiue or astringent medicines, to
stay fluxes, or to Amputate upon occasion; wherefore to satisfy the beneuolent
young Surgion desirous to be informed: I answer, first that there is Pulueris
Restring. Maius 3. pounds, also Bolus 6. lb. Wine Viniger, 2. lb. Myrrhae A
stringent or Restringent or Restrictiue medicine.
4.. Alluminis 2. lb. Vitrio. Crudae, 2. lb. Vitriol. Combusta, lb ss.
Mercury. precipitat. 2.. Sublimat. 1.. Bean and Barley meal 6 lb. Galls, 1
lb. Pomgranat Rindes 4.. and whites of eggs, besides good ligature and
boulsters ready, all which, with Judgment and discretion used: I dare say are
sufficient. And for one instance, namely that the restrictiue powder is
sufficient in quantity: I can produce witness if need were, that upon the 24.
of July, 1628. I took of 2. members, whereof one above the knee, with one 1.
ss. of the powder to both, and had a fourth part to spare of the made medicine.

There is also an astringent defensatiue powder prepared, and made ready for
use as hereafter follows.

And if all what is said, (together with the supply in the Magazine Chest,
with also the help of Phlebottomie ligature, actual and potentiall
Cauteries,) will not suffice; then I am I confess mistaken.

Note in burnings with Gunpowder, that if the face Nota.
or hands be burned, I have found it best from the first Common practice.
to the last, namely to the end of the cure, to use Vng. Album, either mixed
with Populeon or with Linseed oil, or Vnguentum Diapompholigos is fully as
good made A note in the cure of burnings in the face.
into a very thin linament, and warm laid on the face, with a feather and no
clouts at all, nor ought else to cover the face; this heals excoriations or
scorchings best: or that the Surgion take Ceruse ground in a mortar with
Linseed oil, and apply it as the former; I have approved it to be very good:
Triaphormicon is also very good so used.

I spoke but now of honey for burnings, and who so Of honey.
shall prove it, shall find it safe to take out the fire, and after to heal
the grief, but it is somewhat more painful then some other medicines are, it
being once or twice a day applied upon brown paper, being first rubbed soft,
and the medicine spread thereon, and in that manner applied, it heals without
any scarce.

Also Mell Saponis, and all other medicines appropriate, may be applied upon
paper at Sea, partly for sparing Linen.

Moreover, I find a great weakness in young Surgions, that I have just
occasion to question, in that their Masters that bred them, have not taught
them the true knowledge of our usual weights and measures, but chiefly they
fail in the weights, which does even great danger to their poor patients,
whose life hangs dangerously in the balance by a grain; too much given when
the Surgion knows not how many grains are in a scruple, or in a dragme; no
nor scarce that there is a weight so called; wherefore let young Surgions note
as follows: the Physicians, Surgions. and Apothecaries have two sorts of
weights in use, namely, Troy weights, which likewise are the Goldsmiths
weights; and that contains 12. ounces to the pound; and Haberdepoys weight,
which contains 16. ounces to the pound; and is, that common weight which the
Grocers and all other tradesmen use; and indeed which we most use: for though
my self sometimes buy Musk, Ciuet, or Ambergreese and Drugges by Troy weight;
yet I dispense, and administer all by Haberdepoys weight, which is 16. ounces
to the pound, so I will only for breuity speak thereof:

A pound Haberdepoys, has 16. ounces, an ounce has 8. dragmes. A dragme has
3. scruples. A scruple has 20. grains, and by that account, a dragme has 60.
grains, and a full grain of barley is a reasonable grain, and a pepper Corn
or a wheat Corn may be used.
And our Measures agreeing with our weights, most Of Measures.
usual are as follows; a wine gallon of water, contains 8. pound, a pottle
four pound, a quarte 2. pound, a pint 1. pound, etc. and of ordinary sallet
oils 7. pound and a half is accounted a gallon.

Of Cathaplasmes.
OF all other necessaries in the Surgions Chest, I confess my deficiencie
therein, for I ought to have had dried herbs of all sorts sitting, some store,
but I pray you accept of my excuse, I had Surgions Chests, and parts of Chests,
40. at once, and had but ten days respit to make and to fit them all, and yet
the said Chests contain herbs of diverse sorts, as also bean and barley
meal, Lineseeds, Foenigreeke, Camomill-flowers, Cummen-seeds, Fennell-seeds,
and diverse other things that are helps that way, but what shall I say to some
contentious persons, my best things fall too short for them? but to beneuolent
understanding Artists, they can many ways make use of fitting helps in a
ship, and not always charge the Surgions Chest: viz. If my self were at sea,
and put to If a Surgion be put to it
it, I would find waste crummes of biskets, and I would boil them in
ship-beere, and with some fat of the beefe-kettle, or of the porke-kettle, I
would make up a supperatiue Cathaplasme and if it had not a fit consistance or
body, I would deal with the Steward for a little meal, or take of my own
store, and according to my store, enrich that with other helps from the Chest.

And if I need a discutient Cathaplasme, and the Chest had not to help me to
my will being put to it, I would as I said make my ground of the medicine to
be of crummes of biscuit or of soft bread decocted in beer, adding when it had
well sod, viniger and honey a fit quantity, these things with other rational
additions according to several occasions do much comfort the weak patient
and also grace the Artist: Nam frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per
pauciora. And to put young Surgions in mind what other supperatiue medicines
are in the Surgions Chest, there are either Unguents, Oils, or Emplasticke
medicaments, (diverse) which my time will not admit me to inform you off,
though I confess I should advise young men Of Supperatiue medicines
in their necessities, but to be short, they shall find Vnguentum Bazillicon
spread thick and applied to an Aposteme does well, and the better if the place
Embrocated with some Oleum Lili. Lini. or the like, and you shall find that
Arceus Linament is good: and likewise Emplastrum Mellilote, and who knows not
that shippe-pitch and a little fat mixed, ripeneth a Tumor duly applied, or
Pix Graeca with fat, or Turpentine and diverse other the like good things may
be found, where the discreet Surgion is put to his shifts: but no more of
that, for whereas Bees may suck honey, enen there Spiders will convert a plain
style into poison and gall.

Nonomnibus dormio. A ready defensatiue powder to be applied where just cause
is for a defensatiue; either for wounds with gunshot or other wounds which I
have long made use of, and will impart the secret to young practitioners as
follows.


Terra Sigillata. Aluminis. Vitrioli. Tartarae. Cerussae ana 1. Ib. Boli Armeni
2. Ib. Aque 1. Ib. ss
Take a new earthen pot of almost a gallon and an half, put the water into the
pot, and thereunto at the first put the Allom and the Copperas, then powder the
Tarter and put that in also, and then have ready the other ingrediences in
powder, put them in by little and little, stirring them very well until all be
incorporated, and without seething, keep the medicine on the fire till it be
hard, and if you cannot make it hard enough in that manner so that being cold
it will powder, then put it into some dripping pan or the like, and into an
oven when the bread is drawn and it will be hard: then being cold powder it,
and keep it to your use; it will not decay nor alter his virtue in many years.

And when you would use it for a defensatiue, take of this powder about half
an ounce, of Posca, I mean water and vinegar mixed four ounces, put the
powder therein, which will almost al melt, then dippe clouts therein and apply
them.

This medicine with moderation used is a true and excellent defensatiue and
very Anodine.

Also it heals all Itchings, Smartings, gaulings, or any Erisiphilas, or
other Excoriations speedily, and safely and mightily preuenteth accidents
either in great wounds or fractures, and being in small quantity used with
fair water to bathe used with fair water to bathe ulcers, it cleanses them
well and heals them.

And if you have whites of eggs mixed with Posca it were the better, or in
fractures with yelke and whites together it is very good, only let the care of
the Surgion be that he apply it in his true nature, namely as a defensatiue in
fit time, and so touching the rest of the uses thereof, and he may presume he
has a sure good medicine, and so for this time I make my leave.

FINIS.

