THE SCHOLARS PVRGATORY, Discovered In the Stationers Commonwealth, And
Discribed in a Discourse Apologeticall, asvvell for the public advantage of
the Church, the State and, whole Commonwealth of England, as for the remedy
of private iniuryes.

By GEO: WITHER.

Pro: 18. 13. He that answeares his matter before he hear him, it is shame and
folly unto him. Suffer him then that he may speak; and when he has spoken,
mock on, Job. 21. 2.

IMPRINTED For the Honest Stationers.

The occasion and contents of this Apology.
THe Author of this ensuing Apology haueing the Kings Grant, concerning his
book (called the Hymns and Songs of the Church) unjustly and maliciously
opposed by the Stationers, who unchristianly vilify and scandalize also, the
said Book, to the contempt of his Majesty's power, the hinderance of devotion,
the prejudice of the Authors estate, and the disparagment of his best
endeavors: He does here Apologize both for his Book and Privilege, showing
the true grounds of their spightfull opposition* discovering the Progress of
it, answearing such friuelous objections as they have dispersed, and
discovering how injurious also, they are even to the whole Commonwealth in
many other particulers. It has been offered to the Press, because it was
otherwise impossible to divulge the same so universally as they have spread
their scandalls; And it was directed also to the most reverend Conuocatio^,
that the said Book might be corrected or approved of as the wisdom of that
grave Assembly shall find cause: and that the representative body of the
Church of England, beholding a glimpse of the Stationers harbarous dispositions
in misvsing this Author, might from thence take occasion to be informed, What
other insolencyes and abuses they are guilty of, both to the disturbance of
Christian unity, and to the Common prejudice.

If the Printers have, shall occasion any slipps, he desires that if his work
be legible he may be ex* cused* So, does our Author likewise, if in the
method or language, any over sight be committed. For, haueing many other
employments, and being constrained to write it in have (that it might be
imprinted before this present Session of Parliament were expired) there may be
somewhat ouerseene perhapps, which needs pardon. But as it is, he humbly
offers to consideration* the said Apology; whose perticulers are these that
follow.

1. First, an Induction; after which the Author haueing breefly touched upon
those troubles, Imprisonments and expenses, which compelled him to make some
benifite of his own books, shows why he got his Hymns confirmed unto him
by his Majesty's Letters Patents, and what honest Course he took in procuring
his Grant: Page 1, etc. 2. He shows how unjustly and ingratfully the
Stationers thereupon opposed him; how vncivelly they abused him; how
unchristianly they vilified his Hymns, rather as Censurers then sellers of
Books: And a little touches upon the particular vsur pations, In sinuations,
Insolencyes, Avarice, and abuses of Bookesellers, Page 6, etc. 3. He declares
why he exercised his Muse in Divinity: What reason he had to translate the
Canonical Hymns into Lyrick verse; and that some of the Clergy mooned him
thereunto* He shows also, to what end he composed the Spiritual Songs for
the obseruable times: Of what nature that Book is, which the Stationers
oppose: And what they do in particular, rail and object against the said
Book. Page 11, etc. 4. He proves by diverse Arguments that the said Hymns
are necessary, and not impertinent as the Stationers object: Then touches
again upon the abuses and gross partiality of the Stationers, acquiteth
himself of seeking his own profitt (to the public prejudice,) as his
Adversaries untruly affirm: and demonstrateth his Patent to be neither
Monopoly, as the Stationers allege (and as some of their Pate^ts are) but
rather a benifite. Page 24, etc. 5. He sets down the Stationers peremptery
claim to all Authors labors: refuting a Lawyers foolish judgment passed on
their behalfes. Instanceth in what particulers they usurp larger Prerogatives
then they will allow the King: And then (haueing just occasion) points at
their fraudulent and insufferable abusing of the people in their Mystery of
Book selling. Page 29, etc. 6. He particularizeth in what vnciuell terms the
Stationers vilify his Hymns: How unjustly they disparage his expressions: And
how impudently they usually prefer and divulge those pernicious and
impertinent things, whereby they themselves may receive profitt. Page 33, etc.
7. He iustifies his expressions: Protests with what mind, what preparation,
and with what Caueats he proceeded in that work. And there withal me^tioneth
some of those difficulties which are in such a task and speaks somewhat
concerning the metricall version of David's Psalms now in use. Page 35, etc. 8.
He maintains the lawfulness of undertaking a work of that nature,
notwithstanding he is no professed Divine, against those who object he has
intruded upon the Divine calling; and glanceth at the ignorance and envy of
those Obiectors. P: 39, 9. He discovers how presumptuously they have
countenanced their detraction and opposition, by pretending that the Lo: Archb:
of Cant: andothers are all affected to the said Hymns and Grant. And it is
made evident that they have impudently abused the Lo: Archb: therein. Page 45*
etc. 10. He gives reason; for his translating and publishing the so^g of
Salomo^* in Lyrick verse. Setts down the Stationers impious and scurrilous
manner of traducing it. Expresses somewhat of that Songs comfortable use, with
what may be said in answer to them who think it ought to be restrained, for
fear of being misapplyed. And haueing spoken somewhat concerning his own
proceedings, submits all to censure. Page 49, etc. 11. He displaies the
Stationers demeanor toward those who come to ask for his Book. Setts forth
the quality of those whom they have drawn to pass their censures against it.
Shows how wilfully the Kings iniunction, and his pious intent therein has
been rejected: And what inconveniences are likly to follow their insolencyes,
if order be not taken. Page 63, etc. 12. He vpholds his Hymns for the
obseruable times, against the Stationers and those whom they have stirred up to
oppose them: Offers them to strictest examination* Shows his Christian
simplicity in co^posing the^; that they tend to the glory of God, and the
furtherance of uniformity: That they were lawfully Authorized: That they are
consanant to the word of God, the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, and to all
the laws and ecclesiastical Ordinances of this Realm. Page 66, etc. 13. He
intimates that it is probable his Hymns are scandalized by none but such as
are ill affected to the government of our Church. Shows that his prefaces has
vindicated all our Solemnities from those imputations of popery, Schismatics
has cast upon them: Touches upon the pious usefulness of the Churches
Discipline: Illustrateth their impiety who seek to disparage or abolish it,
And specifieth in what places, and in what ridiculous manner the Stationers
pass their virdicts upon his book. Page 69, etc: 14. He sets down how
barbarously the Stationers seek to disparage all his Hymns by reason of that
for S. Georges day: How unchristianly they misinterpreted his pious and
warrantable inte^tion in composing that Hymn; and thereupon takes occasion to
speak somewhat of the pious use of that solemnity; of the most noble and most
Christian order of S. George and the Patron thereof; to the honor of that
institution, and in reproof of the vulger and ignorant misconceits of his
Reproouers. Pa. 76. 15. He humbly entreats that neither his youth, his calling,
nor the unjust scandalls of his Adversaries may prejudice what he has well
done: She was why his writings and Actions are exposed to more scandalls then
vaniest inventions bring on their Authors; protests what it is that made him
thus endeavor to maintain his reputation; and professes some what of his hopes
and Resolutio^s. p: 84. 16. He displaies the true condition of his adversaries*
by showing how nere they parallel David's enemies, and that they have given him
just occasion to take up in a litteral se^ce almost every bitter complain
whereby the Psalmist has expressed the cruelty of a malicious multitude. P. 87
17. He expostulatheth concerning that unequal dealing the world has hitherto
used toward him: And (taking it a little unkindly that any of those who ought
to cherish men in good employements, should do him injury by a rash censure)
Touches upon some others who together with the Stationers have injuriously and
causelessly detracted from his labors. Page 89. 18. He nominateth many of those
particular injuries offered him by the Stationers. He describes also the
power, policy, and true condition of his opposers, with many of those dangers,
disadva^tages, and inco^ueniences which their malice portend* And then shows
both how much he contemns all they can bring to pass, and how he hops to
convert all their hate, mischeefes, and slanders; to his future profitt and
commendation in their despite* Page 94. 19. He gives the reason of his hopes
of prevailing; co^cicture^ Gods good purpose in suffering him to be afflicted by
these Adversaries, and his other troubles; apologizeth for that overmuch
sharpness* which he has seemed to use; and makes it probable, that he has no
uncharitable intention in any thing which he has expressed in this book. p.
103. 20. He renounceth to have any purpose to Disparage or defame either the
whole Corporation of Stationers, or any particular member thereof, and that no
other may abuse this Discourse to that end; he shows also, how all the
reprehensions therein expressed, may be applied to those only who are guilty,
and how every man that is innocent, or sorry for his oversight, may, if he
himself please, be freed from all personal blame or scandal. Page 108. 21.
To prevent their malice likewise, who would perhapps apply this Discourse to the
general disparagment of the Stationers Mystery; he has added the definition
of an honest Stationer; and the true Character of his contrary, whom he calls
a mere Stationer, and against whom, only, this book is intended. Page 116.
22. He reconeth up, some of those many inconveniences which the Universities,
the State, the whole Commonwealth, and the Church of God suffers, by the
Disorders among those whom he calls mere Stationers; but reserueth their
amplification to another Discourse, which he intends to publish if there be
cause. Page 127. 23. And lastly (to show he ha^h not aimed at the shame or
ruin of any, but at their reformation only) he offers to discover a profitable
remedy for what he has found to be amis^e; to the glory of God, the content of
the King, the quiet of the State, the honor of learning, and to the credit and
profit of the Stationers themselves. And these, among some other accidental
passages, are the co^tents of this Apology, p. 130.
To the most Reverend Father in God. the Lo: Archb: o Canterbury etc. and to
the Reverend LLs. Bishops, and others; in the Convocation house assembled.
MOst Reverent Fathers; Notwithstanding I acknowledge my self unworthy, that
this Reverend Assembly should from their more w^ighty affairs, turn their
eyes, or inclyne their ears to my private Fortunes: Yet if those testimonies,
which I have already given of my true affection to the peace and prosperity of
that Church and Commonwealth, of which you are members: or my promise of
future indea^ours, or your own pious inclinations may deserve* so much for me*
I humbly beseech your Reuerences, to receive this following declaration, into
your serious and christian considerations, and to ^ouchsafe respect thereunto,
according to the piety becoming this Reverent Assembly, and that rule of
charity, which commands al men (without exception) to be so inclyned toward
others, as they desire others should be affected toward them in the like
necessities.

For* most Reverend Fathers, I am not ashamed to confess that an extraordinary
necessity has invited me to interrupt you in this unusual manner. And yet
mistake me not, I am not so necessitated, as be in doubt of falling into base
want^ or to fear I can be overtaken with any inconvenience, from which I
could not be delivered without your commiseration, but perhaps rather, God has
laid his hand on me by some affliction, that I might be constrained to offer
that unto your considerations for my private ease, which I should never have
found opportunity to present for the public good, if oppressions had not
prepared me thereunto. Cammomile thriues not unless it be trodden on; the plate
must to the hammer before it will be in fashion: and such is our natural
corruption, and self love, that till the sparks touch our own houses, we can
sleep though the city be on a flame. Nay, even those who are grapes of the
mystical vine Jesus Christ, must be crushed in the winepresse, or bruised on
the tongue, at the least, before they yeald any profitable nourishment. If it
be so with me, though my particular smart has given the occasion of this
narration, somewhat may ere the conclusion, be delivered not impertinent to
more general consideration. And once again therefore I beseech your patience.

About the time of the last Convocation, I composed a little Poem, well known
throughout this kingdom; wherein haueing to conscionable purposes, expressed
such resolutions, as every reasonable man should endeavor to entertayne. And
having as opportunity was offered, glaunced also in general terms at the
reproof of a few things of such nature as I feared might disparage or
prejudice the Commonwealth; some particulars, not then in season to be meddled
withal, were at unawares so nearly touched upon, that I unhappily fell into
the displeasure of the State: and all my apparent good intentions were so
mistaken by the aggrauations of some ill affected toward my endeavors, that I
was shutt up from the society of mankind. And as one unworthy the compassion
vouchsafed to thieves and murderers, was neither permitted the use of my pen,
the access or sight of acquaintance, the allowance usually afforded other
close prisoners, nor means to send for necessaries beefitting my present
condition. By which means I was for many days compelled to feed on nothing
but the coursest bread, and sometimes locked up four and twenty hours
together, without so much as a dropp of water to cool my tongue. And being
at the same time in one of the greatest extremityes of sickness that was ever
inflicted upon my body, the help both of Physician, and Apothecary was
uncivilly denied me. So that if God, had not by resolutions of the mind which
he infused into me, extraordinarily enabled me to wrestle with those, and such
other aflictions as I was then exercised withal, I had been dangerously and
everlastingly overcome.

But, of these vsages I complain not; for, they are past: and He that made me,
made me strong enough to despise them. Nor do I here mention them as accusing
the State of injustice: God forbidd. For I assure my self my restraint was
just until such time as I had acquitted my self of what was laid to my charg;
Yea I assure myself the severity of my sufferings was un known to that most
honorable counsel which ommitted me; and that more favor should have been
showed, if means had been afforded me to complain^; Because as soon as I
had opportunity to justify my honest intentions, and to give reasons for my
questionable expressions* I was restored to the common liberty; (as I persuade
my self) both with the good favor of the King, and of all those that
restrained me. For, the greatest fault which over I committed, confessed, or
others could discover in those writings; was this, that they favored a little
more of Honesty then discretion. And verily should every man publickely (...)
for his indiscretions as I have done, our prisons must be made larger then our
streets.

The reason then why I thus begin this discourse with relation of my past
indurances, is to sharpen the dullness of my oratorie on the remembrance of
those things, and to begett in your hearts the more feeling of that christian
compun^tion which they must entertain before this declaration, that I now
intend will be of any force. And least I have not yet delivered enough in that
kind, to stir up your regard, I will (under your favors) proceed a little
further in the discovery of my outward fortunes, before I propose what
principally I do desire this reverend Ass^mbly should please to take notise of.

May it please you then to understand, that my punishment ended not with my
imprisonment. For, before I had license to come abroad again into the world, I
was forced to expenses so far beyond my abillity, that ere I could be
clearly discharged, I was left many pounds worse then nothing: And to enjoy
but the name of liberty, was cast into a greater bondage then before.

Whereupon, coming abroad again into the world accompanied thither with
those affections which are natural to most men, I was loath (if it might
conveniently be prevented) either to sink below my rank, or to live at the
mercy of a creditor. And therefore (haueing none of those helps, or trades, or
shifts, which many others have to relieve themselves withal) I humbly
peticioned the Kings most excellent Majesty (not to be supplied at his charge,
or by any proiectment to the oppression of his people) but that according to
the laws of nature, I might enjoy the benifit of some part of mine own
labors, by virtue of his Royal privilege. For, by an unjust custom (as most
of your Reuerences well know) the Stationers have so usurped upon the labors
of all writers, that when they have consumed their youth and fortunes in
perfiting some laborious work, those cruel B^e-masters burn the poor
Athenian bees for their honey, or else drive them from the best part thereof by
their long practiced cunninge. Which to prevent, his Majesty vouchsafed my
reasonable request, with addition of voluntary favor, (...) mine own desire.
For, before his warrant to Master Attorney, he graciously expressed his royal
comm^ndatory allowance of my Book, which I had presented him withal,
peticioning his privilege for printing thereof. And both in the procur^ing of
it, and in the passing of his Grant, I took no other course, then what I have
hitherto used, and purpose to use for ever in all mine affairs: that is;
neither directly, nor indirectly to solicit any man to favor me, otherwise
the^ he shall be moved by his own conscience, and the iustnes of my cause, when
I have made means to discover the true state thereof to his understanding.

Nor was this manner of proceeding any hindrance unto me; for my Grant
nevertheless passed his Majesty's hand and every office after (where many
times lets are cast in the way) with so much unusual favor, and such good
wishes, besides expedition, that I was greatly encouraged to engage my credit
almost three hundred pounds further thereupon; to imprint, and diuoulge my
Book, according to his Majesty's Letters Pattents. All which expense, together
with my paynefull endeauours, are now in danger to be lost, to the overthrow of
my new hopes; and (which is my greater grief) to the hinderance of those my
friends, who have adventured their goods in my sinking vessel.

For, some of the Booke-sellers (who like the Silver Smithes of Ephesus,
prefer their unjust gain before conscience, or piety) though their
Corporation has much profited, and is daily enriched by my former labors,
though they may have benifit by this in question; though they are not ignorant
of the great troubles, and hindrances I have received by that which did the
more advantage them; though they are privy to my large expense in this work,
and how much it will be my undoing to the world-ward, if it succeed not; though
they know it favored both by his Majesty and those also who are esteemed
among the most devout, and learned of the Clergy; though their own
consciences (whatsoever they pretend) tell them it tendes to the glory of God,
and the furtherance of true devotion, without prejudice to any particular man;
yea, though I have orderly proceeded in receiving the benefit of mine own
labors, without taking away the least part, either of their, or of any other
man's just profit: I say, notwithstanding all this, they indeauoured, without
all compassion, or honest consideration, not only to procure the overthrow of
my Grant, and with it (so far as in them lies) my ruin also, because I would
not let them have the benifit thereof at their own rates: But have publikly,
and unjustly slaundered me, as one that had proiected, and procured a
privilege to the general greeuance of the subject; which thing I utterly
abhor.

Nor have they thought it sufficient ingratfully to seek the compassing of
their own ends, by the ruin both of his state and good name, whose former
studies have been a means to help the raising of them; But they will
disparage the Kings power and judgment, rather then fail. Nay, to show
themselves suparlatiuely dareing to attempt any thing to further their
designs, there be of that generation, (I beseech your patience, if passion may
seem to carrye me away: it is in the cause of God) I say there be some of them,
who spare not God himself, and his religion: but (AVDAX OMNIA PERPETI) have
blasphemed the sacred expressions of the holy Spirit, and unchristianly
vilified that Book which supreme Authority has commanded to be published
for the reverence and practice of devotion. And because in doing this, they
would not seem so profane, as to make their gain, the cause of their
opposition, nor be thought so heathenish as to call out for Diana with their
types at Ephesus, they cry, TEMPLVM DOMINI, the Temple of the Lord; and
craftily cullor their aim with the cloak of sanctity, and zeal of true
religion. Yea they are grown so malepert, and arrogant, that being but the
pedlers of Books, and for the most part ignorant fellows (acquainted with
nothing concerning them, but their names, and pryses) they nevertheless dare
take upon them the miscensuring of any man's labors though allowed by authority.

In this kind, among diverse others, I at this present suffer their inisusag in
a high measure. And in me they have abused the King, the State, and the whole
Hierarchy; Yea God, and religion. Having therefore propoposed their injuries of
other natures, to the consideration of them, unto whom properly they belong: I
am bold to appeal yet hither, that I may obtain the ce^sure of this most
reverend Convocation, concerning those particulers which are most genuine to be
determined of in this place

I do protest unfeignedly, that I will deliver nothing in my relation, which
proceeds from spleen or malice: nor express my self in more sharp terms,
then my conscience shall witness charitable, and necessary, to let your
Reuerences understand the height of those iniurys, that I am to complain on;
and the lively character of those fellows, whose in^ignityes the whole
commonwealth of learning suffers under. For they have by their sly
insinuations, and honest pretenses so far screwed themselves into the good
opinion of many Reverend, and Honorable parsonages, and so strengthened
themselves through the abuse of their favors; that my fingers will not serve,
and therefore pardon me if in a case of necessity, I sometime use my teeth to
pluck those rusty nails, forth of the fair table of their ill deserved
esteem.

Nevertheless conceive me not, I pray you, that I go about to lay a general
ymputation up ^n all S^tioners. For, to disparage the whole profession, were an
act neither becoming an honest m^n to do, no^ a prudent Auditory to suffer.
Their mystery (as they not untruly term it) consists of diverse Trades
incorporated together: as Printers, Booke-bin^s* Clas^makers, Bookesellers.
etc. And of all these b^ some honest men, who to my knowledge are so grieved
being ouer-born by the notorious oppressions and proceedings of the rest, that
they have wished themselves of some other calling. The Printers mystery, is
ingenious, paynefull, and profitable: the Booke-bin^ ^cessary; the Claspemakers
useful. And in (...) r^tailer of books, commonly (...) a Booke-seller, is a
Trade, which being well governed* (...) ^in certain bounds, might become
somewhat serviceable to the rest. But as it is now (for the most part abused)
the Bookeseller has not only made the Printer, the Binder, and the Claspmaker
a slave to him: but has brought Authors, yea the whole Commonwealth, and all
the liberal Sciences into bondage. For he makes all professers of Art, labor
for his profit, at his own price, and vtters it to the Commonwealth in such
fashion, and at those rates, which please himself.

In-somuch, that I wonder so insupportable, and so impertinent a thing, as a
mere Bookseller (considering what the profession is become now) was ever
permitted to grow up in the Commonwealth. For, many of our modern
booke-sellers, are but needelesse excrements, or rather vermin, who being
engendered by the sweat of scholars, Printers, and book-binders, do (as worms
in timber, or like the generation of vipers) devour those that bred them. While
they did like fleas, but suck now and then a dropp of the writers blood from
him, and skipp off when he found himself diseased, it was somewhat tolerable:
but since they began to feed on him, like the third plague of AEGIPT without
remoouing, and to lay claim to each Authors labors, as if they had been
purposely brought up to study for their mayntenance. Yea, since they take
upon them to publish books contrived, altered, and mangled at their own
pleasurs, without consent of the writers: nay and to change the name someyms,
both of book and Author (after they have been ymprinted) and all for their
own private lucre; like traders in stuffes, who under new names, many times
shift off their old wares. And yet further also, to disparage, or censure
maliciously, both writers, and their labors, and so vsurp unto themselves the
high authority of the Church and State. I say these things considered, it is
high time to seek a remedy, and a remedy (I hope) will shortly be provided in
due place.

In the mean time I humbly beseech this reverend Asse^bly, to take an assay of
the^ in my particular cause, and in their manner of dealing with me touching
that book before mentioned, and lately privileged by his Majesty. For, they
haueing very vnchristianlik traduced both my self, and it, I will (according
to my duty) give unto your Reuerences, a true account of all my principal
proceedings, and intentions, and my reasons against their feigned objections;
together with what was by authority determined by that work. And then leave my
self, and it, unto your Reuerences, to approve, alter, amend, or condemn, as
you shall think fytt. wherein I will rest satisfied, although it be to the
overthrowing both of my credit and estate.

First then, may it please you to understand, that being from my childhood in
love with the study of Divinity (though I have yet, neither knowledge, nor
opinion in my self worthy of so high a calling) I ymployed that natural
faculty which God had given me upon such expressions, as sauouring of honesty,
and religion, won me the general good opinyon of honest men. And though I was
so young every way, that, I first began to write, and then to learn (as the
childishness, and indiscretions of my Poems discover) yet they procured me
much respect, and applause. which well con sidering on, and weighing my known
insufficiencies, the slenderness of my performances, and my little means of
knowledge, together with what base entertaynment lines of that nature usually
find in the world: I began to parswade my self, that God had extraordinarily
given me this unlooked for esteem to some better purpose, then either that I
should dispyse the same, or glory in it to a vain end. And that which made me
give most faith to such an apprehensio^, was this: I observed, that the good
repute which I had attained unto, never got me any outward profit, nor ever be
fryended me in the compassing of any thing for my pleasure.

Whereupon, least God should turn his blessing to a curse, and my reputation
to my shame, if I sought not what way to ymploy it, unto his praise: and
observing withal, that we make use of the most excelent expressions of the
holy ghost in rude, and barbarous Numbers, whilst our own wanton fancies were
painted, and trymed out in the most moving languag. Me thought it fared with
us, as with those against whom the Prophet Hosea complained, that dwelt in
sieled houses themselves, whilst the Temple of God lay wast And therefore
seeing no other to undertake the same, I spent about three years, to prepare
my self* for such a I ask, and then proceeded with the translation of the
Psalms according to that ability God had given me. But before I had half
ended them I heard that one of much better sufficiency had made a long, and
happy progress into that work: and thereupon in expectation of his more able
performance delayed to proceed with what I had begun, until such time as I
was informed that the other was by the multiplicity of weighty Affairs
compelled to give over his laborious Attempt. And then* I thought my self
engaged again, to proceed.

Now, dureing the time of intermission as aforesaid, that I might not want an
employment answereable to my first intention I was by some of the Clergy (who I
hope were moqued there unto by the Spirit of God) inui^ed to collect and
translate into Lyricke-verse* the Hymns dispersed* throughout the Canonical
Scriptures. Which I embraced with much readynes, and persoi^d willingly; adding
unto the^ such other par^ds of Holy-writt, Creeds and Songs, as I conceived
proper and necessary to be sunge.

And, because some can well enough allow an endlesse^ variety of foolish Songs
and ballads, ^e^ding to the (...) of the flesh and the devil, yet be apt to
say, we (...) Psalms, and Songs enough in this kind already. And so (...)
also, as I have heard others (who^ presume much on their own fo^ndnes in (...))
in nora^t by demand, what ye So^gs of Mo^s, Deb^rah, (...) and such like, are
perti^e^t unto us. To let those, and (...) unlearned, and ignorant men know,
that the Holy Ghost (...) none of the Canonical Scriptures till these times of
(...) in (...) have in a short Proeme (^ding to the opinion of the true Church)
declared: that those Scriptures, are every whitt as useful and necessary for
us, as for them in whose times, and for whose particular occasions they were
first written. And before each Hymn, I have presixed also a brief preface, to
show in what sense the congregation, or men may privately, and ought to repeat
them.

Moreover, having with grief observed, how the Church of England (like Jesus
Christ crucified between two thieves) is traduced, and abused between Papists,
and Schismatiks: the one falsely charging her with want of order, and christian
discipline; the other as unjustly vpbrayding her with popish and superstitious
observations. And having experience, that there are great multitudes of well
affected people, easy to be led aside for company into the later oversight,
through want of some to inform them better, who would with small ado be
conformable, if they had means of instruction concerning their particular
mistakings. Yea, many of these being well inclyned toward me; and I not knowing
which way to use that affection better, then to make it a means of increasing
christian unity and devotion. I resolved to publish some what, to stir up in
them that obedience and reverence, which they ought to express toward the
pious ordinances of the Church: and if I lost any man's esteem for so
conscionable an attempt; I assured my self I lost nothing but what was never
worth the saving.

To that end therefore (having received incouragment and taken advice, from
some of the most devout, and learned of our Deuines) I composed certain
Hymns, and Songs, appropriated to the ordynary public occasions of our
Congregations, and to those times obseruable by command of the Church, and by
the authority of the State; that so God might be gloryfied in every
Solempnity, and those times not so much profaned and contemned, as heretofore.

And, because I had heard some Teachers in Israel profess themselves ignorant
concerning the use of the Holy Days observed in our Church, I took the more
pains (though not presuming to teach them) to express before ye proper Song
of every obseruable Time or other occasion, their religious use; briefly, and
in such a manner, as I hope every reasonable capacity may thereby understand,
our Churches discipline in that point, to be far from a needles, popish, or
superstious Tradition.

Moreover, that I might not trouble any man's charity or devotion in the use of
these Hymns, I was as watchful, as possible I could be, to make all my
expressions free from bitterness, or touches of those controversies, which
might give offense to the weak members of our Church. And God so prosper me,
as I was and am clear, from meaning to grieve, offend, or discontent the
souls, or consciences of any.

Thus with a good purpose, I began and finished those Hymns and Songs, which
make up the Book, called the HYMNS and SONGS OF THE CHVRCH. So named, not for
that I would have them accounted part of our Lyturgie (as I have delivered to
his Majesty in my Epistle) but because they do for the most part, treat of
such particulers* as concern ye whole Church of God. And this is that book*
for which his Majesty vouchsafed me the privilege before mentioned, and
which he pyously and graciously commanded to be annexed to the singing
Psalms, that it might be ye more generally and the more conuenie^tly divulg^d
among his subjects for their instruction.

And indeed, by that means, those poor people (whose Pastors suffer them or
cause them to be misinformed concerning that point) shall carry about with them
in their most vsesual book, what may at one time or other open their
understandings to perceive their error.

This is that Book, for which I (was ever worst used for my best intentions)
suffer more, then for all my former in discretio^s; and for which, I have
received those afro^ts* that may well be ra^ked among my greatest injuries;
notwithstanding it had besides the ordinary allowance of Authority* the
particular approbation, and commendation both of the King himself, and of many
the members of this most reverend Convocation.

Yea, this is that Book, for which the Common wealth of Stationers (^ Tyrrany
unheard of in former ages) desire to make me as odious* as if I had ympolyed my
whole study to the oppression of this weal public, or to the subuertio^ of
religion and for which they have persued me with such violence and clamor as
has seldom or never been exampled in any cause.

Hear therefore (I humbly beseech you) their particular objections; and for
his sake (who has honored you with high places, and holy callings) be you
Judges between me and them. For though in regard of my self, I should take
no more notice of their malicious wrongs, then the Nightingale in a Summers
night, does of the barking of dogs, and whooping of Owls: but sing on
without distemper, to the contentment of mine own soul. Yet since their
clamorous noise hinders others from heareing the voice of the Charmer, and
through my sides, wounds the credit of Authority, and may parhapps hereafter
encourage them presumptuously, for the bringing in of greater inconveniences: I
desire their dealing with me, may be taken notice of by this most Reverend
Assembly. To which end, I have here set down, what they cry out, to the
disparagement of me, and my book, instead of dispersing it abroad according to
his Majesty's royal command.

Some give out that my book contains nothing but a few needles Songs: which I
composed, and got privileged by Patent, merely for my private benifit, to
the oppression of the Commonwealth.

Some discourage those that come to buy the book: other whiles denying that it
is to be had, and other while peremptorily protesting against the selling of
it, or disgracefully telling such as enquire after the same, that the work is
Ridiculous, and that it better be^itted me to meddle with my poetry, then to be
^ampering with divinity. with such like other words of contempt. Other some
there be, who dare auerr that my* Lords Grace of Canterbury, with many of the
Bishopps, and best Deuines, do much dislike and oppose the said Hymns.

Others again buze in the peoples ears that the Hymns for the Obseruable
times are popish, and tending to the maintenance of superstition.

And some there be among them, who (in such terms of ribaldry, as no Stews can
go beyond them) blasphemingly affirm, that the CANTICLES are obscene, and not
fit to be divulged in Song, or Verse.

Yea, many other objections they make, and cast out diverse aspersions, as well
upon the Author, as on his book, to bring both into contempt.

The maliciousnes, and superfluity of wickedness, appearing in these their evil
speakeinges, your Reuerences can easily perceive: Nevertheless, forasmuch as
there lie Padds in the straw, which the best judgments cannot discern at the
first sight. And seeing I have been openly traduced, as vnbeseemingly intruding
upon the divine calling, and stand now accused as one that has hatched and
brought forth such things for my temporal advantage, which are offensive, and
scandalous to ye Church, and consciences of good me^; which I would not
willingly be guilty, of for all the world (by your patience) I do hereby give
an account of my action now in question, hopeing that it shall be to the
satisfying of this reverend Assembly, the contentment of such as have upon
misreport been offended, and to the shame of mine opposers. And I trust also it
shall discover, that although there may be found indiscretions, or ouersights
in my undertaking, yet I have deserved fairer usage, my adversaries less
credit, and my studies better entertainment then heretofore they have found.

To keep my self the closer to that which shall be pertinent to this Apology,
I will make these particular objections my Theames, which I have repeated: nor
will I bring any other authorities to make good my defense, then the true
relations, of what has been don, and such plain arguments as mine own reason
shall be able to frame. For, if this discourse come to the veiw of your
Reuere^ces only, you well enough know, what the Records of Antiquity can afford
to these purposes. And if it happen among those only of mean capacity such
plain expressions, as I purpose to use, will acquire most credit among them.

And first, whereas they give out, that my Hymns are needles; they do not
only thereby contemn, and slight my pains but lay an imputation of vanity
upon the wisdom of the Holy Ghost also. For a great part of them are
parcells of the Canonical Scriptures: originally Song. And, to say any
fragment thereof, were needeles, is in effect, to deminish from Gods words,
upon which follows a heavy curse.

God deserves every day to be praised of us for delivering his Church, by the
overthrow of Pharaoh in the redd Sea, as much as he did in the very moment of
their deliverance. And the song of Moses then used, does in each particular, as
properly concern every christian Congregation, as it did the Jews themselves
upon that occasion. For, Gods mercy showed to v^ in our baptism, (and the
spiritual overthrow of the devil, pursuing us with an host of sins, and
temptations,) is in mine opinion more effectually expressed to a spiritual
understanding, by apprehending the actions and circumstances of that temporal
deliverance, the^ it could be by ye power of any words, or by any other
ordinary means; except by conte^plating of that most excellent material object,
the Sacrament of Baptism it self, of which the other was but a type.

In like manner, all the other Canonical Hymns do admyrablie help toward
Gods everlasting mercies, and for illustrating those particular Mysteries of
our christian faith, which they did typically and prophetically foreshew. Yea,
they are part of the prophetical witness, as the Hymns of the new Testament
are patt of the Evangelical witness, of our interest in Christ Jesus. And
verily, the late neglect of their application, in our christian mysteries, has
not only much injured, one of the two great witnesses of our salvation: but
given occasion also, that many unsound professors have corrupted them; even to
the bringing in of diverse Jewish and Talmudicall fancies, to the fearful
distraction of weak people.

But, were not those Hymns necessary in respect of the variety of their
arguments, yet the variety of expression, were somewhat needful, although the
matter were the same. For, as the several dressings of one sort of meat, maks
it diversely agreeable to the pallats, and stomachs of men: so the various
manner of things de^uered in holy Scripturs, makes them applicable to our
understandings; and what in one kind of delivery seems harsh, or obscure, in
another kind is acceptable, and more easily apprehended. That which is easy to
you, is hard parhapps to me: and what may be thought an impropriety to some
great judgments, does many times most properly insinuate the speakers meaning
unto them of weaker capacityes.

In observing the seeming differences among* Interpreters in their
tra^slatio^s of these words: NASSECHV BAR, (part of ye last verse of the second
psalm) I conceived thereby, that the profitable use of variety, was very
apparent. For, the translation most agreeable to the original Hebrew renders ye
words: OSCVLEMINI FILIVM. the Septuagint, APPREHENDITE DISCIPLINAM and
Saint-Hierome, ADORATE PVRE: which being all orthodoxe Interpretations, and
agreeable both to the scope of the Psalm, and that which the words originally
bear, and all standing well together also with the Analogy of faith: this
variety made me conceive in my meditations thereupon, that the holy ghost had
delivered his meaning in these triple Equivokes, that they might the more
properly* be accomodated to the several States, and ages of his Church.

For (pardon me if I err) me thought in saying, OSCVLEMINI FILIVM (which was
according to the genuin, and most common understanding of y^ original words
among the Hebrews) I apprehended that the Holy ^host exhorted his Church among
the Jews to homage and worshipp that Son of God, who was diverse wais made
ma^ifest unto the^ to be their true King. And APPREHENDITE DISCIPLINAM, (being
according to that Translation, which I am persuaded God himself
extraordinarily provided to reveal his truth by unto ye Heathen) I conceived
that ye Holy Ghost persuaded his Church among the Gentiles. (who yet knew not
Christ their King) to embrace the knowledge of him. And ADORATE PVRE (being
the first trans^ation that in latin the Church publikly received, and about
that time the true worship of Jesus Christ beginning to be adulterated) my mind
gave me (that psalm being a manifest prophecy concerning the kingedome of
Christ to the worlds end) it might be, that God did by that interpretation
perswad those peruerters of his Truth to repentance, who should disturb the
peace and quiet of his kingdom in these later times.

But I stand not so thereupon as if I could not submitt to better judgments:
Sure I am this meditation is no way repugnant to the Catholic verity; and
howsoever it shall be approved, it serves well enough to my purpose for
demonstratinge, that the variety, or different expressions of sacred things,
are not needles, but do afford advantage unto those of mean capacityes, if
they meditate upon them with reverence and humility.

If it be but to awaken our dullnes, and take away our wearisomenesse in holy
duties, variety is needful. For, flesh and blood (as we find by daily
experience) loathes those things, wherwithal they are naturally best plesed, if
they be to frequent: how much more tedious then will those things be unto us,
which are perpetually iterated in the same words, being naturally unpleasing to
a carnal ear? Since god in mercy has provided and permitted us means to
assist our weaknesses, let not such as are strong enough to be without them,
condemn the use of such helps in those, who being not so able, must have
their affections weaned by degrees from their childish inclynations.

We see the Flesh and the Devil, having for their service thousands of vain
Songs, and profane ballads stored up in ye Stationers warhouses, have
nevertheless, many Muses perpetually ymployed for the composing of new
Straynes; And that many hundred pounds are yearly consumed upon them, to the
enriching of those merchants; to the shame of our profession, to the corruption
of youth, and to the building up of the kingdom of sin, and Satan: as it is
well known, and observed by many of good note in this reverend assembly. Yet
there haueing been for diverse ages together, but so many Hymns composed, and
published, as make in some impressio^s not above two sheets and a half of
paper (for the reverence and practice of Devotion unto the honor of god) they
are censured impertinent; maliciously exclaymed on; violentely opposed; and the
Author of them seeking for the needful hyre of his labor, (but his due, and
what strangers should have been suffered to make thereof) is publicly accused
as a man coueteously hunting after the world, and an injurious oppressor of the
commonwealth.

Oh god! how partial are all men bewitched with self-love, in the prosecution
of their base ends! and how uncharitable in their censunes! For the Stationers
have not only labored to deprive me of the benefit due to my labors, but also
to make me appear without Christianity in my intentions* by affirming that I
sought mine own benyfit only, in composing my book of Hymns, and in
publishing it according to the kings command. My Poem^ last deuulged was said
to have been written in mine own praise* and the Hymns for my private profit;
I wonder to what purpose, y^ next book I write shall be composed. Verily, if I
be not altogether forgetful of mine own thoughts, o^ too apt to believe
ouerwell of my self (as parhaps I am) my principal aim was the glory of God
in both those vndertakinges. Nevertheless, truth is, I am so inclyned to the
corruptions of other men, that although I did what I was able, yet was I not
altogether so free from outward hopes (as I ought to have been) in those works.

My weak fortunes, my troubles, and the chargablenesse of a study that
bringes with it no outward supply, put me unto a kind of necessity to cast my
thoughts a side unto wo^ldly respects but I have siu^e been sorry for it upon
better consideration. And as a just reward for my too earnest lookeing after
vain ho^, I do now accept of my present trouble, that outwardly is like to
impouerish me. And the time thereof, draws me the more heedfully to consider
it, being just about that season, wherein I expected to reap some contentment
in the fruition of my labors and expenses. God grant this experience may
enrich me another way, and settle my hopes upon more certain things and that
those who accuse me of this imperfection, may examine their own hearts, and
(if they find them guilty of the like infirmity) learn by mine example to
confess their error. And my prayer shall be, that we both may more directly
seek gods glory in our undertakings.

But why should I be the man more accused, the^ all others, for seekeing after
the just hyre of my labors? am I the only One guilty of studyinge mine own
profit^, in the course of my paynefull endeavors for religious end? I would to
god I were, and that no man living save I, were so wicked, as to make his own
glory, and enriching, the end and scope of his christian diligence. For
doubtless, such an universal piety, would be a powerful means of drawing me
to repentance. But I believe, there be so few, who can with the Apostle clear
himself herein, that if none might be permitted to throw at me the stone of
reproof, but only they who are free from this weakness, I may walk from Saint
Michaels Mount in Cornwall to Douer^ and from thence eue^ through our
mitropolitan Churches, to the farthest Northeren Isles without touch of
exception.

And whereas they object I have compassed a priveledge to the public
greeuance; your Reuerences shall ceiue how innocent I am from giving cause of
such an imputation, if you please to consider the circumstances of his
Majesty's Grant with his pyous intention, and my carriage in the procuring and
execution of it. For, I did not, as some of the Stationers have done, in the
name of many, and by pretending the relief of the poor (whom they may be
proved thereby to oppress) monopolize the principal books of Sale within
this Realm (even those wherein the whole commonwealth have a inst interest)
which is really one of those Monopo^es that our State abhores. But having
composed a new Book, which no man could claim a share in, while it remained
mine own, and in mine own power to make public or no; and proposing the same
to his Majesty, briefly and plainly, without pretense of any by-respect) I
obtained a free and gracious grant to make such benifit thereof as usually
heretofore in like cases, his Majesty has vouchsafed unto others: yea such as
the Stationers would have made of it without a privilege if so be I had left
it in their power.

Nor can any disadvantage come to the Commonwealth thereby, seeing the price is
lymited to be such as* themselves sell books for, like chargeable of the same
kind. Besides, no man's trade or ymployment, is thereby usurped upon, hindered, or
taken away: but many are rather set on work in several professions, more
then before. Insomuch that there can be no public grieuance truly named or
probably pretended which that privilege is cause of: except it be a grief to
some few Idle drones, to behold the laborious lyving upon the sweat of their
own brows.

Indeed The Booke-sellers do peremptorily challeng an interest in every man's
labor of this kind; and a worshipful Lawyer was lately pleased on their
behalf to say, that the benifite arisinge from the sale of books, was their
ancient, and lawful birthright. But if his Masterships Judgment be noe better
in other cases, I hope to bless my self from his opinions. For unless he can
prove, the Author has sold them his birthright (as often he does, for less
then a mess of pottage) he being the elder brother, the right first (by his
own law that he professes) falls unto him. And there are other heirs (but
of a collateral line) the Printer, and Booke-binder that claim just title
before the booke-seller: at leastwise may in Gauilekind be coheires with him;
yea indeed, the meanest of them doubly deserves the better right. But it may
be our learned Counselor, was a kentish man, where in some place, the youngest
brother inherites by custom of Borough English, and so thought perhapps that
the like teneur might be peculier unto the Booke-sellers trade. Therefore as I
am willing, his ignorance should excuse him, so I hope, all Authors shall be
excused, and and vnblame worthy, if having their proper rightes incroched upon,
they seek repossession by the royal power.

To that purpose is my privilege; which the Sationers have not only called in
question before the high Court of Parliament (whose Censure I shall be ready to
abide with good contentment) but by many clamors, and by a multytud of papers
in print also, scandalized the Kings Grauntas, an oppression; and cast upon me
the unjust imputation of a base Monopolist: whereas I doubt not but I shall be
able to prove that his Majesty has vouchsafed me nothing, but what was, IVS
REGALE, and in his Lawful power to conferr; and that I enjoy nothing by virtue
of the Privilege he granted me, but what I am honestly capable to receive.
For, if his Majesty has not a legal power to confirm unto me that which is
naturally mine own, By what right then, do they and others enjoy priueledges
for those books wherein every man has as good property as they* Or if his
Majesty has not Authority to command the addition of a few leaves (for Gods
glory, and the peoples edification) to such a book, as has allowance from the
Prerogative Royal only; Then, either the Stationers are very presumptious, in
anexing the singing Psalms and Robert Wisdoms Songs to the Bible and book of
Common prayer, at their own pleasures, and for their own profit: Or else their
Prerogative is more absolute then the Kings.

For, the Stationers do not only reap the Benefit of diverse books by virtue
of his Majesty's Graunts, in such wise as the same is vouchsafed unto me, but
in a far larger manner, and (acording as they execut the^) to the publkie
injury many ways. Yea, by the laws and Orders of their Corporation, they can
and do setle upon the particular members thereof, a prpetuall interest in such
Books as are Registered by them at their Hall, in their several Names: and are
secured in taking the full benefit of those books, better then any Author can be
by virtue of the Kings Grant, notwithstanding their first Coppies were
purloyned from the true owner, or imprinted without his leave.

Moreover, they annexe Additions to books formerly imprinted, and increase the
pryses of them accordingly, though y^ matter be altogether impertine^t. And yet
if the King do but conferr upon some Author the sole printing of a tenth part
of his own labors, (which he might still have reserved in his own power) Or
but please (for the Reverence and practice of devotion) to command the
addition of a few leaves to some book authorized by the State only: they
immediately break out into an vproare, as if the King had dealt unjustly with
them; As if the Author had committed Sacrilege: and as if the Commonwealth
had been ready to sink under the weight of that burden.

Good God! how many dung-botes full of fruitles Volumnes do they yearly foyst
upon his Majesty's subjects, by lying Titles, insinuations, and disparaging of
more profitable Books! how many hundred reames of foolish profane and sensles
Ballads do they quarterly disperse abroad? And how many thousand pounds do
they yearly pick out of the purses of ignorant people, who refer the Choice
of their books to the discreations and honesties of these men! by that means
ridding their warehouses from heaps of trasla and refuse, which might else have
layne by the walls till the Ratts had eaten it? how unconscionably is the
Subject by these vsages robbed both of his money and time? how often in stead of
being bettered, are their manners corrupted and their affections drawn away by
lewd and wanton Poemes? how unchristianly is their loyalty sometime shaken by
seditious Pamphlets? Yea, how da^gerously is their faith and religion perverted
by those many heretical and schismatic Treatises, which they from time to
time secretly or openly disperse through his Majesty's Dominyons.

How unfortunate am I (as some think) that haueing performed a good work; do
nevertheless hear it exclaimed upon as a friuelous labor, and stand accused
for oppressing the people (because a few Hymns containing the praises of God
are commanded to be divulged the most convenient way) whilst such abuses as
these before mentioned, and many of a higher nature, may be winked at in my
Accusers: Yet, I say rather, how happy am I and how much bound to praise Gods
mercy, who couers the multitudes of my transgressions and still bringes me
into public question for such Actions only, as shall upon Trial become mine
honor, and to the shame of my Traducers. For, I am confident that I shall in due
time be delivered from that, and from all other scandalous imputations which
the world has laid to my charg. And therefore whether it be now or hereafter,
I am indifferent; and place such assurance in gods love that I can stay his
leisure.

I procured the Kings Grant (being the possibility of a temporal blessing)
by moving for it, where I ought, and as I ought to seek the same, without
entreating any man's furthera^ce; and if it be not in every particular just and
convenient, that I should enjoy the same; yt shall go, and I will venture an
utter vndoeing rather then make use of any man's friendship to detain it. For,
God (who has hitherro provided for me in such a manner as best befitted both
my temporal and spiritual Condition) will I know, continue his provident
care of me; while I can have grace to be thankful, and retain the resolution
to do my lawful endeavor. Howsoever (let the world conceit of me as it
pleases) I scorn to enjoy my life, much more any privilege to the common
prejudice: and am able to demonstrate (as shall hereafter appear) that my
book and the Kings Grant have been maliciously traduced without cause.

Yet, the Stationers have not only scandalized the said grant unjustly, and
laid the imputation of impertinencie to the Book of Hymns without cause; but
feareing (as it seems) lest their publication would disco^uer their false
dealing, and gain me and my labor some good approbation in spite of their
malice; They have (as I said before) practiced also, or rather conspired, as
much as in them lies, to hinder the lawful sale of my Book. For, they provide
them not in their shoppes as they are commanded by Authority, nor furnish
themselves with those as with other books, notwithstanding they may take them
upon trust, and make profitt of them before payment is required at their hands,
being content somewhat to hinder themselves that they may disadvantage me. And
to excuse this injury they give out, contrary to their own knowledges, that if
they take my books from me, none will fetch them out of their hands, which
they falsely pretend, merely to dispariage that which I hope they shall never
be able to bring out of credit, till they have lost their own. For, they are
daily so much enquired after, that had the Booke-sellers preferred them to sale
as they would have done if the coppie had been their own, twenty thousand
might have been dispersed, long ere this time. Yea if they had either any loyal
respect to the Kings pyous command; or love to the practice of Devotion, or
but that humanity which is to be found among Infidells; they might have deulged
a hundred in place of every ten^ which are yet dispersed. For, though few
know where to get the said Hymns, because they are seldom to be had among
the Booke-sellers; yet thousands of them have been bought up by gentlemen and
others, who (having enquired out, with much difficulty, where to find them)
report to me how much I am abused among the Stationers, and how hardly they
cann forbear from using them uncivilly that come to ask for my Book: with
diverse other particular Discourtesies.

But because those vsages do demonstrate their own evil disposition rather
then disparage the said Book; I will omit to perticularize those many
discourtesies which I am that way offered, and proceed to answer such other
objections as they and their abetters have framed to bring both my Hymns and
me, into contempt.

And first, they object (forsooth) that they are not worthy to be annexed with
their Psalms in meeter, in respect of that insufficiency which they have
discovered in my expressions. For, so harsh and improper do my lines appear to
these iuditious censurers, and their chaplins; that some compare them to DOD
the fillkemans late ridiculous translation of the Psalms, which was by
authority worthily condemned to the fire. Some term them in scorn* WITHERS
SONNETS; and some, among them, the better to express what opinion they have of
their pious use, are pleased to promise that they will procure the ^aring
Ballett singer with one leg, to sing and self them about the City* which base
speeches proceeding from those skoffing Is^alites, I could well enough brook
in respect of mine own person* o^ me^t* For, there is so much evil, even in
the best of my actions, that contempt is the fairest reward, which they can
justly challenge: Yet, when I call to mind with what Christian intentions I
was emploie^ (...) those Hymns, and how many hours at ^ight I spent about
them, whilst, it may be* my Traducers, were either sleeping out their ty^, o^
(...) employed* when I consider also how^ many (...) and religious men have
approved the^, and how much their pious use might further the reverence and
practice of Devotion to the praise of God; it greeues me that there should be
in this nation any so wicked as to oppose so Christian a work, to so friuelous
an end. But, when I remember, by whom, and by what Authority that book was
allowed, and commanded to be made publik; and withal, what mystery of
iniquity it is that has conspired against the sa^e; me thinks it is an
Injury not to be tolerated*

Is it reason, they who live by books, should be permitted to abuse the
Authors of their liuelyhood? Or is it seemly that those who (as I said
before) are but the pedlers of books, should become their censurers; and by
consequent, both the censurers and deprauers of that Authority which allowed
them? If this be tolerated, the fairest draughts of Apelles, shall be daily
subject to the foolish critiscismes of those arrogant cobblers; and the State
shall not be able ^re long to publish any thing, but what they have a fancy to
approve. For, to this pass it is already come, that whatsoever the State
dislykes shall be imprinted and devulged by them (though both absurd and
sca^dalous) with twice more seriousnes, then any book lawfully commanded:
but, let it tend to schism* and they will disperse more underhand in one
week, then the Royal Authority shall be able to divulge in a year, toward the
settling of unity in the Church.

I know not what it is which should make my book of Hymns appear so
ridiculus unto the^* or so unworthy to be annexed to the English Psalmbook, as
they pretend. In respect of the matter it cannot justly be excepted against*
for, a great part thereof, is canonical Scripture; and the rest also, is both
agreeable thereunto in every particular, and consonant to the most approved
Discipline of the Church of England. So that (how sque^ishly soever some of
their stomachs brook it) they being allowed by Authority, are as fit, I
trust, to keep company* with David's Psalms, as Robert Wisdoms TVRK^ and
POPE; and those other apocryphal Songs and prayers, which, the stationers add
to the Psalmebooke for their more advantage: Sure I am, that if their additions
shall be allowed of by the most voices, yet mine shall be approved of before
those, by the best Judgments.

Now, as for the manner of expression which I have used, I hope it is such as
no just exception cann be taken thereunto; seeing I have (as well in that which is
of my own Invention, as in the Translations) used that simplicity of speech
which (best) becomes y^ subject, without affectatio^ to those poetical
phrases and fancies, which (being commendable in other things) would have
obscured the majesty of those inventions. To this I had so much regard
(especially in my translations of the Canonical Hymns) that, if I mistake
not, I have as naturally, and as playuely expressed the sense of them, as most
prose Translations have done. And if those indifferent men, who know the Poesy
and power of the English tongue may be my Judges, they will censure my
expressions to be such, as shall neither be obscure to the meanest capacityes,
nor contemptible to the best Judgments, but (observing a middle way) best
becoming that purpose, for which they were intended.

I did not leap on a sudden, or irreuerently into this employment* but,
haueing consumed almost y^ years of an Apprentishipp, in studies of this
kind, I entered therinto conscionably and in the fear of God: nor have I
proceeded without his assistance, as the difficulties and discouragments which
I have passed through, do witness unto me. For, if it be well weighed, how full
of short sentences, and sudden breakings off, those scriptures are; how
frequently, these Particles, FOR, BUT, and such lik, (which are graceful in the
Original Text) will seem to obscure the dependancy of Sense, in the English
phrase, if the power of their signification be not heedfully observed in those
places: How ha^sh the music will be, if the chief Pauses be not*carefully
reduced unto the same place in the line throughout the whole Hymn, which they
have in the first Stanza; how many differences must be observed between
Lyricke-verse and that which is composed for reading only: How the Translater
is tied, not to make choice of those fashion Stanzaes which are easiest, to
expres the matter in, but to keep that with which he first began: how he is
bound, not only to the sense (according to the liberty used in other
Translationes) but to the very words, or words of the same power with those
used in our allowed Interpretations: Lastly, how prec^se he must be, when he is
forced to express any sentence by circumlocution, to labor still to retain a
relish of the holy phrase in his expressions: I say, if all these circumstances
be well considered, (and how difficult they make it to close up every Stanza
with a period, or some such point that the voice may decently pause there) I am
parswaded a work of this nature could not have been persisted in, to this
conclusion, by a man haueing somany weaknesses, and discouragments as I have
had; unless the Almighty had been with me. Nor can I believe that the devil
would have raised up so many maliciously to oppose the same, if it had not
tended to Gods honor.

But sure, no man will grudge the annexing of the Book of Hymns to our
metricall Psalms now used, in regard of any faultiness in their expression,
if they consider the meannesse of that Translation. For, though some (of no
mean degree) are very violent for the mayntenance and continuance of their
old Version, pleading (as the papists do for many of their trumperyes) a long
prescription, in steed of better arguments: yet I know it to be so much to
blame, that no man of understanding can sing many of those Psalms, but with
trouble to his devotion. And I dare undertake to demonstrate, that they are not
only full of absurdityes, s^oeloscismes, improprietyes, non-se^ce, and
impertinent circumlocutions (to more then twice the length of their originalles
in some places) but that there are in the^ many expressio^s also* ^uite beside
if not quite contrary, to the meaning of the Text. Which I would not thus
openly have declared, but that even school boys perceive it, though some (that
would be thought wiser) do ignorantly or wilfully, protest against an
alteration of our singing Psalms. Excuse me I beseech you, if I seem a little
too plain in discovering the faultines of that whereof so many are ouerweening:
for, I do it not to disparage the pious endeauours of those who took pains
in that Translation; but rather, commending their laborious and Christian
intention, do acknowledge, that (considering the times they lived in, and of
what quallity they were) they made so worthy an attempt; as may justly shame
us who came after, to see it no better seconded during all the flourishing
times which have followed their troublesome Age: especially, seeing how
curiously our language and expressiones are refined in our triuiall Discourses.

This has given the papist, the Atheist and the Libertyne occasion to skoffe
at our christian exercises, and troubles the devotion of many a religious man,
who being desirous to sing with his understanding in the congregations, does
often (before he is aware) loose the sense of the Prophet: yea and sometimes
fall upon direct nonsense, among those many impertynent circumlocutions, and
independancies which he is (for Rymes sake) compelled to wander through in that
Translation.

Nevertheless, some I know will be obstinate in defense of their oulde
Meeter* and I shall seem to the^, as one that had presumpteously laid an
imputation upon our Church, and irreverently taxed what her Authority had
commanded; which, I thank God, I am not guiltye of. For, I well enough know
(and your Reuerences can witness it) that those metrical Psalms were never
commanded to be used in Divine service, or in our public congregations, by
any Canon or Ecclesiastical constitution, though many of the vulger be of that
opinion: But (whatsoever the stationers do in their Title page pretend to that
purpose) they being first allowed for private devotion only, ^ept into publik
use, by toleratio^ rather the^ command. Yea, custom has been hitherto their
chief Authority: and therefore we may not only lay open their defects to a
good purpose (without just blame to our selves or scandal to the Church) but I
hope chang them also without offense, when a better translation shall come to
light. In the mean time there will be no reason, I am sure, why those should
condemn my expressiones while they approve those measures we have hitherto
made use of, in our Devotions.

But, lest the work should be able to justify it self, in spite of their
detraction, my Aduersarys do pick personal quarrels also: alleging that I
have indecently intruded upon the Divine calling; and that my performances
being but the fruits of a private spirit are therefore vain and unwarrantable.
Yea (if we may believe the stationers) many zealous Ministers have taxed me for
meddling with a work of that nature, affyrming that it was a task fitter for a
Divine then for me: and so bitterly have many of them (as I hear) censured me
for it, in their private conferences, that I have good cause to suspect, it was
rather envy, then any thing else which induced most of them to be of that
opinion. If it be a work so proper to a Divine, that noe man else ought to
have meddled with it, I would some of them had taken it in hand, who give me so
little thanks for my labor, that we might have seen with what spirit they are
guided. I wonder what divine calling HOPKINS and STERNHOLD had more then I
have, that their metricall Psalms may be allowed of rather then my Hymns.
Surely, if to have been Grooms, of the privy Chamber, were sufficient to
quallify them; that profession which I am of, may as well fit me for what I
have undertaken; who haueing first laid the foundation of my studies in one of
our famous Universities, have ever since builded thereon, toward the erecting
of such fabrics, as I have now in hand.

But, I would gladly know by what rule those men discern of spirits, who
condemn my endeavor as the work of a private spirit. The time was, men did
judge the tree by his fruit, but now they will judge the friute by the Tree.
If I have expressed any thing repugnant to the Analogy of y^ Christian Faith;
or irreuerently opposed the orderly and allowed Discipline; or ^issented in any
point from that spirit of Verity which breathes through the holy Catholic
Church; then let that which I have done be taxed for the work of a private
spirit. Or if it may appear, that I have indecently intruded my self to
intermedle with those mysteryes of our Christian Sanctuarye, which the God of
Order has by his divine Law reserved for those who have, according to his
Ordinance, a special calling thereunto; Then indeed let me be taxed as
deserving both punishment and reproof.

But, if making Conscience of my Actions, I observed that seemly distance
which may make yt apeare, I intruded not upon ought appropriated to y^ outward
ministry; If, like an honest hearted Gibeonit I have but a little extraordinarily
labored, to how wood and draw water, for the spiritual Sacrifizes; If,
according to the art of the Apothecary, I have composed a sweet perfume to
offer up to God, in such manner as is proper to my own Faculty only, and then
brought yt to those unto whom the consecration thereof belonges; If, keeping
my own place, I have labored for the building up of Gods house as I am bound
to do, in offering up of that which God has given me, and making use with
modesty of those gyfts which were bestowed on me to that purpose: If I say,
the case be so, what blame worthy have I done? why should those disciples which
follow Christ in a nearer place, forbid us (from doing good in his name) who
follow him, farther off? why should they with Ioshuah forbid Eldad and Medad
from prophesying, seeing every good Christian wishes with Moses, that all Gods
people were prophets, and that he would give his spirit to them all.

If I could have believed that for me to enter into Orders would have made me
either the more profitable instrument of Gods glory, or caused my labors to
have been the more holy or the more edifyinge; what had let me to procure
that aduantag? Noe man living more honors that calling (or would think himself
more honored) by being admitted therinto, the^ I. yea, often have I been urged
unto it, and my possibillityes of outward preferments that way, are not y^
least. nevertheless, I a^ not only privy to much unworthiness, and many
insufficiencies in my self, justly disenabling me of that function; but my
mind perswads me also, that God has appointed me to serve him in some other
course. There are diverse guyftes, and diuersitys of callings; and by the gift
God has given him, every man may guess at his calling, as the soldier may
know in what part of the battle to range himself, by those Arms his Captain
appointed him unto: and that place he ought to make good, until he find
himself furnished and authorized for another Station.

I will, as the Apostle counsels me, strive and coue^ for the best gifts so
far as God shall enable me: but in what place soever I make use of them (I
think) I may be indifferent. For, every good gift of God may be employed with
advantage in any vocation, one time or other. A common soldier haueing the
experience of a commander, may by advising and directing his fellows in
familliarity, and by keep^ing his place with the^ as a companion; find
opportunity perhaps, to instruct them better in some military discipline, then
the office of a Captayn will permit. And so fares it in the christian
warfarr. Yea, even I my self have many times found occasion by means of my
habit and outward fashion of life, to effect some good which I should hardly
have brought to pass by a more strict profession. And as some cheerful
laborer, by carrying stones and mortar (by encouraging his fellows, and giving
now and then a word of direction) may further the building of a house more then
many others, and winn great commendation in that employment; who would be
rather a let (if not the ruin of it) if he should take upon him to lay the
stones; So, I that have as a common labourer seriously and some way profitably
endeavored; presuming into the place of a master workman, may become less
^eruiceable, and peradventure a trouble to the business which I thought to
further.

Let it not therefore, I beseech you, be an imputation unto me, that I have
performed a better work the^ my calling seems to oblige me unto. For, though
some have taxed me for medlinge with that which seems more properly to belong
to their profession; it is odds but they are other while as busy in some
employments which would better have beseemed a man of my quallity, then one of
their cote; and therefore, let us excuse and forgive one another. That which I
have done, when it was my own; was subject to any man's censure: but, now
Authority has consecrated it, and delivered the same forth for public use; yt
is noe more mine, but the work of Authority which they deprave.

Let al my writings privately or publikly dispersed, be examined from the first
Epygra^ that ever I composed, until the publishing of these Hymns now
traduced by my adversaries; and if there can be found out one line sauouring of
such a mind, as may give cause to suspect I undertook that task, without
that true Christian aim which I ought to have had; or if the performance it
self shall make it appear that I proceeded without due preparation; or if you
can have any probable testimony that throughout the course of my life, or by
any one sa^ndalous act, I have given that cause of offense as may disparage my
studis, or trouble their devotions to whose use my Hymns are tendered; let
those things be laid to my charge, until I find means to disprooue or wash
away such imputations. Sure I am, no man can attempt such a work with a heart
more desireous to be rectified, or more fearful to offend by a negligent
performance; and therefore if I wanted an outward calling thereunto, (which
this Reverent Asse^bly may supply) yet I hope I had that inward calling which
is beyond the power of any to conferr.

But, observe the malice of the Stationers; they are not content to smother my
book as much as may be, by denying to give it utterance according as the King
has commanded, and as by their trade they ought to do; or to disparage it,
by striving to make me seem unfitting or insufficient for a work of that
nature: but, to countenance their detractions, they pretend, as I said before,
that the Lo: Archb: with other of your LLos: have disliked my Hymns, and that
my Lo: of Canterbury would this Parliament take order to suppress them. I
cannot but wonder at the boldness and impudence of these fellows, that dare
publish such improbable untruths, to the disparagement of honorable
personages. For, many of your Reuerences have received those Hymns at my
hands, and returned me that good respect, which has been my encouragement; and
I cannot think, any possessing those reverent places, would have so much
forgotten humanity as to have condemned my labors in such fashi^ as those give
out. It cannot be thought, they censured them upon the Stationers reports;
seeing that were an inexcusable leuity; and if they examined it, me thinks my
pains, my pyous intention, and the good use which may be made of that book,
would have moved them to counsel me how to amend that which was found amiss,
rather then to disparage my whole work, for a few ouersights.

Can I suppose they who should encourage men in their pyous studies, (and be
glad to see that we are able in any measure to exercise our facultyes toward
the setting forth of Gods praise) would be so harsh, to give me hard censures
for my pains; because, forsooth, I have not answered their expectations, in
some one t^iuiall point? Sure, this were not that tenderness which might be
expected in the Fathers of the Church; nor do I believe that any of your LL^s:
would use that severity toward me: for then, if I had no^ better comfortes
then such critescisme affords, those who w^ their time altogether in idleness,
and abuse their facultyes to vainest purposes, are in (...) ^n I.

Now, that they have abused my Lo: Grace of (...), by (...) his dislike of my
book, (to the disparagement thereof) I shall make yt very apparent. For, his
Grace took notise that my book was perused and allowed by his Majesty
himself; and worthily approved his Royal judgment both in Divinity and
Poetry, the Stationers being present: he was informed likewise, concerning
every particular circumstance in the Grant, and how it was his Majesty's
pleasure my book should be anexed to the metricall Psalms; and thereupon both
illustrated the reasonableness thereof to the said stationers, and gave them
and me incouragment to proceed to composition touching the same: moreover, the
Canonical Hymns haueing been allowed by the Lo: Bp: of London (and part of
them imprinted for an assay) I delivered to my L: Archbs: own hands a copy of
them almost four year ago; since when (about two years after) they, being
imprinted altogether, passed without contradiction, even to the diuvlging of a
full impression: and lastly haueing an addition of spiritual Songs, for the
obseruable times, they came forth altogether, authorized as well by the Kings
particular approbation, as by the common allowance appointed by the State. Yea
my Lo: of Canterbury himself, received one of those books from me upon
Michelmas day last, and, giving me order to alter one word only, has permitted
all the rest to have free passage without controwle.

Is it likely then, that my Lord will so iniure the Kings judgment and his
own, as to disparage in private, what they have publicly allowed; or secretly
combine with the stationers to oppose the Kings royal command, in that which
he himself, has approved reasonable? Is it likely his Grace would so
dishonor the reverent Authority of his place, as to make the stationers or
bookebinders his instruments of suppressing my book, in such a scandalous
fashion; consideringe what power he has given him, to take order and reform
in matters of that nature? or is it likely that his Lp: had so little
compassion and respect, as not to consider what faultiness might be in my
Hymns, or what inconvenience might arise by my Grant, until I had bestowed
(besides my pains) so much cost in printing them, that he might at one blow,
make frustrate my studies, and quite overthrow my estate both together? Whilst
there was hope of a composition between me and the stationers* the Priueledg
was no Greeua^ce, neither was there any fault found with my Hymns; and is it
likly that since our disgreement, malice and detraction should find out those
escapes, which the eye of Authority could not discover? Is it likely my Lo:
would ^e so partial as to pass over all my pains, and unquestionable
expressions without regard; and finding but one place doubtful, (as easy to
be amended as found fault withal) that he would have sought to cast away my
whole endeavor for that ouersighte which I was able and ready, with all
humility to reform? Or is it likly he reputed of so little co^seque^ce, what y^
King was pleased to peruse and grant a priueledg for; that neither his private
devotion, nor his public care, would move him to consider what good or
inconvenience might succeed upon the publication thereof, until the
stationers had for their own ends awakened him? Or if it were considered; can
I think he would have been silent until it might be objected to my public
disgrace?

It cannot be, but that they have abused my Lds: Grace and diverse other
reverend personages in their reports. For, such usage of me were not
answereable to y^ reverence and pyety of their callings; and if religious
endeavors should ever find such encouragmentes; there were more hope of thrift
(to the worldwarde) by making Ballades for the company of stationers, then
could be by composing of Hymns and spiritual Songs for the honor of God. I
hope no man in authority enuies me the honor of my emploime^t* nor grudges me
that poor profit which my labors may honestly bring in. For, though it be
no^ mean content to a christian, (whose soul is touched with the
understanding of spiritual comfortes) to be an instrument of Gods glory; yet,
that which I have attempted, mak^ me in regard of one of you, noe better then
the meanest servant attendinge on the outward ceremonies, is in comparison of
him, that has y^ most holy mysteries of the Church committed to his
dispensation. And as for the benefit likely to arise unto me from that I have
done; I know not what it may prove hereafter, but hitherto I have been
acquainted with nothing save the privation of it; and have been so
preposterously rewarded for my best labors, that if all those who are thought
to censure me, had met with such discouragments as I have done; it is tenn to
one, but some of them now (flourishing in eminent places) had sat as low as I
do at this day.

But, if it shall please my Lo: of Canterbury: to pardon them for abusing his
name in the disparagement of my Hymns; I shall also forgive them. For, being
warrantable in themselves, no man's Authority shall be able to dishonor them: nor
cann his eminence excuse them, if they be not iustifyable in their own nature.
I will therefore proceed to answer those two perticulers, which are
principally objected against my book of Hymns, by the Stationers, and their
Abet^ers.

First; they impudently give out, that the Song of Solomon is not fit to be
expressed in Lyricke verse: and that my expression thereof, is in some places
obsce^e. Which, as I perswad my self, I shall be able to disprove; and show that
(upon due examination) y^ modesty of my Version, with the conueniency of
publishing that Song shall appear so evident, as will make them ashamed of
their malice and ignorance* who oppose it.

For, whatsoever I am in my outward appearance, I neither consulted with flesh
and blood nor with mine own fancy. when I meddled with that sacred Mystery:
and therefore (seeing there be those who do not only cavil against the
publycation of the Canticles in Lyticke Verse, but vnciuelly censure also, with
what mind I was employed on that subject) I could wish that, before they pass
further in their judgments upon that book, or me; they would a little judge
themselves, and impartially examine their own hearts, whether it be not
spleen or envy which has moved them, to carp at my labors. If it had not
been so, I should have been tymely and Christianly admonished, rather then
so inhumanly traduced, as I have been, where I was not to make answer for my
self: yea, I having professed so much willingness to harken to instruction,
some of them would have thought me worthy the speaking unto in a matter of that
consequence; and there would have been used such sweet mildness in the
reproof, with such respect of my labor and expenses, and such care to have
preserved my credit and Christian patience in the remedy of my oversight, as
would have witnessed from what good spirit it proceeded. And, thus I shall
expect to be dealt withal, if: Authority shall please to call into question my
Performances.

But, from my Traducers what good usage can I expect, seeing they have not
spared God, but blasphemously termed the expressions of his holy spirit
Obscene? For, this some of the most eminent of the stationers have not blushed
in public to affirm, in the most immodest terms; whereupon many of the
inferiors of their fraternity, do (instead of using my book to that Christian
use for which it was published) carry the same about them purposly to disparage
it. Yea, at their Tavern tiplings, and in all companies whereinto they can
thrust themselves, they seek occasion to posses their hearers, that my book is
unworthy to be received among good people: And the place (which to their
understanding is so offensive) is in the ninth Canticle, where I render, THE
KNITTING OF THE THIGHS, what the Latyne translates, IVNCTVRAE FEMORVM. and our
English Version, THE IOINTS of the Thighs.

I beseech you, what Obscenity is in that, more then in the holy Ghosts own
words? To the clean all things are clean. And I protest before God (at
whose throne I shall be judged for it, if I lie) I do not remember that I had
one immodest thought (so much as cast into me) by means of any expression in
that holy Song, during the time I was busied thereabout. But, with those clean
thoughts, I contemplated the loveliness of Gods workemanshipp, in the
several parts of the body; and there withal, so temperately meditated those
passions and passages, which are incident to an honest natural affection;
that, by contemplating those material obiectes, I raised my understanding to
more then usual apprehensions of that unspeakable love, which is between the
Divine and human nature in general; and between Jesus Christ and my own
soul in particular. And, as I have been, more then ordinarily apprehensiue of
the contentments and discontentments incident to a natural love, (lymited
within the bounds of Chastity) So; that heavenly Song, hitherto indiscreetly
neglected (and by the malice of the Devil judged dangerous to be made common)
taught me to be much the more affected with those kindnesses, and unkindness,
which I felt between God and my self. Yea, so was I moved thereby, as it cann
neither be expressed by me, nor conceived by those, who have irreuerent opinions
of the means God has prepared to beget those apprehensions in their souls.

Those that acquire their Divinity, merely by reading books, will persuade us,
out of some few weak Authorityes, perhapps, that the Song of Solomon is not to
be read of young men; but by those only, in whom the carnal affections are quit
mortified. which (the scope of the holyghost being well considered) is just as
if they should tell us, Fire were to be made, rather with Ashes then with wood.
But, he that has gained his humble knowledge, both by hearing the Church, and
observing the power which Gods word has shown upon him, in his own
affections; is persuaded that heavenly Poem was composed and preserved for the
pyous use of al men; and principally for young lovers, inflamed with a natural
love: that by their carnal affections they might ascend, and be made capeable
of that which is spiritual. So, other Allegoryes, are chiefly intended to stir
up those who are subject to other Affections. For, little would it prevail
with an old man, whose heart is settled upon riches, and such like, to
illustrat the pleasure he might receive in his communion with God, by setting
before him the mutual contentments enterchanged between two affectionat Lovers;
seeing those passages are usually derided by the elder sort. And less would it
move that young man who is delighted in beauty, and the perfections of his
belooued, to express unto him the spiritual happiness, by Tytles, Treasures,
or the profits and pleasures of a vineyarde; which he meanly regards.

I humbly desire your RRces, that my Christian labor in prepareing that Song
for a more frequent use, may not be made void, or become despised by those who
speak evil of that they understand not. The dispisednesse of my person and
quallity, may at first appearance, easily draw a rash censure upon my actions
(before due consideration) as it has often done: And their opinion who oppose
the publication of the Canticles in Lyricke Verse, carries such a formal show
of reverence to that holy Poem, and has, at first sight, such a shaddowe of
pyous respect (by reason of the spareing use which the Church has heretofore
seemed to make of those Hymns) that it may, at a blush, deceive the
understandings of good and learned men. But if they take leisure to examine
the true state of ye Question, they will be able to satisfy both themselves and
others, against that fruitleesst opinion; which being mayntayned will open
passage again or their heresy, who deny unto the lay people the free use of
holy Scripture.

Those who please to observe with good purpose my general preface to that
Song, and my Arguments before each particular Canto, shall find how necessary
it is to be presented to an universal consideration; and perceive whether I
have spiritually, or carnally meditated thereon, and whether I have been
guided by the interpretations of the Catholic Church, or by mine own fancy.
If I have any way ^rred, I am heartily sorry for yt, and (humbly desireing
pardon) am ready to give satisfaction, both by publik acknowledgment, of my
oversight, and in takeinge away, or reforming what is amiss. If I have don
well; God forgive them whose fleshly understandings have abused my good
intentions; and I wish them the spirit of true charity, that they may beecome
more capeable of that celestial Love Song. For, the sweet contentmentes which
I tasted in contemplateinge the mysteryes therein contained, were somewhat
interrupted, through the care I had of them, whose ignorance, or wilful
blindness would deprive both themselves and others of those comfortes. And I
pray God those that speak irreuerently of that Song, or hinder the publycation
thereof (in such wise as may best rouse up the spiritual affections) may repent
themselves thereof, least they come within danger of that curse those are
lieable unto, who add, or take away from the book of God. For, though some
foolish Verse-haters (who are wise men in their own opinions) have
indiscreetly passed their censures against translating the Canonical Hymns
into our English Numbers; I shall be able not only to make proof, upon good
occasion, that they may be as truly converted into our meeter as into Prose;
and that our English measures are capable of expressing them with as much
power, and gravity; but to demonstrat also, that Verse was first invented and
used altogether in setting forth the praises of God* and that those things
which were originally penned in measured word^s* cannot be so properly nor so
usefully expressed in Prose, as in our Verse.

It would too much ^nlarge this hasty discourse if I should deliver here all I
could infer to that purpose; or insist upon all the reasons which I could give
in defense of giving way to the free use of the Song of Solomon in our English
meeter. But, under correction, and submitting my opinions* to your better
Judgments, I will in brief, answer some of those reasons which I have heard
brought against the common use thereof; that it may appear I am not altogether
without consideration, in what I have done.

The principal causes objected for restrayning of that Song, are three. First,
least it should be abused by profane or indis^reet people; Secondly, because
the Jewish Rabbines have restrained it from their Laicty, as unfit for the
vulger; and lastly, by reason the Christian Church (as they think) has
neither by command nor by practice, warranted the same.

It is true, that the Canticles, may be, and are often abused, (yea and the
rest of the holy scriptures) even by those who by restrayning them, seek to
prevent their abuse, as well as by others. But God forbid, that such as would
rightly apply them, should be deprived of their most comfortable use, because
sensual men will turn that grace of God into wantonness. By that rule, the
use of most things should be taken away: for, many men abuse their liberty in
that which is most lawful: yea, the whole book of holy scriptures should be
sealed up, because many have heritically applied them; seeing the same may be
alleged for denyinge the use of both Testamentes, which is objected for
restrayning the Canticles.

The word of God loses no worth, by any man's abusing of it; but he that
abuses the same, harmeth himself only, and them whose own corruptions have
made that the savor of death unto the^, which is life in it own nature: and
whose power, if it be hidden, is hidden to those only that perish. Seeinge we
permit the rest of Gods book to be read of all without exception, and even
this song in the Prose; why should it be more offensive in the meeter? since
Divinity and the praises of God, may be proved (as I have said before) to be
the most ancient and most proper subjects of Verse. If I have not expressed the
meaning of the Original so truly, or so gravely, as the prose has don; let
it be declared in what pertituler, and I cann amend the oversight, as easily as
it may be found. For, whatsoever sense is given me in prose, I can as fully
and as plainly express, again in measured words. Yea, I doubt not, but I
shall be able to justify that my Metricall Version of the Canticles, is as
proper, as modest, and as perspicuous as most prose Translations; and that
those who accuse it of Obscenity (haueing unclean thoughts themselves) do
rather accuse God then me, and blasphemously disparage the wisdom of the holy
ghost. But, noe wonder: to the fylthy all things are filthy; even the purity
of God seems uncleanness to them; and their preposterous discretion is ashamed
of his prudence.

But, some object it is unfitting that Mystery should be exposed to the view
and perusal of children; and I say also that it is as unseemly the childrens
bread should be devoured of dogs, or that pearls should be cast before swine
Nevertheless these things do often fall out so, without remedy: and pity it
were that bread should be kept altogether from the children, because they
sometime spoil or play childishly with that, which should feed and norrish
them. The story of ye incest of that Lot, of Thamer, and diverse other passages
in holy scripture, are more subject to abuse then the Canticles; yet clildren
are permitted to read them, because we know not by what warrant we may
divide them from the book of God. The best course therefore, is to instruct
them with what mind to pervse them, or to prefixe such warnings before those
places, as I set before my Versio^ of Solomon's song. For, there I have adjured
al Readers, under pain of Gods heavy indignation, to be wary with what mind
and to what end, they shall make use of those excellent Hymns: which I am
persuaded, will be a means to make them less abused hereafter. The truth is,
they cannot be more profaned by children, then the whole Book of God is by
those that peruse it negligently; nor so much as the most easy and most
useful passages thereof, are, by those presumptious Libertynes, and scoffing
Atheists, who make application of them according to their own humors. For,
though an ignorant simplicity, makes children sometime misunderstand such
things as they read* or frutlesly pass them over, yet they do not wilfully
pervert them to wicked purposes; And therefore, God does many times give such a
blessing even to that which in their childhood they perused without
understanding, as that many times it is a means of bringing it the better into
memory (to their great profit and comfort) in riper years.

No holy scripture, or canon of our Church, has commanded the keepeing of
this, or that part of Gods Book, from public use: and therefore why should
any dissallowe free passage to those Hymns in their proper kind? seeing noe
man knows by what portion of his word, the Divine providence shall please to
call his children unto a true understanding of their duties? who can tell, but
that which is restrained, may be with held from such as would receive
needful comfortes thereby, as well as from those who will* abuse it? One
time or another, we may be enlightened by what is for a season obscure unto
us; and that sentence which was an occasion of stumbling, may be a means of
rising again to more strength being better understood. Yea, (I persuade my
self) it is less inconvenient, that a thousand carnal men should add to their
confusion by the abuse of Gods grace, then that one of his children should want
any comfort offered in his word.

Much more might be said to this purpose; even so much, that (if the likelihood
of truth deceive not) it would make every good christian fearful to oppose
the commendable use of any part of Gods word upon those weak foundations which
fleshly policy has laid: but this I hope will suffice in this place. And, as
for those exceptions made against the kind of Measure which I have used, and
some particular expressions; I perceive they have been flirted out, either in
malice to me, or upon a superficial view, without considering the
circumstances, the proprieties of the Languages, Metaphors, or Allegories; and
therefore I regard them not: Partly seeing my Version has had the approbation
of better Judgments; and partly, because I know it ordinary among such as
those, to cauell at our most approved Translations.

Whereas some allege that the Jews permitted not the Song of Solomon to be
read of the Vulger; what is that to us? They being heritikes we ought not to be
ledd by their example. They were divided among themselves, concerning that
Song; some receiving it among the books called Hagiographa, and some
rejecting it. And it may be, those who reconned it among the holy writings;
restrained the common use thereof by reason of that scandal, those had given,
who (accountinge it a profane writing) had foolishly applied the same, to
Solomon and King Pharaohs daughter: Or else, because the depth of the Mystery
made them unable to accomodate it to the common capacity. Or it may be (which
is most probable) they were moved to restrain it through the malice of the
devil; that after times following their example, the most excellent Mystery
therein couched, might be the more obscured from us of later Times, unto whom
the revelation of it would much plainer appear.

And, their negative is hard (if not impossible) to be proved, who deny that
Song to have at any time been used by the christian Congregation in the
primative ages. For, they practiced the singing of Psalms, and Hymns, and
spiritual Songs; and were at lest counseled (if not commanded) by Saint Paul
thereto* Coll: 3. Why therefore, may we not think, that Solomon's song was one
of those which the church then sunge, seeing the holy ghost has entitled it
THE SONG OF SONGS? If it were then sunge, it is likely they sung it in those
languages which were understood. For, Saint Paul would sing, not with the
spirit only, but with the understanding also. And if yt may be sunge by the
congregation, in the vulger tongue, why not in Verse, the proper language of
SONG (and the most moouinge way of expression)?

But, what necessity is there of examples; seeing in lawful things, we may
make presidentes, when we please, with good commendations? By what pulike
example did we sing David's Psalms in English meeter, before the Reign of King
Edward the sixth? Or by what command of the Church do we sing them as they are
now in use? Verily, by none: but time and christian devotion having first
brought forth that practice (by the providence of God) and custom ripening it;
long tolleratio^ has, in a manner, fully authorized the same. And, if our
metricall translation of the Psalms were rectified, and purged from those
imperfections and escapes, which the first translators (worthy to be
christianly excused) unwillingly committed in that infancy of Reformation:
There was never any one accidental thing in the outward worshipe of God, more
helpefull to devotion (or more powerfully stirring up the affections toward
settinge forth his praise) then the singinge of Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual
songs, in such manner as the reformed Churches now use yt.

I cannot believe therefore, but that the singing both of David's Psalms and of
the song of Solomon was practiced in all ages of the Church since Christ, as
freely and as frequently, as the strictnes and blindness of the times would
permyt; though not with so full and in so public a Quire as at this present.
But, what if the Canticles had not been ordinarily sung in former times? can
that prove the vulger use of them to be now unlawful or inconvenient, more
then the use of y^ rest of holy scripture in our mother tongue; is proved
inconvenient, because the blindness of passed ages causeleslye restrained it?
May we not judge, it was rather through ignorance, and because they had them
not prepared to be sung, as now they are? Or might it not be because the time
was not then come in which a more public use thereof would be most necessary?
For, the state of the mystical body of Jesus Christ (from the creation to the
last Judgment) being expressed Allegorically in that song, with the several
appearances it had, and shall have in the several peryods of time, together
with those admyrable loue-passages enterchanged beetweene the divine and human
nature; we doubtless, who live in the last Age of the world, (and having seen
by long experience, and success of things, much more of that prophetical
song fulfilled, then those who went before us) may without disparagement to
their knowledges, vnriddle some dark Aenigmas, heretofore not understood. And
the consumation of the LAMBS marriage being near at hand, may the more
properly, sing that Marriage song of his, to the glory of his name, and our own
spiritual comforts.

To that end I fitted the same unto our English Lyre, in measures becoming the
nature of the subject, in a plain and unaffected Phrase: and (if those who
understand both the scripture Dialect, and the language of an English Muse may
be my censurers) in words agreeable to ye mea^ing of ye holy Text. Yea, I have
so well as I was able (in so few lines) opened also according to the Doctrine
of the Catholic Church, the Allegory of every particular Canticle, that God
might be the more glorified, and the unlearned both delighted and profited, in
the repetition of those Hymns. And thus much I have delivered concerning what
has been objected touching the song of Solomon; not presuming to lead your
opinions toward mine own ends; but to declare with what know edge and
conscience I have proceeded therein. And as this testifies I had some
understanding of that I went about; so to give testimony also, how far I am
from being wilful, in my own opinions, I do in all humility submit my self
to be rectified by your RRces, in whatsoever I have done or spoken: which
(though offense had been given; will, I hope* make me somewhat more excusable,
then my adversaries pretend. Howsoever; I cannot despair. For if those
ouersightes which I have unwillingly committed in that performance, do bring
on me those outward troubles which shall frustrate some of my temporal hopes;
yet I am confident, that those christian affections which Gods mercy has made
acceptable in me, shall produce those inward comfortes which will vphould my
faith, till my contentments are made perfect: and therefore his will be done.

I come now to speak of that imputatio^ by which the stationers and their
Abetters have don my book and me the greatest injury: and that is in pretending
my Hymns for the Obseruable times, to be furtherances to Popery and
superstition. When they cannot bring men to dislyke me and that labor of mine,
by disparaging the vsefullnesse thereof; they object against the manner or
method: when that will not serve turn, they except against my calling: when
that will not prevail, they impudently accuse it of obscenity: when that
effects not their purpose, they give out that it is inclyning to Popery: and
when none of these courses will advantage them, they rail, and send him that
enquires for the book, to go and seek yt where he cann. But, the best of
their stratagems has been by accusing yt of favoring superstition. For, it
has not only made many hundreds (who know not yet what the Book treates
of) to forbear the buyeng and perusing of it; but has given them occasion
also, to pass their censures on me in so unchristian a manner, as if I were an
Apostate that had fallen from my Religyon; or sought the subuertion of yt, for
my outward profitt. Wheresoever I come, one gyddy brain or another, offers to
fall into disputation with me about my Hymns. Yea; Brockers, and
Costermongers, and Tapsters, and Pedlers, and Sempsters, and Fydlers, and
Feltmakers, and all the Brotherhoods of Amsterdam, have scoffingly passed
sentence upon me in their conuenticles, at taphouses and Tauernes. So that,
instead of diuvlging my book that (according to the Kings intent) yt might
further y^ reverence and practice of devotion, and confirm in his Maiestyes
subjects, obedience to the pyous discipline of our Church; some of the
stationers have by traducing it, given ignorant people occasion to speak the
more in contempt of those Ordinances which they ought reverently to obey.

If these presumptions shall be suffered without rebuke, neither the Authority
of the Church or State will shortly take place, but that only which makes for
the profitt or humor of the Stationers* For, some of them dare already tell me
to my face, that if the King had not peremptorely commanded the addition of my
Hymns to the metricall Psalmbooke, they would have the sooner anexed the^; but
by compulsion they will not. And for that cause, one of them (as he himself
affirmed) has sold of those books, 500 less then he might have done, in one
quarter of a year. What is this but to profess wilful disobedience in
contempt of his Majesty and his pious Iniunctio? as if he had not power to
command the publication of a few leaves to the glory of God, without craving
their favors?

For, though it might be objected that I petitioned the said Hymns might be
added to the metricall Psalms out of a private respect, as doubting or
foreseeing that the Stationers and others would feeke the suppressing of them,
if they were not compou^ded withal to their own liking. Yet the Kings
Majesty had no such end; but enjoined the same merely to this christian
purpose, that those Hymns might be the more conveniently dispersed throughout
his Dominions, for the edifying and instructing of his Loyal subjects:
persuading himself, that those who have enjoyed so many great Privileges by
his gracious favor, would never have opposed that authority by which they fub
sist, and by virtue whereof they receive benefit of such Grants as are both of
the same and of a higher nature: especially seeing it is probable that none of
his loving subjectes, worthy the name of a Christia, would have grudged to
enlarge his book the quantity of a few leaves (at the ordinary rate) to so
pyous an end as those Hymns tend unto; considering how many pounds are
yearly consumed in triuiall Pamphlets and other vain expenses

But why should I only, complain against the Stationers, and the inciuillity
of those whom they have stirred up to clamor against the Hymns for the solemn
Days, as if I alone suffered in this vproare? Do not your RRces perceive, that
the kings Judgment and Authority suffers by it? Nay perceive you not, that
while they seem to aim at me they strike at you, and seek to overthrow or
disparage the allowed Discipline of our Church? Verily, that is the white which
they seem to shoot at. And there is not one of them, but if he dare stand to
his Objections before this reverend Assembly, I dare undertake to prove him to
be little better then a Schismatic in his opinions, and an enemy to the
government established in the Church of England. If upon the review of my Hymns
there may be found either in them, or in their Prefaces, any thing repugnant to
the Catholic Verity, or the allowed Discipline, I will recant it, make public
acknowledgment of my error, and undergo what punishment shall be thought
deserved. For I had rather be irrecouerably undone both in my credit and estate,
then to be an occasion of prejudice, or scandal to the Church of God. Nay let
all my labors be made frustrate and my person be delivered over to be subject
to the tyrany of the Stationers, if my Hymns do not evidently appear, upon
serious view, to be instruments of Gods glory; helpful to devotion; tending
to Christian Conformity, and likely to be a means of delivering our
Solemnities from being so much traduced and misunderstood, for relics of
Popery, as heretofore.

I am thus confident thereof, by reason of that blessing which God has already
given: For, notwithstanding that great opposition of the Stationers hitherto
made, and those vilde imputations which they have laid on my Book, Many have
confessed unto me that my Hymns for the Obseruable Times and their Prefaces,
have made them more reverently affected toward that Discipline then formerly
they were; And have professed, that yt shall for ever hereafter, teach them to
be more conscionable in condemning and sleighting the observation of that which
is established in our Church: Yea, some Divines have modestly acknowledged,
that they did not so well consider the piety and vsefulnes of those
observations as they have since done.

If I were so greedy of temporal advantages as the Stationers judge me; or if
I had meereley proiected my own profit in the course of my studies, without
making conscience of Religion: I have had many, more easy and more thriuing
ways, offered me then the world is a ware of; and needed not to have expressed my
self in such manner as I have done in my Hymns (which I was certain, before
I published them would never purchase me good opinion from Papist or
Schifmatick:) For (beside other ways of these times which I have despised) I
have been offered a larger yearly stipend, and more respective entertaynments,
to employ my self insetting forth heretical fancies, then I have yet
probabilitey to hope for, by professing the Truth. Yea, I have been wooed to
the profession of their wild and ill grounded opinions, by the Sectaries of
so many several seperatio^s, that had I listed (or rather, if God had not been
the more merciful unto me) I might have been Lieutenant, if not Captain, of
some new Band of such Volunteers, long ere this time.

But I thank God, neither the swelling impostumations of vaineglory, nor the
ytchings of singularity; nor the ticklings of self love, nor the convulsions
of Envy, nor the inflammations of Revenge, nor the hunger and thirst of Gold,
were ever yet so preuayling over me, as to move me to the prosecution of any
thing against my conscience; especially, if yt seemed any way repugnant to
Religion, or the authority of the Church. Nay, those things which I might
justly and lavvfully have done to my great advantage, and without reproof, I
have volu^tarily forborne (even almost to the ruin of my estate) for no other
end; but because I feared least the malice of my Adversaries should
misinterpret my doings, either to the scandal of Authority, to the offense of
ignorant people, or to the troubling of their devotions, who are ignorant of
the reasonableness, and true purpose of my actions.

I therefore beseech your Reuerences, that my Hymns for the Observable times
may be re-examined whether they be not in every circumsta^ce agreeable to the
holy Scriptures and discipline of our Church: And if there be any passage or
expression found among them, scandalously faulty, let it not only be corrected
according to the Truth: but let me be commanded also, to make public
acknowledgement of my ouersights: And if Authority think it expedient,
undergo some penalty for my default. But if on the contrary (as I hope it will
evidently appear) those Hymns and their Prefaces shallbe approved much
tending to the edification of the people, and helpefull to increase true
devotion and Christian obedience, by explaning the pious and commendable use of
those Ecclesiastical constitutions, which many people have ignorantly judged
unprofitable, If they shall be found consonant to the Divine word and
conformable to the Cannons and Ordinances of our Church: If they have been
lawfully allowed of by those in Authority, and may appear to advance the
practice of Piety to Gods honor, and to maintain those Rites only, which were
agreed upon, and established by our Parliaments, Provincial Synodes, National
Counsels, and the Authority of the State And if, moreover, those who scandalize
and oppose the said Hymns, may be probably suspected (if not proved) to have
either private malice and designs in their opposition, or to be some of those
who are trou blesome and ill affected to the government of our Church: The^ let
their unchristian behauiours toward Authoritey, and their vncivell daeling
with me, be accordingly considered on.

If those Observatio^s which our Church commands were as unprofitable or
superstitions, as some of that ignorant Rabble seem to conceive: Yet I having
followed the steps of Authority, and prepared means to make those Observations
the more edifying for the common people, methinks I might hope for better
things, then to be abused for my labor and expenses. But seeing the Church
has by those observations, wisely and pyously, so distributed the
commemoration of the principal mysteries of Religeon, that they may be once
throughout every year presented to public consideration; since the temporal
blessings of every season are thereby the better and the oftener tendered to our
thankful Remembrances, as well as those eternal Priueledges which we receive
by the Incarnation, Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension of our
hlessed Redeemer, and the particular mysteries of his holy-Saintes and Angels:
And since I have by Gods assistance found out, and by Authority divulged those
helps whereby the Churches pious intent in those Ordinances, may be the more
vulgerly understood and practiced, both to her honor and the glory of God;
why should not I be defended, against the malicious and irreligeous
combinations and practices of my Aduersaris? Nay, why am I rather given up into
their power, to be traduced and abused for that, which in the opinion of all
good men, ought to have procured me more esteem?

So far am I from insinuating any popish Superstition among the people, that I
have vindicated all our Solemnities from those imputatio^s which ignorant men
have that way, cast upon them; by setting down their primative use, freed from
the Corruption of the later Ages: and in such manner as they are observed by
the Church of England, who imposes them, not as essentially pertaining to
Religeon, but as accidentally helpefull toward the performance of those
exercises which are necessary to salvation. For, whosoever can propose to
himself any other warrantable means, which in his judgment may be more
profitable to his particular disposition, to stir him up, and continue him in
the practice of his Christian duties: He may (as I believe) freely make use of
them, and with good commeodation; provided* he neither tie the Generality to
his private Rules, nor presnmptuously neglect or contemn the allowed Church
discipline, to the dishonor of Authority, and the offense of his vveake
Brethren. Because (in my understanding) humane Traditions and observations
discreetly established in the Church, do (in our highway to Heaven) resemble
those marks which charitable and skillful Seam^n have anciently set up to
discover dangerous passages, and a safe Channel to unskillful Mariners. If any
man suppose himself so good a Pilot, that by his industry and continual
sounding* he can bring his Bark to a safe Road, without heeding the common
observations: Or if his Vessel dravv so little water that by sailing over
those Bars (upon which others most commonly strike) he can find a nearer
course into the Harbor; he may steer by his own Compass. But, if he shall
therevpo^ deface those ancient Beacons, which meaner Artsmen have need of, or
seek to make contemptible those helps which he himself was (yt may be)
directed and preserved by in his times of less experience, we may justly
tax him of sacrilege and impiety.

And the same taxation are they worthy of, who in their pilgrimage to the
spiritual Canaan despise and seek to abolish those general furtherances,
which their vviser Forefathers had provided, because they have in their own
imagination) found out some discipline fitter for their particular
inclinations. Let them use what Christian advantage they can in their private
practice of piety; but let them not measure the Church by their cubite, nor
judge the profitablenes of her Discipline by the abuses or misinterpretatio^s
of ignorant Detractors. For, if those who fancy most perfection in their
private rule of life, had at first wanted those helps, remembrances, and
public means of instruction, which were tendered them by the Church; they had
either wandered, perhaps, after uncertain paths, or neglected to proceed at
all in their Spiritual Journey.

Our holy Mother the Church, has many Children of diverse tempers and
constitutions, and as the Master of a great Feast provides so, that every
Guest may find some what to agree with his appetite; So Gods Church has
established such discipline for her children, that every one may find that
which accordes with their capacities and inclinations. As, therefore, it were
madness, for a Guest to rail at his friends Ba^quet, because he saw there
many more varieries the^ he listed to seed on; or some wholesome meats, which
his stomach loathed through his own default: And as it were barbarous
inhumanity in him that had learned the way through an obscure Desert, by heaps
of stone raised by his Predecessors, to pull down those marks because he
imagins that he has found a passage without them. So, it is monstrous impiety
in them who seek either to take away or make contemptible, those Chaistian
helps whereby others may be assisted, and by which they themselves were at
first initiated; because forsooth they find a distaste through their own
distemper, or a possibillity of doing well without them* through their own
ouerweening conceit: And it is the great mercy of God, if their presumption
carry them not into the gyddy and uncertain paths of perdition.

I wish heartily that those weak members of our Church, who are ignorantly
offended at her Disciplines (because they know not the Christian use of them)
would with more sincerity, take those things into their consideration, and
weigh how far our Solemnityes are from that superstition whereof their blind
guides accuse them; how different from popish Observations, and how great an
offense it is to scandalize that Authority whereunto they ought to be obedient
in every thing, not repugning the sacred word. And if they be not hardened in
their malice) I would those Stationers also, who by falsely accusing my Hymns
of blasphemy and superstition (have drawn many of that censorious generation,
to help them clamor against what they have not yet perused) would make more
conscience of their actions, and not work upon the credulity of their
customers, to the general disparagme^t of that book which they ought rather
to have advanced.

But I fear I vvish an impossibility on the Stationers behalf. For, they have
so long, and so vnciuelly, resisted those Himnes which have been published for
helps to devotion; that it may be doubted they will be now ashamed to speak
well of them, how profitable soever they be approved* Nor will yt be much
material (I think) ere long, whether those who have been my Detractors,
praise or discommend. For, I am persuaded they will make their dispositions so
well known after a while, that no man of understanding will regard what they
speak.

As yet, their true qualitey is not fully discovered; and therefore if any
should happen to ouer-heare them at their Goose-nest behind Saint Nicholas
Shambles; Or when a knot of them has gotten a Cuntrey-Chapman,
Citty-Customer, or new flovvne Academick, to some Drincking-schoole, within
the compass of their verge; yt would deceive a common judgment to observe
what grauitey, zeal, and learning, some of them will consume in railing upon
my Hymns. One, as if he had been Register, or Liberary-keeper to all the
primitive Churches, undertakes to tell his Auditory, that no such thing had
been published in the first 300 years after Christ: As if that had been to any
purpose. A second, out of his deep understanding in such language, dares
pronounce some of my expressions obsceane. A third, by conuersing with the
Titles of Books only (for their insides he was never acquainted vvithall) is
become so learned that he ^yndes himself impudent enough to accuse me of
blasphemy. A fourth (justly suspecting that his own opinion will add no credit
to his foolish invectiues) belyes some Reverend customer of his. or brings the
Authority of some of those Worshipful censurers, who upon the Stationers bare
credit, use to condemn Books before they read them. Yea, so shamefully will
some of them aver and object, whatsoever they can imagine will disparage my
Labor; and with such counterfeite shows of pitying me, and making a
Religions conscience of their words, that such as know neither of us, would
think them the very quintesse^ce of Sincerity, and me some irreligious
Scribler, who cared not what I published for mine own advantage.

But, that whereby they hope to work me farthest out of good opinion, is my
Hymn for Saint Georges day. Yea, the bare obiecting of that, has made many
(who pass for wiser men then they prove) to condemn the same before trial.
And (as if that Hymn could have been to no purpose but to mainetaine a Popish
and superstitious observation) they rashly make yt an occasion of misco^stering
all the rest; and so maliciously vilify my honoring the sole^nity of that day
with a Hymn, as if they had been of that Dragons confederacy, for whose
overthrow yt praises God.

I know no cause there is given of such dislike. For, I have ascribed no
Divine honor to any creature in that Hymn, nor appropriated it to that Martyr
ignora^tly reputed the tutelary saint of this Kingdom, and by some heretofore
superstitiously inuoked in warlike incounters; Nor have I sorted the Festival
of Saint George among the solemnities appointed by the Church, but mentioned
the same as an Observation set apart by the State only; as are the first days
of Kings reigns. And though my Hymn prepared for that Solemnitey* is numbered
among the Hymns of the congregation, because it is composed as personating
many: Nevertheless, even that and all the rest, were by me intended for
paterns to assist or direct private deuotio^s* rather then to be imposed for
set forms which I thought worthy to be used in our public Assemblies.

Were the observation of Saint Georges feast, as popish an limpertine^t, as
some of my traducers ignorantly and irreuerently conceive: yet since I neither
invented it nor have power to abolish the same, why should I be blamed, for
showing with what meditations it may be the more appleyd to Gods glory, and
redound to the greater honor and edification of those who are attendants on
that solemnity? Seeing that place of Saint Paul which counsels that we
should direct all our Actions to the glory of God, may be my warrant for so do^
ing, without wresting the meaning of the Text.

For, that Hymn together (with a Preface showing the true use thereof, and
whom we understood by Saint George) I inserted among the rest, for those
purposes. First, to give men occasion of spiritual meditations in their civil
Tryumphs, and to remember the^ to honor God in those Solemnities, wherein he
has honored the^, with place and Title above others. Secondly, that the order
of Saint George, being one of the most honorable orders of christian knighthood
throughout the world; Instituted to the praise of God, and (as I take it) our
highest Title of honor, might have more high esteem then among some it
finds. And lastly, that such who are apt to misdeeme of those things whose
Reasons and true purposes they know not, might be more sparing in their
censures, and not conceive (as many ignorantly do) that our State
acknowledges any other Patron, then that champyon of the holy catholic
church, by whom the great Dragon and his Angels were overcome.

Even those were my christian intentions in publishing that Hymn among the
rest; which I offer to be censured by your RRces, whether there be just
occasion of scandal given thereby to others, or of any such reprooses as my
Traducers have bestowed on me. If it be so; let that Hymn bedivorced from the
rest in all future impressions. But if it be otherwise, and that in your
opinions it te^deth rather to Gods glory, and the honor of the State; I doubt
not but God and that Noble order, (of whose Solemnities I have declared the
right use) will deliver me from that many-headed monster, which has Dragon
like persecuted the honorer and interpreter of their mystery.

But, Saint George being received for a Martyr, and the order called after that
Name, being at first founded upon a very mean occasion; some are of opinion
that there was neither any such Allegory understood, or to be understood, in
the story of Saint George, as I have affirmed, nor any thing directly intended
to the glory of God in the so lemnization of that day: And upon this false
ground, they improperley conclude, that I have neither warrant for shaddowing
the true Cham pion of the Church under that Name, nor ground for applying that
solemnity to so Christian a pur pose.

That there was George a Martyr we may be leeue, but that ever he slew a
Dragon and delivered a Lady (as the vulger story of saint George relates the
same) there is noe probable testimony: Therefore yt has been generally
understood as an Allegorical expression of the churches deliverance from the
power of Satan. And that the Title of saint George may be allegorically
imposed upon our spiritual Patron without just exception, I have declared in
my preface before the Hymn of saint George his Day, by an argument drawn from
the greater. For, the Father being by the Aevangelist called (...), that
person, doubtless, who is inferior touching the ma^hood may in some respects,
be called by the same Name without irreuerence. Or if this be not sufficient,
it may be inferred also by an argument from the less. For, if Jesus Christ be
termed a Lamb, a Lyo^, or by the Nams of creatures inferior to those, as a
Dove, a Way, a Vine, etc, sure we may then, without exception, entitle him
(...), and give him such attributes or appellations, as are proper to creatures
of a higher nature; if they may with any warrant of the holy Text, serve to
express him the better to our apprehensions.

So ignorantly devout were those times in which the Order of Saint George
was first instituted, that it may be some mistook our Patro^. Yet none can
peremptorily affirm that it was any created Saint whom our Fore fathers first
chose to be the Guardian of this Kingdom, and honored by the Name of Saint
George, much less can they affirm that it was George the Martyr. For, if
they had aimed at a creature for their Patron, it is likely they would have
chosen one of the blessed Patriarcks or Apostles, as Scotland, Spain, and
other Nations did; or one of their own contry Saints, as in Ireland and
France; and not have committed themselves to a stranger-saint who, perhaps,
never heard of this Realm; and of whose being, or holiness they have no
certainty. Otherwise they were either much distressed for a Saint, or very
indifferent to whose patronage they committed themselves.

Our predicessors desiring a tutelary Saint for this kingdom, according to the
superstition of their neighboring Cuntrys (as the Children of Israel longed for
a King after the manner of other Nations) It may be, that it pleased God,
(providing better then they themselves desired) to move them to make choice of
a Name, long since attributed to God himself; which being considered according
to that allegorical story aunciently ascribed thereunto (and usually
interpreted to mean the Champion of the Churcb) could not certainly be
applied to the person of any inferior Saint. And so, they honored in their
solemnity the true Deity, though it were, perhapps, (till the light of the
gospel begann to shine clearer) as ignorantly as the Athenians did, when they
sacrifized thereunto, upon that Alter which they inscribed, TO THE UNKNOWN
GOD. For the vulger history of Saint George, is in the litterall sense so
improbable, so hyperboicall, and so void of testimony: And in the Allegorical
sense so proper; so auntiently received, So aluding to the Victory of Saint
Michael; and that name of George, aunciently made the patron of so many
Christian Cuntryes, and Honorable Orders of kingthood, that I am persuaded it
siginfied no less person then he that is said to make war with the Dragon in
the Revelation of Saint John. But (whomsoever former Ages understood by St.
George) the Sovereigns of that Order who were since the Reformation of
Religeon (and who by the laws of that fellowship are to resolve all doubtful
questions concerning their Order) have long since (as I am informed) declared
that by Saint George they understand no other Patron then he to whose praise I
have directed my Hymn.

Yet some will not allow the Sole^nities of that day to be esteemed so
reverend, nor the Order of St. George to be so Christian an Institution as I
account it, by reason of that occasion wherevpo^ it is said to have been first
inverted. As if the almighty providence did never turn men's vain purposes, to
become beyond their own meaning the occasion of that which is of great
consequence. Yes verily. When Pharohs daughter went to fetch but an idle
walk, she brought home Moses the Deliverer of his Brethren: when Saul went
to seek Asses, he found a Kingdom; and when Agrippa heard St. Paul out of
curiosity only, he was made almost a Christian. So, the first founder of that
Honorable Order, did intend a while (it may be) to erect some Title of honor
suitable to his first apprehension. But considering better thereupon, and
aduising with his grave Counsel how to establish that which might redound
most to his honor; he raised his purposes far above the first design, and
instituted a new Brotherhood of Christian Knights; which he and his Nobles
entered into, and reco^me^ded to posterity, to be professed and continued to the
praise of God almighty; the honor of the holy Church milita^t; and the increase
and confirmation of brotherly love among his Peers: As their Records (and the
Divine exercices used in the Church belonging to their order) do apparently
show. Yea, they voluntarily oblige themselves to the observation of so many
pious Ordinances and Resolutions (which are the conditions of their Order)
that it testifies much piety in the first Founders, occasioneth much virtuous
emulatio^ in the princely Brotherhood, and is for these Reasons become so
renouned, that it has been desired and received, by the greatest Kings and
Princes of Christendom, as one of the most Christean, and most honorable
Orders of Kinghthood in the world.

And to show that those things which are worthy on themselves are not thought
any whitt disparaged among wisemen (because they have sprung from mean
occasion) the Sovereign and fellowshipp of this excellent Brotherhood (knowing
it no shame to retain the remebra^ce of that which first occasioned this
institution) have called themselves Knights of S. Georg and of the Garter. Yet
as if they foresaw also, that some foolish or malicious detractors would from
thence take advantage, to endeavor how they might disparage, their honorable
Fraternitey, they have for their Impreza these words imbroydered upon a little
Belt or Garter; HONI SOIT QVI MALY PENSE, which they wear as in reproof and
contempt, of all evil and sinister imaginations.

I am sorry there should have been any necessity of speaking thus much, in
defense of that which is so apparently commendable; but, since the malice and
ignorance of some has given the occasion, I hope, neither the Kings Majesty
the Sovereign of that most Honorable Order here mentioned, nor any member
thereof will take it amise, that out of my zeal to their honor I have spoken
according to my simple understanding in a matter of such consequence. For,
while it is permitted, that divine Mysteryes and those things which concern
even to the honor of God Almighty, may be defended by the meanest of his
servants, when his adversaries have made them disputable; I trust it shall be
excusable for me, to exprese my good opinion of this Mystery of State (which by
some is not so rightly conceived of as in my Judgment it ought to be)
especially seeing we have had often experience that truth and honorable
Actions, become the more confirmed and the more glorious, by being drawn into
question.

I have now delieuered unto your RRces the reason of those things for which I
and my Book of Hymns have been abused and miscensured by the Stationers* and
their Confederates; humbly desiring your Fatherhoods, that if you perceive any
good in what I have said or done, or any hope of making me such a one as I
desire to approve my self, that you would be pleased to give your approbation
to that which is well; and instruct me wherein I might be made better. If not
for my sake, yet for that truths sake which you your selves profess, and for
the honor of that devotion which (for ought you know) I have truly sought to
advance let not faulse imputations or the scandalls of the malicious (which
even the best men were ever subject unto) prejudice that among you, which I
have offered up unto God; or loose me any of your good opineons, until you
shall see more apparent cause to condemn me. For, since God has been so
merciful unto me, to cover all my transgressions in such manner that none cann
justly accuse me of any scandalous matter, in all my life time why should men
be so cruel, as to seek my disparagment by my best endeavor?

Let not my youth (or the want of that calling which I dare not usurp) make me
or my labors the more contemptable to your Wisdoms; nor let the unjust Rumors
which the Deceaver has provoked my traducers to divulge, make those
meditations seem unhallowed, which I have prepared for the honor of God. For,
if the Devil had not perceived them somewhat tending to the Almighties praise,
doubtless, he and his Instruments would have suffered them to pass as quietly,
as those vain inventions do, which he inspires; and yt would have been no more
disparagment to me, to have been thought subject to some imperfections, then it
is to other men; nor had my Life, my lines, my habit, my words, and my very
thoughts been pried into and censured, as they have been: Which (living were I
do, so much known as I am, and the world being so malicious as it is) might
give occasion to discover some spotts in a fayrer garment then mine.

I protest before the searcher of all hearts, that I am not careful to make
this Apology, or to beseech your good opinion, so much to preserve mine own
personal esteem, as to provide that virtue and devotion might not be hindered
or scandalized through me or my deprauers. Yet am I neither insensible of my
temporal repute, nor so desirous of maintaining it, as if I should droupe
without it; or thought the honor of good studyes might not be preserved without
mine. For, I know truth shall prevail though I perish; and to the praise of
God (and out of my confidence in his love) be it spoken, I am persuaded, for
mine own part, that all the world shall not have power to turn me out of that
course, which he has set me into: but rather, make me relish my happiness the
better by their disturbance, and enable me in due time to despise, most
perfectly those vain applauses and encouragments, whereby my weakness does,
as yet, require to be otherwhile supported. And, it may be those who shall live
in the next Age (howeuer I am now thought of) will wonder how the Devil could
find out a Company shameless enough to oppose and dispaurage me in so
unchristian a manner, as my Adversaries do.

For, they have not only offered me those injuries, before mentioned, and many
other which humanity forbidds; but exercised their tongues also, so
scurrilously; so vnciuelly, and so unjustly to the disgrace of my personn, that
had I not long time envred my self to the barking of Dogs, and the snarling
of such Beasts, I had been much out of patience.

If I might not be thought to misapply the text, (as I think I should not)
there is scarce one passage in the Psalms of blessed David, concerning the
co^binations and practices of a malicious multitude, but I have had occasion in
a literal se^ce to apply the same to my Adversaries For, they have rewarded me
evil for good, and laid things to my charge which I knew not. They have
privily laid netts to ensnate me without a cause. They have reviled me all the
day long, are madd upon me, and sworn together against me. Like Oxen and fatt
Bulls they have enclosed me, grind at me like dogs round about the City; and
when I sound the words of their mouths as soft as butter, there was war in
their hearts. They hold all together, keep themselves close, and mark my
stepps* when they see me, they flatter, speak lies, and disse^ble with their
double heart. They are set on fire, they have whett their tongues like swords;
their teeth are spears and arrows, their lips speak deceit, and their mouth
is full of ^urfing and bitterness, they have persecuted me when I was smitten,
eue^ in my Adversity they rejoiced, and gathered themselves together against
me, They whisper and take counsel to my hurt. The drunkards among them have
made songs on me; yea the very abjects have assembled and made mowes at me,
and so nearely imitated that crew of whom the Psalmist complains, that if my
Hymns were as full of that good spirit which inspired David, as my
Adversaryes seem to be of that evil spirit which possessed his enemies, my
Songs might well have passed whithout exception.

But, Gods will be done, For; I know he will in the best opportunity, deliver
me from those oppressors. I have been hitherto as a deaf man to all they have
objected, because I knew it was gods pleasure, that I should be afflicted for
the evil which is in my work that he might the more comfort me, for that
which his goodness has made good in me. And I had been longer silent in their
reproof, but that my Adversaries have, perhapps, been permitted so much and
so foolishly to provoke me, that those many iniuryes they have offered others,
might be called into question by this means, for the general good. yea
paradventure they have given this occasion, that their own words might make
them fall. whether it be so or not, sure I am to be delivered from them, when
my sufferings are complete. He that has shown me troubles will (as he has
often done) now also deliver me. Even he will comfort me for those years
wherein he has afflicted me; because I have placed my hope only on him. Yea,
he will show me some token for good, that such as have hated me may be
ashamed, and that those who love me may praise his name for my cause; In
which assurance, I will rest, expecting my revvard from above the Sun. For,
I have with Solomon observed and seen that here under the Sun the race is
not to the swift, nor the batle to the strong, nor bread to the wise, nor
riches to men of understanding, nor favor to men of knowledge; but time and
chance comes to them all. Eccl. 9. 11.

And, I hope that your RRces, whom as the Ambassodors, and true Ministers of
God I have ever honored, loved, and obeyed, will in what you may be as
helpefull in the settling of my ontvvard peace, as your Instructions have been
to beget in me an inward contentment. That, which has been ce^sured
indiscreet in my former studyes was punished severely: let not that also,
which the King and Authority approoues commendable, be made preiuditiall unto
me. For, which way then shall I employ my self without disadvantage?
Although I grudge not that men addicted to the most vain exercizes, cann reap
profitt and regard; Yet, methinks, it is somevvhat unequal that he who has
bestovved his time, his pains, and his fortunes in better studyes, should be
altogether denied his labor for his travel: Or which is worse, suffer for
his good intentions; and because he has endeauored more then a hundred, be
abused more then a thousand.

I would it were otherwise, for their sakes, who have but begun to taste the
comfort and sweetness of attempting good things; that none of those may be
discouraged (through my hard usage) who have in the prime of their youth,
forborne their pleasures, and forsaken the ordinary paths of preferment, to
prosecute that, which may redound as well to the profit of others, as to
their own benefit. And I would to god, that such as ought to cherish and
direct those, who desire to spend their time and best faculties in the service
of God, would not so enuiously carpe at honest parformances, as many do, when
their humor is not fitted in every particular: Perhapps also, when those
perticulers were approved of, by wisermen. When an Archer has shot, it is
aneasy and an ordinary matter for the foolish lookers on, to say he has mist
thus, or thus much of the mark; but give them the Bovv, and it will soon
appear that they are better at finding fault with others, then in doing well
themselves.

Against such as these; I have had some cause to complain, not only among the
Stationers, but (I am sorry I should have reason to speak it) some, even of
the Clergy, are that way blame worthy; and have (as I am credibly informed)
so friuelously and so inuiriously objected against my Hymns; that their own
friends, and hearers have discovered that it was the Author rather then his
Book which they affected not. For, al they could say being urged, to express
particular exceptions, was this, that I was no Divine; And, it has appeared to
the just disparagment of some among them, that they had never so much as
handled the book they disapprooued. Whence should this proceed, but from self
corruption, and the basest envy? And what flesh and blood could endure it, with
silence?

The most eminent, the most learned, the most devout, and the most approved of
our Devines, have thought it worthy praising God, for to see a man of my
quality exercize his faculty that way. Some of the most reverend of them, have
sought me out, and honored me for it, with more respect then I find my self
worthy of; that they might encourage me in such endeavors. Yea the Kings most
excellent Majesty, has by his priuiate approbation of that book, and under
his public seal, given so princely a testemony of his desire, to credit and
cherish in his Subjects, exercizes' of such nature; that their abuse of me, is
not without some injury to the Judgment and Authority of his Majesty.

Surely, he has not deserved it at their hands: And alas, what cause have I
given them, that they should thus deal with me? What labor of thei^s did I
e^r traduce? Or whose good repute at any time have I envied at? when I have
seen the nakedness of some among them, I have covered it. Yea, I have labored
to save the reputation of such as these, where their indiscretions had nigh
lost it: And will they so recompense me as to convert my best Actions to my
reproach? Cann they not be content to be silent, when they are not disposed to
approve, but must they dispraise also, to the encouragment of my other
ignorant Adversaries in their opposition? And, because I have performed a
laborious work, not so exactly, perhapps, as they conceive it might have
been; will they make it more my disparagment, then it is to some of them to be
employed about nothing?

If in any thing I have deserved ill, let them not secreetly traduce me, but
christianly reprove me according to the duty of their callings. If I have
deserved nothing, let them advise me how to merit better; or suffer me to be
altogether unspoken of, as those many thousands are that do^ nothing. If I have
deserved any thing, let t^m leave me to the fruit of mine own labor, and if
that be not able to reward it self without their cost, I vvil suffer the
loss. I have hitherto spent my own time and fortunes, in my studyes; never
aiming at any of their spiritual promotions, (no not so much as at a lay
Prebhend) for my labor. For, the principal revvard I seek, is that which
every eye sees not, and that which those who judge my affections by their
own, think me to have least thought on. As for that outward benifite which
the necessityes of this life, and my fraylties urge me somevvhat to look
after; it is that little profitt only, which my work naturally brings with
it self: nor shall I be long discontented, if that also be taken from me.
Some have already a strong expectation to see me wholly deprived of it; and some
(kind hearts) could be content to allow me a part thereof, but not so much as
they suppose my just profitt would amount unto. For, (they say) that were too
great a consideration for so little a work. Wherein, they show their gross
partiality: For, thousands a year is not accounted suffieient for some who
have suddenly attained their estates, by unnecessary or base (and perhapps,
wicked) employments: Yet, they esteem one hundred too much for him that has
performed a work honest and profitable to the public* because he performed it
in a shorter time then some would have done. Never thinking how many years
practice and expenses, he had first con^ed* to make himself fit for such an
(...) never considering what he might have gained, if he had bestowed the same
time, charge, and industry in other professions; never regarding ^owlo^g he
might have been without hope of profit, if that had not happened, How
vncertain^ the fruit may yet prove, nor how many troubles, charges, and
hindrances he has been heretofore at, without any consideration at all. But,
I leave them to their unjust diuission: Let them alot me what they please, and
balance my Talent as they list. God will provide sufficient for me, to whose
pleasure I referr the succeffe: and, though I may in this manner speak a
little, to show them I am sensible of their usage. Yet, they shall see I will
walk as contentedly, what ever happens, as if I had the fullfilling of all my
hopes.

I beseech your RRces to pardon me, though my penn has spirted a little ynke
on those last mentioned; For, next the Stationers they have been of all others
the most injurious unto me: And save that I have a Christian regard, to their
calling, and to preserve the patience becoming him that has exercized
himself in sacred Studies, I had here dropped gall, and made them perceive that
I have as true feeling of harsh vsages, as other men. But, I do for Gods sake
spare them, and for your sakes, whom I have found ready to comfort, assist, and
direct me in my good purposes.

I do forbear the Stationers also in the mention of many particular mivsages
yet not spoken of; and in desisting to agrauate what I have hitherto touched
upon, so far forth as I have cause.

For, if I should here declare unto your RRces, by way of illustratio^ how many
several Discourtisies they have offered me; how they have resisted the Kings
Grant, since the beginning of our Controversy: how they concluded to let me
disburse all the money I could, before they would openly oppose me, that the^ my
profit being hindered I might be constrained to yeald to their pleasures, or to
be ruined in my estate: How violently they have ever since persecuted my
purposed hinderance, to my great loss: How wilfully they have misenformed the
Kings Majesty and diverse honorable personages concerning my Grant (and my
procedings) to procure my damage: How unjustly they gave out among their
Customers, that my Grant was a Monopoly, and an exaction to the oppression of
the people: How impudently and faulsly, they have verefied, that I had
procured that no man might buy a Bible, Testament, or Communion-Booke which out
my Hymns: How they compelled a fevv of the Bookebynders (whose estates much
depend on their favors) to present the high Court of Parliament with diverse
untrue suggestions in the name of fourscore; when as all except 4. or 5, of
them, did (as I have heard) reject the said information as faulse and
rediculous: how foolishly they have sought to make me seem pore in my estate,
as if I had aimed at some reputation that way: How from day to day, during all
this Session they have maintained three or four of their Instruments, to
clamor against me at the Parliament house door, in so rude a fashion as was
never exampled in any Cause: How far they have threatened to engage themselves
and their fortunes in my opposition: How dishonestly they dare pretend the
good of the Common wealth when they have but private ends; and when they
themselves do really oppress the same, and are (in a higher nature) truly
guilty of those greeuances, which they faulsely lay unto my Charge: How
maliciously they have hindered themselves and their whole Company, of an
assured benifite, that I might have the greater loss: How they take occasion
in all Assemblyes to vent as much as they cann to my disparagment; as if they
had projected to make me (if it were possible) infamous through out the whole
Kingdom. I say, if I should give unto your RRces all these perticulers truly
Illustrated; and show how false I could prove their informations; how cruel
their dealings, how base their slanders, how absurd their cavills, and how
much I have with patience endured them unspoken of (till this day) in hope to
find them better affected; you would say that God had enabled me beyond the
power of mine own weakness. And perhapps also, you would think it a
work of mercy, to help deliver me from their Tyranny.

But, the amplification of these things, and my answeares to all those
objections which they have published, I reserve for the high Court of
Parliament; or for their hearing who shall be appointed Judges of the
differences betvveene us. And then, if I shall not appear worthy to be freed
from their oppression, I will be contented still to suffer; and to give up both
my labors and Priueledges to be the prey of their Avarice. In the mean time, I
will defend my self and my right as I am able. In which I know, I shall have
much to do; Seeing those whom I am to resist are an Adversary so many ways
armed for my disadvantage, as I could hardly have found out the like. For, they
will not only come against me, in the Name of a respected Corporation,
pretending the good and relief of a pore Multitude (which I shall be able to
prove under the hands, of 60 of their own Company they have made porer then
otherwise it would have been) but they have so many other fair pretenses
also, such clokes of sincerity, and such unsuspected insinuations to screwe
themselves into good opinion, to his disadvantage whom they oppose, that he
shall have need of all his faculties.

And, though their cause should appear faulty: Yet, they have so plentiful a
stock to make it hopeful; so many heads to plott euasions; so many
Soliciters to prosecute their designs, such Instruments ready to stretch their
consciences to serve them; So many several persons to procure friends; Such a
multitude to lay the shame and blame among* when they do a man any wilful or
apparent injury; So much oppertunity (by means of their Trade and Customers)
to possess the generality on their behalfes; Such a Brood of Ingles (by reason
of their many troublesome suites) in every Court of Justice, and about every
eminent person, ready to serve their turns; And so desperately valiant are
they in vowing the persecution of what they undertake (though it were to be
maintained by the expense of many thousand p^unds) that to graple with them,
and come of vnfoiled, were one of Hercules his labors.

I scarcely set my foot into any place, whither I usually resort, but I am
told of their foul language against me: I seldom meet that man of my
Acquaintance, but they have possessed him with somewhat against my Grant; Nor
come I into that Noble-mans lodginge, where they have not already one of his
Chamber, or some other near about him, forward to dispute their cause; and
upon all occasions to possess their Lord with such untrue suggestions as they
dare inform. And questionles they have other adua^tages that my experience
among them, has not yet discovered; which if God should turn to foolishnes, I
doubt they would grow desperate. For, (as I am told) one of them was not
ashamed lately to affirm, that if their aim succeeded not, it would cost
some their lives. God bless the men, and give them grace to see their
distemper before it come to that; and in time to suspect the honoesty of that
cause, which vvresteth out such words of desperation. For mine own part, my
conscience is witness of such vvarrantablenes in mine, that (whether I sink
or swim in that particular) I hope, and am persuaded, it shall make toward my
best happiness.

But, I have gotten (some will say) such a powrefull and furious Adversary by
this quarrel, that I shall fill my life full of troubles and dangers. Indeed,
I look to find them perfect enemies; but (since I must have enemies) they are
such soes as I would desire to have. I expect they will prove violent and
subtle, but not so violent or subtle, as the Devil, who is every moment
watching to devour me: And, it may be their malice will make me so vigilant
over my self, that I shall the better escape his. I have heard one that
thinking to kill his enemy, gave him a slight hurt that cured him of a
mortal disease; and so may they serve me. I was ever as careful as I could
be, of my ways; Yet, knowing no great Foes I had, but such only as were
spiritual, I more striued for an inward sincerity, then to make fair
appearances outwardly; and therefore gave, perhapps, some occasion now and
then, of scandal through my simple freedom: because, haueing no ill purpose,
I thought every looker on, would censure as charitably of my Actions, as my
Intentions deserved. But, now I shall have remembrancers to provoke me to more
strict circumspection, and betwixt the Devil in secret, and my new foes in
public* shall be kept, I hope so watchful, that mine eye shall not dare look
off from God. Nor, my hand fasten it self upon the rotten sta^e of any humane
protection. I will persuade my self, that where ere I go, one of them dogs
me: and though it is not the fear of the world for which I make conscience of
what I do, yet an outward object may sometime quicke^ an inward consideration
when it is almost asleep, and I embrace the occasion*

They lately threatened the marking of my ways: and I therefore give them
hearty thanks: for, I never since behold one of their Fraternity, but it is an
Alarm to me, and drives me immediately to consider, what I last did, what I am
then doing, and what I purpose to go about. Nay, I have apossiblity of brave
Advantages, if their enmity increase, as it has done hitherto. There is not an
oversight which I was guilty of since my cradle, nor a Folly which I was ever
suspected of, nor any forgetfulness which I may be prone to fall into; but I
hope they will enquire it out and lay it to my charge. That the great Accuser
may have the ^sse to object, at the last Judgment.

These priueledges will I gain by it. If they accuse me of ought wherein I am
truly faulty; it shall I trust move me to a true repentance, begett in me
amendment for the time to come; and through the shame of this life, lead me
into the glory of the next. If any cry me be objected whereof I am clear, I
will remember that the world has sometime praised me more then I diserued,
so (^etting her praises and disparagments to balance one another) will
forgive her, and have as little to do with her, hereafter as I cann. Yea, it
may be that if my Adversaries would once speak out and openly, that which they
whisper privately to to my disgrace, I should thence take occasion not only to
acquit my self of many imputations, whereby I am now injured to the
scandal of my personn, and the hinderance of some of that good with my labors
might else effect; But I shall paraduenture also find oppertunity thereby to to
publish that, which will teach others upon what considerations they may keep
their minds quiet, in the like affliction; And show them how to convert all
malicious defamations to the shame of their enemies, to the glory of God, to
their present consolation, and to their future advantage for ever. Nay if my
Adversaries hold on that violence which they now make show of, I trust to
Discover hereafter, by my constant example, these to be no brauadoes or mere
verbal florishes* but that there is in my soul a real knowledge and feeling
of what I profess.

For, I have by my self mustered my forces; and I have considered that I am
but one, and they many: I know no man of power whose assistance I may challenge
by any desert of my own, whereas their large gratuities have that way made
them strong. I find my natural bashfullnesse to be such that I could not
(though it were to save my life) trouble men in honorable place about my
private quarrels. For, if they be altogether strangers it seems to me
impudence to solicit them; If we are but acquainted only, me thinks I should
first deserve somewhat. And I hold that he who is worthy the name of my friend
will do me what favor he cann without asking it, as soon as he parceaues I need
him. On the contrary; their audacity is such, that they cann shamelesly
importune and scrape to any man, for their advantage; even to those whom they
have abused rather then fail. I have remembered likewise, that I am scarce able
to provide their due fees required in the prosecution of my cause, whereas they
have large bribes to give (if any lived in this Age that would accept them.) I
have pondered also, how unapt my disposition is to work upon dishonest
Advantages, and how readily they take all oppertunities to my vvrong. Beside
these, many other disproportions I discovered in our strenghts upon my survay;
Nevertheless when I had set down the nature of my cause, and surveyed what
Ammunition God (...) a good conscience had stored up within me, I made up my
Resolution for the cumbate; And, now I beginn to be acquainted with their
skirmishes, the more my dangers appear, the less are my discouragments. Yea,
I vow, all their great threats are but as so many handfulls of dust cast into
the vvind; and all the mischief the whole body of their forces is yet able to
bring about, cannot break me of so much sleep as on^ flea.

For, when according to David's example I seek to strenghthen my says with
calling to mind Gods former protections; I find that when I was all alone and
unarmed (after the manner of the world) I was delivered from two afflictions,
which (all circumstances considered) were as dangerous in appearance* as the
Bear and Lion which assailed David: and I take it for an in^allable token,
that I shall be now also saved from the Philistian-like troop, and their
Goliah-like Champions, who have railed upon that which vva^ prepared for the
honor of the liueing God: And (though I am not used to their weapons) shall be
provided of a sling and a stone sufficient enough to encounter their iron
spears, and brazen headpeeces, in spite of that Targateer in whom they
trust. And I am persuaded that God has permitted me to suffer what has be
fallen me by their means, not only to punish my sins, and exercize my faith
in him; but that being a little experienced in David's afflictions, I might have
somevvhat the more feeling of that which he suffered (by reason of the
Combinations of his wicked Adversaries) and ^oe be made the abler to express
his passions, and the persecutions of Jesus Christ and his members, set forth
in his holy Psalms; which I am preparing for our English Lyre. For, I find
as well by my own experience, as by the testimony of diverse learned men
conversant in that book, that it can never be relished or well understood by
any man, until he has passed through the trial of some extraordinary
afflictions.

These expressions will to some (paraduenture) who are not acquainted with me,
and the true state of my cause, seem impertinent and unsavory; but, I know
their use and necessity to be such, and have so well examined the
warra^tablenes^e of my private ends therein, (and the probablenesse of a
profitable success) that I am not ashamed to expose them to the world; nor
fearful of any man^ dislike. Nor do I value the taxation of those who shall
upon the view of this condemn me of too much bitterness in the reproving and
laying open the cruelty of my Adversaries. For, my conscience is witness that
I have used no terms of sharpness but such as I have example for, out of the
complaints of the meekest saints of God; and such as are properly required to
describe the true nature of their malice. And I protest before the almighty
God, that to my knowledge I have added nothing in this discourse concerning
them, but what is either true in my own experience, or so probably declared
unto me, that I have no cause to suspect the contrary: And so far am I from
bearing the least personal malice to any of them, that I daily pray for them
as heartely as for my self. Yea, that day in which they do me the greatest
unkindness, I most earnestly vvish them well; and do the^ feel my spirit
striving against my natural corruption on their behalf, more powrefully then
at other times. And (vvhateuer they believe of me) God let me not prosper in
any affayre of this life, if I would not be deprived of my best earthly hopes,
rather then do a vvilfull i^iury, even to him among them of whose particular
malice I have most experience. Which protestation, no man haueing the fear of
God dare to pronounce untruly; nor cann any man haueing the charity of a good
Christian, suspect it to be false, being so deliberately declared.

Or if this asseueration be not enough, my daily practice and behauior toward
them will witness somevvhat on my befalfe. For, though they have not only
hindered my profit to the value of some hundreds of pounds since our
dissension, but waste much also of my principal estate; Yet, when I had
sufficient Authority to have made my self immediately whole again, upon their
goods who were prime Agents against me; nevertheless, I long forbore to put my
power in execution, and when I was compelled to execute it upon some of them,
I returned their goods back again upon their own entreaty, and forgot and
forgave all misvsages without returning so much as a harsh word unto them, or
retaining so much as the charges of ceasure; because, if it had been possible I
would have vvonn them by fair means. Yea, when it was in my power to have
procured the committment of some among them, who had shown themselves most
spightfull unto me; I forbore to aggrauate the matter against them, according
to their desert (even out of mere charitable compassion) though I suspected
they would laugh at me for my labor, as I heard afterward they did. Which
does (at least) probably verify that I have no malignant or reuengfull
inclination toward the personn of any one among them. For, what cann they
devise against me more provoking then they have already done? Verily, there is
no other cruelty lest, for them to practice, but the torturing of my flesh: and
what is that, in respect of wounding my reputation, which they have so much
endeauored.

Men of the basest condition will daily hazard their bodies for the defense
even of their suparfluous goods, or upon the giving of one disgraceful word;
and therefore, it seems that among some, those are greater injuries then to
vvound and kill. How great wrong do I then bear in my fame, that suffer
patiently not only their triuiall imputatio^s, but to be unjustly also,
accounted a blasphemer and a profane person? and am by their means deprived,
not only of superfluities, but in a manner of all my liuelyhood? For when those
Friends who are engaged for me are satisfied (to which purpose there is yet I
praise God, sufficient set apart) I vow in the faith of an honest man, that
there will not be left me in all the world, to defend me against my
Adversaries, and supply the common necessityes of nature, so much as will feed
me one week, unless I labor for it. Which, my enemies are partly informed of,
and do thereupon triumph. But not to my coffeehouse. For, I do comfort my
self, to think how sweet it will be to sit hereafter at some honest labor,
and sing those Hymns and Songs to the praise of God, for which the world
has taken from me her favors. Nor does it trouble me to publish thus much of
my poverty, though I know it will sound disgracefully in the ears of most
men. For, I mean to procure no man to hazard his estate for me, by pretending
better possibilities to secure him then I have; as others usually do: Nor value
I the reputation which comes by wealth or such like things as may be lost
through the malice of others, because I know I shall be the better esteemed of
for those toys, by none but Fools or such Idiots as will sooner blush to be
found pore, then dishonest. Yea, I am assured that among good and wise men, it
will be no more shame unto me to be made pore by such means as I have been,
then it is to be made sick by the hand of God: Nor cann I think it will be
more my disgrace to have waste my estate through my studyes, then it is to
some other students to have thereby empaired their healthes.

But, some will object that I have by publishing this Apology not only taxed
those who are guilty of such things as I have perticularized, but laid a
public imputation also, upon the whole Company of Stationers; and been so
general in my accusations that the credit even of those honest men among them,
will be much endangered. Indeed, the good and badd are incorporated together
into one body, and so intermixed that it will be very difficult to shoot at the
Starlings and miss the Pigeons. Yet, I have discharged this among them (in
spite of their threatening the Starchamber) and if now it be examined where my
pelletts fell, you shall find none wounded, but those Starlings which have
troubled the Douehouse; and that there is not one innocent Dove dispoiled of a
feather*

I protested in the beginning of this discourse, that I had no purpose to lay
any scandal upon the whole Corporation; and that it may appear I protested no
more then truth, I will here show you how those Stationers against whom I have
complained, may be known from such as I desire to except from this
accusation. I will be bold to averr, that many, (and the most powrefull of
them) are some of those who usurp the maniging of the Companies affairs; and
that to cullor their malice and private coueteousnesse, they do in the name of
the Corporation and at the common charge prosecute against me; pretending that
it is the cause and good of their whole Company, for which they stand.
Nevertheless, I do not take the whole body of the Corporation to be my
adversary, no more then I would think the whole City of London hated me, if
the greatest part of the Court of Aldermen should pursue me with malice upon a
private quarrel. For, most of those men who are princepally busy against me,
under the name of the Company of Stationers, are above all others injurious and
scandalous to that Company; as appears by those petitions which have been
heretofore preferred both to the Kings Majesty and the Parliament house, by
some of their own fraternity, against the oppressions and usurpations of their
Governors. Those indeed may well be called the scumme (that is the cream) of
the Company. For, if they were thoroughly churnd, welnigh all the fatness of
his Majesty's gracious priueledges given to relieve their pore, and for the
general benifite of their Corporation, would be found in them. And so far is
the maine body of their Society from favoring their courses, or from fearing
any disgrace to them by this Apology that lately hearing it was to be divulged
by the name of the Stationers Commonwealth; they did* expect it with much
content: In hope it would be an occasion to make some way to their
deliverance, from those injuries which they suffer. And verily, if you had
heard, as I have done, how many of the Printers, of the Bookebynders, and of
the younger Bookesellers among them, do complain against most of their
Governors, and how many matters of great consequence they do probably object:
You would think it were insufferable, and that it is great pity there is not
some course taken for the strick examination of their Abuses, in such manner
that those who are oppressed, may come to declare their greeuances without
fear of a future disadvantage. For, those against whom they would complain,
haueing now in their power the estates, and employments of such poor men as
think themselves oppressed, they dare not openly appear against them, until
they perceive a likely hope of being fully, speedily, and impartially heard;
lest it turn to their utter undoing, if they prevail not.

But, what if those aforesaid among the Stationers (who would be taken*
forsooth* to be the whole Corporation) have not abused their own society only,
but that trust also which has been committed unto them by the State? What,
if it may be proved that those books which they have taken from others as
unlawful, have been divulged again by some in office among them for their
private commodity? What, if it may appear they have sold those books which
did to their knowledge co^taine matter injurious to the person of the King,
and Prince? What, if many of those pamphletts which have discontented his
Majesty, troubled the State, and disturbed the people, were dispersed (nay
procured to be ymprinted) by some of those? and that their shifting it upon
their servants, with such like evasions, will be found of no truth? What, if
it will be justified, that the Wardens of their Company have found such books
imprinting; taken a way part of them; knevv they were vnauthorized and
scandalous; and yet permitted both the press to go on, and the books to be
divulged? What, if they have dispersed popish and schismatic books more
then any others? What, if those foolish and profane books where vvithall the
world is now filled to the perverting of youth, and the corrvption of good
manners, be manifested to be the coppies that have enriched many of them? What
if those wrongs, offered to the Universities, and those greeuances which the
whole commonwealth suffers (in being burdened with volumes of trash* in
being oppressed in the prizes of books and injured by their unserviceable
bynding) may be declared to be altogether by their default? Verily, if I should
instance upon these particulers, what I could; their Foundations would shake,
and the whole frame of their foolish machinations would be shattred about
their ears. But, I spare to proceed further until they shall further compel
me: (eue^ for the sakes of their pore vviues and Children) and would vvish
them to be warned by this gentle Item, to amend among themselves what is
amiss before the strict hand of Authority cease them; lest it be then made
apparent to the whole Kingdom, that my chief persecutors among the
Stationers, be those who are so unworthy to bear the name of the whole
Company, that they are not so much as good members thereof, but rather,
enemies, Robbers and Defamers of their Society, and injurious to this whole
Commonwealth.

But, do I lay this to the charge of all those who are the rulers of this
Corporation? No verily, not to them alone. For, I believe there be some of
their Cheefes grieved at the perverseness of such among them who have been
injurious to me, and to their Society; and I think they would willingly
remedy all, if the vvilfulnesse of the rest were not more powrefull then their
good persuasions; as one (not of the meanest of them) lately confessed unto me.
There be also among the inferior sort of Bookesellers, (as my experience has
taught me) some well and some ill affected to my cause: among which
multitude, if any man be desirous to distinguish those men from the rest, to
whose charge I purpose not to lay the abusing of me, in such manner as is
mentioned in this discourse; by these observations following yt may infallably
be done.

When any man shall come to a Stationers shopp to buy a Psalmebooke, or any
other book, with which the Psalms of David in English meeter are bound up: if
he be proffered that book with my Hymns thereunto, annexed (according to the
Kings Command) or if vvanting it, a reasonable excuse be made; or a promise to
provide it according to the Customers desire: or if upon the mentioning of me,
and that work of mine, he do neither cauil, nor object any thing to the
disgrace of that, or me: or if upon enquiry after this book, he promise to
procure it, or show some likely cause why it is not to be had, and neither
rail, nor grumble, nor look doggedly on him that demands it, before
departure: that man was never any of those that abused me. Or, if he were, it
seems he is either sorry, or so ashamed he has wronged me, that he deserves
to be forgiven: and therefore, I would not that any thing which he was guilty
of to my harm, should be laid to his charge while he continues in that temper;
but my desire is (if it were possible) that every man who has heard him
abuse me, should rather quite forget that any such vvronges had been done.

For, some have been ledd on to iniure me out of mere ignorance; some, for
Company sake; some, because of their dependence upon such as are my illwillers;
and some, by reason they believed ouerwell of those who missedd them: all
which, will turn another leaf, as soon as the state of my cause appears.
But, they who have out of pure malice persecuted me, will not so relent. The
Devil owes them a shame, and will not suffer them to see whereunto their
envy and blind Coueteousnesse will bring them, before he has paid them.
Assooone as ever this book shows it self abroad, I durst wager the price of
it, that you shall find those fellows at some Tavern within a flight shot of
Paul's, constulting, quotinge, commenting, and observing, what may be
collected out of it, to my disadvantage: and, if anger do not put them beside
their old custom, it will cost them a worthy leg of Mutton, a Capon, and a
gallon or twoe of wine before any matter vvillbe disgested vvorth their
expenses. Next morning (it is tenn to one else) they may be found at some
Lawyers Chamber, to know what cann be picked out of this Apology, to bear an
Action of slander; or some such like cullor of prosecuting the Law, against me.
But, that will be to little purpose; for the book is so large that if their
Counsel have any good practice, he must be feign to take time until the next
long vacation to read it over; and by that time, he will have the same opino^
of the^ which I express. As Soon as they com from Counsel; at some typling
house they will presently meet again, to comfort themselves with that little
hope which the law seems to promise. And it may be, thither they will send
for some of those hyreling Authors of theirs, that use to fashion those
Pamphletts that suite the several humors and inclinations of the times; or one
of those that penns for them such worthy stories, as the Dragon of Sussex, Tom
Thumb, and the vveekely news. From whom if they cann procure but the promise
of making some foolish libell against me; or to publish an impudent reply to
my Apology; it shall not cost him a farthing, if he sit among them till
twelve a clock at night; and perhapps he shall have somewhat in earnest also,
of a better penny.

If any man enquire of the^ for my book of Hymns, he shall be sent away
without it; and perhapps they will pass some scandalous censure thereupon.
If this book be asked after among them, they will presently discover
themselves by some bitter language; and by protesting against it, as a
scurrilous and libellous pamphlet: upon the very nameing of me, their cullor
does usually change: And if the Company and I should have any meetings together
about these matters in question, those will discover themselves from the rest,
by their Distempered looks, their contemptible speeches of me, their furious
behauiors, and these are the marks, whereby I distinguish those whom I accuse
from those whom I clear. And, here are no personal Notions, whereby the
person of any particular man is vninstly desamed (for publicly to accuse any
one in that kind until Authority require it, is both unlawful and
uncharitable) But these are marks of quality, which if any man have upon him
(especially being thus forewarned) it is his own fault if his disgrace
follovv. And I do no greater vvrong in saying he that does this or thus, is my
malicious enemy; then in affyrming, that he who steals is a Thief.

But, these rules do but only mark my friends from my Foes among the
Stationers: Because therefore, I have charged them in general with some abuses
publicly injurious; I will declare also, how such as are to be approved
blameless among them, shall be known from the rest; by expressing the trne
definition of an honest Stationer; and the lively Charecter of his contrary.
Whom, for difference sake, I call a mere Stationer.

An honest Stationer is he, that exercizeth his Mystery (whether it be in
printing, bynding, or selling of Books) with more respect to the glory of God,
and the public advantage, then to his own commodity: and is both an
ornament, and a profitable member in a civil Commonwealth. He is the Caterer
that gathers together provision to satisfy the curious appetite of the Soul,
and is careful to his power that whatsoever he prouides shall be such as may not
poison or distemper the understanding. And, seeing the State intrusteth him
with the disposing of those Books, which may both profitt and hurt, as they
are applied, (like a discreet Apothecary in selling poysnous druggs) he
observes by whom, and to what purpose, such books are likely to be bought up,
before he will deliver them out of his hands. If he be a Printer, he makes
conscience to exemplefy his Copy fayrely, and truly. If he be a Booke-bynder;
he is careful his work may be strong and serviceable. If he be a seller of
Books, he is no mere Bookeseller (that is) one who sells merely ynck and
paper bundled up together for his own advantage only; but he is the Chapman of
Arts, of wisdom, and of much experience for a little money. He would not
publish a book tending to schism, or propha^nesse* for the greatest gain: and
if you see in his shopp, any books vain or impertine^t; it is not so much to
be imputed his fault, as to the vanity of the Times: For when books come forth
allowed by authority, he holds it his duty, rather to sell them, then to
censure them: Yet, he meddles as little as he can, with such as he is truly
persuaded are pernicious, or altogether unprofitable.

The reputation of Scholars, is a^ dear unto him as his own: For, he
acknowledges, that from them, his Mystery had both beginning and means of
continuance. He heartely loves and seeks the prosperity of his own
Corporation* Yet he would not iniure the Universities, to advantage it, norbe
so saucy as to make comparisons between them. He loves a good Author as his
Brother, and vvillbe ready to yield him the due portion of his labors, without
wrangling. When he comes to be Master or Warden of his Company, he labors
truly to rectify what is amiss; but fyndes so many peruerseones, and so few of
his good mind, that his year is out, before he cann bring any remedy to pass.
He greeues for those Abuses which have been offered, to me, and other Authors;
but fynding that by speaking on our behalfes he is likely to bring himself
into an inconvenience without profitt to us; he prays in ^ilence for
amendment, and that God would not lay to the charge of the whole Corporation,
that which but some among them are guilty of. He fears none of those
reproves which are to be found in this book: For, he knows himself clear,
and is resolved to make sale of it so it come forth with allowance from
Authority. In a word, he is such a man that the State ought to cherish him;
Scholars to love him; good Customers to frequent his shopp; and the whole
Company of Stationers to pray for him; For, it is for the sake of such as he,
that they have subsisted, and prospered thus long. And thus, you have the true
description of such a Stationer as I exempt from my reprofes; now follows the
Charecter of him, at whose reformation I have aimed.

A mere Stationer is he that imagines he was borne altogether for himself,
and exercizeth his Mystery without any respect either to the glory of God, or
the public advantage. For which cause, he is one of the most pernicious
superfluities in a Christian government, and may be well termed the Devils
seedman; seeing he is the aptest Instrument to sow schisms, heresies,
scandalls, and seditions through the world. What book soever he may have hope
to gain by, he will divulge; though it contain matter against his Prince,
against the State, or blasphemy against God; And all his excuse will be* that he
knew not it comprehended any such matter. For (give him his right) he scarcely
reads over one page of a book in seven year, except it be some such history
as the Wise men of Gotham; and that he does to furnish himself with some
foolish co^ceits to be thought facetious. He prayseth no book, but what sells
well, and that must be his own Copy too or else he will have some flirt at it:
No matter, though there be no cause; For, he knows he shall not be questioned
for what he says; or if he be, his impudence is enough to outface it. What
he believes is prepared for him, in the next world, I know not* but, for his
enriching in this life, he is of so large a faith, that he seems to believe,
all Creatures and Actions of the world, were ordained for no other purpose
but to make books upon, to increase hi^ trade: And if another man, of his
small understanding, should hear him plead his own supposed right where none
might contradict; He would half think, that all our Universities, and
Schools of Learning, were erected to no other end, but to breed Scholars to
study for the enriching of the Company of Stationers.

If an Author out of mere necessity, do but procure means to make sale of his
own book, or to peruent the combinations of such as he, by some Royal and
lawful privilege: He presently cries it down for a Monopoly; affyrming that
men of his profession may go hang themselves, if that be suffered. Marry;
Authors have a long time preserved a very thankful generation of them from
hanging, if they cannot afford them one book of ten Millions to relieve them
vvithall in a case of need: and when that book was the Authors own also,
and no part of the Stationers former liuelyhood. This is just as reasonable a
complaint, as if a Company of Haglers should prefer a bill against the Cuntry
Farmers* for bringing their own Corn and other provisions to the next
markett. He will fawn upon Authors at his first acquintance, and ring them to
his hiue, by the promising sounds of some good entertainment; but as soon as
they have prepared the honey to his hand, he drives the Bees to seek another
Stall. If he be a Printer, so his work have such appearance of being well
done, that he may receive his hyre, he cares not how vnworkmanlike it be
parformed; nor how many faults he let go to the Authors discredit, and the
readers trouble. If his employment be in bynding books; so they will hold
together but till his work Master has sold them, he desires not, they
should last a week longer: For, by that means a book of a Crown is mard in
one Month, which would last a hundred years, if it had 2d. more
vvorkmanshipp; and so, their gain and employment is increased to the subjects
loss. If he be a seller of Books; he makes no conscience what trash he putts
off; nor how much he takes, for that which is vvorth nothing. He will not
stick to belie his Authors intentions, or to publish secretly that there is
somewhat in his new ymprinted books, against the State, or some Honorable
personages; that so, they being questioned his vvare may have the quicker sale.
He makes no scruple to put out the right Authors Name, and insert another in
the second edition of a Book; And when the impression of some pamphlet lies
upon his hands, to imprint new Titles for yt, (and so take men's moneys twice
or thrice, for the same matter under diverse names) is no injury in his
opinion. If he get any written Copy into his power, likely to be vendible*
whether the Author be vvilling or no, he will publish it; And it shallbe
contrived and named also, according to his own pleasure: which is the
reason, so many good Books come forth imperfect, and with foolish titles.
Nay, he oftentimes gives books such names as in his opinion will make them
saleable, when there is little or nothing in the whole volume suitable to such a
Title. If he be none of the Assistance of his Company he ordinarily rayles on
their partiallyty in m^niging of the Kings Priveledges or the general stock;
but, this he does more in envy, them in love to upright dealing: For, when he
comes to those places (into which his very troublesomnesse sometime helps him
the sooner) he makes all worse then before, and plays the knave CUM
PRIVILEGIO. He is then bound to pray for the poor, much more then they are,
for him* For, they are indeed his Benefactors.

He will be ready upon all occasions, to boast of the 200. li: a year, which
is given among their pensioner^: but, he has not thankfulness enough to tell
any man, that it arises out of his Majesty's Privileges bestowed for that
purpose, nor how many thousand pounds are yearly made thereof beside. If he
once get to be an officer in the Society; he forgetts to speak in the first
personn for ever after; but (like a Prince) says, we will, and we do this
etc. He thinks upon nothing more then to keep under the inferiors of the
Corporation, and to draw the profitt of the Kings Priveledges to his private
use. He stands infeare of nobody ^ut the Archb: of Canterbury, the Bishop of
London, and the high Commission, and loves nobody but himself. I cannot devise
what his Religion is nor he neither (I think.) For, what sector profession
soever his customer is of, he will furnish him with Books tending to his
opinions. To a Papist he rayles upon Protestants; to Protestants he speaks
ill of Papists; and to a Browinst, he reuiles them both. Yet, I dare say this
for him, that he is an enemy to the alteration of Religeon in this
Commonwealth, because he fears it would spoil their Privilege, for David's
Psalms in English meeter, or hinder the reprinting of many vendible coppyes.
Marry a Tolleration he would hold well with all, so he might have but the sole
printing of the Masse-booke or our Ladies Psaltet. He will take upon him to
censure a book as arrogantly a^ if he had read it; or were a man of some
understanding. He speaks of reverend Doctors, as disdaynfully as of school
boys; And mentiones the Universities with no more respect, then if all their
famous Colleges were but so many Almeshouses maintained out of the Stationers
Hall. When he shall hear me or any other object those Abuses, which some of
his Company have offered me to my face; he will vnciuelly give the lie, and
justify the contrary, as confidently, as if he had been present at all times,
and in all places. He is no more pittyfull to a poor man that falls into his
power, then a hungry Bear to a Lamb. When he spakes of him whom he loves not,
it is usually with as much contempt (of what quality soever the other be of) as
if he were one of the Almesmen of his Company. If he come among the rest of his
fraternity about any co^trouersy between them and others; he will speak any
untruth that may advantage his own side: For, if the matter should require to
be iustifyde, he knows that among many the speaker will hardly be found out,
and that when the lie is divided among them all, there will not fall much shame
upon any one man. He will allow of no Priveledges which the Kings Majesty
shall vouchsafe concerning books, unless he may be interested in the best part
of the profitt: Yea, rather the^ those which are bestowed upon his own
Corporatio^ shall be disposed of for the benefit of the generallity, according
to his Majesty's inte^tio^; he will go near to do his best to forfeit them
altogether: For, he will at any time suffer some mischeese himself to do
another a great spite.

He will swear the peace or good behauior against any one whom he is disposed
to trouble, though there be no cause; And if he may have but some of his
Brotherhood to stand among; he will not stick wilfully to misinforme the whole
Court of Aldermen to procure the committment of such pore men as he prosecutes.
And this is one of his infallable marks; if he prevail in a business, or
have but any hope of getting the better; the Tavern is the Temple where he
gives his God praise: Thither he presently repayres to offer up the sacrifize
of fools; and perhapps is ledd from thence in slate, between two supporters
(Porters I should have said) to his own house, where he vtters his stomach to
his wife and famely. He is so extreme guilty, and so fearful that most of
these marks are to be found upon him, that all his friends shall never
persuade him, but this Character was made by him; and therefore, he will take
it to himself though he be one whom I never knew nor heard of. He will
condemn the Stationer that sells this Apology for a faulse brother; and (if it
be possible to draw the rest to be so indiscreet) he will get the whole
Company to take this description as an abuse to their Mystery; but, they will be
better advised. He will bestow both upon me, and upon this book, all the foul
terms he cann invent; or give out, perhapps, that it is nothing suitable to
that Mind which I have express in my Motto: But, let him examine them
together, and he shall find they disagree not in a word. He will much insist
upon all those bitter reproo^es which I have used, and be very sensible of
them (noe doubt) because they touch himself: but, those iniuryes which are the
cause of them, he will never mention. He will tell his Companions, that they
have Boys in the Churchyard, able to answer all this: and (it is odes) but
he will carpe al^oe, at some want of wit or learning in these expressions; as
if there needed any great wit, or learning to be used, in bidding a Dog come
out. These pills may, perhapps, stir his humors, but they will not purge away
one dramm of his corruptions; For, he is so blinded with coueteousnesse and
self will, that (to change his mind) Noise will prevail with him, as much as
reason: and therefore, this which I have written, was never intented to satisfy
him, but others. He truly resembles the Ephesian Siluersimthes; and rather then
his Mystery should decay, would prefer Paganism before Christianity, profane
Ballads before Hymns praising God; and, that which he has not ability to
compass by Reasons, he will attempt by vproares. To conclude, he is a
dangerous excrement, worthy to be cut off, by the State; to be detested of all
Scholars; to be shunned of all the people; and deserves to be cursed, and expeld
out of the Company of Stationers. For, by the coueteousnesse, cruelty, and
inconsionableness of such as he; a flourishing and well esteemed Corporatio^,
is in danger to come to ruin, and disgrace.

This man, with such as he, are those whom I have declamed against in this
discourse, and no other; nor will I, that my general accusations shall, in
part, or in the whole be imputed to any man in particular; but to him that
shall apply unto himself this Character, or have it proved to be true upon
him by apparent testimony. For, it shall satisfy me enough (and it shall do the
Commonwealth good service) if by this satyricall description of a bade
Stationer, and my definition of a good one, those things which are amise may be
amended hereafter. And this is an easy and warrantable way of Correction. For*
I do not mark them out by their redd Noses, or corpulent paunches (or such
like personal defects) which they cannot remedy (as some vvonld have done)
but by their vices which they ought to give over. What an old Poet once said,
is yet in force.

-- -- LICUIT, SEMPERQUE LICEBIT
PARCERE PERSONIS DICERE DE VITIIS.
It shall be lavvfull ever; and has been
To spare the personns, and to touch the syn.
I have taken that Authors word, and put his vvarrant often times in
execution; and (though I have smarted for it) never was, nor ever will be
driven from this course of proceeding against Male factors; until that
foresaid Author come back and deny his warrant.

Blame me not, if I seem bitter to such as these* for, their disease needs it:
I have had means to know them perfectly; and was compelled to search into the
very marrow of their Mystery: and when through my love to a carnal rest, I
became loath to meddle with such a nest of hornets (but to suffer an
inconvenience rather) they were so ^oolishly confident, that they stung me to
it. And doubtless, it was permitted by the providence of God, that their
wickedness might come to light, before it should occasion greater troubles.
Yea, perhapps, I have been trained up all my life time in afflictions, and have
heretofore suffered concerning books, partly to experience me in their Abuses;
and partly to enable me to bear out the fury of such a powrefull multitude as
does now oppose me.

Many men of good sufficiency, do wonder (as I hear) what abuses worthy all
these words cann be found among the Stationers. For, alas think they; those do
but sell books to such as come for them; and are a harmless kind of people
by whom (to their understanding) the Commonwealth can receive no great
prejudice, in any matter concerning their Mystery. But, when they have read
over this, it will begett another opinion: If not; my next discovery shall.
For, I cann, yet lance deeper, and make it evident to the capacity of every
common man; that such as those whom I have marked out, are they who are the
principal dispersers of heresies, and the prime disturbers of unity in the
Church. I cann demonstrate, that they are most times occasioners of those
grudgings and discontentme^ts which do other while distemper the minds of the
people. That much trouble to the State, is procured by them; that they are the
likelyest instruments to kindle factions, and stir up sedition; that they have
invoulued and obscured the certain tenants of our Church, among such a
multitude of the private fancies and opinions of vpstart vvriters; that the
Common people scarce know what principles we profess; and our Adversaries
take advantage, out of their vnallovved Pamphlets, to impute to the Church of
England, what absurdityes they please. I cann make it evident they have so
pestered their printing houses, and shopps with fruitless volumes, that the
Ancient and renouned Authors are almost buried among them as forgotten; and
that they have so much work to prefer their termely Pamphlets, which they
provide to take up the peoples money, and time; that there is neither of them,
left to bestow on a profitable book: so they who desire knowledge are still
kept ignorant; their ignorance increases their affection to vain toys; their
affection makes the Stationer to increase his provision of such stuff; and at
last you shall see nothing to be sold amongst us, but Curra^to's, Beauis of
Southamptonn or such trumpery. The Arts, are already almost lost among the
vvritings of Mountebanck Authors. For, if any one among us would Study
Physic, the Mathamaticks, Poetry, or any of the liberal sciences, they have
in their vvarehouses so many volumes of quacksaluing recepts; of faulse
propositions; and of inartificall Ryminngs (of which last sort they have some
of mine there God forgive me) that unless we be directed by some Artist, we
shall spend half our Age before we cann find those Authors which are vvorth
our readings. For, what need the Stationer be at the charge of printing the
labors of him that is Master of his Art, and will require that respect which
his pain deserves? Seeing he cann hyre for a matter of 40 shillings, some
needy IGNORAMUS to scrible upon the same subject, and by a large promising
title, make it as vendible for an impression or two, as though it had the
quintessence of all Art?

I cann make it appear also, that they are the Chief hinderers of the
advancement of our language, the principal peruerters of good manners; and the
prime causers of all that irreligious profaneness which is found among us.
And, I do foresee, that if they proceed as hitherto they have done, they will
be the ruin of their own Mystery, and bring an invndatio^ of Barbarism upon
all his Majesty's Kingdoms, which God divert.

These things have I discovered; and with a mind neither malitio^sly bent to
the ruin of the Corporatio^ of Stationers, or desirous of the shame or
confusion of any one member thereof: but, (whatsoever some among them conceive)
I aim rather at the profitt of the one, and the reformation of the other. And
that this may appear to be true. I will in due time show, that I have sought
as much how to find a gentle plaster to cure those vl^rs, as to make a sharp
instrument to search them. For, if I may be heard without prejudice; I cann
declare by what means, and how, the Corporation of Stationers may be hereafter
acquitted of all those scandalls, that some corrupt members thereof, have
brought upon it; How, the repinings and discontentments which are among
themselves, may be quieted: How, all my inivryes may be satisfied, to my
contentment, without their damage; and how, all the public abuses mentioned in
this discourse, shallbe in some good measure prevented, for ever hereafter: to
the Kings Majesty's great content, to the avoiding of much trouble heretofore
occasioned to the State; to the good likeing of both Universities, to the
profit ease and credit of the Stationers themselves; to the furtherance of
Christian peace and v^ity in the Church, to the prevention of many publik and
private inconveniences, and in a word, to the glory of God, and to the honor
and benifite, of all his Majesty's Dominions.

And now I have done troubling your RRces for this time: Though I bent my bow
to shoot in my own defense; yet I have stuck my arrows upon a public enemy.
Now you have heard me, healpe, or leave me to my self as you shall think
fitting: For, I have in every circumstance honestly delivered my Conscience;
and I know God will deliver me.

Nec Habeo, nec Careo, nec Curo.

