The Frontespeice discovered.
This spreading Vine, like these choice Leaves invites
The Courteous eye to taste her choice Delights.
These painful Bees, presented to thy view,
Shows The Author works not for himself, but you.
The windy Music, that salutes thine eye,
Bespeaks thine Ear, thy judgment standing by.
The Devious Horseman, wandering in this Maze,
Shows Error, and her execrable ways:
Whose brazen Insolence, and boldness urges
The hornefoot Satyrs to their angry Scourges:
And he that Draws his Sword against the Swarm
Of Waspes, is he, that lasht, begins to storm.
WITS RECREATIONS Selected from the finest Fancies of Modern Muses.

WITH A Thousand out Landish Proverbs.

London. Printed for Humph: Blunden at ye Castle in Cornhill 1640.

The Stationer to the Reader.
IF new or old wit please the reader best,
I Have hope each man of wit will be our guest,
The new was framed to humor some men's taste;
Which if they like not, they may carve the last:
Each dish has sauce belongs to it, and you will
By your dislike, censure the Authors skill;
Yet if you cannot speak well of it, spare
To utter your dislike, that the like snare
May entrap others; so the book may be
Sold, though not liked, by a neat fallacy:
That Is all I ask yet'twill your goodness raise,
If as I gain your coin, he may your praise.
Wits Recreations.
1 To the Reader.
EXcuse me Reader though I now and than
In some light lines do show my self a man,
Nor be so sour, some wanton words to blame
They are the language of an Epigram.
2 On Battus
Battus does brag he has a world of books
His studies maw holds more then well it may,
But seld' or never he upon them looks
And yet he looks upon them every day,
He looks upon their outside, but within
He never looks, nor never will begin:
Because it clean against his nature goes
To know men's secrets, so he keeps them close.
3 On the same
I pray thee Battus, add unto thy store
This book of mine to make thy number more;
It is well bound, well printed, neatly strung,
And does deserve to have a place among
The Inhabitants of thy Vatican, if thou Will so much favor to its worth allow.
4. An evil age.
Virgill of Mars and ruthful wars did treat,
Ovid of Venus love, and peace did write:
Yet Virgill for his strain was counted great,
And Ovid for his love was bannished quite;
No marvel then if c^ur^ezie grow cold,
When hare is praised and love it self controlled.
5 On a woman's will.
How dearly does the simple husband buy,
His wiv^s defect of will, when she does die?
Bett^r in death by will to let her give,
Then let her have her will whilst she does live.
6. To a (...) ^eader.
Thou say these verses are rude, ragged, rough,
Not like some others, ^imes smooth dainty ^^uffe:
Epigrames are like satires rough without,
Like chesse-nuts sweet, take thou the kernel out.
7 Of a Judge.
Were I to choose a Captain I would than,
Not choose your courtier or a youthful man,
No, I would choose a judge, one grim and grave;
To make a Captain such a man I Would crave:
Give me that man, whose frowning brow is death,
I, such an one, as can kill men with breath.
8 Of Poet^s.
Poetus with fine sonnets painteth forth,
This and that soul Ladies beauties worth:
He shows small wit thereby, and for his pains,
By my consent he never shall reap gains,
Why what need poets paint them? O sweet Elves?
When Ladies paint their beauties best themselves.
9 On an up-start.
Pray wrong not (late-coyn'd) give the man his right
He Is made a gentleman although no knight,
For now it is cloths the gentleman does make,
Men from gay cloths their pedigrees do take;
But wot you what is the arms to such men's house^
Why this -- hands chacing of a rampant louse.
10 Ad Clodium.
Wir, once thou said was worth thy weight in gold
Though now't be common for a trifle sold;
It dearer seems to thee, that get'st not any,
When thou should use it, for thy love or money
11 In Getam.
Geta from wool and weaving first began,
Swelling and swelling to a gentleman,
When he was gentleman and bravely dight:
He left not swelling till he was a knight;
At last forgetting what he was at first,
He swole to be a Lord, and then he burst.
12 In Fimum.
Fimus is coach'd and for his farther grace,
Does a ske his friends how he becomes the place;
Troth I should tell him, the poor coach has wrong
And that a cart would serve to carry dung.
13 Asper^m ^imis condimentum.
Monsieur Albanus new invested is,
With sundry suits and fashions passing fit,
But never any came so near as this,
For joy whereof Albanus frollique is:
Until the Taylours bill of solvi fias,
Diverts his humor to another bias.
14 Gender and number.
Singular sins and plural we commit;
And we in every gender vary it.
15 At^eists pastimes.
Grammarians talk of times past and hereafter:
I spend time present in pastime and laughter.
16 To Sr. John Suckling.
If learning will beseem a Courtier well,
If honor (...) on those who dare excel,
Then let not Poets envy but admire,
The eager flames of thy poetique fire;
For whilst the world loves wit, Aglaura shall,
Phoenix-like live after her funeral.
17 On a braggadocio.
Don Lollus brags, he comes of noble blood,
Drawn down from Brutus line; it is very good!
If this praiseworthy be, each flea may then,
Boast of his blood more then some gentlemen.
18 To Mr. George Sands.
Sweet-tongued Ovid, though strange tales ^e told,
Which gods and men did act in days of old,
What various shapes for love sometimes they took;
To purchase what they ay^'d at: could he look,
But back upon himself he would admire,
The sumptuous bravery of that rich attire;
Which Sands has clad him with, and then place this
His change amongst their Metamorphosis.
19 To Mr. William Habbington on his Castara, a Poem.
Thy Muse is chaste and thy Castara too,
^Tis strange at Court, and thou had power to woo
And to obtain (what others were denied)
The fair Castara for thy virtuous bride:
Enjoy what you dare wish, and may there be,
Fair issues branch from both, to honor thee.
20 To Mr. Francis Beaumont and Mr. John Fletcher gent.
Twin-stars of poetry, whom we justly may,
Call the two-tops of learned Pernassus-Bay,
Peerlesse for freindship and for numbers sweet;
Whom often the Muses swaddled in one sheet:
Your works shall still be praised and dearer sold,
For our new-nothings do extol your old.
21 On apump stopped with stones.
M. I Will cut it down, I swear by this same hand,
If 'twill not run, it shall no longer stand.

R. Pray ^ir be patient, let your pump alone,
How can it water-make when it has the stone.
Yet did he wisely when he did it fell,
For in so doing he did make it well.

22 To Mr. Benjamin Johnson.
Had Rome but heard her worthies speak so high,
As thou have taught them in thy Poesy;
She would have sent her poets to obtain,
(Tutour'd by thee) thy most majestique strain.
23. In Aulam.
Thou still art mutring Aulus in mine ear,
Love me and love my dog, I will I swear,
Thou ask'st but right and Aulus truth to tell,
I think thy dog deserves my love as well.
24 To Mr. George Chapman on his Translation of Homers works into English
meeter.
Thou Ghost of Homer 'twere no fault to call,
His the translation thine the Original,
Did we not know 'twas done by thee so well;
Thou make Homer, Homers self excel.
25 To Mr. William Shake-spear.
Shake-speare we must be silent in thy pra^se,
'Cause our encomion's will but blast thy Bays,
Which envy could not, that thou did do well;
Let thine own histories prove thy Chronicle.
26 Ad Tilenum.
Tilenus 'cause thou art old, fly not the field,
Where youthful Cupid does his banner weild
For why^ this god, old men his soldiers styled
None loves, but he, who has bin twice a child.
27 To Mr. Thomas Randolph.
Thou darling of the Muses for we may
Be thought deserving, if what was thy play
Our utmost labors can produce, we will
Freely allow thee heir unto the hill,
The Muses did assign thee, and think 't fit,
Thy younger years should have the elder-wit.
28 In Paulum.
Paul what my cloak does hide thou fain would know
Were It to be seen I would not cover't so.
29 Of sleep and death.
That death is but a sleep I not deny
Yet when I next would sleep, I would not die.
30 Ad Lectorem.
Reader thou see how pale these papers look,
Whiles they fear thy hard censure on this book.
31 Ad Momum.
Momus thou say our verses are but ^oyes,
It Is true, yet truth is often spoken by boys.
32 On Thraso.
Thraso goes lame with a blow he did receive,
In a late duel, if you will him believe.
33 News.
When news does come if any would discuss,
The letters of the word, resolve it thus:
News is convay'd by letter, word or mouth
And comes to us, from north, east, west and sout^
34 Of Ru^us.
Rufus had robbed his host and being put to it;
Said I Am an arrar^t rogue, if I did do it.
35 Of Marcus.
When Marcus failed a borrowed sum to pay,
Unto his friend at the appointed day:
'Twere superstition for a man he says,
To be a strict observer of set days.
36 Of a thief.
A thief arested and in custody,
Under strong guards of armed company,
Ask't why they held him so? Sir quoth the chief*
We hold you for none other than a theif.
37 Of motion.
Motion brings heat, and thus we see it proved
Most men are hot and angry, when they are moved
38 Ad Scriptorem.
Half of your book is to an index grown,
You give your book contents, your reader none.
39 Domi^a Margarita Sandis: Anagramma.
Anne domi das Marg^^it as?
Why do we seek and sail abroad to find,
Those pearls which do adorn the female-kind,
Within our seas there comes unto our hands,
A matchless Margaryte among the Sands.
40 Man.
Man's like the earth, his hair like grass is grown,
His veins the rivers are, his heart the stone.
41 Vita via.
Well may man's life be likened to a way,
Many be weary of their life they 'll say.
42 To Mr. Thomas May.
Thou son of Mercury whose fluent tongue
Made Lucan finish his Pharsalian song,
Thy fame is equal, better is thy fate,
Thou have got Charles his love, he Nero's hate.
43 On Harpax.
Harpax gave to the poor all by his will,
Because his heir should no feigned tears distill.
44 On Sextu^.
Sextus does wish his wife in heaven were
Where can she have more happiness then there.
45 To Mr. George Wyt^ers.
Thou Have whipped our vices shrewdly and we may,
Think on thy scourge until our dying-day:
Th* have given us a Remembrancer which shall,
Outlast the vices we are taxed withal,
Th^'ha^t made us both eternal, for our shame
Shall never Wyther, whilst thou have a name.
46 On a Drawer drunk.
Drawer with thee now even is thy wine,
For thou have pierced his hogs-head and he thine.
47 Upon the weights of a clock.
I wonder time's so swift, when as I see,
Upon her heels, such lumps of lead to be.
48 To Mr. Thomas Middleton.
F^cetious Middleton thy witty Muse,
Has pleased all, that books or men peruse
If any thee despise, he does but show,
Antipathy to wit, in daring so:
Thy fam's above his malice and 'twilbe,
Dispraise enough for him, to censure thee.
49 On Cyn^^.
Because, I am not of a Giant's stature,
Despise me not, nor praise thy liberal nature,
For thy huge limbs, that you are great it is true,
And that I Am little in respect of you,
The reason of our growths is easily had,
You many had perchance, I but one Dad.
50 To Mr. James Shirly on his Comedy viz. the young Admiral.
How all our votes are for thee ( S^irly) come
Conduct our troops, strike up Apollo's drum,
We wait upon thy summons and do all,
Intend to choose thee our young Admiral:
51 On Alastrus.
Alastrus has nor coin, nor spirit nor wit,
I think he is only then for Bedlam fit.
52 On Macer.
You call my verses ^oyes the are so it is true,
Yet they are better, then ought comes from you.
53 To Mr. Philip Massinger.
Apollo's Messenger, who does impart
To us the edicts of his learned art,
We cannot but respect thee, for we know,
Princes are honored in their Legates so.
54 On Celsus.
Celsus does love himself, Celsus is wise,
For now no rival ere can claim his prize.
55 On Candidus.
When I am sick not else thou come to see me:
Waild fortune from both torments still would free me.
56 To Mr. John Ford.
If e're the Muses did admire that well,
Of Hellicon as elder times do tell,
I dare presume to say upon my word;
They much more pleasure take in thee rare Ford
57 On Paulus.
Because thou followst some great Peer at Court,
Do think the world deem's thee a great one for^
Ah no! thou art mistaken Paulus, know
Dwarfs still as pages unto giants go.
58 To Mr. Thomas Heywood.
Thou have writ much and art admired by those,
Who love the easy ambling of thy prose;
But yet thy pleasingst flight, was somewhat hig^
When thou did touch the angels Hyerarchie:
Fly that way still it will become thy age,
And better please then grovelling on the stage.
59 On a cowardly Soldier.
Strotzo does wear no ring upon his hand,
^lthough he be a man of great command;
But gilded spurs do jingle at his heels
Whose rowels are as big as some coach-wheels,
He graced them well, for in the Netherlands,
His heels d^d him more service then his hands.
60 To Mr. Thomas Goffe on his tragedies.
When first I heard the Turkish Emperors speak,
In such a dialect, and O^estes break
His silence in such language, I admired
What powerful favorite of the Nimphs inspired
Into their Souls such utterance, but I wrong,
To think 'twas learnt from any but thy tongue.
61 On Cornuto.
Cornuto is not jealous of his wife,
Nor e're mistrust's her too la^civious life,
Ask him the reason why he does forbear,
He Will answer straight, it comes with a fear.
62 On a Shrew.
A froward shrew being blamed because she showed,
Not so much reverence as by right she owed
Unto her husband, she replied he might
Forbear complaint of me, I do him right*
His will is mine, he would bear rule, and I
Desire the like, only in sympathy.
63 On a youth married to an old woman.
Fond youth I wonder why thou did intend
To marry her who is so near her end,
Thy fortune I dare tell, perchance thou wilt have
At supper dainties; but in bed a grave.
64 On a dying Usurer.
With greater grief non does death entertain,
Then wretched Chrysalus, he sighs a mayn,
Not that he dies, but 'cause much cost is spent
Upon the Sexton and his regiment
The joviall ringers, and the Curate must
Have his fee too, when dust is turned to dust,
And which is greater then the former sum,
He Will pay an angel for a Moor-stone-tomb.
65 On a fly in a glass.
A fly out of his glass a guest did take,
E're with the liquor he his thirst would slake,
When he had drunk his fill, again the fly
Into the glass he put, and said though I
Love not flies in my drink, yet others may,
Whose humor I nor like, nor will gainsay.
66 On Collimus.
If that Collimus any thing do lend,
Or dog, or horse, or hawk unto his friend,
He to endear the borrowers love the more,
Says he never lent it any one before,
Nor would to any but to him: his wife
Having observed these speeches all her life,
Behind him forks her fingers and does cry:
To none but you, I Would do this courtesy.
67 Auri-sacra fames-qui^ non?
A smoothfac'd youth was wedded to an old,
Decrepit shrew, such is the power of gold:
That love did tie this knot, the end will prove,
The love of money not the god of love.
68 On Sex^us.
What great revenews Sextus does possess,
When as his sums of gold are numberless,
What cannot Sextus have? I wonder then,
Sextus cannot live as well as other men.
69 Good wits jump.
Against a post a scholar chanced to strike,
At unawares his head, like will to like:
Good wits will jump (quoth he) if that be true
The title of a block-head is his due.
70 On Women's Maskes.
It seems that Masks do women much disgrace,
Since when they wear them they do hide their face.
71 On Lepidus and his wife.
Lepidus married somewhile to a shrew,
She sick'ned, he in jesting wise to show
How glad her death would make him; said sweetheart
I pray you e're you sing loath to depart
Tell who shall be my second wife, and I
After your death will wed her instantly,
She somewhat vexed hereat, straightway replied
Then let grim Pluto's daughter be your bride.
He answered wife I would your will obey,
But that our laws my willingness gainsay:
For he who Pluto's sister takes to wife,
Cannot his daughter too upon my life.
72 Upon a pair of Tongs.
The burnt child dreads the fire; if this be true,
Who first invented tongs it is fury knew.
73 On Celsus his works.
Celsus to please himself, a book has writ:
It seems so, for there is few that buyeth it.
He is no popular man it thereby seems;
Since men condemn, what he praise worthy deems,
Yet this his wisdom and his book prefer,
Disprais'd by all, they think both singular.
74 The Devil and the Friar.
The Devil was once deceived by a friar,
Who though he sold his soul cheated the buyer,
The devil was promised if he would supply,
The Friar with coin at his necessity,
When all the debts he owed discharged were quite,
The Devil should have his soul as his by right,
The Devil defrayed all scores, paid all, at last,
Demanded for his due, his soul in haste:
The Friar returned this answer, if I ow
You any debts at all, then you must know,
I am indebted still, if nothing be
Due unto you, why do you trouble me?
75 To Phillis.
Ask me not Phillis why I do refuse
To kiss thee as the most of gallants use,
For seeing often thy dog to fawn and skip
Upon thy lap and joining lip to lip,
Although thy kisses I full fain would crave;
Yet would I not thy dog my rival have.
76 Of Charidem^s.
Although thy neighbor have a handsome horse,
Matchless for comely shape, for hue and course
And though thy wife thou know ill-shapen ^e,
Yet Charidemus praises mightily,
His ugly wife and does the horse dispraise:
How subtly the fox his engine lays,
For he desires his neighbors horse to buy,
And sell his wife to any willingly.
77 Of Clytus.
Clytus the barber does occasion fly,
Because it is bal'd and he gains naught thereby.
78 On Balbus.
Balbus a verse on Venus, boy does scan,
But ere 'twas fini^^'d Cupid's grown a man.
79 On Comptulus.
I wondered Comptulus, how thy long hair
In comely curles could show so debonair
And every hair in order be, when as
Thou could not trim it by a looking-glass,
Nor any barber did thy tresses pleat,
It Is strange; but Monsieur I conceive the feat
When you your hair do kemb, you off it take
And order 't as you please for fashions sake.
80 On Gellius.
In building of his house, Gellius has spent
All his revenews and his ancient rent,
Ask not a reason why Gellius is poor.
His great house has turned him out of door.
81 To Ponticus.
At supper-time will Poutus visit me,
I Would rather have his room then company;
But if him* from me I can no ways fright,
I Would have him visit me each fasting night.
82 On a Pot-poet.
What lofty verses Cael^s writes? it is,
But when his head with wine oppressed is,
So when great drops of rain fall from the skies
In standing pools, huge bubles will arise.
83 On Onellus.
Thou never supp'st abroad, Onellus, true;
For at my home I Am sure to meet with you.
84 On Wine.
What? must we then on muddy tap-lash swill,
Neglecting sack? which makes the poet's quill
To thunder forth high raptures, such as when
Sweet-tongued Ovid erst with his smooth pen,
In flourishing Rome did write; frown god of win^
To see how most men disesteem thy Vines.
85 On beer.
Is no juice pleasing but the grapes? is none,
So much beloved? does perfection,
Only conjoyn in wine? or does the well
Of Aganippe with this liquor swell,
That Po^ts thus affect it? shall we crown,
A mere ex^tique? and contemn our own,
Our native liquor? haunt who list the grape,
He more esteem our Oate, whose reed shall make,
An instrument to warble forth her praise,
Which shall survive until the date of days,
And eke invoke some potent power divine,
To patronize her worth above the vine.
86 On a vaunting Poetaster.
C^cilius boasts his verses worthy be,
To be engraven on a Cypress tree,
A Cypress wreath befits 'em well; it is true,
For they are near their death, and crave but due.
87 On Philos.
If Philos, none but those are dead, do praise,
I would I might displease him all his days.
88 On a valiant Soldier.
A Spanish Soldier in the Indian war,
Who often came off with honor and some scar,
After a teadious battle, when they were
Enforced for want of bullets to forbear,
Farther to encounter, which the Savage Moor
Perceiving, scoffed, and nearer then before,
Approached the Christian host, the soldier grie^
To be out braved, yet could not be relieved
Beyond all patience vexed, he said although
I bullets want, my self will wound the foe;
Then from his mouth, took he a tooth and sent,
A fatal message to their regiment,
What arms will fury steed men with, when we.
Can from our selves have such artillery;
Sampson thy jaw bone can no trophy rear
Equal to his, who made his tooth his spear.
89 On Aurispa.
Why does the world repute Aurispa learned?
Because she gives men what they never earned.
90 On Paulus.
Those verses which thou made I did condemn,
Nor did I censure thee in censuring them,
Thou made them, but since them in print I see,
They must the peoples not the authors be.
91 On Alexander the great.
If Alexander thought the world but small
Because his conquering hand subdued it all,
He should not then have styled himself the great,
An Infants stool can be no giants seat.
92 On a virtuous talker.
If virtue's always in thy mouth, how can
It ere have time to reach thy heart fond man?
93 On a land-skip in the lid of his Mrs. Virginals.
Behold Don Phoebus in yon shady grove,
On his sweet harp plays Roundelaies of love,
Mark how the fatyr grim Marsyas plays
On his rude pipe, hi^ merry-harmlesse lays,
Mark how the swains attentively admire,
Both to the sound of pipe and tang of lyre;
But if you on these Virginals will play,
They both will cast their instruments away,
And deeming it the ^^sique of the Spheres
Admire your music as the swains do theirs
94 Upon pigs devouring a bed of penny-royall commonly called Organs.
A good wife once a bed of Organs set,
The pigs came in and eat up every whit,
The good man said wife you your garden may
Hogs Norton call, here pigs on Organs play.
95 On a fortune tellers.
The influence of the stars are known to thee,
By whom thou can each future fortune see
Yet, since thy wife does thee a cuckold make,
It Is strange they do not that to thee partake.
96 On sore eyes.
Fuscus was counseled if he would preserve,
His eyes in perfect sight drinking to swerve;
But he replyd' it is better that I should
Loose them, then keep them for the worms as food
97 On a gallant.
A glittering gallant, from a prauncing steed,
Alighting down, desired a boy with speed
To hold his horse a while, he made reply,
Can one man hold him fast? 'twas answered I,
If then one man can hold him sir, you may
Do it your self, quoth he, and slunk away.
98 On an inevitable Cuckold.
Two wives the have buried and another wed,
Yet neither of the three chaste to thy bed,
Wherefore thou blam'st not only them, but all
Their Sex into disgrace and scorn do call,
Yet if the thing thou will consider well,
Thou will thy malice, and this rage expel,
For when the three were all alike 't should seem
Thy stars gave thee the Cuckold's anadem,
If thou were born to be a wittoll, can
Thy wife prevent thy fortune? foolish man!
That woman which a Hellen is to thee,
Would prove another man's Penelope.
99 On an empty house.
Lollus by night awaked heard thieves about
His house, and searching narrowly throughout
To find some pillage there, he said you may
By night, but I can find naught here by day.
100 On a bragging coward.
Corsus in camp, when as his mates betook,
Themselves to dine, encouraged them, and spoke,
Have a good stomach Lads, this night we shall
In heaven at supper keep a festival,
But battle joynd he fled away in haste,
And said I had forgot, this night I fast.
101 On a great nose.
Thy nose no man wipe, Proclus unless
He have a hand as big as Hercules,
When thou do sneeze the sound thou do not hear,
Thy nose is so far distant from thine ear.
102 On an unequal pair.
Fair Pbi^^is is to churlish Pris^us wed,
As stronger wine with waters mingled,
Priscus his love to Phillis more does glow;
With fervency then fire, here is cold as snow;
It Is well for if their flames alike did burn,
One house would be to hot to serve their turn.
103 On a changeable raiment.
Know you why Lollus changes every day,
His Perriwig, his face and his array,
It Is not because his commings in are much,
Or cause he will swill it with the roaring dutch;
But 'cause the Sergeants (who a writ have had
Long since against him) should not know the lad.
104 On the ensuring office.
Linus met Thuscus on the burse by chance,
And swore he would drink a health to th'heir of France
For on the exchange for current news 'twas told,
France had a Daulphin not yet seven days old,
Thuscus excused himself, and said he must
By all means go to the ensuring office first,
And so ensure some goods, he doubted were,
Unlikely else ere to his hands appear,
Linus replied I Will with thee then, for I
Would have my lands ensur'd to me in fee
Which otherwise I doubt, I never shall,
From debt and morgage ere redeem at all.
105 On a Tennis-court haunter.
The world's a court, we are the bals, wherein
We bandied are by every stroke of sin,
Then only this can I commend in thee,
Thou actest well our frail mortality.
106 On Barossa.
Barossa boasts his pedigree although,
He knows no letter of the Christ-crosse-row,
His house is ancient, and his gentry great,
For what more ancient e're was heard of yet
Then is the family of fools, how than
Dare you not call Barossa gentleman?
107 On Clodius Albinus.
Clodius great cheer for supper does prepare,
Buys Chickens, Rabbets, Phesants and a hare,
Great store of fowl, variety of fish,
And tempting sauce served in, in every dish,
To this great feast, whom does he mean to envite,
Aloinus only sups with him to night.
108 On Afer.
Afer has sold his land and bought a horse,
Whereon he p^aunceth to the royal Burse,
To be on horse back he delights; wilt know?
'Cause then his company he would higher show,
But happy chance tall Afer in his pride,
Mounts a Gunnelly and on foot does ride.
109 On Balbulus.
Thou do complain poets have no reward
And now adays they are in no regard:
Verses are nothing worth, yet he that buys,
Ought that is thine, at a three-(...) price,
Will think it too too dear, and justly may
Think verses are in price, since (...) other day,
Yea who ere buies 'em at a farthing rate,
At the same price can never sell 'em at.
110 To Lycus.
That poetry is good and pleasing thou do cry,
Yet know not when it is right or when awry
Thou know great Ovid's censure to abstain
From pleasing good, is virtue's chiefest aim.
111 On Charismus.
Thou have composed a book, which neither age
Nor future time shall hurt through all their rage,
For how can future times or age invade
That work, which perished as soon as made.
112 Of one praising my book.
Harpax does praise my book I lately writ,
Says it is short and sweet and full of wit;
I knew his drift and said be silent 'pray,
For in good faith, I Have given 'em all away.
113 Facilis discensus averni.
The way to hell is easy, the other day,
A blind man ^hither quickly found the way.
114 Age and Youth.
Admire not youth, despise not age, although
Some young are grave, most old men children grow
115 On Orus.
Orus sold wine, and then Tobacco, now
He Aqua-vitae does his friends allow,
What ere he had, is sold, to save his life,
And now turned Pander he does sell his wife.
116 On Women.
Women are books and men the readers be,
In whom often times they great Errata's see;
Here sometimes we a blot, there we espy
A leaf misplaced, at least a line awry;
If they are books, I wish that my wife were
An Almanacke to change her every year
117 On Acerra.
Tobacco hurts the brain phisicians say,
Does dull the wit and memory decay,
Yet fear not thou Acerra, for 'twill never
Hurt thee so much by use, as by thy fear.
118 On Briso.
Who private lives, lives well, no wonder then
You do absent you from the sight of men,
For out of doors you near by day appear,
Since last you lost in the pill^ry your ear.
119 On the King of (...) picture.
Who but the half of this neat picture drew,
That it could never be fully done, well knew.
120 To his Mistress.
Hyperbole of worth, should wit suggest.
My will with Epithites, and I invest,
That shrine but with deserved paraphrase,
Adulatory poetry would praise.
And so but stain your wo^th: your virtues (or
Else none at all) shall be my orator.
121 B. I. answer to a thief bidding him stand.
Fly villain hence or be thy coat of steel,
I Will make thy heart, my ^razen b^llet feel,
And send that thrice as thievish soul of thine,
To hell, to wear the Devils V^lentine.
122 The Theefe's ^eplie.
Art thou great Ben? or the revived ghost
Of famous Shake-spear? or some drunken host?
Who being tipfie with thy muddy beer,
Do think thy rimes shall daunt my soul with fear
Nay know base slave, that I am one of those,
Can take a purse a swell in verse as prose,
And when the art dead, write this upon thy hearse;
Here lies a Poet that was robbed in verse.
123 Upon Clarinda begging a lock of her lovers hair.
Fairest Clarinda, she whom truth calls fair,
Begged my heart of me, and a lock of hair
Should I give both said I, how should I live,
The lock I would, the heart I would not give,
For that lest^heeving love should steal away,
Discretion had locked up and kept the key;
As for the lock of hair, which lovers use
My head laid on her knee I prayed her choose,
Taking her ^izars by a cunni^g art,
First picked the lock, and then she stole my heart.
124 To his Mistress.
Dearest thy twined hairs are not threads of gold,
Nor thine eyes diamonds, nor do I hold,
Thy lips for rubies, nor thy cheeks to be,
Fresh roses, nor thy dugs of Ivory,
The skin that does thy dainty body sheath,
Nor Alablaster is, nor do thou breath,
Arabian odours, these the earth brings forth,
Compared with thine, they would impair thy worth;
Such then are other mistrisses, but mine,
Has nothing earth, but all divine.
125 The Answer.
If earth does never change, nor move,
There Is naught of earth, sure in thy love,
Since heavenly bodies with each one,
Concur in generation,
And wanting gravitie are light,
Or in a borrowed luster bright;
If meteors and each falling star
Of heavenly matter framed are:
Earth has my mistrisse, but sure thine
All heavenly is, though not divine.
126 On his Mrs.
I saw fair Flora take the air,
When P^aehus shined and it was fair;
The heavens to allay the heat,
Sent drops of rain, which gently beat
The sun retires, ashamed to see
That he was barred from kissing thee
Then Bore as took such high disdain,
That soon he dried those drops again:
Ah cunning plot and most ^ivine!
Thus to mix his breath with thine.
127 On an hour glass.
Do thou consider this small dust
Here running in this glass
By atoms moved
Can thou believe, that this the body was
Of one that loved.
And in his Mistrisse playing like a fly
Turned to cinders by her eye:
Yes and in death as life, have it expre^t
That lovers ashes take no rest.
128 On the picture of Cupid in a jewel worn by his Mrs. on her breast.
Little Cupid enter in and heat
Her heart, her breast is not thy seat;
Her breasts are fitted to entice
Lovers, but her heart's ofice,
Thaw Cupid, that it hence forth grow
Tender still by answering no.
129 On his Mistress.
When first I saw thee thou did sweetly play,
The gentle thief, and stol'st my heart away;
Ren^er me mine again, or leave thy own,
Two are too much for thee since I have none;
But if thou will not I will swear thou art
A sweet-fac'd creature with a double heart.
130 On Cupid.
Cupid has by his sly and subtle art,
A certain arrow shot and peirc't my heart:
What shall I do to be revenged on love?
There is but one way and that one I Will prove;
I Will steal his arrows and will head them new,
With women's hearts and then they will fly true.
131 On a Tobacconist.
All dainty meats I do defy,
Which feed men fat as swine,
He is a frug all man indeed,
That on a leaf can dine,
He needs no napkin for his hands
His fingers ends to wipe,
That keeps his kitchen in a box
And roast-(...) in a pipe.
132 On the same.
If man's flesh be like swines, as it is said
The metamorphosis is sooner made
Then full-fac'd Gnatho no tobacco take
Smoking your corpse, lest bacon you do make.
133 Another.
Tom I commend thee above all I know
That sold'^t thy cushion for a pipe of To
For now it is like if ere thou study more,
Thou Wilt sit to it harder then thou did before.
124 On Tobacco.
Nature's Idea, phisicks rare perfection,
Cold rheumes expeller and the wits direction,
O had the gods known thy immortal smack,
The heavens ere this time had been colored black.
135 On a beloved lie.
I hate a lie, and yet a lie did run
Of noble Goring's death and Kensington,
And for that they did not untimely dye
I love a lie because that was a ly,
For had it been an accident of ruth
'T had made me grow in hatred of the truth,
Though lies be bad, yet give this lie it is due,
It Is ten times better, then if 't had been true.
136 On Button a S^xton, making a grave.
Ye powers above and heavenly poles
Are graves become but Button-holes.
137 On long hair.
Luc as long hair down to his shoulders wears,
And why? he dares not cut it for his ears.
138 A Crab's Restorative.
The Crab of the wood
Is sauce very good;
For the crab of the foaming sea,
But the wood of a Crab
Is sauce for a drab
That will not her husband obey.
139 On Iustus Lypsius who bequeathed his gown to the Virgin Mary.
A dying latinist of great renown,
Unto the Virgin Mary gave his gown
And was not this false latin, so to join
With femall gender, the case Masculine.
140 On a fidle-stick.
Am I an instrument to make you sport,
A fiddle-stick I am, ye shann't report
That ere ye hand'led me in such a case;
To make me strike up fiddles mean and base,
Nay you shall never bend me to your bow
It goes against the hair you should do so,
Nor shall you curb me in, thus every day,
I Will but my pleasure, I was made to play;
But here I must not play upon another,
Why have I then a fiddle for my brother?
If I were gone, you would be compelled my friends
To make your music on your fingers ends:
My brother fiddle is so hollow hearted,
That ere't be long, we must needs be parted
And with so many frets he does abound,
That I can never touch him but he will sound:
When he is revived, this poor excuse he puts,
That when I play, I vex him to the guts;
But since it is my nature, and I must
I Will crowd and scrape acquaintance for a crust;
I am a genleman of high descent
Come from Apollos glorious element,
Above the bridge I always use to keep,
And that is my proper sphere, when I do sleep,
So that I cannot be in tune or town,
For all my scraping if the bridge be down;
But since without an end, naught can endure,
A fiddle-stick has two ends to be sure.
141 On hopes of preferment.
I saw my fortune go before
As Palinurus saw the shore,
If that I dye, before it hitch,
Welfare mine eyes for they are rich.
142 Sort tu^^ contentus.
If adverse fortune bring to pass,
And will that thou an ass must be;
Then be an ass, and live an ass,
For out of question wife is he
That undergoes with humble mind,
The state that chance has him assigned.
143 On a pretender to prophecy.
Ninety two years the world as yet shall stand
If it do stand or fall at your command;
But say why placed you not the world's end nigher
Lest ere you died you might be proved a liar.
144 Mart. lib 8 epigr. 69.
Old Poets only thou do praise,
And none but dead one's magnify:
Pardon Voc^rra, thee to please,
I am not yet in mind to dye.
145 On a Gamester.
For hundred-thousands Matho plays;
Olus what is that to thee?
Not thou by means thereof I trow,
But Matho poor shall be.
146 On Fr. Drake.
Sir Drake whom well the world's end knew,
Which thou did compass round,
And whom both Poles of heaven once saw
Which North and South do bound,
The stars above, would make thee known,
If men here silent were;
The Sun himself cannot forget
His fellow traveller.
147 B. I. approbation of a copy of verses.
One of the witty sort of gentlemen,
That held society with learned Ben --
Showed him some verses of such Tragique sense
They did his curious ear much violence;
But after Ben had been a kind partaker
Of the sad lines, he needs must know the maker;
What unjust man he was, that spent his time
And banished reason to, advance his rhyme:
Nay gentle Ben, replies the gentleman
I see I must support the Poet than;
Although those humble strains are not so fit
For to please you, he is held a pretty wit;
Is he held so? (sa^es Ben) so may a goose,
Had I the holding, I would let him loose.
148 On a gentleman that married an heir privately at the Tower.
The angry Father hearing that his child,
Was stolen, married, and his hopes beguild;
('Cause his usurious nature had a thought
She might have bin to greater fortunes brought)
With rigid looks, bent brows, and words austere
Asked his forced son in law, how he did dare
(Without a full consenting from him carried)
Thus bear his only daughter to be married,
And by what Cannons he assumed such power?
He said the best in England sir, the Tower.
149 A Gentleman's satisfaction for spitting in another face.
A gentleman (not in malice nor disgrace,
But by a chance) spet in another face,
He that received it, knowing not the cause
That should produce such rashne^ ('against the law^
Of Christian manhood or civility)
In kindling anger, asked the reason why;
Pray ^ir says he, what thing that does but sound
Like to an injury have you ere found
By me at any time? or if you had,
It never could deserve contempt so bad
It Is an inhumane custom none ere use;
But the vile nation of conte^ned Jews:
Pray sir, cries the other be not so unkind,
Thus with an accident to charge my mind
I meant it not, but ^^nce it falls out so,
I Am sorry, yea make satisfaction too;
Then be not moved but let this ease your doubt
Since I have spet, please you, I Will tread it out.
150 On a little Gentleman and one Mr. Story.
The little man, by the other man's vainglory,
It seems was roughly used (so says the story)
But being a little h^ated and high blown,
In anger flies at Story, pulls him down;
And when they rise (I know not how it fated)
One got the worst, the Story was tran^^ated
From white to red, but ere the fight was ended
It seems a Gentleman that one be^riended
Came in and parted them; the little blade,
There Is none that could entreat, or yet persuade,
But he would fight still, till another came,
And with sound reasons councel'd against the same
'T was in this manner friend ye shall not fight
With one that is so unequal to your height,
Story is higher, the other made reply,
I Would pluck him down were he three Stories high.
151 On a Welshman and an Englishman.
There was a time a difference began
Between a Welshman and an Englishman,
And thus it was; the Englishman would stand
Against all argument, that this our land,
Was fre^st of her fruits, there is a place
Quoth he, whose ground, so fruitful is of grass;
But throw a staff in it but this night, you shall
Not See It the morrow, 't would be covered all:
The Welsh-man cried it is true, it might ly under,
The o're-grown grass, (...) is with us no wonder,
For turn your horse into our frui^full ground,
And before morning come, he shann't be found.
152 On a Soldier.
The soldier fights well and with good regard,
But when he is lame, he lies at an ill ward.
153 On a fair Gentlewoman whose name was Brown.
We praise the fair, and our inventions wrack,
In pleasing numbers to applaud the black,
We court this Ladies eye, that Ladies hair,
The fair love black, the black best like the faire^
Yet neither sort, I court, I doat upon
Nor fair nor black, but a complexion
More rare then either; she that is the crown
Of my entire affection is brown,
And yet she is fair, it is strange, how can it be,
That two complexions should in one agree
Do I love Brown, my love can please mine eye,
And ^ate my narrow'st curiosity,
If I like fair, she has so sweet a grace,
That I could leave an Angel for her face,
Let any judge then, which complexion's rarest,
In my opinion, she is Brown that is fairest.
154 On Garret and Chambers.
Garret and his friend Chambers having done
Their City business walked to Paddington,
And coming near the fatal place where men
I mean offenders never return again,
Looking on Tyborn in a merryment,
Says Chambers here is a pretty Tenement
Had it a garret: Garret hearing that,
Replies friend Chambers I do wonder at
Your simple censure, and could mock you for it,
There must be chambers ere there be a garret.
155 On the word intolerable.
Two gentlemen did to a Tavern come,
And called the drawer for to show a room,
The drawer did, and what room think ye was it?
One of the small ones, where men drink in haste;
One gentleman sat down there, but the other
Disliked it, would not sit, called for another:
At which his friend, rising up from the table,
Cries friend lets stay, this room is tolerable:
Why that is the cause (quoth he) I will not stay,
Is that the cause, quoth the other? why I pray?
To give a reason to you, I am able,
Because I hate to be in -- Tolerable.
156 Ad Lectorem.
Is It possible that thou my book have bought,
That saidst^'twas nothing worth? why was it naught
Read it again, perchance thy wit was dull,
Thou may find something at the second pull,
Indeed at first thou naught did understand,
For shame g^t something at the second hand.
157 Suum cuique pulcbrum.
Posthumus not the last of many more,
Ask's why I write in such an idle vain,
Seeing there are of Epigrams such store;
Oh give me leave to tell thee once again
That Epigrams are fitted to the season,
Of such as best know how to make rhyme reason
158 In magnis voluisse sat^est.
In matters great to will it does suffice,
I blush to hear how loud this proverb lies,
For they that ow great sums by bond or bill,
Can never cancel them, with mere good will.
159 As proud as witless Draccus.
Draccus his head is highly by him born,
And so by strawes are emptied heads of corn.
160 S^liem^videret^^r.
A Welshman and an Englishman disputed,
Which of their Lands maintained the greatest (...)
The Englishman the Welshman quite confuted,
Yet would the Welshman naught his brags abate,
Ten cooks quoth he, in wales one wedding fees
Truth quoth the other, each man to^t^ his cheese.
161 On women's inconstancy.
Go catch a star that is falling from the sky*
Cause an immortal creature for to dye,
Stop with thy hand the current of the seas,
Post over the earth to the Antipodes,
Cause times return and call back yesterday;
Cloth January with the Month of May,
Weigh out an ounce of flame, blow back the wind
And then find faith within a woman's mind.
162 On Women.
Why sure these necessary harms were framed,
That man as too too heedlsse might be blamed,
His weakness cannot greatest weakness fly,
In her strong drawing, frail necessity;
Then happy they, that know what women are,
But happier, which to know them never care.
163 To his Mrs.
Sweetest fair be not too cruel,
Blot not beauty with disdain,
Let not those bright eyes add fuel
To a burning heart in vain,
Least men justly when I dye
Deem you the candle, me the fly.
164 How to choose a wife.
Good sir, if you will show the best of your skill;
To pick a virtuous creature,
Then pick such a wife, as you love a life,
Of a comely grace and feature;
The noblest part let it be her heart,
Without deceit or cunning,
With a nimble wit, and all things fit,
with a tongue that is never running,
The hair of her head, it must not be red,
But fair and brown as a berry;
Her forehead high, with a crystal eye
Her lips as red as a cherry.
165 On his Mistress.
My love and I for kisses played,
She would keep stakes, I was content,
And when I won, she would be paid;
This made me ask her what she meant,
Says she, since you are in this wrangling vain,
Take you your kisses, and give me mine again.
166 On a proud Maid.
She that will eat her breakfast in her bed,
And spend the morn in dressing of her head,
And fit at dinner like a mayden-bride,
And talk of nothing all day but of pride,
God in mercy may do much to save her,
But what a case is he in that shall have her?
167 Satis est quod sufficit.
Weep no more, sigh nor groan,
Sorrow recals not times are gone,
Violets plucked, the sweetst rain,
Makes not fresh or grow again,
Joys are windy, dreams fly fast
Why should sadness longer last?
Grief is but a wound to woe,
Gentle fair, mourn no more.
168 Tempus edaxrerum.
Time eats all things could the Poets say,
The times are changed our times drink all away.
168 Of women.
Commit thy ship unto the wind,
But not thy faith to woman kind,
There is more safety in a wave,
Then in the faith that women have;
No woman's good, if chance it fall,
Some one be good amongst them all,
Some strange intent the dest' nies had,
To make a good thing of a bad.
169 On a coy woman.
She seems not won, yet won she is at length,
In loves war women use but half their strength.
170 On Morcho.
Morcho for have was married in the night,
What needed day? his fair young wife is light.
171 On Bed keeping.
Bradus the smith, has often sworn and sed,
That no disease should make him keep his bed;
His reason was, I often have heard him tell it,
He wanted money therefore he would fell it.
172 On a man stealing a candle from a la^ther^.
One walking in the street a winter night,
Climbed to a lanthern, thought to have stole the light,
But taken in the manner and descri'd
By one of the servants who looked out and cried,
Whose there? what d' you? who does our lanthern
Nothing said he, but only snuf the candle. handle,
173 On Fraternus.
Fraternus' opinions show his reason weak
He held the nose was made for man to speak.
174 On a french ^encer, that challenged Church an English fencer.
The fencing Ca^les in pride and gallant vaunt,
Challenged the English at the fen^ing, skill,
The fencer Church, or the Church militant,
His errors still reproved and knocked him still,
But si^h our Church him disciplined so sore,
He (rank Recusant) comes to Church no more.
175 On two striving together.
Two falling out into a ditch they fell,
Their falling out was ill, but in was well.
176 On Music.
I want a quill out of an Angels wing,
To write sweet musike's everlasting praise,
I likewise want an Angels voice to sing
A wished an^hem to her happy days*
Then since I want an angels voice and pen,
Let angels write and sing, I Will say amen.
177 On Tobacco.
Times great consumer, cause of idleness,
Old whorehouse hunter, cause of drunkenness
Bewitching smoke, vainest wealths consumer;
Abuse of wit, stinking breath's perfumer,
Cause of entrails blacknes, bodies dyer
Cause of nature's slacknesse, quenching her fire,
Offense to many, bringing good to none,
Even be thou hacked till thou art burnt and gone.
178 Claudianus de Sphaer^a Archimedis
When Jove within a little glass survay'd,
The heavens he smiled, and to the Gods thus said,
Can strength of mortal wit proceed thus far?
Lo in a frail orb, my works mated are,
Hither the Syracu^ians art translates,
Heavens form, the course of things and humane fates
The including spirit serving the star-deck'd signs
The living work inconstant motion winds,
The adult' rate zodiaque runs a natural year,
And Cyntsias forged horns monthly new light bear,
Viewing her own world, now bold industry
Triumphs and rules with humane power the sky.
179 On Caelia.
In Caelia's face a question did arise,
Which were more beautiful her lips or eyes;
We say the eyes, send forth those pointed darts,
Which pierce the hardest adamantine hearts,
From us reply the lips proceed those blisses,
Which lovers reap by kind words and sweet kisses
Then wept the eyes and from their eyes did power
Of liquid Oriental pearl a shower,
Whereat the lips moved with delight and pleasure
Through a sweet smile ^^lock'd their I vory treasure,
And bad love judge, whether did ad more grace
Weeping or smiling pearls to C^lia's face.
180 On Chloris walking in the snow.
I saw fair Chloris walk alone,
When feathered rain came softly down,
Then Jove descended from ^is Tower,
To court her in a silver shower,
The wanton snow flew to her breast,
Like little birds into their nest;
But overcome with whitenes there,
For grei^e it thawed into a tear,
Then falling down her garment him,
To deck her, froze into a gem.
181 To a Shoemaker.
What boots it thee, to follow such a trade,
That Is always under foot and underlaid?
112 Youth and Age.
Age is deformed, youth unkind,
We scorn their bodies, they our mind.
183 To Loquax.
Loqu^x to hold thy tongue, would do thee wrong,
For thou would' st be no man, but for thy tongue.
184 Death.
The lives of men seem in two seas to swim,
Death comes to young folks and old go to him.
185 A disparity.
Children fondly blad truth, and fools their brothers
Women have learned more wisdom of their mothers.
186. To Make dict.
Thou speak st ill, not to give men their dues*
But speakestill, because thou can not choose.
187 Women's properti^s.
To weep often, still to flatter, sometimes spin.
Are properties, women excel men in.
188 Interpone tuis etc.
Not mirth, nor care alone, but inter-wreathed,
Care gets mirth stomach, mir^h makes care long breathed.
189 Women's tears
When women weep in their dissembling art,
Their tears are sauce to their malicious heart.
190 Pot-Poets.
Poet and pot differ but in a letter,
Which makes the Poet love the pot the better.
191 Content.
Content is all we aim at with our store;
If that be had with little, what needs more.
192 Fast and loose.
Paphus was married all in haste,
And now to rack does run;
So knitting of himself too fast,
He has himself undone.
193 On Gervase.
A double gelding Gervase did provide,
That he and 's wife to see their friends might ride,
And he a double gelding proved indeed;
For he so suddenly fell to his speed,
That both alight, with blows and threats among*
He leads him, and his wife drives him along.
194 Tortus.
Tortus accused to lie, to fawn, to flatter,
Said he but set a good face on the matter,
Then sure he borrowed it for it is well known;
Tortus never wore a good face of his own*
195 ANNAGRAMS.
Thom^s Egerton. 1 anagr. Honors met age.
Honors met age and seeking where to rest;
Agreed to lodge, and harbor in thy breast.
196 On Capt^ine John, Came-age 2 anagr. Age-came.
When perils I by land and sea had past,
Age came to summon me to death at last.
197 Christopher Lindall, 3 anagr. I offer, lend Christ all.
Tha^ with this Epigram thy deeds agree,
They well know, that did ever well know thee.
198 John Rysdon 4 anagr. In honors die.
Thy actions friend declare thy noble mind,
And to the world thy real worth proclaim
That fame her self cannot thy equal find,
To parallel thy glory and thy name,
On, onward still from no good action fly,
Who lives like thee, cannot but in honors die.
199 On the same.
I never will credit any powerful fare,
Can turn thy glory to a waning state,
Thou ^till wilt be thy self; therefore say I,
In honors thou shall live, but never die.
200 Phineas Fletcher. 5 anagr. Has Spencer life? Or Spencer has life.
That Spencer lives, none can ignorant be,
That reads his works (Fletcher) or knows thee.
201 Mrs. Elizabeth Noell 6 anagr. holiness be still my star.
The safest conduct to the port of bliss,
Lies not in brittle honor, for by this
We often loose our way, to shun this bar,
To heaven, holiness be still my star.
202. My lot is bliss ^ternall.
The world's a lottry, full of various chances,
Whereof each draws a share as fortune fancies,
Among the rest that aim at things supernall;
I Have drawn, and find my lot is bliss eternal.
203 I shall smite no ill breast.
The common way to wound men's hearts I shun,
Nor with mere outside am I to be won,
Virtue may move me, for it crowns the best,
But I shall smite no ill or lustful breast.
204 My bliss on earth's little.
Honors are fair but fading flowers which give,
Delight to those that gather them, but live
Not ever flowrishing, this truth I find,
Too truly in my self, by fate assigned
For having all, I see that all is but but brittle,
And even at best my bliss on earth's but little.
205 See my heart is still noble:
Thongh fortune frowns and fate suppres my will,
Yet see the luck, my heart is noble still.
206 A riddle.
Thoughts Searching c
Valued Love may B
Truth never ties
Too A fool y y:
Three in one heart
If 2 in V have part
WR


207 Another being a translation.
Est aliis servire tenetur
Iure qui
sum, servire necesse est
Iure tibi me
Te nulli cunctos
ant are videris
Qui cunctos bos laud
ant fero cunctis.
Thus Englished.
-ling bound to serve his Mr's hands
An- is
you -bound to do your high command^
I Am and
None's you
you all are then
I Will you
-praise other men.
208 Another.
A beggar once exceeding poor,
A penny prayed me give him,
And deeply vowed nere to ask more
And I never more to give him,
Next day he begged again, I gave,
Yet both of us our oaths did save.
209 Another.
I hold as faith
What Rome's Church says
Where the King is head
The Flocks misled
Where the Alter's dressed
The peopele's blessed
He Is but an ass
Who shuns the Mass
Who charity preach
They heaven soon reach
On faith to rely
Is heresy
What England's Church allows
My conscience disavowes
The Church can have no seame,
Where the Pope's supreme
There Is service scarce divine
Where Is table bread and wine
Who the Communion flies
Is Catholic and wise
Their church with error's fraught
Where only faith is taught
No matter for good works
Make's Christians worse then Turks
210 Another:
There was a man bespake a thing,
Which when the owner home did bring,
He that made it, did refuse it,
He that bought it, would not use it,
He that has it does not know
Whether he has it, yea or no.
211 On Women.
Woman's the center and the lines are men
The circles love, how do they differ then?
Circles draw many lines into the center
But love gives leave to only one to enter.
212 On Clarret wine spilt.
What Is this that is spilt? it is clarret wine,
It Is well it is spilt, it is fall saved mine.
213 On woman's love.
A woman's love is like a Syrian flower,
That buds and spreads and withers in an hour.
214 On Cook a cuckold.
A young cook married upon Sunday last,
And he grew-old e're tuesday night was past.
215 A Butcher marrying a tanners daughter.
A fitter match then this could not have bin,
For now the flesh is married to the skin.
216 On Cupid.
Cupid, no wonder was not cloth d of old,
For love though naked seldom ere is cold.
217 A plain suitor to his love.
Fair I love thee, yet I cannot sue,
And show my love as masking courtiers do,
Yet by the smock of Venus for thy good,
I Will freely spend my thrice concocted blood.
218. On a passing bell.
This doleful mu^ique of impartial death,
Who danceth after, danceth out of breath.
219 On a farmer knighted.
In my conceit sir John, you were to blame,
To make a quiet goodwife a mad^dame.
220 On Pallas and Bacchus birth.
Pallas the offspring of Jove's brain,
Bacchus out of his thigh was taken,
He breake's his brain that learning winns,
When he that is drunk breaks but his shins.
221 On an old man doting on a young mench.
A rich old man loving a fair young less,
Out of his breeches his spectacles drew,
Wherewith he read a note, how rich he was:
All which (quoth he) sweetheart I Will give to you
Excuse me sir (quoth she) for all your riches,
I Will marry none, that wears his eyes in's breeches.
222 Clownish Court-Ship.
Excellent Mrs. brighter then the moon,
Then scoured p^wter or the silver spoon,
Fairer then Phoebus or the morning star,
Dainty fair Mistrisse by my troth you are,
As far excelling Dian, and her Nimphs,
As lobsters crawfish, and as craw fish shrimps.
Thine eyes like Diamonds do shine most clearly,
As I Am an honest man I love thee dearly.
223 A Gen^leman to his love.
Tell her I love, and if she ask how well;
Tell her my tongue told thee no tongue can tell.
224 Her answer.
Say not you love, unless you do,
For lying will not honor you.
225 His answer.
Maddam I love, and love to do,
And will not lie unless with you.
226 On a Wels^man.
The way to make a welshman think on bliss,
And daily say his prayers on his knees,
Is to persuade him that most certaiae' it is,
The moon is made of nothing but green cheese,
Then he will desire of Jove, no geater boon,
Then to be pleased in heaven to eat the moon.
227 The vanity of man.
That every thing we do, might vain appear,
We have a vein, for each day in the year.
228 To a friend on the loss of his Mrs.
If thou the best of women did forgo,
Weigh if thou found'st her, or did, make her so,
If she was found, know there is more then one,
If made, the workman lives though she be gone.
229 On a whore.
Rosa is fair, but not a proper woman,
Can any woman proper be that is common.
230 On a Welshman.
A Welshman coming late into an Inn,
Asked the maid what meat there was within?
Cow-heels she answered, and a breast of mutton;
But quoth the Welshman, since I am no glutton,
Either of both shall serve, to night the breast,
The heels in the morning, then light meat is best,
At night he took the breast, and did not pay,
I the morning took his heels and run away.
231 On men and women.
I Will thrives that hapless family, that shows
A cock that is silent, and a hen that crows,
I know not which lives more unnatural lives,
Obeying husbands or commanding wives.
232 On Linus.
Linus told me of verses that he made,
Riding to London on a trotting Jade,
I should have known, had he concealed the case,
Even by his verses of his horses pace.
233 On a little diminutive band.
What is the reason of God-dam-me's band,
Inch-deep? and that his fashion does not alter,
God-dam me saves a labor, understand,
In pulling't off when he puts on the halter.
234 On Julius.
By fraud the Merchant Julius rakes in pel^e,
For heaven he sels, yet has it not himself.
235 On fine apparel.
Some that their wives may near and cleanely go,
Do all their substance upon them bestow:
But who a goldfinch fain would make his wife,
Make's her perhaps a wag-taile all her life.
236 Upon Conscience.
Many men this present age dispraise,
And think men have small conscience now adays.
But sure I Will lay no such fault to their charge,
I rather think their conscience is too large.
237 In Cornutum.
Cornutus called his wife both whore and slut,
Quoth she, you will never leave your brawling, but.
But what quoth he? quoth she the post or door,
For you have horns to but, if I Am a whore.
238 A witty passage
An old man sitting at a Christmas feast,
By eating Brawn occasioned a jest;
For whilst his tongue and gums chafed about,
For want of pales the chafed bore broke out,
And lights perchance upon a handsome less,
That near him at the table placed was,
Which when she' spied she plucked out of her sleeve
A pin and did it to the old man give,
Saying since your brawn, out of your mouth does slip,
Sir take this pin and therewith close your lip,
And bursting into laughter, strained so much,
As with that strain her back-part spakelow dutch
Which the old man hearing, did the pin restore.
And bad her therewith close her postern door.
239 A new married Bride.
The first of all our sex, came from the side of man
I thither am returned from whence I came.
240 On a pudding.
The end is all, and in the end, the praise of all depends,
A pudding merri^s double praise, because it has two ends.
241 Answer.
A pudding has two ends? you lie my brother,
For it begins at one, and ends at the other.
242 On maids.
Most maids resemble Eve now in their lives,
Who are no sooner women, then the are wives,
As Eve knew no man ere fruit wrought her woe,
So these have fruit often e're their husbands know.
243 On a man whose choice was to be hanged or married.
M. Lo here is the bride, and here is the tree,
Take which of these, best likes thee.

R. The choice is bad on either part,
The woman's worse drive on the cart.

244 Women.
Were women as little, as they are good,
A pease cod would make them a gown and a hood.
245 On a louse.
A louse no reason has to deal so ill,
With them of whom she has so much her will,
She has no tongue to speak ought in their praise,
But to back-bite them, finds a tongue all ways.
246 A Courtier and a Scholar meeting.
A Courtier proud walking along the street,
Happened by chance a Scholar for to meet,
The Courtier said, (minding naught more then place
Unto the Scholar meeting face to face,
To take the wall, base men I Will not permit,
The Scholar said, I will, and gave him it.
247 Cede maj^ribus.
I took the wall, one rudely thrust me by,
And told me the high way did open lie,
I thank't him that he would me so much grace,
To take the worse and leave the better place,
For if by owners we esteem of things,
The wall's the subjects, but the way the kings.
248 On Women.
Are women Saints? no Saints, and yet no devils,
Are women good? not good, but needful evils,
So angel like that devils you need not doubt,
Such needful evils, that few can be without.
249 On a M^^sitian and his Scholar.
A man of late did his fair daughter bring
To a Musician for to learn^ to sing,
He fell in love with her, and her beguiled,
With flattering words and she was got with child,
Her Father hearing this was grieved and said,
That he with her but a base-part had played,
For Which he swore that he would make him smart
For teaching of his daughter such a part:
But the musician said, he did no wrong,
He had but taught her how to ^ing prick-song.
250 Why women wear a fall.
A question it is why women wear a fall,
The truth it is to pride they are given all,
And pride the proverb says must have a fall.
251 For As expertus.
Priscus has been a traveller, for why?
He will so strangely swagger, swear and ly.
252 Liber too wary to thrive.
Liber is late set up, and wants custom,
Yet great resort has got, but will not trust 'em:
Is not his love unto his friend the greater,
He Will want himself, ere he will see him a debtor.
253 On Venus and Vulcan.
I muse, why Venus has such fiery holes,
I think that Vulcan, once there blowed his coals.
254 Detur quod meritum.
A courtier kind in speech, cursed in condition,
Finding his faults could be no longer hidden,
Came to his friend to clear his bad suspicion,
And fearing least he should be more then chidden.
Fell to flattering and most base submission,
Vowing to kiss his foot if he were bidden.
My foot said he? nay that were too submisse,
You three foot higher, well deserve to kiss.
255
Gluto, at meals is never heard to talk,
For which the more his chaps and chin do walk,
When every one that sits about the board,
Makes sport to ask; what Gluto never a word?
He forced to answer being very loath
Is almost choked speaking and eating both.
256 Sort t^a contentus.
B^rtus being bid to supper to a Lord,
Was marshalled at the lower end of the board,
Who vexed thereat, amongst his comrades does fre^
And swears that he below the salt was set;
But Bartus, the art a fool to fret and swear,
The salt stands on the board would thou sit there^
257 Fovent perjuria furtum.
Piso has stolen a silver bole in jest,
For which suspected only, not confessed,
Rather then Piso will restore your bole,
To quit the body, he will cast the soul.
258 The promise breaker.
Ventus does promise much, but still does break,
So all his promises are great and weak;
Like bubbles in the water (round and light)
Swelling so great, that they are broke outright.
259 Nummos and demona jungit.
Bat bids you swell with envy till you burst,
So he be rich, and may his coffers fill,
Bringing the example of the fox that is cursed,
And threatening folks who have least power to kill^
For why it is known, his trade can never fall,
That has already got the devil and all.
260 Nil gratum ratione carens.
Paulus a pamphle^ does in prose present,
Unto his lord, (the fruits of idle time)
Who far more careless then therewith content,
Wishes it were converted into rhyme:
Which done and brought him at another season,
Said now ' it is rhyme, before not rhyme nor reason.
261 Non cessat perdere lusor.
Ask Ficus how his luck at dicing goes.
Like to the tide (quoth he) it ebbs and flows,
Then I suppose his chance cannot be good,
For all men know, it is longer ebb then flood.
262 Volucren^ sic decipi^ auceps.
Hidrus the horse-courser (that cunning mate)
Does with the buyers thus equivocate,
Claps on his hand, and prays he may not thrive
If that his gelding be not under five.
263 Perdat qui cav^at emp^or.
Nor less meant Promus when that vow he made,
Then to give ore his cous'ning tapsters trade,
Who checked for short and frothy measure, swore
He never would from thence forth fill pot more.
264 Virescit vulnere Venus.
Susan's well sped and wears a velve^ hood,
As who should know, her breeding has bin good?
It Is reason she should rise once in her life,
That fell so often before she was a wife.
265 On Death.
How base has ^in made man, to fear a thing
Whichmen call M^rs? which yet has lost all sting,
And is but a privation as we know,
Nay is no word, if we exempt the O,
Then let good men the fear of it de^ie*
All is but O when they shall come to dye.
266 On a rich country Gentleman.
Of woods, of plains, of hills and vales,
Of fields, of meades, of parks and pales,
Of all I had, this I possess,
I need no more I have no less.
267 On his Mrs.
Shall I tell you how the rose at first grew red,
And whence the lilly whitenes borrowed,
You blushed, and straight the rose with red was dight,
The lilly kissed your hand, and so was white,
Before such time, each rose had but a stain,
And lillies naught but palenes did contain,
You have the native color, these the die,
And only flowrish in your livery.
268 To bis Mrs.
Think not dear love that I Will reveal,
Those hours of pleasure we do steal,
No eye shall see, nor vet the sun,
Descrie what thee and I have done;
The God of love himself, hose dart
Did first pierce mine, and next thy heart,
He shall not know, that we can tell
What sweets in stolen cmoracem^nts dwell,
Only this means may find it out,
If when I die, Phisians doubt
What caused my death and they to view
Of all the judgments that are true,
Rip up my heart oh then I fear,
The world will find thy picture there.
269 To Mr. Ben. Johnson demanding the reason why he called his plays ^arks.
Pray tell me Ben, where does the mystery lurk,
What others call a play you call a work.
270 Thus answered by a friendin Mr. Ioh^sons defense.
The authors friend thus for the author says,
Bens plays are works, when others works are plays
271 Tempus edax rerum.
The sweetest flower in the summers prime,
By all agreement is the damask rose,
Which if it grow, an^ be not plucked in time,
She sheds her leaves her buds their sent do loose,
Oh let not things of worth, for want of use
Fall into all consuming times abuse:
The sweetest work that ever nature framed,
By all agreement is a virgins face,
Which not enjoyed, her white and red will fade,
And unto all worm eating time give place:
Oh let not things of worth, for want of use
Fall into all consuming times abuse.
272 Ad Aristarchum.
Be not agriev'd my humerous lines afford,
Of looser language here and there a word,
Who undertakes to sweep a common sink,
I cannot blame him, though his broom do stink.
273 To his Mrs.
Thou send'st to me a heart was Crowned,
I took it to be thine,
But when I saw it had a wound,
I knew that heart was mine.
A bounty of a strange conceit,
To send mine own to me,
And send it in a worse estate,
Then when it came to thee;
The heart I gave thee had no stain,
It was entire and sound;
But thou have sent it back again,
Sick of a deadly wound.
Oh heavens! how would thou use a heart
That should rebellious be,
When thou have killed me with a dart,
That so much honored thee.
274 On a charming beauty.
I Will gaze no more on that bewitched face,
Since ruin harbors there in every place,
For my enchanted soul alike she drowns,
With calms and tempests of her smiles and frowns
I Will love no more those cruel eyes of hers,
Which pleased or angered still are murderers,
For if she dart like lightning through the air,
Her beams of wrath, she kills me with despair,
If she behold me with a pleasing eye,
I surfeit with excess of joy and die.
275 Covetous persons.
Patrons are latrons, then by this,
The are worst of greedy people,
Whose cognizance a wolfes head is,
And is his mouth a steeple.
276 On a dyer.
Who has time has life, that he denies,
This man has both, yet still he dies.
277 Non verber a sed verba.
Two Scholars late appointed for the field,
Must, which was weakest to the other yield,
The quarrel first began about a word,
Which now should be decided by the sword;
But er'e they drew, there fell that alteration,
As they grew friends again by disputation.
278 In Octavium.
Octavius lying at the point of death,
His gelding kindly did to me bequeath:
I wanted one, and was in haste to ride,
In better time he never could have di'd.
279 Ofletting.
In bed a young man with his old wife lay,
O wife quoth he I Have let a thing to day,
By which I fear I am a looser much:
His wife replies youths bargains still are such;
So turning from him angry at her heart,
She unawares let out a thundering --
Oh wife quoth he, no looser I am now,
A marv'lous saver I am made by you:
Young men that old wives have may never fell,
Because old wives quoth he let things so well.
280 In Dossum.
Dosse riding forth the wind was very big
And strained court'sie with his perriwig,
Leaving his sconce behind so void of hair,
As Esops crow might break her oyster there;
Fool he to think his hair could tarry fast,
When Bore as tears up forests with a blast.
281 Post dulcia finis amarus.
Ienkin a welshman that had suires in law,
Journying to London chanced to steal a cow;
For which (pox on her luck as never man saw)
Was burnt within the fist, and know not how:
Being asked if well the laws with him did stand
Was have her now (quoth Ienkin) in her hand.
282 In Mi^cam.
Fine Minca lisping yea and no forsooth,
Though little ears, yet keeps a dainty tooth:
Minca that longs for apples on the tree,
In May, before the blossoms fallen be,
Or will not eat a Kentish cherry down,
But for a couple, when she pays a crown;
And cares not for a straw-berry or pear,
In truth because the are common every where,
Yet what is that which may be had for reason,
And never comes to Minca out of season?
283 Feminae ludifieantur vi^os.
Kind Katherine to her husb and kissed these words;
Mine own sweet Will how dearly do I love thee ^
If true (quoth Will) the world no such affords,
And that it is true I durst his warrant be,
For never heard I of woman good or ill,
But always loved best her own sweet will.
284 Ad T^sserum.
Tusser, they tell me when thou were alive,
Thou teaching thrift, thy self could never thrive
So like the whetstone many men are wont
To sharpen others when themselves are blunt.
285 Praestar videri qu^messe.
Clit^s with clients is well customed,
That has the laws but little studied,
No matter Clitus so they bring their fees,
How ill ^he case and thy advice agrees.
286 Tun^^ua res agitur.
A jealous merchant that a saylor met,
Asked him the reason why he meant to marry,
Knowing what ill their absence might beget,
That still at sea, constrained are to tarry?
Sir (quoth the Saylor) think you that so strange?
It Is done the time whiles you but walk the exchange
287 A conference.
A Dane, a Spaniard, a Polonian,
My self, a Swisse, with a Hungarian,
At supper met discoursed each with other,
Drank, laughed, yet none that understood another.
288 In Marcum.
Marcus is not a hypocrite and why?
He flies all good, to fly hypocrifie.
289 Quid ^on verba suadeant.
Sextus, half salv'd his credit with a jest,
That at a reckoning this devise had got,
When he should come to draw amongst the rest,
And saw each man had coin, himself had not;
His empty pocket feels and 'gins to say,
In sadness firs here is not a cross to pay.
290 Stupid Binus.
Since time flies fast away, his fastest flight,
Binus prevents with dreaming day and night.
291 In divites.
Rich men their wealth as children rattles keep,
When played a while with it then they fall asleep.
292 In Fannium.
What furi's this, his foe whilst Fannius flies,
He kills himself, for fear of death he dies.
293 To Vellius.
Thou swearest I bowl as well as most men do,
The most are bunglers, therein thou say true.
294 In divites iracundos.
Rich friends' against poor to anger still are prone,
It is not well but profitably done.
295 Clericus absque libro.
When Crassus in his office was instal'd,
For sums of money, which he yet does ow,
A client by the name of Clerk him called,
As he next day to Westminster did go,
Which Crassus hearing whispers thus in's ear,
Sirrah you now mistake and much do err,
That henceforth must the name of Clerk forbea^,
And know I am become an officer.
Alas (quoth he) I did not so much mark,
Good Mr. officer, that are no clerk.
296 Durum telum necessitas.
Coquus with hunger pennilesse constrained
To call for meat and wine three shillings cost,
Had suddenly this project entertained;
Instead of what is to pay, to call mine host,
Who being come entreats him discuss;
What price the law allots for shedding blood:
Whereto mine host directly answers thus,
'Twas always forty pence he understood;
So then quoth Coquus to requite your pains
Pray break my head, and give me what remains.
297 Loves Lunacy.
Before I knew what might belong to war,
I was content to suffer many a scar;
Yet none could hurt me, 'till at length a boy,
Disgrace to manhood, wrought my sad annoy,
This lad though blind, yet did he shoot a dart
Which pierced my breast and lighted on my heart,
Yetdid I feel no hurt till from above,
I heard a voice say soldiers you must love,
I liked it well and in this pleasing vain:
I lost my wits to get my heart again.
298 So his Mrs.
Your lips (fair Lady) (if it be not too much,
I beg to kiss, your hand I crave to touch,
And if your hand deny that courtesy,
(Sweet Mistri^) at your feet I prostrately;
But if your foot Spurn my humility,
Or that your lips think I do aim too high:
Then let your hand in token of consent,
Point at the mean, the maine of all content,
And I shall leave extremes, and to be blist,
Rest in your midst where virtue does consist.
299 To an upstart.
Thine old frinds thou forgot'st having got wealth
No marvel, for thou have forgot thy self.
300 Suum euique.
A strange contention being lately had
Which kind of Music was the sweet'st and best,
Some praised the sprightly sound and some the sad
Some liked the viols; and among the rest
Some in the bag-pipes commendations spoke,
(Quoth one stood by) give me a pipe of smoke.
301 Similis doctrina libell^.
Craesus of all things loves not to buy
So many books of such diversity:
Your Almanac (says he) yeeld's all the sense,
Of time's best profit and experience.
302 On Tullus.
Tullus who was a Taylour by profession,
Is late turned Lawyer, and of large possession.
303 In Prodigum.
Each age of men new fashions does invent,
Things which are old, young men do not esteem:
What pleased our fathers does not us content:
What flourished then we out of fashion deem.
And that is the cause as I do understand,
Why Prodigus did sell his fathers land.
304 In medicum.
When Mingo cries how do you sir? it is thought,
His Patient's wants and his Practice's naught:
Wherefore of late, now every one he meets,
With I am glad to see you well -- he greeteth:
But who will believe him now, when all can tell,
The world goes ill with him, when all are well.
305 Crispati crines plumae dant calcar am^ri.
Why is young Annas thus with feathers dight?
And on his shoulder wears a dangling lock?
The one foretells he will sooner fly then fight,
The other shows he is wrapped in's mothers smock.
But wherefore wears he such a jingling spu^*:
O know, he deals with jades that will not sti^^
306 Most men mistaken.
Good, bad, rich, poor, the foolish and the sage,
Do all cry out against the present age:
Ignorance make us think our young times good,
Our elder days are better understood:
Besides griefs past, we easily forget,
Present displeasures make us sad or fret.
307 On Glaucus.
Glaucus a man, a woman's hair does wear,
But yet he wears the same combed out behind:
So men the wallet of their faults do bear,
For if before him, he that fault should find:
I think foul shame, would his fair face invade,
To see a man so like a woman made.
308 Of Batardas.
Batardas needs would know his Horoscope,
To see if he were borne to escape the rope:
The Magus said, ere thou mine answer have,
I must the names of both thy parents crave:
That said, Batardas could not speak, but spit;
For on his fathers name he could not hitt:
And out of doors at last he stepped with shame,
To ask his mother for his fathers name.
309 An idle huswife.
Fine, neat, and curious misteris Butterfly,
The idle toy, to please an idiots eyes:
You, that wish all good huswives hanged, for why,
Your days work's done, each morning as you rise:
Put on your gown, your ruff, your mask, your chain,
Then dine and sup, and go to bed again.
310 Consuetudo lex.
Two Woers for a Wench were each at strife,
Which should enjoy her to his wedded wife:
Quoth the one, she is mine, because I first her saw,
She Is mine quoth the other by Pye-corner law:
Where sticking once a prick on what you buy,
It Is then your own, which no man must deny.
311 In Battum.
Battus affirmed no Poet ever writ,
Before that love inspired his dull-head wit:
And that himself in love, had wit no more,
Then one stark mad, though somewhat wise before*
312 To women.
You were created angels pure and fair,
But since the first fell, tempting devils you are:
You should be men's bliss, but you prove their rod^
Were there no women men might live like gods.
313 On marriage.
Wedding and hanging the destinies dispatch,
But hanging to some, seems the better match.
314 Quidam erat.
A preaching friar there was, who thus began,
The scripture says there was a certain man:
A certain man? but I do read no where,
Of any certain woman mentioned there:
A certain man a phrase in scripture common*
But no place shows there was a certain woman:
And fit it is, that we should ground our faith,
On nothing more then what the scripture says.
315 Against a certain --
For madmen Bedlam, Bridewell for a knave,
Choose whether of those two, the had rather have.
316 Loves progress.
Loves first approach, delights sweet song does sing,
But in departure, she woes stinge does bring.
417 On old Scylla.
Scilla is toothlesse, yet, when she was young,
She had both teeth enough and to much tongue:
What shall I then of toothlesse Scilla say,
But that her tongue has worn her teeth away.
318 On Gallants Cloakes.
Without, plain cloth, within, plufh' t? but I doubt
the wearers worst within, and best without.
319 On Banks the usurer.
Banks feels no lamenesse of his knotty gout,
His monyes travail for him in and out:
And though the soundest legs go every day,
He toils to be at hell as soon as they.
320 Pecunia praevale^s.
Tell Tom of Plato's worth or Aristotle's?
Hanged give him wealth enough, let wit stop bottl^.
321 On the same.
Tom vowed to beat his boy against the wall,
And as he struck, he forthwith caught a fall:
The boy deriding said, I do aver,
Y' have done a thing, you cannot stand to ^ir.
322 On debt.
To be indebted is a shame men say,
(...)
323 Vmbras non certus metuit
Mistrisse Maryna starts to see a frog,
A naked rapier or a creeping mouse:
To hear a Gun, or barking mastive dog,
Or smell Tobacco, that defiles her house,
To taste of fish, no man alive shall woeher,
Yet fears she not what flesh can do unto her.
324 On women.
Although they seem us only to affect,
It Is their content, not ours, they most respect:
They for their own ends cunningly can feign,
And though they have't by nature, yet they will strain:
Snre if on earth, by wiles gained might be bliss,
Staight that I were a woman I would wish.
325 On Saranzo.
Soranzos broad-brim'd hat I often compare,
To the vast compass of the heavenly sphere:
His head, the earths globe, fixed under it,
Whose center is, his wondrous little wit.
326 In Cottam.
Cotta when he has dined says god be praised,
Yet never prayseth god, for meat or drink:
Since Cotta speaks and not practiceth,
He speaks surely what he does not think.
327 De cord and lingua.
The tongue was once a servant to the heart,
And what it gave she freely did impart:
But now hypocrisy is grown so strong:
She makes the heart a servant to the tongue.
328 On poverty.
If thou be poor, thou shall be ever so.
None now do wealth but on the rich bestow.
329 Women are men's shadows:
Follow a shadow it still flies you,
Seem to fly, it will pursue:
So court a mistrisse she denies you,
Let her alone, she will court you.
Say are not women tr^ely then,
Styled but the shadwoes of us men?
At morn and even shades are longest,
At noone they are, or short or none:
So men at weakest they are strongest;
But grant us perfect they are not known.
Say are not women truly then
styled but the shadows of us men?
330 In ebriosum.
Fie man (says she) but I tell mistrisse An^e,
Her drunken husband is no drunken man:
For those wits, which are overcome with drink,
Are void of reasons and are beasts I think.
331 Wills error.
Will says his wife's so fat, she scarce can go,
But she as nimbly answers faith sir no:
Alas good Will thou art mistaken quite,
For all men know, that she is wondrous light.
332 On Rome.
Hate and debate, Rome through the world has spread,
Yet Ro^a a mock is if backward read:
Then is^t not strange, Rome hate should foster? no,
For out of backward love all hate does grow.
333
All things have savor, though some very small,
Nay a box on ^he ear has no smell at all.
334 Act, fortune, and ignorance.
When Fortune fell asleep, and Hate did blind her,
Art Fortune lost, and Ignorance did find her:
Since when, dull Ignorance with Fortune's store,
Has bin enriched and Art has still bin poor.
335 On Ebrio.
See where Don Ebrio like a Dutchman goes,
Yet drunk with En^lish ale; one would suppose:
That h^e would shoulder down each door and wall,
But they must stand, or he, poor fool! must fall:
336 On love.
Love has two diverse wings, as lovers say,
Thou following him, with one he flies away:
With the other, if thou fly, he follows thee,
Therefore the last, Love, only use for me.
337 On the same.
Love, as it is said, does work with such strange tools,
That he can make fools wisemen, wisemen fools:
Then happy I, for being nor fool nor wise,
Love with his toys and tools I shall despise.
338 On a wanton.
Some the word wanton fetch, though with sinal ski^
From those that want one to effect their will:
If so, I think that wantons there are none,
For till the world want men, can they want one!
339 In procos:
Who woes a wife, thinks wedded men do know*
The only true content, I think not so:
If Woe in wooers be, that women court,
As the word Woe in wooers does import:
And Woe in women too, that courted be,
As the word Woe, in women we do see:
I think it is better lead a single life,
Then with this double woe to woo a wife.
340 Ingluviem sequitur fames:
Curio would feed upon the daintyest fare,
That with the court or country might compare:
For what let us Curio that he need to care,
To frolique freely with the proud'st that dare:
But this excess was such in all things rare,
As he proved banquerout e're he was aware.
341 In Corbum.
Corbus will not, persuade him all I can,
The world should take him for an gentleman:
His reason^s this, because men should not deem,
That he is such, as he does never seem.
342 On Priscus mistrisse.
Priscus commends his mistrisse for a girl,
Whose lips be rubies, and whose teeth are pearl:
The had need prove so, or else it will be found,
He pays too dear; they cost him many a pound.
343 On Women.
Women think woe -- men far more constant be,
Then we men, and the letter O we see:
In woe -- men* not in we men, as they say,
Figures earth's constant Orb; we men say nay:
It means the moon, which proves (none think it strange
women are constant, and most true in change
344 On Promises.
My Mistrisse swears she would leave all men for me,
Yea though that Jove himself should rival be:
She swears it, but what women swear to kind-
-Loves, may be writ in rapid seas and wind.
345 To his mistrisse.
Take, oh take those lips a way,
That so sweetly were for-sworne:
And those eyes like break of day.
Lights that do mislead he morn:
But my kisses bring again,
Seals of love, though sealed in vain.
Hide, oh hide those hills of snow,
Which thy frozen bosom bears:
On whose tops the pinkes that grow,
Are of those that April wears:
But first set my poor heart free,
Bound in those icie chains by thee.
346 On soldiers.
Not faith, nor conscience common soldiers carry,
Best pay, is right; their hands are mercinary.
347 In Diogenem and Craesum:
When the tubb'd Cynicke went to hell, and there,
Found the pale ghost of golden Craesus bare,
He stops; and jeering till he shrugges again,
Says O! thou richest king of kings what gain
Have all thy large heaps brought thee, since I spy
Thee here alone, and poorer now then I?
For all I had, I with me bring; but thou,
Of all thy wealth haft not one farthing now.
348 On a barber.
Suppose my Barber, when his razors nigh
My throat, should then ask wealth and liberty:
I Would promise sure, the Barber asks not this,
No, it is a Thief and fear imperious is.
349 Drusiu^ and Furio.
Furio would fight with Drusius iu the field,
Because the Straw, stout Drusiu^ would not yield,
On which their mistrisse trod, they both tid meet,
Drusius in fight fell dead at Furios feet,
One had the Straw, but with it this greek letter
The other lo^t it, pray who had the better?
350 On Cupid.
Love is a boy, and subject to the rod
Some say, but lovers say he is a god:
I think that love is neither god nor boy,
But a mad-braines imaginary toy.
351 On Durus.
A friend of Durus coming on a day
To visit him, finding the doors say nay;
(...) locked fast up, first knocks, and then does Pause,
As Lord have mercy on's had bin the cause;
But missing it, he ask't a neighbor by
When the rich Duru's were locked and why?
He said it was a Custom grown of late
At diner time to lock your great man's gate.
Durus' his poor friend admired and thought the doo^
Was not for State locked up, but against the poor,
And thence departing empty of good cheer,
Said, Lord have mercy on us, is not there.
352. On a Puritan.
From impure mouths now many bear the name
Of Puritan, yet merit not the same,
This one shall only be my Puritan
That is a knave, yet seems an honest man.
353. Quantum mutatus ab illo.
Pedes grown proud makes men admire thereat
Whose baser breeding, should they think not bear it
Nay, he on cock-horse rides, how like you that?
Tut Pedes Proverb is, Win gold and wear it,
But Pedes you have seen them ri^e in ha^te,
That through their pride have broke their necks at last.
354 On Bibens.
Bibens to show his liberality,
Made Lusus drunk; a noble quality,
And much esteemed, which Bibens fain would prove,
To be the sign of his familiar-love.
Lusus beware, thou wilt find him in the end,
Familiar devil, no familiar friend.
355 On Tobacco.
Things which are common, common men do use,
The better sort do common things refuse:
Yet countrys-cloth-breech, and court-velvet-hose,
Puff both alike, Tobacco, through the nose.
356 In Superbum.
Rustic Superbus fine new clothes has got,
Of Taffata and Velvet, fair in sight;
The show of which has so bewitched the sot,
That he thinks Gentleman to be his right.
But he is deceived; for, true that is of old,
An Ape's an Ape, though he wear cloth of gold.
357 On Infidus.
Infidus was so free of oaths last day,
That he would swear, what e're he thought to say:
But now such is his chance, whereat h^'s grieved,
The more he swears, the less he is believed.
358 On Christmas-Ivy.
At Christmas men do always Ivy get,
And in each corner of the house it set.
But why do they, then, use that Bacchus weed?
Because they mean, then, Bacchus-like to feed.
359 On Bacchus.
Pot-lifting- Bacchus, to the earth did bend
His k^ee, to drink a Health unto his friend:
And there he did, so long, in liquor pour,
That he lay quite sick-drunk upon the floor.
Judge, was not there a drunkards kindness shown,
To drink his friend a Health, and lose his own?
360 Of a fat man.
He Is rich, that has great in-comes by the year;
Then that great bellied man is rich, I Will swear:
For sure, his belly never so big had bin,
Had he not daily had great comings-in.
361 Vindicta vim sequitur.
Kitt being kicked and spurred, pursu^s the Law,
That doomed the damage at twice forty pence.
Which, when the party which had wronged him, saw;
Thought it was too great a fine for such off^nce.
Why then, quoth Kitt, if I too much request,
Thou may at any time kick out the rest.
363 On Flaccus.
Flaccus being young, they said he was a Gull;
Of his s^mplicity, each mouth was full:
And pitying him, they would say, the foolish Lad
Would be deceived, sure, of all he had.
His youth is past, now may they turn him loose;
For why? the Gull is grown to be a Goose.
363 Per plumas anser.
See how y^ng Rufus walks in green each day,
As if he never was youthful until now:
E're Christmas next, his green Goose will be gray,
And those high burnished plumes in's cap will bow.
But you do wrong him, since his purse is full*
To call him Goose, that is so young a Gull.
364 Of Ienkyn.
Ienkyn is a rude clown, go tell him so.
What need I tell, what he himself does know?
Perhaps he does not, then he is a sot;
For tell me, what knows he that knows it not?
365 To Fortune.
Poets say Fortune's blind, and cannot see,
And therefore to be born withal, if she
Sometimes drop gifts on undeserving wights:
But sure they are deceived; she has her sight,
Else could it not at all times so fall out,
That fools should have, and wise men go without.
366 Vnde venis, memora.
With earthen plate, Agathocles, they say,
Did use to meal; so served with Samo's clay,
When jewell'd plate, and rugged earth was by,
He seemed to mingle wealth and poverty.
One asked the cause: he answers, I that am
Si^ilia's King, from a poor Potter came.
Hence learn, thou that art raised from mean estate*
To sudden riches, to be temperate.
367 On Leucus.
Leucus loves life, yet lives wickedly;
H^ ha^eth death, yet wishes he may die
Honestly and well: so what is naught he loves,
And what he would have good, he naught approves.
368 On Biscus.
I pray you Sir, give Biscus leave to speak,
The Gander loves to hear himself to creak.
369 In Thrasonem.
Since Thraso met one stoutly in the field,
He crakes his spirit, and knows not how to yield;
Looks big, swears, strouts with set-side-arms the streets,
Yet gently yields the wall to al he meets.
And to his friends that asks the reason, why?
His an^wer's this, My self I grace thereby:
For every one the common proverb knows,
That always to the wall the weakest go's.
370 In Cornutum.
One told his wife, a Hart's-head he had bought,
To hang his Hat upon, and home it brought.
To whom his frugal wife, What needs that ca^^*
I hope, sweetheart, your head your hat can bear*
371 On More-dew.
More-dew the Mercer, with a kind salute,
Would needs entreat my custom ^ for a suit:
Here Sir, quoth he, for Sattins, Velvets call,
What e're you please, I Will take your word for all*
I thanked, took, gave my word; say than,
Am I at all indebted to this man?
372 On Sims marriage.
Six months, quoth Sim, a Suitor, and not sped*
I in a sev'n-night did both woo and wed.
Who gre^n fruit loves, must take long pains to shake*
Thine was some downfall, I dare undertake.
373 On a Wittall.
I know my fate, and that must bear;
And since I know, I need not fear.
374 On Mopsus.
Mopsus almost, what e're he means to speak,
Before it sir-reverence the way must break:
Such manners has sir-reverence learnt at school,
That now sir-reverence Mopsus is a fool.
375 On Clym.
Clym calls his wife, and reckoning all his neighbors,
Just half of them are Cuckolds, he averrs.
Nay fie, quoth she, I would they heard you speak;
You of your self, it seems, no reckoning make.
376 Turpe lucrum Veneris.
Will in a wilful humor, needs would wed
A wench of wonder, but without a stock;
Whose fame no sooner through the street was spread,
But thither straight our chiefest Gallants flock.
Put ca^e she is poor, brings she not chapmen on?
I hope his stock may serve to graff upon.
377 On Women's f^ults.
We Men in many faults abound,
But two in Women can be found:
The worst that from their sex proceeds,
Is naught in words, and naught in deeds.
378 Si hodie tibi, cras mihi.
A scornful Dame, invited overnight,
To come and dine next morrow with a Knight,
Refused his sudden bidding with disdain.
To whom this message was returned again;
Since with so short time she could not dispense,
To pray her come at that day Twelve-moneth hence.
379 On Law.
Our Civill-Law does seem a Royal thing,
It has more Titl^s than the Spanish King:
But yet the Common Law quite puts it down,
In getting, like the Pope, so many a Crown.
380 Better lost than found.
Lo here is a Coyner, yet he fears no death,
For he never stamps in metal, but in breath:
Swears from Believe me, and Good-faith and troth,
Up to God-damn-me; and without an oath
Protests in nothing, be he never so bare,
He Is brave in this, that he can bravely swear.
381 In Coam.
A nor (...) will Coa espy,
Till she ascend up the cornered (...).
382 De Ore.
Os of O, a Mouth, Scaliger does make;
And from this letter, Mouth his name does take.
I had been in Scaligers belief,
But that I looked in O, and saw no Teeth.
383 In Hugonem.
Though praise, and please, does Hugo never none,
Yet praise, and please, does Hugo ever one;
For praise, and please, does Hugo himself alone.
384 Fronti nulla fides.
Cantus that Wooll-ward went, was wondered at;
Which he excused, as done through pure contrition.
But who so simple, Cantus, credits that?
It Is too well known, thou art of worse condition.
And therefore if no linen thee begirt,
The naked truth will prove, thou have no shirt.
385 On Severus.
Severus is extreme in Eloquence,
For he creates rare phrase, but rarer sense:
Unto his Serving-man, alias, his Boy.
H^ utters speech exceeding quaint and coy;
Diminitive, and my defective slave,
My Pleasures pleasure is, that I must have
My Corpse Coverture, and immediately,
T'insconce my person from frigidity.
His man believes all is Welsh his master spoke,
Till he rails English, Rogue, go fetch my Cloak.
386 On a Gallant.
What Gallant's that, whose oaths fly through mine ears?
How like a Lord of Pluto's Court he swears!
How Dutchman like he swallows down his drink!
How sweet he takes Tobacco, til he stink!
How lofty sprighted, he disdains a Boor:
How faithful hearted he is to a --!
How cock-tail proud he does himself advance!
How rare his Spurs do ring the Morri^e-dance!
Now I protest, by Mistress Susans Fann,
He and his Boy will make a proper Man.
387 Against Caius.
Twenty small pieces I Would have borrowed late,
Which, if bestowed, had been a gift not great:
For, 'twas a rich fri^nd whom I asked, and old;
Whose crowded chests would scarce his riches hold.
He cry's, Turn Lawyer, and thou wilt thrive: I'^ have
No Conncell, Caius, give me what I crave.
388 On Virtue, Milla's maid.
Says Aristotle, Virtue ought to be
Communicative of her self, and free;
And has not Virtue, Milla's maid, been so?
Who Is grown hereby, as big as she can go.
389 On Corydon.
An homespun Peasant with his Urine-glasse,
The Doctor asked what Countryman he was.
Quoth Corydon, with making legs full low,
Your Worship, that, shall ^y my Water kn^w.
389 Fam^ mendax.
Report, thou sometime art ambitious,
At other times, too sparing, covetous;
But many times exceeding envious,
And out of time most devilish, furious.
Of some, or all of these, I dare compound thee;
But for a Liar ever have I found thee.
390 On a Spanish soldier.
A Spanish soldier, sick unto the death,
His Pistol to's Physician did bequeath.
Who did demand, what should the reason be,
'Bove other things to give him that. (Quoth he)
This, with your practice joined, you may kill,
Sir, all alive, and have the world at will.
391 On Otho.
Three daughters Otho has, his only heirs,
But will by no means let them learn to write;
'Cause, after his own humor, much he fears,
They Will one day learn, Love Letters to indite.
The youngest now is with child; who taught her then,
Or of her self learned she to hold her pen?
392 On Hypocrisy.
As Venison in a poor man's kitchin's rare,
So Hypocrites and Usurers in Heaven are.
393 On Man and Woman.
When Man and Woman dies, as Poets sung,
His Heart's the last that stirs, of hers, the Tongue.
394 On Fabullus.
I asked Fabullus, why he had no wife?
(Quoth he) because I Would live a quiet life.
395 On Furnus.
Furnus takes pains, he need not without doubt;
O yes, he labors much. How? with the Gowt.
396 On a Thief.
A Thief condemned for a heinous crime,
Was for to lose his tongue at the same time:
But he the Court entreats with feigned tears,
To spare his Tongue, and cut off both his Ears.
To t^is, the Judge, and all the Bench agreed,
And for th'Executioner sent with speed:
Who being come, and searching, there was found
No Ears, but Hairs; at which, all laughed round*
Says th'Ju^ge, thou have no Ears. Sir (quoth the wight)
Where there is naught, the King must lose his right.
397 Quidn^^ ebrietas?
^ubin reports, his Mistress is a Punk;
Which being told ^er, was no whit dismayed,
For sure as death (quoth she) the villains drunk*
And in that taking, knows not what he said.
'Twas well excused, but often it comes to pas^e,
That true we find, In vino veritas.
398 Infirmis-animosus.
^ontus by no means from his coin departs,
Z'foot, will you have of men more than their hearts?
399 A culina ad curiam.
Lixa, that long a Serving-groom has been,
Will now no more the man be known or seen:
And reason good, he has that place resigned,
Witness his cloak, throughout with velvet lined.
Which by a Paradox comes thus to pass,
The greasy Gull is turned a gallant ass.
400 Fruf^ra vocaveris heri.
Dick had but two words to maintain him ever,
And that was, Stand; and after, stand-Deliver.
But Dick's in Newgate, and he fears shall never
Be blessed again with that sweet word, D^liver*
401 Magnis non est morandum.
See how Silenus walks accomplished,
With due performance of his fathers Page:
Looks back of purpose to be honored,
And on each slight occasion 'gins to rage;
You villain, dog, where has your stay bin such*
Quoth he, the Broaker would not lend so much*
402 Puduit sua ^amna refer.
Such ill success had Dick, at Dice, last night,
As he was forced, next day, play least in sight:
But if you love him, make thereof no speeches,
He lost his Rapier, Cloak, and velvet Breeches.
403 Nimis-docuit consuetudo.
Old Fucus board is often replenished,
But naught thereof must be diminished,
Unless some worthless upper-dish or twain;
The rest for service still again remain.
His man that used to bring them in for show,
Leaving a dish upon the bench below,
Was by his Master (much offended) blamed:
Which he, as brief, with answer quickly framed;
'Tath been so often brought before this day,
As now ch'ad thoft it self had known the way.
404 Poculo junguntur amici.
A health, says Lucas, to his Loves bright eye;
Which no^ to pledge, were much indignity:
You cannot do him greater courtesy,
Than to be drunk, and damned for company.
405 Nullum s^imulum ignaris.
Caecus awake, was told the Sun appeared,
Which had the darkness of the morning cleared:
But Caecus sluggish, thereto makes reply,
The Sun has further far to go than I.
406 Detur laus digniori.
Mistress Marina amongst some gossips sat,
Where faces were the Subject of their chat;
Some looked too pale, some seemed too fiery red,
Some brown, some black, and some ill fashioned.
Good Lord (quoth she) you all are much to blame,
Let Us alone, and praise the maker of the same:
Her Chamber maid, who heard her, standing by,
Said, then love me, for that you know was I.
407 Non p^nna, sed ^sus.
Caius accounts himself accursed of men,
Only because his Lady loves him not:
Who, till he taught her, could not hold her Pen,
And yet has since, another Tutor got.
Caius, it seems, thy skill she did but cheapen,
And means to try him at another weapen.
408 An absolute Gallant.
If you will see true valor here displayed,
Hear Poly-phemus, and be not afraid:
Do You see me wronged, and will ye thus restrain me?
Sir let me go, for by these hilts I Will brain ye.
Shall a base patch, with appearance wrong me?
I Will kill the villain, pray do not prolong me;
Call my Tobacco pu^rified stuff?
Tell me it stinks? say it is dross I snuff?
Sirrah what are you? why sir what would you?
I am a Prentice, and will knock you too:
O are you so? I cry you mercy then,
I am to fight with none but Gentlemen.
409 In Dolentem.
Dolens does show his purse, and tells you this,
It is more horrid than a Pesthouse is;
For in a Pesthouse many mortals enter,
But in his purse one angel dares not venture.
410 Ambo-dexter.
Two Gentlemen of hot and fiery sp'rite,
Took boat and went up westward to go fight;
Embarked both, for Wend-worth they set Sail,
And there arriving with a happy gale.
The Watermen discharged for their fare,
Then to be parted, thus their minds declare:
Pray Oars, say they, stay here, and come not nigh,
We go to fight a little, but here by:
The Watermen, with Staves did follow then,
And cried, oh hold your hands, good Gentlemen,
You know the danger of the Law, forbear;
So they put weapons up, and fell to swear.
411 On a Gallant.
Sirrah come hither, boy, take view of me,
My Lady I am purposed to go see;
What, does my Feather flourish with a grace?
And this my curled hair become my face?
How decent does my doublet's form appear?
I would I had my suit in Hounds-ditch here.
Do not my Spurs pronounce a silv^r sound?
Is not my hose-circumference profound?
Sir these be well, but there is one thing ill,
Your Tailor with a sheet of paper-bill,
Vow's he will be paid, and Sergeants he has fee'd*
Which wait your coming forth to do the deed.
Boy God-a-mercy, let (...) Lady stay,
I Will see no Counter for her sake to day*
412 In sextum.
Sextus six pockets wears; two for his uses,
The other four, to pocket up abuses.
413 Tom's Fortune.
Tom tells he is robbed, and counting all his losses,
Concludes, all is gone, the world is full of crosses:
If all be gone, Tom take this comfort then,
Thou Art certain never to have cross again.
414 Opus and Vsus.
Opus for need, consumed his wealth apace,
And never would cease until he was undone;
His brother Vsus lived in better case
Than Opus did although the eldest Son.
It Is strange it should be so, yet here was it,
Opus had all the Land, Vsus the Wit.
415 A good Wi^e.
A Bachelor would have a Wife were wis^,
Fair, rich, and young, a maiden for his his bed --
Nor proud, no^ churli^h, but of faultlesse size;
A Country huswife, in the City bred.
But he is a fool, and long in vain has staid;
He should bespeak her, there is none ready made.
416 On an inconstant Mistress.
I dare not much say, when I thee commend,
Lest thou be changed e're my praises end.
417 In Lesbiam.
Why should I love thee Lesbia? I no reason see,
Then out of reason, Lesbia I love thee.
418 In Paulinum.
Paul by day wrongs me, yet he daily swears.
He wishes me as well as to his soul:
I know his drift to damn that he naught cares,
To please his body; therefore good friend Paul,
If thy kind Nature, will afford me grace,
Hereafter love me in thy body's place.
419 On Zeno.
Zeno would feign the old widow Egle have;
Trust me she is wise, for she is rich and brave:
But Zeno, Zeno, she will none of you,
In my mind she is the wiser of the two.
420 To Cotta.
Be not wroth Cotta, that I not salute thee,
I used it whilst I worcester thy did repute thee;
Now thou art made a painted saint, and I,
Cotta, will not commit Idolatry.
421 To Women.
Ye that have beauty, and withal no pity,
Are like a prick-song lesson without ditty.
422 On Creta.
Creta does love her husband wondro^s well,
It needs no proof, for every one can tell:
So strong's her love, tha^ if I not mist ache,
It does extend to others, for his sake.
423 On Priscus.
Why still does Priscus strive to have the wall?
Because he is often dr^nk, and fears to fall.
424 Ictus piscator sapit.
Brutus at length escaped the Surgeons hands,
Begins to frollique as if all were well;
And would not for the worth of thrice his lands,
Endure the brunt of such another hell;
But leaves this farewell, for his Physics hire;
the child tha^'s burnt, for ever dreads the fire.
425 On Rufus.
At all, quoth Rufus, set ye, what you dare?
I Will throw at all, and 'twere a peck of gold;
No life lies on it, then coin I Will never spare,
Why Rufus, that is the cause of all that is sold.
For with franck gamesters it does often befall,
they throw at all, till thrown quite out of all.
426 On Tobacco.
Tobacco is a weed of so great power,
That it (like earth) does all it feeds, devour.
427 Ne^ vultus indicat virum.
Dick in a raging deep discourtesie,
Called an A^torny mere necessity:
The more Kna^e he, admit he had no Law,
Must he be ^louted at by every Daw?
428. On F^rius.
Furius a Lover was, and had loving fits*
He loved so madly, that he lost his wits;
Yet he lost naught, yet grant I he was mad,
How could he loose that which he never had?
429 Fools Fortune.
God sends fools Fortune, but not to all,
For some are great fools, whose fortunes are small.
430 Tace sed age.
Little or nothing said, soon mended is,
But they that nothing do, do most amiss.
431 On a Madman.
One asked a madman if a wife he had?
A wife, quoth he, I never was so mad.
432 To Scilla.
If it be true, that promise is a debt,
Then Scill^ will her freedom hardly get;
For if she has vowed her service to so many,
She Will neither pay them all, nor part from any.
Yet she to satisfy her debts, desires
To yield her body (as the La^ r^quires.)
433 Nescis, quid serus vesper vehat.
Lyncus devises as he lies in bed,
What new apparel, he were best to make him:
So many fashions flow within his head,
As much he fears the Tailor will mistake him:
But he mistook him not, that by the way,
Did for his old ^uit lay him up, that day.
434 To Ficus.
Ficus has lost his nose, but knows not how,
And that seems strange to every one that knows it:
Methinks I see it written in his brow,
How, wherefore, and the cause that he did loose it.
To tell you true, Ficus I thus suppose,
'Twas some French Caniball, bit off your nose.
435 Of Arnaldo.
Arnaldo free from fault, demands his wife,
Why he is burdened with her wicked life?
Quoth she, good husband, do not now repent,
I far more burdens bear, yet am content.
436 Quis nisi mentis inops --
Ware profer'd, stinks, yet stay good Proverb, stay,
Thou art deceived, as clients best can say;
Who profering trebble fees, for single care,
It Is well accepted, gold it is such ware.
437 On a Friend inde^d.
A real friend a Canon cannot batter;
With nom'nall friends, a Squib's a perilous matter.
438 Man's ingresse, and egresse.
Nature, which headlong, into life did throng us,
With our feet forward, to our grave does bring us:
What is less ours, than this our borrowed breat^?
We stumble into life, we go to death.
439 On bad de^tors.
Bad debtors are good liars; for they say,
I Will pay you without fail, on such a day:
Come is the day, to come the debt is still,
So still they lie, though stand in debt they will.
But Fulcus has so often ly'd in this wise,
That now he lies in Lud-gate for his lies.
440 On a foolish dolt.
A Justice walking over the frozen Thames,
The Ice about him round, began to crack;
He said to's man, here is some danger, James,
I prithee help me over on thy back.
441 On Panurgus.
Panurgus pryes in high and low affairs,
He talks of foreign, and our civil state:
But for his own, he neither counts nor cares;
That he refers to fortune and his ^ate,
His neighbors faults straight in his face he will find,
But in a bag he laps his own behind.
442 To a sleeping talker.
In sleep thou talk unfore-thought mysteries,
And utter'st unfore-seen things, with close eyes:
How well would thou discourse, if thou were dead,
Since sleep, death's image, such fine talk has bred?
443 Omne simile non est idem.
Together as we walked, a friend of mine,
Mistook a painted Madam for a sign
That in a window stood; but I acquainted,
Told him it was no wooden sign was painted,
But Madam -- yea true said he,
Yet it is little sign of modesty.
444 Qui ebrius laudat temperantiam.
Severus likes not these unseason'd lines,
Of rude absurdities, times foul abuse,
To all posterities, and their assigns,
That might have bin, says he, to better use.
What senseless gull, but reason may convince,
Or jade so dull, but being kicked will wince.
445 On Misus.
They say the Usurer Misus has a mill,
Which men to powder grindeth cruelly;
But what is that to me? I fear no ill,
For smaller than I am, I cannot be.
446 On wisdom and virtue.
Wisemen are wiser than good-men, what then?
It Is better to be wiser than wise men.
447 On Ducus.
Ducus keeps house, and it with reason stands,
That he keep house, has sold away his lands,
448 On Mysus, and Mopsus.
Mysus and Mopsa hardly could agree,
Striving about superiority:
The Text which says that man and wife are one,
Was the chief argument they stood upon.
She held, they both one woman should become:
He held, they should be man, and both but one.
So they contended daily, but the strife;
Could not be ended, till both were one wife.
448 On Photinus.
I met Photynus at the B. Court,
Cited (as he said) by a knave relator:
I asked him wherefore? he in laughing sort,
Told me it was but for a childish matter.
How ere he laughed it out, he lied not:
Indee d'twas childish, for the child he got.
449 On Ca^triotes.
See, see, what love is now betwixt each fist,
Since Castriotes had a scabby wrist:
How kindly they, by clawing one another,
As if the left hand were the right hands brother.
450 New Rhetoric.
Good arguments without coin, will not stick,
To pay, and not to says best Rhetoric.
451 Est mi^i Diva parens.
Ominus wondreth, since he came from Wales,
What the description of this Isle might be;
That never had seen but mountains, hills, and dales,
Yet would he boast, and stand on's pedigree.
From Rice ap Ric^ard, sprung from Dick a Cow,
Be cod was right good gentleman, look ye now?
452 On T^irsites.
Although Thirsites have a filthy facae,
And staring eyes, and little outward grace:
Yet this he has, to make amends for all,
Nature her self, is not more natural.
453 On Zoylus.
If Soldiers may obtain four Terms of war,
Muskets should be the pleaders, Pikes the bar:
For black bags, Bandeleirs, Jackets for gowns,
Angels for fees; we'll take no more cracked crowns.
454 On a swearing Gallant.
What God commands, this wretched creature loathes,
He never names his Maker, but by oaths:
And wears his tongue, of such a damned fashion,
That swearing is his only recreation.
In morning, even as soon as he does rise,
He swears his sleep is scarcely out of's eyes;
Then makes him ready, swearing all the while,
The drowzy weather did him much beguile.
Got ready, he, to dice or tables goes,
Swearing an oath, at every cast he throws:
To dinner next, and then in stead of Grace,
He swears his stomach is in hungry case.
No sooner dined, but calls, come take away,
And swears it is late, he must go see a Play.
There sits, and swears, to all he hears and see's,
This speech is good, that action disagrees.
So takes his Oa^es, and swears he must make have,
His hour of Supper-time is almost past.
455 On a long Beard.
Thy Beard is long, better it would thee ^it,
To have a shorter Be^rd, and longer wit.
456 On my Self.
Who seeks to please all men each way,
And not himself offend;
He may begin to work to day,
But God knows when he will end.
457 To the mis-interperter.
Cease gaul'd backed guilt, those inscious lines to mince,
The world will know you are rubd if once you wince
They hem within their ^eeming Critique wall,
Particularly none, generally all:
Amongst which if you have chanced to catch a prick
Cry we-hy if you will, but do not kick*
458 On a Mother and her son having but two eyes betwixt the^, each one.
A half blind-boy, born of a half blind mother,
Peerlesse for beauty, save compared to the other;
Fair boy, give her thine eye and she will prove
The Queen of beauty, thou the God of love.
459 To his quill.
Thou have been wanton, therefore it is meet,
Thou 'shouldst do penance do it in a sheet.
460 Of C^irst crucified.
When red the Sun goes down, we use to say
It is a sign, we shall have a fair day:
Blood red the Sun of Heaven went down from hence
And we have had fair weather ever since.
461 On himself.
Mirth pleases some, to others it is offen^e,
Some commend plain conceits, some profound sense
Some wish a witty jest, some dislike that,
And most would have themselves they know not what
Then he that would plea^e all, and himself too,
Takes more in hand than he is like to do.
462 To young men.
Young men fly, when beauty darts
Amorous glances at your hearts,
The fixed mark gives your shooter aim,
And Ladies looks have power to maime,
Now 'twixt their lips, now in their eyes
(...) a kiss or smile love lies,
Then fly betimes for only they
Conquer love that run away.
463 The pens prosopopeia to the Scrivener.
Thinike who when you cut the quill,
Wounded was yet did no ill;
When you mend me, think you must
Mend your self, else you're unjust
When you dip my nib in Ink,
Think on him that gall did drink,
When the Ink sheds from your pen,
Think who shed his blood for men;
When you write, but think on this,
And you never shall write amiss.
464 A raritie.
If thou be born to strange sights,
Things invisible to see:
Ride ten thousand days and nights,
Till age snow white hairs on thee.
And thou when thou return'st wilt tell me;
All strange wonders that befell thee,
And thou 'lt swear that no where
Lives a maiden true and fair.
465 Upon Tom Tolt^am's nose.
The radiant color of Tom Toltham's nose,
Puts down the lilly and obscures the rose;
Had I a jewel of such precious hew,
I would present it to some Monarch's view,
No subject should possess such jems as those
Ergo, the King must have Tom Toltham's nose.
466 Upon Thorough-good an unthrif^.
Thy sir name Thorough-good befitteth thee,
Thou T^orough-good, and good goes thorough thee
Nor thou in good, nor good in thee does stay,
Both of you, thorough go, and pass away.
467 In Amorem.
Love, if a God thou art, then evermore thou must
Be merciful and just,
If just thou be, O wherefore does thy dart,
Wound mine alone, and not my Mistrisse heart?
If merciful, then why am I to pain reserved,
Who have the truly served?
Whiles she that for thy power cares not a fly,
^aughs thee to scorn, and lives at liberty:
Then if a God thou will accounted be
Heal me like her, or else wound her like me.
468 Ariddle on a pound of candles.
One evening as cold as cold might be,
With frost and snow, and pinching weather,
Companions about three times three,
Lay close all in a bed together;
Yet one after other they took^ a heat,
And died that night all in a sweat.
469 On the new aressings.
Ladies that wear black cypress vailes,
Turned lately to white linen railes,
And to your girdle wear your bands;
And show your arms in stead of hands:
What can you do in Lent more meet,
As fittest dress, than wear a sheet:
'Twas once a band, it is now a cloak,
An acorne one day proves an oak,
Wear but your lawn unto your feet,
And then your band will prove a sheet:
By which device and wise excess,
You do your penance in a dress,
And none shall know, by what they see,
Which Lady's censured, which goes free.
469 T^us answered.
Black Cypress vailes are shrouds of night,
White linen railes are railes of light;
Which though we to our girdles wear,
We Have hands to keep your arms off there;
Who makes our bands to be a cloak,
Makes John a Styles of John an Oak:
We wear our linen to our feet,
Yet need not make our band a sheet.
Your Clergy wears as long as we,
Yet that implies conformity:
Be wise, recant what you have writ,
Least you do penance for your wit:
Love charms have power to weave a string
Shall tie you, as you tied your ring,
Thus by loves sharp, but just decree
You may be censured, we go free.
470 Amicitia.
What Is ^riendship? it is a treasure,
it is a pleasure:
Bred 'twixt two worthy spirits,
by their merits:
It Is two ^inds in one, meeting
never fleeting:
Two wills in one consenting,
each contenting,
One breast in two divided, yet not parted;
A double body, and yet single hearted;
Two bodies making one, through self election,
Two minds, yet having both but one affection.
471* To his Mistrisse.
I cannot pray you in a studied style,
Nor speak words distant from my heart a mile;
I cannot visit Hide-parke every day,
And with a hackney court my time away;
I cannot spanniolize it week by week,
Or wait a month to kiss your hand or cheek;
If when you are loved you cannot love again,
Why do but say so, I am out of pain.
472 On the Queen of Bohemia.
You meaner Beauties of the night,
Which poorly satisfy our eyes;
More by your number then your light;
The common people of the skies:
What are ye when the moon shall rise?
You violets that first appear,
By your purple mantle known;
Like proud virgins of the year,
As if the Spring were all your own;
What are you when the rose is blown?
You wandering chaunters of the wood,
That fill the air with natures lays:
Thinking your passions understood,
By weak accents, where is your praise,
When Philomell her voice shall raise:
So when my Princess shall be seen,
In sweetness of her looks and mind:
By virtues first, then choice a Queen,
Tell me, was she not designed,
The eclipse and glory of her kind?
473 To his noble friend.
There Is no necessity that can exclude
The poorest being from a gratitude;
For when the strength of fortune lends no more,
He that is truly thankful is not poor,
Yours be the bounty then, mine the great debt,
On which no time, nor power can ransom set.
474 Fatum Supremum.
All buildings are but monuments of death,
All clothes but winding sheets for our last knell,
All dainty fattings for the worms beneath,
All curious music, but our passing bell;
Thus death is nobly waited on, for why?
All that we have is but deaths livery.
475 On his Mrs. death
Unjustly we complain of fate,
For short'ning our unhappy days,
When death does nothing but translate
And print ^s in a better phrase;
Yet who can choose but weep? not I,
That beauty of such excellence,
And more virtue then could die;
By deaths rude hand is ravished hence,
Sleep blessed creature in thine Urne,
My sighs, my tears shall not awake thee,
I but stay until my turn
And then, Oh then! I Will overtake thee.
476 Aeque facilitas ac difficultas nocet amoris.
I love not her that at the first cries I,
I love not her that does me still deny,
Be she too hard she will cause me to despair,
Be she too easy, she is as light as fair;
It Is hard to say whether most hurt procure,
She that is hard or easy to allure,
If it be so, then lay me by my side
The hard, soft, willing and unwilling bride.
477 In monumenta Westminsteriensia.
Mortality behold and fear,
What a change of flesh is here;
Think how many royal bones,
Sleep within this heap of stones,
Here they ly, had realms and lands;
Who now want strength to stir their hands;
Where from their Pulpits seel'd with dust,
They preach, In greatness is no trust;
Here Is an acre sown indeed,
With the richest royal'st seed,
That the earth did e're suck in
Since the first man died for sin,
Here the bones of birth have cried,
Though Gods they were, as men they died:
Here are sands, ignoble things,
Dropped from the ruined sides of Kings;
Here Is a world of pomp and state,
Buried in dust, once dead by fate.
478 Semel it sa^ivimus.
Beldam, God bless thee, thou want naught but wit
And having gotten that, we are freed from it,
Bridewell, I cannot any way dispraise thee
For thou do feed the poor and jerke the lazy.
Newgate, of thee I cannot much complain;
For once a month, thou freest men out of pain,
But from the Counters gracious Lord defend us:
To Bedlam, Bridewell, or to New gate send us,
For there in time wit, work, or law sets free;
But here wit, work, nor law gets liberty.
479 On the Marriage of one Turbolt, with Mrs. Hill.
What are Deucalions days returned that we,
A Turbolt swimming on a Hill do see?
What shall we in this age so strange report,
That fishes leave the sea on hills to sport?
And yet this hill, though never tired with standing
Lay gently down to give a Turbolt landing.
480 Upon Annas marriadge with a lawyer.
Anne is an angel, what if so she be?
What is a angel? but a lawyers fee.
481 In Cupidinem.
Who grafts in blindness may mistake his stock,
Love has no tree, but that whose bark is smock.
482 Aenigma.
The Devil men say in Devonshire died of late;
But Devonshire lately lived in rich estate,
Till Rich his toys did Devonshire so bewitch,
As Devonshire died and left the Devil rich.
483 On Cupid.
Why feign they Cupid robbed of sight;
Can he whose seat is in the eye, want light?
484 A^ answer.
Experience shows, and reason does decree
That he who sits in's own light cannot see.
485 Barten Holiday to the Puritan on his Technogamia.
It Is not my person, nor my play,
But my surname, Holiday,
That does offend thee, thy complaints
Are not against me, but the Saints;
So ill do thou endure my name,
Because the Church does like the same,
A name more awful to the puritan
Then Talbo^ unto france, or Drake to Spain*
486 On a Picture.
This face here pictured time shall longer have,
Then life the substance of it, or the grave,
Yet as I change from this by death I know,
I shall like death, the liker death I grow.
487 In Meretrices.
The law hangs thieves for their unlawful stealing,
The law carts bawds for keeping of the door,
The law does punish rogues, for roguish dealing,
The law whips both the pander and the whore;
But yet I muse from whence this law is grown;
Whores must not steal, yet must not use their own.
487 On the City Venice.
When in the Adriatic Neptune saw
How Venice stood, and gave the seas their law,
Boast thy Tarpeian towers, now Jove said he,
And Mars thy walls, if Tiber before the sea
Thou do prefer, view both the cities ods,
Thou'l^ say that men built Rome, Venice, the gods.
488 To a Lady that every morning used to paint her fa^e.
Preserve what nature gave you, nought's more base,
Th^n Belgian color on a Roman face,
Much good time's lost, you rest your faces debtor,
And make it worse, striving to make it better.
489 On a Cuckold.
My friend did tax me seriously one morn,
That I would wear, yet could not wind a horn
And I replied he perfect truth should find it,
Many did wear the horn that could not wind it,
However of all that man may wear it best,
Who makes claim to it as his ancient crest.
490 Upon Marriage.
Marriage as old men note, has likened bin
Unto a publiq^e feast or common route,
Where those that are without, would fain get in,
And those that are within would feign get out.
491 Quicquid non nummus.
The mony'd man can safely sail all seas,
And make his fortune as himself shall please,
He can wed Danae, and command that now
Acrisius self that fatal match allow:
He can declaime, chide, censure verses, write,
And do all things better then Cato might;
He knows the Law and rules it, has and is
Whole Servius, and what Labeo can possess,
In brief let rich men wish what e're they love,
'Twill come, they in a locked chest keep a Jove.
492 On Annas a news-monger.
Annas has long ears for all news to pass:
His ears must needs be long for he is an ass.
494 Semel in^anivimus omnes.
Thus have I waded through a worthless task,
Whereto I trust there is no exception taken,
For meant to none, I answer such as ask,
It Is like apparel made in birchen lane;
If any please to suit themselves and wear it,
The blames not mine but theirs that needs will wear it.
495 To Aulus.
Some (speaking in their own renown)
Say that this book, was not exactly done;
I care not much, like banquets, let my books
Rather be pleasing to the guests then cooks.
496 Ad sesquipedales poetastros.
Hence Brauron's God to Tauriminion,
And you Levaltoring Corybants be gone;
Fly thundering Bronsterops to Hippocrene,
And Maur^s to nymph nursing Mytelene;
Grisly Maegera's necromantique spell
Depart to black nights Acheronticke cell:
Avaunt transformed Epidarian,
Unto the Antipod Isles of Tabraban,
Away Cyllenius plumy-pinnion'd God,
With thy peace making wand, snake charming rod
And all the rest not daring look upon
Vranus' blood-borne brood, and fell Typhon
Chimaera's victor great Bellepheron;
Thou vanquisher of Spanish Geryon,
Stout Asdruball Sicilian Lord of yore,
Thou that destroyd'st the Calidonian bore;
Courageous conqueror of Creetes Minotaure,
Thou pride of Mermeros' cloudy Semitaure.
Perseus whose marble stone transforming shield;
Enfor^'d the whale, Andromeda to yield,
You Argonautes that scoured Syndromades,
And passed the quick sands of Semplegades,
Help Demogorgon, King of heaven and earth,
Chaos Lucina at Litigiums birth,
The world with child looks for delivery
Of Cannibals or Poetophagie;
A devilish brood, from Ericthonius,
From Iphidemia, Nox, and Erebus,
Chide Pegasus for opening Helicon,
And Poets damn to Pery-Phlegeton,
Or make this monstrous birth abortive be
Or else I will shake hands with poetry.
497 A Serving man.
One to a Serving man this council sent,
To get a Master that is intelligent;
Then if of him no wages he could get,
Yet he would understand he is in his debt.
498 Two Thieves.
Two Thieves by night began a lock to pick,
One in the house awake; thus answered quick,
Why how now? what a stir you there do keep,
Go home again, we are not yet asleep.
499 A Physician and a Farrier.
A neat Physician for a Farrier sends
To dress his horse, promising him amends.
Nay (quoth the Farrier) amends is made,
For nothing do we take of our own trade.
500 A poor Peasant.
A poor man being sent for to the King,
Began to covet much a certain thing
Before he went: being but an Iron nail,
His friend did ask him what it would avail?
(Quoth he) this is as good as one of steel,
For me to knock now into fortunes wheel.
501 Three Pages.
Three Pages on a time together met,
And made a motion, that each one would let
The other know what he would desire to be
Having his wish, thereto they did agree.
Quoth one, to be a Melon I would choose,
For then I Am sure, none would refuse
To kiss my breech although the sent were hot,
And so they would know whether I were good or not.
502 A Gentleman and his Physician.
A Gentleman not richest in discretion,
Was always sending for his own physician.
And on a time he needs would of him know,
What was the cause his pulse did go so slow?
Why (quoth the Doctor) thus it comes to pass,
Must needs go slow, which goes upon an ass.
503 A Peasant and his wife.
A Peasant with his wife was almost wild,
To understand his Daughter was with child,
And said if to the girl sh'ad taken heed,
Sh'ad not been guilty of so foul a deed.
Husband (said she) I swear by cock,
(Welfare a good old token)
The Dev^ll him self cannot keep that lock
Which every key can open.
504 G-L-Asse.
He that loves Glass without a G,
Leave out L and that is he.
-- Nihil hic nisi carmina desunt.
EPITAPHS.
1. On a traveling beggar.
HEre lies a Vagrant person whom our laws,
(Of late grown strict) denied passage, cause
He wandered thus, therefore return he must,
From whence at first he hither came, to dust.
2. On a Mason.
So long the Mason wrought on other's walls,
That his own house of clay to ruin falls:
No wonder spiteful death, wrought his annoy,
He used to build, and death seeks to destroy.
3. On a Dyer.
Though death the Dyer colour-lesse has made,
Yet he dies pale, and will not leave his trade;
But being dead, the means yet does not lack
To die his friends cloth into mourning black.
Some sure foresaw his death, for they of late
Used to exclaim upon his dying fate.
And weak, and faint, he seemed oft-times to have been,
For to change colors, often he was seen;
Yet there no matter was so foul, but he
Would set a color on it handsomlye.
Death him no unexpected stroke could give
That learnt to dye, since he began to live.
He shall yet prove, what he before has tried,
And shall once more, live after he has died.
4. Of a Schoolmaster.
The gra^mer School a long time taught I have,
Yet all my skill could not decline the grave,
But yet I hope it one day will be show'ne
In no case save the Ablative alone.
5. On William Shake-speare.
Renowned Spencer lie a thought more nigh
To learned Chaucer, and rare Beaumont lie
A little nearer Spencer, to make room
For Shake-speare in your threefold, fourefold tomb
To lodge all four in one bed make a shift
Until Doomes d^y, for hardly will a fifth
Betwixt this day and that by Fates be slain*
For whom your curtains may be drawn again.
If your precedencie in death do bar
A fourth place in your sacred Sepulcher;
Under this sacred marble of thine own,
Sleep rare Tragaedian Shake-speare! sleep alone.
Thy unmolested peace in an unshared cave
Possess as Lord, not tenant of thy grave.
That unto us, and others it may be
Honor hereafter to be laid by thee.
6. On a youth.
Now thou have Heaven for merit, but it is strange
Mortality should ^nvie at thy change:
But God thought us unfit, for such as thee,
And made thee consort of eternitye.
We grieve not then, that thou to heaven art taken
But that thou have thy friends so soon forsaken*
7. On Prince Henry.
I have no vein in verse, but if I could,
Distill on every word a pearl I would.
Our sorrows pearls drop not from pens, but eyes,
Whilst other's Muse? write, mine only cries.
8. On a Footboy that dyed with overmuch running.
Base tyrant death thus to assail one tired
Who scarce his latest breath being left expired;
And being too too cruel thus to stay
So swift a course, at length ran quite away.
But pretty boy, be sure it was not death
That left behind thy body out of breath:
Thy soul and body running in a race,
Thy soul held out; thy body tired apace,
Thy soul gained, and left that lump of clay
To rest it self, until the latter day.
9. On Hobson the Carrier.
Hobson, (what is out of sight is out of mind)
Is gone, and left his letters here behind.
He that with so much paper used to meet;
Is now, alas! content to take one sheet.
10. Another.
He that such carriage store, was wont to have,
Is carried now himself unto his grave:
O strange! he that in life never made but one,
Six Carriers makes, now he is dead and gone.
11. Another.
Here Hobson lies, pressed with a heavy load,
Who now is gone the old and common Road;
The wagon he so loved, so loved to ride,
That he was drawing on, whilst that he died.
12. Another.
Hobson^s not dead but Charles the Northern swain
Has sent for him, to draw his lightsome-waine.
13. On a treachero^s Warrener.
Behold here lies a scalded pate quite bare*
In catching conies, who lost many a hare.
14. On a fair Damsel.
Life is the Road to death, and death Heavens gate must be,
Heaven is the throne of Christ, and Christ is life to me.
15. On a Footman.
This nimble footman ran away from death,
And here he rested being out of breath;
Here death him overtooke, made him his slave,
And sent him on an errand to his grave.
16. On Queen Anne, (...) dyed in March, was kept all April, and buried in
May.
March with his winds has struck a Cedar tall,
And weeping April mournes the Cedar's fall;
And May inte^ds her month no flowers shall bring
Since she must lose, the flower of all the spring.
Thy March his winds have caused April showers
And yet sad May must lose his flower of flowers.
17. Iustus Lipsius.
Some have high mountains of Parian stone,
And some in brass carve their inscription,
Some have their tombs of costly marble rea^'d,
But in our tears, only art thou interred.
18. On a child of two years old, being borne and dying in July.
Here is laid a July-flow'r
With surviving tears bedewed
Not despayring of that hour
When her spring shall be renewed;
E're she had her Summer seen,
She was gathered, fresh and green.
29. Another.
Like bird of prey,
Death snatched away,
This harmless dove,
Whose soul so pure
Is now secure
In heaven above.
20. Another.
That flesh is grass
It Is grace a flower
Read e're you pass
Whom worms dovour^.
21. On a Cobbler.
Death at a Cobblers door often made a stand,
And always found him on the mending hand;
At last came death in very foul weather,
And ripped the soale, from the upper leather:
Death put a trick upon him, and what was it?
The cobbler called for's awle, death brought his Last.
22. On a Lock-smith.
A zealous Lock-smith died of late,
Who by this time's at heaven-gate
The reason why he will not knock
Is, 'cause he means to pick the lock.
23. On a Collier.
Here lies the Collier Jenkin Dashes,
By whom death nothing gained he swore,
For living he was dust and ashes:
And being dead, he is no more.
24. On Dick Pinner.
Here lies Dick Pinner, O ungentle death!
Why did thou rob Dick Pinner of his breath?
For living, he by scraping of a pin
Made better dust, then thou have made of him.
25. On M. Thomas Best.
With happy stars he sure is blessed,
Where ^ ere he goes, that still is Best.
26. On Robyn.
Round Robyn's gone, and this grave does enclose
The pudding of his doublet and his hose.
27. On Proud Tygeras.
Proud and foolish, so it came to pass,
He lived a Tiger, and he died and Ass.
28. On John Cofferer.
Here lies John Cofferer, and takes his rest,
Now he has changed a coffer for a chest.
29. On blind and deaf Dicke Freeman.
Here lies Dicke Freeman
That could not hear, nor see man.
30. On a Miller.
Death without warning, was as bold as brief,
When he killed two in one, Miller and Thief.
31. On a disagreeing couple.
Hic jacet ille, qui ^enties and mill:
Did scold with his wife,
Cum illo jacet illa, quae communis in villa
did quittance his life:
His name was Nicke, the which was sick,
And that very mal^,
Her name was Nan, who loved well a man,
So gentlemen vale.
32. On a Sack-sucker.
Good reader bless thee, be assured,
The spirit of Sack lies here immured:
Who havock'd all he could come by
For Sack, and here quite sacked does lie.
33. On a Lady.
Here lies one dead under this marble stone,
Who when she lived, lay under more than one*
34. On a Westler.
Death to this Wrestler, gave a fine fall*
That tript up his heels, and took no hold at all.
35. On John Death.
Here Is Death intterred, that lived by bread,
Then all should live, now death is dead.
36. On a Scrivener.
Here to a period, is the Scrievener come,
This is the last sheet, his full point this tomb.
Of all aspersions I excuse him not,
It Is known he lived not, without many a blot;
Yet he no ill example showed to any,
But rather gave good coppies unto many:
He in good letters always has been bred
And has writ more, then many men have read.
He rulers had as his command by law,
And though he could not hang, yet he could draw.
He far more bond men had and made than any,
A dash alone of his pen ruined many.
That not without good reason, we might call
Hi^ letters great or little Capital:
Yet is the Scriveners fate as sure as just,
When he has all done, then he falls to dust.
37. On a Chandler.
How might his days end that made weeks? or he
That could make light, here laid in darkness be?
Yet since his weeks were spent how could he chose
But be deprived of light and his trade lose*
Yet dead the Chandler is, and sleep's in peace,
No wonder! long since melted was his grease:
It seems that he did evil, for daylight
He hated, and did rather wish the night,
Yet came his works to light, and were like gold
Proved in the fire, but could not trial hold.
His candle had an end, and death's black night
Is an extinguisher of all his light.
38. On a young gentlewoman.
Nature in this small volume was about
To perfect what in women was left out;
Yet careful least a piece so well begun
Should want preservatives when she had done:
E're she could finish, what she undertook,
Threw dust upon it, and shut up the book.
39. On an Infant.
The reeling world turned poet, made a play,
I came to see it, dislik't it, w^nt my way.
40. On a Lady dying quickly after her husband.
He first deceased, she a little tried
To live without him, liked not, and died.
41. On a Smith.
Farewell stout Iron-side, not all thine art
Could make a shield against death's envious dart.
Without a fault no man, his life does pass,
For to his vice the Smith addicted was.
He often, (as choler is encreas't by fire)
Was in a ^ume, and much inclined to ire.
He had so long bin used to forge, that he
Was with a black coal marked for forgery
But he for witness needed not to care,
Who but a blacke-smith was, though ne^'e so fair.
And opertunities he slacked not
That knew to strike, then when the^ir'n was hot
As the doore-nailes he made, he is now as dead,
He them, and death him, has knocked on the head.
42. On Mr. Stone.
Jerusalems curse is not fulfilled in me,
For here a stone upon a stone you see.
43. On a Child.
Into this world as stranger to an Inn
This child came guest-wise, where when it had been
A while and f^und naught worthy of his stay,
He only broke his fast and went away.
44. On a man drowned in the snow.
Within a fleece of silent waters drowned;
Before my death was known a grave I found.
That which exiled my life from her sweet home,
For grief straight froz it self into a tomb.
One element my angry fate thought meet
To be my death, grave, tomb, and winding sheet,
Phoebus himself mine Epitaph had writ,
But blotting many e're he thought one fit;
He wrote until my grave, and tomb were gone,
And ^twas an Epitaph that I had none;
For every one that passed by that way,
Without a sculpture read that there ^ lay;
Here now the second time untomb'd I lie,
And thus much have the best of Destiny:
Corruption from which only one was free,
Devoured my grave but did not feed on me:
My first grave took me from the ^ace of men,
My last shall give me back to life again.
45. On Prince Henry.
In natur's law it is a plain case to dye,
No cunning Lawyer can demurre on that;
For cruel death and destiny,
Serve all men with a Latitat.
So Princely Henry; when his case was tried,
Confessed the action, paid the debt, and died.
46. On Mr. Strange.
Here lies one Strange, no Pagan, Turk, nor Jew
It Is strange, but not so strange as it is true.
47. On a Scholar.
Forbear friend to unclaspe this book
Only in the forefront look,
For in it have errors bin,
Which made the author call it in:
Yet know this, 't shall have more worth,
At the second coming forth.
48. On a young woman.
The body which within this earth is laid,
Twice six weeks knew a wife, a saint, a maid;
Fair maid, chaste wif, pure saint, yet it is not strange
She was a woman therefore pleased to change:
And now she is dead, some woman does remain
For still she hopes, on^e to be changed again.
49. On Brawne.
Here Br^wne the quondam beggar lies*
Who counted by his tale,
Full sixscore winters in his life;
Such virtue is in ale.
Ale was his meat, ale was his drink,
Ale did him long reprive,
And could he still have drunk his ale,
He had been still alive.
50. On a liar.
Good passenger! here lies one here,
That living did lie every where.
51. On a Dyer.
He lives with God none can deny,
That while he lived to the world did dye.
52. On a Candle.
Here lies (I wot) a little star
That did belong to Jupiter,
Which from him Prometheus stole
And with it a fire-coale.
Or this is that I mean to handle,
Here does lie a farthing-candle
That was loved well, having it is light,
But losing that, now bids goodnight.
53. Another.
Here lies the chandlers chiefest say
Here lies the scholars pale-faced boy,
Having naught else but skin and bone
Died of a deep consumption.
54. On M. R.
Who soonest dies lives long enough,
Our life is but a blast or puff.
I did resist and strive with death
But soon he put me out of breath;
He of my life thought to bereave me
But I did yield only to breathe me.
Over him I shall in triumph sing,
Thy conquest grave, where is thy sting?
55. On an Inne-keeper.
It is not I that dye, I do but leave an Inn,
Where harbored was with me all filthy kind of sin;
It is not I that dye, I do but now begin
Into eternal joy by faith to enter in.
Why weep you then my friends, my parents and my kin
Lament ye when I lose, but weep not when I win
56. On Hobson the Carrier.
Whom seek ye sirs? Old Hobson? fie upon
Your tardinesse, the carrier is gone.
Why stare you so? nay you deserve to fail,
Alas here is naught, but his old rotten maile.
Her went a good-while since, no question store
Are glad, who vexed he would not go before:
And some are grieved he is gone so soon away,
The Lord knows why he did no longer stay.
How could he please you all? I Am sure of this,
He lingered soundly howsoever you miss.
But gone he is, nor was he surely well
At his departure as mischance befell,
For he is gone in such unwonted kind
As never before, his goods all left behind.
57. On Bolus.
If gentleness could tame the fates, or wit
Delude them, Bolus had not dyed yet;
But one that death over rules in judgment sits,
And says ou^ sins are stronger than our wits.
58. On Iuggler.
Death came to see thy tricks and cut in twain
Thy thread, why did not make it whole again
59. On a Child.
A child and dead? alas! how could it come?
Surely thy thread of life was but a thrumme.
60. On a Clown.
Softly tread this earth upon,
For here lies our Corydon
Who through care to save his sheep
Watched too much, oh let him sleep!
60. On Queen Anne.
Thee to invite the great God sent his star,
Whose friends and kinsmen mighty Princes are
For though they run the race of men and dye,
Death serves but to refine their majesty.
So did the Queen from hence her court remove,
And left the earth to be enthroned above.
Thus is she changed not dead, no good Prince dies
But like the day star, only sets to rise.
62. On Sir Horatio Palavozeene.
Here lies Sir Horatio Palavozeene,
Who robbed the Pope to pay the Queen,
And was a theife. A theife? thou lie:
For why, he robo'd but Antichrist.
Him death with his beesome sweept from Babram,
Into the bosom of old Abraham:
But then came Hercules with his club,
And struck him down to Beelzebub.
63. On an only child.
Here lies the fathers hope, the mothers joy,
Though they seem hapless, happy was the boy
Who of this life, the long and tedious race,
Has traveled out in less then 2 month's space;
Oh happy soul to whom such grace was given*
To make so short a voyage back to heaven,
As here a name and christendom t'obtaine
And to his maker then return again^.
64. Another.
As careful nurses on their beds do lay,
Their babes which would too long the wantons play*
So to prevent my youth's ensuing crimes
Nature my nurse laid me to bed betimes.
65. On a Mu^^tian.
Be not offended at our sad complaint,
You quire of Angels, that have gained a Saint!
Where all perfection met in skill and voice,
We mourn our loss, but yet commend your choice.
66. On Prince Henry.
Did he dye young? oh no, it could not be,
For I know few, that lived so long as he.
Till God and all men loved him, then be bold
The man that lives so long must needs be old.
67. On a Cobbler.
Come hither, read, my gentle friend!
And here behold a cobler's end.
Longer in length his life had gone,
But that he had no last so long;
O mighty death! whose dart can kill,
The man that made him souls at will.
68. On Master Do.
Do is my name, and here I lie,
My Grammar tells me, Do fit Di.
69. On a Gardener.
Could he forget his death that every hour
Was emblem'd to it, by the fading flower?
Should he not mind his end? yes sure he must
That still was conversant among beds of dust.
70. On Edmund Spencer, poet laureat.
He was, and is (see then where lies the od^s)
Once god of Poets, Poet now to the gods,
And though his time of life, be gone about,
The life of his lines never shall wear out.
71. Ou Taylour a Sergeant, killed by a Horse.
A Taylour is a thief, a Sergeant is worse
Who here lies dead, god-a-mercy horse.
71. On Sir Francis Drake, drowned.
Where Drake first found, there last he lost his fame
And for his tomb left nothing but his name.
His body's buried under some great wave,
The sea that was his glory, is his grave.
Of him no man, true Epitaph can make,
For who can say, here lies Sir Francis Drake?
73. On a Drunkard.
By^ax the drunkard, while he lived would say,
The more I drink the more me think's I may:
But see how death ha^h proved his saying just,
For he has drunk himself as dry as dust.
74. On a Child.
Tread softly passenger! for here does lie
A dainty Jewel of sweet infancy:
A harmless babe, that only came and cried
In baptism to be washed from sin and died.
75. Another.
In this marble-casket lies
A matchless jewel of rich prize
Whom nature in the worlds disdain
But showed and put it up again.
76. On Master Stone.
Here worthy of a better chest,
A precious stone enclosed does rest
Whom nature had so rarely wrought
That Pallas it admired and thought,
No greater jewel, than to wear
Still such a diamond in her ear:
But sickness did it from her wring,
And placed it in Libitina's ring,
Who changed natures work a new
And death's pale image, in it drew*
Pity that pain had not been saved*
So good a stone to be engraved.
77. On Master Air.
Under this stone of marble fair
Lies th'body' ntomb'd of Gervase Air.
He died not of an ague fit
Nor surfetted of too much wit,
Me thinks this was a wondrous death,
That Air should dye for want of breath.
78. On a young man.
Surpised by grief and sickness here I lie,
Stopped in my middle age and soon made dead,
Yet do not grudge at God, if soon thou dye,
But know he trebles favors on thy head.
Who for thy morning work, equals thy pay,
With those that have endured the heat of day
79. On Master Sand's.
Who would live in others breath?
Fame deceives the dead man's trust,
When our names do change by death;
Sands I was and now am dust.
80. On a Scholar.
Some do for anguish weep, for anger I,
That ignorance should live, and art should dye.
81. On Master Goad.
Go add this verse, to Goad's hearse,
For Goad is gone, but whither?
Goad himself, is gone to God
'Twas death's goad drove him thither.
82. On Master Monday.
Hallowed be the Sabboath,
And farewell all worldly pelf;
The week begins on Tuesday,
For Monday has hanged himself.
83. On the two Littletons who were drowned at Oxford. 1636.
Herelye we (reader can thou not admire?)
Who both at once by water died and fire,
For whilst our bodies perished in the deep,
Our souls in love burnt, so we fell asleep,
Let this be then our Epitaph, here lies
Two, yet but one, one for the other dies.
84. On a Matron.
Here lies a wife was chaste, a mother blessed,
A modest Matron, all these in one chest:
Sarah unto her mate, Mary to God,
Martha to men, whilst here she had abode.
85. In Latin thus.
Vxor casta, parens foelix, matrona pudica,
Sara viro, mundo Mart^a, Maria De^.
86. On a Butler.
That death should thus from hence our Butler
Into my mind it cannot quickly sink,
Sure death came thirsty to the butt'ry-hatch catch
When he (that buisy'd was) denied him drink.
Tut 'twas not so, it is like he gave him liquour
And death made drunk, him made away the quicker
Yet let not others grieve to much in mind
(The Butlers gone) the key's are left behind.
87. On a Soldier.
When I was young in wars I shed my blood,
Both for my King and for my countries good;
In elder years, my care was chie^e to be
Soldier to him that shed his blood for me.
88. On a Tobacconi^t.
Lo here I lie, rolled up like the Indian weed
My pipes I have pack't up, for breath I need.
Man's breath's a vopour, he himself is grass
My breath, but of a weed, the vapor was.
When I shall turn to earth, good friends! beware
Least it evap'rate and infect the air.
94. On Master Thomas Allen.
No Epitaphs need make the just man famed,
The good are praised, when they are only named
89. On Master Cook.
To God, his country, and the poor, he had
A zealous Soul, free heart, and lib'rall mind.
His wife, his children, and his kindred sad
Lack of his love, his care, and kindness find:
Yet are their sorrows asswag'd with the thought
He has attayn'd the happiness he sought.
90. On a Printer whose wife was lame.
Sleep William! sleep, she that thine eyes did close
Makes lame Iambiques for thee, as she goes.
91. On a Taylour who died of the stitch.
Here lies a Taylour in this ditch,
Who lived and dyed by the stitch.
92. On a dumb fellow dying of the collicke.
Here lies John Dumbello,
Who died because he was so
For if his breech could have spoke,
His heart sur^ly had not broke.
92. On Isabella a Curtezan.
He who would write an Epitaph
Whereby to make fair Is'bell laugh,
Must get upon her, and write well
Here underneath lies Isabell.
94. On a virtuous wife, viz. Susanna wife to Mr. William Horsenell.
In brief, to speak thy praise let this suffice,
Thou were a wife, most loving, modest, wise;
Of children careful, to thy neighbor's kind,
A worthy mistress and of liberal mind.
95. On M. Christopher Lawson.
Death did not kill unjustly this good man,
But death in death by death did show his power,
His pious deeds and thoughts to heaven fore-ran;
There to prepare his soul a blessed bower.
96. On Hobson the Carrier.
Here Hobson lies amongst his many betters,
A man unlearned, yet a man o^ letters,
His carriage was well known, often has he gone
In Embassye 'twixt father and the son;
There Is few in Cambridge, to his praise be it spoken
But may remember him, by some good token:
From whence he rid to London day by day,
Till death benighting him, he lo^t his way,
His teame was of the best, nor would he have
Benee min'd in any way, but in the grave.
Nor is it a wonder, that he thus is gone,
Since all men knew, he long was drawing on.
Thus rest in peace thou everlasting swain
And supreme waggoner, next Charles his wayne.
97. On a Welshman.
Here lies puried under these stones
Shon ap Williams ap Ienkyn ap Jones,
Her was porne in Wales, her was killed in Fra^^e
Her went to Cottpy a fe^y mischance,
La ye now*
98. On M. Prick.
Upon the fith day of November
Christ's College lost a privy, member*
Cupid and death did both their arrows micke,
Cupid shot short, but death did hit the prick.
Women lament and maidens make great mones
Because the Pri^ke (...) the stones.
99. (...) Porter.
At length by work of wondrous face
Here lies the porter of Wynchester-gate:
If gone to heaven, as much I fear,
He can be but a porter there:
He feared not hell so much for's sin,
As for the great rapping and often coming in.
100. On M. Carter, burnt by the great powder- mischance in Finsbury.
Here lies an honest Carter (yet no clown)
Unladen of his cares, his end the crown,
Vanished from hence even in a cloud of smoke,
A blowne-up Citizen, and yet not broke.
101. On a Lady dying in Childbed.
Borne at the first to bring another forth,
She leaves the world, to leave the world her worth
Thus Phaenix-like, as she was borne to bleed
Dying herself, renew's it in her seed.
102. On Prince Henry.
Lo where he shines yonder
A fixed star in heaven,
Whose motions thence, coms under
None of the Planets seven:
If that the Moon should tender,
The Sun her love and marry,
They both could not ^ngender,
So bright a star as Harry.
10. Upon one, who died in prison.
Reader, I lived, enquire no more,
Least a spy enter in at door,
Such are the times a dead-man dare
Not trust or creditt common air:
But dye, and lie entombed here,
By me, I Will whisper in thine ear
Such things as only dust to dust,
(And without witness) may entrust.
14. On Sir Walter Rawleygh.
If spite be pleased, when as her object's dead,
Or Malice pleased, when it has bruiz'd the head
Or envy pleased, when it has what it would,
Then all are pleased, for Rawleyh's blood is cold,
Which were it warm and active would overcome
And strike the two first blind, the other dumb.
105. On Doctor Hacket's wife.
Drop mournful eyes your pearly trick'ling tears
Flow streams of sadness, drown the spangled spheres
Fall like the tumbling cataracts of Nile,
Make deaf the world with cries; let not a smile
Appear, let not an eye be seen to sleep
Nor slumber, only let them serve to weep
Her dear lamented death, who in her life
Was a religious, loya^l, loving wife,
Of children tender to an husband kind
Th'undoubted symptoms of a virtuous mind*
Which mak's her glorious, bove the highest pole,
Where Angels sing sweet Requicins to her soul
She lived a nonesuch, did a non-such dye
Near Non-such here her corpse interred lie.
107. On Waddham. Colledge-Butler.
Man's life is like a new turned caske they say,
The fore-most draught is most times cast aw^y,
Such are our younger years, the following still,
Are more and more inclining unto ill;
Such is our manhood, until age at length,
Does sour it is sweetness* and does stop it is strength
Then death prescribing to each thing it is (...)
Takes what is left, and tu^nes it all to grounds.
107. On a Horse.
Here lies a Horse, who dyed but
To make his master go on foot.
A miracle should it be so
The dead to make the lame to go;
Yet fate would have it, that the ^ame
Should make him go, that made him lame.
108. On Aratyne.
Here biting Aretyne lies buried,
With gall more bitter never man was fed*
The living, nor the dead to carpe he spar'de,
Nor yet for any King or Caesar cared.
Only on God to rail he had forgot*
His answer was, indeed I know him not.
109. On William Coal an Ale-house-keeper, at Coaton near Cambridg^.
Does William Coal lie here? he^ceforth be stale,
Be strong, and laugh on us, thou Coaton ale!
Living indeed, he with his violent hand
Never left grasping thee, while he could stand.
But death at last, has with his fiery flashes
Burnt up the Coal, and turned it into ashes.
110. On one Andrew Leygh who was vexed with a shrewd wife, in his lifetime.
Here lies Leygh, who vexed with a shrewd wife
To gain his quiet, parted with his life,
But see the spite, she, that had always crossed
Him living, dies, and mean's to haunte his Ghost.
But she may fail, for Andrew out of doubt
Will cause his brother Peter, shutt her out.
111. On Richard Burbage a famous Actour.
-- Exit Burbage.
112. On an Infant unborne, the Mother dying in travel.
The Father dug a pit, and in it left
Part of himself interred, that soon bereft
The Mother of the gift, she gave, life; so
Both now are buried in one tomb of woe.
It Is strange the mother should a being give*
And not have liberty to make it live.
'Twas strange, that the child blindfold espied
So quick and near a way to parricide*
Yet both are justly questioned, child and Mothe^
Are guilty of the killing of each other.
Not with an ill intent, both did desire
Preserves for life, and not a funeral fire;
And yet they needs must dye, and 'twas thought best
To keep the infant in the mother's chest;
It had both life and death from her, the womb
In which it was begot, became the tomb;
There was some marble saved, because in her
The womb that bare it, was a sepulcher;
Whose Epitaphs are these,-here lies a child that shall
Be free from all sins but original.
Here lies a pitied mother that did dye
Only to bear her poor child company.
113. In quendam.
Stay mortal, stay, remove not from this tomb
Before thou have considered well thy dombe;
My bow stands ready bent and could^st it see
Mine arrow's drawn to head, and aims at thee;
Prepare yet wandering ghost, take home this line
The grave that next is opened, may be thine.
114. On Sir Philip Sy^ney.
Reader. Within this ground sir Philip Sydney lies
Nor is it fit that more,
I should acquaint,
Least superstition rise
And men adore,
A Lover, Scholar, Soldier, and a Saint.

115. Upon John Crop, who dyed by taking a vomit.
Man's life's a game at tables, and he may
Mend his bad fortune, by his wiser play;
Death pla^'s against us, each disease and sore
Are blotts, if hit, the danger is the more
To lose the the game; but an old stander by
Bind's up the blotts, and cures the malady,
And so prolongs the game; John Crop was he
Death in a rage did challenge for to see
His play, the dice are thrown, when first he drink's
Cast's, makes a blott, death hits him with a Synke
He cast's again, but all in vain, for death
By the after-game did win the prize, his breath
What though his skill was good, his luck was bad
For never mortal man worse casting had.
But did not death play false, to w^nne from such
As he, no doubt he bare a man too much.
116. On Q Elizabeth
King's, Queens, Men's, Virgin's eyes
See, where the Mirror lies.
In whom her friend's have ^eene,
A Kings state in a Queen:
In whom her foes survay'd,
A man's heart in a Maid:
Whom least men for her piety
Should grow to think some diety,
Heaven hence by death did summon
Her, to show she was a woman.
117. On a virtuous youth.
Reader, let a stone thee tell
That in this body, there did dwell
A soul as heavenly, rich, and good
As e're could live in flesh and blood:
And therefore heaven that held it dear*
Did let it stay the less while here*
Whose corpse here sacred ashes mak's
Thus heaven and earth have parted stakes.
118. On a learned Noble man.
He that can read a sigh and spell a tear,
Pronounce amaze-ment, or accent wild fear,
Or get all grei^e by heart, he, only he
Is fit to write, or read thy Elegye.
Unvalued Lord! that were so hard a Text,
Read in one age and understood in the next.
119. On a Lady.
Finis and Bonum are converted, so
That every good thing to an end must go.
120. On Mr. Mychael Drayton buried in Westminster, Admarmor Tumulj.
Do pious Marble let thy Readers know
What they and what their children owe
To Drayton's sacred name, whose ^ust
We recommend unto thy trust.
Protect his memory, preserve his story
And a lasting monument of his glory,
And when thy ruins shall disclaim
To be the Treasury of his name:
His name, which cannot fade, shall be
An everlasting monument to thee.
121. On a Faulconer.
Death with her talons having seas'd this prey,
After a tedious flight trussed him away.
We marked him, here he fell, whence he shall rise
At call, till then unretriu^d here he lies.
122. On a Cocke-master.
Farewell stout hott-spur, now the battail's done
In which the art foyi'd, and death has overcome
Having o're-matcht thy strength, and made thee stoop
She quickly forct thee on the pit to droop
From whence thou art not able, rise or stir:
For death is now become, thy vanquisher.
123* On a pious benefactour.
The poor, the world, the heavens, and the grave
His alms, his praise, his soul, and body have.
124. Upon Hodge Pue's Father.
Oh cruel death that stopped the view;
Of Thom's parishioner good man Pue,
Who lived always in good order,
Until that death stopped his recorder,
Which was betwixt Easter and Penticost,
In the year of the great frost,
At New Market then was the King:
When as the bells did merrily ring;
The Minister preached the day before
Unto his highness, and no more,
Returning home said prayers, and
Bnried the man as I understand.
125. On M. Washington, page to the Prince.
Knew'st thou whose these ashes were;
Reader thou would weeping swear,
The rash fate er^'d here; as appears,
Counting his virtues for his years,
His goodness made them so over seen,
Which showed him threescore;at eighteen.
Enquire not his disease or pain!
He died of nothing else but spain,
Where the worst calenture he feels,
Are Jesuits, and Alguaziles,
Where he is not allowed to have,
(Unless he steal't) a quiet grave.
He needs no other Epitaph or stone
But this, here lies loved Washington,
Write this in tears, in that loose dust
And every greiv'd beholder must,
When he waigh^s him, and knows his years*
Renew the let^ers with his tears.
126. On Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden.
The world expects Swede's monumentall stone,
Should equal the Philosophers, each groan
Should breath a golden vein, and every verse
Should draw Elixar from his fatal hearse.
No fitter subject where strong lines should meet
Than such a noble center; could the feet
Of able verse but trace his rectories,
They need not fear over strayn'd Hyperbole's,
Where all is transoendent, who out-paralell'd
Plutarch's selected Heroes; and is held
The tenth of Worthies, who has over-acted
Great Caesar's German-comments, and contracted
His expeditions by preventing awe,
He often over-came before he saw;
And (what of his great son Jove used to say)
He always either found or made his way.
Such was his personal and single fight,
As if that death it self had taken her flight
Into brave Swedens scabbard, when he drew;
Death with that steel inevitably flew;
His camp a church, wherein the Gen'rall's life
Was the best Sermon, and the only strife
'Amongst his was to repeat it, bended knee
Was his prime posture, and his ^nemy
Found this most praevalent, his discipline
Impartial and exact, it did outshine
Those antique Martiall-Graecian, Roman lamps
From Which most of the worlds succeeding camps
Have had their borrowed light; this, this was he
All this and more, yet even all this can dye.
Death surely ventured on the Swede' to try
If heaven were subject to mortality;
And shot his soul to heaven, as if that she
Could (if not kill) unthrone a diety
Bold death's deceived, it is in another sense
That heaven is said to suffer violence.
No yr'n chaine-shot, but it is the golden chain
Of virtue and the Graces, are the maine
That do unhinge the everlasting gates
All which like yoaked undivided mates,
Were linck't in Sweden, where they were enchain'd
Like Orthodoxall volumes nothing feigned,
Though fairly bound his story is not dipped
In oil, ^ut in his own true Manuscript.
It is enough to name him, surely we
Have got that Roman's doting Lethargy
And may our names forget, if so we can
Forget the name of Sweden; renown^d man!
Thon had no sooner made the Worthies ten
But heaven did claim the tenth; zealous that men
Would idolize thee, but their inst^ment.
Thus thy Meridian proved thy Occiden.
Had longer days been granted by the fates,
Rome had heard this Hanniball at her gates
Farewell thou Austrian scourge,
thou modern wonder,
Srange rain has followed
thy last clap of thunder,
A shower of tears:
and yet for ought we know,
The Horn that is left.
may blow down Jericho.
FINIS.
Imprimatur.

October. 8. 1639. Matthew. Clay.

OVTLANDISH PROVERBS, SELECTED

LONDON, Printed by T. P. for Humphrey Blunden; at the Castle in Corn-bill.
1640.

Outlandish PROVERBS.
1. MAN Proposes, God disposes.

2. He begins to die, that quits his desires.

3. A handful of good life, is better then a bushel of learning.

4. He that studies his content, wants it.

5. Every day brings his bread with it.

6. Humble Hearts, have humble desires.

7. He that stumbles and falls not, mends his pace.

8. The House shows the owner.

9. He that gets out of debt, grows rich.

10. All is well with him, who is beloved. (...) (...)

41. All came from, and will go to others.

42. He that will take the bird, must not skare it.

43. He lives unsafely, that looks too near on things.

44. A gentle houswife, marres the household.

45. A crooked log makes a strait fire.

46. He has great need of a fool, that plays the fool himself.

47. A Merchant that gains not, loses.

48. Let not him that fears feathers, come among wild-foule.

49. Love, and a Cough cannot be hid.

50. A Dwarf, on a Giants shoulder, sees further of the two.

51 He that sends a fool, means to follow him.

52. Brabling Curres never want sore ears.

53. Better the feet slip then the tongue.

54. For washing his hands, none fels his lands.

55. A Lions skin is never cheap.

56. The goat must browse where she is tied.

57. Who has a Wolf for his mate, needs a Dog for his man.

58. In a good house all is quickly ready.

59. A bad dog never sees the Wolf.

60. God often has a great share in a little house.

61. Ill ware is never cheap.

62. A cherefull look, makes a dish a feast.

63. If all fools had bables, we should want fuel.

64. Virtue never grows old.

65. Evening words are not like to morning.

66. Were there no fools, badd ware would not pass.

67. Never had ill workman good tools.

68. He stands not surely, that never slips.

69. Were there no hearers, there would be no backbiters.

70. Every thing is of use to a houskeeper.

71. When prayers are done, my Lady is ready.

72. At Length the Fox turns Monk.

73. Flies are busiest about lean horses.

74. Harken to reason or she will be heard.

75. The bird loves her nest.

76. Every thing new, is fine.

77. When a dog is a drowning, every one offers him drink.

78. Better a ba^e foot then none.

79. Who is so deaf, as he that will not hear.

80. He that is warm, thinks all so.

81. At length the Fox is brought to the Fu^rier.

82. He that goes barefoot, must not plant thorns.

83. They that are booted are not alwa^es ready.

84. He that will learn to pray, let him go to Sea.

85. In spending, lies the advantage.

86. He that lives well is learned enough.

87. Ill vessels seldom miscarry.

88. A full belly neither fights nor flies well.

89. All truths are not to be told.

90. An old wise man's shadow, is better then a young buzzards sword.

91. Noble houskeepers need no doors.

93. Every ill man has his ill day.

93. Sleep without supping, and wake without owing*

94. I gave the mouse a hole, and she is become my heir.

95. Assai^e who will, the valiant attends.

96. Whether go grief? where I am wont.

97. Praise day at night, and life at the end.

98. Whether shall the Ox go, where he shall not labor.

99. Where you think there is bacon, there is no Chimney.

100. Mend your clothes, and you may hold out this year.

101. Press a stick, and it seems a youth.

^02. The tongue walks where the teeth speed not.

103. A fair wife and a frontire Castle breed quarrels,

104. Leave jesting whiles it pleases, lest it turn to earnest.

105. Deceive not thy Physician, Confessor, nor Lawyer.

106. Ill natures, the more you ask them, the more they stick.

107. Virtue and a Trade are the best portion for Children.

108. The Chicken is the Countries, but the City eats it.

109. He that gives thee a Capon, give him the leg and the wing.

110. He that lives ill, fear follows him.

111. Give a clown your finger, and he will take your hand.

112. Good is to be sought out, and evil attended.

113. A good play master starts not at assurances.

114. No Alchymy to saving.

115. To a grate full man give money when he asks.

116. Who would do ill never wants occasion.

117. To fine folks a little ill finely wrapped.

118. A child correct behind and not before.

119. To a fair day open the window, but make you ready as to a foul.

120. Keep good men company, and you shall be of the number.

121. No love to a Fathers.

122. The Mill gets by going.

123. To a boiling pot flies come not.

124. Make have to an ill way that you may get out of it.

125. A snow year, a rich year.

126. Better to be blind, then to see ill.

127. Learn weeping, and thou shall laugh gayning.

128. Who has no more bread then need, must not keep a dog.

129. A garden must be looked unto and dressed as the body.

130. The Fox, when he cannot reach the grapes, says they are not ripe.

131. Water trotted is as good as oats.

132. Though the Mastiffe be gentle, yet bite him not by the lip.

133. Though a lie be well dressed, it is ever overcome.

134. Though old and wise, yet still advise.

135. Three helping one another, bear the burden of six.

136. Old wine, and an old friend, are good provisions.

137. Happy is he that chastens himself.

138. Well may he smell fire, whose gown burns.

139. The wrongs of a Husband or Master are not reproached.

140 Welcome evil, if thou come alone.

141. Love your neighbor, yet pull not down your hedge.

142. The bit that one eats, no friend makes.

143. A drunkards purse is a bottle.

144. She spins well that breeds her children.

145. Good is the mora that makes all sure.

146. Play with a fool at home, and he will play with you in the market.

147. Every one stretcherh his legs according to his coverlet.

148. Autumnall Agues are long, or mortal.

149 Marry your son when you will; your daughter when you can.

150. Dally not with money or women.

151. Men speak of the fair, as things went with them there.

152. The best remedy against an ill man, is much ground between both.

143. The mill cannot grind with the water that is past.

154. Corn is cleaned with wind, and the soul with chastnings.

155. Good words are worth much, and cost little.

156. To buy dear is not bounty.

157. Jest not with the eye or with Religion.

158. The eye and Religion can bear no jesting.

159. Without favor none will know you, and with it you will not know your
self.

160. Buy at a fair, but sell at home.

161. Cover your self with your shield, and care not for cries.

162. A wicked man's gift has a touch of his master.

163. None is a fool always, every one sometimes.

164. From a chollerick man withdraw a little, from him that says nothing, for
ever.

165. Debtors are liars.

166. Of all smells, bread: of all tastes, salt.

167. In a great River great fish are found, but take heed, lest you be
drowned.

168. Ever since we wear clothes, we know not one another.

169. God heales, and the Physician has the thanks.

170. Hell is full of good meanings and wishings.

171. Take heed of still waters, the quick pass away.

172. After the house is finished, leave it.

173. Our own actions are our security, not others judgments.

178. Think of ease, but work on.

179. He that lies long a bed his estate feels it.

180. Whether you boil snow or pound it, you can have but water of it.

181. One stroke fells not an oak.

182. God complains not, but does what is fitting.

183. A diligent Shcoller and the Master's paid.

184. Milk says to wine, welcome friend.

185. They that know one another, salute a far off.

186. Where there is no honor, there is no grief.

187. Where the drink goes in, there the wit goes out.

188. He that stays does the business.

189 Alms never make poor others.

190. Great almes-giving lessens no man's living.

191. Giving much to the poor, does enrich a man's store.

192. It takes much from the account, to which his sin does amount.

193. It adds to the glory both of soul and body.

194 Ill comes in by else, and goes out by inches.

195 The Smith and his penny both are black.

196 Whose house is of glass, must not throw stones at another.

197. If the old dog bark he gives counsel.

198. The tree that grows slowly, keeps it self for another.

199. I wept when I was borne, and every day shows why.

200. He that looks not before, finds him self behind.

201. He that plays his money ought not to value it.

202. He that rises first, is first dressed.

203. Diseases of the eye are to be cured with the elbow.

204. The hole calls the thief.

205. A gentleman's grayhound, and a salt-box; seek them at the fire.

206. A child's service is little, yet he is no little fool that despises it.

207. The river past, and God forgotten.

208. Evils have their comfort, good none can support (to wit) with a moderate
and contented heart.

209. Who must account for himself and others, must know both.

210. He that eats the hard shall eat the ripe.

211. The miserable man makes a penny of a farthing, and the liberal of a
farthing six pence.

212. The honey is sweet, but the Be stings.

213. Weight and measure take away strife.

214. The son full and tattered, the daughter empty and fine.

215. Every path has a puddle.

216. In good years corn is hay, in ill years straw is corn.

217. Send a wise man on an errand, and say nothing unto him.

218. In life you loved me not, in death you bewail me.

219. Into a mouth shut, flies fly not.

220. The hearts letter is read in the eyes

221. The ill that comes out of our mouth ^alles into our bosom.

222. In great pedigrees there are Governors and Chand^ers.

223. In the house of a Fiddler, all fiddle.

224. Sometimes the best gain is to lose.

225. Working and making a fire does discretion require.

226. One grain fills not a sack, but helps his fellows.

227. It is a great victory that comes without blood.

228. In war, hunting, and love, men for one pleasure a thousand griefs prove.

229. Reckon right, and February has one and thirty days.

230. Honor without profit is a ring on the finger.

231. Estate in two parishes is bread in two wallets.

232. Honor and profit lie not in one sack.

233. A naughty child is better sick, then whole.

234. Truth and oil are ev^r above.

235. He that rises betimes has some thing in his head.

236. Advise none to marry or to go to war.

237. To steal the Hog, and give the feet for alms.

238. The thorn comes forth with his point forwards.

239. One hand washes another, and both the face.

240. The fault of the horse is put on the saddle.

241. The corn hides it self in the snow, as an old man in furrs.

242. The Jews spend at Easter, the Mores at marriages, the Christians in
suits.

243. Fine dressing is a foul house swept before the doors.

244. A woman and a glass are ever in danger.

245. An ill wound is cured, not an ill name.

246. The wise hand does not all that the foolish mouth speaks.

247. On painting and fighting look aloof.

248. Knowledge is folly, except grace guide it.

249. Punishment is lame, but it comes.

250. The more women look in their glass, the less they look to their house.

251. A long tongue is a sign of a short hand.

252. Marry a widow before she leave mourning.

253. The worst of law is, that one suit breeds twenty.

254. Providence is better then a rent.

255. What your glass tells you, will not be told by Council.

256. There are more men threatened then stricken.

257. A fool knows more in his house, then a wise man in another.

258. I had rather ride on an ass that carries me, then a horse that throws
me.

259, The hard gives more then he that has nothing.

260. The beast that goes always never wants blows.

261. Good cheap is dear.

262. It costs more to do ill then to do well.

263. Good words quench more then a a bucket of water.

264. An ill agreement is better then a good judgment.

265. There is more talk then trouble.

266. Better spare to have of thine own, then ask of other men.

267. Better good afar off, then evil at hand.

268. Fear keeps the garden better, then the gardener.

269. I had rather ask of my sire brown bread, then borrow of my neighbor
white.

270. Your pot broken seems better then my whole one.

271. Let an ill man lie in thy straw, and he looks to be thy heir.

272. By suppers more have been killed then Gallen ever cured.

273. While the discreet advise the fool does his business.

274. A mountain and a river are good neighbors.

275. Gossips are frogs, they drink and talk.

276. Much spends the traveller, more then the abider.

277. Prayers and provender hinder no journey.

278. A well-bred youth neither speaks of himself, nor being spoken to is
silent.

279. A journying woman speaks much of all, and all of her.

280. The Fox knows much, but more he that catches him.

281. Many friends in general, one in spcciall.

282. The fool asks much, but he is more fool that grants it.

283. Many kiss the hand, they wish cut off.

284. Neither bribe nor loose thy right.

285. In the world who knows not to swim, goes to the bottom.

286. Choose not an house near an Inn, (viz for noise) or in a corner (for
filth.)

287. He is a fool that thinks not, that another thinks.

288. Neither eyes on letters, nor hands in coffers.

289. The Lion is not so fierce as they paint him.

290. Go not for every grief to the Physician, nor for every quarrel to the
Lawyer, nor for every thirst to the pot.

291. Good service is a great enchantment.

292. There would be no great ones if there were no little ones.

293. It Is no sure rule to fish with a crosbow.

294. There were no ill language, if it were not ill taken.

295. The groundsell speaks not save what it heard at the hinges.

296. The best mirror is an old friend.

297. Say no ill of the year, till it be past.

298. A man's discontent is his worst evil.

299. Fear nothing but sin.

300. The child says nothing, but what it heard by the sire.

301. Call me not an olive, till thou see me gathered.

302. That is not good language which all understand not.

303. He that burns his house warmes himself for once.

304. He will burn his house, to warm his hands.

305. He will spend a whole years rent at one meals meat.

306. All is not gold that glisters.

307. A blustering night, a fair day.

308. Be not idle and you shall not be longing.

309. He is not poor that has little, but he that desires much.

310. Let none say, I will not drink water.

311. He wrongs not an old man that steals his supper from him.

312. The tongue talks at the heads cost.

313. He that strikes with his tongue, must ward with his head.

314. Keep not ill men company, lest you increase the number.

315. God strikes not with both hands, for to the sea he made havens, and to
rivers foords.

316. A rugged stone grows smooth from hand to hand.

317. No lock will hold against the power of gold.

318. The absent party is still faulty.

319. Peace, and Patience, and death with repentance.

320. If vou loose your time, you cannot get money nor gain.

321. Be not a Baker, if your head be of butter

322. Ask much to have a little.

323. Little sticks kindle the fire; great ones put it out.

324. Another bread costs dear.

325. Although it rain, throw not away thy watering pot.

326. Although the sun shine, leave not thy cloak at home.

327. A little with quiet is the only dye^.

328. In vain is the mill clacke, if the M^^er his hearing lack.

329. By the needle you shall draw the thread, and by that which is past, see
how that which is to come will be drawn on.

330. Stay a little and news will find you.

331. Stay till the lame messenger come, if you will know the truth of the
thing.

332. When God will, no wind, but brings rain.

333. Though you rise early, yet the day comes at his time, and not till then.

334. Pull down your hatt on the winds side.

335. As the year is, your pot must sees.

336. Since you know all, and I nothing, tell me what I dreamed last night.

337. When the Fox preaches, beware geese.

338. When you are an Anvill, hold you still; when you are a hammer strike your
fill.

339. Poor and liberal, rich and coveteous.

340. He that makes his bed ill, lies there.

341. He that labors and thrives spins gold.

342. He that sowes trusts in God.

343. He that lies with the dogs, rises with fleas.

344. He that repaires not a part, builds all.

345. A discontented man kwes not where to sit easy.

346. Who spits against heaven, it falls in his face.

347. He that dines and leaves, lays the cloth twice.

348. Who eats his cock alone must saddle his horse alone.

349. He that is not handsome at 20, nor strong at 30, nor rich at 40, nor wise
at 50 will never be handsome, strong, rich, or wise.

350. He that does what he will, does not what he ought.

351. He that will deceive the fox, must rise betimes.

352. He that lives well sees a far off.

353. He that has a mouth of his own, must not say to another; Blow.

354. He that will be served must be patient.

355. He that gives thee a bone, would not have thee die.

356. He that chastens one, chastens 20.

357. He that has lost his credit is dead to the world.

358. He that has no ill fortune, is troubled with good.

359. He that demands misseth not, unless his demands be foolish.

360. He that has no honey in his pot, let him have it in his mouth.

361. He that takes not up a pin, slilghts his wife.

362. He that owes nothing, if he makes not mouths at us, is courteous.

363. He that loses his due, gets not thanks.

364. He that believes all, misseth, he that believes nothing, hitts not.

365. Pardons and pleasantness are great revenges of slanders.

366. A married man turns his staff into a stake.

367. If you would know secrets, look them in grief or pleasure.

368. Serve a noble disposition, though poor, the time comes that he will
repay thee.

369. The fault is as great as he that is faulty.

370. If folly were grief every house would weep.

371. He that would be well old, must be old betimes.

372. Sit in your place and none can make you rise.

373. If you could run, as you drink, you might catch a hare.

374. Would you know what money is, Go borrow some.

375. The morning Sun never lasts a day.

376. Thou have death in thy house, and do bew aile another.

377. All griefs with bread are less.

378. All things require skill, but an appetite.

379. All things have their place, knew we, how to place them.

380. Little pitchers have wide ears.

381. We are fools one to another.

382. This world is nothing except it tend to another.

383. There are three ways, the Universities, the Sea, the Court.

384. God comes to see without a bell.

385. Life without a friend is death without a witness

386. Cloth thee in war, arm thee in peace.

387. The horse thinks one thing, and he that sadles him another.

388. Mills and wives ever want.

389. The dog that licks ashes, trust not with meal.

390. The buyer needs a hundred eyes, the seller not one.

391. He carries well, to whom it waighes not.

392. The comforters head never aches.

393. Step after step the ladder is ascended.

394. Who likes not the drink, God deprives him of bread.

395. To crazy ship all winds are contrary.

396. Justice pleases few in their own house.

397. In times comes he, whom God sends.

398. Water a far off quenches not fire.

399. In sports and journeys men are known.

400. An old friend is a new house.

401. Love is not found in the market.

402. Dry feet, warm head, bring safe to bed.

403. He is rich enough that wants nothing.

404. One father is enough to govern one hundred sons, but not a hundred sons
one father.

405. Far shooting never killed bird.

406. An upbraid^d morsel never choked any.

407. Dearths foreseen come not.

408. An ill labourer quarrels with his tools.

409. He that falls into the dirt, the longer he stays there, the fowler he
is.

410. He that blames would buy.

411. He that sings on friday, will weep on Sunday.

412. The charges of building, and making of gardens are unknown.

413. My house, my house, though thou art small, thou art to me the Escuriall.

414. A hundred load of thought will not pay one of debts.

415. He that comes of a hen must scrape.

416. He that seeks trouble never misses.

417. He that once deceives is ever suspected.

418. Being on sea sail, being on land settle.

419. Who does his own business, fowls not his hands.

420. He that makes a good war makes a good peace.

421. He that works after his own manner, his head aches not at the matter.

422. Who has bitter in his mouth* spits not all sweet.

423. He that has children, all his morsels are not his own.

424. He that has the spice, may season as he list.

425. He that has a head of wax must not walk in the sun.

426. He that has love in his breast, has spurs in his sides.

427. He that respects not, is not respected.

428. He that has a Fox for his mate, has need of a net at his girdle.

429. He that has right, fears, he that has wrong, hopes.

430. He that has patience has fatt thrushes for a farthing.

431. Never was strumpet fair.

432. He that measures not himself, is measured.

433. He that has one hog makes him fat, and he that has one son makes
him a fool.

434. Who letts his wife go to every feast, and his horse drink at every
water, shall neither have good wife nor good horse.

435. He that speaks sowes, and he that holds his peace, gathers.

436. He that has little is the less durtie.

437. He that lives most dies most.

438. He that has one foot in the straw, has another in the spittle.

439. He that is fed at another hand may sray long ere he be full.

440. He that makes a thing too fine, breaks it.

441. He that bewailes himself has the cure in his hands.

442. He that would be well, needs not go from his own house.

443. Council breaks not the head.

444. Fly the pleasure that bites to morrow.

445. He that knows what may be gained in a day never steals.

446. Money refused loses its brightness.

447. Health and money go far.

448, Where your will is ready, your feet are light.

449. A great ship asks deep waters.

450. Woe to the house where there is no chiding.

451. Take heed of the viniger of sweet wine.

452. Fools bite one another, but wisemen agree together.

453. Trust not one nights ice.

454. Good is good, but better carries it.

455. To gain teaches how to spend.

456. Good finds good.

457. The dog gnawes the bone because he cannot swallow it.

458. The crow bewailes the sheep, and then eats it.

459. Building is a sweet impoverishing.

460. The first degree of folly is to hold ones self wise, the second to
profess it, the third to dsepise counsel.

461. The greatest step is that out of doors.

462. To weep for joy is a kind of Manna.

463. The first service a child does his father is to make him foolish.

464. The resolved mind has no cares.

465. In the kingdom of a cheater, the wallet is carried before.

466. The eye will have his part.

467. The good mother says not, will you? but gives.

468. A house and a woman suit excellently.

469. In the kingdom of blind men the one eyed is king.

470. A little Kitchen makes a large house.

471. War makes thieves, and peace hangs them.

472. Poverty is the mother of health.

473. In the morning mountains, in the evening fountains.

474. The back-doore robs the house.

475. Wealth is like rheum, it falls on the weakest parts.

476. The gown is his that wears it, and the world his that enjoyes it.

477. Hope is the poor man's bread.

478. Virtue now is in herbs and stones and words only.

479. Fine words dress ill deeds.

480. Labor as long lived, pray as even dying.

481. A poor beauty finds more lovers then husbands.

482. Discreet women have neither eyes nor ears.

483. Things well fitted abide.

484. Prettiness dies first.

485. Talking pays no toll.

486. The masters eye fattens the horse, and his foot the ground.

487. Disgraces are like cherries, one draws another.

488. Praise a hill, but keep below.

489. Praise the Sea, but keep on land.

490. In choosing a wife, and buying a sword, we ought not to trust another.

491. The wearer knows, where the shoe wrings.

492. Fair is not fair, but that which pleases.

493. There is no jollitie but has a smack of folly.

494. He that is long agiving, knows not how to give.

495. The filth under the white snow, the sun discovers.

496. Every one fastens where there is gain.

497. All feet tread not in one shoe.

498. Patience, time and money accommodate all things.

499. For want of a nail the shoe is lost, for want of a shoe the horse is
lost, for want of a horse the rider is lost.

500. Weigh justly and sell dearly.

501. Little wealth little care.

502. Little journeys and good cost, bring safe home.

503. Gluttony kills more then the sword.

504. When children stand quiet, they have done some ill.

505. A little and good fills the trencher.

506. A penny spared is twice got.

507. When a knave is in a plumtree he has neither friend nor kin.

508. Short boughs, long vintage.

509. Health without money, is half an ague.

510. If the wise erred not, it would go hard with fools.

511. Bear with evil, and expect good.

512. He that tells a secret, is another servant.

513. If all fools wore white Caps, we should seem a flock of geese.

514. Water, fire, and shouldiers, quickly make room.

515. Pension never enriched young man.

516. Under water, famine, under snow bread.

517. The Lame goes as far as your staggerer.

518. He that loses is Merchant as well as he that gains.

519. A jade eats as much as a good horse.

520. All things in their being are good for something.

521. One flower makes no garland.

522. A fair death honors the whole life.

523. One enemy is too much.

524. Living well is the best revenge.

525. One fool makes a hundred.

526. One pair of ears draws dry a hundred tongues.

527. A fool may throw a stone into a well, which a hundred wise men cannot
pull out.

528. One slumber finds another.

529. On a good bargain think twice.

530. To a good spender God is the Treasurer.

531. A cursed Cow has short horns.

532. Music helps not the toothache.

533. We cannot come to honor under Coverlet.

534* Great pains quickly find ease.

535. To the counsel of fools a wooden bell.

536. The choleric man never wants woe.

537. Help thy self, and God will help thee.

538. At the games end we shall see who gains.

539. There are many ways to fame.

540. Love is the true price of love.

541. Love rules his kingdom without a sword.

542. Love makes all hard hearts gentle.

543. Love makes a good eye squint.

544. Love asks faith, and faith firmness.

545. A scepter is one thing, and a ladle another.

546. Great trees are good for nothing but shade.

547. He commands enough that obeyes a wise man.

548. Fair words makes me look to my purse.

549. Though the Fox run, the chicken has wings.

550. He plays well that winnes.

551. You must strike in measure, when there are many to strike on one Anvile.

552. The shortest answer is doing.

553. It Is a poor stake that cannot stand one year in the ground.

554. He that commits a fault, thinks every one speaks of it.

555. He that is foolish in the fault, let him be wise in the punishment.

556. The blind eat many a fly.

557. He that can make a fire well, can end a quarrel.

558. The toothache is more ease, then to deal with ill people.

559. He that should have what he has not, should do what he does not.

560. He that has no good trade, it is to his loss.

561. The offender never pardons.

562. He that lives not well one year, sorrows seven after.

563. He that hopes not for good, fears not evil.

564. He that is angry at a feast is rude.

565. He that mockes a cripple, ought to be whole.

566. When the tree is fallen, all go with their hatchet.

567. He that has horns in his bosom, let him not put them on his head.

568. He that burns most shines most.

569. He that trusts in a lie, shall perish in truth.

570. He that blows in the dust fills his eyes with it.

571. Bells call others, but themselves enter not into the Church.

572. Of fair things, the Autumn is fair.

573. Giving is dead, restoring very sick.

574. A gift much expected is paid, not given.

575. Two ill meals make the third a glutton.

576. The Royal Crown cures not the headache.

577. It Is hard to be wretched, but worse to be known so.

578. A feather in hand is better then a bird in the air.

579. It Is better to be head of a Lyzard, then the tail of a Lion.

580, Good and quickly seldom meet.

581. Folly grows without watering.

582. Happier are the hands compast with iron, then a heart with thoughts.

583, If the staff be crooked, the shadow cannot be straight.

584. To take the nuts from the fire with the dogs foot.

585. He is a fool that makes a wedge of his fist.

586. Valor that parlies, is near yielding.

587. Thursday come, and the week's gone.

588. A flatterers throat is an open Sepulcher.

589. There is great force hidden in a sweet command.

590. The command of custom is great.

591. To have money is a fear, not to have it a grief.

592. The Catt sees not the mouse ever.

593. Little dogs start the Hare, the great get her.

594. Willowes are weak, yet they bind other wood.

595. A good prayer is master of another purse.

596. The thread breaks, where it is weakest.

597. Old men, when they scorn young make much of death.

598. God is at the end, when we think he is furthest off it.

599. A good Judge conceives quickly, judges slowly.

600. Rivers need a spring.

601. He that contemplates, has a day without night.

602. Give loosers leave to talk.

603. Loss embraces shame.

604. Gaming, women, and wine, while they laugh they make men pine.

605. The fatt man knows not, what the lean thinks.

606. Wood half burnt is easily kindled.

607. The fish adores the bait.

608. He that goes far has many encounters.

609. Every bees honey is sweet.

610. The slothful is the servant of the counters.

611. Wisdom has one foot on Land, and another on Sea.

612. The thought has good legs, and the quill a good tongue.

613. A wise man needs not blush for changing his purpose.

614. The March sun raises but dissolves not.

615 Time is the Rider that breaks youth.

616. The wine in the bottell does not quench thirst.

617. The sight of a man has the force of a Lion.

618. An examined enterprise, goes on boldly.

619. In every Art it is good to have a master.

620. In every country dogs bite.

621. In every country the sun rises in the morning.

622. A noble plant suites not with a stubborn ground.

623. You may bring a horse to the river, but he will drink when and what he
pleases.

624. Before you make a friend, eat a bushel of salt with him.

625. Speak fitly, or be silent wisely*

626. Skill and confidence are an unconquered army.

627. I was taken by a morsel, says the fish.

628. A disarmed peace is weak.

629. The balance distinguishes not between gold and lead.

630. The persuasion of the fortunate swaies the doubtful.

631. To be beloved is above all bargains.

632. To deceive ones self is very easy.

633. The reasons of the poor weigh not.

634. Perverseness makes one squint eyed.

635. The evening praises the day, and the morning a frost.

636. The table robbes more then a thief.

637. When age is jocond it makes sport for death.

638. True praise roots and spreedes.

639. Fears are divided in the midst.

640. The soul needs few things, the body many.

641. Astrology is true, but the Astrologers cannot find it.

642. Ty it well, and let it go.

643. Empty vessels sound most.

644. Send not a Catt for Lard.

645. Foolish tongues talk by the dozen.

646. Love makes one fit for any work.

647. A pitiful mother makes a scald head.

648. An old Physician, and a young Lawyer.

649. Talk much and err much, says the Spanyard.

650. Some make a conscience of spitting in the Church, yet rob the Altar.

651. An idle head is a box for the wind.

652. Show me a liar, and i will show thee a thief.

653. A bean in liberty, is better then a comfit in prison.

654. None is borne Master.

655. Show a good man his error and he turns it to a virtue, but an ill, it
doubles his fault.

656. None is offended but by himself.

657. None says his Garner is full.

658. In the husband, wisdom, in the wife gentleness.

659. Nothing dries sooner then a tear.

660. In a Leopard the spotts are not observed.

661. Nothing lasts but the Church.

662. A wise man cares not for what he cannot have.

663. It Is not good fishing before the net.

664. He cannot be virtuous that is not rigorous.

665. That which will not be spun, let it not come between the spindle and the
distaffe.

666. When my house burns, it is not good playing at Chesse.

667. No barber shaves so close, but another finds work.

668. There Is no great banquet, but some fares ill.

669. A holy habit cleanses not a foul soul.

670. Forbear not sowing, because of birds.

671. Mention not a halter in the house of him that was hanged.

672. Speak not of a dead man at the table.

673. A hatt is not made for one shower.

674. No sooner is a Temple built to God but the Devil builds a Chapel hard
by.

675. Every one puts his fault on the Times.

676. You cannot make a windmill go with a pair of bellows.

677. Pardon all but thy self.

678. Every one is weary, the poor in seeking, the rich in keeping, the good
in learning.

679. The escaped mouse ever feels the taste of the bait.

680. A little wind kindles; much puts out the fire.

681. Dry bread at home is better than roast meat abroad.

682. More have repented speech then silence.

683. The coveteous spends more then the liberal.

684. Divine ashes are better then earthly meal.

685. Beauty draws more then oxen.

686. One father is more then a hundred Schoolemasters.

687. One eye of the masters sees more, then ten of the servants.

688. When God will punish, he will first take away the understanding.

689. A little labor, much health.

690. When it thunders, the thief becomes honest.

691. The tree that God plants, no wind hurts it.

692. Knowledge is no burden.

693. It Is a bold mouse that nestles in the catts ear.

694. Long jesting was never good.

695. If a good man thrive, all thrive with him.

696. If the mother had not been in the oven, she had never sought her
daughter there.

697 If great men would have care of little ones, both would last long.

698. Though you see a Churchman ill, yet continue in the Church still.

699. Old praise dies, unless you feed it.

700. If things were to be done twice, all would be wise.

701. Had you the world on your Chesse-bord, you could not fit all to your mind.

702. Suffer and expect.

703. If fools should not fool it, they should loose their season.

704. Love and business teach eloquence.

705. That which two will, takes effect.

706. He complains wrongfully on the sea that twice suffers shipwreck.

707. He is only bright that shines by himself.

708. A valiant man's look is more then a cowards sword.

709. The effect speaks, the tongue needs not.

710. Divine grace was never slow.

711. Reason lies between the spur and the bridle.

712. It Is a proud horse that will not carry his own provender.

713. Three women make a market.

714. Three can hold their peace, if two be away.

715. It Is an ill council that has no escape.

716. All our pomp the earth covers.

717. To whirle the eyes too much shows a Kites brain.

718. Comparisons are odious.

719. All keys hang not on one girdle.

720 Great businesses turn on a little pin.

721. The wind in ones face makes one wise.

722. All the Arms of England will not arm fear.

723. One sword keeps another in the sheath.

724. Be what thou would seem to be.

725. Let all live as they would die.

726. A gentle heart is tied with an easy thread.

727 Sweet discourse makes short days and nights.

728. God provides for him that trusts.

729. He that will not have peace, God gives him war.

730. To him that will, ways are not wanting.

731. To a great night a great Lantern.

732. To a child all weather is cold.

733. Where there is peace, God is.

734. None is so wise, but the fool overtakes him.

735. Fools give, to please all, but their own.

736. Prosperity lets go the bridle.

737. The Friar preached against stealing, and had a goose in his sleeve.

738. To be too busy gets contempt.

739. February makes a bridge and March breaks it.

740. A horse stumbles that has four legs.

741. The best smell is bread, the best savor, salt, the best love that of
children.

742. That Is the best gown that goes up and down the house.

743. The market is the best garden.

744. The first dish pleases all.

745. The higher the Ape goes, the more he shows his tail.

746. Night is the mother of Councels.

747. Gods Mill grinds slow, but sure.

748. Every one thinks his sack heaviest.

749. Drought never brought dearth.

750. All complain.

751. Gamsters and race-horses never last long.

752. It Is a poor sport that is nor worth the candle.

753. He that is fallen cannot help him that is down.

754. Every one is witty for his own purpose.

755. A little let lets an ill workman.

756. Good workmen are seldom rich.

757. By doing nothing we learn to do ill.

758. A great dowry is a bed full of brables.

759. No profit to honor, no honor to Religion.

760. Every sin brings it is punishment with it.

761. Of him that speaks ill, consider the life more then the words.

762. You cannot hide an eele in a sack.

763. Give not S. Peter so much, to leave Saint Paul nothing.

764. You cannot flea a stone.

765. The chief disease that reigns this year is folly.

766. A sleepy master makes his servant a Lowt.

767. Better speak truth rudely, then lie covertly.

768. He that fears leaves, let him not go into the wood.

769 One foot is better then two crutches.

770. Better suffer ill, then do ill.

771. Neither praise nor dispraise thy self, thy actions serve the turn.

772. Soft and fair goes far.

773. The constancy of the benefit of the year in their seasons, argues a
Deity.

774. Praise none to much, for all are fickle.

775. It Is absurd to warm one in his armor.

776. Law suits consume time, and money, and rest, and friends.

777. Nature draws more then ten teemes.

778. He that has a wife and children wants not business.

780. A ship and a woman are ever repairing.

781. He that fears death lives not.

782. He that pitties another, remembers himself.

783. He that does what he should not, shall feel what he would not.

784. He that marries for wealth sells his liberty.

785. He that once hitts, is ever bending.

786. He that serves, must serve.

787. He that lends, gives.

788. He that preaches gives alms.

789. He that cockers his child, provides for his enemy.

790. A pitiful look asks enough.

791. Who will sell the Cow, must say the word.

792. Service is no Inheritance.

793. The faulty stands on his guard.

794. A kinsman, a friend, or whom you entreat, take not to serve you, if you
will be served neately.

795. At Court, every one for himself.

796. To a crafty man, a crafty and an half.

797. He that is thrown, would ever wrestle.

798. He that serves well needs not ask his wages.

799 Fair language grates not the tongue.

800. A good heart cannot lie.

801. Good swimmers at length are drowned.

802 Good land, evil way.

803. In doing we learn.

804. It Is good walking with a horse in ones hand.

805. God, and Parents, and our Master, can never be requited.

806. An ill deed cannot bring honor.

807. A small heart has small desires.

808. All are not merry that dance lightly.

809. Courtesy on one side only lasts not long.

810. Wine-Counsels seldom prosper.

811. Weening is not measure.

812. The best of the sport is to do the deed, and say nothing.

813. If thou thy self can do it, attend no others help or hand.

814. Of a little thing a little displeases.

815* He warmes too near that burns.

816. God keep me from four houses, an Usurers, a Tavern, a Spittle, and a
Prison.

817. In hundred else of contention, there is not an inch of love.

818. Do what thou ought, and come what come can.

819. Hunger makes dinners, pastime suppers.

820. In a long journey straw waighs.

821. Women laugh when they can, and weep when they will.

822. War is deaths feast.

823. Set good against evil.

824. He that brings good news knockes hard.

825. Beat the dog before the Lion.

826. Have comes not alone.

827. You must loose a fly to catch a trout.

828. Better a snotty child, then his nose wiped off.

829. No prison is fair, not love foul.

830. He is not free that draws his chain.

831. He goes not out of his way, that goes to a good Inn.

833. There come naught out of the sack but what was there.

834. A little given seasonably, excuses a great gift.

835. He looks not well to himself that looks not ever.

836. He thinks not well, that thinks not again.

837. Religion, Credit, and the Eye are not to be touched.

838. The tongue is not steel, yet it cuts.

839. A white wall is the paper of a fool.

840. They talk of Christmas so long, that it comes.

841. That is gold which is worth gold.

842. It Is good tying the sack before it be full.

843. Words are women, deeds are men.

844. Poverty is no sin.

845. A stone in a well is not lost.

846. He can give little to his servant, that lickes his knife.

847. Promising is the eve of giving.

848. He that keeps his own makes war.

849. The Wolf must dye in his own skin.

850. Goods are theirs that enjoy them.

851. He that sends a fool expects one.

852. He that can stay obtaines.

853. He that gains well and spends well, needs no count book.

854. He that endures, is not overcome.

855. He that gives all, before he dies provides to suffer.

856. He that talks much of his happiness summons grief.

857 He that loves the tree, loves the branch

858. Who hastens a glutton choakes him.

859. Who praises Saint Peter, does not blame Saint Paul.

860. He that has not the craft, let him shut up shop.

861. He that knows nothing, doubts nothing.

862. Green wood makes a hott fire.

863. He that marries late, marries ill.

864. He that passes a winters day escapes an enemy.

865. The Rich knows not who is his friend.

866. A morning sun, and a winebred child, and a latin-bred woman, seldom
end well.

867. To a close shorn sheep, God gives wind by measure.

868 A pleasure long expected, is dear enough sold.

869. A poor man's Cow dies rich man's child.

870. The Cow knows not what her tail is worth, till she have lost it.

871. Choose a horse made, and a wife to make.

872. It Is an ill air where we gain nothing.

873. He has not lived, that lives not after death.

874. So many men in Court and so many strangers.

875. He quits his place well, that leaves his friend there.

876. That which suffices is not little.

877. Good news may be told at any time, but ill in the morning.

878. He that would be a Gentleman, let him go to an assault.

879. Who paies the Physician, does the cure.

880. None knows the weight of another burden.

881. Every one has a fool in his sleeve.

882. One hours sleep before midnight, is worth three after.

883. In a retreat the lame are foremost.

884. It Is more pain to do nothing then something.

885. Amongst good men two men suffice.

886. There needs a long time to know the worlds pulse.

887. The offspring of those that are very young, or very old, lasts not.

888. A Tyrant is most tyrant to himself.

889. Too much taking heed is loss.

890. Craft against craft, makes no living.

891. The Reverend are ever before.

892. France is a meddow that cuts thrice a year.

893. It Is easier to build two chimneys, then to maintain one.

894. The Court has no Almanac.

895. He that will enter into Paradise. must have a good key.

896. When you enter into a house, leave the anger ever at the door.

897. He has no leisure who uses it not.

898. It Is a wicked thing to make a dearth ones garner.

899. He that deals in the world needs four seeves.

900. Take heed of an ox before, of an horse behind, of a monk on all sides.

901. The year does nothing else but open and shut.

902. The ignorant has an Eagles wings, and an Owls eyes.

903. There are more Physicians in health then drunkards.

904. The wife is the key of the house.

905. The Law is not the same at morning and at night.

906. War and Physic are governed by the eye.

907. Half the world knows not how the other half lies.

908. Death keeps no Calender.

909. Ships fear fire more then water.

910. The least foolish is wise.

911. The chief box of health is time.

912. Silks and Satins put out the fire in the chimney.

913. The first blow is as much as two.

914 The life of man is a winter way.

915. The way is an ill neighbor.

916. An old man's staff is the rapper of deaths door.

917. Life is half spent before we know, what it is.

918. The singing man keeps his shop in his throat.

919. The body is more dressed then the soul.

920. The body is sooner dressed then the soul.

921. The Physician owes all to the patient, but the patient owes nothing to
him but a little money.

922. The little cannot be great, unless he devour many.

923. Time undermines us.

924. The Chollerick drinks, the Melancholic eats; the Phlegmatic sleeps.

925. The Apothecaries mortar spoils the Luters music.

926. Conversation makes one what he is.

927. The deaf gains the injury.

928. Years know more then books.

929. Wine is a turne-coate (first a friend, then an enemy.)

930. Wine ever paies for his lodging.

931. Wine makes all sorts of creatures at table.

932. Wine that cost nothing is digested before it be drunk.

933. Trees eat but once.

934. Armor is light at table.

935. Good horses make short miles.

936. Castles are Forests of stones.

937. The dainties of the great, are the tears of the poor.

938. Parsons are souls waggoners.

939. Children when they are little make parents fools, when they are great
they make them mad.

940. The Mr. absent, and the house dead.

941. Dogs are fine in the field*

942. Sins are not known till they be acted.

943. Thorns whiten yet do nothing.

944. All are presumed good, till they are found in a fault.

945. The great put the little on the hook.

946. The great would have none great and the little all little.

947 The Italians are wise before the deed, the Germans in the deed, the
French after the deed.

949. Every mile is two in winter.

950. Spectacles are deaths Harquebuze.

951. Lawyers houses are built on the heads of fools.

952. The house is a fine house, when good folk are within.

953. The best bred have the best portion.

954. The first and last frosts are the worst.

955. Gifts enter every where without a wimble.

956. Princes have no way.

957. Knowledge makes one laugh, but wealth makes one dance.

958. The Citizen is at his business before he rise.

959. The eyes have one language every where.

960. It is better to have wings then horns.

961. Better be a fool then a knave.

962. Count not four except you have them in a wallett.

963. To live peaceably with all breeds good blood.

964. You may be on land, yet not in a garden.

965. You cannot make the fire so low but it will get out.

966. We know not who lives or dies.

967. An Ox is taken by the horns, and a Man by the tongue.

968. Many things are lost for want of osking.

969. No Churchyard is so handsome, that a man would desire straight to be
buried there.

970. Cities are taken by the ears.

971. Once a year a man may say: on his conscience.

972. We leave more to do when we dye, then we have done.

973. With customs we live well, but Laws undo us.

674 To speak of an Usurer at the table, marres the wine.

975. Pains to get, care to keep, fear to lose.

976. For a morning rain leave not your journey.

977. One fair day in winter makes not birds merry.

278 He that learnes a trade has a purchase made.

979. When all men have, what belongs to them, it cannot be much.

980. Though God take the sun out of the Heaven yet we must have patience.

981. When a man sleeps, his head is in his stomach.

982. When one is on horseback he knows all things.

983. When God is made master of a family, he orders the disorderly.

984. When a Lackey comes to hells door the devils lock the gates.

985. He that is at ease, seeks dainties.

986. He that has charge of souls, transports them not in bundles.

987. He that tells his wife news is but newly married.

988. He that is in a town in May, loses his spring.

989. He that is in a Tavern, thinks he is in a vine-garden.

990. He that praises himself, spattereth himself.

991. He that is a master must serve (another.)

992. He that is surprised with the first frost, feels it all the winter after.

993. He a beast does die, that has done no good to his country.

994. He that follows the Lord hopes to go before.

995. He that dies without the company of good men, puts not himself into a
good way.

996. Who has no head, needs no hatt.

997. Who has no have in his business, mountains to him seem valleys.

998. Speak not of my debts, unless you mean to pay them.

999. He that is not in the wars is not out of danger.

1000. He that gives me small gifts, would have me live.

1001. He that is his own Counselor, knows nothing sure but what he has
laid out.

1002. He that has lands has quarrels.

1003. He that goes to bed thirsty, rises healthy.

1004. Who will make a door of gold must knock a nail every day.

1005. A trade is better then service.

1006* He that lives in hope danceth without music.

1007. To review ones store is to mow twice.

1008. Saint Luke was a Saint and a Physician, yet is dead.

1009. Without business debauchery.

1010. Without danger we cannot get beyond danger.

1011. Health and sickness surely are men's double enemies.

1012. If gold knew what gold is, gold would get gold I wis.

1013. Little losses amaze, great, tame.

1014. Choose none for thy servant, who have served thy betters.

1015. Service without reward is punishment.

1016. If the husband be not at home, there is nobodie.

1017. An oath that is not to be made, is not to be kept.

1018. The eye is bigger then the belly.

1019. If you would be at ease, all the world is not.

1020. Were it not for the bone in the leg, all the world would turn
Carpenters (to make them crutches.)

1021. If you must fly, fly well.

1022. All that shakes falls not.

1023. All beasts of prey, are strong or treacherous.

1024. If the brain sowes not corn, it plants thistles.

1025. A man well mounted, is ever Choleric.

1026. Every one is a master and servant.

1027. A piece of a Churchyard fitts every body.

1028* One month does nothing without another.

1029. A master of straw eats a servant of steel.

1030. An old cat sports not with her prey

1031. A woman conceales what she knows not.

1032. He that wipes the child's nose, kisseth the mothers cheek.

FINIS.

