NEW ENGLANDS PROSPECT. A true, lively, and experimental description of that
part of America, commonly called NEW ENGLAND: discovering the state of that
Country, both as it stands to our new-come English Planters; and to the old
Native Inhabitants. Laying down that which may both enrich the knowledge of
the mind-travelling Reader, or benefit the future Voyager. BY WILLIAM WOOD.

Printed at London by Tho. Cotes, for John Bellamie, and are to be sold at his
shop, at the three Golden Lions in Corne-hill, near the Royal Exchange. 1634.

To the Right Worshipful, my much honored Friend, Sir WILLIAM ARMYNE, Knight
and Baronet.
Noble Sir.
THe good assurance of your native worth, and thrice generous disposition, as
also the continual manifestation of your bounteous favor, and love toward my
self in particular, has so bound my thankful acknowledgement, that I count
it the least part of my service to present the first fruits of my farre-fetcht
experience, to the kind acceptance of your charitable hands: well knowing that
though this my work, own not worth enough to deserve your patronage, yet such
is your benign humanity, that I am confident you will daigne it your
protection, under which it willingly shrowdes it self. And as it is reported
of that man whose name was Alexander, being a cowardly milke-sop by nature, yet
hearing of the valiant courage of that magnificent Hero, Alexander the Great,
whose name he bore, he thenceforth became stout and valorous; and as he was
animated by having the very name of puissant Alexander; so shall these my weak
and feeble labors, receive life and courage by the patronage of your much
esteemed self; whereby they shall be able to outface the keenest fanges of a
black mouthed Momus. For from hence the world may conclude, that either there
was some worth in the book, that caused so wise a person to look upon it, and
to vouchsafe to own it; or else if they suppose that in charity he fosterd it,
as being a poor helpelesse brat, they may thence learn to do so likewise. If
here I should take upon me the usual strain of a soothing Epistolizer, I
should (though upon better grounds than many) sound forth a full mouthed
encomiasticke of your incomparable worth: but though your deserts may justly
challenge it, yet I know your virtuous modesty would not thank me for it; and
indeed your own actions are the best Heralds of your own praise, which in
spite of envy it self must speak you Wise, and truly Noble: and I for my
part, if I may but present any thing, which either for its profit or delight
may obtain your favorable approbation, I have already reaped the harvest of
my expectation; only I must desire you to pardon my bold presumption, as thus
to make your well deserving name, the frontispeece to so rude and ill deserving
frame. Thus wishing a confluence of all blessings both of the throne, and
footstool, to be multiplied upon your self, and your virtuous Consort, my
very good Lady, together with all the Stemmes of your Noble family, I take my
leave and rest,

Your Worships to serve and be commanded, W. W.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
THough I will promise thee no such voluminous discourse, as many have made
upon a scanter subject, (though they have travailed no further than the smoke
of their own native chimnies) yet dare I presume to present thee with the
true, and faithful relation of some few years travels and experience, wherein
I would be loath to broach any thing which may puzzle thy belief, and so
justly draw upon my self, that unjust aspersion commonly laid on travailers;
of whom many say, They may lie by authority, because none can control them;
which Proverb had surely his original from the sleepy belief of many a
homebred Dormouse, who comprehends not either the raritie or possibility of
those things he sees not, to whom the most classicke relations seem riddles,
and paradoxes: of whom it may be said as once of Diogenes, that because he
circled himself in the circumference of a tubbe, he therefore contemned the
Port and Palace of Alexander, which he knew not. So there is many a
tub-brain'd Cyn^cke, who because any thing stranger than ordinary, is too large
for the strait hoopes of his apprehension, he peremptorily concludes it is a
lie: But I decline this sort of thicke-witted readers, and dedicate the mite of
my endeavors to my more credulous, ingenious, and less censorious
Countrymen, for whose sake I undertook this work; and I did it the rather,
because there has some relations heretofore past the Press, which have been
very imperfect; as also because there has been many scandalous and false
reports past upon the Country, even from the sulphurious breath of every base
ballad-monger: wherefore to perfect the one, and take off the other, I have
laid down the nature of the Country, without any partial respect unto it, as
being my dwelling place where I have lived these four years, and intend God
willing to return shortly again; but my conscience i^ to me a thousand
witnesses, that what I speak is the very truth, and this will inform thee
almost as fully concerning it, as if thou wentest over to see it. Now whereas I
have written the latter part of this relation concerning the Indians, in a more
light and facetious style, than the former; because their carriage and
behavior has afforded more matter of mirth, and laughter, than gravity and
wisdom; and therefore I have inserted many passages of mirth concerning them,
to spice the rest of my more serious discourse, and to make it more pleasant.
Thus thou may in two or three hours travail over a few leaves, see and
know that, which cost him that writ it, years and travail, over Sea and Land
before he knew it; and therefore I hope thou will accept it; which shall be my
full reward, as it was my whole ambition, and so I rest,

Thine bound in what I may, W. W.

To the Author, his singular good Friend, Mr. William Wood.
THanks to thy travel, and thy self, who have
Much knowledge in so small room, comptly plac't^
And thine experience thus amount do make,
From whence we may New Englands Prospect take,
Though many thousands distant: wherefore thou
Thy self shall sit upon mount Prais^ her brow.
For if the man that shall the short cut find
Unto the Indies, shall for that be shrin'd;
Sure thou deservest then no small praise, who,
So short cut to New England here do show;
And if then this small thanks, thou getst no more,
Of thanks I then will say the world's grown poor.
S. W.

The Table.
Part. 1.
Chap. 1. OF the Situation, B^yes, Havens, and Inlets. Page. 1 Chap. 2. Of the
seasons of the year, Winter and Summer, together with the heat, cold, snow,
rain, and the effects of it. Page. 3 Chap. 3* Of the (...), length, and
shortness of day and night, with the suiteablenesse of it to English bodies
for health and sickness. Page. 8 Chap. 4. Of the nature of the Soil. Page. 10
Chap. 5. Of the Herbs, Fruits, Woods, Waters, and Minerals. Page. 13 Chap. 6.
Of the Beasts that live on the land. Page. 18 Chap. 7. Beasts living in the
water. Page. 24 Chap. 8. Of the Birds and Fowls both of land and water. Page.
26 Chap. 9. Of Fish. Page. 32 Chap. 10. Of the several plantations in
particular. Page. 36 Chap. 11. Of the evils, and such things as are hurtful in
the plantation. Page. 44 Chap. 12. What provision is to be made for a Journey
at Sea, and what to carry with us for our use at Land. Page. 49
Part. 2.
Chap. 1. OF the Connect^cuts, Mowhacks, or such Indians as are Westward.
Page. 56 Chap. 2. Of the Tarrenteenes or the Indians inhabiting E^st ward.
Page. 6^ Chap. 3 Of the Pequants and Narragan^ets, inhabiting Southward. Page.
61 Chap 4. Of the Aberginians or Indians North-ward^ Page. 62 Chap. 5. Of their
Apparel, Ornaments, Paintings, etc. Page. 64 Chap. 6. Of their diet, cookery,
etc. Page. 66 Chap. 7. Of their dispositions and good qualifications, as
friendship, etc. Page. 69 Chap. 8. Of their hardiness. Page. 75 Chap. 9. Of
their wondering at the first view of any strange invention. Page. 77 Chap. 10.
Of their Kings government, and Subjects obedience. Page. 79 Chap. 11. Of their
Marriages, Page. 81 Chap. 12. Of their worship, etc. Page. 82 Chap. 13. Of their
Wars. Page. 84 Chap. 14. Their games, sports, etc. Page. 85 Chap. 15. Of
their huntings. Page. 88 Chap. 16. Of their Fishings. Page. 89 Chap. 17. Of
their Arts, etc. Page. 90 Chap. 18. Of their Language. Page. 91 Chap. 19. Of
their deaths, etc. Page. 92 Chap. 20. Of their women, etc. Page. 94
FINIS.
Errata.
PAge, 13. line 25. for Squno^ersquashes read Isqu^utersquashes, p. 15. l. 10.
he, they, l. 11. his, their. l. 28. spoiling, spoil. p 16. l. 10. mast, masts
p. 17. l. 37. boats, bolles p. 23. l. 12. us, up p. 24. l. 4 an. ^. p. 27. l.
21. humiliters, Humilitees l. 22. million, millions. p. 29. l. 7. ^ide, tides
p. 31. l. 26. those, their. p 32 l. 26. Hage, Haicke. p. 37. l. 33. Clarly,
C^arles p. 41. l. 10. land, Inland. p. 42.8. stone, stop. l. 16. lands, ponds.
l. 36. breach, Beach. p 45. l. 29. house, horse. p. 46. l. 9 lyd, lie. l. 18.
by, her. l. 24. a (le^t out;) l. 30. musketor, m^^keto^. p. 47. l. 2. Fen (left
o^^) p 50. l. 3. it (left out,) p 53. l. 20. handsome, handie. l. 36. C^ntrie,
G^n^rie p 54. l 6. many* If any. l. 8. he, they. p. 57. l. 14. here, there. p.
60. l. 1 placed, placing ^. 33. has (too much,) p. 70. l. ^0. warm. worm. p.
82. l. 8. object, subject. p. 83. l. 38. English ans, English man's.

The South part of New England, as it is Planted this year, 1634.


NEW ENGLANDS PROSPECT.
CHAP. I. Of the Situation, Bays, Havens, and Inlets.
FOr as much as the Kings most excellent Majesty has been graciously pleased
by the grant of his Letters Patents, at first to give life to the plantations
of New England, and has daily likewise by his Favors and Royal protection
cherished their growing hopes; whereby many of his Majesty's faithful Subjects
have been imboldned to venture persons, states, and endeavors, to the
enlargement of his Dominions in that Western Continent: Wherefore I thought
fit (for the further encouragement of those that hereafter, either by Purse, or
Person shall help forward the Plantation,) to set forth these few observations
out of my personal and experiment^ll knowledge.

The place whereon the English have built their Colonies, is judged by those
who have best skill in discovery, either to be an Island, surrounded on the
North side with the spacious River Cannada, and on the South with Hudsons
River, or else a Peninsula, these two Rivers overlapping one another, having
their rise from the great Lakes which are not far off one another, as the
Indians do certainly inform us. But it is not my intent to wander far from
our Patent; wherefore I refer you to the thrice memorable discoverer of those
parts, Captain Smith, who has likewise fully described the Southern and
North-east part of New England, with the noted head-lands, Capes, Harbors,
Rivers, Ponds, and Lakes, with the nature of the Soil, and commodities both by
Sea and Land, etc. within the degrees of forty one and forty five.

The Bay of Massachusetts lies under the degree of forty two and forty three,
bearing South-west from the Lands end of England: at the bottom whereof are
situated most of the English plantations: This Bay is both safe, spacious, and
deep, free from such cockling Seas as run upon the Coast of Ireland, and in
the Channels of England: there be no stiff running Currents, or Rocks,
Shelves, Bars, Quicksands. The Mariners having sailed two or three Leagues
toward the bottom, may behold the two Capes embracing their welcome Ships in
their Arms, which thrust themselves out into the Sea in form of a
halfe-moone, the surrounding shore being high, and showing many white Cliffes
in a most pleasant prospect with diverse places of low land, out of which diverse
Rivers vent themselves into the Ocean, with many openings, where is good
Harboring for Ships of any burden; so that if an unexpected storm or cross
wind should bar the Mariner from recovering his desired Port, he may reach
other Harbors, as Plimmouth, Cape, Ann, Salom, Marvill Head; all which afford
good ground for Anchorage, being likewise land-lockt from Wind and Seas. The
chief and usual Harbor, is the still Bay of Massachusetts, which is close
aboard the plantations, in which most of our ships come to anchor, being the
nearest their mart, and usual place of landing of Passengers; it is a safe and
pleasant Harbor within, having but one common and safe entrance, and that not
very broad, there scarce being room for 3. Ships to come in board and board at
a time, but being once within, there is room for the Anchorage of 500. Ships.

This Harbor is made by a great company of Islands, whose high Cliffes shoulder
out the boistrous Seas, yet may easily deceive any unskilful Pilote;
presenting many fair openings and broad sounds, which afford too shallow
waters for any Ships, though navigable for Boats and small pinnaces. The
entrance into the great Haven is called Nantascot; which is two Leagues from
Boston; this place of it self is a very good Haven, where Ships commonly cast
Anchor, until Wind and Tide serve them for other places; from hence they may
sail to the River of Wessaguscus, Naponset, Charles River, and Misticke River,
on which Rivers be seated many Towns. In any of these forenamed harbors,
the Seamen having spent their old store of Wood and Water, may have fresh
supplies from the adjacent Islands, with good timber to repair their
weather-beaten Ships* Here likewise may be had Masts or Yards, being store of
such Trees as are useful for the same purpose.

CHAP. II. Of the Seasons of the year, Winter and Summer, together with the
Heat, Cold, Snow, Rain, and the effects of it.
FOr that part of the Country wherein most of the English have their
habitations: it is for certain the best ground and sweetest Climate in all
those parts, bearing the name of New England, agreeing well with the temper of
our English bodies, being high land, and sharp Air, and though most of our
English Towns border upon the Seacoast, yet are they not often troubled with
Mists, or unwholesome fogges, or cold weather from the Sea, which lies East and
South from the Land. And whereas in England most of the cold winds and
weathers come from the Sea, and those situations are counted most unwholesome,
that are near the Seacoast, in that Country it is not so, but otherwise; for
in the extremity of Winter, the North-east and South wind coming from the
Sea, produces warm weather, and bringing in the warme-working waters of the
Sea, loosneth the frozen Bays, carrying away their Ice with their Tides,
melting the Snow, and thawing the ground; only the North-west wind coming
over the Land, is the cause of extreme cold weather, being always accompanied
with deep Snowes and bittter Frost, so that in two or three days the Rivers
are passable for horse and man. But as it is an Axiom in Nature, Nullum viole^
tum est perpetuum, No extremes last long, so this cold wind blows seldom
above three days together, after which the weather is more tolerable, the
Air being nothing so sharp, but peradventure in four or five days after
this cold m^ssenger will blow a fresh, commanding every man to his house,
forbidding any to outface him without prejudice to their noses: but it may be
objected that it is too cold a Country for our English men, who have been
accustomed to a warmer Climate, to which it may be answered, (Igne levatur
hyems) there is Wood good store, and better cheap to build warm houses, and
make good fires, which makes the Winter less tedious: and moreover, the
extremity of this cold weather lasts but for two Months or ten weeks,
beginning in December, and breaking up the tenth day of February; which has
been a passage very remarkable, that for ten or a dozen years the weather
has held himself to his day, unlooking his ycie Bays and Rivers, which are
never frozen again the same year, except there be some small frost until the
middle of March. It is observed by the Indians that every tenth year th^re is
little or no Winter, which has been twice observed of the English; the year
of new Plymouth men's arrival was no Winter in comparison; and in the tenth
year after likewise when the great company set led themselves in Massachusetts
Bay, was a very mild season, little Frost, and less Snow, but clear serene
weather, few North-west winds, which was a great mercy to the English coming
over so rawly and uncomfortably provided, wanting all utensils and provisions
which belonged to the well being of Planters: and whereas many died at the
beginning of the plantations, it was not because the Country was unhealthfull,
but because their bodies were corrupted with sea-diet, which was naught, their
Beef and Porke being tainted, their Butter and Cheese corrupted, their Fish
rotten, and voyage long, by reason of cross Winds, so that winter approaching
before they could get warm houses, and the searching sharpnes of that purer
Climate, creeping in at the crannies of their crazed bodies, caused death and
sickness; but their harms having taught future voyagers more wisdom, in
shipping good provision for Sea, and finding warm houses at landing, find
health in both. It has bin observed, that of five or six hundred passengers
in one year, not above three have died at Sea, having their health likewise at
Land. But to return to the matter in hand daily observations makes it
apparent, that the peircing cold of that Country produces not so many noisome
effects, as the raw winters of England. In public assemblies it is strange to
hear a man sneeze or cough as ordinarily they do in old England; yet not to
smother any thing, lest you judge me too partial in reciting good of the
Country, and not bad; true it is, that some venturing too nakedly in
extremity of cold, being more fool hardy than wise, have for a time lost the
use of their feet, others the use of their fingers; but time and Surgery
afterward recovered them: Some have had their over-growne beards so frozen
together, that they could not get their strong water-bottells into their
mouths; I never heard of any that utterly perished at land with cold, saving
one English man and an Indian, who going together a Fowling, the morning being
fair at their setting out, afterward a terrible storm arising, they intended
to return home; but the storm being in their faces, and they not able to
with-stand it, were frozen to death, the Indian having gained three slight-shot
more of his journey homewa^d, was found reared up against a tree with his
Aqua-vitae bottle at his (...) second passage (concerning which many think
hardly of the ^ountry in regard of his cold) was the miscarriage of a boat at
sea, certain men having intended a voyage to new Plymouth, se^^ing sail
toward night, they wanted time to fetch it, being constrained to put into
another harbor, where being negligent of the well mooring of their Boat, a
strong wind coming from the shore in the night, loosned their killocke, and
drove them to Sea, without sight of land, before they had awaked out of sleep;
but seeing the eminent danger, such as were not benumbed with cold, shipped out
their Oars, shaping their course for Cape Cod, where the Indians met them, who
buried the dead, and carried the Boat with the living to Plymouth, where some
of them died, and some recovered. These things may fright some, but being that
there has been many passages of the like nature in our English Climate, it
cannot dishearten such as seriously consider it, seeing likewise that their
own ruins sprung from their own negligence.

The Country is not so extremely cold, unless it be when the North-west
wind is high, at other times it is ordinary for Fishermen to go to Sea in
January and February, in which time they get more Fish, and better than in
Summer, only observing to reach some good Harbors before night, where by good
fires they sleep as well and quietly, (having their main sail tented at
their backs, to shelter them from the wind) as if they were at home. To
relate how some English bodies have borne out cold, will (it may be) startle
belief of some, it being so strange, yet not so strange as true. A certain
man being something distracted, broke away from his Keeper, and running into
the Wood, could not be found with much seeking after; but four days being
expired, he returned, to appearance as well in body, as at his egresse, and in
mind much better: for a mad man to hit home through the unbeaten Woods, was
strange, but to live without meat or drink in the deep of Winter, stranger,
and yet return home bettered, was most strange: but if truth may gain
belief, you may behold a more superlative strangeness. A certain Maid in
the extremity of cold weather, (as it fell out) took an uncertain journey,
in her intent short, not above four miles, yet long in event; for losing her
way, she wandered six or seven days in most bitter weather, not having one
bit of bread to strengthen her, sometimes a fresh Spring quenched her thirst,
which was all the refreshment she had; the Snow being upon the ground at first,
she might have trackt her own footsteps back again, but wanting that
understanding, she wandered, till God by his special providence brought her to
the place she went from, where she lives to this day.

The hard Winters are commonly the forerunners of pleasant Spring-times, and
fertile Summers, being judged likewise to make much for the health of our
English bodies: It is found to be more healthful for such as shall adventure
thither, to come toward Winter, than the hot Summer; the Climate in Winter is
commonly cold and dry, the Snow lies long, which is ^hought to be no small
nourishing to the ground. For the Indians bur^ing it to suppress the
under-wood, which else wou^d grow all over the Country, the Snow falling not
long after, keeps the ground warm, and with his melting conve^ghs the ashes
into the pores of the earth, which does fatten it. It has been observed, that
English Wheat and Rye proves better, which is Winter sown, and is kept warm
by the Snow, than that which is sown in the Spring. The Summers be hotter than
in England; because of their more Southern latitude, yet are they tolerable;
being often cooled with fresh blowing winds, it seldom being so hot as men
are driven from their labors, especially such whose employments are within
doors, or under the cool shade: servants have hitherto been privileged to
rest from their labors in extreme hot weather, from ten of the clock till
two, which they regaine by their early rising in the morning, and double
diligence in cool weather. The Summers are commonly hot and dry, there being
seldom any raines; I have known it six or seven weeks, before one shower
has moystened the Plowmans labor, yet the Harvest has been very good, the
Indian Corn requiring more heat than wet; for the English Corn, it is
refresht with the nightly dewes, till it grow up to shade his roots with his
own substance from the parching Sun. In former times the Rain came seldom,
but very violently, continuing his drops, (which were great and many) sometimes
four and twenty hours together; sometimes eight and forty, which watered the
ground for a long time afrer; but of late the Seasons be much altered, the
rain coming oftener, but more moderately, with less thunder and lightnings,
and sudden gusts of wind. I dare be bold to affirm it, that I saw not so
much rain, raw colds, and misty fogges in four years in those parts, as was
in England in the space of four Months the last Winter; yet no man at the
years end, complained of too much drought, or too little rain. The times of
most Rain, are in the beginning of April, and at Michaelmas. The early
Springs and long Summers make but short Autumnes and Winters. In the Spring
when the Grass begins to put forth, it grows apace, so that where it was
all black by reason of Winters burnings, in a fortnight there will be Grass a
foot high.

CHAP. III. Of the Climate, length, and shortness of day and night, with the
suiteablenesse of it to English bodies for health and sickness.
THE Country being nearer the Equinoctial than England, the days and nights
be more equally divided. In Summer the days be two hours shorter, and
likewise in Winter two hours longer than in England. In a word, both Summer
and Winter is more commended of the English there, than the Summer Winters, and
Winter Summers of England; and who is there that could not wish, that Englands
Climate were as it has b^ene in quondam times, colder in Winter, and hotter in
Summer? or who will condemn that which is as England has been? Virginia
having no Winter to speak of, but extreme ho^ Summers, has dried up much
English blood, and by pest^ferous diseases swept away many lusty bodies,
changing their complexion not into swarthinesse, but into Palenesse; so that
when as they come for trading into our parts, we can know many of them by
their faces. This alteration certainly comes not from any want of victuals or
necessary food, for their soil is very fertile and pleasant, yielding both
Corn and Cattle plenty, but rather from the Climate, which indeed is found to
be hotter than is suiteable to an ordinary English constitution.

In New England both men and women keep their natural complexions, in so much
as Sea men wonder when they arrive in those parts, to see their Contrymen so
fresh and ruddy: If the Sun does tanne any, yet the Winters cold restores
them to their former complexion; and as it is for the outward complexion, so it
is for the inward constitution; not very many being troubled with
inflammations, or such diseases as are increased by too much heat: and whereas
I say, not very many, yet dare I not exclude any; for death being certain to
all, in all Nations there must be something tending to death of like certainty.
The soundest bodies are mortal and subject to change, therefore fall into
diseases, and from diseases to death. Now the two chief messengers of
mortality, be Fevers and Callentures; but they be easily helped, if taken in
time, and as easily prevented of any that will not prove a mere fool to his
body. For the common diseases of England, they be strangers to the English now
in that strange Land. To my knowledge I never knew any that had the Pox,
Measels, Greene-sicknesse, Headaches, Stone, or Consumptions, etc. Many that
have come infirm out of England, retain their old grievances still, and some
that were long troubled with lingering diseases, as Coughs of the lungs,
Consumptions, etc. have been restored by that medicineable Climate to their
former strength and health. God has been pleased so to bless men in the
health of their bodies, that I dare confidently say it, out of that Town from
whence I c^^e, in three years and a half, there dyed but three, one of which
was crazed before he came into the Land; the other were two Children borne at
one birth before their time, the Mother being accidentally hurt. To make good
which losses, I have seen four Children Baptized at a time, which wipes away
tha^ common aspersion, that women have no Children, b^ing a ^eere fals^ty,
there being as sweet lusty Children as many other Nation, and reckoning so
many for so many, more double births than in England; the women likewise having
a more speedy recovery, and gathering of strength after their delivery than in
England.

The last Argument to confirm the healthfulnesse of the Country, shall be
from mine own experience, who although in England I was brought up tenderly
under the careful hatching of my dearest friends, yet scarce could I be
acquainted with health, having been ^et blood six times for the Pleurisy
before I went; likewise being assailed with other weakening diseases; but being
planted in that new Soil and healthful Air, which was more correspondent to
my nature, (I speak it with praise to the merciful God) though my occasions
have been to pass through heat and cold, wet, and dry, by Sea and Land, in
Winter and Summer, day by day, for four years together, yet scarce did I know
what belonged to a days sickness.

CHAP. IIII. Of the nature of the Soil.
THe Soil is for the general a warm kind of earth, there being little
cold-spewing and, no Morish Fennes, no Quagmires, the lowest grounds be the
Marshes, over which every full and change the Sea flows: these Marshes be rich
ground, and bring plenty of Hay, of which the Cattle feed and like, as if they
were fed with the best up-land Hay in New England; of which likewise there is
great store which grows commonly between the Marshes and the Woods. This
Meadow ground lies higher than the Marshes, whereby it is freed from the
overflowing of the Seas; and besides this, in many places where the Tre^ grow
thin, there is good fodder to be got amongst the Woods. There be likewise in
diverse places near the plantations great broad Meadows, wherein grow neither
shrub nor Tree, lying low, in which Plains grows as much grass, as may be
thrown out with a Sith, thick and long, as high as a man's middle; some as
high as the shoulders, so that a good mower may cut three loads in a day. But
many object, this is but a course fodder: True it is, that it is not so fine to
(...) eye as English grass, but it is not sour, though it grow thus rank;
but being made into Hay, the Cattle eat it as well as it were Lea-hay and like
as well with it; I do not think England can show, fairer Cattle either in
Winter, or Summer, than is in those parts both Winter and Summer; being
generally larger and better of milch, and bring forth young as ordinarily as
Cattle do in England, and have hitherto been free from many diseases that are
incident to Cattle in England.

To return to the Subject in hand, there is so much hay-ground in the
Country, as the richest voyagers that shall venture thither, need not fear
want of fodder, though his Heard increase into thousands, there being thousands
of Acres that yet was never meddled with. And whereas it has been reported,
that some has mowne a day for half of a load of Hay: I do not say, but it
may be true, a man may do as much, and get as little in England, on Salisbury
Plain, or in other places where Grass cannot be expected: So Hay-ground is
not in all places in New England: Wherefore it shall behoue every man according
to his calling, and estate, to look for a fit situation at the first; and if
he be one that intends to live on his stock, to choose the grassie Valleys
before the woody Mountains. Furthermore, whereas it has been generally
reported in many places of England, that the Grass grows not in those places
where it was cut the foregoing years, it is a mere falsehood; for it grows
as well the ensuing Spring as it did before, and is more spiery and thick,
like our English Grass: and in such places where the Cattle use to graze, the
ground is much improved in the Woods, growing more grassie, and less weedy.
The worst that can be said against the meddow-grounds, is because there is
little edish, or after-pasture, which may proceed from the late mowing, more
than from any thing else; but though the edish be not worth much, yet is there
such plenty of other Grass and feeding, that there is no want of Winter-fodder
till December, at which time men begin to house their milch-cattle and
Calves: Some, notwithstanding the cold of the Winter, have their young Cattle
without doors, giving them meat at morning and evening. For the more upland
grounds, there be different kinds, in some places clay, some gravel, some a
red sand; all which are covered with a black mould, in some places above a
foot deep, in other places not so deep. There be very few that have the
experience of the ground, that can condemn it of barrenness; although many
deem it barren, because the English use to manure their land with fish, which
they do not because the land could not bring corn without it, but because it
brings more with it; the land likewise being kept in heart the longer: besides,
the plenty of fish which they have for little or nothing, is better so used,
than cast away; but to argue the goodness of the ground, the Indians who are
too lazy to catch fish, plant corn eight or ten years in one place without
it, having very good crops. Such is the rankenesse of the ground that it must
be sown the first year with Indian Corn, which is a soaking grain, before
it will be fit for to receive English seed. In a word, as there is no ground
so purely good, as the long forced and improoved grounds of England, so is
the^^ none so extremely bad as in many places of England, that as yet have not
been manured and improved; the woods of New England being accounted better
ground than the Forests of England or woodland ground, or heathy plains.

For the natural soil, I prefer it before the country of Surry, or
Middlesex, which if they were not enriched with continual manurings, would be
less fertile than the meanest ground in New England, wherefore it is neither
impossible, nor much improbable, that upon improvements the soil may be as
good in time as England. And whereas some gather the ground to be naught, and
soon out of heart, because Plymouth men remove from their old habitations, I
answer, they do no more remove from their habitation, than the Citizen which has
one house in the City and another in the Country, for his pleasure, health,
and profit. For although they have taken new plots of ground, and built houses
upon them, yet do they retain their old houses still, and repair to them
every Sabbath day; neither do they esteem their old lots worse than when they
first took them: what if they do not plant on them every year? I hope it is
no ill husbandry to rest the land, nor is always that the worst that lies
sometimes f^llow. If any man doubt of the goodness of the ground, let him
comfort himself with the cheapenesse of it* such bad land in England I am sure
will bring in store of good money. This ground is in some places of a soft
mould, and easy to plow; in other places so tough and hard, that I have seen
ten Oxen toyled, their Iron chains broken, and their Shares and Coulters much
strained: but after the first bre^king up it is so easy, that two Oxen and a
Horse may plow it; there has as good English Corn grown there, as could be
desired; especially Rye and Oats, and Barley: there has been no great trial
as yet of Wheat, and Beans; only thus much I affirm, that these two grains
grow well in Gardens, therefore it is not improbable, but when they can gather
seed of that which is sown in the country, it may grow as well as any other
Grain: but commonly the seed that comes out of England is heated at Sea,
and therefore cannot thrive at land.

CHAP. V. Of the Herbs, Fruits, Woods, Waters and Mineralls.
THe ground affoards very good kitchen Gardens, for Turnips, Parsnips, Carrots,
Radishes, and P^mpions, Muskmillions, Squonterquashes, Coucumbers, Onyons, and
whatsoever grows well in England, grows as well there, many things being
better and larger: there is likewise growing all manner of Herbs for meat,
and medicine, and that not only in planted Gardens, but in the Woods, without
either the art or the help of man, as sweet Marjoran, Purselane, Sorrel,
Peneriall, Yarrow, Myrtle, Saxifarilla, Bays, etc. There is likewise
Strawberries in abundance, very large ones, some being two inches about; one
may gather half a bushel in a forenoone: In other seasons there be
Gooseberries, Bilberies, Resberies, Treackleberies, Hurtleberries, Currants;
which being dried in the Sun are little inferior to those that our Grocers
sell in England: This land likewise affoards Hemp and Flax, some naturally,
and some planted by the English, with Rapes if they be well managed. For such
commodities as lie underground, I cannot out of mine own experience or
knowledge say much, having taken no great notice of such things; but it is
certainly reported that there is Iron, stone; and the Indians inform us that
they can lead us to the mountains of black Lead, and have shown us lead
ore, if our small judgment in such things do not deceive us: and though no
body dare confidently conclude, yet dare they not utterly deny, but that the
Spaniards bliss may lie hid in the barren Mountains, such as have coasted the
country affirm that they know where to fetch Seacole if wood were scant;
there is plenty of stone both rough and smooth, useful for many things, with
quarries of Slate, out of which they get covering for houses, with good clay,
whereof they make Tiles and Brickes, and pavements for their necessary uses.

For the Country it is as well watered as any land under the Sun, every
family, or every two families having a spring of sweet waters betwixt them,
which is far different from the waters of England, being not so sharp, but
of a fatter substance, and of a more jetty color; it is thought there can be
no better water in the world, yet dare I not prefer it before good Beer, as
some have done, but any man will choose it before bad Beer, Wheay, or
Buttermilke* Those that drink it be as healthful, fresh, and lusty, as they
that drink beer; These springs be not only within land, but likewise
bordering upon the Sea coasts, so that some times the tides overflow some of
them, which is accounted rare in the most parts of England. No man hitherto
has been constrained to dig deep for his water, or to fetch it far, or
to fetch of several waters for several uses; one kind of water serving for
washing, and brewing and other things. Now besides these springs, there be
diverse spacious ponds in many places of the Country, out of which run many
sweet streams, which are constant in their course both winter and summer,
whereat the Cattle quench their thirst, and upon which may be built water
mills, as the plantation increases.

The next commodity the land affords, is good store of Woods, and that not
only such as may be needful for fuel, but likewise for the building of
Ships, and houses, and Mils, and all manner of water-worke about which Wood is
needful. The Timber of the Country grows straight, and tall, some trees
being twenty, some thirty foot high, before he spread forth his branches;
generally the Trees be not very thick, though there be many that will serve
for Mill posts, some being three foot and a half over. And whereas it is
generally conceived, that the woods grow so thick, that there is no more
clear ground than is hewed out by labor of man; it is nothing so; in many
places, diverse Acres being clear, so that one may ride a hunting in most
places of the land, if he will venture himself for being lost: there is no
underwood saving in swamps, and low grounds that are wet, in which the English
get Osiers, and Has^es, and such small wood as is for their use. Of these
swamps, some be ten, some twenty, some thirty miles long, being preserved by
the wetnesse of the soil wherein they grow; for it being the custom of the
Indians ^o burn the wood in November, when the grass is withered, and leaves
dried, it consumes all the underwood, and rubbish, which otherwise would over
grow the Country, making it unpassable, and spoiling their much affected
hunting: so that by this means in those places where the Indians inhabit,
there is scarce a bush or bramble, or any combersome underwood to be seen in
the more champion ground. Small wood growing in these places where the fire
could not come, is preserved. In some places where the Indians dyed of the
Plague some fourteen years ago, is much underwood, as in the mid way
betwixt Wessaguscus and Plymouth, because it has not been burned; cer^aine
Rivers stopping the fire from coming to clear that place of the country,
has made it unusefull and troublesome to travel through, in so much that it is
called ragged plain, because it tears and rents the clothes of them that
pass. Now because it may be necessary for mechanical artificers to know what
Timber, and wood of use is in the Country, I will recite the most useful as
follows.

Trees both in hills and plains, in plenty be,
The long lived Oak, and mournful Cypris tree,
Ski^ towering pines, and Chestnuts coated rough,
The lasting Cedar, with the Walnut tough:
The rezin dropping Fur for mast in use,
The boatmen seek for Oars light, neat, grown sprewse,
The brittle Ash, the ^ver trembling Aspes,
The broad-spread Elm^, whose concave harbors waspes,
The water sp^ngie Alder good for naught,
Small Elderne by the Indian Fletchers sought,
The knottie Maple, pallid Birtch, Hawthornes,
The Horn bound tree that to be cloven scorns;
Which from the tender Vine often takes his spouse,
Who ^wi^ds embracing arms about his boughs.
Within this Indian Orchard fruits be some,
The ruddie Cherrie, and the jettie Plumbe,
Snake murdering Hazell, with sweet Saxaphrage,
Whose spurns in beer allayes hot fevers rage.
The Diars Shumach, with more trees there be,
That are both good to use, and rare to see.
Though many of these trees may seem to have epithites contrary to the nature
of them as they grow in England, yet are they agreeable with the Trees of that
Country. The chief and common Timber for ordinary use is Oak, and Walnut: Of
Oaks there be three kinds, the red Oak, white, and black; as these are
different in kind, so are they chosen for such uses as they are most fit for,
one kind being more fit for clappboard, others for sawne board, some fitter for
shipping, others for houses. These Trees affoard much Mast for Hogs,
especially every third year, bearing a bigger Acorne than our English Oak.
The Wallnut tree is something different from the English Wallnut, being a great
deal more tough, and more serviceable, and altogether as heavy: and whereas
our Gunnes that are stocked with English Wallnut, are soon broaken and cracked
in frost, being a brittle Wood; we are driven to stock them new with the
Country Wallnut, which will endure all blows, and weather; lasting time out of
mind. These trees bear a very good Nut, something smaller, but nothing
inferior in sweetness and goodness to the English Nut, having no bitter
pill. There is likewise a tree in some part of the Country, that bears a Nut
as big as a small pear. The Cedar tree is a tree of no great growth, not
bearing above a foot and a half square at the most, neither is it very high. I
suppose they be much inferior to the Cedars of Lebanon so much commended in
holy writ. This wood is more desired for ornament than substance, being of
color red and white like Eugh, smelling as sweet as Juniper; it is commonly
used for seeling of houses, and making of Chests, Boxes, and staves. The Fur
and Pine be trees that grow in many places, shooting up exceeding high,
especially the Pine: they do afford good masts, good board, Rozin and
Turpentine. Out of these Pines is gotten the candlewood that is so much spoken
of, which may serve for a shift amongst poor folks; but I cannot commend it
for singular good, because it is something sluttish, dropping a pitchie kind
of substance where it stands. Here no doubt might be good done with saw mils;
for I have seen of these stately highgrowne trees, ten miles together close by
the River side, from whence by shipping they might be conveyed to any desired
Port. Likewise it is not improbable that Pitch and Tar may be forced from
these trees, which bear no other kind of fruit. For that country Ash, it is
much different from the Ash of England, being brittle and good for little, so
that Wallnut is used for it. The Horne-bound tree is a tough kind of Wood, that
requires so much pains in riving as is almost incredible, being the best for
to make boats and dishes, not being subject to crack or leake. This tree
growing with broad spread Arms, the vines wind their curling branches about
them; which vines affoard great store of grapes, which are very big both for
the grape and Cluster, sweet and good: These be of two sorts, red and white,
there is likewise a smaller kind of grape, which grows in the Islands which
is sooner ripe and more delectable; so that there is no known reason why as
good wine may not be made in those parts, as well as in Burdeuax in France;
being under the same degree. It is great pit^ie no man sets upon such a
venture, whereby he might in small time enrich himself, and benefit the
Country, I know nothing which does hinder but want of skillful men to manage
such an employment: For the country is hot enough, the ground good enough, and
many convenient hills which lie toward the south Sun, as if they were there
placed for the purpose. The Cherrie trees yield great store of Cherries, which
grow on clusters like grapes; they be much smaller than our English Cherrie,
nothing near so good if they be not very ripe* they so furre the mouth that
the tongue will cleave to the roof, and the throat wax horse with swallowing
those red Bullies (as I may call them,) being little better in taste. English
ordering may bring them to be an English Cherrie, but yet they are as wild as
the Indians. The Plummes of the Country be better for Plummes than the
Cherries be for Cherries, they be black and yellow about the bigness of a
Damson, of a reasonable good taste. The white thorn affords hawes as big as
an English Cherrie, which is esteemed above a Cherrie for his goodness and
pleasantness to the taste.

CHAP. VI. Of the Beasts that live on the land
HAving related unto you the pleasant situation of the Country, the
healthfulnesse of the climate, the nature of the soil, with his vegetatives,
and other commodities; it will not be amiss to inform you of such irrational
creatures as are daily bred and continually nourished in this country, which
do much conduce to the well being of the Inhabitants, affording not only
meat for the belly, but clothing for the back. The beasts be as follows.

The kingly Lion, and the strong armed Bear
The large lim'd Mooses, with the tripping Dear,
Quill darting Porcupines, and Rackcoones be,
Castelld in the hollow of an aged tree;
The skipping Squerrell, Rabbet, purblinde Hare,
Immured in the selfsame Castle are,
Least red-eyd Ferrets, wily Foxes should
Them undermine, if rampird but with mould.
The grim faced Ounce, and raven^^^ howling Woolfe,
Whose meagre pa^nch suckes like a swallowing gulf*
Black glistering Otters, and rich coated Bever,
The Civet sented Musquash smelling ever.
Concerning Lions, I will not say that I ever saw any my self, but some
affirm that they have seen a Lion at Cape Anne which is not above six leagues
from Boston: some likewise being lost in woods, have heard such terrible
roarings, as have made them much aghast; which must either be Devils or Lions;
there being no other creatures which use to roar saving Bears, which have not
such a terrible kind of roaring: besides, Plymouth men have traded for Lions
skins in former times. But sure it is that there be Lions on that Continent,
for the Virginians saw an old Lion in their plantation, who having lost his
Iackall, which was wont to hunt his prey, was brought so poor that he could
go no further. For Bears they be common, being a great black kind of Bear,
which be most feirce in Strawberry time, at which time they have young ones; at
this time likewise they will go upright like a man, and clime trees, and
swim to the Islands; which if the Indians see, there will be more sportfull
Bear bayting than Paris Garden can affoard. For seeing the Bears take water,
an Indian will leap after him, where they go to water cuffes for bloody
noses, and scratched sides; in the end the man gets the victory, riding the
Bear over the watery plain till he can bear him no longer. In the winter
they take themselves to the clifts of rocks, and thick swamps, to shelter
them from the cold; and food being scant in those cold and hard times, they
live only by sleeping and sucking their paws, which keeps them as fat as
they are in Summer; there would be more of them if it were not for the Woolves,
which devour them; a kennell of those ravening runnagadoes, setting on a poor
single Bear, will tear him as a Dog will tear a Kid: it would be a good
change if the country had for every Woolfe a Bear, upon the condition all the
woolves were banished; so should the inhabitants be not only rid of their
greatest annoyance, but furnished with more store of provisions, Bears being
accounted very good meat, esteemed of all men above Venison* again they never
prey upon the English cattle, or offer to assault the person of any man,
unless being vexed with a shot, and a man run upon them before they be dead,
in which case they will stand in their own defense, as may appear by this
instance. Two men going a fowling, appointed at evening to meet at a certain
pond side, to share equally, and to return home; one of these Gunners having
killed a Seal or Sea calfe, brought it to the side of the pond where he was
to meet his comrade, afterward returning to the Sea side for more gain; and
having loaded himself with more Geese and Duckes, he repaired to the pond,
where he saw a great Bear feeding on his Seal, which caused him to throw
down his load, and give the Bear a salute; which though it was but with
Goose shot, yet tumbled him over and over, whereupon the man supposing him to
be in a manner dead, ran and beat him with the hand of his Gunne; The Bear
perceiving him to be such a coward to strike him when he was down, scrambled
up, standing at defiance with him, scratching his legs, tearing his clothes
and face, who stood it out till his six foot Gunne was broken in the middle,
then being deprived of his weapon, he ran up to the shoulders into the pond,
where he remained till the Bear was gone, and his mate come in, who
accompanied him home.

The beast called a Moose, is not much unlike red Dear, this beast is as big
as an Ox; slow of foot, headed like a Bucke, with a broad beam, some being
two yards wide in the head, their flesh is as good as Beef, their hides good
for clothing; The English have some thoughts of keeping them tame, and to
accustom them to the yoke, which will be a great commodity: First because
they are so fruitful, bringing forth three at a time, being likewise very
uberous. Secondly, because they will live in winter without any fodder. There
be not many of these in the Massachusetts bay, but forty miles to the Northeast
there be great store of them; These pore beasts likewise are much devoured by
the Woolves: The ordinary Dear be much bigger than the Dear of England, of a
brighter color, more inclining to red, with spotted bellies; the most store of
these be in winter, when the more Northern parts of the country be cold for
them; they desire to be near the Sea, so that they may swim to the Islands
when they are chased by the Woolves: It is not to be thought into what great
multitudes they would increase, were it not for the common devourer the Woolfe;
They have generally three at a time, which they hide a mile one from another,
giving them suck by turns; thus they do, that if the Woolfe should find
one, he might miss of the other. These Dear be fat in the deep of winter; In
Summer it is hard catching of them with the best Greyhounds that may be
procured, because they be swift of foot. Some credible persons have affirmed,
that they have seen a Dear leap three score feet at little or no forcement;
besides, there be so many old trees, rotten stumps, and Indian barnes, that a
dog cannot well run without being shoulder-shot: yet would I not dissuade any
from carrying good dogs; for in the winter time they be very useful; for
when the snow is hard frozen, the Dear being heavy, sinkes into the snow, the
dogs being light run upon the top and overtake them, and pull them down:
some by this means have gotten twenty Buckes and Does in a winter, the horns
of these Dear grow in such a straight manner, (overhanging their heads) that
they cannot feed upon such things as grow low, till they have cast their old
horns: of these Dear there be a great many, and more in the Massachusetts bay,
than in any other place, which is a great help and refreshment to these
planters. The Porcupine is a small thing not much unlike a Hedgehog; something
bigger, who stands upon his guard and proclaims a Noli me tangere, to man and
beast, that shall approach too near him, darting his quills into their legs,
and hides. The Rack^one is a deep furred beast, not much unlike a Badger,
having a tail like a Fox, as good meat as a Lamb; there is one of them in
the Tower. These beasts in the day time sleep in hollow trees, in the moon
shine night they go to feed on clammes at a low tide, by the Sea side, where
the English hunt them with their dogs. The Squerrells be of thre^ sorts,
first the great gray Squerrell, which is almost as big as an English Rabbet;
of these there be the greatest plenty, one may kill a dozen of them in an
afternoon, about three of the clock they begin to walk. The second is a
small Squerrell, not unlike the English Squerrell, which does much trouble the
planters of Corn, so that they are constrained to set diverse Trappes, and to
carry their Cats into the Corn fields, till their corn be three weeks old.
The third kind is a flying Squerrell, which is not very big, slender of body,
with a great deal of loose skin which she spreads square when she flies,
which the wind gets, and so wafts her Batlike body from place to place; it is
a creature more for sight and wonderment, than either pleasure or profit. The
Rabbets be much like ours in England. The Hares be some of them white, and a
yard long; these two harmless creatures are glad to shelter themselves from
the harmefull Foxes, in hollow trees, having a hole at the entrance no bigger
than they can creep in at: if they should make them holes in the ground, as on
English Rabbets do, the undermining Renoilds would rob them of their lives,
and extirpate their generation. The beasts of offense be Squunckes, Fer^ets,
Foxes, whose impudence sometimes drives them to the good wives Hen roost, to
fill their Paunch: some of these be black; their furre is of much esteem.

The Ounce or the wild Cat, is as big as a mungrell dog, this creature is by
nature feirce, and more dangerous to be met withal than any other creature,
not fearing either dog or man; he uses to kill Dear, which he thus
effects: Knowing the Deares tracts, he will lie lurking in long weeds, the
Dear passing by he suddenly leapes upon his back, from thence gets to his
neck, and scratcheth out his throat; he has likewise a devise to get Geese,
for being much of the color of a Goose he will place himself close by the
water, holding us his bob tail, which is like a Goose neck; the Geese seeing
this counterfeit Goose, approach nigh to visit him, who with a sudden jerke
apprehends his mistrustlesse prey. The English kill many of these, accounting
them very good meat. Their skins be a very deep kind of Furre, spotted
white and black on the belly. The Woolves be in some respect different from
them of other countries; it was never known yet that a Woolfe ever set upon a
man or woman. Neither do they trouble horses or cowes; but swine, goats and
red calves which they take for Dear, be often destroyed by them, so that a red
calfe is cheaper than a black one in that regard; in Autumn and the beginning
of the Spring, these ravenous rangers do most frequent our English
habitations, following the Dear which come down at that time to those parts.
They be made much like a Mungrell, being big boned, la^ke paunched, deep
breasted, having a thick neck, and head, prick ears, and long snoute, with
dangerous teeth, long staring hair, and a great bush tail; it is thought of
many, that our English Mastiffes might be too hard for them; but it is no such
matter, for they care no more for an ordinary Mastiffe, than an ordinary
Mastiffe cares for a C^^re; many good Dogs have been spoiled with them. Once
a fair Grayhound hearing them at their howlings run out to chide them, who was
torn in pieces before he could be rescued. One of them makes no more bones to
run away with a Pigge, than a Dog to run away with a Marrow ^^ne. it is
observed that they have no joints from the head to the tail, which prevents
them from leaping, or sudden turning, as may appear by what I shall show
you. A certain man having shot an Woolfe, as he was feeding upon a Swine,
breaking his leg only, he knew not how to dev^se his death, on a sudden,
the Woolfe being a black one, he was loath to spoil his furre with a second
shot, his skin being worth five or six pound Sterling; wherefore he
resolved to get him by the tail, and thrust him into a River that was hard by;
which effected, the Woolfe being not able to turn his joyntlesse body to bite
him, was taken. That they cannot leap, may appear by this Woolfe, whose mouth
watering at a few poor impaled Kiddes, would needs leap over a five-foote
pale to be at them; but his foot slipping in the rise, he fell a little short
of his desire, and being hung in the Carpenters stocks, howled so loud, that
he frighted away the Kids, and called the English, who killed him. These be
killed daily in some place or other, either by the English, or Indian; who have
a certain rate for every head: Yet is there little hope of their utter
destruction, the Country being so spacious, and they so numerous, traveling
in the Swamps by Kennels: sometimes ten or twelve are of a company. Late at
night, and early in the morning, they set up their howlings, and call their
companies together at night to hunt, at morning to sleep; in a word they be
the greatest inconveniency the Country has, both for matter of damage to
private men in particular, and the whole Country in general.

CHAP. VII. Beasts living in the water.
FOr all creatures that lived both by Land and Water, they be first Otters,
which be most of them black, whose furre is much used for Muffes, and are held
almost as dear as Beaver. The flesh of them is none of the best meat, but
their Oil is of rare use for many things. Secondly, Martins, a good furre for
their bigness: Thirdly, Musquashes, which be much like a Beaver for shape, but
nothing near so big; the Male has two stones which smell as sweet as
Musk, and being killed in Winter, never lose their sweet smell: These skins
are no bigger than a Coney-skinne, yet are sold for five shillings a piece,
being sent for Tokens into England. One good skin will perfume a whole
house-full of clothes, if it be right and good. Fourthly, the Beaver,
concerning whom if I should at large discourse, according to knowledge or
information, I might make a Volumne. The wisdom and understanding of this
Beast, will almost conclude him a reasonable creature: His shape is thick and
short, having likewise short legs, feet like a Mole before, and behind like a
Goo^^, a broad tail in form like a shooe-soale, very tough and strong; his
head is something like an Otters head, saving that his teeth before, be placed
like the teeth of a Rabbet, two above, and two beneath; sharp and broad, with
which he cuts down Trees as thick as a man's thigh, afterward dividing them
into lengths, according to the use they are appointed for. If one Bever be too
weak to carry the logge, then another helps him; if they two be too weak,
then Multorum manibus grande levatur onus; four more adding their help, being
placed three to three, which set their teeth in one another tough tails, and
laying the load on the two hindermost, they draw the logge to the desired
place. That this may not seem altogether incredible, remember that the like
almost may be seen in our Ants, which will join sometimes seven or eight
together in the carrying of a burden. These Creatures build themselves houses
of wood and clay, close by the Ponds sides, and knowing the Seasons, build them
answerable houses, having them three stories high, so that as land-floods are
raised by great Raines, as the waters arise, they mount higher in their houses;
as they assuage, they descend lower again. These houses are so strong, that no
creature saving an industrious man with his penetrating tools can prejudice
them, their ingresse and egresse being under water. These make likewise very
good Ponds, knowing whence a stream runs from between two rising Hills, they
will there pitch down piles of Wood, placing smaller rubbish before it with
clay and sods, not leaving, till by their Art and Industry they have made a
firm and curious damme-head, which may draw admiration from wise understanding
men. These creatures keep themselves to their own families, never parting so
long as they are able to keep house together: And it is commonly said, if any
Beaver accidentally light into a strange place, he is made a drudge so long as
he lives there, to carry at the greater end of the logge, unless he creep
away by stealth. Their wisdom secures them from the English, who seldom, or
never kills any of them, being not patient to lay a long siege, or to be so
often deceived by their cunning evasions, so that all the Beaver which the
English have, comes first from the Indians, whose time and experience fits them
for that employment.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Birds and Fowls both of Land and Water.
HAving showed you the most desirable, useful, and beneficial creatures,
with the most offensive carrions that belong to our Wilderness, it remains in
the next place, to show you such kinds of Foul as the Country affoords: They
are many, and we have much variety both at Sea and on Land; and such as yield
us much profit, and honest pleasure, and are these that follow; as

The Princely Eagle, and the soaring Hawke,
Whom in their unknown ways there is none can chawke:
The Humberd for some Queens rich Cage more fit,
Than in the vacant Wilderness to sit.
The swift winged Swallow sweeping to and fro,
As swift as arrow from Tartarian Bow.
When as Aurora's infant day new springs,
There th'morning mounting Lark her sweet lays sing^.
The harmonious Thrush, swift Pigeon, Turtle-dove,
Who to her mate does ever constant prove:
The Turky-Phesant, Heathcocke, Partridge rare,
The carrion-tearing Crow, and hurtful Stare,
The long lived Raven, th'ominous Screech-Owle,
Who tells as old wives say, disasters foul.
The drowsy Madge that leaves her day-lov'd nest,
And loves to roave when day-birds be at rest:
Th'Eele-murthering Hearne, and greedy Cormorant,
That near the Creekes in morish Marshes haunt.
The bellowing Bitterne, with the long-leg'd Crane,
Presaging Winters hard, and dearth of grain.
The Silver Swan that tunes her mournful breath,
To sing the dirge of her approaching death.
The tatling Oldwines, and the cackling Geese,
The fearful Gull that shunnes the murdering Piece,
The strong winged Mallard, with the nimble Teale,
And ill-shape't Loone who his harsh notes does squeale.
There Widgins, Sheldrackes and Humiliteers,
Snites, Doppers, Sea-Larkes, in whole million flees.
The Eag^es of the Country be of two sorts, one like the Eagles that be in
England, the other is something bigger with a great white head, and white
tail: these be commonly called Gripes; these prey upon Duckes and Geese, and
such Fish as are cast upon the Seashore. And although an Eagle be counted King
of that feathered regiment, yet is there a certain black Hawke that beats
him; so that he is oonstrayned to soar so high, till heat expel his
adversary* This Hawke is much prized of the Indians, being accounted a
Sagamo^es ransom.

To speak much of Hawks, were to trespass upon my own judgment, and bring
upon my self a deserved censure, for abusing the Faulconers terms: But by
relation from those that have more insight into them than my self: There be
diverse kinds of Hawks: their Aieries are easy to come by, being in the holes
of Rocks, near the shore, so that any who are addicted to that sport, if he
will be but at the charge of finding Poul^ry for them, may have his desires. We
could wish them well mewed in England; for they make hauock^ of Hens,
Partridges, Heathcockes, and Duckes; often hindering the Fowler of his long
looked for shoot. The Humbird is one of the wonders of the Country, being no
bigger than a Hornet, yet has all the demensions of a Bird, as bill, and
wings, with quills, spider-like legs, small claws: For color, she is as
glorious as the Rai^e-bow; as she flies, she makes a little humming noise like
a Humble-bee: wherefore she is called the Humbird. The Pigeon of that
Country, is something different from our Dove-house Pigeons in England, being
more like Turtles, of the same color; but they have long tails like a Magpie:
And they seem not so big, because they carry not so many feathers on their
backs as our English Doves, yet are they as big in body. These Birds come
into the Country, to go to the North parts in the beginning of our Spring, at
which time (if I may be counted worthy, to be believed in a thing that is not
so strange as true) I have seen them fly as if the Ayerie regiment had been
Pigeons; seeing neither beginning nor ending, length, or breadth of these
Millions of Millions. The shouting of people, the rattling of Gunnes, and
pelting of small shot could not drive them out of their course, but so they
continued for four or five hours together: yet it must not be concluded, that
it is thus often; for it is but at the beginning of the Spring, and at
Michaelmas, when they return back to the Southward; yet are there some all
the year long, which are easily attained by such as look after them. Many of
them build amongst the Pine-trees, thirty miles to the North-east of our
plantations; joining nest to nest, and tree to tree by their nests, so that the
Sun never sees the ground in that place, from whence the Indians fetch whole
loades of them.

The Turkey is a very large Bird, of a black color, yet white in flesh; much
bigger than our English Turkey. He has the use of his long legs so ready, that
he can run as fast as a Dog, and fly as well as a Goose: of these
sometimes there will be forty, threescore, and a hundred of a flock, somet^mes
more and sometimes less; their feeding is Acornes, Hawes, and Berries, some of
them get a haunt to frequent our English corn: In winter when the Snow covers
the ground, they resort to the Sea shore to look for Shrimps, and such small
Fishes at low tide. Such as love Turkey hunting, must follow it in winter after
a new fallen Snow, when he may follow them by their tracts; some have killed
ten or a dozen in half a day; if they can be found toward an evening and
watched where they peirch, if one come about ten or eleaven of the clock he
may shoot as often as he will, they will sit, unless they be slenderly
wounded. These Turkies remain all the year long, the price of a good Turkey
cock is four shillings; and he is well worth it, for he may be in weight
forty pound; a Hen two shillings. Pheasons be very rare, but Heathcockes, and
Partridges be common; he that is a husband, and will be stirring betime, may
kill half a dozen in a morning.

The Partridges be bigger than they be in England, the flesh of the Heathcockes
is red, and the flesh of a Partridge white, their price is four pence a piece.
The Ravens, and the Crows be much like them of other countries. There are no
Magpies, Iackedawes, Coockooes, Iayes, Sparrows, etc. The Stares be bigger than
those in England, as black as Crows, being the most troublesome, and
injurious bird of all others, pulling up the corns by the roots, when it is
young, so that those who plant by reedy and seggy places, where they frequent,
are much annoyed with them, they being so audacious that they fear not Guns,
or their fellows hung upon poles; but the Corn having a week or nine days
growth is past their spoiling. The Owls be of two sorts; the one being small
speckled, like a Partridge, with ea^es, the other being a great Owl, almost as
big as an Eagle, his body being as good meat as a Partridge. Cormorants be
as common as other fowls, which destroy abundance of small fish, these are not
worth the shooting because they are the worst of fowls for meat, tasting
rank, and fishy: again, one may shoot twenty times and miss, for seeing the
fire in the pan, they dive under the water before the shot comes to the place
where they were; they use to roost upon the tops of trees, and rocks, being a
very heavy drowsy creature, so that the Indians will go in their Cannowes in
the night, and take them from the Rocks, as easily as women take a Hen from
roost; No ducking ponds can affoard more delight than a lame Cormorant, and two
or three lusty Dogs. The Crane although he be almost as tall as a man by
reason of his long legs, and neck; yet is his body rounder than other
fowls, not much unlike the body of a Turkey. I have seen many of these
fowls, yet did I never see one that was far, I suppose it is contrary to their
nature to grow fat* Of these there be many in Summer, but none in winter, their
price is two shilling. There be likewise many Swannes which frequent the fresh
ponds and rivers, seldom consorting themselves with Duckes and Geese; these
be very good meat, the price of one is six shillings. The Geese of the
country be of three sorts, first a brant Goose, which is a Goose almost like
the wild Goose in England, the price of one of these is six pence. The second
kind is a white Goose, almost as big as an English tame Goose, these come in
great flocks about Michelmasse, sometimes there will be two or three thousand
in a flock, these continue six weeks, and so fly to the southward, returning
in March, and staying six weeks more, returning again to the Northward; the
price of one of these is eight pence. The third kind of Geese, is a great gray
Goose, with a black neck, and a black and white head, strong of flight;
these be a great deal bigger than the ordinary Geese of England, some very
fat, and in the Spring so full of Feathers, that the shot can scarce pierce
them; most of these Geese remain with us from Michelmas to April; they feed
on the Sea of Fish, and in the woods of Acornes, having as other Foul have,
their pass and repasse to the Northward and Southward: the accurate marksmen
kill of these both flying and sitting; the price of a good gray Goose is
eighteen pence. The Duckes of the country be very large ones and in great
abundance, so is there of Teale likewise; the price of a Ducke is six pence, of
a Teale three pence. If I should tell you how some have killed a hundred Geese
in a week, 50. Duckes at a shot, 40. Teales at another, it may be counted
impossible, though nothing more certain. The Oldwives, be a foul that never
leave tatling day or night, something bigger than a Ducke. The Loone is an ill
shaped thing like a Cormorant; but that he can neither go nor fly; he makes
a noise sometimes like a Sowgelders horn. The Humilities or Simplicities (as I
may rather call them) be of two sorts, the biggest being as big as a green
Plover, the other as big as birds we call knots in England. Such is the
simplicity of the smaller sorts of these birds, that one may drive them on a
heap like so many sheep, and seeing a fit time shoot them; the living seeing
the dead, settle themselves on the same place again, amongst which the Fowler
discharges again. I my self have killed twelve score at two shootes: these
bird are to be had upon sandy brakes at the latter end of Summer before the
Geese come in. Thus much have I showed you as I know to be true concerning the
Foul of the country. But me thinks I hear some say that this is very good
if it could be caught, or likely to continue, and that much shooting will
fright away the fowls. True it is, that every ones employment will not permit
him to foul: what then? yet those employments furnish them with silver Guns
with which they may have it more easy. For the frighting of the foul, true it
is that many go blurting away their powder and shot, that have no more skill
to kill, or win a Goose, than many in England that have rustie Muskets in
their houses, knows what belongs to a Soldier, yet are they not much
affrighted. I have seen more living and dead the last year than I have done
in former years.

CHAP. IX. Of Fish.
HHving done with these, let me lead you from the land to the Sea, to view
what commodities may come from thence; there is no country known, that yields
more variety of fish winter and summer: and that not only for the present
spending and sustentation of the plantations, but likewise for trade into other
countries, so that those which have had stages and make fishing voyages into
those parts, have gained (it is thought) more than the new found land Iobbers.
Codfish in these seas are larger than in new found land, six or seven making a
quintall, whereas there they have fifteen to the same weight; and though this
they seem a base and more contemptible commodity in the judgment of more
neat adventurers, yet it has bin the enrichment of other nations, and and is
likely to prove no small commodity to the planters, and likewise to England if
it were thoroughly undertaken. Salt may be had from the salt Islands, and as is
supposed may be made in the country. The chief fish for trade is Cod, but for
the use of the country, there is all manner of fish as follows.

The king of waters, the Sea shouldering Whale,
The snuffing Grampus, with the oily Seal,
The storm praesaging Porpus, Herring-Hogge,
Line shearing Sharke, the Catfish, and Sea Dog,
The Scale-fenc'd Sturgeon, wry mouthd Hollibut,
The flounsing Sammon, Codfish, Greedigut:
Cole, Haddocke, Hag^, the Thornebacke, and the Scate,
Whose slimie outside makes him selde in date,
The stately Basse old Neptunes fleeting post,
That tides it out and in from Sea to Coast.
Consorting Herrings, and the bony Shad,
Big bellied Alewives, Machrills richly clad
With Rainebow colors, th'Frost fish and the Smelt,
As good as ever lady Gustus felt.
The spotted Lamprons, Eeles, the Lamperies,
That seek fresh water brooks with Argus eyes:
These waterie villagers with thousands more,
Do pass and repasse near the verdant shore.
Kinds of all Shel-fish.

The luscious Lobster, with the Crabfish raw,
The Brinish Oister, Muscle, Periwigge,
And Tortoise sought for by the Indian Squaw,
Which to the flats dance many a winters Iigge,
To dive for Cocles, and to dig for Clamms,
Whereby her lazy husbands guts s^ee cramms.
To omit such of these as are not useful, therefore not to be spoken of, and
only to certify you of such as be useful. First the Seal which is that
which is called the Sea Calfe, his skin is good for diverse uses, his body
being between fish and flesh, it is not very delectable to the palate, or
congruent with the stomach; his Oil is very good to burn in Lamps, of which
he affoards a great deal. The Sharke is a kind of fish as big as a man,
some as big as a horse, with three rows of teeth within his mouth, with
which he snaps asunder the fishermans lines, if he be not very circumspect:
This fish will leap at a man's hand if it be over board, and with his teeth
snap off a man's leg or hand if he be a swimming; These are often taken, being
good for nothing but to put on the ground for manuring of land. The Sturgions
be all over the country, but the best catching of them be upon the shoales of
Cape Codde, and in the River of Mirrimacke, where much is taken, pickled and
brought for England, some of these be 12.14.18. foot long: I set not down the
price of fish there, because it is so cheap, so that one may have as much for
two pence, as would give him an angel in England. The Sammon is as good as it
is in England and in great plenty. The Hollibut is not much unlike a pleace or
Turbut, some being two yards long, and one wide: and a foot thick; the plenty
of better fish makes these of little esteem, except the head and finnes, which
stewed or baked is very good: these Hollibuts be little set by while Basse is
in season. Thornebacke and Scates is given to the dogs, being not counted
worth the dressing in many places. The Basse is one of the best fishes in the
country, and though men are soon wearied with other fish, yet are they never
with Basse; it is a delicate, fine, fat, fast fish, having a bone in his head,
which contains a sawcerfull of marrow sweet and good, pleasant to the pallat,
and wholesome to the stomach. When there be great store of them, we only eat
the heads, and salt up the bodies for winter, which exceedes Ling or Haberdine.
Of these fishes some be three and some four foot long, some bigger, some
lesser: at some tides a man may catch a dozen or twenty of these in three
hours, the way to catch them is with hook and line: The Fisherman taking a
great Cod-line, to which he fastneth a piece of Lobster, and throws it into
the Sea, the fish biting at it he pulls her to him, and knockes her on the head
with a stick. These are at one time (when Alewives pass up the Rivers) to be
catched in Rivers, in Lobster time at the Rocks, in Macrill time in the Bays,
at Michelmas in the Seas. When they use to tide it in and out to the Rivers and
Creekes, the English at the top of an high water do cross the Creekes with
long scanes or Basse Netts, which stop in the fish; and the water ebbing from
them they are left on the dry ground, sometimes two or three thousand at a set,
which are salted up against winter, or distributed to such as have present
occasion either to spend them in their houses, or use them for their ground.
The Herrings be much like them that be caught on the English coasts. Alewives
be a kind of fish which is much like a Herring, which in the latter end of
April come up to the fresh Rivers to spawne, in such multitudes as is almost
incredible, pressing up in such shallow waters as will scarce permit them to
swim, having likewise such longing desire after the fresh water ponds, that
no beatings with poles, or forcive agitations by other devices, will cause them
to return to the sea, till they have cast their Spawne. The Shaddes be bigger
than the English Shaddes and fatter. The Macrells be of two sorts, in the
beginning of the year are great ones, which be upon the coast; some are 18.
inches long. In Summer as in May, June, July, and August, come in a smaller
kind of them: These Macrills are taken with drailes which is a long small line,
with a lead and hook at the end of it, being baited with a piece of red
cloth: this kind of fish is counted a lean fish in England, but there it is
so fat, that it can scarce be saved against winter without reisting. There be a
great store of Salt water Eeles, especially in such places where grass grows:
for to take these there be certain Eele pots made of Osyers, which must be
baited with a piece of Lobster, into which the Eeles entering cannot return
back again: some take a bushel in a night in this manner, eating as many as
they have need of for the present, and salt up the rest against winter. These
Eeles be not of so luscious a taste as they be in England, neither are they so
aguish, but are both wholesome for the body, and delightful for the taste:
Lamprons and Lampreyes be not much set by; Lobsters be in plenty in most
places, very large ones, some being 20. pound in weight; these are taken at a
low water amongst the rocks, they are very good fish, the small ones being the
best, their plenty makes them little esteemed and seldom eaten. The Indians
get many of them every day for to bait their hooks withal, and to eat when
they can get no Basse: The Oisters be great ones in form of a shoo horn, some
be a foot long, these breed on certain banks that are bare every spring
tide. This fish without the shell is so big that it must admit of a devision
before you can well get it into your mouth. The Perewig is a kind of fish that
lies in the oaze like a head of hair, which being touched conveyes it self
leaving nothing to be seen but a small round hole. Muscles be in great
plenty, left only for the Hogs, which if they were in England would be more
esteemed of the poorer sort. Clamms or Clamps is a shel-fish not much unlike a
cockle, it lies under the sand, every six or seven of them having a round
hole to take air and receive water at. When the tide ebs and flows, a man
running over these Clamm banks will presently be made all wet, by their
spouting of water out of those small holes: These fishes be in great plenty in
most places of the country, which is a great commodity for the feeding of
Swine, both in winter, and Summer; for being once used to those places, they
will repair to them as duly every ebb, as if they were driven to them by
keepers: In some places of the country there be Clamms as big as a penny
white loaf, which are great dainties amongst the natives, and would be in
good esteem amongst the English, were it not for better fish.

CHAP. X. Of the several plantations in particular.
HAving described the situation of the country in general, with all his
commodities arising from land and Sea, it may add to your content and
satisfaction to be informed of the situation of every several plantation, with
his conveniences, commodities, and discommodities, etc. where first I will
begin with the outmost plantation in the patent to the South ward, Wessagustus
which is called Wessagutus an Indian name: this as yet is but a small Village,
yet it is very pleasant, and healthful, very good ground, and is well timbred,
and has good store of Hey ground; it has a very spacious harbor for shipping
before the town; the salt water being navigable for Boats and Pinnaces two
leagues. Here the inhabitants have good store of fish of all sorts, and Swine,
having Acornes and Clamms at the time of year; here is likewise an Alewife
river. Three miles to the North of this is mount Walleston, a very fertile
soil, and a place very convenient for Farmers houses, there being great store
of plain ground, without trees. This place is called Massachusetts fields where
the greatest Sagamore in the country lived, before the Plague, who caused it
to be cleared for himself. The greatest inconvenience is, that there is not
very many Springs, as in other places of the country, yet water may be had
for digging: A second inconvenience is, that Boats cannot come in at a low
water, nor ships ride near the shore. Six miles further to the North, lies
Dorchester; Dorchester.
which is the greatest Town in New England; well woodded and watered; very
good arable grounds, and Hay-ground, fair Corne-fields, and pleasan^ Gardens,
with Kitchin-gardens. In this plantation is a great many Cattle, as Kine,
Goats, and Swine. This plantation has a reasonable Harbor for ships: Here is
no Alewife-river, which is a great inconvenience. The inhabitants of this
town, were the first that set upon the trade of fishing in the Bay, who
received so much fruit of their labors, that they encouraged others to the
same undertakings. A mile from this Town lies Roxberry, which is a fair and
handsome Countrey-towne; Roxberry.
the inhabitants of it being all very rich. This Town lies upon the Maine, so
that it is well woodded and watered; having a clear and fresh Brook running
through the Town: Up which although there come no Alewiues, yet there is great
store of Smelts, and therefore it is called Smelt-brooke.

A quarter of a mile to the North-side of the Town, is another River called
Stony-river; upon which is built a water-^^^^ne. Here is good ground for Corn,
and Meadow for Cattle: Up westward from the Town it is something rocky, whence
it has the name of Roxberry; the inhabitants have fair houses, store of
Cattle, impaled Corne-fields, and fruitful Gardens. Here is no Harbor for
ships, because the Town is seated in the bottom of a shallow Bay, which is
made by the neck of land on which Boston is built; so that they can transport
all their goods from the Ships in Boats from Boston, which is the nearest
Harbor.

Boston is two miles North-east from Roxberry: His situation is very pleasant,
being a Peninsula, Boston.
hemmed in on the South Side with the Bay of Roxberry, on the North-side with
Gla^ly-river, the Marshes on the backe-side, being not half a quarter of a
mile over; so that a little fencing will secure their Cattle from the Woolues.
Their greatest wants be Wood, and Medow-ground, which never were in that place;
being constrained to fetch their building-timber, and firewood from the Islands
in Boats, and their Hay in Loyters: It being a neck and bare of wood: they
are not troubled with three great annoyances, of Woolves, Rattle-snakes, and
Musketoes. These that live here upon their Cattle, must be constrained to take
Farms in the Country, or else they cannot subsist; the place being too small
to contain many, and fittest for such as can Trade into England, for such
commodities as the Country wants, being the chief place for shipping and
Merchandise.

This Neck of land is not above four miles in compass, in form almost
squ^re, having on the South Side at one corner, a great broad hill, whereon is
planted a Fort, which can command any ship as she say^es into any Harbor
within the still Bay. On the North-side is another Hill, equal in bigness,
whereon stands a Winde-mill. To the North-west is a high Mountain with three
little rising Hills on the top of it, wherefore it is called the Tramount. From
the top of this Mountain a man may over-looke all the Islands which lie before
the Bay, and discry such ships as are upon the Seacoast. This Town although
it be neither the greatest, nor the richest, yet it is the most noted and
fr^quented, being the Center of the Plantations where the monthly Courts are
kept. Here like^^^^ dwe^ls the Governor: This place has very good land,
affording rich Corne-fields, and fruitful Gardens; having likewise sweet and
pleasant Springs. The inhabitants of this place for their enlargement, have
taken to themselves Farme-houses, in a place called Muddy-river, two miles from
their Town; where is good ground, large timber, and store of Marsh-land, and
Meadow. In this place they keep their Swine and other Cattle in the Summer,
whilst the Corn is on the ground at Boston, and bring them to the Town in
Winter.

On the North-side of Charles River is Charles Town, which is another neck of
Land, Charles-Towne.
on whose North-side runs Misticke-river. This Town for all things, may be
well paralel'd with her neighbor Boston, being in the same fashion with her
bare neck, and constrained to borrow conveniences from the Maine, and to
provide for themselves Farms in the Country for their better subsistence. At
this Town there is kept a Ferry-boate, to conveigh passengers over Charles
River, which between the two Towns is a quarter of a mile over, being a very
deep Channel. Here may ride forty ships at a time. Up higher it is a broad
Bay, being above two miles between the shores, into which runs Stony-river,
and Muddy-river. Toward the South-west in the middle of this Bay, is a great
Oyster-banke: Toward the North-west of this Bay is a great Creek, upon whose
shore is situated the Village of Medford, Medford.
a very fertile and pleasant place, and fit for more inhabitants than are yet
in it. This Town is a mile and a half from Charles Town, and at the bottom
of this Bay the River begins to be narrower, being but half a quarter of a
mile broad. New-towne.
By the side of this River is built New-towne, which is three miles by land
from Charles Town, and a league and a half by water. This place was first
intended for a City, but upon more serious considerations it was not thought so
fit, being too far from the Sea; being the greatest inconvenience it has.
This is one of the nearest and best compacted Towns in New England, having
many fair structures, with many handsome contrived streets. The inhabitants
most of them are very rich, and well stored with Cattle of all sorts; having
many hundred Acres of ground paled in with one general fence, which is about a
mile and a half long, which secures all their weaker Cattle from the wild
beasts. On the other side of the River lies all their Meadow and Marsh-ground
for Hay.

Half a mile Westward of this plantation, is Water-towne; a place nothing
inferior for land, wood, meadow, and water to New-towne. Within half a mile of
this Town is a great Pond, which is divided between those two Towns, which
divides their bounds Northward. A mile and a half from this Town, is a fall
of fresh waters, which conveigh themselves into the Ocean through Charles
River. A little below this fall of waters, the inhabitants of Water-towne have
built a Wayre to catch Fish, Water-towne.
wherein they take great store of Shads and Alewives. In two Tides they have
gotten one hundred thousand of those Fishes: This is no small benefit to the
plantation: Ships of small burden may come up to these two Towns, but the
Oyster-bankes do bar out the bigger Ships.

Misticke.
The next Town is Misticke, which is three miles from Charles Town by land,
and a league and a half by water: It is seated by the waters side very
pleasantly; there be not many houses as yet. At the head of this River are
great and spacious Ponds, whither the Alewives preasse to spawne. This being a
noted place for that kind of Fish, the English resort thither to take them. On
the West side of this River the Governor has a Farm, where he keeps most of
his Cattle. On the East side is Master Craddockes plantation, where he has
impaled a Park, where he keeps his Cattle, till he can store it with Dear:
Here likewise he is at charges of building ships. The last year one was upon
the Stocks of a hundred Tun, that being finished, they are to build one
twice her burden. Ships without either Ballast or loading, may floate down
this River; otherwise the Oyster-banke would hinder them which crosses the
Channel.

Winnisimet.
The last Town in the still Bay, is Winnisimet; a very sweet place for
situation, and stands very commodiously, being fit to entertain more planters
than are yet seated: Islands there
it is within a mile of Charles Town, the River only parting them. The chief
Islands which keep out the Wind and the Sea from disturbing the Harbors, are
first Dear Island, which lies wirhin a flight-shot of Pullin-point. This Island
is so called, because of the Dear which often swim thither from the Maine,
when they are chased by the Woolves: Some have killed sixteen Dear in a day
upon this Island. The opposite shore is called Pullin-point, because that is the
usual Channel. Boats use to pass through into the Bay; and the Tide being very
strong, they are constrained to go ashore, and hale their Boats by the
sea^ing, or roades, whereupon it was called Pullin-point.

The next Island of note is Long Island, so called from his longitude. Diverse
other Islands be within these: viz. Nodles I Will, Round I Will, the Governors
Garden, where is planted an Orchard and a Vineyard, with many other
conveniences; and Slate-Iland, Glasse-Iland, Bird-Iland, etc. These Isles bound
with Woods, and Water, and Medow-ground; and whatsoever the spacious fertile
Maine affords. The inhabitants use to put their Cattle in these for safety,
viz. their Rams, Goats, and Swine, when their Corn is on the ground. Those
Towns that lie without the Bay, are a great deal nearer the Maine, and reap
a greater benefit from the Sea, in regard of the plenty both of Fish and Foul,
which they receive from thence: so that they live more comfortably, and at
less charges, than those that are more remote from the Sea in the
Land-plantations.

The next plantation is Saugus, Saugus.
six miles North-east from Winnesimet: This Town is pleasant for situation,
seated at the bottom of a Bay, which is made on the one side with the
surrounding shore, and on the other side with a long sandy Beach. This sandy
Beach is two miles long at the end, whereon is a neck of land called Nahant:
Nahant.
It is six miles in circumference; well woodded with Oaks, Pines, and Cedars:
It is beside well watered, having beside the fresh Springs, a great Pond in the
middle; before which is a spacious Marsh. In this neck is store of good
ground, fit for the Plow; but for the present it is only used for to put young
Cattle in, and weather-goates, and Swine, to secure them from the Woolues: a
few posts and rayles from the low water-markes to the shore, keeps out the
Woolves, and keeps in the Cattle. One Black William, an Indian Duke, out of
his generosity gave this place in general to this plantation of Saugus, so
that no other can appropriate it to himself.

Upon the South Side of the sandy Beach the Sea beats, which is a true
prognostication, to presage storms and foul weather, and the breaking up of
the Frost: For when a storm has been, or is likely to be, it will roar like
Thunder, being heard six miles; and after storms casts up great store of
great Clammes, which the Indians taking out of their shells, carry home in
baskets. On the North-side of this Bay is two great Marshes, which are made two
by a pleasant River which runs between them. Northward up this River, goes
great store of Alewives, of which they make good Red Herrings; in so much that
they have been at charges to make a wayre, and a Herringhouse, to dry these
Herrings in; the last year were dried some 4 or 5 Last for an experiment,
which proved very good; this is like to prove a great inrichment to the land,
(being a staple commodity in other Countries) for there be such innumerable
companies in every river, that I have seen ten thousand taken in two hours by
two men, without any weire at all, saving a few stones to stone their passage
up the river. There likewise come sto^e of Basse, which the Indians and English
catch with hook and line, some fifty or threescore at a tide. At the mouth of
this river runs up a great creek into that great Marsh, which is called
Rumny Marsh, which is 4 miles long and a miles broad; half of it being Marsh
ground and half upland grass, without tree or bush: this Marsh is crossed
with diverse creekes, wherein lie great store of Geese, and Duckes. There be
convenient lands for the planting of Duckcoyes. Here is likewise belonging to
this place diverse fresh meddowes, which afford good grass and four spacious
ponds like little lakes, wherein is store of fresh fish: within a mile of the
town, out of which runs a curious fresh brook that is seldom frozen by
reason of the warmenesse of the water; upon this stream is built a water
Milne, and up this river comes Smelts and frost fish much bigger than a
Gudgion. For wood there is no want, there being store of good Oaks, Wallnut,
Caedar, Aspe, Elm; The ground is very good, in many places without trees, fit
for the plough. In this plantation is more English tillage, than in all new
England, and Virginia besides; which proved as well as could be expected, the
corn being very good especially the Barley, Rye, and Oats.

The land affords the inhabitants as many ratities as any place else, and the
sea more: the Basse continuing from the middle of April to Michaelmas, which
stays not above half that time in the Bay: besides here is a great deal of
Rockcod and Macrill, insomuch that shoales of Basse have driven up shoales of
Macrill from one end of the sandy brech to the other, which the inhabitants
have gathered up in wheelbarrowes. The Bay that lies before the Town at a low
spring tide, will be all flatts for two miles together, upon which is great
store of Muscle banckes, and Clam bancks, and Lobsters amongst the rocks and
grassie holes. These flatts make it unnavigable for ships, yet at high water
great Boats, Loiters, and Pinnaces of 20, and 30 tun, may sail up to the
plantation, but they need have a skillful Pilote, because of many dangerous
rocks and foaming breakers, that lie at the mouth of that Bay. The very aspect
of the place is fortification enough to keep off an unknown enemy, yet may
it be fortified at a little charge, being but few landing places there about,
and those obscure. Four miles Northeast from Sangus lies Salem, Salem.
which stands on the middle of a neck of land very pleasantly, having a South
river on the one side, and a North river on the other side: upon this neck
where the most of the houses stand is very bad and s^ndie ground, yet for
seven years together it has brought forth exceeding good corn, by being
fished but every third year; in some places is very good ground, and very good
timber, and diverse springs hard by the sea side. Here likewise is store of
fish, as Basses, Eeles, Lobsters, Clammes, etc. Although their land be none of
the best, yet beyond those rivers is a very good soil, where they have taken
farms, and get their Hay, and plant their corn; there they cross these
rivers with small Cannowes, which are made of whole pine trees, being about two
foot and a half over, and 20. foot long: in these likewise they go a fowling,
sometimes two leagues to sea; there be more Cannowes in this town than in all
the whole Patent; every household having a water-house or two. This Town wants
an Alewife river, which is a great inconvenience; it has two good harbors,
the one being called Winter, and the other Summer harbor, which lies within
Derbies Fort, which place if it were well fortified, might keep ships from
landing of forces in any of those two places. Marvill Head is a place which
lies 4 miles full South from Salem, and is a very convenient place for a
plantation, especially for such as will set upon the trade of fishing. There
was made here a ships loading of fish the last year, where still stands the
stages, and drying scaffolds; here be good harbor for boats, and safe riding
for ships, Agowamme is nine miles to the North from Salem, Agowam.
which is one of the most spacious places for a plantation, being near the
sea, it abounds with fish, and flesh of fowls and beasts, great Meads and
Marshes and plain plowing grounds, many good rivers and harbors and no rattle
snakes. In a word, it is the best place but one, which is Merrimacke, lying 8
miles beyond it, where is a river 20 leagues navigable, Merrimack river.
all along the river side is fresh Marshes, in somes places 3 miles broad. In
this river is Sturgeon, Sammon, and Basse, and diverse other kinds of fish. To
conclude, the Country has not that which this place cannot yield. So that
these two places may contain twice as many people as are yet in new England:
there being as yet scarce any inhabitants in these two spacious places. Three
miles beyond the river of Merrimacke is the outside of our Patent for the
Massachusetts Bay. These be all the Towns that were begun, when I came for
England, which was the 15 of August 1633.

CHAP. XI. Of the evils, and such things as are hurtful in the Plantation.
I have informed you of the Country in general and of every plantation in
particular, with their commodities and wherein one excels another. Now that
I may be every way faithful to my reader in this work, I will as fully and
truly relate to you what is evil, and of most annoyance to the inhabitants.
First those which bring most prejudice to their estates are the ravenons
Woolves, which destroy the weaker Cattle, but of these you have heard before:
that which is most injurious to the person and life of man is a rattle snake
which is generally a yard and a half long, a^ thick in the middle as the
small of a man's leg, she has a yellow belly, her back being spotted with
black, russet, yellow, and green colors, placed like scales; at her tail is
a rattle, with which she makes a noise when she is molested, or when she sees
any approach near her, her neck seems to be no thicker than a man's thumb
yet can she swallow a Squerill, having a great wide mouth, with teeth as sharp
as needles, wherewith she biteth such as tread upon her: her poison lies in
her teeth, for she has no sting. When any man is bitten by any of these
creatures, the poison spreads so suddenly through the veins and so runs to the
heart, that in one hour it causes death, unless he has the Antidote to
expel the poison, which is a root called snakeweed, which must be champed, the
spittle swallowed, and the root applied to the sore; this is present cure
against that which would be present death without it: this weed is rank
poison, if it be taken by any man that is not bitten: whosoever is bitte^ by
these snakes his flesh becomes as spotted as a Leaper until he be perfectly
cured. It is reported that if the party live that is bitten, the snake will
dye, and if the party die, the snake will live. This is a most poisonous and
dangerous creature, yet nothing so bad as the report goes of him in England.
For whereas he is said to kill a man with his breath, and that he can fly,
there is no such matter, for he is naturally the most sleepie and unnimble
creature that lives, never offering to leap or bite any man, if he be not
trodden on first, and it is their desire in hot weather to lie in paths, where
the sun may shine on them, where they will sleep so soundy that I have
known four men stride over one of them, and never awake her: 5 or 6 men have
been bitten by them, which by using of snakeweede were all cured, never any
yet losing his life by them. Cowes have been bitten, but being cut in diverse
places, and this weed thrust into their flesh were cured, I never heard of any
beast that was yet lost by any of them, saving one Mare. A small switch will
easily kill one of these snakes. In many places of the Country there be none
of them, as at Plymouth, Newtowne, Igowamme, Nahant, etc. In some places they
will live on one side of the river, and swimming but over the water, as soon
as they be come into the woods, they turn up their yellow bellies and dye. Up
into the Country westward from the plantations is a high hill, which is called
rattlesnake hill, where there is great store of these poisonous creatures.
There be diverse other kind of snakes, one whereof is a great long black
snake, two yards in length which will glide through the woods very swiftly;
these never do any hurt, neither does any other kind of snakes molest either
man or beast. These creatures in the winter time creep into clifts of rocks
and into holes under ground, where they lyd close till May or June. Here
likewise be great store of frogs, which in the Spring do chirpe and whistle
like a bird, and at the latter end of summer croake like our English frogs.
Here be also toades which will climb the topes of high trees where they will
sit croaking, to the wonderment of such as are not acquainted with them. I
never saw any Worms or Moles, but pismires and spiders be there. There are
likewise troublesome flies. First there is a wild Be or Waspe, which commonly
guards the grape, building by cobweb habitation amongst the leaves: secondly a
great green fly, not much unlike our horse flies in England; they will nippe
so sore that they will fetch blood either of man or beast, and be most
troublesome where most Cattle be, which brings them from out of the woods to
the houses; this fly continues but for the Month of June. The third is
Gurnipper which is a small black fly no bigger than a flea; her biting causes
an itching upon the hands or face, which provokes scratching which is
troublesome to some; this fly is busy but in close mornings or evenings, and
continues not above three weeks, the least wind or heat expells them. The
fourth is a Musketor which is not unlike to our gnats in England; In places
where there is no thick woods or Swampes, there is none or very few. In new
Plantations they be troublesome for the first year, but the wood dec^ying they
vanish ^ these Flies cannot endure wind, heat or cold, so that these are
only troublesome in close thick weather, and against rain many that be
bitten will fall a scratching, whereupon their faces and hands swell. Others
are never troubled with them at all: those likewise that swell with their
biting the first year, never swell the second: for my own part I have bin
troubled as much with them or some like them, in the country of England as ever
I was there: Here be the flies that are called C^antharides, so much esteemed
of Chirurgions, with diverse kinds of Butterflies. Thus have you heard of the
worst of the country: but some peradventure may say no, and reply that they
have heard that the people have been often driven to great wants and
extremities; To which I answer, it is true that some have lived for a certain
time with a little bread, other without any, yet all this argues nothing
against the country in it self, but condemns the folly and improvidence of
such as would venture into so rude and unmanaged a country, without so much
provisions as should have comfortably maintained them in health and strength
till by their labors they had brought the land to yield his fruit. I have my
self heard some say that they heard it was a rich land, a brave country, but
when they came there they could see nothing but a few Canvis Boothes and old
houses, supposing at the first to have found walled towns, fortifications and
corn fields, as if towns could have built themselves, or corn fields have
grown of themselves, without the husbandry of man. These men missing of their
expectations, returned home and railed against the Country. Others may object
that of late time there has been great want; I deny it not, but look to the
original, and tell me from whence it came. The root of their want sprung up
in England, for many hundreds hearing of the plenty of the Country, were so
much their own foes and Countries hindrance, as to come without provision;
which made things both dear and scant: wherefore let none blame the Co^ntry so
much as condemn the indiscreetnesse of such as will needs run themselves
upon hardship. And I dare further assure any that will carry provision enough
for a year and a half, shall not need to fear want, if he either be
industrious himself, or have industrious agents to manage his estate and
affairs. And whereas many do disparrage the land saying a man cannot live
without labor, in that they more disparage and discredit themselves, in giving
the world occasion to take notice of their droanish disposition, that would
live of the sweat of another man's brows: surely they were much deceived, or
else ill informed, that ventured thither in hope to live in plenty and
idleness, both at a time: and it is as much pity as he that can work and
will not, should eat, as it is pity that he that would work and cannot,
should fast. I condemn not such therefore as are now there, and are not able
to work; but I advise for the future those men that are of weak constitutions
to keep at home, if their estates cannot maintain servants. For all new
England must be workers in some kind: and whereas it has been formerly
reported that boys of ten or a twelve years of age might do much more than
get their living, that cannot be, for he must have more than a boys head, and
no less than a man's strength, that intends to live comfortably; and he that
has understanding and Industry, with a stock of an hundred pound, shall
live better there, than he shall do here of twenty pound per annum. But many I
know will say if it be thus, how comes it to pass then that they are so poor?
To which I answer, that they are poor but in comparison, compare them with
the rich Merchants or great landed men in England, and then I know they will
seem poor. There is no probability they should be exceeding rich, because
none of such great estate went over yet; besides, a man of estate must first
scatter before he gather, he must lay out moneys for transporting of servants,
and cattle and goods, for houses and fences and gardens, etc. This may make his
purse seem light, and to the eye of others seem a leaking in his estate,
whereas these disbursments are for his future enrichments: for he being once
well seated and quietly settled, his increase comes in double; and howsoever
they are accounted poor, they are well contented, and look not so much at
abundance, as a competencie; so little is the poverty of the Country, that I am
persuaded if many in England which are constrained to beg their bread were
there, they would live better than many do here, that have money to buy it.
Furthermore when corn is scarce, yet may they have either or flesh for their
labor: and surely that place is not miserably poor to them that are there,
where four Eggs may be had for a Penny, and a quart of new Milk at the same
rate: Where Butter is sixe-pence a pound, and Cheshire-Cheese at five pence;
sure Middlesex affoords London no better penny-worths. What though there be no
such plenty, as to cry these things in the streets? yet every day affords
these penny-worths to those that need them in most places. I dare not say in
all: Can they be very poor, where for four thousand souls, there are
fifteen hundred head of Cattle, besides four thousand Goats, and Swine
innumerable? In an ill sheepe-yeare I have known Mutton as dear in
Old-England, and deerer than Goates-flesh is in New England, which is
altogether as good if fancy be set aside.

CHAP. XII. What provision is to be made for a Journey at Sea, and and what to
carry with us for our use at Land.
MAny peradventure at the looking over of these relations, may have
inclinations or resolution for the Voyage, to whom I wish all prosperity in
their undertakings; although I will use no forcive arguments to persuade any,
but leave them to the relation; yet by way of advice, I would commend to them a
few lines from the Pen of experience. And because the way to New England is
over Sea, it will not be amiss to give you directions, what is most necessary
to be carried. Many I suppose, know as well, or better than my self; yet all
do not, to those my directions tend; although every man have ship-provisions
allowed him for his five pound a man, which is salt Beef, Porke, salt Fish,
Butter, Cheese, Pease, Pottage, Water-grewell, and such kind of Victuals, with
good Biskets, and sixe-shilling Beer: yet will it be necessary, to carry some
comfortable refreshing of fresh victual. As first, for such as have ability,
some Conserved, and good Clarret Wine to burn at Sea: Or you may have it by
some of your Vintners or Wine-Coopers burned here, and put up into vessels,
which will keep much better than other burnt Wine, is a very comfortable thing
for the stomach; or such as are Sea-sicke: Sallet-oyle likewise. Prunes are
good to be stewed; Sugar for many things: White Biskets, and Eggs, and Bacon,
Rice, Poultry, and some weather-sheepe to kill aboard the ship; and fine
flowre-baked meats, will keep about a week or nine days at Sea. Juice of
Lemons well put up, is good either to prevent or cure the Scurvy. Here it must
not be forgotten to carry small Skillets, or Pipkins, and small frying-panns,
to dress their victuals in at Sea. For bedding, so it be easy, and cleanely,
and warm, it is no matter how old or coarse it be for the use of the Sea; and
so likewise for Apparel, the oldest clothes be the fittest, with a long
coarse coat, to keep better things from the pitched ropes and plankes.
Whosoever shall put to Sea in a stout and well-conditioned ship, having an
honest Master, and loving Seamen, shall not need to fear, but he shall find
as good content at Sea, as at Land.

It is too common with many to fear the Sea more than they need, and all such
as put to Sea, confess it to be less tedious than they either feared or
expected. A ship at Sea may well be compared to a Cradle, rocked by a careful
Mothers hand, which though it be moved up and down, yet is it not in danger of
falling: So a ship may often be rocked too and again upon the troublesome Sea,
yet seldom does it sink or over-turne, because it is kept by that careful
hand of Providence by which it is rocked. It was never known yet, that any
ship in that voyage was cast away, or that ever fell into the Enemies hand.

For the health of Passengers it has been observed, that of six hundred
souls, not above three or four have dyed at Sea: It is probable in such a
company, more might have dyed either by sickness or casualities, if they had
stayed at home. For Women, I see not but that they do as well as men, and
young Children as well as either; having their healths as well a^ Sea as at
Land: Many likewise which have come with such foul bodies to Sea, as did make
their days uncomfortable at Land, have been so purged and clarified at Sea,
that they have been more healthful for aftertimes; their weak appetites
being turned to good stomachs, not only desiring, but likewise disgesting
such victuals as the Sea affords. Secondly, for directions for the Country, it
is not to be feared, but that men of good estates may do well there; always
provided, that they go well accommodated with servants. In which I would not
wish them to take over-many: ten or twelve lusty servants being able to
manage an estate of two or three thousand pound. It is not the multiplicity of
many bad servants, (which presently eats a man out of house and harbor, as
lamentable experience has made manifest) but the industry of the faithful and
diligent labourer, that enricheth the careful Master; so that he that has
many dronish servants* shall soon be poor; and he that has an industrious
family, shall as soon be rich.

Now for the encouragement of his men, he must not do as many have done, (more
through ignorance than desire) carry many mouths, and no meat; but rather
much meat for a few mouths. Want of due maintenance produces nothing but a
grumbling spirit with a sluggish idleness, when as those servants which be
well provided for, go thorough their employments with speed and
cheerfulness. For meal, it will be requisite to carry a Hogshead and a
half, for every one that is a labourer, to keep him till he may receive the
fruit of his own labors, which will be a year and a half after his
arrival, if he land in May or June. He must likewise carry Malt, Beef*
Butter, Cheese, some Pease, good Wines, Vinegar, Strong Water, etc. Whosoever
transports more of these than he himself uses, his overplus being sold, will
yield as much profit as any other staple commodity. Every man likewise must
carry over good store of Apparel; for if he come to buy it there, he shall
find it dearer than in England. Woollen-cloth is a very good commodity, and
Linen better; as Holland, Lockram, flaxen, Hempen, Callico stuffes,
Linsey-woolfies, and blew Callicoe, green Says for Housewives aprons, Hats,
Boots, Shoes, good Irish stockings, which if they be good, are much more
serviceable than knit-ones. All kind of grocery wares, as Sugar, Prunes,
Raisons, Currants, Honey, Nutmegs, Clover, etc. Soap, Candles, and Lamps, etc.
All manner of household stuff is very good Trade there, as Pewter and Brass,
but great Iron-pots be preferred before Brass, for the use of that Country.
Warming-pannes and Stewing-pannes be of necessary use, and good Traffic
there. All manner of Ironwares, as all manner of nails for houses, and all
manner of Spikes for building of Boats, Ships, and fishing stages: all manner
of tools for Workmen, Hoes for planters, broad and narrow for setting and
weeding; with Axes both broad an^ pitching-axes. All manner of Angers, piercing
bits, Whip-saws, Two-handed saws, Froes, both for the riving of Pailes and
Laths, rings for Beetles heads, and Iron-wedges; though all these be made in
the Country: (there being diverse Blacke-smiths) yet being a heavy commodity,
and taking but a little stoage, it is cheaper to carry such commodities out of
England. Glass ought not to be forgotten of any that desire to benefit
themselves, or the Country: if it be well leaded, and carefully pack't up, I
know no commodity better for portage or sail. Here likewise must not be
forgotten all vtensils for the Sea, as Barbels, splitting-knives, Leads, and
Cod-hookes, and Lines, Machrill-hooks and lines, Sharke-hookes, Seanes, or
Basse nets, large and strong; Herring-nets, etc. Such as would eat Foul, must
not forget their sixe-foote Gunnes, their good Powder and shot, of all sorts; a
great round shot called Bastable-shot, is the best* being made of a blacker
Lead than ordinary shot: Furthermore, good Pooldavies to make sails for
Boats, Roads, and Anchors for Boats and Pinnaces, be good; Sea-coale, Iron,
Lead, and Mil-stones, Flints, Ordonances, and whatsoever a man can conceive is
good for the Country, that will lie a^ Ballast, he cannot be a loser by it.
And lest I should forget a thing of so great importance, no man must neglect to
provide for himself, or those belonging to him, his munition for the defense
of himself and the Country. For there is no man there that bears a head, but
that bears military Arms; even Boys of fourteen years of age, are
practiced with men in military discipline, every three weeks. Whosoever shall
carry over Drums and English Colors, Pattesons, Halberds, Pickes, Muskets,
Bandelerous, with Swords, shall not need to fear good gain for them, such
things being wanting in the country: Likewise whatsoever shall be needful for
fortifications of holds and Castles, whereby the common enemy may be kept out
in future times, is much desired. They as yet have had no great cause to fear;
but because security has been the overthrow of many a new plantation, it is
their care according to their abilities, to secure themselves by
fortifications, as well as they can: Thus having showed what commodities are
most useful, it will not be amiss to show you what men be most fit for these
plantations.

First, men of good working, and contriving heads, a well experienced common
wealths man for the good of the body politic in matters of advice and
counsel, a well skilled and industrious husbandman, for tillage and
improvements of grounds; an ingenious Carpenter, a cunning Ioyner, a handsome
Cooper, such a one as can make strong ware for the use of the country, and a
good Brickmaker, a Tyler and a Smith, a Leather dresser, a Gardner, and a
Taylour: one that has good skill in the trade of fishing, is of special use,
and so is a good Fowler, if there be any that has skill in any of these
trades, if he can transport himself, he needs not fear but he may improve his
time and endeavors to his own benefit, and comfort; if any cannot transport
himself, he may provide himself of an honest master, and so may do as well.
There is is as much freedom and liberty for servants as in England and more
too; a wronged servant shall have right volens nolens from his injurious
master, and a wronged master shall have right of his injurious servant, as well
as here: Wherefore let no servant be discouraged from the voyage, that intends
it. And now whereas it is generally reported, that servants and poor men grow
rich, and the masters and Gentry grow poor; I must needs confess that ^he
diligent hand makes rich, and that laboring men having good store of
employments, and as good pay* live well, and contentedly; but I cannot perceive
that those that set them a work are any way impoverished by them; peradventure
they have less money by reason of them, but never the less riches; a man's
work well done being more beneficial than his money, or other dead
commodities, which otherwise would lie by him to no purpose. Many men be so
improvident as to set men about building of Castles in the Air, or other
unnecessary employments, he may grow poor; but such as employ laborers about
planting of Corn, building of houses, fenceing in of ground, fishing, and
diverse other necessary occasions, shall receive as much or more by poor men's
labors, than those that live in England do from the industry of such as they
hire: Wherefore I do suppose this to be but the surmisings of some that are
ignorant of the state of the country, or else misinformed by some ill willers
to the plantations. Many objections I know are daily invented, to hinder the
proceedings of these new plantations, which may dampe the unsettled spirits of
such as are not greatly affected with those undertakings; Some say the Spaniard
lays claim to the whole country, being the first discoverer hereof, and that
he may make invasion upon those parts as well as he has done upon S.
Christophers, and S. Martins, and those places: but it does not follow that
because he took such places as lay just in his way to the West Indies, that
he should come thousands of miles with a great Navy to plant^tions, as yet
not worth the pillage: and when the plantations are grown noted in the eyes of
the common foes for wealth, it is hoped that when the Bees have Honey in their
Hives, they will have stings in their tails. Has not Virginia been planted
many years which is four hundred miles nearer the Spaniards course, and yet
never met with any affrontments; so that this scruple smells of fear and
pusill-animitie. To wipe away all groundless calumniations, and to answer to
every too too curious objections, and frivolous question (some so simple as not
ashamed to ask whether the Sun shines there or no) were to run in infinitum;
but I hope that the several manuscripts and letters, and informations by word
of mouth from such of our honest countrymen which daily have recourse unto us,
have given full satisfaction to such as are well willers to the plantations:
and for such as are estrang^d to it in affection, if every word that has been
either writ or spoken were a forcive argument, yet would it be two little to
steddie their belief in any one particular concerning the country. Some are
nimble eared to hear faults, and so ready tongued to publish them, yea often
times with strained constructions; a false asseveration usually wins more
belief than two verifying negatives can resettle: Some there are who count
with Claudian that it is an incomparable happiness to have their birth, life
and burying in the same place: these are never likly to remove further than the
shell of their own country. But because there are some noble spirits that
devote their states, and their persons, to the common good of their king and
country, I have therefore for their direction and delight made this relation*
For as the end of my travel was observation, so I desire the end of my
observation may tend to the information of others: As I have observed what I
have seen, and written what I have observed, so do I desire to publish what I
have written, desiring it may be beneficial to posterity; and if any man
desire to fill himself at that fountain, from whence this tasting cup was
taken, his own experience shall tell him as much as I have here related, and
thus I pass from the country as it stands to the English, and come to
discourse how it stands to the old Natives, and they to it, as follows.

THE SECOND PART. Of the Indians, their persons, cloathings, diet, natures,
customs, laws, marriages, worships, conjurations, wars, games, huntings,
fishings, sports, language, death, and burials.
CHAP. I. Of the Connectacuts, Mowhacks, or such Indians as are Westward.
THe country as it is in relation to the Indians, is divided as it were into
Shires, every several division being swayde by a several king. The Indians to
the East and North east, bearing the name of Churchers, and Tarrenteenes. These
in the Southern parts be called Pequants, and Narraganssts; those who are
seated Westward be called Connectacuts, and Mowhacks: Our Indians that live to
the Northward of them be called Aberginians, who before the sweeping Plague,
were an Inhabitant not fearing, but rather scorning the confrontments of such
as now count them but the scumme of the country, and would soon root them out
of their native possessions were it not for the English.

These are a cruel bloody people, which were wont to come down upon their
poor neighbors with more than brutish savagenesse, spoiling of their Corn,
burning their houses, slaying men, ravishing women, yea very Caniballs they
were, sometimes eating on a man one part after another before his face, and
while yet living; in so much that the very name of a Mowhack would strike the
heart of a poor Abergenian dead, were here not hopes at hand of relief from
English to succor them: For these inhumane homicides confess that they dare
not meddle with a white faced man, accompanied with his hot mouthed weapon.
These Indians be a people of a tall stature, of long grimme visages, slender
wasted, and exceeding great arms and thighs, wherein they say their strength
lies; and this I rather believe because an honest gentleman told me, upon his
knowledge, that he saw one of them with a fillippe with his finger kill a
dog, who afterward ^^^ad him and sod him, and eat him to his dinner. They
are so hardy that they can eat such things as would make other Indians sick
to look upon, being destitute of fish and flesh, they suffice hunger and
maintain nature with the use of vegetatives; but that which they most hunt
after, is the flesh of man; their custom is if they get a stranger near their
habitations, not to butcher him immediately, but keeping him in as good plight
as they can, feeding him with the best victuals they have. As a near
neighboaring Indian assured me, who found what he had spoke true by a
lamentable experience, still wearing the cognizance of their cruelty on his
naked arm, who being taken by them eat of their food, lodged in their beds,
nay he was brought forth every day, to be new painted, piped unto, and hemmed in
with a ring of bare skinned morris dancers, who presented their antiques before
him. In a word, when they had sported enough about this walking Maypole, a
rough hewne satyr cutteth a gobbit of flesh from his brawnie arm, eating it
in his view, searing it with a firebrand, least the blood should be wasted
before the morning, at the dawning whereof they told him they would make an end
as they had begun; he answered that he cared as little for their threats as
they did for his life, not fearing death; whereupon they led him bound into a
Wigwam, where he sat as a condemned Prisoner, grating his teeth for anguish
being for the present so hampered, and the next day to be entombed in so many
living sepulchers; he extends his strength to the utmost, breaks the bands
from his hands, and loosing the cords from his feet, thought at once to be
revenged for the flesh of his arm, and finding a hatchet, lays one with an
arm of revenge to the unliving of ten men at first onset, afterward taking the
opportunity of the dead of night, fled through the woods and came to his
native home, where he still lives to rehearse his happy escapall; of the rest
of their inhumane cruelties let the Dutchmen, (who live among them) testify,
as likewise the cruel manner of leading their prisoners captive, whom they do
not only pinnion with sharp thongs, but likewise bore holes through their
hamstrings, through which they thread a cord coupling ten or a dozen men
together.

These Indians be more desperate in wars than the other Indians; which
proceeds not only from the fierceness of their natures, but also in that they
know themselves to be better armed and weaponed; all of them wearing sea horse
skins and barks of trees, made by their Art as impenitrable it is thought as
steel, wearing head pieces of the same, under which thy march securely and
undantedly, running, and fiercely crying out, Hadree Hadree succomee succomee
we come we come to suck your blood, not fearing the feathered shafts of the
strong-armed bow-men, but like unruly headstrong stallions beat them down
with their right hand Tamahaukes, and left hand Iavelins, being all the weapons
which they use, counting bows a cowardly fight. Tamahaukes be staves of two
foot and a half long, and a knob at one end as round and big as a
footeball: a Iavelin is a short spear, headed with sharp seahorse teeth; one
blow or thrust with these strange weapons, will not need a second to hasten
death, from a Mowhackes arm. I will conclude this discourse concerning the
Mowhackes, in a tragical rehearsal of one of their combats. A Sagamore
inhabibiting near these Canniballs, was so daily annoyed with their injurious
inhumanitie, that he must either become a tributarie subject to their tyranny,
or release himself from thraldom by the stroke of war, which he was unable
to wage of himself: wherefore with fair entreaties, plausible persuasions,
forcive arguments, and rich presents he sent to other Sagamores, he procured so
many soldiers as summed with his own, made his forces six thousand strong;
with the which he resolutely marched toward his enemies, intending either to
win the horse or loose the saddle; His enemies having heard of his designs,
plotted how to confront him in his enterprise, and overthrow him by treachery;
which they thus attempted; knowing their enemies were to swim over a muddie
river, they divided their bands lying in ambush on both sides the river,
waiting his approach, who suspected no danger looking for nothing but victory;
but immediately they were invyroned with their unexpected foes, in their
greatest disadvantage: for being in the water, shoot they could not, for
swimming was their action; and when they came to the side, they could not run
away, for their feet stuck fast in the mudde, and their adversaries impaled
them about, clubbing and darting all that attained the shore; so that all were
killed and captived, saving three who swimming further under the waters (like
the Ducke that escapes the Spannell by diving) until they were out of sight
of their blood thirsty foes, recovered the shore creeping into the thickets,
from whence after a little breathing and resting of their weary limbs, they
marched through the woods and arrived at their own homes, relating to their
inquisitive survivers the sad event of their war, who a long time after
deplored the death of their friends, still placed the remembrance of that day
in the Callender of their mishappes.

CHAP. II. Of the Tarrenteenes or the Indians inhabiting Eastward.
THe Tarrenteenes saving that they eat not man's flesh, are little less
salvage, and cruel than these Canniballs: our Indians do fear them as their
deadly enemies; for so many of them as they meet they kill. About 2 years
ago, our Indians being busy about their accustomed huntings, not suspecting
them so near their own liberties, were on the sudden surprised by them,
some being slain, the rest escaping to their English Asylum, whither they
durst not pursue them; their Sagamore was wounded by an arrow, but presently
cured by English Surgery. These Indians are the more insolent, by reason
they have guns which they daily trade for with the French, (who will sell his
eyes as they say, for beaver:) but these do them more credit than service; for
having guns they want powder, or if they have that, they want shot, something
or other being always wanting; so that they use them for little, but to salute
coasting boats that come to trade, who no sooner can anchor in any harbor;
but they present them with a vollie of shot, asking for sack and strong
liquors, which they so much love since the English used to trade it with them,
that they will scarce trade for any thing else, lashing out into excessive
abuse, first taught by the example of some of our English who to uncloathe them
of their beaver coats, clad them with the infection of swearing and drinking,
which was never in fashion with them before, it being contrary to their nature
to guzell down strong drink, or use so much as to sippe of strong water,
until our bestiall example and dishonest incitation bath brought them to it;
from which I am sure has sprung many evil consequents, as disorder, quarrels,
wrongs, unconscionable and forcive wresting of Beaver and Wampompeage: and from
overflowing Cups there has been a proceeding to revenge, mu^ther and
overflowing of blood. As witness Master Ways Boat, which they sunk with
stones after they had killed his son, with three more: buzzing the English in
the ears, that they see it bulged against the rocks, and the men drowned in
the beating surges: but afterward being betrayed, as many as were caught, were
hanged. Another who was situated on Richmonds Island, living as he list amongst
them, making his covetous corrupt will his law; after many abuses, was with his
family one evening treacherously murdered, under a fair pretense of trade; so
that these that lived beside the Law of God* and their King, and the light of
Nature, dyed by their hands that cared neither for God, King, nor Nature. Take
these Indians in their own trim and natural disposition, and they be
reported to be wise, lofty-spirited, constant in friendship to one another;
true in their promise, and more industrious than many others.

CHAP. III. Of the Pequants and Narragansets, Indians inhabiting Southward.
THe Pequants be a stately warlike people, of whom I never heard any
misdemeanour; but that they were just and equal in their dealings; not
treacherous either to their Countrymen, or English: Requiters of courtesies,
affable toward the English. Their next neighbors the Narragansets, be at this
present the most numerous people in those parts, the most rich also, and the
most industrious; being the storehouse of all such kind of wild Merchandise as
is amongst them. These men are ^he most curious minters of their Wampompeage
and Mowhakes, which they form out of the inmost wreaths of Pe^iwinkle-shels.
The Northern, Eastern, and Western Indians fetch all their Coin from these
Southern Mint-masters. From hence they have most of their curious Pendants and
Bracelets; from hence they have their great stonepipes, which will hold a
quarter of an ounce of Tobacco, which they make with steele-drils and other
instruments; such is their ingenuity and dexterity, that they can imitate the
English mold so accurately, that were it not for matter and color it were hard
to distinguish them; they make the^ of green, and sometimes of black stone;
they be much desired of our English Tobaconists, for their rarity, strength,
handsomnesse, and coolness. Hence likewise our Indians had their pots wherein
they used to sees their victuals before they knew the use of Brass. Since the
English came, they have employed most of their time in catching of Beavers,
Otters, and Musquashes, which they bring down into the Bay, returning back
loaded with English commodities, of which they make a double profit, by selling
them to more remote Indians, who are ignorant at what cheap rates they obtain
them, in comparison of what they make them pay, so making their neighbors
ignorance their enrichment. Although these be populous, yet I never heard they
were desirous to take in hand any martial enterprise, or expose themselves to
the uncertain events of war: wherefore the Pequants call them Women-like
men; but being incapable of a jeare, they rest secure under the conceit of
their popularitie, and seek rather to grow rich by industry, than famous by
deeds of Chevalry. But to leave strangers, and come to declare what is
experimentally known of the Indians, amongst whom we live: of whom in the next
Chapter.

CHAP. IV. Of the Aberginians or Indians Northward.
FIrst of their Stature, most of them being between five or six foot high,
straight bodied, strongly composed, smooth skinned, merry countenanced, of
complexion something more swarthy than Spaniards, black hair'd, high
foreheaded, black eyed, out-nosed, broad shouldred, brawny armed, long and
slender handed, out brested, small wasted, lanke bellied, well thighed, flat
kneed, handsome grown l^ggs, and small feet: In a word, take them when the
blood briskes in their veins, when the flesh is on their backs, and marrow in
their bones, when they frolic in their antique deportments and Indian
postures; and they are more amiable to behold (though only in Adams livery)
than many a compounded phantasticke in the newest fashion. It may puzzle
belief, to conceive how such lusty bodies should have their rise and daily
supportment from so slender a fostering; their houses being mean, their
lodging as homely, commons scant, their drink water, and Nature their best
clothing; in them the old proverb may well be verified: ( Natura paucis
contenta) for though this be their daily portion, they still are healthful and
lusty. I have been in many places, yet did I never see one that was borne
either in redundance or defect a monster, or any that sickness had deformed,
or casualitie made decrepit, saving one that had a bleared eye, and an other
that had a wenne on his cheek. The reason is rendered why they grow so
proportionable, and continue so long in their vigor (most of them being 50
before a wrinkled brow or gray hair bewray their age) is because they are not
brought down with suppressing labor, vexed with annoying cares, or drowned in
the excessive abuse of overflowing plenty, which oftentimes kills them more than
want, as may appear in them. For when they change their bare Indian commons
for the plenty of Englands fuller diet, it is so contrary to their stomachs,
that death or a desperate sickness immediately accrews, which makes so few of
them desirous to see England. Their swarthinesse is the Sun's livery, for they
are borne fair. Their smooth skins proceed from the often anointing of their
bodies with the oil of fishes, and the fat of Eagles, with the grease of
Rackoones, which they hold in summer, the best antidote to keep their skin
from blistering with the scorching Sun; and it is their best armor against
the Musketoes, the surest expeller of the hairy excrement, and stops the pores
of their bodies against the nipping winters cold. Their black hair is
natural, yet it is brought to a more jetty color by oyling, dying, and daily
dressing. Sometimes they wear it very long, hanging down in a loose disheveled
womanish manner; otherwhile tied up hard and short like a horse tail, bound
close with a fillet, which they say makes it grow the faster: they are not a
little fantastical or custom-sick in this particular; their boys being not
permitted to wear their hair long till sixteen years of age, and then they
must come to it by degrees; some being cut with a long foretop, a long lock on
the crown, one of each side of his head, the rest of his hair being cut even
with the scalpe: the young men and soldiers wear their hair long on the one
side, the other side being cut short like a screw; other cuts they have as
their fancy befooles them, which would torture the wits of a curious Barber to
imitate. But though they be thus wedded to the hair of their head, you cannot
woo them to wear it on their chinnes, where it no sooner grows, but it is
stubbed up by the roots, for they count it as an unusefull, cumbersome, and
opprobrious excrement, insomuch as they call him an English man's bastard that
has but the appearance of a beard, which some have growing in a staring
fashion, like the beard of a cat, which makes them the more out of love with
them, choosing rather to have no beards than such as should make them
ridiculous.

CHAP. V. Of their Apparel, Ornaments, Paintings, and other artificial
deckings.
NOw these naked bodies may seem too weak to withstand the assaulting heat of
their parching Summers, and the piercing cold of the icie Winters, or it may be
surmised that these earthly fabrics should be wasted to nothing by the
tempestuous dashings of wind-driven raines, having neither that which may warm
within, or shelter without; yet these things they look not after, saving a
pair of Indian Breeches to cover that which modesty commands to be hid, which
is but a piece of cloth a yard and a half long, put between their groinings,
tied with a snakes skin about their middles, one end hanging down with a
flap before, the other like a tail behind. In the Winter time the more aged
of them wear leather drawers, in form like Irish trouses, fastened under their
girdle with buttons; they wear shoes likewise of their own making cut out of
a Mooses hide, many of them wear skins about them, in form of an Irish
mantle, and of these some be Bears skins, Mooses skins, and Beaver skins
sewed together, Otter skins, and Rackoone skins; most of them in the Winter
having his deep furred Cat skin, like a long large muffe, which he shifts
to that arm which lies most exposed to the wind; thus clad, he busles
better through a world of cold in a frost-paved wilderness, than the furred
Citizen in his warmer Stoave. If their fancy drive them to trade, they choose
rather a good course blanket, thorough which they cannot see, interposing it
between the sun and them; or a piece of broad cloth, which they use for a
double end, making it a coat by day, and a covering by night; they love not to
be imprisoned in our English fashion: they love their own dog fashion better
(of shaking their ears, and being ready in a moment) than to spend time in
dressing them, though they may as well spare it as any men I know, having
little else to do. But the chief reasons they render why they will not
conform to our English apparel, are, because their women cannot wash them
when they be soyled, and their means will not reach to buy new when they have
done with their old; and they confidently believe, the English will not be so
liberal as to furnish them upon gif^ure: therefore they had rather go naked
than be lousie, and bring their bodies out of their old tune, making them more
tender by a new acquired habit, which poverty would constrain them to leave:
although they be thus poor, yet is there in them the sparks of natural
pride, which appears in their longing desire after many kind of ornaments,
wearing pendants in their ears, as forms of birds, beasts, and fishes, carved
out of bone, shells, and stone, with long bracelets of their curious wrought
wampompeage and mowhackees, which they put about their necks and loins; these
they count a rare kind of decking; many of the better sort bearing upon their
cheeks certain pourtraitures of beasts, as Bears, Deares, Mooses, Wolves,
etc. some of fowls, as of Eagles, Hawks, etc. which be not a superficial
painting, but a certain incision, or else a raising of their skin by a small
sharp instrument, under which they conveigh a certain kind of black
unchangeable ink, which makes the desired form apparent and permanent. Others
have certain round Impressions down the outside of their arms and breasts, in
form of mullets or spur-rowels, which they imprint by searing irons: whether
these be foiles to illustrate their unparalleld beauty (as they deem it) or
Arms to blazon their antique Gentilitie, I cannot easily determine: but a
Sagamore with a Humberd in his ear for a pendant, a black hawke on his occiput
for his plume, Mowhackees for his gold chain, good store of Wampompeage
begi^ting his loins, his bow in his hand, his quiver at his back. with six
naked Indian spatterlashes at his heels for his guard, thinks himself little
inferior to the great Cham; he will not stick to say, he is all one with
King Charles. He thinks he can blow down Castles with his breath, and
conquer kingdoms with his conceit. This Pompey can endure no equal, till one
days adverse lotterie at their game (called Puimme) metamorphize him into a
Codrus, robbing him of his conceited wealth, leaving him in mind and riches
equal with his naked attendants, till a new taxation furnish him with a fresh
supply.

CHAP. VI. Of their diet, cookery, meale-times, and hospitality at their
Kettles.
HAving done with their most needful cloathings and ornamentall deckings; may
it please you to feast your eyes with their belly-timbers, which I suppose
would be but stibium to weak stomachs as they cook it, though never so good
of it self. In Wintertime they have all manner of fowls of the water and of
the land, and beasts of the land and water, pond-fish, with Catharres and other
roots, Indian beans and Clamms. In the Summer they have all manner of
Seafish, with all sorts of Berries. For the ordering of their victuals, they
boil or roast them, having large Kettles which they traded for with the French
long since, and do still buy of the English as their need requires, before
they had substantial earthen pots of their own making. Their spits are no
other than cloven sticks sharped at one end to thrust into the ground; into
these cloven sticks they thrust the flesh or fish they would have roasted,
behemming a round fire with a dozen of spits at a time, turning them as they
see occasion. Some of their scullerie having dressed these homely cates,
presents it to his guests, dishing it up in a rude manner, placing it on the
verdent carpet of the earth which Nature spreads them, without either trenchers
napkins, or knives, upon which their hunger-sawced stomachs impatient of
delays, falls aboard without scrupling at unwashed hands, without bread, salt,
or beer: lolling on the Turkish fashion, not ceasing till their full bellies
leave nothing but empty platters: they seldom or never make bread of their
Indian corn, but sees it whole like beans, eating three or four corns with
a mouthfull of fish or flesh, sometimes eating meat first, and corns after,
filling chinkes with their broth. In Summer, when their corn is spent,
Isquoutersquashes is their best bread, a fruit like a young Pumpion. To say,
and to speak paradoxically, they be great eaters, and yet little meate-men;
when they visit our English, being invited to eat, they are very moderate,
whether it be to show their manners, or for shamefastness, I know not; but at
home they will eat till their bellies stand south, ready to split with
fullness; it being their fashion to eat all at some times, and sometimes
nothing at all in two or three days, wise Providence being a stranger to their
wilder ways: they be right Infidels, neither caring for the morrow, or
providing for their own families; but as all are fellows at football, so
they all meet friends at the kettle, saving their Wives, that dance a
Spaniell-like attendance at their backs for their bony fragments. If their
imperious occasions cause them to travel, the best of their victuals for their
journey is Nocake, (as they call it) which is nothing but Indian Corn parched
in the hot ashes; the ashes being sifted from it, it is afterward beaten to
powder, and put into a long leatherne bag, trussed at their back like a
knapsacke; out of which they take thrice three spoonefulls a day, dividing it
into three meals. If it be in Winter, and Snow be on the ground, they can eat
when they please, stopping Snow after their dusty victuals, which otherwise
would feed the^ little better than a Tiburne halter. In Su^mer they must stay
till they meet with a Spring or Brook, where they may have water to prevent
the imminent danger of choking* with this strange viaticum they will travel
four ot five days together, with loads fitter for Elephants than men. But
though they can fare so hardly abroad, at home their chaps must walk night and
day as long as they have it. They keep no set meals, their store being spent,
they champe on the bit, till they meet with fresh supplies, either from their
own endeavors, or their wives industry, who trudge to the Clambankes when all
other means fail. Though they be sometimes scanted, yet are they as free as
Emperors, both to their Countrymen and English, be he stranger, or near
acquaintance; counting it a great discourtesie, not to eat of their
high-conceited delicates, and sup of their un-oat-meal'd broth, made thick
with Fishes, Fowls, and Beasts boiled all together; some remaining raw, the
rest converted by overmuch seething to a loathed mash, not half so good as
Irish Boniclapper.

CHAP. VII. Of their dispositions and good qualifications, as friendship,
constancy, truth, and affability.
TO enter into a serious discourse concerning the natural conditions of these
Indians, might procure admiration from the people of any civilized Nations, in
regard of their civility and good natures. If a Tree may be judged by his
fruit, and dispositions calculated by exterior actions; then may it be
concluded, that these Indians are of affable, courteous, and well disposed
natures, ready to communicate the best of their wealth to the mutual good of
one another; and the less abundance they have, to manifest their entire
friendship; so much the more perspicuous is their love, in that they are as
willing to part with their Mite in poverty, as treasure in plenty. As he that
kills a Dear, sends for his friends, and eats it merrily: So he that receives
but a piece of bread from an English hand, parts it equally between himself
and his comerades and eats it lovingly. In a word, a friend can command his
friend, his house, and whatsoever is his, (saving his Wife) and have it freely:
And as they are love-linked thus in common courtesy, so are they no way sooner
dis-joynted than by ingratitude; accounting an ungrateful person a double
robber of a man, not only of his courtesy, but of his thanks which he might
receive of another for the same proffered, or received kindness. Such is their
love to one another, that they cannot endure to see their Contrymen wronged,
but will stand stiffely in their defense: plead strongly in their behalf, and
justify one another integrities in any warrantable action. If it were
possible to recount the courtesies they have showed the English, since their
first arrival in those parts, it would not only steady belief, that they are
a loving people, but also win the love of those that never saw them, and wipe
off that needelesse fear that is too deeply rooted in the conceits of many,
who think them envious, and of such rankerous and inhumane dispositions, that
they will one day make an end of their English inmates. The worst indeed may
be surmised, but the English hitherto have had little cause to suspect them,
but rather to be convinced of their trustiness, seeing they have as yet been
the disclosers of all such treacheries as have bin practiced by other Indians.
And whereas once there was a proffer of an universal League amongst all the
Indians in those parts, to the intent that they might all join in one united
force, to extirpiate the English, our Indian^ refused the motion, replying,
they had rather be servants to the English, of whom they were confident to
receive no harm, and from whom they had received so many favors, and assured
good testimonies of their Jove, than equals with them, who would cut their
throats upon the least offense, and make them the shambles of their cruelty.
Furthermore, if any roaving ships be upon the coasts, and chance to harbor
either Eastward, Northward, or Southward in any unusual Port, they will
give us certain intelligence of her burden and forces, describing their men
either by language or features; which is a great privilege and no small
advantage. Many ways has their advice and endeavor been advantageous unto
us; they being our first instructers for the planting of their Indian Corn, by
teaching us to cull out the finest seed, to observe the fittest season, to
keep distance for holes, and fit measure for hills, to worm it, and weed it;
to prune it, and dress it as occasion shall require.

These Indians be very hospitable, insomuch that when the English have
traveled forty, fifty, or threescore miles into the Country, they have
entertained them into their houses, quartered them by themselves in the best
rooms, providing the best victuals they could, expressing their welcome in as
good terms as could be expected from their slender breeding; showing more love
than complement, not grumbling for a fortnights or three weeks tarrying; but
rather caring to provide accommodation correspondent to their English custom.
The doubtful traveller has oftentimes been much beholding to them for their
guidance through the unbeaten Wilderness: my self in this particular can do
no less in the due acknowledgment of their love, than speak their
commendations, who with two more of my associates bending our course to new
Plymouth, lost our way, being deluded by a misleading path which we still
followed, being as we thought too broad for an Indian path (which seldom is
broader than a Cart's rutte ^^ut that the daily concourse of Indians from the
Naragansets who traded for shoes, wearing them homewards had made this Indian
tract like an English walk, and had reared up great sticks against the trees,
and marked the rest with their h^tchets in the English fashion, which begat in
us a security of our wrong way to be right, when indeed there was nothing
less: The day being gloomy and our compasses at home, we traveled hard till
night to less purpose than if we had sat still, not gaining an inch of our
journey for a days travel: but happily we arrived at an Indian Wigwamme,
where we were informed of our mispris^on, and invited to a homely lodging,
feasted with the haunch of a fat Beer, and the ensuing morning the son of my
naked host, for a piece of Tobacco, and a four penny whittle, took the clew
of his traveling experience, conducting us through the strange labyrinth of
unbeaten bushy ways in the woody wilderness twenty miles to our desired
ha^bour.

A second demonstration of their love in this kind may appear in a passage of
the same nature. An unexperienced wood man ranging in the woods for Dear,
traveled so far beyond his knowledge, till he could not tell how to get out
of the wood for trees, but the more he sought to direct himself out, the more
he ran himself in, from the home he most desired; the night came upon him
preventing his walking, and the extremity of cold seasing upon his right foot
for want of warming motion, deprived him of the use thereof, so that he could
not remoove farther than his snowie bed, but had there ended his days, had not
six commiserating Indians, who heard of his wandering, found him out by
diligent search, being almost dead with despair and cold: but after they had
conquered his despair with the assurance of his safe conduction to his
habitation, and expelled the cold by the infusion of strong waters which they
brought for the same purpose; they framed a thing like a hand barrow and
carried this selfe-helpelesse person on their bare shoulders twelve miles to
his residence: many other wandering benighted coasters have been kindly
entertained into their habitations, where they have rested and reposed
themselves more securely than if they had ^^ene in some blind obscure old
Englands Inn, being the next day directed in their right way: many lazy boys
that have run away from their masters, have been brought home by these
ranging foresters, who are as well acquainted with the craggy mountains, and
the pleasant vales, the stately woods, and swampie groves, the spacious ponds,
and swift running rivers, and can distinguish them by their names as perfectly,
and find them as presently, as the experienced Citizen knows how to find out
Cheape-side cross, or London stone. Such is the wisdom and policy of these
poor men, that they will be sure to keep correspondence with our English
Magistrates, expressing their love in the execution of any service they command
them, so far as lies in their power, as may appear in this one particular. A
certain man having laid himself open to the Kings laws, fearing atachment,
conviction, and consequently execution: sequestered himself from the honest
society of his neighbors, betaking himself unto the obscure thickets of the
wilderness, where he lived for a time undiscovered, till the Indians who
leave no place unsearched for Dear, found out his haunt, and having taken
notice by diverse discourses concerning him, how that it was the governers
desire to know where he was; they thought it a part of their service to
certify him where he kept his rendevouze, who thereupon desired if they could
to direct men to him for his attachment, but he had shifted his dwelling, and
could not be found for the present, yet he was after seen by other Indians,
but being double pistold, and well sworded, they seared to approach so near
him as to grapple with him: wherefore they let him alone till his own
necessary business cast him upon them; for having occasion to cross a river,
he came to the side thereof, where was an Indian Cannow* in which the Indians
were to cross the river themselves, he vauntingly commanded waftage; which
they willingly granted, but withal plotting how they might take him prisoner,
which they thus effected; having placed him in the midship of their ticklish
wherrie, they lanched forth into the deep, causing the capering Cannow to cast
out her combersome ballast into the liquid water; which swomme like a stone,
and now the water having dank't his pistoles, and lost his Spanish progge in
the bottom, the Indians swomme him out by the chinne to the shore, where
having dropped himself a little dry, he began to bluster out a storm of
rebellious resistance, till they becalmed his pelting chafe with their pelting
of pibles at him, afterward leading him as they list to the governor. These
people be of a kind and affable disposition, yet are they very wary with whom
they strike hands in friendship: nothing is more hateful to them than a
churlish disposition, so likewise is dissimulation: he that speaks seldom,
and opportunely, being as good as his word, is the only man they love. The
Spaniard they say is all one Aramouse (viz. all one as a dog) the Frenchman
has a good tongue, but a false heart: The English man all one speak, all one
heart; wherefore they more approve of them than of any Nation: garrulitie is
much condemned of them, for they utter not many words, speak seldom, and then
with such gravitie as is pleasing to the ear: such as understand them not,
desire yet to hear their emphaticall expressions, and lively action; such is
the mild temper of their spirits that they cannot endure objurgations, or
scoldings. An Indian Sagomore once hearing an English woman scold with her
husband, her quick utterance exceeding his apprehension, her active lungs
thundering in his ears, expelled him the house; from whence he went to the
next neighbor, where he related the unseemelinesse of her behavior; her
language being strange to him, he expressed it as strangely, telling them how
she cried Nannana Nannana Nannana Nan, saying he was a great fool to give her
the audience, and no correction for usurping his charter, and abusing him by
her tongue. I have been amongst diverse of them, yet did I never see any
falling out amongst them, not so much as cross words, or reviling speeches,
which might provoke to blows. And whereas it is the custom of many people in
their games, if they see the dice run cross or their cards not answer their
expectations: what cursing and swearing, what imprecations, and raylings,
fightings and stabbings oftentimes proceed from their testy spleen. How do
their blustering passions, make the place troublesome to themselves and others?
But I have known when four of these milder spirits have sit down staking
their treasures, where they have played four and twenty hours, neither
eating drinking or sleeping in the Interim; nay which is most to be wondered
at, not quarreling, but as they came thither in peace so they depart in peace:
when he that had lost all his wampompeage, his house, his kettle, his beaver,
his batchet, his knife, yea all his little all, having nothing left but his
naked self, was as merry as they that won it; so in sports of activitie at
footeball though they play never so fiercely to outward appearance, yet
angrer-boyling blood never streams in their cooler veins, if any man be
thrown he laughes out his foil, there is no seeking of revenge, no
quarreling, no bloody noses, scratched faces, black eyes, broken shinnes, no
bruised members, or crushed ribs, the lamentables effects of rage; but the goal
being won, the goods on the one side lost; friends they were at the
footeball, and friends they must meet at the kettle. I never heard yet of that
Indian that was his neighbors homicide or vexation by his malepart, fancy, or
uncivil tongue: laughter in them is not common, seldom exceeding a smile,
never breaking out into such a loud laughter, as do many of our English. Of
all things they love not to be laughed at upon any occasion; if a man be in
trade with them and the bargain be almost struck, if they perceive you laugh,
they will scarce proceed, supposing you laugh because you have cheated them:
the Crocodiles tears may sooner deceive them, than the Hienas smiles: although
they be not much addicted to laughter, yet are they not of a dumpish sad
nature, but rather naturally cheerful: A^ I never saw a gigling Democrite, so
I never saw a tear dropping Heraclite; no disaster being so prevalent as to
open the flood-gate of their eyes, saving the death of friends, for whom they
lament most exceedingly.

CHAP. VIII. Of their hardiness.
FOr their hardiness it may procure admiration, no ordinary pains making them
so much as alter their countenance; beat them, whip them, pinch them, punch
them, if they resolve not to whinch for it, they will not; whether it be their
benumbed insensiblenesse of smart, or their hardy resolutions, I cannot tell;
It might be, a Perillus his Bull, or the disjoynting rack might force a roar
from them, but a Turkish drubbing would not much molest them, and although they
be naturally much afraid of death, yet the unexpected approach of a mortal
wound by a Bullet, Arrow, or Sword, strikes no more terror, causes no more
exclamation, no more complaint, or whinching, than if it had been a shot into
the body of a tree: such woun^s as would be sudden death to an English man,
would be nothing to them. Some of them having been shot in at the mouth, and
out under the ear, some shot in the breast, some run thorough the flanks
with Darts, and other many desperate wounds which either by their rare skill in
the use of vegitatives, or diabolical charms they cure in short time.
Although their hardiness bear them out in such things wherein they are sure
death will not ensue, yet can it not expel the fear of death, the very name
and thoughts of it is so hideous to them, or any thing that presents it, or
threatens it, so terrible; insomuch that a hundred of them will run from two
or three Guns, though they know they can but dispatch two or three at a
discharge, yet every man fearing it may be his lot to meet with his last, will
not come near that in good earnest, which he dare play withal in jest. To
make this good by a passage of Experience. Three men having occasion of trade
amongst the Western Indians, went up with some such commodities as they
thought most fit for trade; to secure their person they took a Carbine, two
Pistoles and a sword, which in outward show was not great resistance to a
hundred well skilled bow men: The Indians hearing their gunnes making a
thundering noise, desired to finger one of them, and see it discharged into a
tree, wondering much at the percussion of the bullet; but they abiding two or
three days, the gunnes were forgotten, and they began to look at the odds
being a hundred to three, whereupon they were animated to work treason against
the lives of these men, and to take away their goods from them by force; but
one of the English understanding their language, smelt out their treachery, and
being more fully informed of their intent by the Indian women, who had more
pity, he steps to their King, and hailing him by the long hair from the rest
of his council, commanded him either to go before him and guide him home, or
else he would there kill him. The Sagamore seeing him so rough, had not the
courage to resist him, but went with him two miles; but being exasperated by
his men who followed him along, to resist, and go no further; in the end he
would not, neither for fair promises nor fierce threatenings, so that they were
constrained there to kill him, which struck such an amazement and daunting into
the rest of that naked crew, with the sight of the guns, that though they might
easily have killed them, yet had they not the power to shoot an arrow, but
followed them, yelling and howling for the death of their King forty miles; his
goods being left among them, he sent word by other Indians, that unless they
sent him his goods again, which he there left, he would serve them as he
served their King, whereupon they returned him his commodities, with entreaty
of peace, and promises of fairer trade if he came again. If these heartlesse
Indians were so cowed with so slender an onset on their own dunghill, when
there were scarce six families of ours in the Country, what need we now fear
them being grown into thousands, and having knowledge of martial discipline?
In the night they need not to be feared, for they will not budge from their
own dwellings for fear of their Abamacho (the Devil) whom they much fear,
specially in evil enterprises, they will rather lie by an English fire than
go a quarter of a mile in the dark to their own dwellings: but they are well
freed from this scarecrow since the coming of the English, and less care for
his delusions; and whereas it has been reported, that there are such horrible
apparitions, fearful roarings, thundering and lightning raised by the Devil,
to discourage the English in their settling, I for mine own part never saw or
heard of any of these things in the Country: nor have I heard of any Indians
that have lately been put in fear, saving two or three, and they worse scared
than hurt, who seeing a Black-more in the top of a tree, looking out for his
way which he had lost, surmised he was Abamacho or the Devil, deeming all
Devils that are blacker than themselves; and being near to the plantation,
they posted to the English, and entreated their aid to conjure this Devil to
his own place, who finding him to be a poor wandering Black-moore, conducted
him to his Master.

CHAP. IX. Of their wondering at the first view of any strange invention.
THese Indians being strangers to Arts and Sciences, and being unacquainted
with the inventions that are common to a civilized people, are ravished with
admiration at the first view of any such sight: They took the first Ship they
saw for a walking Island, the Mast to be a Tree, the Sail white Clouds, and the
discharging of Ordinance for Lightning and Thunder, which did much trouble
them, but this thunder being over, and this moving Island stedied with an
Anchor, they manned out their cannowes to go and pick strawberries there, but
being saluted by the way with a broad side, they cried out, what much hoggery,
so big walk, and so big speak, and by and by kill; which caused them to
turn back, not daring to approach till they were sent for. They do much
extol and wonder at the English for their strange Inventions, especially for a
Windmill, which in their esteem was little less than the worlds wonder, for
the strangeness of his whisking motion, and the sharp teeth biting the corn
(as they term it) into such small pieces; they were loath at the first to come
near to his long arms, or to abide in so tottering a tabernacle, though now
they dare go any where so far as they have an English guide. The first
plowman was counted little better than a Iuggler: the Indians seeing the plow
tear up more ground in a day, than their Clamme shells could scrape up in a
month, desired to see the workmanship of it, and viewing well the coulter and
share, perceiving it to be iron, told the plowman, he was almost Abamocho,
almost as cunning as the Devil; but the fresh supplies of new and strange
objects has lessened their admiration, and quickened their inventions, and
desire of practicing such things as they see, wherein they express no small
ingenuitie, and dexterity of wit, being neither furthered by art, or long
experience. It is thought they would soon learn any mechanical trades, having
quick wits, understanding apprehensions, strong memories, with nimble
inventions, and a quick hand in using of the Axe or Hatchet, or such like
tools; much good might they receive from the English, and much might they
benefit themselves, if they were not strongly fettered in the chains of
idleness; so as that they had rather starve than work, following no
employments, saving such as are sweetened with more pleasures and profit than
pains or care, and this is indeed one of the greatest accusations that can be
laid against them, which lies but upon the men, (the women being very
industrious) but it may be hoped that good example, and good instructions may
bring them to a more industrious and provident course of life. For already, as
they have learned much subtlety and cunning by bargaining with the English, so
have they a little degenerated from some of their lazy customs, and show
themselves more industrious. In a word, to set them out in their best colors,
they be wise in their carriage, subtle in their dealings, true in their
promise, honest in defraying of their debts, though poverty constrain them to
be something long before; some having died in the English debt, have left
Beaver by order of Will for their satisfaction: They be constant in friendship,
merrily conceited in discourse, not luxuriously abounding in youth, nor
dotingly froward in old age, many of them being much civilized since the
English Colonies were planted, though but little edified in Religion: They
frequent often the English Churches, where they will sit soberly, though they
understand not such hidden mysteries. They do easily believe some of the
History of the Bible, as the creation of the World, the making of man, with his
fall: but come to tell them of a Savior, with all the passages of the Gospel,
and it exceeds so far their Indian belief, that they will cry out (Pocatnie)
id est, is it possible? yet such is their conviction of the right way, that
when some English have come to their houses, victuals being offered them,
forgetting to crave Gods blessing upon the creatures received, they have been
reproved by these, which formerly never knew what calling upon God meant: thus
far for their natural disposition and qualities.

CHAP. X. Of their Kings government, and Subjects obedience.
NOw for the matter of government amongst them: It is the custom for their
Kings to inherit, the son always taking the Kingdom after his fathers
death. If there be no son, then the Queen rules; if no Queen, the next to
the blood-royall, who com^s in otherwise, is ^ut counted an usurping intruder,
and if his fair carriage bear him not out the better, they will soon
unscepter him.

The Kings have no Laws to command by, nor have they any annual revenewes;
yet commonly are they so either feared or beloved, that half their Subjects
estate is at their Service, and their persons at his command; by which command
he is better known than by any thing else. For though he has no Kingly
Robes, to make him glorious in the view of his Subjects, nor daily Guardes to
secure his person, or Court-like attendance, nor sumptuous Palaces; yet do
they yield all submissive subjection to him, accounting him their Sovereign;
going at his command, and coming at his beck, not so much as expostulating
the cause, though it be in matters thwarting their wills; he being accounted a
disloyal subject, that will not effect what his Prince commands. Whosoever is
known to plot Treason, or to lay violent hands on his lawful King, is
presently executed. Once a year he takes his progress, accompanied with a
dozen of his best Subjects to view his Country, to recreate himself, and
establish good order. When he enters into any of their houses, without any more
complement, he is desired to sit down on the ground; (for they use neither
stools nor cushions) and after a little respite, all that be present, come in,
and sit down by him, one of his Seniors pronouncing an Oration gratulatory to
his Majesty for his love; and the many good things they enjoy under his
peaceful government. A King of large Dominions has his Viceroyes, or
inferior Kings under him, to agitate his State-affaires, and keep his
Subjects in good decorum. Other Officers there be, but how to distinguish them
by name is something difficult: For their Laws, as their evil courses come
short of many other Nations, so they have not so many Laws, though they be not
without some, which they inflict upon notorious malefactors, as Traitors to
their Prince, inhumane murderers, and some say for adultery; but I cannot
warrant it for a truth. For theft, as they have nothing to steal worth the
life of a man, therefore they have no law to execute for trivialls; a Subject
being precious in the eye of his Prince, where men are so scarce. A malefactor
having deserved death, being apprehended, is brought before the King, and some
other of the wisest men, where they enquire out the original of a thing; after
proceeding by aggravation of circumstances, he is found guilty, and being cast
by the Jury of their strict inquisition, he is condemned, and executed on this
manner: The Executioner comes in, who blind-folds the party, sets him in the
public view, and brains him with a Tamahauke or Club; which done, his friends
bury him. Other means to restrain abuses they have none, saving admonition or
reproof; no whippings, no Prisons, Stocks, Bilbowes, or the like.

CHAP. XI. Of their Marriages.
NOw to speak something of their Marriages, the Kings or great Powwowes, alias
Conjurers, may have two or three Wives, but seldom use it. Men of ordinary
Rank, having but one; which disproves the report, that they had eight or ten
Wives apeece. When a man has a desire to Marry, he first gets the good will of
the Maid or Widow, after, the consent of her friends for her part; and for
himself, if he be at his own disposing, if the King will, the match is made,
her Dowry of Wampompeage paid, the King joins their hands with their hearts,
never to part till death, unless she prove a Whore; for which they may, and
some have put away their Wives, as may appear by a story. There was one
Abamoch married a Wife, whom a long time he entirely loved above her
deservings, for that she often in his absence entertained strangers, of which
he was oftentimes informed by his neighbors; but he harboring no spark of
jealousy, believed not their false informations (as he deemed them) being in a
manner angry they should slander his Wife, of whose constancy he was so
strongly conceited: A long time did her whorish gloazing and Syren-like tongue,
with her subtle carriage, establish her in her Husbands favor, till fresh
complaints caused him to cast about, how to find out the truth, and to prove
his friends liars, and his Wife honest, or her a Whore, and his friends true:
whereupon he pretended a long journey to visit his friends, providing all
accoutraments for a fortnights journey; telling his Wife it would be so long
before she could expect his return, who outwardly sorrowed for his departure,
but inwardly rejoiced, that she should enjoy the society of her old Lemman;
whom she sent for with expedition, not suspecting her Husbands plot, who lay
not many miles off in the Woods; who after their dishonest revelings, when they
were in their midnight sleep, approaches the Wiggwamme, enters the door,
which was neither barred nor locked; makes a light to discover what he little
suspected; but finding his friends words to be true, he takes a good
bastinado in his hand brought for the same purpose, dragging him by the hair
from his usurped bed, so lamentably beating him, that his battered bones and
bruised flesh made him a fitter object for some skillful Surgeon, than the
lovely object of a lustful strumpet; which done, he put away his wife,
exposing her to the courtesy of strangers for her maintenance, that so
curtesan-like had entertained a stranger into her bosom.

CHAP. XII. Of their worship, invocations, and conjurations.
NOw of their worships: As it is natural to all mortals to worship something,
so do these people, but exactly to describe to whom their worship is chiefly
bent, is very difficult; they acknowledge especially two, Ketan who is their
good God, to whom they sacrifice (as the ancient Heathen did to Ceres) after
their garners be full with a good croppe: upon this God likewise they invocate
for fair weather, for rain in time of drought, and for the recovery of their
sick; but if they do not hear them, then they verify the old verse, Flectere
si nequeo Superos, Acharonta movebo, their Pow-wows betaking themselves to
their exorcismes and necromanticke charms, by which they bring to pass
strange things, if we may believe the Indians, who report of one Pissacannawa,
that he can make the water burn, the rocks move, the trees dance,
metamorphize himself into a flaming man. But it may be objected, this is but
deceptio visus. He will therefore do more, for in Winter, when there is no
green leaves to be got, he will burn an old one to ashes, and putting those
into the water, produce a new green leaf, which you shall not only see, but
substantially handle and carry away; and make of a dead snakes skin a living
snake, both to be seen, felt, and heard; this I write but upon the report of
the Indians, who confidently affirm stranger things. But to make manifest,
that by Gods permission, thorough the Devils help, their charms are of force
to produce effects of wonderment; An honest Gentleman related a story to me,
being an eyewitnes of the same: A Pow-wow having a patient with the stumpe of
some small tree run thorough his foot, being past the cure of his ordinary
Surgery, betook himself to his charms, and being willing to show his miracle
before the English stranger, he wrapped a piece of cloth about the foot of the
lame man; upon that wrapping a Beaver skin, through which he laying his
mouth to the Beaver skin, by his sucking charms he brought out the stumpe,
which he spat into a tray of water, returning the foot as whole as its fellow
in a short time. The manner of their action in their conjuration is thus: The
parties that are sick or lame being brought before them, the Pow-wow sitting
down, the rest of the Indians giving attentive audience to his imprecations
and invocations, and after the violent expression of many a hideous bellowing
and groaning, he makes a stop, and then all the auditors with one voice utter a
short Cant^; which done, the Pow-wow still proceeds in his invocations,
sometimes roaring like a Bear, other times groaning like a dying horse, foaming
at the mouth like a chased bore, smiting on his naked breast and thighs with
such violence, as if he were mad. Thus will he continue sometimes half a
day, spending his lungs, sweating out his fat, and tormenting his body in this
diabolical worship; sometimes the Devil for requital of their worship,
recovers the party, to nuzzle them up in their divellish Religion. In former
time he was wont to carry away their wives and children, because he would
drive them to these Mattens, to fetch them again to confirm their belief of
this his much desired authority over them: but since the English frequented
those parts, they daily fall from his ^olours, relinquishing their former
fopperies, and acknowledge our God to be supreme. They acknowledge the power
of the English-ans God, as they call, him, because they could never yet have
power by their conjurations to damnifie the English either in body or goods;
and besides, they say he is a good God that sends them so many good things, so
much good corn, so many cattle, temperate raines, fair seasons, which they
likewise are the better for since the arrival of the English; the times and
seasons being much altered in seven or eight years, freer from lightning and
thunder, long droughts, sudden and tempestuous dashes of rain, and
lamentable cold Winters.

CHAP. XIII. Of their Wars.
OF their Wars: Their old soldiers being swept away by the Plague, which was
very rife amongst them about 14 years ago, and resting themselves secure
under the English protection, they do not now practice any thing in martial
feats worth observation, saving that they make themselves Forts to fly into,
if the enemies should unexpectedly assail them. These Forts some be forty or
fifty foot square, erected of young timber trees, ten or twelve foot high,
rammed into the ground, with undermining within, the earth being cast up for
their shelter against the dischargements of their enemies, having loope-holes
to send out their winged messingers, which often deliver their sharp and
bloody embassi^s in the tawnie sides of their naked assailants, who wanting
butting Rams and battering Ordinances to command at distance, lose their
lives by their too near approachments. These use no other weapons in war
than bows and arrows, saving that their Captains have long spears, on which
if they return conquerours they carry the heads of their chief enemies that
they slay in the wars: it being the custom to cut off their heads, hands, and
feet, to bear home to their wives and children, as true tokens of their
renowned victory. When they go to their wars, it is their custom t^ paint
their faces with diversity of colors, some being all black as ^et, some red,
some half red and half black, some black and white, others spotted with
diverse kinds of colors, being all disguised to their enemies, to make them
more terrible to their foes, putting on likewise their rich Jewels, pendents
and Wampompeage, to put them in mind they fight not only for their Children,
Wives, and lives, but likewise for their goods, lands and liberties; Being thus
armed with this warlike paint, the antique warriers make toward their enemies
in a disordered manner, without any soldier like marching or warlike postures,
being deaf to any word of command, ignorant of falling off, or falling on, of
doubling ranks or files, but let fly their winged shaftments without either
fear or wit; their Artillery being spent, he that has no arms to fight,
finds legs to run away.

CHAP. XIIII. Their games and sports of activitie.
But to leave their wars, and to speak of their games in which they are more
delighted and better experienced, spending half their days in gaming and
lazing. They have two sorts of games, one called Puim, the other Hubbub, not
much unlike Cards and Dice, being no other than Lotterie. Puim is 50. or 60.
small Bents of a foot long which they divide to the number of their gamesters,
shuffling them first between the palms of their hands; he that has more than
his fellow is so much the forwa^der in his game: many other strange whimseyes
be in this game; which would be too long to commit to paper; he that is a
noted gamster, has a great hole in his ear wherein he carries his Pu^^is in
defiance of his antagonists. Hubbub is five small Bones in a small smooth Tray,
the bones be like a Die, but something f^atter, black on the one side and
white on the other, which they place on the ground, against which violentl^
themping the platter, the bones mount changi^g colors with the windy whisking
of their hands too and fro; which action in that sport they much use, smiting
themselves on the breast, and thighs, crying out, Hub, Hub, Hub; they may be
heard play at this game a quarter of a mile off. The bones being all black or
white, make a double game; if three be of a color and two of another, then
they affoard but a single game; four of a color and one differing is nothing;
so long as a man winns, he keeps the Tray: but if he loose, the next man takes
it. They are so bewitched with these two games, that they will loose sometimes
all they have, Beaver, Moose-skinnes, Kettles, Wampompeage, Mowhackies,
Hatchets, Knives, all is confiscate by these two games. For their sports of
activitie they have commonly but three or four; as footeball, shooting,
running and swimming: when they play country against country, there are rich
Goales, all behung with Wampompeage, Mowhackies, Beaver skins, and black Otter
skins. It would exceed the belief of many to relate the worth of one Goal,
wherefore it shall be namelesse. Their Goales be a mile long placed on the
sands, which are as even as a board; their ball is no bigger than a hand-ball,
which sometimes they mount in the Air with their naked feet, sometimes it is
swayed by the multitude; sometimes also it is two days before they get a
Goal, then they mark the ground they win, and begin there the next day.
Before they come to this sport, they paint themselves, even as when they go to
war, in policy to prevent future mischief, because no man should know him
that moved his patience or accidentally hurt his person, taking away the
occasion of studying revenge. Before they begin their arms be disordered, and
hung upon some neighboring tree, after which they make a long scrowle on the
sand, over which they shake loving hands, and with laughing hearts scuffle for
victory. While the men play the boys pipe, and the women dance and sing
trophies of their husbands conqu^sts; all being done a feast summons their
departure. It is most delight to see them play, in smaller companies, when men
may view their swift footemanship, their curious tossings of their Ball, their
flouncing into the water, their lubberlike wrestling, having no cunning at all
in that kind, one English being able to beat ten Indians at footeball. For
their shooting they be most desperate marksmen for a point blancke object, and
if it may be possible Cornicum oculos configere they will do it: such is
their celerity and dexterity in Artillery, that they can smite the swift
running Hind and nimble winked Pigeon without a standing paul or left eyed
blinking; they draw their Arrows between the fore fingers and the thumb;
their bows be quick, but not very strong, not killing above six or seven
score. These men shoot at one another, but with swift conveighance shun the
Arrow; this they do to make them expert against time of war. It has been
often admired how they can find their Arrows, be the weeds as high as
themselves, yet they take such perfect notice of the flight and fall that they
seldom loose any. They are trained up to their bows even from their
childhood; little boys with Bows made of little sticks and Arrows of great
bents, will smite down a piece of Tobacco pipe every shoot a good way off: as
these Indians be good markemen, so are they well experienced where the very
life of every creature lies, and know where to smite him to make him dye
presently. For their swimming it is almost natural, but much perfected by
continual practice; their swimming is not after our English fashion of spread
arms and legs which they hold too tiresome, but like dogs their arms
before them cutting through the liquids with their right shoulder; in this
manner they swim very swift and far, either in rough or smooth waters,
sometimes for their ease lying as still as a log; sometimes they will play the
dive-doppers, and come up in unexpected places. Their children likewise be
taught to swim when they are very young. For their running it is with much
celeritie and continuance, yet I suppose there be many English men who being as
lightly clad as they are, would outrun them for a spurt, though not able to
continue it for a day or days, being they be very strong winded and rightly
clad for a race.

CHAP. XV. Of their huntings.
FOr their hunting, it is to be noted that they have no swift foot Grayhounds,
to let slip at the sight of the Dear, no deep mouthed hounds, or senting
beagles, to find out their desired prey; themselves are all this, who in that
time of the year, when the Dear comes down, having certain hunting houses,
in such places where they know the Dear usually does frequent, in which they
keep their randevowes, their snares and all their accoutraments for that
employment: when they get sight of a Dear, Moose or Bear, they study how to
get the wind of him, and approaching within shot, stab their mark quite
through, if the bones hinder not. The chief thing they hunt after is Dear,
Mooses, and Bears, it greeves them more to see an English man take one Dear,
than a thousand Acres of land: they hunt likewise after Wolves, and wild Catts,
Rackoones, Otters, Beavers, Musquashes, trading both their skins and flesh to
the English. Besides their artillery, they have other devices to kill their
game, as sometimes hedges a mile or two miles long, being a mile wide at one
end, and made narrower and narrower by degrees, leaving only a gap of six
foot long, over against which, in the day time they lie lurking to shoot the
Dear which come through that narrow gut; so many as come within the
circumference of that hedge, seldom return back to leap over, unless they
be forced by the chasing of some ravenous Wolf, or sight of some accidentatall
passinger; in the night at the gut of this hedge, they set Dear traps, which
are springes made of young trees, and smooth wrought coards; so strong as it
will toss a horse if he be caught in it. An English Mare being strayed from
her owner, and grown wild by her long sojourning in the Woods ranging up and
down with the wild crew, stumbled into one of these traps which stopped her
speed, hanging her like Mahomets tomb, betwixt earth and heaven; the morning
b^ing come, the Indians went to look what good success their Venison trappes
had brought them, but seeing such a long scutted Dear, praunce in their
Merritotter, they bade her good morrow, crying out, what cheer what cheer
Englishmans squaw horse; having no better epithet than to call her a woman
horse, but being loath to kill her, and as fearful to approach near the
friscadoes of her Iron heels, they posted to the English to tell them how the
case stood or hung with their squaw horse, who unhorsed their Mare, and brought
her to her former tamenesse, which since has brought many a good foale, and
performed much good service. In these traps Deeres, Mooses, Bears, Wolves,
Catts, and Foxes, are often caught. For their Beavers and Otters, they have
other kind of trappes, so ponderous as is unsupportable for such creatures,
the massy burden whereof either takes them prisoners, or expells their breath
from their squised bodies. These kind of creatures would gnaw the other kind
of trappes asunder, with their sharp teeth: these beasts are too cunning for
the English, who seldom or never catch any of them, therefore we leave them to
those skillful hunters whose time is not so precious, whose experience
bought-skill has made them practical and useful in that particular.

CHAP. XVI. Of their Fishings.
OF their fishing, in this trade they be very expert, being experienced in the
knowledge of all baits, fitting sundry baits for several fishes, and diverse
seasons; being not ignorant likewise of the removal of fishes, knowing when to
fish in rivers, and when at rocks, when in Baies, and when at Seas: since the
English came they be furnished with English hooks and lines, before they made
them of their own hemp more curiously wrought, of stronger materials than
ours, hooked with bone hooks: but laziness drives them to buy more than
profit or commendations winnes them to make of their own; they make likewise
very strong Sturgeon nets with which they catch Sturgeons of 12.14, and 16.
some 18. foot long in the day time, in the night time they betake them to
their Burtchen Cannows, in which they carry a forty fathom line, with a sharp
bearded dart, fastened at the end thereof; then lightning a blazing torch made
of Burcthen rindes, they weave it too and again by their Cannow side, which
the Sturgeon much delighted with, comes to them tumbling and playing, turning
up his white belly, into which they thrust their lance, his back being
impenetrable; which done they hail to the shore their struggling prize. They
have often recourse unto the rocks whereupon the sea beats, in warm weather
to look out for sleepie Seals, whose oil they much esteem, using it for
diverse things. In summer they seldom fish any where but in salt, in winter in
the fresh water and ponds; in frostie weater they cut round holes in the ice,
about which they will sit like so many apes, on their naked breeches upon the
congealed ice, catching of Pikes, Pearches, Breames, and other sorts of fresh
water fish.

CHAP. XVII. Of their Arts and Manufactures.
OF their several Arts and employments, as first in dressing of all manner of
skins, which they do by scraping and rubbing, afterward painting them with
antique embroyderings in unchangeable colors, sometimes they take off the
hair, especially if it be not killed in season. Their bows they make of a
handsome shape, strung commonly with the sinnewes of Mooses; their arrows are
made of young Elderne, feathered with feathers of Eagles wings and tails,
headed with brass in shape of a heart or triangle, fastened in a slender piece
of wood six or 8 inches long, which is framed to put loose in the pithie
Elderne, that is bound fast for riving: their arrows be made in this manner
because the arrow might shake from his head and be left behind for their
finding, and the pile only remain to gaul the wounded beast. Their cordage
is so even, soft, and smooth, that it looks more like silk than hemp; their
Sturgeon netts be not deep, nor above 30. or 40. foot long, which in ebbing
low waters they stake fast to the ground, where they are sure the Sturgeon will
come, never looking more at it, till the next low water. Their Cannows be made
either of Pine-trees, which before they were acquainted with English tools,
they burned hollow, scraping them smooth with Clam-shels and Oyster-shels,
cutting their outsides with stone-hatchets: These Boats be not above a foot
and a half, or two feet wide, and twenty foot long. Their other Cannows be
made of thin Birch-rines, close-ribbed on the inside with broad thin
hoopes, like the hoopes of a Tub; these are made very light, a man may carry
one of them a mile, being made purposely to carry from River to River, and Bay
to Bay, to shorten Land-passages. In these cockling fly-boates, wherein an
English man can scarce sit without a fearful tottering, they will venture to
Sea, when an English Shallope dare not bear a knot of sail; scudding ^ver the
overgrowne waves as fast as a winde-driven Ship, being driven by their padles;
being much like battle doors; if a cross wave (as is seldom) turn her keele
up-side down, they by swimming free her, and scramble into her again.

CHAP. XVIII. Of their Language.
OF their Language which is only peculiar to themselves, not inclining to any
of the refined tongues. Some have thought they might be of the dispersed Jews,
because some of their words be near unto the Hebrew; but by the same rule they
may conclude them to be some of the gleanings of all Nations, because they have
words which sound after the Greek, Latin, French, and other tongues: Their
Language is hard to learn; few of the English being able to speak any of it,
or capable of the right pronunciation, which is the chief grace of their
tongue. They pronounce much after the Diphthongs, excluding L and R, which in
our English Tongue they pronounce with as much difficulty, as most of the Dutch
do T and H, calling a Lobster a N^bstann. Every Country do something differ
in their Speech, even as our Northern people do from the Southern, and
Western from them; especially the Tarrenteens, whose Tongues run so much
upon R, that they wharle much in pronunciation. When any ships come near the
shore, they demand whether they be King Charles his Torries, with such a
rumbling sound, as if one we^e beating an unbrac't Drum. In serious discourse
our Southern Indians use seldom any short Colloquiums, but speak their minds
at large, without any interjected interruptions from any: The rest giving
diligent audience to his utterance: which done, some or other returns him as
long an answer, they love not to speak multa sed multum, seldom are their
words, and their deeds strangers. According to the matter in discourse, so are
their acting gestures in their expressions. One of the English Preachers in a
special good intent of doing good to their souls, has spent much time in
attaining to their Language, wherein he is so good a proficient, that he can
speak to their understanding, and they to his; much loving and respecting him
for his love and counsel. It is hoped that he may be an instrument of good
amongst them. They love any man that can utter his mind in their words, yet
are they not a little proud that they can speak the English tongue, using it
as much as their own, when they meet with such as can understand it, puzling
stranger Indians, which sometimes visit them from more remote places, with an
unheard language.

CHAP. XIX. Of their deaths, burials, and mourning.
ALthough the Indians be of lusty and healthful bodies, not experimentally
knowing the Catalogue of those health-wasting diseases which are incident to
other Countries, as Fevers, Pleurisies, Callentures, Agues, Obstructions,
Consumptions, Subfumigations, Convulsions, Apoplexies, Dropsies, Gouts, Stones,
Tooth-aches, Pox, Measels, or the like, but spinne out the thread of their
days to a fair length, numbering threescore, foure-score, some a hundred
years, before the worlds universal summoner (...) them to the craving Grave:
But the date of their life expired, and Deaths arestment seazing upon them, all
hope of recovery being past, then to behold and hear their throbbing sobs and
deepe-fetcht sighs, their griefe-wrung hands, and teare-bedewed cheeks, their
doleful cries, would draw tears from Adamantine eyes, that be but spectators
of their mournful Obsequies. The glut of their grief being past, they commit
the corpse of their diceased friends to the ground, over whose grave is for a
long time spent many a briny tear, deep groan, and Irish-like howlings,
continuing annual mournings with a black stiff paint on their faces: These
are the Mourners without hope, yet do they hold the immortality of the
never-dying soul, that it shall pass to the South-west Elysium, concerning
which their Indian faith jumps much with the Turkish Alchoran, holding it to be
a kind of Paradise, wherein they shall everlastingly abide, solacing
themselves in odoriferous Gardens, fruitful Corne-fields, green Medows,
bathing their tawny hides in the cool streams of pleasant Rivers* and shelter
themselves from heat and cold in the sumptuous Palaces framed by the skill of
Natures curious contrivement; concluding that neither care nor pain shall
molest them, but that Natures bounty will administer all things with a
voluntary contribution from the overflowing storehouse of their Elyzian
Hospital, at the portall whereof they say, lies a great Dog, whose churlish
snarlings deny a Pax intrantibus, to unworthy intruders: Wherefore it is their
custom, to bury with them their Bows and Arrows, and good store of their
Wampompeage and Mowhackies; the one to affright that affr^nting C^rberus, the
other to purchase more immense prerogatives in their Paradise. For their
enemies and loose livers, who^ they account unworthy of this imaginary
happiness, they say, that they pass to the infernal dwellings of Abamocho, to
be tortured according to the fictions of the ancient Heathen*

CHAP. XIX. Of their women, their dispositions, employments, usage by their
husbands, their apparel, and modesty.
TO satisfy the curious eye of women-readers, who otherwise might think their
sex forgotten, or not worthy a record, let them peruse these few lines, wherein
they may see their own happiness, if weighed in the woman's balance of these
ruder Indians, who scorn the tuterings of their wives, or to admit them as
their equals, though their qualities and industrious deservings may justly
claim the pre-eminence, and command better usage and more conjugall esteem,
their persons and features being every way correspondent, their qualifications
more excellent, being more loving, pitiful, and modest, mild, provident, and
laborious than their lazy husbands. Their employments be many: First their
building of houses, whose frames are formed like our garden-arbours, something
more round, very strong and handsome, covered with close-wrought mats of their
own weaving, which deny entrance to any drop of rain, though it come both
fierce and long, neither can the piercing North wind find a crannie, through
which he can conveigh his cooling breath, they be warmer than our English
houses; at the top is a square hole for the smoakes evacuation, which in rainy
weather is covered with a pluver; these be such smoakie dwellings, that when
there is good fires, they are not able to stand upright, but lie all along
under the smoke, never using any stools or chaires, it being as rare to see
an Indian sit on a stool at home, as it is strange to see an English man sit
on his heels abroad. Their houses are smaller in the Summer, when their
families be dispersed, by reason of heat and occasions. In Winter they make
some fifty or threescore foot long, forty or fifty men being inmates under
one roof; and as is their husbands occasion these poor tectonists are often
troubled like snailes, to carry their houses on their backs sometime to
fishing-places, other times to hunting-places, after that to a planting place,
where it abides the longest: an other work is their planting of come, wherein
they exceed our English husbandmen, keeping it so clear with their Clamme
shell-hooes, as if it were a garden rather than a corne-field, not suffering a
choking weed to advance his audacious head above their infant corn, or an
undermining worm to spoil his spurns. Their corn being ripe, they gather
it, and drying it hard in the Sun, conveigh it to their barnes, which be
great holes dug in the ground in form of a brass pot, seeled with rinds of
trees, wherein they put their corn, covering it from the inquisitive search of
their gurmandizing husbands, who would eat up both their allowed portion, and
reserved seed, if they knew where to find it. But our hogs having found a
way to unhindge their barn doors, and rob their garners, they are glad to
implore their husbands help to roll the bodies of trees over their holes, to
prevent those pioners, whose theeverie they as much hate as their flesh. An
other of their employments is their Summer processions to get Lobsters for
their husbands, wherewith they bait their hooks when they go a fishing for
Basse or Codfish. This is an every days walk, be the weather cold or hot, the
waters rough or calm, they must dive sometimes over head and ears for a
Lobster, which often shakes them by their hands with a churlish nippe, and bids
them adieu. The tide being spent, they trudge home two or three miles, with a
hundred weight of Lobsters at their backs, and if none, a hundred scoules meet
them at home, and a hungry belly for two days after. Their husbands having
caught any fish, they bring it in their boats as far as they can by water,
and there leave it; as it was their care to catch it, so it must be their wives
pains to fetch it home, or fast: which done, they must dress it and cook it,
dish it, and present it, see it eaten over their shoulders; and their
loggerships having filled their paunches, their sweet lullabies scramble for
their scrappes. In the Summer these Indian women when Lobsters be in their
plenty and prime, they dry them to keep for Winter, erecting scaffolds in the
hot sunshine, making fires likewise underneath them, by whose smoke the flies
are expelled, till the substance remain hard and dry. In this manner they dry
Basse and other fishes without salt, cutting them very thin to dry
suddenly, before the flies spoil them, or the rain moist them, having a
special care to hang them in their smoakie houses, in the night and dankish
weather.

In Summer they gather flagges, of which they make Matts for houses, and Hemp
and Rushes, with dying stuff of which they make curious baskets with
intermixed colors and portractures of antique Imagerie: these baskets be of
all sizes from a quart to a quarter, in which they carry their luggage. In
winter time they are their hubands Caterers, trudging to the Clamm banks for
their belly timber, and their Porters to lugge home their Venison which their
laziness exposes to the Woolves till they impose it upon their wives
shoulders. They likewise sew their husbands shoes, and weave coats of Turkey
feathers, besides all their ordinary household drudgerie which daily lies upon
them, so that a big belly hinders no business, nor a childebirth takes much
time, but the young Infant being greased and sooted, wrapped in a Beaver skin,
bound to his good behavior with his feet up to his bumme, upon a board two
foot long and one foot broad, his face exposed to all nipping weather; this
little Pappouse travells about with his bare footed mother to paddle in the
Icie Clammbankes after three or four days of age have sealed his pass^board
and his mothers recoverie. For their carriage it is very civil, smiles being
the greatest grace of their mirth; their music is lullabies to quiet their
children, who generally are as quiet as if they had neither spleen or lungs.
To hear one of these Indians unseene, a good care might easily mistake their
untaught voice for the warbling of a well tuned instrument. Such command have
they of their voices. These women's modesty drives them to wear more clothes
than their men, having always a coat of cloth or skins wrapped like a
blanket about their loins, reaching down to their hammes which they never put
off in company. If a husband have a mind to sell his wives Beaver, petticote,
as sometimes he does, she will not put it off until she have another to put
on: commendable is their mild carriage and obedience to their husbands,
notwithstanding all this their customarie churlishness and salvage
inhumanitie, not seeming to delight in frowns or offering to word it with
their lords, not presuming to proclaim their female superiority to the
usurping of the least title of their husbands charter, but rest themselves
content under their helpless condition, counting it the woman's portion: since
the English arrival comparison has made them miserable, for seeing the kind
usage of the English to their wives, they do as much condemn their husbands
for unkindnesse, and commend the English for their love. As their husbands
commending themselves for their wit in keeping their wives industrious, do
condemn the English for their folly in spoiling good working creatures. These
women resort often to the English houses, where pares cum paribus congregatae,
in Sex I mean, they do somewhat ease their misery by complaining and seldom
part without a relief: If her husband come to seek for his Squaw and begin
to bluster, the English woman betakes her to her arms which are the warlike
Ladle, and the scalding liquors, threatening blistering to the naked runnaway,
who is soon expelled by such liquid comminations. In a word to conclude this
woman's history, their love to the English has deserved no small esteem, ever
presenting them some thing that is either rare or desired, as Strawberries,
Hurtleberries, Rasberries, Gooseberries, Cherries, Plummes, Fish, and other
such gifts as their poor treasury yields them. But now it may be, that this
relation of the churlish and inhumane behavior of these ruder Indians toward
their patient wives, may confirm some in the belief of an aspersion, which I
have often heard men cast upon the English there, as if they should learn of
the Indians to use their wives in the like manner, and to bring them to the
same subjection, as to sit on the lower hand, and to carry water, and the like
drudgerie: but if my own experience may out-ballance an ill-grounded
scandalous rumor, I do assure you, upon my credit and reputation, that there
is no such matter, but the women find there as much love, respect, and ease,
as here in old England. I will not deny, but that some poor people may carry
their own water, and do not the poorer sort in England do the same, witness
your London Tankerd-bearers, and your countrie-cottagers? But this may well be
known to be nothing, but the rancerous venom of some that bear no good will
to the plantation. For what need they carry water, seeing every one has a
Spring at his door, or the Sea by his house? Thus much for the satisfaction of
women, touching this entrenchment upon their prerogative, as also concerning
the relation of these Indian Squawes.

Because many have desired to hear some of the Natives Language, I have here
inserted a small Nomenclator, with the Names of their chief Kings, Rivers,
Months, and days, whereby such as have in-sight into the Tongues, may know to
what Language it is most inclining; and such as desire it as an unknown
Language only, may reap delight, if they can get no profit.
A
Aberginian an Indian Abbamocho the devil Aunum a dog Ausupp a Rackoone Au
so hau naut hoc Lobstar Assawog will you play A saw upp to morrow Ascosc^i
green Ausomma petuc quanocke give me some bread Appepes naw aug when I see it
I will tell you my mind Anno ke ^^gge a sieve An nu ocke a bed Autchu wompocke
to day Appause the morn Ascom quom pauputchim thanks be given to God.
B
Boquoquo the head Bisquant the shoulderbones
C
Chesco kean you lie Commouton kean you steal Cram to kill Chicka chava
osculari podicem Cowimm^ sleeps Cocum the navell Cos the nails Conomma a
spoone Cossaquot bow and arrows Cone the Sun Cotattup I drink to you Coetop
will you drink Tobaco Connucke sommona It is almost night Connu good night to
you Cow^mpaum si^ God morrow Coepot ice
D
Dottaguck the back bone Docke taugh he neck what is your name
E
Et ch^ssucke a knife Eat chumnis Indian corn Eans causuacke 4 fathomes Easu
tomm^c quocke half a skin of Beaver Epimetsis much good may your meat do you
F
is not used.
G
Gettoquaset the great toe Genehuncke the fore finger Gettoquacke the knees
Gettoquun the knuckles Gettoquan the thumb Gegnewaw og let me see
H
Haha yes Hoc the body Hamucke almost Hub hub hub come come come Haddo quo
du^na moquonash where did you buy that Haddogoe weage who lives here
I
Isattonaneise the bread Icattop faint with hunger Icatto quam very sleepie
K
Kean I Keisseanchacke back of the hand Ksitt^ it hurts me Kawken^g
wampompeage let me see money Kagmatche^ will you eat meat Ketott^g a whet
stone Kenie very sharp Ketto^a^ese lend me money Kekechoi much pain
L
is not used.
M
Matchet It is naught Mat^amoi to die Mitchin meat Misquanium very angry
Mauncheake be gonne Matta no Meseig hair Mamanock the eye brees Matchanne the
nose Mattone the lips Mepeiteis the teeth Mattickeis the shoulders
Mettosowset the little toe Metosaunige the little finger Misqu^sh the veins
Mohoc the wast Menisowhock the genitals Mocossa the black of the nail
Matchanni very sick Monacus bows and arrows Manehops sit down Monakinne a
coat Mawcus sinnus a pair of shoes Matchemauquot it stinketh Muskana a bone
Menota a basket Meatchis be merry Mawpaw it snowes Mawnaucoi very strong
Mutchecu a very poor man Monosketenog what is this Mouskett the breech Matchet
wequon very blunt Ma^^a ka tau caushana will you not trade Mowhachei^ Indian
gold
N
(...) a boy Nicke squaw a maid Nean you Nippe water Nasamp pottadge No^a six
Nisquan the elbow Noenaset the third toe Nahenan a black bird Naw naunidge the
middle finger Napet the arm Nitchicke the hand Nottoquap the skin Nogcu^ the
heart Nobpaw nocke the breast bone Nequaw the thighs Netop a friend Nenmia
give me Noeicantop how do you N^whaw nissis farewell Noei pauketan by and by
kill Nenelah ha I Will fight with you Noei comquocke a codfish Nepaupe stand by No
ot^ut a great journie Necautauh han no such matter Noewamma he laugheth Noeshow
a father Nitka a mother Netchaw a brother Not^nquous a kinseman Nenomous a
kinswoman Nau maeu nais my son Taunais my daughter No einshom give me corn
Nemnis take it Nenimma nequitta ta auchu give me a span of any thing. Ne^^ nis
ca su acke 2 fathom Notanumoi a little strong Negac^wgh-hi lend me N^b^ks quam
adieu N^^ wi^yan come in Nau^ seam much weary Noe wammaw ^use I love you Net
noe whaw missu. a man of a middle stature
O
Ottucke a Dear Occone a Dear skin Oquan the heel Ottump a bow Ottommaocke
Tobacco Ottannapeake the chinne Occot^^ke the throat Occasu half a quarter
Vnquagh saw au you are cunning Ontoquos a Wolf
P
Pow-wow a conjurer or wizard Petta sinna give me a pipe of Tobaco Peoke
Colts-foote Pappouse a child Petucquanocke bread Pick a pipe Ponesanto make a
fire Papowne winter Pequas a Fox Pausochis a little journie Peamissin a little
Peacumshis work hard Pokitta smoke Petogge a bag Paucasu a quarter
Pausawniscosu half a fathom Peunct^umocke much pray Pesissu a little man
Pau^^^^ssoi the sun is rising Poucksha^ it is broken Poebugketaas you burn
Poussis a big bellied woman
Q
Quequas nummos what cheer Quequas nim it is almost day Quog quosh make haste
Quenobpuuncke a stool Quenops be quiet
R
is never used.
S
Sagamore a king Sachem idem Sannup a man Squaw a woman Squitta a fire spark
S^ggig a Basse Seasicke a rattle snake Shannucke a Squerill Skesicos the eyes
Sickeubecke the neck Supskinge the wrist bones Socottocanus the breast bone
Squehincke blood Siccaw quant the hammes Sis sau causke the shinnes Su^piske
ancle bones Seat the foot Seaseap a ducke Suckis suacke a Clam Sequan the
summer Sockepup he will bite Sis come out Squi red Swanscaw suacko 3 fathomes
Sawawampeago very weak Succomme I will eat you Sasketupe a great man
T
Taubut nean he^ Thanks heartily Tantacum beat him Tap in go in Titta I
cannot tell Tahanyah what news Tonagus the ears Tannicke a cranie Thaw the
calfe of the leg Tahascat the sole of the foot Tasseche quonu^ck the insteppe
Tonokete naum whither go you Tannissin may which is the way Tunketappin where
live you Tonocco wam where have you bin Tasis a pair of stockings Tockucke a
hatchet Towwow a sister Tom maushew a husband Tookesin enough sleep Titto kean
l^atoquam do you nod and sleep Tau kequam very heavy Tauh coi it is very
cold
V
Vkepemanous the breast (...) Vnkesheto will you trucke
W
Wampompeage Indian money Winnet very good Web a wife Wigwam a house Waw^^^t
enough Whenan the tongue Whanksis a Fox Wawpatucke a Goose Wawpiske the belly
Who nuncke a ditch Wappinne the wind Wawtom understand you Wompey white Wa aoy
the sun is down Wa^coh the day breaks Wekemawquot it smells sweet
Weneikin^e it is very handsome Whissu hochuck the kettle boyleth Waawnew you
have lost your way Woenaunta it is a warm summer Wompoca to morrow Wawmauseu
an honest man Weneicu a rich man Weitagcone a clear day Wawnauco yesterday
X
never used
Y
yeips sit down yaus the sides yaugh there yough yough now yoakes lice
The number of 20.
A quit 1 Nees 2 Nis 3 Yoaw 4 Abbona 5 Ocqinta 6 Enotta 7 Sonaske 8 Assaquoquin
9 Piocke 10 Appon^a qiut 11 Apponees 12 Apponis 13 Appoyoaw 14 Apponabonna 15
Apponaquinta 16 Apponenotta 17 Apponsonaske 18 Apponasquoquin 19 Neeniss^hicke
20
The Indians count their time by nights, and not by days, as follows.
Sawup 1 sleeps Isoqu^^ocquock 2 sleeps Sucqunnocquocke 3 sleeps
Yoawqunnocquock 4 sleeps Abonetta ta sucqunnocquock 5 sleeps Nequitta ta
sucqunnocquock 6 sleeps Enotta ta sucqunnocquock 7 sleeps Soesicta
sucqunnocquock 8 sleeps Pausa quoquin sucqunnocquock 9 sleeps Pawquo
qunnocquock 10 sleeps
How they call their Months.
A quit-appause 1 months Neec-appause 2 months Ni^-appause 3 months Yoaw
appause 4 months Abonna appause 5 months Nequit appause 6 months E^otta
appause 7 months Sonaske appause 8 months Assaquoquin appause 9 months
Piocke appause 10 months App^na quit appause 11 months App^^^ce^ appause 12
months Apponnis appause 13 months Apponyouw appause 14 months Nap nappona
appause 15 months Nap napocquint appause 16 months Nap nap enotta appause 17
months Napsoe sick appause 18 months Nappawsoquoquin appause 16 months
Neesnischicke appause 20 months Neesnischicke appon a quit appause 21 months
Neesnischicke apponees appause 22 months Neesnischick apponis appause 23
months Neesnischick appo yoaw appause 24 months
The names of the Indians as they be divided into several Countries.
Tarrenteens Churchers Aberginians Narragansets Pequants N^pn^ts Connectacuts
Mowhacks
The Names of Sagamores.
Woenohaquahham Anglice King John Montowompate Anglice King James Mausquonomend
Igowam Sagamore Chickkatawbut Naponset Sagamore Caroni^^es Narraganset Sagamore
Osomeagen Sagamore of the Pequants Kekut Petchutacut Sagamore
Nassawwho^an Woesemagen
Two Sagamoes of Nipust. Pissacannua A Sagamore and most noted Nigromancer.
Sagamores to the East and North-east, bearing rule amongst the Churchers and
Tarrenteens.
Nepawhamis Asteco Assotomowite Nannopo^nacund Nattonanite. Noenotchuo^k
The names of the noted Habitations.
Merrimack Igowam Igoshaum Chobocco Anglice Nahumkeake Salem Saugus Swampscot
Nahant Winnisimmet Mis^aum Mishaumut Charles town Massachusetts Boston Mistick
Pigsgusset Water tow Napons^t Matampan Dorchester Pawtuxet Plymouth Wessaguscus
Conihosset Mannimeed Soewampse^ Situate Amuskeage Pemmiquid Saketeho^
Piscat^qua Cannibek Penopscot Pa^toquid Nawquot Musketoquid Nipnet Whawcheusets
At what places be Rivers of note.
Cannibeck River Merrimacke River T^bobocco River Saugus River Mistick River
Mishaum River Naponset River Wessaguscus River Luddams ^oard Narragausets River
Musk toquid River Hunniborne River Connectacut River
FINIS.

