A PREPOSITION to this FRONTISPIECE.
THis BOOK containing EMBLEMS, 'twas thought fit,
A Title Page should stand to usher it,
That Is Emblematicall: And, for that end,
Our AVTHOR, to the Graver did commend
A plain Invention; that it might be wrought,
According as his Fancy had forethought.
Instead thereof, the Workman brought to light,
What, here, you see; therein, mistaking quite
The true Design: And, so (with pains, and cost)
The first intended FRONTISPIECE, is lost.
The AVTHOR, was as much displeased, as He
In such Adventures, is inclined to be;
And, half resolved, to cast this PIECE aside,
As nothing worth: but, having better eyed
Those Errors, and Confusions, which may, there,
Blameworthy (at the first aspect) appear;
He saw, they fitted many Fantasies
Much better, then what Reason can devise;
And, that, the Graver (by mere Chance) had hit
On what, so much transcends the reach of Wit,
As made it seem, an Object of Delight,
To look on what, MISFORTVNE brought to light:
And, here it stands, to try his Wit, who lists
To pumpe the secrets, out of Cabalists.
If any think this Page will, now, declare
The meaning of those Figures, which are there,
They are deceived. For, Destiny denies
The utt'ring of such hidden Mysteries,
In these respects: First, This contains naught
Which (in a proper sense) concerns, ought,
The present-Age: Moreover, it is ordained,
That, none must know the Secrecies contained
Within this PIECE; but, they who are so wise
To find them out, by their own prudencies;
And, he that can unriddle them, to us,
Shall styled be, the second OEDIPVS.
It Is, likewise, thought expedient, now and then,
To make some Work, for those All-knowing men,
(To exercise upon) who think they see
The secret-meanings, of all things that be.
And, lastly, since we find, that, some there are,
Who best affect Inventions, which appear
Beyond their understandings; This, we knew
A Representment, worthy of their view;
And, here, we placed it, to be, to these,
A FRONTISPIECE, in any sense they please.


A COLLECTION OF EMBLEMES, ANCIENT AND MODERN: Quickened With METRICALL
ILLVSTRATIONS, both Moral and Divine: And disposed into LOTTERIES,

That Jnstruction, and Good Counsel, may be furthered by an Honest and
Pleasant Recreation.

By GEORGE WITHER.

The First Book.



LONDON, Printed by A.M. for John Grismond, and are to be sold at the sign of
the Gunne in Ivie-Lane. MDCXXXV.

REcensui hoc Poema, cui titulus est (A Collection and Illustration of Emblems
Ancient and Modern) in quo nihil reperio, quo minus cum utilitate imprimatur,
ita tamen, ut si non intra septem menses proxime sequentes Typis mandetur, haec
licentia sit omnino irrita.

GVIL. BRAY.
Ex aedibus Lambithanis Iul. 2. 1634.
A WRIT OF PREVENTION Concerning the AVTHORS Dedication of the four following
BOOKS, to those Royal, Princely, and Illustrious PERSONAGES, whose Names are
mentioned in this Leaf.
I Have not often used, with Epigrames,
Or, with Inscriptions unto many NAMES,
To charge my Books: Nor, had I done it, now,
If I, to pay the Duties which I owe,
Had other means; Or, any better Ways
To honor them, whose Virtue merits praise.
In ARCHITECT, it gives good content,
(And passes for a praisefull Ornament)
If, to adorn the FORE-FRONTS, Builders rear
The Statues of their Soveraigne-Princes, there;
And, trim the Outsides, of the other SQVARES
With Portraitures of some Heroicke PEERS.
If, therefore, I (the more to beautify
This Portion of my MUSES Gallerie)
Do, here, presume to place, the NAMES of those
To whose Deserts, my LOVE remembrance owes,
I hope 'twill none offend. For, most, who see
Their worthy mention, in this BOOK, to be,
Will think them honored: And, perhaps, it may
(To their high praise) be found, another day,
That, in these LEAVES their Names will stand unrac'd,
When many fairer STRVCTVRFS, are defaced.
Jn this Hope, I have placed on the FOREFRONT (or before the First Book of
these EMBLEMS) a Ioint-Inscription to the KING and QVEENES most excellent
MAJESTY.

Upon the Right-Side-Front of this Building (or before the Second Book) One
Inscription to the most hopeful Prince, CHARLES, Prince of Wales; And, another
to his dear Brother, JAMES, Duke of York, etc.

On the other Side-Front, (or before the Third Book) One Inscription to the
gracious Princess, FRANCES Dutchesse-Dowager of RICHMOND and LENOX; And,
another to her most noble Nephew, JAMES Duke of Lenox, etc.

On the Fourth Front of our Square, (Or before the Fourth Book) One
Inscription to the right Honorable PHILIP Earl of Pembrooke and Montgomery,
etc. And another to the right Honorable, HENRY Earl of Holland, etc.

TO THE READER.
IF there had not been some Books conceitedly composed, and suitable to mean
capacities, I am doubtful, whether I had ever been so delighted in reading,
as thereby to attain to the little Knowledge I have: For, I do yet remember,
that, things honestly pleasant, brought me by degrees, to love that which is
truly profitable. And as David said, His Heart showed him the wickedness of
the Ungodly; (meaning perhaps, that he felt in himself, some Experiments, of
the same natural Corruption, by which they are overcome, who resist not evil
suggestions at their first motions:) Even-so, I may truly acknowledge, that
mine own Experience has shown me so much of the common Ignorance and
Infirmity in mine own person, that it has taught me, how those things may
be wrought upon in others, to their best advantage.

Therefore, though I can say no more to dissuade from Vice, or to encourage men
to Ver^ue, than has already been said in many learned Authors; yet I may be
an occasion by these Endeavors, to bring that, the oftener into remembrance,
which they have, more learnedly, expressed^ and perhaps, by such circumstances,
as they would not descend unto, may insinuate further also with some
Capacities, than more applauded Means. Viniger, Salt, or common Water, (which
are very mean Ingredients) make Sawces more pleasing to some tastes, than
Sugar, and Spices. In like manner, plain and vulgar notions, seasoned with a
little Pleasantness, and relished with a moderate Sharpness, work that,
otherwhile, which the most admired Compositions could never effect in many
Readers; yea, we have had frequent proofs, that a blunt Jest has moved to
more consideration, than a judicious Discourse.

I take little pleasures in Rymes, Fictions, or conceited Compositions, for
their own sakes; neither could I ever take so much pains, as to spend time to
put my meanings into other words than such as flowed sorth, without Study;
partly because I delight more in Matter, than in Wordy Flourishes, But,
chiefly, because those Verbal Conceits, which by some, are accounted most
Elegant, are not only (for the greater part) Empty Sounds, and Impertinent
Clinches, in themselves; but, such Inventions, as do sometime, also, obscure
the Sense, to common Re^ders; and, serve to little other purpose, but for
Witty men to show Tricks one to another: For, the Ignorant understand them
not; and the Wise need them not.

So much of them, as (without darkning the matter, to them who most need
instruction) may be made use of, to stir up the Affections, win Attention,
or help the Memory, I approve and make use of, to those good purposes,
according as my leisure, and the measure of my Faculty will permit; that,
Vanity might not, to worse ends, get them wholly into her Possession. For, I
know that the meanest of such conceits are as pertinent to some, as Rattles,
and Hobby-horses to Children; or as the A.B.C. and Spelling, were at first to
those Readers, who are now past them. And, indeed, to desp^se Mean Inventions,
Pleasant Compositions, and Verbal Elegancies, (being qualified as is
aforesaid) or to banish them out of the world, because there be other things of
more excellency, were as absurd, as to neglect and root out all Herbs* which
will not make Pottage; Or, to destroy all Flowers which are less beautiful
than the Tulip, or less sweet than the Rose.

I (that was never so sullenly wise) have always intermingled Sports with
Seriousness in my Inventions; and, taken in Verball-conceites, as they came to
hand, without Affectation; But, having, ever aimed, rather to profit my
Readers, than to gain their praise, I never pumpe for those things; and am,
otherwhile, contented to seem Foolish, (yea, and perhaps, more fool^sh than I
am) to the Overweening-Wise; that, I may make others Wiser than they were: And,
(as I now do) am not ashamed to set forth a Game at Lots, or (as it were) a
Puppet-play in Pictures, to allure men to the more serious observation of the
profitable Morals, couched in these Emblems. Nevertheless, (if some have said,
and thought truly) my Poems have instructed, and rectified many People in the
Course of Honest-living, (which is the best Wisdom) much more than the
Austerer Volumes of some critical Authors; who, are by the Common-sort,
therefore only, judged Wise, because they composed Books, which few
understand, save they who need them not.

In these Lots and Emblems, I have the same aim which I had in my other
Writings: and though I have not dressed them sutably to curious Fancies, yet,
they yield wholesome nourishment to strengthen the constitution of a Good-life;
and, have solidity enough for a Play-game, which was but accidentally composed;
and, by this Occasion.

These Emblems, graven in Copper by Crispinus Passaeus (with a Motto in Greek,
Latin, or Italian, round about every Figure; and with two Lines (or Verses) in
one of the same Languages, periphrasing those Motto's) came to my hands, almost
twenty years past. The Verses were so mean, that, they were afterward cut
off from the Plates; And, the Collector of the said Emblems, (whether he were
the Versifier or the Graver, was neither so well advised in the Choice of them,
nor so exact in observing the true Proprieties belonging to every Figure, as
he might have been.

Yet, the Workman-ship being judged very good, for the most part; and the rest
excusable; some of my Friends were so much delighted in the Gravers art, and,
in those Illustrations which for mine own pleasure, I had made upon some few
of them, that, they requested me to Moralize the rest. Which I condiscended
unto: And, they had been brought to view many years ago, but that the Copper
Prints (which are now gotten) could not be procured out of Holland, upon any
reasonable Conditions.

If they were worthy of the Gravers and Printers cost, being only dumb
Figures, little useful to any but to young Gravers or Painters; and as little
delightful, except, to Children, and Childish-gazers: they may now be much
more worthy; seeing the life of Speech being added unto them, may make them
Teachers, and Remembrancers of profitable things.

I do not arrogate so much unto my Illustrations, as to think, they will be
able to teach any thing to the Learned; yet if they cast their eyes upon them,
perhaps, these Emblems, and their Morals, may remember them, either of some
Duty, which they might else forget, or mind them to beware of some Danger,
which they might otherwise be unheedfull to prevent. But, sure I am, the Vulgar
Capacities, may from them, be many ways both Instructed, and Remembered; yea,
they that have most need to be Instructed, and Remembered, (and they who are
most backward to listen to Instructions, and Remembrances, by the common Course
of Teaching, and Admonishing) shall be, hereby, informed of their Dangers, or
Duties, by the way of an honest Recreation before they be aware.

For, when levitie, or a childish delight in trifl^ng Objects, has allured
them to look on the Pictures; Curiosity may urge them to peep further, that
they might seek out also their Meanings, in our annexed Illustrations; In
which, may lurk some Sentence, or Expression, so evidently pertinent to t^eir
Estates, Persons, or Affections, as w^ll (at that instant or afterward) make
way for those Considerations, which will, at last, wholly change them, or much
better them, in their Conversation.

To seek out the Author of every particular Emblem, were a labor without
profit; and, I have been so far from endeavoring it, that, I have not so much
as cared to find out their meanings in any of these Figures; but, applied them,
rather, to such purposes, as I could think of, at first sight; which, upon a
second view, I found might have been much betterd, if I could have spared time
from other employments. Something, also, I was Confined, by obliging my self
to observe the same number of lines in every Illustration; and, otherwhile, I
was thereby constrained to conclude, when my best Meditations were but new
begun: which (though it has pleased Some, by the more comely Vn^formitie, in
the Pages) yet, it has much injured the liberty of my Muse.

There be, no doubt, some faults committed by the Printer, both Literal and
Material, and some Errors of the Gravers in the Figures, (as in the
Tetragrammaton; in the Figure of Arion; and in the Proprieties due to some
other Hieroglyphics; but, for the most part, they are such, as Common-Readers
will never perceive; and I think, that they who are Judicious, will so plainly
find them to be no faults of mine; that, leaving them to be amended by those,
to whom they appertain; and, You, to accept of these Play-games as you please:
I bid you Farewell.

The Occasion, Intention, and use of the Four Lotteries adjoined to these
four Books of Emblems.
STultorum plena sunt omnia. The world is grown so in Love with Folly, that
the Imprinting of over-solid and ser^ous ^^atises would undo the Booksellers;
especially, being so chargeable as the many costly Sculptures have made this
Book: therefore, (to advance their Profits, rather than to satisfy my own
Judgment) I was moved to invent somewhat, which might be likely to please the
vulgar Capacity, without hindrance to my chief End. And, though that which I
resolved on, be not so Plausible to Critical understandings, yet I am
contented to hazard among them, so much of my Reputation, as that comes to.

I have often observed, that where the Summer-bowers of Recreation are placed
near the Church, it draws thither more people from the remote Hamlets, than
would else be there. Now, though I praise not their Devotion, yet I am glad if
any thing (which is not evil in it self) may be made an occasion of Good*
(because, those things may, perhaps, be continued, at last, for Conscience
sake, which were at first begun upon vain occasions) and, have therefore
added Lotteries to these Emblems, to occasion the more frequent notice of the
Morals, and good Counsels tendered in their Illustrations; hoping that, at one
time or other, some shall draw those Lots, which will make them the better, and
the happier, whilst they live. I confess that this Devise may probably be
censured, as unsuitable to the gravitie expected in my ripe years: and be
reputed as great an Indecorum, as erecting an Alehouse at the Church-stile;
yet, the same having had beginning in my younger days, I do now resolve not to
be ashamed of it, for the Reasons aforementioned. To such as I was, it will be
someway avayleable: and perhaps, if the Wisest did otherwhile, when they walk
abroad, to Uncertain purposes, take up this Book, and (without Superstitious
Conceits) make trial what their Lots would remember, or give them cause to
think on; It might, now and then, either occasion better Proceedings, or
prevent Mischieves.

Some Games were ever in use; ever, I think, will be, and for ought I know,
ever may be without exception. And, I believe, this Recreation, will be as
harmless as any, if it be used according to my Intentions. For, my meaning is
not, that any should use it as an Oracle, which could signify, infallibly,
what is divinely alloted; but, to serve only for a Moral Pastime. And, that I
may no way encourage the secret entertaining of such a Fantasy, I do before
hand affirm unto them, that none but Children, or Idiots may be tolerated to
be so foolish, without laughing at.

Yet, if any one shall draw that Lot wherein his Secret vices are reproved; or
some good Counsels proposed, which in his own understanding are pertinent to
his welfare, let not such as those, pass them over as mere Casualties to
them; for, whatsoever these Lots are to others, or in themselves, they are to
all these, made pertinent in such cases, both by their particular Knowledges
and Occasions.

Some will think perhaps, that I have purposely invented this Game, that I
might find means to reprove men's vices, without being suspected, (as I have
hitherto unjustly been) to (...) at particular persons: For, if any who are
notoriously Guilty, shall by drawing their Chances, among other Companions, be
(...) with Lots, (which may now and then happen) that those Vices be thereby
intimated to the by stan^^^^ (...) them guilty they do (...) with (...) be
(...) at without my (...) such (...) are worthily suspected (...) ^^andalous
conversations, either forbear (...) excus^^^^ of they be justly sham^d by
their (...).

Having thus (...) the ^eason of this Inventio^, and made these (...) every man
has his (...), whether he will make (...) or no; he that will, is left to
his (...) of (...) how he shall make trial direction is given in the (...)
Pages of this Book.

This Game occasions not the frequent crime,
Of Swearing, or mispending of our Time;
Nor loss of money: For, the Play is short,
And, every Gamester wins by the sport.
We, therefore, know it may as well become
The Hall, the Parlor, or the Di^ing room,
As Chesse, or Tables; and, we think the Pr^^e
Will be as low; because, it needs no Dice.
What I WAS, is passed by,
What I AM, away does fly;
What I SHALL BE, none do see;
Yet, in that, my Beauties be.
The AVTHORS Meditation upon sight of his PICTVRE.
When I behold my Picture, and perceive,
How vain it is, our Portraitures to leave
In Lines, and Shadows, (which make shows, to day,
Of that which will, to morrow, fade away)
And, think, what mean Resemblances at best,
Are by Mechanike Instruments expressed;
I thought it better, much, to leave behind me,
Some Draught, in which, my living friends might find me
The same I am; in that, which will remain,
Till all is ruined, and repaired again:
And, which, in absence, will more truly show me,
Than, outward Forms, to those, who think they know me.
For, though my gracious MAKER made me such,
That, where I love, beloved I am, as much
As J desire; yet, Form, nor Features are,
Those Ornaments, in which J would appear
To future Times; Though they were found in me,
Far better, than I can believe they be.
Much less, affect I that, which each man knows,
To be no more, but Counterfeits of those,
Wherein, the Painters, or the Gravers tool,
Befriends alike, the Wiseman, and the Fool:
And, (when they please) can give him, by their Art,
The fairest-Face, that had the falsest-Heart.
A PICTVRE, though with most exactness made,
Is nothing, but the Shadow of a SHADE.
For, even our living Bodies, (though they seem
To others more, or more in our esteem)
Are but the shadows of that Reall-being,
Which does extend beyond the Fleshly-seeing;
And, cannot be discerned, till we rise
Immortall-Objects, for Immortall-eyes.
Our Everlasting-Substance lies unseene,
Behind the Fouldings, of a Carnall-Screene,
Which is, but, Vapors thickened into Blood,
(By due concoction of our daily food)
And, still supplied, out of other Creatures,
To keep us living, by their wasted natures:
Renewing, and decaying, every Day,
Until that Veil must be removed away.
For, this loved Flesh, wherewith, yet clothed we go,
Is not the same, we had sev'n years ago;
But, rather, something which is taken-in,
To serve instead of what has wasted bin,
In Wounds, in Sicknesses, in Colds, and Heates,
In all Excrescions, and in Fumes, and Sweates.
Nor shall, this present Flesh, long stay with us:
And, we may well be pleased, it should be Thus.
For, as I view, those Towns, and Fields, that be
In Landscape drawn; Even so, me thinks, I see
A Glimpes, far off, (through FAITH'S Prospective glass
Of that, which after Death, will come to pass;
And, likewise, gained have, such means of seeing,
Some things, which were, before my Life had being,
That, in my Soul, I should be discontent,
If, this my Body were, more permanent;
Since, We, and all God's other Creatures, here,
Are but the Pictures, of what shall appear.
Yet, whilst they are, I thankfully would make
That use of them, for their CREATOR'S sake,
To which he made them; and, preserve the Table,
Still, Fair and Full, as much as I were able,
By finishing, (in my allotted place)
Those Works, for which, he fits me by his Grace.
And, if a Wrenne, a Wrenn's just height shall soar,
No Aegle, for an Aegle, can do more.
If therefore, of my Labors, or of ME,
Ought shall remain, when I removed, must be,
Let it be that, wherein it may be viewed,
My MAKERS Image, was in me renewed:
And, so declare, a dutiful intent,
To do the Work I came for, e're I went;
That, I to others, may some Pattern be,
Of Doing-well, as other men to me,
Have been, whilst I had life: And, let my days
Be summed up, to my Redeemer's praise.
So this be gained, I regard it not,
Though, all that I am else, be quite forgot.
To the MAJESTY of Great Britain, France, and Jreland, the Most Illustrious
King, CHARLES; And his excellently beloved, the most gracious Queen MARY.
SEv'n years are full expired, Royal SIR,
Since last I kneeled, an offering to prefer
Before your feete^ where, now, my self I throw
To pay once more, the Tributes which I owe.
As many years are past, most beauteous QVEENE,
Since witnesses, mine ears and eyes, have been
Of those Perfections; which the general Fame
Has sounded forth, in honor of your Name.
And, both your beaming-splendors (oh ye fair,
Thrice blessed, and most fitly-matched PAIR)
Upon each other, make such bright reflections;
And have so sweetly mingled your affections,
Your Praise, your Pow're, your Virtues, and your Beauty:
That, (if preserving of my Sovereign duty,
This may be said) you do appear, to me,
TWO PERSONS, in One MAJESTY, to be;
To whom, there, appertains (in veneration
Of your large Worth) the right of some Oblation:
And, best, I thought, my Homage would be done,
If, thus, the tender were to BOTH-in-ONE.
Which, in this humble GVIFT, my Love presents;
And, wishes it may add to your Contents.
Perhaps it shall: For, though I dare not show
These Figures, as well meriting your view;
Nor boast, as if their Moralls couched ought,
By which your sacred Wisdoms may be taught:
Yet, I have humble Hopings, that, they might
Prove, some way, an occasion of delight;
Since mean and common Objects, now and then,
Beget contentments in the greatest-men.
But, that before this Book, I should propose
Your praisefull NAMES, there is (as I suppose)
A fair inducement: For, considering these
Are EMBLEMS, whose intention is to please
And profit vulgar Judgments (by the view,
Of what they ought to follow, or eschew.)
And, I well knowing, that your MAJESTY'S
Set forth before my Book, in Emblem-wise,
Throughout your Lands, more Virtues might convay,
Than many Volumes, of these Emblems, may;
It seemed Petty-treason, to omit
This good occasion of endeavoring it.
For, (if your MAJESTY'S, well heeded, were)
You, double-treble-foure-fold Emblems are;
Which, fully to illustrate, would require
The Wit I want; or, means to raise, that, higher
Which I have gained; (and, which, as yet, has flowne
By no encouragements, but by her own.)
Of all the Virtues OECONOMICAL,
Of Duties MORAL and POLITICAL,
Your Lives are Patterns, and fair EMBLEMS; whether
Considered apart, or both together.
Your CHILDHOODS were bright Mirrours, which did show
What Duties Children, to their Parents owe:
And, by the sequel, we now understand,
That, they who best obay'd, can best command.
The glorious Virtues of your NVPTIALL- state,
Your Courtiers, find so hard to imitate,
That, they admire them, rather; and, would swear,
(Had others told, what, now they see and hear)
That, all the former Times, were not acquainted,
With such a Pair, when Kings and Queens were Sainted.
The chastest Cupids, and the gamesom'st Graces,
Are always mingled in your Deare-embraces.
The mutual enterchanges of your loves,
May teach affection to the Turtle doves:
And, such as are with goodly sights, delighted,
May see in You, all Excellence uni^ed.
You, SIR, who bear Jove's Thunders in your Fist,
And, (shake this Islands EMPIRE when You list)
Did never in your Orb, a Tempest move
But, by the Beauteous Mistress of your Love
It might be calmed. And, in your lofty Sphere,
Most lovely QVEENE, Your Motions ever mere
So smoath, and, so direct; that none can say,
They have withdrawn his Royall-heart awa^
From Just Designs; Which, lo^dly speaks your Praise,
And, intimates much (...) than, yet ^t sa^es.
Yea, both Your Splendors (...) glorious grow,
And, You, each other have out-vyed so,
In these, and other Virtues, that, on You,
Should I confer what praise I think is due,
My Lines, (which from that stune have, yet, been clear)
Would Flattery seem, unto an envious ear.
But, what needs Flattery, where the Truth may teach
To praise, beyond immodest Flatt'ries reach?
Or, what needs he to fear a slandrous-mouth,
Who seeks no meed, nor utters more than Truth?
Your Princely Virtues, what can better show,
Than Peace, and Plenty, which have thrived so,
Whilst You have reigned that, yet, no people see,
A Richer, or more Peaceful time, than we?
Your Civil Actions (to the public eye)
Are fair examples of Morality,
So manifest; That, if he Truth did sing,
Who said. The World does imitate the King;
My Muses dare, with boldness to presage,
A Chaste, a Pious, and a Prosperous Age:
And, that, the storms which, late, these Realms deterred,
Shall all be quite removed, or deferred
Till you Ascend; And, future times have seen,
That, your Examples have not followed been.
Thus, you are living Emblems, to this Nation:
Which being marked with heedefull speculation,
May serve, as well, to help us how to see
Our Happiness, As, what our Duties be.
And, if I might unlocke all Mysteries,
Which do declare, how in a foure-fold-wise,
Your Lives are useful EMBLEMS; I, perchance,
Should vex blind Zeal, or anger Ignorance;
And, teach well-tempered Spirits, how to see,
That, we, for Blessings, often, Unthankful be.
For, as you, Both, Prime Children are of those
Two Sister-Churches, betwixt whom, yet, grows
Unseemly strife; So, You; perhaps, may be
An Emblem, how those MOTHERS may agree.
And, not by your Example, only, show,
How wrought it may be; but, effect it so.
Yea, peradventure, GOD, united You,
That, such a blessed UNION might ensue:
And, that, Your living-lovingly, together;
Your Christian hopefullnesse, of one another;
Your mild forbearance, harsh attempts to prove;
Your mutual waiting, until God shall move
By some calme-voice, or peaceful inspiration,
That Heart Which needs better Information;
And, that, your Charities, might give a sign,
How, ^ll the Daughters, of the SPOUSE Divine
Might reconciled be; And show, that, Swords,
Flames, Threats, and Fury, make no true Accords.
GOD grant a better UNION may appear:
Yet, wi^h I not the tollerating here,
Of Politicke-Agreements; (further than
Our wholesome Laws* and, Civill-vowes to man,
With Piety, approve) but, such, as may
Make up a blessed CONCORD, every way:
Might it be so; your Virtues, would become
A Glorious Blessing, to all CHRISTENDOM:
Your EMBLEM should, by future Generations;
Be placed among the famous Constellations,
And, aftertimes (though, Me, this Age despise)
Would think, these Verses, had been Prophecies.
What ever may succeed, my Prayers and Powr's
Are this way bent; with Hope, that You or Yours
Shall Helps (at least) become, that Breach to close,
Which, in the SEAMLES-ROBE, yet, wider grows.
SO BE IT: And, let bright your Glories be,
For ever, though You never shine on ME.
Your MAJESTY'S most Loyal Subject, GEO: WITHER.

By Knowledge only, Life we gain,
All other things to Death pertain.

VIVITVR INGENIO CAETERA MORTIS ERV^T


ILLVSTRATIO I. Book. 1.
HOw Fond are they, who spend their precious Time
In still pursuing their deceiving Pleasures?
And they, that unto ayery Titles clime
Or tire themselves in hoording up of Treasures?
For, these are Death's, who, when with weariness
They have acquired most, sweepes all away;
And leaves them, for their Labors, to possess
Naught but a raw-bon'd Carcass lapt in clay.
Of twenty hundred thousands, who, this hour
Vaunt much, of those Possessions they have got;
Of their new purchac'd Honors, or, the Power,
By which, they seem to have advanced their Lot:
Of this great Multitude, there shall not Three
Remain, for any Future age to know;
But perish quite, and quite forgotten be,
As Beasts, devoured twice ten years ago.
Thou, therefore, who desir'st for aye to live,
And to possess thy Labors maugre Death,
To needful Arts and honest Actions, give
Thy Spanne of Time, and thy short blast of Breath.
In holy Studies, exercise thy Mind;
In works of Charity, thy Hands employ;
That Knowledge, and that Treasure, seek to find,
Which may enrich thy Heart with perfect Joy.
So, though obscured thou appear, awhile,
Despised, poor, or borne to Fortunes low,
Thy Virtue shall acquire a nobler st^le,
Then greatest Kings are able to bestow:
And, gain thee those Possessions, which, nor They,
Nor Time, nor Death, have power to take away.
The Man that has true Wisdom got,
Continues firm, and wavers not.

SAPIENTIA CONSTANS


ILLVSTR. II. Book. 1.
STill fixed, and with triumphant Laurel crowned,
Is truest Wisdom; whom, expressed thus,
Among the old Impresa's, we have found;
And, much, this Emblem has instructed us.
For, hence we learn; that, Wisdom does not flow
From those unconstant men, whom every Blast,
Or small Occasion, turns to and fro;
But, from a Settled-head that stands fast.
Who'ever shoulders, him, he gives no place;
What Storm soever, his Times or Fortunes, breath,
He neither hides his Brow, nor turns his Face;
But, keeps his Looks undaunted, even in Death.
The Laureat-head, upon the Pillar set,
Thus signifies; And that Bay-wreath does show
That constant Wisdom will the conquest get,
When giddy Policy prevails not so.
If, therefore, thou desire to be taught,
Propose good Ends with honest Means thereto,
And therein Constant be, till thou have brought
To perfect end, that Work, thou have to do.
Let neither flattering Pleasures, nor Disgrace,
Nor scoffing Censures, nor the cunning Sleigh^s
Of glozing Sycophants, divert that Race
To which, a harmless Prudence, thee invites.
Though others plot, conspire, and undermine,
Keep thou a plain right Path; and let their Course,
For no advantage, make thee change from thine,
Although it (for the present) seems the worse.
He, thus that works, puts Policy to School,
And makes the Machavilian prove a fool.
The Law is given to direct;
The Sword, to punish and protect.

LEX REGIT ET ARMA TVENTVR.


ILLVSTR. III. Book. 1.
WHen God-Almighty first engraved in stone
His holy Law; He did not give the same
As if some common Act had then been done;
For, armed with Fires and Thunders, forth it came.
By which, that great Lawmakers, might infer
What d^eadfull Vengeance would on those attend,
Who did against those holy Precepts err;
And, that, his Power, well-doers could defend.
Thereto, this Emblem, also does agree;
For, lo, before the Tables of the Law,
A naked Sword is borne, whose use may be
As well to keep in Safety, as in Awe.
Whence, Princes (if they please) this note may take,
(And it shall make them happily to reign)
That, many good and wholesome Laws to make
Without an Executioner, is vain.
It likewise intimates, that such as are
In Sovereign place, as well obliged be
Their zeal for true Religion to declare,
As, what concerns Manners, to foresee.
It lastly, shows that Princes should affect
Not only, over others to Command,
But Swords to wear, their Subjects to protect;
And, for their Guard, extend a willing hand.
For, Laws, or Peace to boast of; and, the whiles,
The Publique-weale, to weaken or disarme,
Is nor the way to hinder Civill-Broyles,
Nor to secure it from a Forraigne-harme.
For, As by Laws a Land is kept in f^ame;
So, Arms is that, which must protect the same.
Occasions-past are sought in vain;
But, often, they wheele-about again.

NE TENEAR


ILLVSTR. IV. Book. 1.
UNwise are they that spend their youthful Prime
In Vanities; as if they did suppose
That men, at pleasure, might redeem the Time;
For, they a fair advantage fondly lose.
As ill-advis'd be those, who having lost
The first Occasions, to Despa^ring run:
For, Time has Revolutions; and, the most,
For their Affairs, have Seasons more, then one.
Nor is their Folly small, who much depend
On Transitory things, as if their Power
Could bring to pass what should not have an End;
Or compass that, which Time will not devour.
The first Occasions, therefore, see thou take
(Which offered are) to bring thy hopes about;
And, mind thou, still, what Haste away they make,
Before thy swift-pac't hours are quite run out.
Yet, if an Opportunity be past,
Despair not thou, as they that hopeless be;
Since, Time may so revolve again, at last,
That New-Occasions may be offered thee.
And see, thou trust not on those fading things,
Which by thine own Endeavors thou acquir'st:
For, Time (which her own Births to ruin brings)
Will spare, nor thee, nor ought which thou desir'st.
His Properties, and Uses, what they are,
In vain observed will be, when he is fled:
That, they in season, therefore, may appear,
Our Emblem, thus, has him deciphered;
Balde save before, and standing on a Wheel;
A Razor in his Hand, a Winged-Heele.
By Labor, Virtue may be gained;
By Virtue, Glory is attained.

LABOR VIRTUES, VIRTVTE GLORIA PARATVR


ILLVSTR. V. Book. I,
SVppose you Sirs, those mimicke Apes you meet
In strange fantastic habits? or the Rabble,
That in gay clothes embroyder out the street,
Are truly of Worshipful or Honorable?
Or can you think, that, To be borne the Son
Of some rich Alderman, or ancient Peer,
Or that the Fame our Predecessors won
May claim those Wreathes which true Deserving wear?
Is Honor due to those, who spend their days
In courting one another? or consuming
Their Fortunes and themselves, on Drabbs and Plays?
In sl^eping, drinking, and Tobacco-fuming?
Not so. For, (though such Fools, like children, place
Gay Titles on each other) Wisemen know
What slaves they be; how miserably-base;
And, where such Attributes would better show.
An idle Body clothes a vicious Mind;
And, what (at best) is purchac'd by the same,
Is nothing else, but stinking Smoke and Wind;
Or froth^e Bubbles of an empty Fame.
True Glory, none did ever purchase, yet,
T^ll, to be Virtuous they could first attain,
Nor shall those men fai^e Virtues favor get,
Who labor not, such Dignities to gain.
And, this Impresa does infer no less:
For, by the Spade, is Labor here implide;
The Snake, a virtuous Prudence, does express;
And, Glory, by the Wreath is Typiside.
For, where a virtuous Industry is found,
She, shall with Wreaths of G^ory, thus be crowned.
Though Fortune prove true Virtues Foe,
It cannot work her Overthrowe.

NON OBEST VIRTVTI SORS.


ILLVSTR. VI. Book. 1.
UNhappy men are they, whose Ignorance
So slaves them to the Fortunes of the Time,
That they (attending on the Lot of Chance)
Neglect by Virtue, and Deserts, to clime.
Poor Heights they be which Fortune reares unto;
And, fickle is the Favor she bestows:
Today, she makes; tomorrow, does undo;
Builds up, and in an instant overthrowes.
On easy Wheels, to Wealth, and Honors high,
She winds men often, before they be aware;
And, when they dream of most Prosperity,
Down, headlong, throws them lower then they were.
You, then, that seek a more assured estate,
On good, and honest Objects, fix your Mind,
And follow Virtue, that you may a Fate
Exempt from fear of Change, or Dangers, find.
For, he that is Virtuous, whether high or low
His Fortune seems (or whether foul or fair
His Path he finds) or whether friend, or foe,
The World does prove; regards it not a hair.
His Loss is Gain; his Poverty is Wealth;
The Worlds Contempt, he makes his Diadem;
In Sickness, he rejoices, as in Health:
Yea, Death it self, becomes Life, to him.
He fears no disrespect, no bitter scorn,
Nor subtle plottings, nor Oppressions force;
Nay, though the World should topsie-turvie turn,
It cannot fright him, nor divert his Course.
Above all Earthly powers his Virtue reares him;
And, up with Eglets wings, to Heaven it bears him.
A fickle Woman wanton grown,
Preferres a Crowd, before a Crown.

NON SCEPTRO SED PLECTRO DVCITVR


ILLVSTR. VII. Book. 1.
Fool! Do thou hope, thine Honors, or thy Gold,
Shall gain thee Love? Or, that thou have her heart
Whose hand upon thy tempting Bay^ lays hold?
Alas! fond Lover, thou deceived art.
She that with Wealth, and Titles, can be won,
Or wooed with Vanities, will way ring be;
And, when her Love, thou most dependest on,
A Fiddle-sticke shall win her heart from thee.
To Youth and Music, Venus leans most;
And (though her hand she on the Scepter lay)
Let Greatness, of her Favors never boast:
For, Heart and Eye, are bent another way.
And lo, no glorious Purchase that Man gets,
Who has with such poor Trifles, wooed, and won:
Her footing, on a Ball, his Mistress sets,
Which in a moment slips, and she is gone.
A Woman, merely with an Out side caught,
Or tempted with a Galliard, or a Song,
Will him forsake (whom she most lovely thought)
For Players and for Tumblers, ere't be long.
You, then, that wish your Love should ever last,
(And would enjoy Affection without changing)
Love where your Loves may worthily be plac^t;
And, keep your own Affection, still from ranging.
Use noble Means, your Longings to attain;
Seek equal Minds, and well beseeming Years:
They are (at best) vain Fools, whom Folly gain;
But, there is Bliss, where, Virtue most endeares:
And, wheresoever, Affection she procures,
In spite of all Temptations, it endures.
This Ragge of Death, which thou shall see,
Consider it; And Pious be.

IN HVNC INTVENS PIUS ESTO


ILLVSTR. VIII. Book. I.
WHy, silly Man! so much admirest thou
Thy present Fortune? overvaluing so
Thy Person, or the beauty of thy Brow?
And Clothed, so proudly, wherefore do thou go?
Why do thou live in riotous Excess?
And Boast, as if thy Flesh immortal were?
Why do thou gather so? Why so oppress?
And, over thy Fellow Creatures, Domineere?
Behold this Emblem, such a thing was he
Whom this does represent as now thou art;
And, such a Fleshlesse Raw-bone shall thou be,
Though, yet, thou seem to act a comelier part.
Observe it well; and mark what Ugliness
Stares through the sightlesse Eye holes, from within:
Note those lean Craggs, and with what Gastlinesse,
That horrid Countenance does seem to grin.
Yea, view it well; and having seen the same
Pluck down that Pride which puffs thy heart so high;
Of thy Proportion boast not and (for shame)
Repent thee of thy sinful Vanity.
And, having learned, that, all men must become
Such bare Anatomies; and, how this Fate
No mortal Power, nor Wit, can keep thee from;
Live so, that Death may better thy estate.
Consider who created thee; and why:
Renew thy Spirit, ere thy Flesh decays:
More Pious grow; Affect more Honesty;
And seek hereafter thy Creatours praise.
So though of Breath and Beauty Time deprive thee,
New Life, with endless Glory, God will give thee.
Before thou bring thy Works to Light,
Consider on them, in the Night.

IN NOCTE CONSILIV^


ILLVSTR. IX. Book. 1.
AN Owl (the Hieroglyphicke used for Night)
Twixt Mercury and Pallas, here takes place,
Upon a crowned Caduceus fixed upright;
And, each a Cornucopia does embrace.
Through which dark Emblem, I this Light perceive;
That, such as would the Wit and Wealth acquire,
Which may the Crown of approbation have,
Must wake by Night, to compass their desire.
For, this Mercurian-Wand, does Wit express;
The Cornu-copia, Wealthinesse implies;
Both gained by a studious Watchfulness;
Which, here, the Bird of Athens signifies.
Nor, by this Emblem, are we taught alone,
That, (when great Undertakings are intended)
We Sloth, and lumpish Drowsinesse must shun;
But, Rashness, also, here is reprehended.
Take Counsel of thy Pillow, (says our Saw)
And, ere in weighty Matters thou proceed,
Consider well upon them; lest they draw
Some Afterclaps, which may thy Mischief breed.
I, for my seriou'st Muses, choose the Night;
(More friend to Meditation, then the Day)
That neither Noise, nor Objects of the Sight,
Nor bus'nesses, withdraw my Thoughts away,
By Night, we best may ruminate upon
Our Purposes; Then, best, we may enquire
What Actions we amiss, or well, have done;
And, then, may best into our Selves retire:
For, of the World-without, when most we see,
Then, blindest to the World-within, are we.
An Innocent no Danger fears,
How great soever it appears.

SPERNIT PERICULA VIRTUS


ILLVSTR. X. Book. I.
WHen some did seek Arion to have drowned,
He, with a dreadlesse heart his Temples crowned;
And, when to drench him in the Seas they meant,
He played on his melodious- Instrument;
To show, that Innocence disdayned Fear,
Though to be swallowed in the Deeps it were.
Nor did it perish: For, upon her Back
A Dolphin took him, for his Musick's sake:
To intimate, that Virtue shall prevail
With Brutish Creatures, if with Men it fail.
Most vain is then their Hope, who dream they can
Make wretched, or undo, an Honest-Man:
For, he whom Virtuous Innocence adornes,
Insults over Cruelties; and, Peril scorns.
Yea, that, by which, Men purpose to undo him,
(In their despite) shall bring great Honors to him.
Arion-like, the Malice of the World,
Has into Seas of Troubles often hurled
Deserving Men, although no Cause they had,
But that their Words and Works sweet Music made.
Of all their outward Helps it has bereft them;
Nor means, nor hopes of Comfort have been left them;
But such, as in the House of Mourning are,
And, what Good-Conscience can afford them there.
Yet, Dolphin-like, their Innocence has reared
Their Heads above those Dangers that appeared.
God has vouchsafed their harmless Cause to heed,
And even in Thraldom, so their Hearts has freed,
That, whilst they seemed oppressed and forlorn;
They Ioyd, and Sung, and Laughed the World to scorn.
When thou a Dangerous-Way do go,
Walk surely, though thy pace be slow.

AD SCOPVM LICET AEGRE ET FRVSTRA


ILLVSTR. X^. Book. 1.
EXperience proves, that Men who trust upon
Their Natural parts, too much, often lose the Day,
And, fail in that which else they might have done,
By vainly trifling precious Time away.
It also shows, that many Men have fought
With so much Rashness, those things they desired,
That they have brought most likely Hopes to naught;
And, in the middle of their Courses, tired.
And, not a few, are found who so much wrong
Gods Gratiousnesse, as if their thinkings were,
That (seeing he deferres his Judgments long)
His Vengeance, he, for ever, would forbear:
But, such as these may see wherein they fail,
And, what would fitter be for them to do,
If they would contemplate the slow-paced Snaile;
Or, this our Hieroglyphicke look into:
For, thence we learn, that Perseverance brings
Large Works to end, though slowly they creep on;
And, that Continuance perfects many things,
Which seem, at first, unlikely to be done.
It warnes, likewise, that some Affairs require
More Heed then Haste: And that the Course we take,
Should suite as well our Strength, as our Desire;
Else (as our Proverb says) Haste, Waste may make.
And, in a Mysticke-sense, it seems to preach
Repentance and Amendment, unto those
Who live, as if they lived beyond Gods reach;
Because, he long deferres deserved Blows:
For, though Iust-Vengeance moves like a Snaile,
And slowly comes; her coming will not fail.
As, to the World I naked came,
So, naked-stript I leave the same.

PANTA LELOIPA.


ILLVSTR. XII. Book. 1.
Thrice happy is that, Man whose Thoughts do rear
His Mind above that pitch the Worldling flies,
And by his Contemplations, hovers where
He viewes things mortal, with unbleared eyes.
What Trifles then do Villages and Towns
Large Fields or Flocks of fruitful Cattle seem?
Nay, what poor things are Miters, Scepters, Crowns,
And all those Glories which Men most esteem?
Though he that has among them, his Delight,
Brave things imagines them (because they blind
With some false Luster his beguiled fight)
He that is above them, their meane-Worth may find.
Lord, to that Blessed-Station me convey
Where I may view the World, and view her so,
That I her true Condition may survey;
And all her Imperfections rightly know.
Remember me, that once there was a Day
When thou did weane me from them with content,
Even when shut up within those Gates I lay
Through which the Plague-inflicting Angel went.
And, let me still remember, that an Hour
Is hourly coming on, wherein I shall
(Though I had all the World within my power)
Be naked stripped, and turned out of all.
But mind me, chiefly, that I never cleave
Too closely to my Self; and cause thou me,
Not other Earthly things alone to leave,
But to forsake my Self for love of Thee:
That I may say, now I have all things left,
Before that I of all things, am berest.
To him a happy Lot befalls
That has a Ship, and pros'prous Gales.

REMIGIO VENTISQUE SECVNDIS


ILLVSTR. XIII. Book. 1.
NO wonder he a prosperous Voyage finds
That has both Sails and Oars to serve his turn,
And, still, through means of some propitious Winds
Is to his wished Harbor, swiftly borne.
Nor is it much admired, if they that lack
Those aids (on which the Common faith depends)
Are from their hoped aims repelled back,
Or made to labor for unfruitful ends.
Yet neither in the Ship, Wind, Oars, or Sails,
Nor in the want of Outward means, alone,
Consists it, that our Hope succeedes or fails;
But, most in that, which Men least think upon.
For, some endeavor, and their Pains are blessed
With Gales which are so fortunate, that they
Fly safe, and swiftly on, among the best,
Whilst others labor, and are cast away.
Some others, on this Worlds wide Ocean floate,
And neither Wind, nor Tide assistant have,
Nor Sail, nor Oar, nor Anchor, nor sound Boat,
Nor take so much as heed themselves to save;
And yet are safe: A third sort, then, there are
Who neither want fit Means, nor yet neglect
The painful- Industry, or honest Care,
Which Need requires; yet find small good effect.
Therefore, let that which you propose, be Just;
Then, use the fairest Means, to compass it:
And, though Means fail, yet foster no mistrust;
But fearelesly, to God, your Course commit:
For, He, to Faithful Hearts, and Honest-Mindes
Turns Loss to Gain; and Storms to prosperous Winds.
When Vice and Virtue Youth shall woo,
It Is hard to say, which way 'twill go.

QVID SI SIC


ILLVSTR. XXII. Book. 1.
MY hopeful Friends at thrice five years and three,
Without a Guide (into the World alone)
To seek my Fortune, did adventure me;
And, many hazards, I alighted on.
First, Englands greatest Rendevouz I sought,
Where VICE and VERTVE at the highest sit;
And, thither, both a Mind and Body brought,
For neither of their Services unfit.
Both, wooed my Youth: And, both persuaded so,
That (like the Young man in our Emblem here)
I stood, and cried, Ah! which way shall I go?
To me so pleasing both their Offers were.
VICE, Pleasures best Contentments promised me,
And what the wanton Flesh desires to have:
Quoth VERTVE, I will Wisdom give to thee,
And those brave things, which noblest Minds do crave.
Serve me said VICE, and thou shall soon acquire
All those Achievements which my Service brings:
Serve me said VERTVE, and I Will raise thee higher,
Then VICES can, and teach thee better things.
Whilst thus they strove to gain me, I espyde
Grim Death attending VICE; and, that her Face
Was but a painted Vizard, which did hide
The foul'st Deformity that ever was.
LORD, grant me grace for evermore to view
Her Ugliness: And, that I viewing it,
Her Falsehoods and allurements may eschew;
And on fair VERTVE my Affection set;
Her Beauties contemplate, her Love embrace,
And by her safe Direction, run my Race.
I pine, that others may not perish,
And waste my Self, their Life to cherish.

DVM NVTRIO CONSVMOR


ILLVSTR. XV. Book. 1.
OBserve I pray you, how the greedy Flame
The Fuel, on an Altar does consume.
How it destroys that which feeds the same,
And how the Nourisher away does fume.
For, so it fares with Parents that uphold
Their thriftlesse Children in unlawful Pleasures:
With Cares, it wears them out, ere they are old;
And ere their Lives consume, consumes their Treasures.
So fares it with such Wantons as do feed
Unchaste Desires; for, every day they grow
Until their Longing's, their Supplies exceed,
And, quite devour those men that fed them so.
So fares it with all those that spend their Youth
In laboring to enrich ungrateful Men,
Who, growing Great, and Wealthy, by their Truth,
Return them Smoke and Ashes back again.
So fa^es it with good Statesmen, who to keep
A thankelesse Commonwealth in happy Peace,
Deprive their Minds of Rest, their Eyes of Sleep,
And, waste themselves, that others may increase.
And, so it fares with Men that pass away
Their time in Studies, (and their Healths impair)
That helps to other men become they may,
And, their defective Knowledges, repair.
But, let my Flesh, my Time, and my Estate,
Be so consumed; so spent; so wasted be,
That they may nourish Grace, and pe^fit that
For which all these were first bestowd'd on me:
So when I quite am vanished out of seeing,
I shall enjoy my Now-concealed-Being.
When to suppress us, Men intend,
They make us higher to ascend.

CONCVSSVS SVRGO


ILLVSTR. XVI. Book. 1.
WHen we observe the Ball, how to and fro
The Gamesters force it; we may ponder thus:
That whilst we live we shall be played with so,
And that the World will make her Game of us.
Adversities, one while our hearts constrain
To stoop, and knock the Pavements of Despair;
Hope, like a Whirlwind mounts us up again,
Till often it lose us in the empty air.
Sometimes, above the Battlements we look;
Sometimes, we quite below the Line are tossed:
Another-while, against the Hazard struck,
We, but a little want, of being lost.
Detraction, Envy, Mischief, and Despite,
One Party make, and watchfully attend
To catch us when we rise to any Height;
Lest we above their hatred should ascend.
Good-Fortune, Praises, Hopes, and Industries,
Do side-together, and make Play to please us;
But, when by them we think more high to rise,
More great they make our Fall, and more disease us.
Yea, they that seek our Loss, advance our Gain;
And to our Wishes, bring us often the nigher:
For, we that else upon the Ground had lain,
Are, by their striking of us lifted higher.
When Balls against the Stones are hardest thrown,
Then highest up into the Air they fly;
So, when men hurl us (with most fury) down,
We hopeful are to be advanced thereby:
And, when they smite us quite unto the Ground,
Then, up to Heaven, we trust, we shall rebound.
Till God has wrought us to his Will,
The Hammer we shall suffer still.

DVM EXTENDAR


ILLVSTR. XVII. Book. 1.
WHy should the foolish World discourage Men,
In just endurances? or bid them shun
Good Actions, 'cause they suffer now and then,
For Doing well, as if some Ill were done?
Ere Plates extended are, they must abide
A thousand hamm'rings; And, then that which filled
So little room, it scarce your Hand could hide,
Will serve a goodly Monument to gild.
So, he that hopes to win an honest Name,
Must many blows of Fortune undergo,
And hazard, often, the blast of Evill-Fame,
Before a Good-Report her Trumpe will blow.
A thousand Worthies had unworthily
Been raked up in Ashes and in Clay,
Unknown and buried in Obscurity,
If Malice had not filled their Rust away.
But, lo^; their lasting praises now are spread,
And raised, by Adverse-Chance, to such a height,
That they most glorious are, now they are dead;
And live in Injuries, and Deaths, despite.
For, by Afflictions, man refined grows,
And, (as the Gold prepared in the Fire)
Receives such a Form by wrongs and blows,
That he becomes the Jewel we desire.
To thee therefore, Oh God! Mv Prayers are
Not to be freed from Griefs and Troubles quite:
But, that they may be such as I can bear;
And, serve to make me precious in thy Sight.
This please me shall, though all my Life time, I
Between thine Anvill and the Hammer, lie.
From thence, where Nets and Snares are laid,
Make-hast; lest else you be betrayed.

MATVRA


ILLVSTR. XVIII. Book. 1.
THe nimble Spider from his Entrails draws
A subtle Thread, and curious art does show
In weaving Nets, not much unlike those Laws
Which catch Small-Thieves, and let the Great-ones go.
For, as the Cob-web takes the lesser Flies,
When those of larger size break through their Snares;
So, Poor men smart for little Injuries,
When Rich-men escape, whose Guilt is more then theirs.
The Spider, also represents such
Who very curious are in Trifling things,
And neither Cost, nor Time, nor Labor grutch,
In that which neither Gain nor Pleasure brings.
But those whom here that Creature does implye
Are chiefly such, who under cunning shows
Of simple-Meanings (or of Courtesy)
Do silly Men unwarily abuse.
Or else, it means those greedy- Cormorants
Who without touch, of Conscience or Compassion,
Seek how to be enricht by others wants,
And bring the Poor to utter Desolation.
Avoid them therefore, though compelled by need,
Or if a Storm enforce, (ye laboring Bees)
That ye must fall among them; Fly with speed
From their Commerce, when Calmes your passage frees.
Much more, let wastfull Gallants haste from these;
Else, when those Idling-painted- Butterflies,
Have flutter'd-out their Summertime, in ease,
(And spent their Wealth in foolish Vanities)
The Blasts of Want may force them to be brought
For shelter thither, where they shall be caught.
When thou a Dangerous-Way do go,
Walk surely, though thy pace be slow.

LENT SED ATTENTE


ILLVSTR. XXI. Book. 1.
EXperience proves, that Men who trust upon
Their Natural parts, too much, often lose the Day,
And, fail in that which else they might have done,
By vainly trifling precious Time away.
It also shows, that many Men have sought
With so much Rashness, those things they desired,
That they have brought most likely Hopes to naught;
And, in the middle of their Courses, tired.
And, not a few, are found who so much wrong
Gods Gratiousnesse, as if their thinkings were,
That (seeing he deferres his Judgments long)
His Vengeance, he, for ever, would forbear:
But, such as these may see wherein they fail,
And, what would fitter be for them to do,
If they would contemplate the slow-paced Snaile;
Or, this our Hieroglyphicke look into:
For, thence we learn, that Perseverance brings
Large Works to end, though slowly they creep on;
And, that Continuance perfects many things,
Which seem, at first, unlikely to be done.
It warnes, likewise, that some Affairs require
More Heed then Haste: And that the Course we take,
Should suite as well our Strength, as our Desire;
Else (as our Proverb says) Haste, Waste may make.
And, in a Mysticke-sense, it seems to preach
Repentance and Amendment, unto those
Who live, as if they lived beyond Gods reach;
Because, he long deferres deserved Blows:
For, though Iust-Vengeance moves like a Snaile,
And slowly comes; her coming will not fail.
A Sive, of shelter makes show;
But every Storm will through it go.

TRANSEAT


ILLVSTR. XX. Book. 1.
SOme Men, when for their Actions they procure
A likely color, (be it nere so vain)
Proceed as if their Projects were as sure,
As when Sound Reason did their Course maintain:
And these not much unlike those Children are,
Who through a Storm advent'ring desp'rately,
Had rather on their Heads, a Sive to bear,
Then Cov'rings, that may serve to keep them dry.
For, at a distance that perchance is thought
A helpful Shelter; and, yet, proves to those
Who need the same, a Toy, which profits naught;
Because, each drop of Ra^ne quite through it, goes.
So, they, whose foolish Projects, for a while,
Do promise their Projectors hopeful ends,
Shall find them, in the Trial, to beguile;
And, that both Shame and Want, on them attends.
Such like is their estate, who, (to appear
Rich-men to others) do, with Inward-payne,
A gladsome out-ward Port desire to bear;
Though they at last nor Wealth nor Credit gain.
And, such are all those Hypocrites, who strive
False Hearts beneath Fair spoken Words to hyde:
For, they o'^evaile themselves but with a Sive,
Through which, their purposes at length are spyde.
And, then, they either woefully-lament
Their Bruitish-folly, or so hardened grow
In Sinning, that they never can repent,
Nay, jest and scoff at their own Overthrow.
But no false Veil can serve (when God will smite)
To save a Scorner, or an Hypocrite.
Death is no Loss, but rather, Gain;
For we by Dying, Life attain.

MORS VITAE INITIVM.


ILLVSTR. XXI. Book. 1.
I Will not blame those grieved Hearts that shed
Becoming-teares, for their departed Friends;
Nor those who sigh out Passions for the Dead;
Since, on Good-natures, this Disease attends.
When Sorrow is conceived, it must have Vent
(In Sighs or Moisture) or the Heart will break;
And, much they aggravate our Discontent,
Who, out of Season, Reason seem to speak.
Yet, since our Frailty may require we should
Remembrances admit to keep us from
Excess in Grief: this Emblem here behold,
And take such Hope as may our Tears become.
The Wheat, although a while it lies in Earth,
(And seems lost) consumes not quite away;
But, from that Womb receives another Birth,
And, with Additions, rises from the Clay.
Much more shall Man revive, whose worth is more:
For, Death, who from our Dross will us refine,
Unto that other Life, becomes the Door,
Where, we in Immortality shall shine.
When once our Glass is run, we presently
Give up our Souls to Death; So Death must give
Our Bodies back again, that we, thereby,
The Light of Life eternal, may receive.
The Venomed Sting of Death is took away;
And, now, the Grave, that was a Place of Fear,
Is made a Bed of Rest, wherein we may
Lie down in Hope, and bide in safety, there.
When we are Borne, to Death-ward straight we run;
And by our Death, our Life is new-begunne.
When Vice and Virtue Youth shall woo,
It Is hard to say, which way 'twill go.

QVO ME VERTA^ NESCIO


ILLVSTR. XXII. Book. 1.
MY hopeful Friends at thrice five years and three,
Without a Guide (into the World alone)
To seek my Fortune, did adventure me;
And, many hazards, I alighted on.
First, Englands greatest Rendevouz I sought,
Where VICE and VERTVE at the highest sit;
And, thither, both a Mind and Body brought,
For neither of their Services unfit.
Both, wooed my Youth: And, both persuaded so,
That (like the Young man in our Emblem here)
I stood, and cried, Ah! which way shall I go?
To me so pleasing both their Offers were.
VICE, Pleasures best Contentments promised me,
And what the wanton Flesh desires to have:
Quoth VERTVE, I will Wisdom give to thee,
And those brave things, which noblest Minds do crave.
Serve me said VICE, and thou shall soon acquire
All those A^chievements which my Service brings:
Serve me said VERTVE, and I Will raise thee higher,
Then VICES can, and teach thee better things.
Whilst thus they strove to gain me, I espyde
Grim Death attending VICE; and, that her Face
Was but a painted Vizard, which did hide
The foul'st Deformity that ever was.
LORD, grant me grace for evermore to view
Her Ugliness; And, that I viewing it,
Her Falsehoods and allurements may eschew;
And on fair VERTVE my Affection set;
Her Beauties contemplate, her Love embrace,
And by her safe Direction, run my Race.
By Pain, on Pleasures we do seize;
And, we by Suff'rance, purchase Ease.

PATIOR VT POTIAR


ILLVSTR. XXIII. Book. 1.
THe lick'rish Bear to rob the Honey-Bees
Among their stinging-Swarms thrusts in his paws;
Adventureth to climb up hollow Trees,
And from their Cells, the well filled Combs he draws:
Right so, the Sensual Man that he may gain
His brutish Lust, a thousand perils dares;
And, that his Lawlesse-will he may attain,
Nor Conscience, Credit, Cost, nor Labor spares.
'Twere shameful baseness, therefore, if that he
Who knows Virtue, and is thought her Lover,
Should so by any Perils frighted be,
To make him such Affections to give-over.
For, why should that Vaine-Crew whose Valor springs
From beastly Fury, or inflamed- Passion,
Enabled be to compass bolder things,
Then Sober-Wit, and Grave-Consideration?
Or, why should lisping Wantons, for their Lust
So much adventure as one finger, there,
Where we our Lives in hazard would not thrust
For Virtues Glory, if it needful were?
For, though her Sweetness fast is closed in
With many Thorns, and such a Prickling-guard,
That we must smart, before that Prize we win,
The Pain is followed, with a Rich Reward.
By Suffering, I have more Contentment had,
Then ever I acquired by Slothful Ease;
And, I by Grief, so joyful have been made,
That I will bear my Cross, while God shall please.
For, so at last my Soul may Joy procure,
I care not, in my Flesh what I endure.
Who by good Means, good things would gain,
Shall never seek, nor ask in vain.

CONSEQVITUR QVODCVNQUE PETIT


ILLVSTR. XXIIII. Book. 1.
IN vain fair Cynthia never takes pains,
Nor faints in foll'wing her desired Game;
And, when at any Mark her Bow she strains,
The winged Arrow surely hits the same.
Her Picture, therefore, in this place does show
The Nature of their Minds who Cynthia like,
With Constancy their Purposes pursue,
And faint not till they compass what they seek.
For, naught more God-like in this World is found,
Then so Resolved a man, that nothing may
His Resolution alter or confound,
When any task of Worth, he does assay.
Nor, is there greater Baseness, then those Minds
That from an Honest-purpose can be wrought
By Threatenings, Bribes, Smooth-Gales or Boyst'rous-Windes,
What ever color or excuse be brought.
You then, that would, with Pleasure, Glory gain,
Diana like, those modest things require,
Which truly may beseem you to attain;
And stou^ly follow that which you desire:
For, changing though the Mo^ne to us appear,
She holds a firm Dependence on the Sun;
And, by a Constant-Motion, in her Sphaere
With him* does in Conjunction often run:
So, Constant-men, still move their hopes to win;
But, never by a Motion-indirect;
Nor, will they stop the Course that they are in,
Until they bring their purpose to effect.
For, whosoever Honest things requires,
A Promise has of all that he desires.
Often Shooting, does not Archers make;
But, hitting right the Mark they take.

NON QVAM CREBRO SED QVA^ BE^E


ILLVSTR. XXV. Book. 1.
WHen to the Fields we walk to look upon
Some skillful Mark-man; so much heed we not
How many Arrows from his Bow are gone,
As we observe how nigh the Mark he shot:
And, justly we deride that Man who spends
His Time and Shafts, but never aim does take
To hit the White; or foolishly pretends,
The number of the Shots, does Archers make.
So, God, who marketh our Endeavors, here,
Does not by tale, account of them receive;
But, heedeth rather how well meant they were,
And, at his Will how rightly aimed we have.
It is not mumbling over thrice a day
A Set of Ave Mary's, or of Creeds,
Or many hours formally to pray;
When from a dull Devotion it proceeds:
Nor is it, up and down the Land to seek
To find those well breathed Lecturers, that can
Preach thrice a Sabbath, and six times a week,
Yet be as fresh, as when they first began:
Nor, is it, such like things performed by Number
Which God respects: Nor does his Wisdom crave
Those many Vanities, wherewith some cumber
Their Bodies, as if those their Souls could save.
For, not Much-doing, but Well-doing, that
Which God commands, the Doer* justifies*
To pray without Devotion, is to Prate;
And, Hearing is but half our Exercise.
We ought not, therefore, to regard, alone,
How often, but how Well, the Work be done.
With Patience, I the Storm sustain;
For, Sunshine still does follow Rain.

DVRABO


ILLVSTR. XXVI. Book. 1.
THe little Squirrell, has no other Food
Then that which Natures thrifty hand provides;
And, in purveying up and down the Wood,
She many cold wet Storms, for that, abides.
She lies not heartlesse in her Mossie Dray,
Nor fears to adventure through the ^aine;
But skippeth out, and bears it as she may,
Until the Season waxes calm again.
Right thus, have I and others, often fared;
For, when we first into the World were brought,
We found but little, for our Use prepared,
Save that, which by Hard-Labour, must be sought.
In many Storms, unheeded, we are feign
To seek out needful things; and, smilingly
To jest, at what some others would complain:
That, none might laugh at our Necessity.
Yea, some have lived on Husks, whilst others fed
On that which was their Labors due Reward;
And, were pursued (till they almost were dead)
Without the Worlds Compassion or Regard.
Yet, by Enduring, they outlived the Blast
Of Adverse-Fortune; and, with good success,
(Expecting calmer Seasons) at the last,
Arrived at the Port of Happiness.
Their Suffring-much, has made their Sufferings none;
And brought forth Hopes, by which, perceive they may,
That Nights have but their Turns; and (they once gone)
Their Darkness, makes much welcomer, the Day.
All Grief shall have an ending, I am sure;
And, therefore, I with Patience, will Endure.
Where Hellen is, there, will be War;
For, Death and Lust, Companions are.

VBI HELENA IBI TROIA


ILLVSTR. XXVII. Book. 1.
THeir foolish Guise, I never could affect,
Who dare, for any cause, the Stews frequent:
And, thither, where I justly might suspect
A Strumpet lived, as yet, I never went.
For, when (as Fools pretend) they go to seek
Experience, where more Ill then Good, they see;
They venture for their Knowledge, Adam like;
And, such as his, will their Achievements be.
Let, therefore, those that would loose Trulls detest,
Converse with none, but those that modest are;
For, they that can of Whoredom make a Jest,
Will entertain it, ere they be aware.
Chast-Company, and Chast-Discourse, does make
The Mind more pleased with it, every day;
And, Frequent viewes of Wantonness, will take
The Sense and Hatred, of the Vice away.
Some, I have known, by Harlots Wiles undone,
Who, but to see their Fashions, first pretended;
And, they that went for Company, alone,
By sudden Quarrels, there, their Days have ended.
For, in the Lodgings of a Lustful Woman,
Immodest Impudence has still her Being;
There, Fury, Fraud, and Cruelties are common:
And, there, is Want, and Shame, and Disagreeing.
Even Beauty, of it self, stirs loose Desires,
Occasioning both Iealousies, and Fears;
It kindles in the Breast, concealed Fires,
Which burn the Heart, before the Flame appears:
And, every day, experienced are we;
That, there, where Hellen is, Troyes Fate will be.
No Inward Grief, nor outward Smart,
Can overcome a Patient-Heart.

VICTRIX PATIENTIA DVRI.


ILLVSTR. XXVIII. Book. 1.
SOme Trees, when Men oppress their Aged Heads,
(With weighty Stones) they fructify the more;
And, when upon some Herbs, the Gardener treads,
They thrive and prosper, better then before:
So, when the Kings of Egypt did oppress
The Sons of Jacob, through their Tyrannies;
Their Numbers, every day, did more increase,
Till they grew greater then their Enemies.
So, when the Jews and Gentiles, joined their Power
The Lord, and his Anointed, to withstand;
(With raging Fury, laboring to devour
And root the Gospel, out of every Land)
The more they raged, conspired, and envied,
The more they slandered, scorned, and murdered;
The more, the Faithful, still, were multiplied:
And, still, the further, their Profession spread.
Yea, so it spread, that quite it overthrew
Even Tyranny it self; that, at the last,
The Patience of the Saints, most powerful grew,
And Persecutions force, to ground was cast.
The selfsame Power, true Patience, yet retains,
And (though a thousand Suff^rings wound the same)
She still has Hope enough to ease her pains;
That Hope, which keeps off, all Fear and Shame:
For, it is not Hunger, Cold, nor Fire, nor Steel,
Nor all the Scorns or Slanders, we can hear,
Nor any Torment, which our Flesh can feel,
That conquers us; but, our own Trayt'rous Fear.
Where, Honest Minds, and Patient Hearts, are Mares;
They grow victorious, in their Hardest-Fates.
By many Strokes, that Work is done,
Which cannot be performed at One.

NON VNO STERNITVR ICTV


ILLVSTR. XXIX. Book. 1.
Despair not Man, in what thou oughtst to do,
Although thou fail when one Attempt is made;
But, add a New-Endeavour thereunto,
And, then another, and another, add:
Yea, till thy Power and Life shall quite be spent,
Persist in seeking what thou should desire;
For, he that falls from a good Intent,
Deserves not that, to which he did aspire.
Rich Treasures, are by Nature, placed deep;
And, ere we gain them, we must pierce the Rocks:
Such Perils, also, them, as Guardians keep,
That, none can win them without wounds and knockes.
Moreover, Glories, Thrones are so sublime,
That, whosoever thinks their Top to gain,
Till many thousand weary steps he clime,
Does fool himself, by Musings which are vain.
And, yet, there is a Path way, which does lead
Above the highest things that Man can see;
And (though it be not known to all who tread
The Common-Tract) it may ascended be.
As, therefore, none should greater things presume
Then well becomes their strength; So, none should fear
(Through Folly, Sloth, or Baseness) to assume
Those things upon them, which beseeming are.
In Time, and by Degrees may things be wrought,
That seemed impossible to have been done,
When they were first conceived in the thought;
And, such as these, we may adventure on.
Mine Arm, I know, in time will fell an Oak;
But, I will never attempt it, at a Stroke.
Afflictions Fire consumes Sin;
But, Virtue takes Life therein.

NVDRISCO IL BVONO ET SPENGO IL REO


ILLVSTR. XXX. Book. 1
WHether the Salamander be a Beast,
Or Precious-Stone, which overcomes the Flame,
It skills not; Since, by either is expressed
The Meaning which we purpose by the same:
Both brook the Fire unhurt; And (more then so)
The fiercer and the longer Heats there are,
The livelyer in the same the Beast will grow;
And, much the brighter, will the Stone appear.
This Crowned-Salamander in the Fire,
May, therefore, not unfitly, signify
Th^se, who in Fiery Charriots, do aspire
Elijah-like, to Immortality:
Or, those Heroicke spirits, who unharm'd
Have through the Fires of Troubles, and Affliction,
(With Virtue, and with Innocence armed)
Walked onward, in the Pathway, of Perfection.
The Fiery-Tryall, which like Wood and Hay,
Consumes the Works of every Wicked-one;
(And makes all their Hopes to fume away)
Does purify what Faithfull-men have done.
They triumph in the Flames, and shall obtain
The glorious Crown of Endlesse-Happinesse,
When all that show of Bliss appears vain,
Which Worldly men have seemed to possess.
For, though some Sins and Follies, gilded are,
And shine like purest Gold, and Pretious-Stones;
This Test, will find of what Allay they were,
And, make them known but Counterfeited Ones:
For, in this Furnace, all such Worms expire;
And, none but Virtue lives in this Fire.
He, over all the Stars does reign,
That unto Wisdom can attain.

SAPIENS DOMINABITVR ASTRIS.


ILLVSTR. XXXI. Book. 1.
I Am not of their Mind, who think the Sun,
The Moon, the Planets, and those glorious Lights
Which trim the Sphares, do in their Motions run
To no more purpose, then to please our Sights.
Nor for distinguishment of Nights, and Days,
Or of the Seasons, and the Times, alone,
Can I suppose the Hand of God displayes
Those many Stars, we nightly gaze upon:
For, both by Reason, and by Common-sense
We know (and often feel) that from above
The Planets have, on us, an Influence;
And, that our Bodies vary, as they move.
Moreover, Holy Writ inferres, that these
Have some such power; even in those Places, where
It names Orion, and the Pleiades;
Which, Stars of much inferior Nature are.
Yet, hence conclude not, therefore, that the Mind
Is by the Stars constrained to obey
Their Influence; or, so by them inclined,
That, by no means resist the same we may.
For, though they form the Bodies temp'rature,
(And though the Mind inclines after that)
By Grace, another Temper we procure,
Which guides the Motions of Supposed Fate.
The Soul of Man is nobler then the Sphaeres;
And, if it gain the Place which may be had,
Not here alone on Earth, the Rule it bears,
But, is the Lord, of all that God has made.
Be wise in him; and, if just cause there be,
The Sun and Moon, shall stand and wayt on thee.
A Princes most ennobling Parts,
Are Skill in Arms, and Love to Arts.

EX VTROQVE CAESAR


ILLVSTR. XXXII. Book. 1.
RIght blessed are they on whom God has bestowne
A King, whose Virtues have approved him
To be an Ornament unto his Throne,
And as a Luster to his Diadem.
He seeks not only how to keep in awe
His People, by those means that rightful are;
But, does unto himself, become a Law,
And, by Example, Pious Ways declare.
He, loves Peace, and after it pursues;
Yet, if of War a just occasion come,
Does nor Bellona's Challenges refuse,
Nor fear, to beat Defyance on his Drum;
He is as ready, also, to advance
The Lib'rall Arts, and from his Lands to drive
All false Religion, Schism, and Ignorance,
As other public profits to contrive.
And, such a Prince is not a Casuall-thing,
The Glories of a Throne, by Chance, possessing;
Nor merely from his Parents, does he spring,
But, he is rather Gods immediate Blessing.
If thou desire such a Prince to be,
Or, to acquire that Worth which may allure
Such Princes to vouchsafe some Grace to thee;
Their Kingly Virtues, labor to procure.
In Military Practices delight,
Not for a wicked, or vainglorious end;
But, to maintain the Cause that is upright,
Or thy distressed Country to defend.
And, strive that thou, as excellent may be
In Knowledge, as, thou art in thy Degree.
True-Lovers Lives, in one Heart lie,
Both Live, or both together Dye.

PERSEQVAR EXSTINCTV^


ILLVSTR. XXXIII. Book. 1.
He that shall say he Loves, and was again
So well-belov'd, that neither He nor She
Suspects each other, neither needs to gain
New proofs, that they in all Desires agree;
And, yet, shall cool again in their Affection,
(And leave to Love) or live till they are Lovers
The second-time; It some gross Imperfection
In One (if not in Both) of them discovers.
It was not Love which did between them grow;
But, rather, somewhat like unto the same;
Which (having made a fair deceiving Show)
Obtained, a while, that honorable Name.
For, False-Affections will together play
So lovingly; and, often, so act those Parts
Which real seem; that, for a time, they may
Appear the Children of Vnfeigned-Hearts:
Yea, Many-times, true Turtles are deceived
By counterfeited Passions, till their Love
Of her true Object finds her self bereaved;
And, after it, is forced to remove:
But, where True Love begets, and enjoyes
The proper Object, which she does desire,
Nor Time, nor Injury the same destroys;
But, it continues a Perpetual Fire.
Like am'^ous Thisbe to her Pyramus,
On all occasions, it continues true:
Nor Night, nor Danger, makes it timorous;
But, through all Pe^ills, it will him pursue.
Thus, both in Life, in Death, in all estates,
True- Lovers will be true Associates.
When Two agree in their Desire,
One Spark will set them both on Fire.

FLAMMESCIT VTERQVE


ILLVSTR. XXXIV. Book. 1.
THe Westerne-Indians, when they want a Fire
To warm their naked limbs, or dress their Food,
At every need, accomplish their Desire,
By often rubbing of two Sticks of Wood.
From whence, these Observations we may take;
First, that in them whose Natures gentlest are,
A long Contention such a Change may make,
As did, before, scarce possible appear.
Next, that when Two in Opposition be,
Whose power and strength and Malice is the same,
Their struggling Hearts but seldom do agree,
Till they beget, a Selfe-devouring-Flame.
And, thirdly, it informs, that those chaste Fires
Which on Loves Altars keep a Lasting-Heat;
Are those, which in two Hearts, two Like-Desires
Upon each other, mutually beget.
Hence, therefore, learn thou, first, not to contemn
Their Mildness, who to anger are not prone;
Lest, many wrongs do stir up Fires in them,
And work thee Mischief, when thou look for none.
Be wary, next, though thou thy self be strong,
How with a powerful Foe thou do contend;
For, they that wrestle in Contention, long,
Will, sure, beshrew their Madness, in the end.
And, if to warm thee by Loves Fires thou seek,
Thy Pe^re in Years, and Manners, pray to find;
Let both your Aims, and Longings, be alike;
Be one in Faith, and Will; and, one in Mind:
So, you shall reap the fruits of your Desire,
And warm each other with a kindly Fire.
He that delights to Plant and Set,
Makes After-Ages in his Debt.

POST ERITATI


ILLVSTR. XXXV. Book. 1.
WHen I behold the Havocke and the Spoil,
Which (even within the compass of my Days)
Is made through every quarter of this I Will,
In Woods and Groves (which were this Kingdoms praise)
And, when I mind with how much greediness,
We seek the present Gain, in every thing;
Not caring (so our Lust we may possess)
What Damage to Posterity we bring:
They do, me-thinkes, as if they did foresee,
That, some of those, whom they have cause to hate,
Should come in Future-times, their Heirs to be:
Or else, why should they such things perpetrate?
For, if they think their Children shall succeed;
Or, can believe, that they begot their Heirs;
They could not, surely, do so foul a Deed,
As to deface the Land, that should be theirs.
What our Forefathers planted, we destroy:
Nay, all Men's labors, living heretofore,
And all our own, we lavishly employ
To serve our present Lusts; and, for no more.
But, let these careless Wasters learn to know,
That, as Vaine-Spoyle is open Injury;
So, Planting is a Debt, they truly owe,
And ought to pay to their Posterity.
Self love, for none, but for it self, does care;
And, only, for the present, takes pain:
But, Charity for others does prepare;
And, joys in that, which Future-Time shall gain.
If, After-Ages may my Labors bless;
I care not, much, how Little I possess.
To Have, and not to Use the same;
Is not our Glory, but our Shame.

NIL PENNA, SED VSVS


ILLVSTR. XXXVI. Book. 1.
THe Estridge (though with many Feathers trimmed,
And decked with goodly Plumes of no mean size)
Is so unwieldy, and so largely limbed,
That, up into the Air he cannot rise.
And, though in Wings and Feathers, he appears
A goodly Foul, and bears his Head so high,
As if he could oretop the lower Sphaeres;
And, far above the towering Eagles fly;
So useless are those Feathers, and those Wings,
To gain him Name among their aerie Race;
That, he must walk with such Inferior things,
As in this Common-Region, have their place.
Such Fowls as these, are that Gay-plumed-Crew,
Which (to high place and Fortunes being borne)
Are men of goodly worth, in outward view;
And, in themselves, deserve naught else but scorn.
For, though their Trappings, their high-lifted Eyes,
Their Lofty Words, and their Much-feared Powers,
Do make them seem Heroicke, Stout, and Wise,
Their Hearts are often as fond, and faint as ours.
Such Animals as these, are also those
That Wise, and Grave, and Learned Men do seem
In Title, Habit, and all Formal shows;
Yet, have nor Wit, nor Knowledge, worth esteem.
And, lastly, such are they; that, having got
Wealth, Knowledge, and those other Gifts, which may
Advance the Publike-Good, yet, use them not;
But Feed, and Sleep, and laze their time away.
He, may be but a Goose, which wears the Quill;
But, him we praise, that uses it with Skill.
He, that his Course directly Steeres,
Nor Storms, nor Windy-Censures fears.

DVM CLAVVM RECTVM TENEAM


ILLVSTR. XXXVII. Book. 1.
We to the Sea, this World may well compare,
For, every Man which lives in the same,
Is as a Pilot, to some Vessel there,
Of little size, or else of larger frame.
Some, have the Boats of their own Life to guide,
Some, of whole Families do row the Barge,
Some, govern petty Towneships too, beside,
(To those compared, which of small Barks have charge)
Some others, rule great Provinces; and, they
Resemble Captains of huge Argoses:
But, when of Kingdoms, any gain the Sway,
To Generals of Fleets, we liken these.
Each has his proper Course to him assigned,
His Card, his Compass, his due Tacklings, too;
And, if their Business, as they ought, they mind,
They may accomplish all they have to do.
But, most Men leave the Care of their own Course,
To judge or follow others, in their ways;
And, when their Follies make their Fortunes worse,
They curse the Destiny, which they should praise.
For, Waves, and Winds, and that oft-changing Weather
Which many blame, as cause of all their Losses,
(Though they observe it not) helps bring together
Those Hopes, which their own Wisdom, often crosses.
Regard not, therefore much, what those things be,
Which come, without thy fault, to thwart thy Way;
Nor, how, Rash-Lookers-on will censure thee;
But, faithfully, to do thy part, assay:
For, if thou shall not from this Counsel vary,
Let my Hopes fail me, if thy Hopes miscarry.
A sudden Death, with Shame, is due
To him, that, swears What is untrue.

SI SCIENS FALLO.


ILLVSTR. XXXVIII. Book. 1.
WHen the Ancients made a solemn League or Vow,
Their Custom was to ratify it, thus;
Before their Idol God, they slew a Sow,
And said aloud; So be it unto us.
Implying, that, if otherwise they did
Then had been vowed; or, if within their Breast
A Fraudulent-Intention had been hid,
They merited such Usage, as that Beast.
For, by the Swine that they had slaughtred so,
(Which, during Life, was helpefull unto none)
Of Life deprived by a sudden blow,
And, then, cast out, that none might feed thereon;
They, mystically did infer; that, he
Who falsify'd that Oath which he had sworn,
Deserved, by Sudden-Death, cut off to be;
And, as a Beast unclean, to lie forlorn.
That Heathenish Hieroglyphicke, does implye
This Christian Doctrine; that, we should in Vows,
In Leagues, and Oaths, assume no Liberty,
But, what sincerest Honesty allows.
By Swine, the babbling Sophisters are meant,
In Hieroglyphicall Signification;
Which we do Sacrifice, when our intent
Is free from Falsehood, and Aequivocation.
And, this, let every Man end^avour for,
Who loves the Blessings, for just men prepared;
Or, if the Sin he do not much abhor,
At least, the Danger let him well regard:
For, to pursue him, Vengeance never leaves,
That falsely Swears, or willingly Deceives.
Where strong Desires are entertained,
The Heart 'twixt Hope, and Fear, is pained.

SPEQVE METVQVE PAVET


ILLVSTR. XXXIX. Book. 1.
A Troubled Mind, ore-charged with Desires,
Between great Hopes, and no less Fears oppressed,
And payned inwardly with secret Fires,
Was thus, by some, in former times expressed.
A Smoking Heart, they placed just betwixt
A Fastened Anchor, and a Bended Bow;
To which a Barbed-Arrow seemed fixed,
And, ready from the Strayned-String to go.
The Smoke does Sighs, the Anchor does declare
That Hope, which keeps us from Despairing quite;
The Bow and Arrow, signify that Fear,
Which does, perpetually, the Soul affright.
And, by this Emblem, it appears to me
That they which are with strong Desires oppressed,
(Though good or bad the Object of them be)
In seeking Pleasures, find no small unrest:
For, they are not by Fears, alone, disturbed,
But, as the Wiseman says, even Hope-Delayd
Torments the Heart; and, when Desire is curbed,
The Soul becomes sad, and ill-apayd.
A Groundlesse-Hope, makes entrance for Despair,
And with Deceiving shows the Heart betrays:
A Causelesse-Feare, does Reasons force impair,
And, terrifies the Soul, in doubtful ways.
Yet, quite neglect them not; For, Hope repells
That Grief sometimes, which would our Hearts oppress.
And, Fear is otherwhile the Sentinel
Which rouzeth us from dangerous Carelessness.
Thus, Both are good: but, Both are Plagues to such,
Who either Fondly fear, or Hope too much.
Those Fools whom Beauties Flame does blind,
Feel, Death, where Life they thought to find.

COSI VIVO PIACER CONDVCEA MORTE


ILLVSTR. XL. Book. 1.
WHen you do next behold the wanton Flies
About the shining Candle, come to play,
Until the Light thereof has dimmed their Eyes,
Or, till the Flame has singed their Wings away:
Remember, then, this Emblem; and, beware
You be not playing at such harmefull Games:
Consider, if there sit no Female, there,
That overwarmes you, with her Beauties Flames.
Take heed, you do not over dally so
As to inflame the Tinder of Desire;
But, shun the Mischief, e're too late it grow,
Lest you be scorched in that Foolish-Fire.
For, as those Wandring-Fires which in the Night,
Do lead unwary Travelers astray,
Alluring them, by their deceiving Sight,
Till they have altogether lost their way:
Right so, fantastic Beauty does amaze
The Lust-full Eye, allures the Heart aside,
Captives the Senses (by a sudden blaze)
And, leaves the Judgment wholly stupify'd.
Nay, if Men play too long about those Torches,
Such is the Nature of their wanton Flame,
That, from their Bodies (unawares) it scorches
Those Wings and Feet, on which they thither came.
It wastes (even to nothing) all their Wealth,
Consumes their precious Time, destroys their Strength,
Bespots their Honest-Fame, impaires their Hea^th,
And (when their Fatal Thread is at the length)
That thing, on which their Hope of Life is placed,
Shall bring them to Destruction, at the last.
Let him, that at GODS Altar stands,
In Innocence, wash his Hands.

PVRIS MANIBVS.


ILLVSTR. XLI. Book. 1.
WHen ( Reader) thou have first of all survayd
That Reverend Priest, which here engraven stands,
In all his Holy Vestiments arrayed,
Endeavoring for Purifyed-Hands;
Collect from hence, that, when thou do appear
To offer Sacrifice of Praise or Prayer,
Thou oughtst the Robes of Righteousness, to wear,
And, by Repentance, thy defects repair.
For, thou, that, with polluted Hands presum'st
Before Gods Altar to present thy Face;
Or, in the Rags of thine own Merits come,
Shall reap Displeasure, where thou look for Grace.
Then, if thou be of those that would aspire
A Priest, or Prelate, in Gods Church to be;
Be sure, thou first those Ornaments acquire,
Which, may be suting to that High-Degree.
Intrude not, as perhaps too many do,
With Gifts unfit, or by an Evil mean:
Desire it with a right Intention too;
And, seek to keep thy Conversation clean.
For, they that have assumed this Holy-Calling,
With Hands impure, and Hearts unsanctify'd,
Defame the Truth; give others cause of Falling,
And, scandalize their Brethren, too, beside:
Yea, to themselves, their very Sacrifice
Becomes unhallowed; and, their Thanks and Prayers,
The God of Purity, does so despise,
That, all their Hopes, he turns to Despaires:
And, all their best Endeavors, countermands,
Till they appear with unpolluted Hands.
No Heart can think, to what strange ends,
The Tongues unruely Motion tends.

LINGVA OVO TENDIS


ILLVSTR. XLII. Book. 1.
WEll-worthy of our better Heeding were,
That Holy Pen-mans Lesson, who has said,
We should be slow to Speak, and swift to Hear;
If, well, the nature of the Tongue we waigh'd.
For, if we let it loose, it gets Wings,
And, flies with wanton Carelessness, about;
It prateth in all places, of All things;
Tells Truth and Lies, and babbleth Secrets out.
To speak, of things unknown, it takes leave,
As if it had all Knowledge in Possession;
And, Mysteries (which no Man can conceive)
Are thought fit Objects for the Tongues Expression.
With Truth it mixeth Errors; says, unsayes;
And, is the Preacher of all Heresies.
That Heart, which gives it motion, it betrays;
And, utters Curses, Oaths, and Blasphemies.
It spreads all Slanders, which base Envy raises;
It moves Anger, and begets Hates:
It blames Virtue; filthy Deeds it praises;
And, causes Vproares, Murders, and Debates.
Yea, it is the chiefest Factor for the Devil;
And, yet, with speeches feignedly-sincere,
It otherwhile reproves what is Evil,
And, will in Lowly-words, a Saint appear.
Now this is known; we, next of all, should learn,
How we may shun the Mischief being known;
How, we bad Tongues, in Others, may discern;
And, how to guide and moderate our Own.
And, reason good; for, none can apprehend,
What Mischief does an Evil Tongue attend.
The Mind should have a fixed Eye
On Objects, that are placed on High.

OY E LLPSON ANO


ILLVSTR. XLIII. Book. 1.
A ^eart, which bore the figure of an Eye
Wide open to the Sun; by some, was used,
When in an Emblem, they would signify
A Mind, which on Celestial Matters mused:
Implying, by the same, that there is naught
Which in this lower Orb, our Eyes can see,
So fit an Object for a manly thought,
As those things, which in Heaven above us be.
God, gave Mankind (above all other Creatures)
A lovely Form, and upward-looking Eye,
(Among the rest of his peculiar Features)
That he might lift his Countenance on high:
And (having viewed the Beauty, which appears
Within the outward Sights circumference)
That he might elevate above the Sphaeres,
The piercing Eye, of his Intelligence.
Then, higher, and still higher strive to raise
His Contemplations Eyes, till they ascend
To gain a glimpse of those eternal Rays,
To which all undepraved Spirits tend.
For, it is the proper nature of the Mind
(Till fleshly Thoughts corrupt it) to despise
Those Lusts whereto the Body stands inclined;
And labor always, upward to arise.
Some, therefore, thought those Goblins which appear
To haunt old Graves and Tombs, are Souls of such,
Who to these loathsome places doomed were,
Because, they doted on the Flesh too much.
But, sure we are, well-minded Men shall go
To live above, when others bide below.
Those Fields, which yet appear not so,
When Harvest comes, will yellow grow.

FLAVESCENT


ILLVSTR. XLIV. Book. 1.
WHen, in the sweet and pleasant Month of May.
We see both Leaves and Blossoms on the Tree,
And view the Meadows in their best array,
We hop full are a Joyful Spring to see;
Yet, often, before the following Night be past,
It chances, that a Vapor, or a Frost,
Does all those forward bloomings wholly waste;
And, then, their Sweetness and their Beautie's lost.
Such, is the state of every mortal Wight:
In Youth, our Glories, and our Lusts we show;
We fill our selves with every vain Delight,
And, will most think on that which may ensue.
But, let us learn to heed, as well as know,
That, Spring does pass; that, Summer steals away;
And, that the Flower which makes the fairest show,
E're many Weeks, must wither and decay.
And, from this Emblem, let each Lab'ring-Swaine
(In whatsoever course of life it be)
Take heart, and hope, amidst his daily pain,
That, of his Travailes, he good fruits shall see.
The Plowed and Harrow'd Field, which, to thine eye,
Seems l^ke to be the Grave, in which the Seeds
Shall (without hope of rising) buried lie,
Becomes the fruitful Womb, where Plenty breeds.
There, will be Corn, where naught but Mare appears;
The Du^ty Seed, will form a greenish blade;
The Blade, will rise to Stemmes with fruitful Ears:
Those Ears, will ripen, and be yellow made:
So, if in honest Hopes, thou persevere,
A Joyful Harvest will at last appea^e.
As soon, as we to be, begun;
We did begin, to be Undone.

FINIS ABORIGINE PE^DET


ILLVSTR. XLV. Book. 1.
WHen some, in former Ages, had a meaning
An Emblem, of Mortality, to make,
They formed an Infant, on a Deaths-head leaning,
And, round about, encircled with a Snake.
The Child so pictured, was to signify,
That, from our very Birth, our Dying springs:
The Snake, her Tatle devouring, does implie
The Revolution, of all Earthly things.
For, whatsoever has beginning, here,
Begins, immediately, to vary from
The same it was; and, does at last appear
What very few did think it should become.
The solid Stone, does molder into Earth,
That Earth, e're long, to Water, rarifies;
That Water, gives an Airy Vapor birth,
And, thence, a Fiery-Comet does arise:
That, moves, until it self it so impair,
That from a burning-Meteor, back again,
It sinketh down, and thickens into Air;
That Air, becomes a Cloud; then, Drops of Rain:
Those Drops, descending on a Rocky Ground,
There, settle into Earth, which more and more,
Does harden, still; so, running out the round,
It grows to be the Stone it was before.
Thus, All things wheel about; and, each Beginning,
Made entrance to it own Destruction, has.
The Life of Nature, enters in with Sinning;
And, is for ever, waited on by Death:
The Life of Grace, is formed by Death to Sin;
And, there, does Life-eternall, straight begin.
Though very small, at first, it be,
A Sprout, at length, becomes a Tree.

TANDEM FIT ARBOR


ILLVSTR. XLVI. Book. 1.
We find it common (but not comely thou)
That, when a good Endeavor is begot,
Unless, at very first, it equal grow
With our Expectance, we regard it not.
Nor Wit, nor Patience, have we to conceive,
That every thing, which may by Man be wrought,
Proportionable Time, and Means, must have;
Before it can be to Perfection, brought.
Yet, every day, in things of every kind,
Experience has informed us, herein;
And, that, in many things, a change we find,
Which, at the first, would scarce believed have bin.
For, though a Gosling will not prove a Swan,
Vnruely-Colts become well-trayned Steeds;
A Silly Child grows up a Mighty-Man,
And, Lofty-Trees do Spring from Little Seeds.
Learn, therefore hence, that, nothing you despise,
Because it may, at first, imperf^ct seem:
And, know, how all things (in some sort) to prise,
Although, you give them not the best esteem.
From hence, moreover, learn; not to despair,
When you have just occasion, to pursue
A toylesome work, or any great affair:
Since* all-things, at the first, from nothing, grew.
And, I my self will, also, learn, from hence,
(Of all my Pains, though little fruits I see)
Nor to repine, nor to receive Offense;
But, rather joy in what befalls me.
For, though my Hopes appear but meanly grown,
They will be Great, when some shall think them none.
When we above the Cross can rise,
A Crown, for us, prepared lies.

SVPERATA CRVCE CORONOR


ILLVSTR. XLVII. Book. 1.
A Serpent raised above the Letter Tau,
Aspiring to a Crown, is figured here:
From whence, a Christian-Morall we may draw,
Which worth our good-regarding will appear.
For, by those Characters, in brief, I see
Which Way, we must to Happiness ascend;
Then, by what Means, that Path must clymed be;
And, what Reward, shall thereupon attend.
The Cross, does show, that Suffering is the Way;
The Serpent, seems to teach me, that, if I
Will overcome, I must not then, assay
To force it; but, my self thereto apply.
For, by embracing what we shall not shun,
We wind about the Cross, till we arise
Above the same; and, then, what Prize is won,
The Crown, which overtops it, signifies.
Let me, O God, obtain from thee the Grace,
To be partaker of thy Blessed Passion;
Let me, with Willingness, thy Cross embrace,
And, share the Comforts of thy Exaltation.
To bear that Part, whereto I doomed am,
My Heart, with Strength, and Courage, Lord, inspire:
Then, Crucify my Flesh upon the same,
As much as my Corruption shall require.
And, when by thy Assistance, I am reared
Above that Burden, which lies yet upon me;
And, over all, which (justly may be feared)
Shall, during Lifetime, be inflicted on me;
Among those Blessed-Soules, let me be found,
Which, with eternal Glory, shall be Crowned.
In Death, no Difference is made,
Between the Scepter, and the Spade.

MORS SCEPTRA LIGONIBUS AEQVAT


ILLVSTR. XLVIII. Book. 1.
LEt no man be so sottish as to dream,
Though all Men in their Death made equal are,
That, therefore, they may gather by this Theme,
That, Parity, in Lifetime, fitting were.
For, as the Bodies Members (which in Death
Have all the like esteem) had their Degrees,
And Honors, differing in time of breath;
The same (in States) Discretion comely sees.
Nor, should we hence infer, that it were just
To disesteeme the breathless Carcasses
Of Kings and Princes, when they sleep in Dust;
For, Civill-Reverence is due to these.
Nor, ought we, in their Lifetime, to apply
The Truth, which by this Emblem is declared,
The Dignities of Men to vilify;
Or, bring upon their Persons less regard.
That, which from hence, I rather wish to preach,
Is this; that every Man of each degree,
Would mark it so, that he, himself might teach
What thoughts and deeds, to him most proper be.
If he be great; let him remember, then,
That (since, nor Wealth, nor Title, can procure him
Exemption from the Doomes of other Men)
He ought to seek, how Virtue may secure him.
If he be Poor; let him this Comfort take,
That, though, awhile, he be afflicted here,
Yet, Death ^ay him as fully happy make,
As h^, that does a Crown Imperial wear.
For, when his Fatall-blow Death comes to strike,
He, makes the Beggar, and the King, alike.
What cannot be by Force attained,
By Leisure, and Degrees, is gained.

PAVLATIM NON IMPETV.


ILLVSTR. XLIX. Book. 1.
SOme Foolish- Boys (and such a Boy was I)
When they at School have certain hours to pass,
(To which they are compelled unwillingly)
Much time they spend in shaking of the Glass:
Thus, what they practice, to make-short their stay,
Prolongs it more; for while they seek to force
The Sands, to run more speedily away,
They interrupt them; and, they pass the worse.
Right so, in other things, with us it fares;
(And, seeming wise, we act a foolish part)
For, otherwhile, what Time alone prepares,
We seek to make the subject of an Art.
Sometimes, by Rashness, we endeavor what
We ought with Leisure, and Advice, to do:
But, if a good Success does follow, that,
Our Wit was nothing helpefull thereunto.
Sometime, again, we prosecute a thing
By Violence; when our desired effect,
No other means so well to pass can bring,
As Love and Gentleness, which we neglect.
But, let this Emblem teach us to regard
What Way of Working, to each Work pertaines:
So, though some Portion of our Hopes be barred,
We shall not, altogether, lose our pains.
Some things are strong, and, othersome are weak;
With Labor, some; and, some with Ease be wrought:
Although the Reed will bend, the Kexe will break;
And, what mends one thing, makes another naught.
Mark this; And, when much Haste will mar thy Speed,
That, then, thou take good Leisure; take thou Heed.
Of Little-Gaines, let Care be had; For, of small Ears, great Mowes are made.

DE PARVIS GRANDIS A CERVVS ERIT.


ILLVSTR. L. Book. 1.
AMong the many Faylings of the Time,
This Emblem gives Cause to mention one,
Which, unto me, does seem the greater Crime,
Because, to many, it appears none.
I find, that petty things are so neglected
(Well nigh of all) in Losings and in Winnings,
As if, what ere they thought to have effected,
Subsisted without Members, or Beginnings.
The Man, that loses every Month a Penny,
May salve-up Twelve-months Losses, with a Shilling.
But, if of other Losses he has many,
To save a Pin, at length, he shall be willing.
For, he that sees his Wine-fill'd Vessel drop,
(Although a Drop, in value, be but small)
Should, thence, Occasion take, the Leake to stop,
Lest many Droppings draine him dry of all.
Moreover, they, that will to Greatness rise,
A Course, not much unlike to this, must keep:
They ought not Small-Beginnings to despise;
Nor, strive to run, before they learn to creep.
By many single Ears, together brought,
The Hand is filled; by Handfulls, we may gain
A Sheafe; with many Sheaves a Barn is fraught:
Thus, often, by Little, we do much obtain.
Consider this; And, though I wish not thee
To take, of Trifling-things, too great a care;
Yet, know thus much (for truth) it best will be,
If all things may be weighed as they are:
By slender Losses, great-ones are begun;
By many trifling Gains, much Wealth is won.
FINIS Libri primi.
THE FIRST LOTTERIE.
1
THou, do overmuch respect
That, which will thy harm effect;
But, some other things there be,
Which will more advantage thee:
Search thy heart; and, thou shall, there,
Soon discover, what they are:
Yea, thine Emblem shows thee, too,
What to shun; and, what to do. See, Emblem I.

2
It is a little feared, that you
Are to your own Designs, untrue;
And, that, if you more constant were,
You would be richer, then you are,
(It may be, also, wiser, too)
Look, therefore, what you are to do:
Then, follow it, and, you will say,
That, well advised, you were, to day. See, Emb. II.

3
How rich or poor soever thou be,
Thou, art a Prince, in some degree;
And, over thy self, thou should command,
As does a Monarch, in his Land.
Within thy Heart, therefore, ingrave
The Laws, that Grace and Nature gave:
For, thus (to counsel thee) inclines
That Emblem, which, thy Lot assigns. See, Emb. III.

4
Much Liberty, thou have assumed;
And, heretofore, so much presumed
On Time, which, always rides poast,
That, for awhile, some Hopes are crossed.
But, lo, to keep thee from Despair,
And, thy Misfortune, to repair,
Mark, what to thee, by Lot, befell,
And, practice, what is counseled, well. See, Emb. IV.

5
Thou seek Honor, to obtain,
By means, which frustrate all thy pain.
Thy Predecessors rich were made,
By using of the Plough and Spade:
Thou, honorable would be thought,
By taking Courses, that are naught;
But, if, right noble, thou will be,
Look, what thine Emblem counsels thee. See, Emb. V.

M 6
This Man, what ever he may seem,
Is worthy of a high esteem:
Though Fortune may, his person, grind;
She, cannot harm him, in his Mind.
Right blessed, this Company would be,
If all of them, were such, as He.
Read that Impresa, which he drew;
For, that, in part, the same will show. See, Emb. VI.

M 7
If some, now present, this had got,
They, would have blushed, at their Lot;
Since, very fit, the same does prove
For one, that is either light of Love,
Or, troubled with a fickle Mate:
If you enjoy a better Fate,
Yet, hearken, what your Lot does say;
Lest, you, hereafter, need it may, See, Emb. VII.

8
For ought, that, plainly, does appear,
You may outlive the longest, here;
Yet, seeing, now, of all this crew,
The Lot of Death, you, only, drew,
See what, your Emblem has enjoined;
And, still, that Moral, bear in mind:
So, Deaths deformed and ghastly Shade
Shall, Means of Life, to thee, be made. See, Emb. VIII.

9
Though you have Wit, and, know it well;
That, rash you are, your Friends can tell;
Yea, Sleep, and Ease, possess you so,
That, some do fear, you will sottish grow:
But, lo, your hind'rance, to prevent,
This Lot, was, peradventure, sent;
For, in the Moralls, that, ensue,
Are Counsels, fit, for such as you. See, Emb. IX.

10
You, have been wronged, many ways,
Yet, patient are; and, that is your praise:
Your Actions, also, seemed upright;
Yet, some there are, that, bear you spite:
Lest, therefore, you discouraged grow,
An Emblem, you have drawn, to show
What other Innocents have borne,
And, how, the worlds despites, to scorn. See, Emb. X.

M 11
Doubtless, you are either wooing,
Or, some other Business, doing;
Which, you shall attempt, in vain,
Or, much hazard all your pain:
Yet, if good, your meanings are,
Do not honest means forbear;
For, where things are, well, begun,
God, often, works, when Man has done. See, Emb. XI.

12
Be not angry, if I tell
That, you love the World, too well;
For, this Lot, perhaps, you drew,
That, such Faults, you might eschew.
Mark, to what their Souls aspire,
Who, true Blessedness, desire:
For, if you can do, like those,
Heaven you gain, when Earth you lose. See, Emb. XII.

13
You love the Rich; and, honor them;
The needy person, you contemn:
Yet, Wealth, nor want of Wealth, is that,
Which, wretched makes, or fortunate:
From other Causes, those things flow;
Which, since, you either do not know,
Or, heed not much, this Emblem came,
That, you might learn to mind the same. See, Emb. XIII.

M 14
Thy Chance is doubtful; and, as yet,
I know not, what to say of it;
But, this I know, a foe thou art
To what thine Emblem has, in part,
Expressed by a Mimicke Shape;
Or, thou, thy self, art such an Ape.
Now, which of these, pertaines to thee,
Let them, that know thee, Judges be. See, Emb. XIV.

15
Thy Virtues he may wrong, that says
Thou spend'st thy self, in wanton ways;
But, some have thought, and said of late,
That, those thou love, consume thy state:
Yet, spare nor Time, nor Substance, tho,
Where, them, thou ought to bestow;
But, to thine Emblem turn, and, see
When Life, and Wealth, well ventured be. See, Emb. XV.

16
Though Troubles, you may have (or had)
Enough, to make some others mad;
Yet, be content: for, they, that are
As weak, have had as much to bear;
And, that, which Malice did contrive,
To make them poor, has made them thrive.
That Emblem, which, by Lot, you drew,
Prognosticates, as much, for you. See, Emb. XVI.

17
Though, you suffer blame and pain,
You, at last, may Comfort gain,
(Sharing Honors, truly gotten,
When, your Foes are dead, and rotten)
For, of this, you have a pawn,
In the Lot, that you have drawn;
And, by that, it may appear,
What your pains, and wages, are. See, Emb. XVII.

18
Take you serious heed, I pray,
Whither, you do go to day;
Whom you credit; and, for whom
You, engaged, shall become;
And, unless you wish for Sorrow,
Be as provident, to morrow:
For, there are some traps and Snares,
Which, may take you unawares. See Emb. XVIII.

19
Your Wit, so much, you trust upon,
That, weaker Means, has yours out-gone;
Sometime, you run, when there is need
Of much more Wariness, then Speed.
But, you, to God ward, worse have erred;
And, yet, Amendment is deferred.
See, therefore, what your Chance does say,
And, take good Counsel, while you may. See, Emb. XIX.

20
Take heed, you do not quite forget,
That you are dancing in a Net:
More, then a few, your Course do see,
Though, you, suppose, unseene to be.
Your Fault, we will no nearer touch;
Me-thinkes your Emblem blabs too much:
But, if, you mind, what is amiss,
You, shall be nere the worse, for this. See, Emb. XX.

21
Let such, as draw this Lot, have care,
For Death, and Sorrow, to prepare
All times, to come, lest one of these,
Their persons, unexpected, seize:
For, them, or some of theirs, to slay,
Pale Death, draws nearer, every day.
Yet, let them not, disheartened, be:
For, in their Emblem, they shall see,
Death, may (though, in appearance, grim)
Become, a blessing, unto them. See, Emb. XXI.

22
With Mary, thou art one of those,
By whom, the better part, is chose;
And, though, thou tempted art, astray,
Continu'st in a lawful way.
Give God the praise, with heart unfaign'd,
That, he, such Grace to thee, has dain'd;
And, view thy Lot, where thou shall see,
What Hag, has laid a Trap, for thee. See, Emb. XXII.

23
Although, that, thou demure appear,
For Pleasure, there is no man here
Will venture more: And, some there are,
Who think you venture over far:
Hereof, consider well, therefore,
E're, so, you venture, any more;
And, in your Lotted Emblem, see,
For what, your Sufferings ought to be. See, Emb. XXIII.

24
If ought, thou purpose, to assay,
Pursue the same, without delay;
And, if thou mean to gather fruit,
Be constant in thy Hopes pursuit:
For, by thine Emblem, thou may find,
Thy Stars, to thee, are well-inclin'd;
Provided, thy Attempts be good:
For, that, is ever understood. See, Emb. XXIV.

25
Take heed, thou love not their deceip^,
Who Number give, in steed of Weight;
Nor, let their Fancies, thee abuse,
Who, suchlike foolish Customs, use.
Perhaps, it may concern thee, much,
To know the Vanities of such;
And, who they are: Mark, therefore, what
Thine Emblem, will, to thee relate. See, Emb. XXV.

26
Thou, to Impatience, art inclined;
And, have a discontented Mind;
That, therefore, thou may Patience learn,
And, thine own Over-sights discern,
Thy Lot (as to a School to day)
Has sent thee to the Squirrells Dray;
For, she instructs thee, to endure,
Till, thou, a better state, procure. See, Emb. XXVI.

27
Your Lot, is very much to blame,
Or else, your person, or, your Name
Has injured been, or, may have wrong
By some loose wanton, ere't be long:
Therefore, e're, hence, you pass away,
Mark, what your Emblem, now, does say.
Perhaps, by drawing of this Lot,
Some Harms prevention may be got. See, Emb. XXVII.

28
Upon your head, those weights were laid,
Which, your Endeavors, downward waigh'd;
For, those, who do your weal envy,
Much fear, your top will spring too high;
Nay, yet, some Burden, you sustain:
But, what their Malice will obtain,
Your Emblem prophesies; if you,
With Patience, Honest- ways, pursue. See, Emb. XXVIII.

29
This Lot, befell thee, for the nonce;
For, if things come not, all at once,
Thou, to despairing, soon, do run,
Or, leave the Work, that is well begun:
Which, to prevent, regardfull be
Of what thine Emblem counsels thee. See, Emb. XXIX.

30
Afflictions, are thy chiefest Lot;
Yea, great ones, too: yet, murmr not.
For, all, must fiery trials bide,
And, from their Dross be purified.
Therefore, though this, in sport, be done,
Thy Morall'd Emblem, look upon;
And, learn, those Virtues to acquire,
Which, will not perish in the Fire. See, Emb. XXX.

31
You seek a Lot, which, proving bad,
Would, peradventure, make you sad;
But, this may please: for, you are taught
To mend a Fortune, that is naught;
And, armed, with such Counsel, here,
That, you, no Destiny, need fear.
Now, if you come to Harm, or Shame,
Upon the Stars, lay not the blame. See, Emb. XXXI.

M 32
In Court, thou may have hope, to clime,
This present, or some other time;
But, something thou do want, as yet,
Which, for that place, must make thee fit.
Presume not, therefore, on thy Lot,
Till, those accomplishments are got,
Which, in thine Emblem, are expressed;
And, then, march on, among the best. See, Emb. XXXII.

33
Some think, you love; it is true, you do;
And, are as well beloved too:
But, you (if we the truth shall say)
Love not so truly, as you may.
To make a perfect Love, there goes
Much more, then every Lover knows.
Your Emblem, therefore heed; and, then,
Begin, anew, to love again. See, Emb. XXXIII.

34
Now, some good Counsel, thou do need;
Of what we say, take, therefore, heed.
Beware, left thou, too much, offend
A meek, and, gentle-natur'd, Friend:
Though power thou have, be careful, too,
Thou vex not, long, thine able Foe;
And, e're thou love, be sure to find
Thy Match, in Manners, and in Mind.
If thou demand a Reason, why,
To thee, thine Emblem will reply. See, Emb. XXXIV.

35
Beware, thou share not in their crime,
Who care, but for the present time:
For, by thy Lot, we may suspect,
Or that, or things, to that effect.
If so it be, or if thy Mind,
To such an Error, be inclined,
Thy Chance unto an Emblem, brings,
Which, will advise to better things. See, Emb. XXXV.

36
You, love to seem; this, all Men see:
But, would you loved, as well, to be.
If, also, better use were made
Of those good Blessings, you have had;
Your praise were more. Mark, therefore, well,
What Moralls, now, your Emblem, tell;
And, gather, from it, what you may,
To set you in a better way. See, Emb. XXXVI.

37
To escape a Storm, great thought you take;
But, little heed, what means you make.
You, love your ease, and, Troubles, fear;
But, careless are, what Course you steer.
Which Indiscretions, to prevent,
You, to an Emblem, now, are sent:
Whereof, if you regardfull are,
You, less will fear, and better fare. See, Emb. XXXVII.

38
What you have, done, consider, now;
For, this your Chance, does seem to show
That you have sworn, or vowed, of late,
Or promised (you best know what)
Which, you have, since, unwilling bin,
To keep; or, else, did fail, therein.
If it be so; repent, or else,
What will befall, your Emblem tells. See, Emb. XXXVIII.

39
Thy Hopings, and thy Fears, are such,
That, they afflict, and pain thee, much;
Because, thou giv'st too great a scope
Unto thy Fear, or to thy Hope:
For, they will pain, or pleasure thee,
As they enlarged, or curbed be.
But, lo; thine Emblem, if thou please,
Instructs thee, how, to manage these. See, Emb, XXXIX.

40
Let them, who get this Chance, beware,
Lest Cupid snarle them in a Snare:
For, by their Lot, they should be apt
To be, in suchlike Ginnes, intrapt.
Some help, is by their Emblem, got,
If they, too late, observe it not;
But, then, no profit will be done them:
For, Counsel will be lost upon them. See, Emb. XL.

41
Whether, merely, Chance, or no,
Brought this Lot, we do not know:
But, received, let it be,
As, divinely, sent to thee:
For, that, merits thy regard,
Which, thine Emblem has declared;
And, the best, that are, have need,
Such Advisements, well to heed. See, Emb. XLI.

42
Thou, have already, or, e're long,
Shall have some damage by the Tongue:
But, fully, yet, it is not known,
Whether the Tongue shall be thine own,
Or else, another tongue, from whom
This Mischief, unto thee, shall come:
But, much the better, thou shall speed,
If, now, thine Emblem, well thou heed. See, Emb. XLII.

43
Unworthy things, thou do affect,
With somewhat overmuch respect;
Unto the World, inclining so,
As if thy Hopes were all below:
But, now, to rowse thee from this crime,
Good Counsel comes in happy time.
Make use thereof; and, think it not
Mere casual, or a needless Lot. See, Emb. XLIII.

44
Thou, either, too much love, have placed
On things, that will not always last;
Or else, thou art a little scared.
Because thy Hopes are long deferred:
Nay, thou art touched, in both of these.
Thy Profit, therefore, and thine ease,
It will effect, if well thou mind
What, in thine Emblem, thou shall find. See, Emb. XLV.

45
When thou have Changes, good, or bad,
Ore-joy'd, thou art, or over-sad;
As if it seemed very strange
To see the Wind or Weather, change:
Lo, therefore, to remember thee,
How changeable, things Mortal, be,
Thou, art assisted by this Lot;
Now, let it be, no more, forgot. See, Emb. XLV.

46
Of thy just Aims, though means be slight,
Thou may attain their wished height;
Unless, thy Folly shall destroy
The Weal, thou seek to enjoy,
By thy Despair, or by neglect
Of that, which, may thy Hopes effect:
For, by thine Emblem, thou may know,
Great things, from small Beginnings, grow* See, Emb. XLVI.

47
Thou must have Crosses; but they, shall,
To Blessings, be converted, all;
And, Sufferings, will become, thy Praise,
If, Wisdom order, well thy ways:
Yea, when thy Crosses ended are,
A Crown of Glory, thou shall wear.
Yet, note, how this to pass is brought:
For, in thine Emblem, it is taught. See, Emb. XLVII.

48
If they, who drew this Lot, now be
Of great Estate, or high Degree,
They shall ere long, become as poor,
As those, that beg from door to door.
If poor they be; it plain appears,
They shall become great Princes Peers:
And, in their Emblem, they may know,
What very day, it will be, so. See, Emb. XLVIII.

49
You, have attempted many a thing,
Which, you, to pass, could never bring;
Not, that, your Work was hard to do,
But, 'cause, you used wrong Means, thereto.
Hereafter, therefore, learn, I pray,
The Times of Working, and, the Way;
And, of thine Emblem, take thou heed,
If, better, thou desire to speed. See, Emb. XLIX.

50
If you, to greater Wealth, will rise,
You must not, slender Gain, despise;
Nay, if, you mind not, to be poor,
You must regard slight Losses, more:
For, Wealth, and Poverty, do come,
Not all at once, but, some and some.
If this, concern you, any ways,
See, what your Emblem, further, says. See, Emb. L.

51
Your Fortune, has deserved thank,
That she, on you, bestows a Blank:
For, as you, nothing good, have had;
So, you, have nothing, that is bad.
Yea, she, in this, has favor shown,
(If, now, your Freedom well be known)
For, you, by Lot, these Emblems, mist,
That you, may choose out, which you list.
52
You, by an Emblem, seek to get
What Counsel your Affairs may fit;
But, in particular, there is none,
Which, you, by Lot, can light upon:
And, why? because, no Moral, there,
Does, worthy of your Heed, appear?
No; but because you rather, need,
Of every Emblem, to take heed.
53
The Stars, are, now, no friends of your,
Or this is not their lucky hour:
For, at this time, unto your Lot,
They, by an Emblem, answer not.
If, therefore, you desire to know
What good advice they will allow,
Some further Means, you must assay,
Or, try your Chance, another day,
54
You, in your secret thoughts, despise
To think an Emblem should advise,
Or give you cause to mind or heed
Those things, whereof you may have need*
And, therefore, when, the Lot, you tried,
An answer, justly, was denied.
Yet (by your leave) there are but few,
Who, need good Counsel, more then you.
55
In some extreme, you often are,
And, shoot too short, or else too far;
Yea, such an error, you were in,
When, for a Lot, you moved the Pin:
For, one touch more, or less, had laid
Our Index, where it should have stayed.
But, if you can be warned, by this,
To keep the Mean, which often you miss,
You have obtained as good a Lot,
As any one, this day, has got.
56
Among these Emblems, none there be,
Which, now by Lot will fall to thee;
However, do not thou repine:
For, this does seem to be a sign,
That, thou, thy Portion, shall advance
By Virtue, not by fickle Chance.
Yet, nerethelesse, despise thou not
What, by good Fortune, may be got.
FINIS.
A COLLECTION OF EMBLEMES, ANCIENT AND MODERN: Quickened WITH METRICALL
ILLVSTRATIONS; And, disposed into LOTTERIES, both Moral and Divine.

That Jnstruction, and Good Counsel, may be furthered by an Honest and
Pleasant Recreation.

By GEORGE WITHER.

The Second Book.



LONDON,

Printed by AUGUSTINE MATTHEW'S. MDCXXXIV.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY Prince, CHARLES, Prince of Wales, etc.
Fairest Blossom of our hopes; and Morning-starre
To all these Islands, which enclosed are
By Neptunes arms, within our Northern cli^nes;
And who (we trust) shall rise, in future times,
To be the brightest Light, that, then will shine,
Betwixt the Artick-Circle, and the LINE.
To You (as now you are) that I present
These EMBLEMS, it is not so impertinent
As those may think it, who have neither seen
What, of your Cradle-sports, has heeded been;
Nor heard how many serious Questionings,
Your Childhood frames, out of trifling things:
And, if mine aim I have not much mistook,
I come not oversoone with such a Book.
So long as in this Infant-Age you are,
(Wherein, the speechless Portraitures appear
A pleasurefull delight) your HIGHNESS may
Among our EMBLEMS, find a Harmelesse-play:
And, those mute Objects will from time to time,
Still Riper, seem, till you to ripeness clime.
When their dumb Figures, no more sport can make,
Their Illustrations, will begin to speak,
And, every day, new matter still disclose,
Until your Judgment to perfection grows.
They likewise, who their Services, to do
Frequent your Presence, may have pleasure too,
From this your Play-game: yea, and some perchance,
May cure a Folly, or an Ignorance
By that, which they shall either hear or view
In these our Emblems, when they wait on You;
Or, shall be called, by your EXCELLENCE,
To try what LOT, they shall obtain from thence.
It may, moreover, much increase the sport,
Which is allowed in a virtuous COURT;
When they whose faults have long suspected bin,
Shall draw forth private Censures of their Sin,
And, hear their EMBLEMS, openly, display,
What, others dare not, but in private, say:
Nor will, to You, the MORALS be in vain,
Even when to manly Knowledge you attain;
For, though to Teach, it will not them become
To be Remembrancers, they may presume:
And, that which in their ( hild-hood, men shall heed,
Will soonest come to mind, in time of need.
Encouraged by these Hopes, I thought it meet
To lay this humble Present at your feet.
Accept it, now; and, please to favor me,
When I grow old, and, You a Man shall be.
To your Highness most humbly devoted, GEO: WITHER.

TO THE MOST HIGH-BORNE and hopeful Prince JAMES, Duke of YORK, etc.
Sweet PRINCE,
YOur hand I kiss; and, thus my Lines address
Unto your wise, and virtuous The Countess of Dorset.
GOVERNESSE.
For, MADAME, ( as his PROXY) it is fit,
That, You both Read, and answer for him, yet.
To You for HIM, I therefore tender, here,
To welcome-in the New-beginning Year,
This harmless PLAY-GAME; that, it may have place,
When somewhat riper Days, shall Make his GRACE,
Affect such Objects; which, to look upon
May pleasure yield him, e're this Year be gone.
It Is not the least Discretion, in great COURTS,
To know what Recreations, and what Sports
Become young PRINCES; or, to find out those,
Which may, with harmless pleasantness, dispose
Their Minds to VERTVE: neither in their Cradles,
Should this be heeded less, than in their Sadles:
Because, when first to know, we do begin,
A small Occasion, lets much Evil in.
Among those things, which both Instruct and please;
But few, (for Children) are surpassing these:
For, they, to look on Pictures, much desire:
And, not to Look alone, but, to enquire
What things those are, that represented be,
In every MAP, or EMBLEM, which they see.
And, that which they shall view, or shall be told,
( By means of any Figure they behold)
Experience breeds; assisteth Memory:
Or, helps to form a Witty Fantasy:
And, if those Forms to good Instruction tend,
Often steads them, also, till their lives have end.
Then, since even all of us, much Good receive
By Virtuous PRINCES; And should, therefore, strive
To add some helps, whereby they might acquire
That Excellence, which we in them desire.
I ( being able, to present his GRACE,
With nothing but a Rattle, or a Glass,
Or some such Cradle-play-game) bring, to day,
This BOOK, to be as useful as it may:
And, how, and when, it will most useful grow,
Without my Teaching, YOU can fully show.
For, what is of your Ableness believed,
Through all these famous Islands, has received,
A large applause; in that, from out of those
Which ablest were, both King and State have those
Your Faith and Wisdom, to be TREASVRESSE
Of their chief Jewels; and the GOVERNESSE
Of our prime Hopes. And, now Iibi have weighed,
Me thinks, there needs no more, by me, he said,
But, (having prayed your HONOV^ to receive
This PRESENT for the DVKE) to take my leave;
And Versifie to him, some other day,
When He can understand me, what I say.
Till then, let it please your Honor sometimes to remember Him, that

I am his Graces daily and humble Orator, GEO: WITHER.

We best shall quiet clamorous Thronges,
When, we our selves, can rule our Tongues.

NEQVEO COMPES CERE MVLTOS


ILLVSTR. I. Book. 2
WHen I observe the Melancholy Owls,
Considering with what patience, they sustain
The many clamours, of the greater Fowls;
And, how the little Chirpers, they disdain:
When I remember, how, their Injuries
They slight, (who, causeles give them an offense)
Vouchsafing, scarce to cast aside their eyes
To look upon that foolish Insolence.
Me thinks, by their Example, I am taught
To slight the slanders of Injurious Tongues;
To set the scoffs of Censurers, at naught,
And, with a brave neglect, to bear out Wrongs.
He, doubtless, whom the Psalmist, long ago,
Unto a lonely Desert-Owle compared,
Did practice thus; And, when I can do so,
I, shall for all affronts, become prepared.
And, (though, this Doctrine, Flesh and blood gainsay)
Yet, sure, to stopp the malice of Despite,
There is no better, (nay, no other) way:
Since, Rage by Opposition gathers Might.
Good God! vouchsafe, sufficient grace and strength,
That (though I have not yet, such Patience got)
I may attain this happy gift, at length;
And, find the cause, that, yet, I have it not.
Though me, my Neighbors, and my Foes revile;
Make me of all their words, a Patient-bearer:
When er'e I suffer, let me be, the while,
As is the silent Lamb before the Shearer.
So; though my speakings, cannot quiet any,
My Patience may restrain the Tongues of many.
When we by Hunger, VVisdome gain,
Our Guts, are wiser then our Brain.

INGENII LARGITOR VENTURE.


ILLVSTR. II. Book. 2
THe Crow, when deep within a close-mouth'd- Pot.
She water finds, her thirstinesse to slake;
(And, knows not where else it might be got)
Her Belly, teaches her, this course to take:
She flies, and fetches many Pibbles thither,
Then, down into the Vessel, lets them drop;
Until, so many stones are brought together,
As may advance the water to the top.
From whence, we might this observation heed;
That, Hunger, Thirst, and those necessities,
(Which from the Bellies craving, do proceed)
May make a Fool, grow provident and wise.
And, though (in sport) we say, the brains of some,
Not in their Heads, but in their Gutts, do lie;
Yet, that, by wants, Men wiser should become,
Dissenteth not from true Philosophy:
For, no man labors with much Willingness,
To compass, what he naught at all desires;
Nor seeks so, his longing to possess,
As, when some urgent need, the same requires.
Nay, though he might, a willingness, retain,
Yet, as the Belly, which is ever full,
Breeds fumes, that cause a sottish-witles-braine;
So, plenteous Fortunes, make the Spirits dull.
All, borne to Riches, have not all-times, wit
To keep, (much less, to better) their degree:
But, men to nothing borne, often, passage get,
(Through many wants) renowned, and rich to be:
Yea, Poverty and Hunger, did produce,
The best Inventions, and, of chiefest use.
Though Music be of some abhorred,
She, is the Handmaid of the Lord.

QVI ME ALIT ME EXTINGVIT.


ILLVSTR. III. Book. 2
TO Music, and the Muses, many bear
Much hatred; and, to whatsoever ends
Their Soule-delighting-Raptures tuned are,
Such peevish dispositions, it offends.
Some others, in a Moral way, affect
Their pleasing Strains (or, for a sensual use)
But, in Gods Worship, they the same suspect;
(Or, tax it rather) as a great abuse.
The First of these, are full of Melancholy;
And, Pity need, or Comfort, more then blame;
And, soon, may fall into some dangerous folly,
Unless they labor, to prevent the same.
The Last, are giddie-things, that have befooled
Their Judgments, with beguiling-Fantasies,
Which (if they be not, by discretion, fchool'd)
Will plunge them into greater Vanities.
For, Music, is the Handmaid of the LORD,
And, for his Worship, was at first ordained:
Yea, therewithal she fitly does accord;
And, where Devotion thriveth, is retained.
She, by a natural power, does help to raise,
The mind to God, when joyful Notes are founded:
And, Passions fierce Distemperatures, alaies;
When, by grave Tones, the Mellody is bounded.
It, also may in Mysticke-sense, imply
What Music, in our-selves, ought still to be;
And, that our jarring-lives to certify,
We should in Voice, in Hand, and Heart, agree:
And, sing out, Faiths new-songs, with full concent,
Unto the Laws, ten-stringed Instrument.
Mark, what Rewards, to Sin, are due,
And, learn, upri^^tnesse to pursue.

DISCITE IVSTICIAM.


ILLVSTR. IIII. Book. 2
A Sword unsheathed, and a strangling-Snare,
Is figured here; which, in dumbe-shewes, do preach,
Of what the Malefactor should beware;
And, they do threaten too, as well as Teach.
For, some there are, (would God, that sum were less)
Whom, neither good Advise, nor, wholesome Law,
Can turn from Pathwaies of Unrighteousness,
If Death, or Tortures, keep them not in awe.
These, are not they, whose Conscience for the sake
Of Goodness only, Godliness, pursues;
But, these are they, who never scruple make
What Guilt, but, what great punishment ensues.
For such as these, this Emblem was prepared:
And, for their sakes, in places eminent,
Are all our Gallow-trees, and Gibbets, reared;
That, by the sight of them, they might repent.
Let, therefore, those who feel their hearts inclined
To any kind of Death-deserving-Crime,
(When they behold this Emblem) change their mind,
Lest, they (too late) repent, another time.
And, let not those our Counsel, now, contemn,
Who, doom poor Thieves to death; yet, guilty be
Of more, then most of those whom they Condemn:
But, let them Learn their peril to foresee,
For, though a little while, they may have hope
To seem upright, (when they are nothing less)
And, escape the Sword, the Gallows, and the Rope,
There is a Judge, who sees their wickedness;
And, when grim Death, shall summon them, from hence,
They will be fully plagued for their offense.
That Kingdom will established be,
Wherein the People well agree.

CONSENSV POPVLI REGNV^ SVBSISTIT.


ILLVSTR. V. Book. 2
A Crowned Scepter, here is fixed upright,
Betwixt four Fowls, whose postures may declare,
They came from Coasts, or Climats opposite,
And, that, they diffring in their natures are.
In which, (as in some others, that we find
Amongst these Emblems) little care I take
Precisely to unfold our Authors mind;
Or, on his meaning, Comments here to make.
It is the scope of my Intention, rather
From such perplexed Inventions (which have naught,
Of Ancient Hieroglyphick) sense, to gather,
Whereby, some useful Moral may be taught.
And, from these Figures, my Collections be,
That, Kingdoms, and the Royall-dignitie,
Are best upheld, where Subjects do agree,
To keep upright the state of Sovereignty.
When, from each Coast and quarter of the Land,
The Rich, the Poor, the Swain, the Gentleman,
Leads, in all wants, and at all times, his hand,
To give the best assistance that he can:
Yea, when with Willing-hearts, and Winged-speed,
The men of all Degrees, do duly carry
Their Aides to publicke-workes, in time of need,
And, to their Kings, be freely tributary:
Then shall the Kingdom gain the gloriest height;
Then shall the Kingly-Title be renowned;
Then shall the Royall-Scepter stand upright,
And, with supremest Honor, then, be Crowned.
But, where this Duty long neglect, they shall;
The King will suffer, and, the Kingdom fall.
From that, by which I somewhat am,
The Cause of my Destruction came.

MVSICA SERVA DEI


ILLVSTR. VI. Book. 2
THe little Sparks which raked in Embers lie,
Are kindly kindled by a gentle blast:
And, brands in which the fire begins to die
Revive by blowing; and, flame out at last.
The self same wind, becoming over strong,
Quite blows out again that very flame;
Or, else, consumes away (ere it be long)
That wasting substance, which maintained the same.
Thus fares it, in a Thousand other things,
As soon as they the golden Mean exceed;
And, that, which keeping Measure, profit brings,
May, (by excess) our loss, and ruin, breed.
Preferments (well and moderately sought)
Have helped those men, new Virtues to acquire,
Who, being to superior places brought,
Left all their goodness, as they climed higher.
A little wealth, may make us better able
To labor in our Callings: Yet, I see
That they, who being poor, were charitable,
Becoming rich, hard-hearted grow to be.
Love, when they entertain it with discretion,
More worthy, and more happy, makes men;
But, when their Love is overgrowne with Passion,
It overthrowes their happiness, again.
Yea, this our Flesh, (in which we do appear
To have that being, which we now enjoy)
If we should overmuch the same endeare,
Would our Well-being, totally destroy.
For, that which gives our Pleasures nourishment,
Is often the poison of our best Content.
By Guiltines, Death entered in,
And, Mischief still pursues Sin.

SEQVITVR SVA POENA NOCENTEM


ILLVSTR. VII. Book. 2
IXions wheel, and he himself thereon
Is figured, and (by way of Emblem) here,
Set forth, for Guilty men to look upon;
That, they, their wicked Courses might forbear.
To gain a lawless favor he desired,
And, in his wicked hopes beguiled was:
For, when to claspe with Juno, he aspired,
In stead of her, a Clowd, he did embrace.
He, likewise, did incur a dreadful Doom,
(Which well befitted his presumptuous Crime)
A terror, and, a warning, to become,
For wicked men, through (...) succeeding time.
As did his longings, and his after Pain,
So, theirs affects, nor effects ought,
But, that, which proves either false or vain;
And, their false Pleasures, are as dearly, bought:
Yea, that, whereon they build their f^^est Hope,
May, bring them (in conclusion of the (...))
To clime the Gallows, and to stretch a Rope;
Or, send them thither, where far worse they speed:
Even thither, where, the never-standing-Wheele
Of everlasting-Tortures, turns round,
And, racks the Conscience, till the soul does feel
All Pains, that are in Sense, and Reason found.
For, neither does black Night, more swiftly follow,
Declining Daylight: Nor, with Nimbler Motion
Can waves, each other, down their Channel follow,
From high-rais'd Mountains, to the bigg-womb'd Ocean,
Then, Justice will, when she does once begin,
To prosecute, an Vnrepented-Sin.
When we have greatest Griefs and Fears,
Then, Consolation sweet'st appears.

POST TENTATIONEM CONSOLATIO.


ILLVSTR. VIII. Book. 2
WHen, all the year, our fields are fresh and green,
And, while sweet Flowers, and Sunshine, every day,
(As often, as need requires) come between
The Heavens and earth; they heedles pass away.
The fulness, and continuance, of a blessing,
Does make us to be senseles of the good:
And, if it sometime fly not our possessing,
The sweetness of it, is not understood.
Had we no Winter, Summer would be thought
Not half so pleasing: And, if Tempests were not,
Such Comforts could not by a Calm, be brought:
For, things, save by their Oppos^^^ appear not.
Both health, and wealth, is tastles unto some;
And, so is ease, and every other pleasure,
Till poor, or sick, or grieved, they become:
And, then, they relish these, in ampler measure.
God, therefore (full as kind, as he is wise)
So tempreth all the Favors he will do us,
That, we, his Bounties, may the better prize;
And, make his Chastisements less bitter to us.
One while, a scorching Indignation burns
The Flowers and Blosomes of our HOPES, away;
Which into Scarsitie, our Plenty turns,
And, changes vnmowne-Grasse to parched Hay;
Anon, his fruitful showers, and pleasing dewes,
Commixt with cheerful Rays, he sends down;
And then the Barren-earth her cropp renewes,
Which with rich Harvests, Hills, and Valleys Crown:
For, as to relish Joys, he sorrow sends,
So, Comfort on Temptation, still, attends.
To brawle for Gain, the Cock does slight;
But, for his Females, he will fight.

PRO GALLINIS


ILLVSTR. IX. Book. 2
SOme, are so quarrellous, that they will draw,
And Brawle, and Fight, for every toy they see;
Grow furious, for the wagging of a straw;
And, (otherwile) for less then that may be.
Some, are more staid, a little, and will bear,
Apparent wrongs (which to their face you do;)
But, when they Lie, they cannot brook to hear
That any should be bold to tell them so.
Another sort, I know, that blows will take.
Put up the Lie, and give men leave to say
What words they please; till spoil they seek to make
Of their estates; And, then, they will kill and slay.
But, of all Hacksters, far the fiercest are
Our Cockrills of the game, (Sir Cupid's knights)
Who, (on their foolish Coxcombes) often wear
The Scarres they get in their Venerean-fights.
Take heed of these; for, you may pacify
The first, by time: The second, will be pleased
If you submit, or else your words deny;
The third, by satisfaction, are appealed:
But, he that for his Female, takes offense,
Through Iealousy, or madness, rages so;
That, he accepts of no recompense,
Till he has wrought his Rivals overthrow.
Such Fury, shun; and, shun their Vulgar mind,
Who for base trash despitefully contend;
But, (when a just occasion, thou shall find)
Thy Virtuous Mistress, lawfully defend.
For, he, that in such cases turns his face,
Is held a Capon, of a Dunghill Race.
If Safely, thou desire to go,
Be nor too swift, nor overslow.

TVTIVS VT POSSIT FIGI.


ILLVSTR. X. Book. 2
Our Elders, when their meaning was to show
A native-speedinesse (in Emblem wise)
The picture of a Dolphin-Fish they drew;
Which, through the waters, with great swiftness, flies.
An Anchor, they did figure, to declare
Hope, stayednesse, or a grave-deliberation:
And therefore when those two, united are,
It gives us a twofold Intimation.
For, as the Dolphin puts us in mind,
That in the Courses, which we have to make,
We should not be, to slothfulness inclined;
But, swift to follow what we undertake:
So, by an Anchor added thereunto,
Informed we are, that, to maintain our speed,
Hope, must be joined therewith (in all we do)
If we will undiscouraged proceed.
It shows (also) that, our speediness,
Must have some staydnesse; lest, when we suppose
To prosecute our aims with good success,
We may, by Rashness, good endeavors lose.
They work, with most security, that know
The Times, and best Occasions of delay;
When, likewise, to be neither swift, nor slow;
And, when to practice all the speed, they may.
For, whether calm, or stormie-passages,
(Through this life's Ocean) shall their Bark attend;
This double Virtue, will procure their ease:
And, them, in all necessities, befriend.
By Speediness, our works are timely wrought;
By Staydnesse, they, to pass are, safely, brought.
They that in Hope, and Silence, live,
The best Contentment, may atchive.

IN SILENTIO ET SPE.


ILLVSTR. XI. Book. 2
IF thou desire to cherish true Content,
And in a troublous time that course to take,
Which may be likely mischieves to prevent,
Some use, of this our Hieroglyphick, make.
The Friars Habit, seems to import,
That, thou (as ancient Monks and Friars did)
Should live remote, from places of resort,
And, in retyrednesse, lie closely hid.
The clasped-Booke, does warn thee, to retain
Thy thoughts within the compass of thy breast;
And, in a quiet silence to remain,
Until, thy mind may safely be expressed.
That Anchor, does inform thee, that thou must
Walk on in Hope; and, in thy Pilgrimage,
Bear up (without despairing or distrust)
Those wrongs, and sufferings, which attend thine Age.
For, whensoere Oppression grows rise,
Obscurenesse, is more safe than Eminence;
He, that then keeps his Tongue, may keep his Life,
Till Times will better favor Innocence.
Truth spoken where untruth is more approved,
Will but enrage the malice of thy foes;
And, otherwhile, a wicked man is moved
To cease from wrong, if no man him oppose.
Let this our Emblem, therefore, counsel thee,
Thy life in safe Retyrednesse, to spend:
Let, in thy breast, thy thoughts reserved be,
Till thou art laid, where none can thee offend.
And, whilst most others, give their Fancy scope,
Enjoy thy self, in Silence, and in Hope.
Let none despair of their Estate,
For, Prudence, greater is, than Fate.

FATO PRVDENTIA MAYOR.


ILLVSTR. XII. Book. 2
Be merry man, and let no causeless fear
Of Constellation, fatal Destiny,
Or of those false Decrees, that published are
By foolish brains, thy Conscience terrify.
To thee, these Figures better Doctrines teach,
Than those blind Stoikes, who necessitate
Contingent things; and, arrogantly teach
(For doubtless truths) their dreams of changelesse Fate.
Though true it be, that those things which pertain,
As Ground-workes, to Gods glory, and our bliss,
Are fixed, for aye, unchanged to remain;
All, is not such, that thereon builded is.
God, gives men power, to build on his Foundation;
And, if their works be thereunto agreeing,
No Power-created, brings that Variation,
Which can disturb, the Workmans happy being.
Nor, of those workings, which required are,
Is any made unpossible, until
Man's heart begins that Counsel to prefer,
Which is derived from a crooked-will.
The Stars, and many other things, incline
Our natural Constitutions, diverse ways;
But, in the Soul, God placed a Power-divine,
Which, all those Inclinations, overswayes.
Yea, God, that Prudence, has infused, by Grace,
Which, till Self-will, and Lust, betrays a man,
Will keep him firmly, in that happy place,
From whence, no Constellation move him can.
And, this is that, whereof I notice take,
From this great Star, enclosed by a Snake.
Their Friendship firm will ever bide,
Whose hands unto the Cross are tide.

CONIVNCTIS VOTIS


ILLVSTR. XIII. Book. 2
WHen first I knew the world, (and was untaught
By tryde experience, what true Friendship meant)
That I had many faithful friends, I thought;
And, of their Love, was wondrous confident.
For, few so young in years, and mean in fortune,
Of their Familiars, had such troops, as I,
Who did their daily fellowship importune;
Or, seem so pleased in their company.
In all their friendly meetings, I was one;
And, of the Quorum, in their honest game:
By day or night, I seldom sat alone;
And, welcome seemed, wheresoere I came.
But, where are now those multitudes of Friends?
Alas! they on a sudden flasht away.
Their love begun, but, for some sensual ends,
Which failing them, it would no longer stay.
If I to vain expenses, would have moved them,
They, nor their pains, nor purses, would have spared;
But, in a real need, if I had proved them,
Small shows of kindness, had bin then declared.
Of thrice three thousands, two, perhaps, or three,
Are left me now, which (yet) as Friends I prize;
But, none of them, of that great number be,
With whom I had my youthful Iollities.
If, therefore, thou desire a Friend, on Earth,
Let one pure-faith betwixt you be begot,
And, seek him not, in vanities, or mirth,
But, let Afflictions tie your true-love-knot:
For, they who to the Cross, are firmly tide,
Will fast, and everlasting Friends, abide.
A Candle that affords no light,
What profits it, by Day, or Night?

CVI BONO.


ILLVSTR. XIIII. Book. 2
THere be of those in every Commonweal,
Whom to this Emblem we resemble may;
The Name of none I purpose to reveal,
But, their Condition, here, I will display.
Some, both by gifts of Nature, and of Grace,
Are so prepared, that, they might be fit
To stand as Lights, in profitable place;
Yet, loose their Talent, by neglecting it.
Some, to the common Grace, and natural parts,
(By help of Nurture, and good Discipline)
Have added an accomplishment of Arts,
By which, their Light may much the brighter shine.
Some others, have to this, acquired more:
For, to maintain their Lamp, in giving light,
Of Wax, and Oil, and Fatness, they have store,
Which over-flowes unto them, day and night.
And, even as Lamps, or Candles, on a Table,
(Or, fixed on golden Candlesticks, on high)
To light Assemblies, Great and Honorable,
They, often, have (also) place of Dignity.
By means of which, their Splendour might become
His praise, who those high favors did bequeath:
They might increase the Light of Christendom,
And, make them see, who sit in shades of Death.
But, many of them, like those Candles be,
That stand unlighted in a Branch of gold:
For, by their help we nothing more can see,
Than we in grossest darkness, may behold.
If such there be, (as there be such, I fear)
The question is, For what good use they are.
The Sacrifice, God loves best,
Are Broken-hearts, for Sin, oppressed.

SACRIFICIVM DEO COR CONTRIBVLATIM.


ILLVSTR. XV. Book. 2
NO Age, has had a people, to profess
Religion, with a show of holiness,
Beyond these times; nor, did men sacrifice,
According to their foolish fantasies,
More often than at this present. One, bestows
On pious-workes, the hundredth part, of those
Ill-gotten goods, which from the poor he seized,
And, thinks his God, in that, is highly pleased.
Another, of her dues, the Church bereaves:
And, yet, himself a holy man conceives,
(Yea, and right bountiful) if he can spare
From those his thefts, the tenth, or twentieth share,
To some new Lecture; or, a Chaplain keep,
To please Himself, or, preach his Wife asleep.
Some others, think they bring sincere Oblations,
When, fired with zeal, they roar out Imprecations
Against all those, whom wicked they repute:
And, when to God, they tender any suit,
They dream to merit what they would obtain,
By praying-long, with Repetitions vain.
With many other such like Sacrifices
Men come to God: but, he such gifts despises
For, neither gifts, nor works, nor any thing
(Which we can either do, or say, or bring,)
Accepted is of God; until he find
A Spirit-humbled, and a troubled-minde.
A contrite Heart, is that, and, that alone,
Which God with love, and pity, looks upon.
Such he affects; therefore ( Oh Lord) to thee;
Such, let my Heart, and, such, my Spirit be.
A King, that prudently Commands,
Becomes the glory of his Lands.

REGNI CORONA REX


ILLVSTR. XVI. Book. 2
THe Royall-Scepter, Kingly power, implies;
The Crowne-Imperiall, GLORY, signifies:
And, by these joined in one, we understand,
A King, that is an honor to his Land.
A Kingdom, is not always eminent,
By having Confines of a large extent;
For, Poverty, and Barbarousnesse, are found
Even in some large Dominions, to abound:
Nor, is it Wealth, which gets a glorious-Name;
For, then, those Lands would spread the widest Fame,
From whence we fetch the Gold and Silver-ore;
And, where we gather Pearls upon the shore:
Nor, have those Countries highest exaltations,
Which breed the strongest, and the Warlikst Nations;
For, proud of their own power, they sometimes grow,
And quarrel, till themselves they overthrow.
Nor, do the chiefest glories, of a Land,
In many Cities, or much People, stand:
For, then, those Kingdoms, most renowned were,
In which Unchristian Kings, and, Tyrants are.
It is the King by whom a Realme's renown,
Is either builded up, or overthrown.
By Solomon, more famed was Judah made,
Then, by the Multitude of men it had:
Great Alexander, glorified Greece,
Throughout the World, which, else had been a piece
Perhaps obscure; And, Caesar added more
To Rome, then all her greatness did before.
Grant, Lord, these Isles, for ever may be blessed,
With what, in this our Emblem is expressed.
By Study, and by Watchfulness,
The Jemme of Knowledge, we possess.

STVDIO ET VIGILANTIA.


ILLVSTR. XVII. Book. 2
I Think you would be wise; for, most men seem
To make of Knowledge very great esteem.
If such be your desires, this Emblem view;
And, mark how well the Figures, counsel you.
We by the Bird of Athens, do express,
That painful, and that useful watchfulness,
Which ought to be enjoined, unto them,
Who seek a place, in Wisdoms Academ.
For, as an Owl mewes up her self by Day,
And watches in the Night, to get her prey;
Even so, good Students, neither must be such,
As daily gad; or nightly sleep too much.
That open-booke, on which the Owl is perched,
Affords a Moral, worthy to be searched:
For, it informs, and, darkly does advise,
Your Watchings be not after Vanities;
(Or, like their Wakings, who turn days to nights,
In following their unlawful appetites)
And, that, in keeping Home, you do not spend
Your hours in sloth, or, to some fruitless end.
But, rather in good Studies; and, in that,
By which, true Knowledge, is arrived at.
For, if your Studies, and your Wakings, be
To this intent; you shall that Pathway see
To Wisdom, and to Honor, which was found,
Of them, whose Knowledge has been most renownd.
But, if your Watchings, and Retyrednesse,
Be for your Lust, or, out of Sottishness;
You are not, what the Athenian-Owle implies,
But, what our English-Owlet signifies.
When Mars, and Pallas, do agree,
Great works, by them, effected be.

ART ET MART


ILLVSTR. XVIII. Book. 2
IT prospers ever best, in all Estates,
When Mars and Pallas are continual Mates.
And, those affairs but seldom luckie be,
In which, these needful Powers, do not agree.
That Commonwealth, in which, good Arts are found
Without a Guard, will soon receive a wound:
And, Soldiers, where good order bears no sway,
Will, very quickly, rout themselves away.
Moreover* in our private Actions too,
There must be both a Knowledge, how to do
The work proposed; and strength to finish it;
Or, we shall profit little by our Wit.
Discretion takes effect, where Vigor fails;
Where Cunning speeds not, outward-force prevails;
And, otherwhile, the prize pertaines to neither,
Till they have joined their Virtues both together.
Consider this; and, as occasions are,
To both of these your due respects declare.
Delight not so in Arts, to purchase harms
By Negligence, or Ignorance of Arms:
If Martiall-Discipline thou shall affect;
Yet, do not honest-Policie, neglect.
Improve thy Mind, as much as e're thou may;
But fool thou not thy Bodies gifts away.
The Virtues both of Body, and of Mind,
Are, still, to be regarded in their kind.
And, we should neither of the two disgrace;
Nor, either of them, raise above his place:
For, when these two we value as we ought,
Great works, by their joint power, to pass are brought.
They, after suffering, shall be crowned,
In whom, a Constant-faith, is found.

CONSTANTE FIDVCIA


ILLVSTR. XIX. Book. 2
Mark well this Emblem; and, observe you thence
The nature of true Christian-confidence.
Her Foot is fixed on a squared-Stone,
Which, whether side soever you turn it on,
Stands fast; and, is that Cornerstone, which props,
And firmly knits the structure of our Hopes.
She, always, bears a Cross; to signify,
That, there was never any Constancy
Without her Trials: and, that, her perfection,
Shall never be attained, without Affliction.
A Cup she has, moreover, in her hand;
And, by that Figure, thou may understand,
That, she has draughts of Comfort, always near her,
(At every brunt) to strengthen, and to cheer her.
And, lo, her head is crowned; that, we may see
How great, her Glories, and Rewards, will be.
Here by, this Virtue's nature may be known:
Now, practice, how to make the same thine own.
Discouraged be not, though thou art pursued
With many wrongs, which cannot be eschew'd;
Nor yield thou to Despairing, though thou have
A Cross (which threatens death) to be embraced;
Or, though thou be compelled to swallow up,
The very dregs, of Sorrows bitter Cup:
For, whenever griefs, or torments, pain thee,
Thou have the same Foundation to sustain thee:
The self same Cap of Comfort, is prepared
To give thee strength, when fainting fits are feared:
And, when thy time of trial, is expired,
Thou shall obtain the Crown, thou have desired.
Love, a Musician is professed,
And, of all Music, is the best.

AMOR DOCET MVSICAM


ILLVSTR. XX. Book. 2
IF to his thoughts my Comments have assented,
By whom the following Emblem was invented,
I Will hereby teach you ( Ladies) to discover
A true-bred Cupid, from a fained Lover;
And, show (if you have Wooers) which be they,
That worth'est are to bear your Hearts away.
As is the Boy, which, here, you pictured see,
Let them be young, or let them, rather, be
Of suiting-yeares (which is instead of youth)
And, woo you in the nakedness, of Truth;
Not in the common and disguised Clothes,
Of Mimick-gestures, Complements, and Oaths.
Let them be winged with a swift Desire;
And, not with slow-affections, that will tire.
But, look to this, as to the principal,
That, Love do make them truly Musical:
For, Love's a good Musician; and, will show
How, every faithful Lover may be so.
Each word he speaks, will presently appear
To be melodious Raptures in your ear:
Each gesture of his body, when he moves,
Will seem to play, or sing, a Song of Loves:
The very looks, and motions of his eyes,
Will touch your Heart Strings, with sweet Harmonies;
And, if the Name of him, be but expressed,
It Will cause a thousand quaverings in your breast.
Nay, even those Discords, which occasioned are,
Will make your Music, much the sweeter, far.
And, such a mooving Diapason strike,
As none but Love, can ever play the like.
Thy seeming-Lover, false will be,
And, love thy Money, more than Thee.

NON TE SED NVMMOS


ILLVSTR. XXI. Book. 2
WHat may the reason be, so many wed,
And miss the blessings of a joyfull-Bed,
But those ungodly, and improper ends,
For which, this Age most Marriages intends?
Some, love plumpe-flesh; and, those as kind will be
To any gamesome Wanton, as to thee.
Some, doat on Honors; and, all such will prize
Thy Person, merely, for thy Dignities.
Some, fancy Pleasures; and, such Flirts as they,
With every Hobbyhorse, will run away.
Some (like this Couple in our Emblem, here)
Woo hard for Wealth; and, very kind appear,
Till they have won their prize: but, then they show
On what their best Affections they bestow.
This Wealth, is that sweet Beauty, which preferres
So many to their Executioners.
This, is that rare Perfection, for whose sake,
The Pol^tician, does his Marriage, make.
Yea, most of those whom you shall married find,
Were cousned, (or did cosen) in this kind;
And, for some by respects, they came together,
Much more, than for the sakes, of one another.
If this concerns thee, now, in any sense;
For thy instruction, take this warning hence:
If thou have erred already, then, lament
Thy passed crime, and, bear thy punishment.
If thou, as yet, but tempted art to err;
Then, let this Emblem be thy Counselor:
For, I have said my mind; which, if thou slight,
Go, and repent it, on thy wedding night.
Give Credit; but, first, well beware,
Before thou trust them, who they are.

FIDE SED CVI VIDE


ILLVSTR. XXII. Book. 2
I Rather would (because it seems just)
Deceived be, than causelessly distrust:
Yet, whom I credited; and, then, how far;
Be Cautions, which I thought worth heeding were:
And, had not this been taught me long agone,
I had been poorer, if not quite undone.
That, others to such wariness, may come,
This Emblem, here, has filled up a room;
And, though a vulgar Figure, it may seem,
The Moral, of it, meriteth esteem.
That Seeing-Palme, (endowed with an Eye,
And handling of a Heart) may signify
What wary Watchfulness, observe we must,
Before we venture on a weighty Trust:
And, that, to keep our kindness from abuse,
There is of double-diligence, an use.
Men's hearts, are grown so false, that most are loath
To trust each others Words, or Bands, or Oath:
For, though we had in every part an Eye,
We could not search out all Hypocrisy;
Nor, by our utmost providence, perceive
How many ways, are open to deceive.
Now, then (although perhaps thou art so wise,
To know already, what I would advise)
Yet may this Emblem, or this Motto, be
Instead of some Remembrancer, to thee.
So, take it therefore; And, be sure, if either
This Warning, or thy Wit, (or both together)
Can, still, secure thee from deceitfull-hearts;
Thy luck exceeds all thy other parts.
He, that on Earthly-things, does trust,
Depends, upon Smoke, and Dust.

HVMANA FVMVS


ILLVSTR. XXIII. Book. 2
LOrd! what a coil is here! and what a puther,
To save and get? to scratch and scrape together
The Rubbish of the world? and, to acquire
Those vanities, which Fancy does desire?
What Violence is used, and what Cunning?
What nightly Watchings, and what daily Running?
What sorrows felt? what difficulties entered?
What losses hazarded? what perils ventred?
And, still, how sottishly, do we persever
(By all the power, and means we can endeaver)
To wheel our selves, in a perpetual Round,
In quest of that, which never will be found?
In Objects, here on Earth, we seek to find
That perfect sollidnesse, which is confinde,
To things in Heaven, though every day we see,
What emptiness, and faylings, in them be.
To teach us better; this, our Emblem, here,
Assayes to make terrestrial things appear
The same they be, (both to our ears and eyes)
That, we may rightly their Condition prize.
The best, which of earths best things, we can say,
Is this; that they are Grass, and will be Hay.
The rest, may be resembled to the Smoke,
(Which does but either blind the sight, or choke)
Or else, to that uncleanly Mushrum-ball,
Which, in some Countries, we a Puff-soyst call;
Whose outside, is a nastie rotten skin,
Containing dirt, or smoking-dust, within.
This is my mind; if wrong you think I Have done them,
Be Fools; and, at your perils, dote upon them.
I bear, about me, all my store;
And, yet, a King enjoyes not more.

OMNIA MEA MECVM PORTO.


ILLVSTR. XXIIII. Book. 2
THis Emblem is a Torteise, whose own shell
Becomes that house, where he does rent-free dwell;
And, in what place soever he resides,
His Arched-Lodging, on his back abides.
There is, moreover, found a kind of these,
That live both on the shore, and in the Seas;
For which respects, the Torteise represents
That man, who in himself, has full contents;
And (by the Virtues lodging in his mind)
Can all things needful, in all places, find.
To such a Man, what ever does betide;
From him, his Treasures, nothing can divide.
If of his outward-meanes, Thieves make a prise;
He, more occasion has to exercise
His inward-Riches: and, they prove a Wealth,
More useful, and less liable to stealth.
If, any at his harmless person strike;
Himself he straight contracteth, Torteis-like,
To make the Shell of Suffrance, his defense;
And, counts it Life, to die with Innocence.
If, he, by hunger, heat, or cold, be payn'd;
If, he, by slaundred, slighted, or disdayn'd;
He, always keeps and carries, that, within him,
Which may, from those things, ease and comfort, win him.
When, him uncloathed, or unhous'd, you see;
His Resolutions, clothes and houses be,
That keep him safer; and, far warmer too,
Than Palaces, and princely Robes, can do.
God give me wealth, that has so little Cumber;
And, much good do it the World with all her Lumber.
To Learning, J a love should have,
Although one foot were in the Grave.

TAMEN DISCAM.


ILLVSTR. XXV. Book. 2
HEre, we an Aged-man described have,
That has one foot, already, in the Grave:
And, if you mark it (though the Sun decline,
And horned Cynthia does begin to shine)
With open book, and, with attentive eyes,
Himself, to compass Knowledge, he applies:
And, though that Evening, end his last of days,
Yet, I will study, more to learn, he says.
From this, we gather, that, while time does last,
The time of learning, never will be past;
And, that, each hour, till we our life lay down,
Still, something, touching life, is to be known.
When he was old, wise Cato learned Greek:
But, we have aged-folkes, that are to seek
Of that, which they have much more cause to learn;
Yet, no such mind in them, we shall discern.
For, that, which they should study in their prime,
Is, often, deferred, till their latter time:
And, then, old age, unfit for learning, makes them,
Or, else, that common dullness overtakes them,
Which m^kes ashamed, that it should be thought,
They need, like little children, to be taught.
And, so, out of this world, they do return
As wise, as in that week, when they were borne.
God, grant me grace, to spend my lifetime so,
That I my duty still may seek to know;
And, that, I never, may so far proceed,
To think, that I, more Knowledge, do not need:
But, in Experience, may continue growing,
Till I am filled with fruits of pious-knowing.
Good-fortune, will by those abide,
In whom, True-vertue does reside.

VIRTVTI FORTVNA COMES.


ILLVSTR. XXVI. Book. 2
Mark, how the Cornucopias, here, apply
Their Plenties, to the Rod of Mercury;
And (if it seem not needless) learn, to know
This Hieroglyphick's meaning, ere you go.
The Sages old, by this Mercurian-wand
( Caducaeus named) were wont to understand
Art, Wisdom, Virtue, and what else we find,
Reputed for endowments of the Mind.
The Cornucopias, well-knowne Emblems, are,
By which, great wealth, and plenties, figured were;
And (if you join together, what they spell)
It will, to every Understanding, tell,
That* where Internall-Graces may be found,
Eternall-blessings, ever, will abound.
For, this is truth, and (though some thoughts in you
Suggest, that this is, often times, untrue)
This, ever is the truth; and, they have got
Few right-form'd Virtues, who believe it not.
I will confess, true Virtue has not ever
All Common-plenties, for which most endeavor;
Nor have the Perfect'st-Vertues, those high places,
Which Knowledge, Arts (and, such as have the faces
Of outward beauty) many times, attain;
For, these are things, which (often) those men gain,
That are more flesh, then spirit; and, have need
Of carnall-helpes, till higher they proceed.
But, they, of whom I speak, are flowne so high,
As, not to want those Toys, for which we cry:
And, I had shown you somewhat of their store,
But, that, this Page, had room to write no more.
The Gospel, thankefully embrace;
For, God, vouchsafed us, this Grace.

DEVS NOBIS HAEC OTIA FECIT.


ILLVSTR. XXVII. Book. 2
THis modern Emblem, is a mute expressing
Of Gods great Mercies, in a Moderne-blessing;
And, gives me, now, just cause to sing his praise,
For granting me, my being, in these days.
The much-desired Messages of Heaven,
For which, our Fathers would their lives have given,
And (in Groves, Caves, and Mountains, once a year)
Were glad, with hazard of their goods, to hear;
Or, in less bloody times, at their own homes,
To hear, in private, and obscured rooms.
Lo; those, those Ioyfull-tydings, we do live
Divulged, in every Village, to perceive;
And, that, the sounds of Gladness, echo may,
Through all our goodly Temples, every day.
This was (Oh God) thy doing; unto thee,
Ascribed, for ever, let all Praises be.
Prolong this Mercy, and, vouchsafe the fruit,
May to thy Labor, on this Vineyard, suit:
Lest, for our fruitlesnesse, thy Light of grace,
Thou, from our Golden candlestick, displace.
We do, me thinks, already, Lord, begin
To wantonize, and let that loathing in,
Which makes thy Manna tastlesse; And, I fear,
That, of those Christians, who, more often hear,
Then practice, what they know, we have too many:
And, I suspect my self, as much as any.
Oh! mend me so, that, by amending me,
Amends in others, may increased be:
And, let all Graces, which thou have bestowed,
Return thee honor, from whom, first, they flowed.
The Bees, will in an Helmet breed;
And, Peace, does after War, succeed.

EX BELLO PAX


ILLVSTR. XXVIII. Book. 2
WHen you have heeded, by your Eyes of sense,
This Helmet, hiving of a Swarm of Bees,
Consider, what may gathered be from thence,
And, what your Eye of Understanding sees.
That Helmet, and, those other Weapons, there,
Betoken War; the Honey-making, Flies,
An Emblem of a happy Kingdom, are,
Enjoying Peace, by painful Industries:
And, when, all these together are expressed,
As in this Emblem, where the Bees, do seem
To make their dwelling, in a Plumed-Crest,
A Moral is employed, worth esteem.
For, these infer, mysteriously, to me,
That, Peace, and Art, and Thrift, most firm abides,
In those Re-publikes, where, Arms cherisht be;
And, where, true Martiall-discipline, resides.
When, of their Stings, the Bees, disarmed, become,
They, who, on others Labors, use to prey,
Encouraged are, with violence, to come,
And, bear their Honey, and, their Wax, away.
So when a People, merely, do affect
To gather Wealth; and (foolishly secure)
Defenses necessary, quite neglect;
Their Foes, to spoil their Land, it will allure.
Long Peace, brings War; and, War, brings Peace, again:
For, when the smart of Warfare seizes on them,
They cry, Alarm; and, then, to fight, are feign,
Until, their War, another Peace, has won them;
And, out of their old rusty Helmets, then,
New Bees do swarm, and, fall to work again.
The Heart of him, that is upright,
In Heavenly-knowledge, takes delight.

COR RECTV^ INQVIRIT SCIENTIA^.


ILLVSTR. XXIX. Book. 2
THis Emblem, with some other of the rest,
Are scarce, with seemly Properties, expressed,
Yet, since a vulgar, and a mean Invention
May yield some Fruit, and show a good Intention;
I Will, hence, as well inform your Intellects,
As if these Figures had not those defects.
The Book, here shadowed, may be said, to show
The Wisdom, and Experience, which we know
By Common means, and, by these Creatures, here,
Which to be placed below us, may appear.
The Winged-heart, betokens those Desires,
By which, the Reasonable-soule, aspires
Above the Creature; and, attempts to clime,
To Mysteries, and Knowledge, more sublime:
Even to the Knowledge of the Three-in-one,
Employed by the Tetragrammaton.
The Smokings of this Heart, may well declare
Those Perturbations, which within us are,
Until, that Heavenly wisdom, we have gained,
Which is not, here, below, to be attained;
And, after which, those Hearts, that are upright,
Enquire with daily study, and delight.
To me, Oh Lord, vouchsafe thou, to impart
The gift of such a Rectifyed-heart.
Grant me the Knowledge of Inferior things,
So far, alone, as their Experience, brings
The Knowledge, which, I ought to have of thee,
And, of those Duties, thou requir'st of me:
For, thee, Oh God, to know, and, thee to fear,
Of truest Wisdom, the Perfections are.
Where, Labor, wisely, is employed,
Deserved Glory, is enjoyed.

EK PONOY KLEOS.


ILLVSTR. XXX. Book. 2
Do men suppose, when Gods free-giving Hand,
Does by their Friends, or, by Inheritance,
To Wealth, or Titles, raise them in the Land,
That, those, to Lasting-glories, them advance?
Or, can men think, such Goods, or Gifts of Nature,
As Nimble-apprehensions, Memory,
An Able-body, or, a comely Feature
(Without improvement) them, shall dignifie?
May Sloth, and Idleness, be warrantable,
In us, because our Fathers have been rich?
Or, are we, therefore, truly honorable,
Because our Predecessors, have been such?
When, nor our Fortunes, nor our natural parts,
In any measure, are improved by us,
Are others bound (as if we had deserts)
With Attributes of Honor to belie us?
No, no; the more our Predecessors left,
(Yea, and, the more, by nature, we enjoy)
We, of the more esteem, shall be bereft;
Because, our Talents, we do mis-imploy.
True Glory, does on Labor, still attend;
But, without Labor, Glory we have none.
She, crowns good Workmen, when their Works have end;
And, Shame, gives payment, where is nothing done.
Laborious, therefore, be; But, lest the Spade
(which, here, does Labor mean) thou use in vain,
The Serpent, thereunto, be sure thou add;
That is, Let Prudence guide thy taking pain.
For, where, a wise-endeavour, shall be found,
A Wreath of Glory, will enclose it round.
Behold, you may, the Picture, here,
Of what, keeps Man, and Child, in fear.

PVEROS CASTIGO VIROSQUE


ILLVSTR. XXXI. Book. 2
THese, are the great'st Afflictions, most men have,
Even from their Nursing-cradle, to their Grave:
Yet, both so needful are, I cannot see,
How either of them, may well spared be.
The Rod is that, which, most our Childhood fears;
And, seems the great'st Affliction that it bears:
That, which to Manhood, is a plague, as common
(And, more unsufferable) is a Woman.
Yet, blush not Ladies; neither frown, I pray,
That, thus of Women, I presume to say;
Nor, number me, as yet, among your foes;
For, I am more your friend, then you suppose:
Nor smile ye Men, as if, from hence, ye had
An Argument, that Woman kind were bad.
The Birch, is blameless (yea, by nature, sweet,
And gentle) till, with stubborn Boys, it meet:
But, then, it smarts. So, Women, will be kind,
Until, with froward Husbands, they are joined:
And, then indeed (perhaps) like Birchen boughs,
(Which, else, had been a trimming, to their House)
They, sometimes prove, sharp whips, and Rods, to them,
That Wisdom, and, Instruction do contemn.
A Woman, was not given for Correction;
But, rather for a furtherance to Perfection:
A precious Balm of love, to cure Man's grief;
And, of his Pleasures, to become the chief.
If, therefore, she occasion any smart,
The blame, he merits, wholly, or in part:
For, like sweet Honey, she, good Stomachs, pleases;
But, pains the Body, subject to Diseases.
Death's one long-Sleepe; and, Life's no more,
But one short-Watch, an hour before.

VITA MORTALIVM VIGILIA.


ILLVSTR. XXXII. Book. 2
WHen, on this Child-like-figure, thou shall look,
Which, with his Light, his Houre-glasse, and his book,
Sits, in a watching-posture, formed here;
And, when thou have perused that Motto, there,
On which he lays his hand; thy self apply
To what it counsels; and, learn to die,
While that Light burns, and, that short-houre does last,
Which, for this Lesson, thou obtained have.
And, in this business, use thou no delays;
For, if the bigger Motto truly, says,
There is not left unto thee, one whole Watch,
Thy necessary labors, to dispatch.
It was no more, when first thy Life begun;
And, many Glasses of that Watch be run:
Which thou observing, should be put in mind,
To husband well, the space that is behind.
Endeavor honestly, whilst thou have light:
Defer thou not, thy Journey, till the night;
Nor, sleep away, in Vanities, the prime,
And flower, of thy most acceptable time.
So watchful, rather, and, so careful be,
That, whensoere the Bridegroom summons thee;
And, when thy Lord returns, unlookt for, home;
Thou may, a Partner, in their joys, become.
And, oh my God! so wary, and so wise,
Let me be made; that, this, which I advise
To other men (and really have thought)
May, still, in practice, by my self, be brought:
And, help, and pardon me, when I transgress,
Through humane frailty, or, forgetfulness.
What ever God did fore-decree,
Shall, without fail, fulfilled be.

MANET IMMVTABILE FATVM.


ILLVSTR. XXXIII. Book. 2
ME thinks, that Fate, which God weighs forth to all,
I, by the Figure of this Even-Skale,
May partly show; and, let my Reader, see
The state, of an Immutable-decree;
And, how it differs, from those Destinies,
Which carnal understandings, do devise.
For, this implies, that every thing, to-come,
Was, by a steady, and, by equal doom,
Weighed out, by Providence; and, that, by Grace,
Each thing, each person, every time, and place,
Had thereunto, a power, and portion given,
So proper to their nature (and, so even
To that just measure, which, aright became
The Workings, and, the being, of the same)
As, best might help the furthering of that end,
Which, God's eternal wisdom, does intend.
And, though, I dare not be so bold, as they,
Who, of God's Closer, seem to keep the Key;
(And, things, for absolute Decrees, declare,
Which, either false, or, but Contingents are)
Yet, in his Will-reveal'd, my Reason, sees
Thus much, of his Immutable-decrees:
That, him, a Doome-eternall, reprobateth,
Who scorneth Mercy; or, Instruction hates,
Without Repenting: And, that, whenever,
A Sinner, true amendment, shall endeavor;
Bewail his Wickedness, and, call for grace;
There shall be, for Compassion, time, and place.
And, this, I hold, a branch of that Decree,
Which, Men may say, shall never changed be.
My Fortune, I had rather bear;
Then come, where greater perils are.

DETERIVS FORMIDO.


ILLVSTR. XXXIV. Book. 2
Mark well this Caged-fowle; and, thereby, see,
What, thy estate, may, peradventure, be.
She, wants her freedom; so, perhaps, do thou,
Some freedoms lack, which, are desired, now;
And, though, thy Body be not so confined;
Art straightened, from some liberty of Mind.
The Bird in thrall, the more contented lies,
Because, the Hawke, so near her, she espyes;
And, though, the Cage were open, more would fear,
To venture out, then to continue there:
So, if thou could perceive, what Birds of prey,
Are hovering round about thee, every day,
To seize thy Soul (when she abroad shall go,
To take the Freedom, she desires so)
Thou, far more fearful, would of them, become,
Then thou art, now, of what thou flyest from.
Not Precepts, but Experience, thus has taught me;
Which, to such resolutions, now have brought me,
That, whatsoever mischiefs others do me,
I make them yield some true Contentments to me;
And, seldom struggle from them, till I see,
That, smother-fortunes will securer be.
What spite soere my Foes, to me, can do,
I laugh thereat, within an hour or two:
For, though the World, and I, at first, believe,
My Sufferings, give me cause enough to grieve;
Yet, afterward, I find (the more to glad me)
That, better Fortunes, might far worse have made me.
By some young Devils, though, I scratched am,
Yet, I am hopeful, I shall escape their Dam.
The more contrary Winds do blow,
The greater Virtues praise will grow.

ADVERSIS CLARIVS ARDET.


ILLVSTR. XXXV. Book. 2
OBserve the nature of that Fiery-flame,
Which on the Mountains top so brightly shows;
The Winds from every quarter, blow the same,
Yea, and to blow it out, their fury blows;
But, lo; the more they storm, the more it shines;
At every Blast, the Flame ascends higher;
And, till the Fuells want, that rage confineth,
It, will be, still, a great, and glorious Fire.
Thus fares the man, whom Virtue, Beacon-like,
Has fixed upon the Hills of Eminence,
At him, the Tempests of mad Envy strike,
And, rage against his Piles of Innocence;
But, still, the more they wrong him, and the more
They seek to keep his worth from being known,
They, daily, make it greater, then before;
And, cause his Fame, the farther to be blown.
When, therefore, no selfe-doting Arrogance,
But, Virtues covered with a modest veil,
Break through obscurity, and, thee advance
To place, where Envy shall thy worth assail;
Discourage not thy self: but, stand the shockes
Of wrath, and fury. Let them snarle and bite;
Pursue thee, with Detraction, Slanders, Mockes,
And, all the venomed Engines of Despite,
Thou art above their malice; and, the blaze
Of thy Caelestiall-fire, shall shine so clear,
That, their besotted souls, thou shall amaze;
And, make thy Splendours, to their shame, appear.
If this be all, that Envies rage can do,
Lord, give me Virtues, though I suffer too.
Even as the Smoke does pass away;
So, shall all Worldly-pompe decay.

SIC TRANSIT GLORIA MUNDI.


ILLVSTR. XXXVI. Book. 2
SOme better Arguments, then yet I see,
I must perceive; and, better causes, why,
To those gay things, I should addicted be,
To which, the Vulgar their Affections tie.
I have considered, Scepters, Miters, Crowns,
With each appurtenance to them belonging;
My heart, has searched their Glories, and Renownes;
And, all the pleasant things about them thronging:
My Soul, has truly weighed, and, took the measure,
Of Riches (which the most have so desired)
I have distilled the Quintessence of Pleasure,
And, seen those Objects, that are most admired.
I, likewise feel all Passions, and Affections,
That help to cheat the Reason, and persuade
That those poor Vanities, have some perfections,
Whereby their Owners, happy might be made.
Yet, when that I have roused my Understanding,
And cleans'd my Heart from some of that Corruption,
Which hinders in me Reasons free commanding,
And, shows, things, without vailes, or interruption;
Then, they, me thinks, as fruitless do appear,
As Bubbles (wherewithal young-children play)
Or, as the Smoke, which, in our Emblem, here,
Now, makes a show, and, straight, consumes away.
Be pleased, Oh God, my value may be such
Of every Outward-blessing, here below,
That, I may neither love them overmuch,
Nor underprise the Gifts, thou shall bestow:
But, know the use, of all these fading Smokes;
And, be refresht, by that, which others chokes.
Death, is unable to divide
Their Hearts, whose Hands True-love has tide.

IVSQVE A LA MORT


ILLVSTR. XXXVII. Book. 2
UPon an Altar, in this Emblem, stands
A Burning-heart; and, therewithal, you see
Beneath Deaths-head, a pair of Loving-hands,
Which, close, and fast-united, seem to be.
These modern Hieroglyphickes (vulgarly
Thus bundled up together) may afford
Good-meanings, with as much Propriety,
As best, with common Judgments, will accord.
It may imply, that, when both Hand and Heart,
By sympathizing dearness are invited,
To meet each others natural Counterpart,
And, are by sacred Ordinance united:
They then have entered that strict Obligation,
By which they, firmly, every way are tied;
And, without means (or thought of separation)
Should in that Union, till their Deaths, abide;
This, therefore, mind thou, whatsoere thou be
(Whose Marriage-ring, this Covenant, has sealed)
For, though, thy Faith's infringement, none can see,
Thy secret fault, shall one day, be revealed.
And, thou that art at liberty, take heed,
Lest thou (as over great a number do)
Of thine own person, make a Privy-deed,
And, afterward, deny thy doing so.
For, though there be, nor Church, nor Chapel, nigh thee
(Nor outward witnesses of what is done)
A Power-invisible does always eye thee;
And, thy pretended Love, so looks upon,
That, if thou be not, till thy dying, true;
Thy Falsehood, till thy dying, thou shall rue.
False Weights, with Measures false eschew,
And, give to every man, their Due.

SVVM CVIQVE TRIBVE


ILLVSTR. XXXVIII. Book. 2
FOrth of a Cloud (with Scale and Rule) extended
An Arm (for this next Emblem) does appear;
Which has to us in silent-showes, commended,
A Virtue, that is often wanting, here.
The World, is very studious of Deceipts;
And, he is judged wisest, who deceives.
False-measures, and, Adulterated-weights,
Of many dues, the needy-man bereaves.
Even Weights to fell, and, other Weights to buy
( Two sorts of weights) in practice are, with some;
And, both of these, they often falsify,
That, they to great, and suddaine-wealth, may come.
But, Conscience make of raising your estates,
By such a base, and such a wicked way:
For, this Injustice, God expressly hates;
And, brings, at last, such thrivers to decay.
By Weight and measure, He on all bestows
The Portions due; That, Weight and Measure, then,
Which Man to God, or to his Neighbor owes,
Should, justly, be returned back again.
Give every one, in every thing his own:
Give honor, where an honor shall be due;
Where you are loved, let your love be shown;
And, yield them succors, who have succored you.
Give to thy Children, breeding and Corrections;
Thy Charities, even to thy Foes extend:
Give to thy Wife, the best of thy Affections;
To God, thy self, and, all thou have, commend:
And, lest thou fail, Remember who has said,
Such measure, as thou giv'st, shall be repaid.
He needs not fear, what spite can do,
Whom Virtue friends, and Fortune, too.

IN VIRTVTE ET FORTVNA.


ILLVSTR. XXXIX. Book. 2
WHen, in this Emblem here, observe you shall
An Eaglet, perched, on a Winged-ball
Advanced on an Altar; and, have eyed
The Snakes, assayling him, on every side:
Me thinks, by that, you straight should apprehend
Their state, whom Wealth, and Virtue, do befriend.
My Judgment, by that Altar-stone, conceives
The sollidnesse, which, true Religion gives;
And, that fast-grounded goodness, which, we see,
In grave, and sound Morality, to be.
The Flying-ball, does, very well, express
All Outward-blessings, and, their fickleness.
Our Eaglet, means such Contemplatives,
As, in this world, do pass away their lives,
By so possessing that which they have got,
As if they cared not, though, they had it not.
The Snakes, may well resemble those, among them,
Who, merely out of envy, seek to wrong them;
And, all these Figures (thus together laid)
Do speak to me, as if these words, they said:
That man, who builds upon the best foundation,
( And spreads the widest wings of Contemplation)
Whilst, in the flesh, he bides, will need some props
Of earthly-fortunes, to support his hopes:
And, other-while, those things, may means become,
The stings of Envy, to secure him from.
And, hence, I learn; that, such, as will abide,
Against all Envy, strongly fortified,
Must join, great Virtues, and great Wealth, together.
God help us, then, poore-soules, who scarce have either!
Time, is a Fading-flowre, that is found
Within Eternities wide round.

AIONION KAI PPOS KAIPON.


ILLVSTR. XL. Book. 2
FIve Terms, there be, which five, I do apply
To all, that was, and is, and, shall be done.
The first, and last, is that ETERNITY,
Which, neither shall have End, nor, was begun.
BEGINNING, is the next; which, is a space
(Or moment rather) scarce imaginary,
Made, when the first Material, formed was;
And, then, forbidden, longer time to tarry.
TIME entered, when, BEGINNING had an Ending,
And, is a Progress, all the works of Nature,
Within the circuit of it, comprehending,
Even till the period, of the Outward-creature.
END, is the fourth, of those five Terms I mean;
(As brief, as was Beginning) and, ordained,
To set the last of moments, to that Scaene,
Which, on this Worlds wide Stage, is entertained.
The fifth, we EVERLASTING, fitly, call;
For, though, it once begun, yet, shall it never
Admit, of any future-end, at all;
But, be extended onward, still, for ever.
The knowledge of these Terms, and of what actions,
To each of them belongs, would set an end,
To many Controversies, and Distractions,
Which do so many trouble, and offend.
TIME'S nature, by the Fading-flowre, appears;
Which, is a Type, of Transitory things:
The Circled-snake, ETERNITY declares;
Within whose Round, each fading Creature, springs.
Some Riddles more, to utter, I intended,
But, lo; a sudden stop, my words have ended.
When great Attempts are undergone,
Join Strength and Wisdom, both in one.

VIRIBVS IVNGENDA SAPIENTIA.


ILLVSTR. XLI. Book. 2
IF ( Reader) thou desirous be to know
What by the Centaure, seems here intended;
What, also, by the Snake, and, by the Bow,
Which in his hand, he bears always bended:
Learn, that this halfe-a man, and halfe-a horse,
Is ancient Hieroglyphicke, teaching thee,
That, Wisdom should be joined with outward force,
If prosperous, we desire our works to be.
His Vpper-part, the shape of Man, does bear,
To teach, that, Reason must become our guide.
The hinder-parts, a Horses Members are;
To show, that we must, also, strength provide:
The Serpent, and the Bow, does signify
The same (or matter to the same effect)
And, by two Types, one Moral to implie,
Is doubled a fore-warning of neglect.
When Knowledge wants Power, despised we grow,
And, know but how to aggravate our pain:
Great strength, will work it own sad overthrow,
Unless, it guided be, with Wisdoms reine.
Therefore, Oh God, vouchsafe thou so to marry
The gifts of Soul and Body, both, in me,
That, I may still have all things necessary,
To work, as I commanded am, by thee.
And, let me not possess them, Lord, alone,
But, also, know their use; and, so well know it,
That, I may do each duty to be done;
And, with upright Intentions, always do it.
If this be more, then, yet, obtain I may,
My will accept thou, for the deed, I pray.
The Ground brings forth all needful, things;
But, from the Sun, this virtue springs.

SOLVM A SOLE


ILLVSTR. XLII. Book. 2
WE do acknowledge (as this Emblem shows)
That Fruits and Flowers, and many pleasant-things,
From out the Ground, in every season grows;
And, that unto their being, help it brings.
Yet, of it self, the Ground, we know is dull,
And, but a Willing-patient, whereupon
The Sun, with Beams, and Virtues wonderful,
Prepares, and effects, what is done.
We, likewise, do acknowledge, that our eyes
Endowed are with faculties of Seeing,
And, with some other natural properties,
Which are as much our own, as is our Being.
However, till the Sun imparts his light,
We find, that we in darkness do remain,
Obscured in an everlasting night;
And, boast our Seeing-faculties, in vain.
So, we, by nature, have some natural powers:
But, Grace, must those abilities of ours
First move; and, guide them, still, in moving, thus,
To work with God, when God shall work on us:
For, God so works, that, no man he procures
Against his nature, ought to choose, or shun:
But, by his holy-Spirit, him allures;
And, with sweet mildness, proves every one.
The Sun is faultlesse of it, when the birth
Of some bad Field, is nothing else but Weeds:
For, by the selfsame Sun shine, fruitful Earth
Bears pleasant Crops, and plentifully breeds.
Thus, from our selves, our Vices have increase,
Our Virtues, from the Sun of Righteousness.
No passage can divert the Course,
Of Pegasus, the Muses Horse.

RECTO CVRSV


ILLVSTR. XLIII. Book. 2
This is the Poets-horse; a Palfray, SIRS,
(That may be ridden, without rod or spurs)
Abroad, more famous then Bucephalus,
Though, not so known, as Banks his horse, with us;
Or some of those fleet-horses, which of late,
Have run their Masters, out of their estate.
For, those, and Hobby-horses, best befit
The note, and practice of their modern wit,
Who, what this Horse might mean, no knowledge had,
Until, a Taverne-signe, they saw it made.
Yet, this old Emblem (worthy veneration)
Does figure out, that winged-contemplation,
On which the Learned mount their best Invention,
And, climb the Hills of highest Apprehension.
This is the nimble Gennet, which does carry,
Their Fancy, through Worlds imaginary;
And, by Ideas feigned, shows them there,
The nature of those Truths, that real are.
By means of this, our Souls do come to know
A thousand secrets, in the Deeps below;
Things, here on Earth, and, things above the Skies,
On which, we never fixed, yet, our eyes.
No thorny, miery, steep, nor craggy place,
Can interrupt this Courser, in his race:
For, that, which others, in their passage troubles,
Augments his courage, and his vigor doubles.
Thus, fares the Mind, infused with brave desires;
It flies through Darkness, Dangers, Floods, and Fires:
And, in despite of what her aim resists:
Pursues her hopes, and takes the way she lists.
The Husbandman, does sow the Seeds;
And, then, on Hope, till Harvest, feeds.

SPES ALIT AGRICOLAS


ILLVSTR. XLIV. Book. 2
THe painful Husbandman, with sweaty brows,
Consumes in labor many a weary day:
To break the stubborn earth, he digs and ploughes,
And, then, the Corn, he scatters on the clay:
When that is done, he harrowes in the Seeds,
And, by a well-cleans'd Furrow, lays it dry:
He, frees it from the Worms, the Moles, the Weeds;
He, on the Fences, also has an eye.
And, though he see the chilling Winter, bring
Snowes, Floods, and Frosts, his Labors to annoy;
Though blasting-windes do nip them in the Spring,
And, Summers Meldewes, threaten to destroy:
Yea, though not only Days, but Weeks, they are
(Nay, many Weeks, and, many Months beside)
In which he must with pain, prolong his care,
Yet, constant in his hopes he does abide.
For this respect, HOPE'S Emblem, here, you see
Attends the Plough, that men beholding it,
May be instructed, or else minded be,
What Hopes, continuing Labors, will befit.
Though, long thou toyled have, and, long attended
About such workings as are necessary;
And, oftentimes, ere fully they are ended,
Shall find thy pains in danger to miscarry:
Yet, be not out of hope, nor quite dejected:
For, buried Seeds will sprout when Winter's gone;
Vnlikelier things are many times effected;
And, God brings help, when men their best have done.
Yea, they that in Good-workes their life employ;
Although, they sow in tears, shall reap in joy.
Things, to their best perfection come,
Not all at once* but, some and some

POCO A POCO.


ILLVSTR. XLV. Book. 2
WHen, thou shall visit, in the Month of May,
A costly Garden, in her best array;
And, view the well-grown Trees, the wel-trimm'd Bowers,
The Beds of Herbs, the knots of pleasant flowers,
With all the deckings, and the fine devices,
Perteyning to those earthly Paradises,
Thou can not well suppose, one day, or two,
Did finish all, which had been, there, to do.
Nor do thou, when young Plants, or new-sowne Lands,
Do thirst for needful Watrings, from thy hands,
By Floodgates, let whole Ponds amongst them come;
But, them besprinklest, rather, some and some;
Lest else, thou mar the Flowers, or chill the Seed,
Or drown the Saplings, which did moisture need.
Let this experiment, which, to thy thought,
May by this Emblem, now perhaps, be brought,
Persuade thee to consider, that, no actions,
Can come, but by degrees, to their perfections;
And, teach thee, to allot, for every thing,
That leisurely-proceeding, which may bring
The ripeness, and fullness, thou expectest:
And, though thy Hopes, but slowly thou effectest,
Discourage not thy self; since, often they prove
Most prosperous actions, which at leisure move.
By many drops, is made a mighty shower;
And many minutes finish up an hour:
By little, and by little, we possess
Assurance of the greatest Happiness.
And, often, by too much haste, and too much cost,
Great Wealth, great Honors, and, great Hopes, are lost.
Affliction, does to many add
More value, then, before, they had.

TRIBVLATIO DITAT


ILLVSTR. XLVI. Book. 2
THough I am somewhat soberer to day,
I have been (I confess) as mad as they,
Who think those men, that large Possessions have,
Gay Clothes, fine Furnitures, and Houses brave,
Are those (nay more, that they alone are those)
On whom, the style of Rich, we should impose.
But, having, by experience, understood
His words, who said, his troubles did him good,
I, now perceive, the Wordly-rich are poor,
Unless of Sorrows, also, they have store.
Till from the Straw, the Flaile, the Corn does beat;
Until the Chafe, be purged from the Wheat,
Yea, till the Mill, the Grains in pieces tear,
The richness of the Flower, will scarce appear.
So, till men's persons great Afflictions touch
(If worth be found) their worth is not so much,
Because, like Wheat, in Straw, they have not, yet,
That value, which in threshing, they may get.
For, till the bruising Flailes of GOD'S Corrections,
Have threshed out of us our vain Affections;
Till those Corruptions, which do misbecome us,
Are by thy Sacred-spirit, winnowed from us;
Until, from us, the straw of Wordly-treasures;
Till all the dusty Chafe of empty Pleasures;
Yea, till his Flaile, upon us, he does lay,
To thresh the husk of this our Flesh away;
And, leave the Soul uncovered; nay, yet more,
Till God shall make, our very Spirit poor;
We shall not up to highest Wealth aspire:
But, then we shall; and, that is my desire.
Though Fortune, has a powerful Name,
Yet, Virtue overcomes the same.

VICTRIX FORTVNAE SAPIENTIA.


ILLVSTR. XLVII. Book. 2
A Snake, (which was by wise Antiquity
Much used, the type of Prudencie to be)
Hemmes in a Winged-ball, which does imply,
That Fickle-fortune, from which, none are free.
Above this Ball, the Snake advances too,
The Laurel, and the Sword; which, Emblems are,
Whereby our Author makes much ado,
A Conquest over Fortune, to declare.
And, well enough this purpose it befits,
If ( Reader) any one of those thou be,
Whose Fortunes must be mended by their Wits;
And, it affords instructions fit for thee:
For, hence, thou may collect, that, no estate
Can, by Misfortunes means, become so bad,
But, Prudence (who is Mistress over Fate)
May rule it so, that, good it might be made.
Though Fortunes outlawes, on thy Riches prey,
By Wisd^me, there is means, of getting more;
And, every rub that is placed in thy way,
Shall make thee walk more safely, then before.
Nor Poverty, nor Pains, nor Spightfulnesse,
Nor other, Mischiefs, that Mischance can do thee,
Shall bring thee any sorrow or distress,
Which will not be, at last, advantage to thee.
Lord, give me such a Prudence: for my Fortune
Puts many foyles, and cruel thrusts upon me:
Thy help, long since, it made me to importune;
And, thou did grant it, or she had undone me.
Still, daigne me thy assistance, Lord, and, than,
Let all Misfortunes, do the worst they can.
A Life, with good-repute, Jle have,
Or, win an honorable Grave.

AVT MORS AVT VITA DECORA


ILLVSTR. XLVIII. Book. 2
IN this our Emblem, you shall find expressed
A Man, incountring with a Salvage-beast;
And, he resolves (as his Motto says)
To live with honor; or, to dye with praise.
I like the Resolution, and the Deed,
In which, this Figure teaches to proceed.
For, us, me thinks, it counsels, to do,
An act, which all men are obliged unto.
That ugly Bore (wherewith the man in strife
Here seems to be) does mean a Swinish-life,
And, all those beastly Vices, that assay
To root becoming Virtues quite away;
Those Vices, which not only mar our features,
But, also, ruinate our manly natures.
The harmefull fury, of this raging Bore,
Oppose courageously, lest more and more,
It get within you; and, at last, appear
More prevalent, then your defenses are.
It is a large-growne Pig, of that wild Swine,
Which, every day, attempts to undermine
Our Safeties Fort: It Was he, which long ago,
Did seek the Holy-Vineyards overthrow:
And, if we charge him not with all our power,
The Sire, or he, will enter and devour.
But, what is our strength, O Lord! or, what are we
In such a Combat, without aid from thee?
Oh, come to help us, therefore, in this Fight;
And, let us be enabled in thy might:
So, we shall both in lifetime, Conquests have;
And, be victorious, also, in the Grave.
She shall increase in glory, still,
Until her light, the world, does fill.

DONEC TOTV^ IMPLEAT ORBE^.


ILLVSTR. XLIX. Book. 2
WHat in this Emblem, that man's meanings were,
Who made it first, I neither know nor care;
For, whatsoere, he purposed, or thought,
To serve my purpose, now it shall be taught;
Who, many times, before this Task is ended,
Must pick out Moralls, where was none intended.
This knot of Moons (or Crescents) crowned thus,
Illustrate may a Mystery to us,
Of pious use (and, peradventure, such,
As from old Hieroglyphics, er^es not much)
Old-times, upon the Moon, three names b^stow'd;
Because, three diverse ways, her self she showed:
And, in the sacred-bookes, it may be shown,
That holy-Church, was figured by the Moon.
Then, these three Moons in one, may intimate
The holy-Churches threefold blessed estate.
The Moon, still, biding in our Hemisphaere,
May typisie the Church, consisting, here,
Of m^n, yet living: when she shows her light
Among^^ here, in portions of the night;
The Church it figures, as consist she may
Of them, whose bodies in the Grave do stay;
And, whose blessed spirits, are ascended thither,
Where Soul and Body meet, at last, together.
(...), when the Moon is hidden from our eyes,
The Church-triumphant, then, she signifies;
Which, is a Cres^ent yet, that, some, and some,
Must grow, till all her puts together come:
And, then, this Moon shall beams, at full, display;
LORD, hasten this great Coronation-day.
True Virtue is a Coat of Maile,
Against which, no Weapons can prevail.

VIRTUES LORICA FIDELIS


ILLVSTR. L. Book. 2
LOrd, what a coil men keep, and, with what ear
Their Pistolls, and, their Swords do they prepare,
To be in readiness? and, how they load
Themselves with Irons, when they ride abroad?
How wise and wary too, can they become,
To fortify their persons up at home,
With locks, and bars? and such domestick-Armes,
As may secure their bodies, there, from harms?
However, when all is done, we see, their foes
Break in, sometimes, and work their overthrowes.
For, though (about themselves, with Cable-quoiles,
They could enclose a hundred thousand miles)
The gunshot of a slanderous tongue, may smite,
Their Fame quite through it, to the very White.
Yea, more (though, there, from others, they were free)
They wounded, by themselves, to death might be,
Except their Innocence, more guards them, than
The strength of twenty royal Armies, can.
If, therefore, thou thy Spoylers, wilt beguile,
Thou must be armed, like this Crocodile;
Even with such natural Armor (every day)
As no man can bestow, or take away:
For, spiteful Malice, at one time or other,
Will pierce all borrowed Armours, put together.
Without, let Patience durifie thy Skin;
Let Innocence, line thy heart within;
Let constant Fortitude, unite them so,
That, they may break the force of every blow:
And, when thou thus art armed, if ill thou speed;
Let me sustain the Mischief, in thy steed.
Finis Libri secundi.
THE SECOND LOTTERIE.
1
SOme friends, and foes, of thine, there be,
That make a wondring-stocke of thee;
Some other overmuch, of late,
To thy dishonor boldly prate,
And, peradventure, to thy face,
E're long, they will do thee some disgrace:
Thine Emblem, therefore, does advise
That thou should make them no replies;
And shows that silent-patience, than
Shall stead thee more then Answers can. See, Emblem. I.

2
By such as know you, it is thought,
That, you are better fed then taught:
And, that, it might augment your wit,
If you were sometimes hunger-bit.
That Emblem, which by Lot you drew,
To this effect does somewhat show:
But 'twill go hard, when you are feign,
To feed your Bowels, by your Brain. See, Emb. II.

3
Perhaps you may be one of those,
Whom, from the Church, an Organ blows;
Or, peradventure, one of them,
Who does all melody contemn:
Or, one, whose life is yet untaught,
How into tune it should be brought.
If so, your Lot, to you has sent
An Emblem, not impertinent. See, Emb. III.

4
God bless thee, whosoere thou art,
And, give thee still an honest heart:
For, by the fortune of thy Lot,
That Sword, and Halter, thou have got,
Which threatens death, with much disgrace;
Or, promises the Hang-mans's place.
But, be not grieved; for, now and than,
The Gallows makes an honest man;
And, some, who escape an outward curse,
Both in their lives and deaths are worse, See, Emb. IV.

M 5
Thou would be loath, we should suspect,
Thou did not well thy King affect;
Or, that, thou should be so ingrate,
To slight the welfare of the State:
Ye^, thou, perchance, art one of those,
Who discord through the Kingdom sowes.
W^ know not, but if such thou be,
Mark, what thine Emblem teaches thee. See, Emb. V.

6
In you, a natural desire
Begins to blow Affection's fire;
But, by discretion, guide the blast,
Lest, it consume you, at the last;
Or, by the fury of the same,
Blow out some necessary Flame.
Yea, that, which does your Profit breed,
May harm you, if you take not heed. See, Emb. VI.

7
Be careful, what you go about;
For, by this Lot, there may be doubt,
That you, some wickedness intend,
Which will undo you, in the end.
If you have done the deed, repent:
If purposed ill, the same prevent.
Else, though in jest, this Counsel came,
In earnest, you may rue the same. See, Emb. VII.

8
Thou art afflicted; or, ere long
Shall sing some lamentable Song:
And, of those troubles, take some share,
Which, thou art very loath to bear.
But, be not overmuch dismayed,
Nor pine, what ere on thee be laid,
For, comfort shall thy joy restore,
And, make thee gladder, then before. See, Emb. VIII.

9
If this thy Chance has done thee right,
Thou art, or have been apt to fight;
And, wilt upon occasion small,
Begin, sometimes, a needless brawle.
To show thee, therefore, thy defect;
Or, that thy folly may be checked,
And, fit thy mind for better things,
Thine Emblem, some good counsel brings. See, Emb. IX.

10
What thing soere thou undertak'st,
Thou seldom good conclusion make;
For, still, when thou have ought to do,
Thou art too hasty, or too slow;
And, from that equal temper stray'st,
By which, thy work effect thou may.
To mend this fault thou counseled art,
Be wiser, therefore, then thou were. See, Emb. X.

11
Thou have in public lived long,
And, over freely used thy tongue;
But, if thy safety thou desire,
Be silent, and, thy self retire.
And, if thou will not be undone,
Poss^sse thy joys, and hopes, alone:
For, they, that will from harms be free,
Mu^^ silent, and obscured, be. See, Emb. XI.

12
Thy Fortune, thou do long to hear,
And, what thy Constellations are:
But, why should thou desire to know,
What things, the Planets do foreshow;
Seek, rather. Wisdom to procure,
And, how, all Fortunes to endure:
So, thou shall gain a blessed estate,
And, be the Master of thy Fate. See, Emb. XII.

13
Thou, seem to have great store of friends,
But, they affect thee, for their ends.
There i^, in those, but little trust,
Who love, for profit, mirth, or lust.
L^arne, therefore, when, thou may be sure,
Thy Friend's affection will endure;
And, that this Knowledge may be got,
Good notice take thou of thy Lot. See, Emb. XIII.

14
It is conceived, that means thou have,
O^, might have had good means, at least,
T^ b^ing those matters to effect,
Watch thou do carelessly neglect;
And, good for many might have done,
Who yet, have pleasur'd few, or none.
If this b^ true, thy Lot peruse,
And, God's good gifts, no more abuse. See, Emb. XIV.

15
Religious thou would feign be deemed,
And, such, to many thou have seemed:
But, to this matter more there goes,
Then zealous looks, and formal shows.
Look, therefore, that thy heart be true,
What e're thou s^eme in outward view.
And, if God's favor thou would have,
Observe what Offerings, he does crave. See, Emb. XV.

16
That Emblem, which this Lot will bring,
Concerns the honor of a King:
How, therefore, thee it may conc^rne,
By thy discretion seek to learn.
Perhaps, the Royal power has seemed
To thee, not so to be esteemed,
As well it merits, to be prized.
If so, now better be advised. See, Emb. XVI.

17
Both learned, and wise, thou would become,
(Else thou have much dece^ved some)
But, if ^hy hopes thou will effect,
Thou mu^^ not likely means neglect;
And, what the likelyest means may be,
Thine Emblem has advised thee:
For, by a Foul, that is blockish thought,
Good counsel may to thee be taught. See, Emb. XVII.

18
If, to preferment thou will rise,
Thou must not Arts, nor Arms, despise;
Nor so in one of these delight,
That, thou the other, wholly slight.
Nor, to thy Body be inclined,
So much, as to neglect thy Mind.
This, by thine Emblem, thou may learn;
And, much thy good it may concern. See, Emb. XVIII.

19
Thy fortunes have appeared bad;
For, many suff^rings thou have had:
And trials too, as yet made known
To no man's knowledge, but thine own.
But, let nor loss, nor fame, nor smart,
From constant hopes remove thy heart:
And, as thine Emblem does foreshew,
A good conclusion will ensue. See, Emb. XIX.

W 20
Your Lot informs how to know
Where, best your Love you may bestow:
And, by the same it may appear
What Music most affects your ear.
Deny it not; for (by your leave)
We by your looks, your heart perceive.
And, this perhaps you will think upon
(To purpose) when you are alone. See, Emb. XX.

21
This Lot may make us all suspect,
That some wrong object you affect;
And, that, where dearness you pretend,
It is not for the noblest end.
What mischief from such falsehood flows,
Your Emblem very truly shows;
And, may more happy make your Fate,
If counsel be not come too late. See, Emb. XXI.

22
To trust on others, thou art apt;
And, have already been intrapt;
Or, may er'e long be much deceived
By some, whom thou have well believed.
Be heedfull, therefore, of thy Lot;
And, let it never be forgot:
So, though some hazard thou may run,
Yet, thou shall never be undone. See, Emb. XXII.

23
It seems thou take too great a care
For things, that vain, and fading are;
Or else, do overp^ise them so,
As if all bliss from them did flow.
That, therefore, thou may view their worth,
In Hieroglyphicke shaddow'd forth,
Thy Lot befriends thee: mark the same,
And, be in this, no more to blame. See, Emb. XXIII.

24
Though some, should thee, for one, mistake,
Whose wealth is all upon his back,
If what thou have, be all thine own,
God, has enough on thee bestowne.
A Princes ransom, we may b^are,
In Jewels, which most p^ecieu are;
And, yet, to many men may seem,
To carry nothing worth esteem.
Therefore, though small thy sub^^ance be,
Thine Emblem, somewhat comforts, the^ See, Emb. XXIV.

25
^y this your Emblem, we discern,
That, you are yet of age to learn;
And, that, when el^er you shall grow,
There, will be more for you to know:
Presume not, therefore of your wit,
But, strive that you may better it.
For, of your age, we many view,
That, far more wisdom have, then you. See, Emb. XXV.

26
By thy complaints, it has appeared,
Thou think thy Virtues want reward;
And, that, if they their merit had,
Thou rich and nobler should be made.
To drive thee from that partial t^^ught,
Thou, by an Emblem, shall be taught,
That, where true Virtue may be found,
The truest wealth will still abound. See, Emb. XXVI.

27
By this thy Lot, thou do appear
To be of those, who love to hear
The Preacher's voice; or, else of them,
That undervalue, or contemn
Those daily showers of wholesome words,
Which God, in these our times, affords.
Now, which soere of these thou be,
Thine Emblem, something, teaches thee. See, Emb. XXVII.

28
Thou deal'st, when thee thy foe offends,
As if, you never should be friends.
In peace, thou so secure do grow,
As if, thou could not have a foe.
How, therefore, Peace and War pursues
Each other, this thine Emblem shows,
That, thou may learn, in every tide,
For future chances, to provide. See; Emb. XXVIII.

29
What e're thou art in outward show,
Thy Heart is ever very true,
And, to those Knowledges aspires,
Which every prudent Soul desires:
Yet, be not proud that thou have got
This testimony, by thy Lot.
But, view thine Emblem, and endeaver
In search of Knowledge to persever. See, Emb. XXIX.

30
If Glory, thou desire to get,
Thy Wits, thou must on working set;
And, labor unto Prudence add,
Before true Honor will be had:
For, what thy Friends, or Parents brought,
To make thee famous, profits naught;
But, rather will procure thy shame,
Unless, thou shall improove the same. See, Emb. XXX.

M 31
The time has been, that of the Rod,
Thou were more fearful, then of God;
But, now unless thou prudent grow,
More cause thou have to fear a shrowe;
For, from the Rod, now thou art free,
A Woman, shall thy torment be.
At her, yet do not thou repine,
For, all the fault is only thine. See, Emb. XXXI.

32
It seems, thy Time thou do mispend:
To warn thee, therefore of thine end;
To show, how short thy Life will be;
And, with what speed it flies from thee;
This Lot was drawn: and, may advize,
That, thou thy time should better prize.
Which, if accordingly thou do,
This, will be sport, and profit too. See, Emb. XXXII.

33
It may be, thou art one of those,
Who, do not all aright suppose,
of Gods Decrees; or, of the state
Of an inevitable Fate.
That, therefore, so thou may believe,
(And, of these Mysteries conceive)
As thou art bound; this Lot befell.
Peruse, and mind thine Emblem well. See, Emb. XXXIII.

34
Thou, at thy Fortune, have repined,
And, seem imprisond in thy mind,
Because thou art not straight releast
From those things which have thee oppressed.
To thee, a Lot is therefore sent,
To qualify thy discontent,
By showing, that thy present Fate
Preserves thee, from a worse estate. See, Emb. XXXIV.

35
Thy Virtues and thy Worth are such,
That, many do envy thee much;
And, they that hate thee, take delight
To do thee mischief and despite.
But, heart assume, and follow on
The course that thou have well begun;
For, all their spite shall do no more,
But, make thee greater then before. See, Emb. XXXV.

36
In outward pomp, thy pleasures are;
Thy hope of bliss is placed there;
And, thou this folly wilt not leave,
Till, all content, it shall bereave,
Unless, thou timely come to see
How vain, all earthly Glories be.
An Emblem, therefore, thou have gained,
By which, this Knowledge i^ obtained. See, Emb. XXXVI.

37
It may be feared, that thou have
In public, or in private, past
Some promise, or else made some vow,
That Is broke, or else endangered, now.
If so; this Lot is come, in time,
To mend, or to prevent this crime;
And, show what should by them be done,
'Twixt whom Affection is begun. See, Emb. XXXVII.

38
Thou art reproved of deceit,
In faulty Measures, and in Weight;
And, overbackward have been known,
In giving every one his own.
Thine Emblem, therefore, counsels thee,
That, thou more just, hereafter be.
For, that, which is by falsehood got,
Makes likely shows, but prospers not. See, Emb. XXXVII.

39
So highly, thou do Virtue prize,
That, thou do Fortunes help despise,
As if, where Virtues present are,
Her favors always needless were:
But, sometimes there is enough to do,
For Fortune, and for Virtue too,
The power of envious tongues to charm,
And, keep an Innocent from harm.
Therefore, make both of these, thy friends;
For, thereunto thine Emblem tends. See, Emb. XXXIX.

40
Thou may be one of those, perchance,
Who Sch^sme, and Heresies advance,
Because they Times and Terms mistake;
And, difference know not how to make
'Twixt that, which temp'rall does appear,
And, those things which eternal are.
Thou, by thy Lot, art therefore warned,
To search what should of these be learned. See, Emb. XL.

41
Great works to do, thou have a mind;
But, power thereto thou can not find.
Sometime, thy power is not unfit;
But, then thou failest in thy wit.
Such Undertakings, therefore, choose
(If thou will not thy time abuse)
A^ to thy pow'^s, and wits agree;
And, let them both employed be. See, Emb. XLI.

42
When any Blessing thou have gained,
Thou mind'st not whence it was obtained;
But, bear thy self, as if the same
By thine own power, or merit, came:
That, therefore, thou may better heed
From whence, all Graces do proceed,
Thou, have an Emblem, by this Lot,
From which, good Cautions may be got. See, Emb. XLII.

43
By this thy Lot, it should appear,
The Muses thy acquaintance are;
Or, that thou art (at least) of those,
Who, of their Steed ambitious grows.
If thou have wit, his Reins to guide,
Upon his back, mount up and ride;
But, if thou find thy self to weak,
Forbear him, lest thy neck he break. See, Emb. XLIII.

44
In many things, the worse thou art,
By thy despayring, fainting heart;
And, often, thy labor, and thy cost,
For want of hopefulnesse, is lost.
This indiscretion to prevent,
Thou, therefore, by thy Lot, art sent,
The Plough-man's hopefulnesse to see:
Observe it; and, reformed be. See, Emb. XLIV.

45
As soon as e're thy Seeds are sown,
Thou fruits expectest, fully grown.
And, if they ripe not in a day,
Thou, foolest all thy hopes away:
That wiser, therefore, thou may grow,
Thy Lot, an Emblem does bestow,
To teach, that works both fair and great,
By small-degrees, are made complete. See, Emb. XLV.

46
Thou had, or have, or thou shall have
Much trouble, ere thou fill thy Grave;
And, may, when thou expectest rest,
With pain, or sorrows, be oppressed.
But, be content, and wail not much:
For, Poverty shall make thee rich.
The pain will soon be overpast,
And, thou shall happy be at last. See, Emb. XLVI.

47
Thy Fortune, be it good or bad,
May, by thy wit, be better made;
Yea, whatsoere mischances fall,
By prudence, thou may help them all.
That, hopeful, therefore, thou may bide,
What change soever, shall betide,
Thou, by thy Lot, informed art,
What succors, Wisdom does impart. See, Emb. XLVII.

M 48
A man at Arms, thou would be thought,
And, have the Crown of Honor sought;
But, thou have much mistook the ways,
Which tend to well-deserved praise.
How, Honor, therefore, may be got,
Thou art informed by thy Lot;
And, with what Foes, and, for what end,
Thou should be ready to contend. See, Emb. XLVIII.

49
Perhaps, thou may be one of those,
Who does God's holy Church oppose;
For, over many in these days,
Disturb her Peace, and slight her Praise:
That her esteem, therefore may be
Increased, or preserved, by thee,
Thine Emblem, now, to thee, will show,
To what perfection she will grow. See, Emb. XLIX.

50
Thou safety love, and would have Arms,
Thy person to secure from harms:
But, most of those thou have prepared,
Are but a weak uncertain Guard,
And, if thou take not greater heed,
May fail thy trust, in time of need.
Thine Emblem, therefore, has expressed,
What Arms, for thy defense are best. See, Emb. L.

51
Of Planetary-Calculations,
Of Superstitious-Observations,
Of Lots, and Dreams, and Accidents,
Which have but casual events,
Thou art so fond; and, unto such,
Thou do adhere, and trust so much,
That, it succeeds very well,
No Emblem, now, to thee befell:
Lest, these, which only Counsels be,
Might seem firm Destinies to thee.
52
He that by drawing, here, his Lot,
Some caveat or advice has got,
Did, peradventure, need alone
That Caution, which he lighted on:
But, unto thee, so needful are
All Warnings, and, all Counsels here,
That, Fortune will not one bestow,
Lest, thou may think thou need'st no more.
53
You, may be glad, you drew not that,
Which, in your thought, you guessed at;
For, so it points out that condition,
Whereof you give a great suspicion,
That, had it such an Emblem named,
As fits you right, you had been shamed.
Since, then, your fault is unreveal'd,
Amend, and keep it still concealed.
54
The Muses Oracle is dumb,
Because to tempt them you are come;
For, in your heart you much despise,
To follow that, which they advise:
Their admonitions, you do jeere,
And, scorn to help your Wisdom, here.
The Muses, therefore, leave you, still,
To be as foolish, as you will.
5
It would, perhaps, have made thee proud,
If, now, thy Lot had been allowed
To let an Emblem shadow forth
What is conceived of thy worth.
Or, if thy Virtues were desery'd,
Perchance, thou would be more envied
Then praised, when they are expressed;
A Blanke for thee, was therefore best.
6
No Emblem, to this Lot, replies;
Mind, therefore, well (I thee advise)
What from the Preacher's voice thou hear'st,
When in the Church, thou next appear'st:
Yea, there endeavor thou, to seek
Thy Lot of Counsel, every week.
For, at all seasons, there will be
Such Prophecies, concerning thee,
That, if of those, thou take heed,
These Emblems, thou shall never need.
FINIS.
A COLLECTION OF EMBLEMES, ANCIENT AND MODERN: Quickened With METRICALL
ILLVSTRATIONS, both Moral and Divine: And disposed into LOTTERIES.

That Jnstruction, and Good Counsel, may be furthered by an Honest and
Pleasant Recreation.

By GEORGE WITHER.

The third Book.



LONDON, Printed by AUGUSTINE MATTHEW'S. MDCXXXIV.

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS Princess, FRANCIS, Duchess Dowager of RICHMOND, and
LENNOX, etc.
FAME says (great PRINCESS) that the Pow'rs-above,
Will soon forgive; which, I desire to prove:
For, I am guilty of a Venial-sinne
Against your GRACE; and, have remained therein
Without an Absolution, so long time,
That, now, my Conscience checks me for the Crime;
And, to reprove me for it, will not cease
Till I have, someway, sought to make my Peace.
To palliate my Fault, I could produce
Enough, perhaps, to stand for an Excuse.
But, when I mind what Favors, and what Fame
I might have purchased unto my Name,
(By taking Courage, to have done my best)
I dare not make Excuses; but, request
Your pardon, rather, and, that some Oblation
May gain my Person, future acceptance.
To that intent, this humble Offering, here,
Within your gracious presence, does appear.
And, that it may the more content your eye;
Well-graven Figures, help to beautify
My lowly Gift: And, veiled are in these,
A Treasury of Golden Sentences;
By my well-meaning Muse, interpreted,
That, with your NAME, their Morals may be spread,
And scattred, Largesse-like, (at your commanding)
To help enrich the Poor in Understanding.
If YOU accept the Tender, I shall know,
Your GRACE is pleased with your Servant, so,
As, that there may be hope, my future Actions,
Will give the more contenting Satisfactions:
And, your Encouragements, my Powers may raise,
To make the BEAVTIES of your Later days,
More glorious, far, than your fresh YOVTH's perfection,
Though, known to be, the Lodestone of Affection.
For, like the loving TVRTLE, you have stood
So constant, in your vowed Widdow-hood;
So strictly, kept a solitary state;
So faithful been, to your deceased MATE;
So firmly true, and truly kind, to them,
Which are the Branches of his Princely-stemme;
And, personated in so high a Strain,
The parts of HONOR; that, my rusticke vain,
Must raised be, before it can ascend
To say, how much, your Fame, does you commend.
Yet, if these Lines, (or, that they Usher in)
For me, some Passage may, anew, begin
To your Esteem; I, may so happily,
Illustrate forth, the Golden-History
Of those Affections, which within your Breast,
Have to the world remained unexprest.
That, future times, to your applause may read,
The matchless Pattern of a Widdowed-bed,
Which you have drawn, for those to imitate
Who can; and, for the rest to wonder at.
For, what (thereto) yet wants, in my Muse,
Your GRACE, as my Minerva, may infuse.
Nor, will it be in vain, to show the worth
Of those Perfections, truly blazed forth,
Which you may personate: Nor, shall it be
To your Content unusefull, when you see
The Best part of your self, (as in a Glass)
Disclosed, and set up, before your GRACE,
To represent those Beauties, wherein lurkes,
More sweetness, than in Picture-drawers Works;
And show, how temp'rall Glor^es, and Affections,
Have hourly ripened you, for those Perfections
That, make Immortal; and, which are that End,
Whereto, all Earthly Graces, ought to tend.
Then, if your EXCELLENCE, desire to hear,
Those MUSES, honor you, whose praises; are
Attending Virtue; and, shall please to live
That Life of Glory, which my Verse can give;
Your GRACES favor, (when you please) has powers
To make both ME, and all my Muses yours.
And, we are hopeful, that, so well we know
Your Merits, and those Duties, which we owe,
That, we shall raise, your HONOVR'S Trophies high,
Though, We our selves, upon the pavement lie.
Thus, I have made mine Offering; and I stand
Attending, now, to kiss your GRACES hand.
Your GRACES in all humility, GEO: WITHER.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY Prince, JAMES, Duke of LENNOX, etc.
When Richmond, your, beloved, Uncle, lived,
(For whose departure, all this Empire grieved,
And, yet laments) his GRACE did not refuse
To deigne respects, to my obscured MUSE;
Nor scorn, from Highest-worth, to stoop so low,
As, me, in my despisednesse, to know:
And, had not Bashfulnesse restrained my Wit,
From pressing-on, (when he encouraged it,)
My PEGASVS, had learned, e're now, to rise,
Which, yet, with lame, and sickly Feathers flies.
But, HE has left us; and, I thought not on
The loss I had of HIM, till he was gone;
Nor could I dream, till he did hence ascend,
What it was to want an Honourable-friend:
Nor, what they feel, whom Fate constraines, to tarry
On stormy Plains, without a SANCTVARIE.
As Soon, as from among us, he made wing,
My Hopes did waine, and, I began to sing
A Mournfull-song, not easy to forget;
Because, I bear the burden of it, yet.
Nor was I silent (though my Epicede
Appeared not, for the public eye to read)
But, grieved in private, as one wanting Art,
To give, the Life of praise, to his desert:
Which, if I could have equaled with his Name,
His Death had gained my Verse, a living-Fame.
And, why express I this? except it give
Your GRACE, a fit occasion to perceive,
That, my decayed Hopes I would renew,
And, feign derive them down, from HIM to YOU?
That, as you branched from his Princely Stem;
(Are, honored with his Ducall-Diadem)
And, imitate his Virtue; So, you might
Be Lord, in me, of that, which was his right:
And, for his Noble sake, vouchsafe to own
A Servant, which, to you, is yet unknown.
As Prologue, to the service I intend,
This PRESENT comes; and, without Hope, or End,
Of gaining further Grace, or more Esteem,
Than may, with humblest modesty, beseem
His Love, and Honest-meaning, to expect,
Whose, Merits have, no visible effect,
Conducing to your profit; and, from whom
The best of his intents, are yet to come.
I cannot think, these Lots, or Emblems, are
So worthy in themselves, as they will appear
In your acceptance; Or, that they can give,
Such Grace to YOU, as they will from you receive.
Yet, if YOU please, they may be, otherwhile,
A profitable Means, to help beguile
A Melancholy thought; And, have the power
To shorten (without loss) a tedious hour.
Sometime (no doubt) content you are in walk
In Artlesse Groves; Or, to admit the talk
Of Rustic Swains (though every day you might
Your self in well-trim'd garden-bowr's, delight,
Or, hear the learned Muses, when you please;)
Even so, for change you may, perhaps, in these
A Recreation find; and, in some measure,
A Profit, intermixed with your Pleasure.
I will not make my Promises too large,
Lest, my Performances, they overcharge
With Expectation: but, I leave them, SIR,
To Be, and to be thought, the same they are.
And, if your EXCELLENCE, (when you behold
The Ground whereon I first became so bold,
To make this Entrance) shall vouchsafe to daigne
Those Favors, which, I dare not think to gain
By Meer-deserving; you may then, perchance,
My Willingness, to Ableness advance:
And reap in Me (when ripened they are grown)
Some timely fruits, of that, which you have sown.
Till then, let it suffice, that I profess
A cheerful, and a thankful Readiness
To honor YOU; and, openly to show
The Duty, which, it may appear, I owe
To HIM that is gone. And, let your GRACE descend
To take this Pledge, of what I more intend.
Who am in all humility Your GRACES to be commanded, GEO: WITHER.

If well thou do, and well intend,
Thou shall be crowned, in the end.

SI RECTE FACIES.


ILLVSTR. I. Book. 3
WHen, many, for the chiefest Garland run,
That height of Glory, can befall but one;
Yet, Wreaths there are, for every man prepared,
According as he meriteth reward:
And, though the Work deserves little meed,
Grace, prints a worth, on every willing-deed,
Which forms it current; and, does gracious make
Man's weak endeavors, for GOD's promise sake.
All seek the selfsame prize; but, do not seek,
With mendes, and, with endeavors, all alike.
Most, with the Wreath; but, few those things will do,
That may be helpful to attain thereto:
And, some (that will be doing) more delight
In doing their own will, then doing right.
One, thinks by airie titles, to atchieve
The Palm he seeks; Another, does believe
It Is gained, by giving to his Appetite,
The fullness of his Bodies vain delight:
To reach their aim, some others nourish hopes,
By scrambling up unto the dunghill-tops;
Of temp'rall Riches: and, of all the ways,
Most think this course deserves the greatest praise.
But, this our Emblem's Motto, does implie,
That, nothing Man possesses outwardly
Can purchase him the Crown, that should be sought,
Like rightly-doing, what is rightly-taught.
And, that, God never passed any doom.
To bar their bless, who righteous would become:
For, even to Cain he said (of sin detected)
If well thou do, thou shall be well respected.
A little Wit, may stand in stead,
When Strength does fail, in time of need.

SUPERAT SOLERTIA VIRES.

ILLVSTR. II. Book. 3
THe Squirrell, when she must go seek her food,
By making passage through some neighboring flood,
(And fears to be devoured by the Stream)
Thus, helps her weakness, by a Stratagem.
On blocks, or chips, which on the waves do flote,
She nimbly leaps; and, making them her boat
(By help of Winds, of Current, and of Tide)
Is wafred over to the further side.
Thus, that, which for the Body proves unfit,
Must often be acquired by the Wit.
And, what our ou^ward Fortu^es shall deny,
Our providence must labor to supply.
Those Casualties, which may our need befriend,
We should with heedfull diligence attend;
And, watch to seize those oppurtunities,
Which, men of abler fortunes may despise.
Some Birds, when they an Oyster would unlock,
Mount up, and let it fall upon a Rock;
And, when the Cockles on the Shores lie gasping,
(At ev'^^ Tides approach their Shells unclasping)
Crows cast in Pebles, and so take that meat
By craft, which by their force they could not get.
We, by indeav'ring thus, may gain, at length,
That, which at first appears above our strength.
By little Scr^wes an entrance we may make,
Where Bars of Iron cannot passage break.
Small Engines lift huge weights; and, we have heard,
That one Wiseman (though poor without regard)
May save a City, when the Men of War,
And, all their Captains, at a non plus are.
To Kings, both Sword and Mace pertain;
And, these they do not bear in vain.

NON SINE CAUSA.


ILLVSTR. III. Book. 3
WHen thou behold'st, upon a Day of State,
The King (or, some inferior Magistrate)
Walk forth in public, and the royal Mac^,
The Sword, or Scepter borne before his face:
Suppose thou not, that those are carried, so,
In ostentation, or for idle show.
These vulgar Emblems, are significant;
And, that authority, which Princes grant
To Bodies politic, was, heretofore
Declared, by those Ensigns, which they bore.
The bruzing Mace (although, perhaps, with us,
It be not in these times, restrained thus)
That branch of Royall-power did signify,
Which does by Fines, or loss of liberty,
Correct Offenders. By the Sword, they meant,
That larger branch of power, to represent,
Which takes the Malefactors life away;
And, arms itself; when Rebels disobay.
As often, therefore, as thou shall epsy
Such Hieroglyphickes of Authority;
Be mindful, and advised (how mean soere
The Persons, or the Places may appear,
Who get this power) that still thou honor them:
Lest, thou in those, the power of God contemn.
If not for theirs, yet for thy Sov'raignes cause,
Whom these do personate; Or, for the Laws,
(Which threaten punishment) thy self submit;
And, suffer what Authority thinks fit:
For, whatsoere they be that guide the Reyne,
He, gave the power, who gave it, not, in vain.
He, that concealed things will find,
Must look before him, and behind.

PANDO RECONDITA.


ILLVSTR. IV. Book. 3
THat Head, which in his Temple, heretofore,
The well-knowne figure of old Ianus bore,
Retained the form, which pictured here you find;
A Face before him, and a Face behind.
And this old Hieroglyphicke does comprize
A multitude of Heathenish Mysteries;
Which, we omitting, will insist on what
This Emblem's Motto, chiefly poynteth at.
In true Divinity, it is God alone,
To whom, all hidden things are truly known.
He, only, is that ever-present-being,
Who, by the virtue of his power all-seeing,
Beholds, at one aspect, all things that are,
That ever shall be, and that ever were.
But, in a Morall-sense, we may apply
This double-face, that man to signify,
Who (whatsoere he undertakes to do)
Looks, both before him, and behind him, too.
For, he shall never fruitfully forecast
Affa^^^ to come, who minds not what is past:
And, such as do not, often, before them look,
May lose the labor, that is already took.
By, sometimes, looking backward, we behold
Those things, which have been done in times of old;
By looking wisely forward, we foresee
Such matters, as in future-times will be:
And, thus, we do not only fruits receive,
From that short space of time, in which we live;
But, by this means, we likewise have a share,
In times to come, and, times that passed are.
Good Fortune will with him abide,
That has true Virtue, for his guide.

VIRTUTE DUCE COMITE FORTUNA


ILLVSTR. V. Book. 3
THe Gryphon, is the figure of a creature,
Not found within the Catalogues of Nature:
But, by those Wits created, who, to show
Internal things, external Figures drew:
The Shape, in which this Fiction they expressed,
Was borrowed from a Foul, and, from a Beast;
Importing (when their parts were thus combined)
The Virtues, both of Body, and of mind:
And, Men are said on Gryphons backs to ride,
When those mixed Virtues, them have dignified.
The Stone (this Brute supporting) may express
The firm abiding, and the solidnesse
Of all true Virtues. That, long-winged Ball,
Which does appear fast-linked therewithal,
The gifts of changing Fortune, do implye:
And, all those things together, signify,
That, when by suchlike Virtues Men are guided,
Good Fortune cannot be from them divided.
If this be true (as true I this believe)
Why should we murmr, why repine, or grieve,
As if our Studies, or our honest pains,
Deprived were of some deserved gains?
Why should we think the world has done us wrong,
Because we are not registered among
Those thriving men, who purse up evr'y day,
For twelve hours labor more then twelve months pay?
If we our pains rewarded cannot see,
We count our Merits greater then they be.
But if we bide content, our worth is more;
And rich we are, though others think us poor.
When prosperous our Affairs do grow;
God's Grace it is, that makes them so.

FLOREBO PROSPICIENTE DEO.


ILLVSTR. VI. Book. 3
SVch pleasant Flowers, as here are shadowed out
(Full-grown, well trimmed, and strongly fenced about)
At first, perchance, had planting (where they stand)
And, husbanding, by some good Gardeners hand:
But, when to perfect ripeness, they are grown,
(And, spread forth leaves, and blossoms, fully blown)
They draw it from the Virtue of the Sun,
Which works, when the Gardeners work is done:
For, lost were all his Travail, and his praise,
Unless that Planet cheer them with his rays.
In this our Pilgrimage, it fares with us
(In all our hopes, and all our labors) thus.
For, whatsoever business we intend,
On God, our good successes do depend.
Our Hands may build; but, structures vain we make,
Till God, to be Chief builder, undertake.
To wall a City, we may bear the cost;
But, he mu^t guard it, or, the Town is lost:
The Plowman uses diligence to sow;
But, God must bless it, or, no Corn will grow:
Yea, though Paul plant, and, though Apollo water,
They spend their sweat, upon a fruitless matter,
Till God, from heaven, their labors please to bless,
And crown their travailes, with a good increase.
Let, therefore, those that flourish, like this Flower,
(And, may be withered, e're another hour)
Give God the praise, for making of their Seeds
Bring forth sweet Flowers, that, else, had proved Weeds:
And, me despise not, though I thrive not so;
For, when, God pleases, I shall flourish too.
If thou thy Duties truly do,
Of thy Reward, be hopeful too.

FAC ET SPERA.


ILLVSTR. VII. Book. 3
SOme Sects are found, who so believing be,
They think themselves from legall-workings free;
And, so they live, as if they stood in fear
That, with Good-works, their God offended were.
Another sort we know, who credit not,
That any hope of Mercy can be got,
Till they themselves, by their externall-deed,
Have merited the favors they shall need:
And, so they prize their workings; that, for Grace,
They seem to disallow all useful place.
Both sorts, their errors may be purged from,
When to the Fiery-tryall they shall come.
So, likewise, may another Faction too,
That err more deadly then these former do.
These do (forsooth) affirm, that God's decree
Before all Worlds (what Words can fouler be?)
D^barr'd the greatest part of humane-race,
Without respecting sin, from hope of Grace;
And, that, howere this number shall indeaver,
They must continue Reprobates, for ever.
The first, are errors of Impiety;
But, this, ascends the top of blasphemy;
Dispoyles Religion wholly of her fruits;
And, wrongeth God in all his Attributes.
These Errors, therefore shun; and, so believe,
That we thy Faith, may by thy Works perceive.
So work, that thy believing may approve
Thou wrought'st not for thy Wages; but, for love.
For (whatsoever thou be) if thus thou do,
Thou may have hopes, and, God will grant them too.
By Wisdom, things which pass away,
Are best preserved from decay.

RERUM SAPIENTIA CUSTOS.


ILLVSTR. VIII. Book. 3
THe Laurel, which is given for a Crown
(To men deserving Glory, and renown)
Is figured here, those noble deeds to show,
For which, the Wreaths of Honor, we bestow.
Two Serpents (WISDOME'S Emblems) twisted are
About this branch of Laurel, to declare,
That, Wisdom is the su^est means to save
Our Names and Actions, from Oblivion's Grave.
The Snakes are two, perhaps, to signify
That Morall-wit, and Christian policy
(United both together) do contrive
The safest guard, and best preservative.
Consider this, all ye, that trust your Names
To Marble Monuments; or, mount your Fames
By those poor means, which Fools and Knaves pursue;
And, may effect as easily as you:
Nay, with more ease; and, overtop you too,
When you have done the best, your wits can do.
I say, consider this; and, let the Pen
Of learned, wise, and understanding men,
Renown your worths, and register the story
Of your deserved, and, well-gotten glory;
L^st, else, it suffer close-imprisonments,
Within the walls of such poor Monuments,
As often are built, to leave it quite forgotten,
Whose bones they covered, e're those bones be rotten.
But, you shall best preserve your Honest-fame,
Your Works, your Hopes, and Honors of your Name,
If you your selves be wise; and, so provide
That Prudence, all your Works, and Speeches guide.
Good Hopes, we best accomplish may,
By laboring in a constant-Way.

LABOR ET CONSTANTIA.


ILLVSTR. IX. Book. 3
SOme Folks there are, (and many men suppose,
That I my self, may pass for one of those)
Who many likely Businesses intend,
Yet, bring but very few, unto an end.
Which folly to prevent, this Emblem, here,
Did in a luckie hour, perhaps, appear.
For, as to draw a Circle, with our hand,
We cause the brazen Compasses to stand
With one foot firmly fixed one the ground;
And move the other in a Constant-round:
Right so, when we shall purpose to proceed
In any ju^t, and profitable deed,
We first, should by a constant-resolution,
Stand firm, to what we put in execution:
And, then, with perseverance, labor out
Those workings, which we are employed about.
For, we with constant-liking, must elect
Those Businesses, we purpose to effect:
Or else, our time, our labor, and our cost,
Will, often, be much in vain, or wholly lost.
With constant-labour, we must follow, too,
Those things, which we resolved are to do;
Or, else, our hopes will never be effected,
How warily soever we have projected.
Long Iourneys I abhor; yet, otherwhile
I mean a Furlong, and perform a Mile.
I greatly fear Long-labours to begin;
Yet, some I finish, when I Am entered in:
And, if in Labor, I more constant grow,
How I improve, hereafter, you shall know.
Ere thou a fruitfull-Cropp shall see,
Thy ground must plough'd and harro'wd be.

EVERTIT ET AEQUAT.


ILLVSTR. X. Book. 3
BEfore the Plowman hopeful can be made,
His untilled earth good Hay or Corn will yield,
He breaks the hillocks down, with Plough or Spade;
And, harrowes over, all the cloddie Field.
Then, from the leaveld-ground, at last, he mowes
That Cropp of grass, which he had hope to gain;
Or, there, does reap the fruit of what he sowes,
With profit, which contents him for his pain.
Our craggle-Nature must be tilled, thus,
Before it will, for Herbs of Grace, be fit.
Our high-conceit, must down be broke in us;
Our heart is proud, and God must humble it.
Before good Seed, in us will rooting take,
Afflictions ploughes and harrowes, must prepare us:
And, that the truer level, he may make,
When we are sunck too low, Gods hand must rear us.
Then, neither stormings of Adversity,
Shall drown the Seeds of Hope, which we have sown;
Nor shall the Sunne-beames of Prosperity,
Dry up their moisture, ere they ripe are grown.
Oh Lord, thou know the nature of my mind;
Thou know my bodies tempers what they are;
And, by what means, they shall be best inclin'de
Such Fruits to yield, as they were made to bear.
My barren Soul, therefore, manure thou so;
So, harrow it; so empty, and so fill;
So raise it up, and bring it down, so low
As best may lay it level to thy Will.
In this Desire, the work is well begun;
Say thou the Word, and all is fully ^one.
True Knowledge is a constant Friend,
Whose Friendship, never shall have end.

SCIENTIA IMMUTABILIS.


ILLVSTR. XI. Book. 3
BY viewing this fixt-Head, enwreath'd with Bays,
(And, what the Motto round about it says)
Your Apprehension's, eye, may partly see
What constant Virtues, in true Knowledge be.
For, if right placed it be, it ever will
Continue in the same condition, still:
And, though it make men's manners to be changed;
Yet, never is it, from it self, estranged:
Nor does, nor can it, cease to be a Friend,
What Fate soever, shall on us attend.
When Wealth is lost, or fails to besteed us;
She finds out honest means to cloth and feed us.
In far, and foreign Lands, she will become,
As kind, and as familiar, as at home;
And, travelleth, without the costly cumber,
Of Carriages, or Clokebagges full of Lumber.
No Place can from our presence, her enclose;
Nor is she frighted from us by our Foes.
No Pickthankes, of her Favors, can bereave us;
No Promises, can woo her to deceive us.
In Youth, in Age, in Sickness, and in Grief,
She brings Consolation and relief:
And, is in all estates, a blessing to us,
So constant (and so apt, all helps to do us)
That, he for whom, such Knowledge, God provideth,
Enjoyes a Friend, that always firm abides.
Lord, I am friendlesse left; therefore, to me,
This Knowledge, and this Friend, vouchsafe to be:
For, thou that Wisdom art, (from heaven descending)
Which, neither has beginning, change, nor ending,
By Studiousnesse, in Virtue's ways
Men gain an universall-praise.

VIRTUTE AC STUDIO PER ORBEM FAMA PERPETUA COMPARATUR.


ILLVSTR. XII. Book. 3
WHen Emblems, of too many parts consist,
Their Author was no choice Emblematist:
But, is like those, that wast whole hours, to tell
What, in three minutes, might be said as well.
Yet, when each member is interpreted,
Out of these vulgar Figures, you may read
A Moral, (altogether) not unfit
To be remembered, even, by men of wit.
And, if the Kernel prove to be of worth,
No matter from what shell we drew it forth.
The Square whereon the Globe is placed, here,
Must Virtue be; That Globe upon the Square,
Must mean the World; The Figure, in the Round,
(Which in appearance does her Trumpet sound)
Was made for Fame; The Book she bears, may show,
What Breath it is, which makes her Trumpet blow:
The Wreath, enclosing all, was to intend
A glorious Praise, that never shall have end:
And, these, in one summed up, do seem to say;
That, (if men study in a vertuous-way)
The Trumpet of a never-ceasing Fame,
Shall through the world proclaim their praisefull Name.
Now Reader, if large Fame, be thy ambition,
This Emblem does inform, on what condition
She may be gained. But, (herein, me believe)
Thy study for meere-praise, will thee deceive:
And, if thy Virtues, be, but only, those
For which the vulgar Fame, her Trumpet blows,
Thy Fame's a blast; Thy Virtues, Vices be;
Thy Studie's vain; and, shame will follow thee.
Above thy Knowledge, do not rise,
But, with Sobriety, be wise,

NOLI ALTUM SAPERE.


ILLVSTR. XIII. Book. 3
EXalt thou not thy self, though, placed thou be,
Upon the topp of that old Olive Tree,
From whence the natural branches pruned have bin,
That, thou, the better, might be grafted in.
Be not so over-wise, as to presume
The Gardener, for thy goodness, did assume
Thy small Crab-Olive, to insert it, there,
Where, once, the sweetest-berries, growing were:
Nor let thy Pride those few old-boughes contemn,
Which, yet, remain upon their ancient Stem;
Because, thy new-incorporated Sprayes,
Do more enjoy the Suns refreshing rays:
But, humbled rather, and, more awful be;
Lest, he that cut off them, do break down thee.
Be wise, in what may to thy good, belong;
But, seek not Knowledge, to thy neighbors wrong:
Be thankful for the Grace thou have received,
But, judge not those, who seem thereof bereaved;
Nor into those forbidden secrets peep,
Which God-Almighty, to himself does keep.
Remember what our Father Adam found,
When he for Knowledge, sought beyond his bound.
For, doubtless, ever since, both good and ill
Are left with Knowledge, intermingled still;
And, (if we be not humble, meek, and wary)
We are in daily danger, to miscary.
Large, proves the fruit which on the Earth does lie;
Winds, break the twigge, that is grafted over-high;
And, he that will, beyond his bounds, be wise,
Becomes a very Fool, before he dies.
When each man keeps unto his Trade,
Then, all things better will be made.

TRACTANT FABRILIA FABRI.


ILLVSTR. XIV. Book. 3
WE more should thrive, and err the seldomer,
If we were like this honest Carpenter,
Whose Emblem, in reproof of those, is made,
That love to meddle, farther then their Trade.
But, most are now exceeding cunning grown
In every man's affairs, except their own:
Yea, Cobblers think themselves not only able,
To censure; but, to mend Apelles Table.
Great-Men, sometime, will gravely undertake
To teach, how Broomes and Mortar, we should make.
Their Indiscretions, Peasants imitate,
And boldly meddle with affairs of State.
Some Houswives teach their Teachers how to pray,
Some Clarks, have showed themselves, as wife as they;
And in their Callings, as discreet have bin,
As if they taught their Grandames how to spinne:
And, if these Customs, last a few more Ages,
All Countries will be nothing else, but Stages
Of evill-acted, and mistaken parts;
Or, Gallemaufries, of imperfect Arts.
But, I my self (you will say) have medlings made,
In things, that are improper to my Trade.
No; for, the MUSES are in all things free;
Fit subject of their Verse, all Creatures be;
And, there is nothing named so mean, or great,
Whereof they have not Liberty to treat.
Both Earth and Heaven, are open unto these;
And (when to take more liberty they please)
They Worlds, and things, create, which never were;
And, when they list, they play, and meddle, there.
A Shepherd careful of the Sheep,
At all times, faithful Watch does keep.

NON DORMIT QUI CUSTODIT.


ILLVSTR. XV. Book. 3
THe Figure of a Storke in elder days,
Was used in Hieroglyphick, many ways:
But, when one Foot, thus grasped a Peple-stone,
The other being firmly fixed on
The Staff Episcopal; in that position,
It makes an Emblem, of a late edition:
By some, thought not improper, to express
Their painful, and their serious, watchfulness,
Who take upon themselves, the Pastoral care;
And, in that Function, truly watchful are.
The Shepherds-Crooke, does some expression make
Of that regard, which, of their Flocks, they take.
The Peble in the Foot, does seem to show,
That, these must farther diligence bestow,
(And, use their utmost power) themselves to keep
From slothful Ease; and from intemp'rate sleep:
For, he that has such Duties undertook,
(And, must the lives of others overlooke)
Shall find himself, unto himself become
A burden, and a Charge more troublesome
Th^n all his Flock, unles, he still provide
His own, as well as others ways, to guide.
Now, though this Emblems Moral does concern
The Clergy most; yet, hence we all may learn
Strict watch to keep; since, unto all that be,
A Watchmans place belongs, in some degree.
Which, to discharge, if we endeavor, still,
Our universal Shepherd aid us will,
And us from harms and error he will keep,
For, He that guardeth Isr'ell does not sleep.
Our Days, until our Life has end,
In Labors, and in Hopes, we spend.

IN SPE ET LABOR TRANSIGO VITAM.


ILLVSTR. XVI. Book. 3
AS soon as our first Parents disobeyed,
Forthwith a Curse, for their offense, was laid,
Enforcing them, and their succeeding race,
To get their Food, with sweatings of the Face.
But, afterward, this Doom to mitigate,
(And ease the miseries of their estate)
God gave them Hope, that she might help them bear
The burdens of their Travail, and their care.
A Woman with an Anchor, and a Spade,
An Emblem of that Mystery is made:
And, this Estate, we all continue in,
By God's free Mercy, and our proper Sin.
By Sin, the Labor is on us entailed;
By Grace, it is, that Hoping has not failed;
And, if in Hope, our Labors we attend,
That Curse will prove a Blessing, in the end.
My Lot is Hope, and Labor; and, between
These Two, my Lifetime has prolonged been:
Yet, hitherto, the best of all my Pain,
With most of all my Hopes have been in vain;
And to the VVorld-ward, I am like to wast
My time in fruitless labors, till the last.
However, I have still my Hopes as fair
As he, that has no temptings to Despair;
And, change I will not, my last hours for theirs,
Whose Fortune, more desirable appears;
Nor cease to Hope and Labor, though, of most,
My Hope and Labor be adjudged lost:
For, though I lose the shadow of my Pains,
The stubstance of it, still, in God, remains.
Man's life, no Temper, more does bless,
Then Simple-prudent-harmelessenesse.

PRUDENTE SIMPLICITATE.


ILLVSTR. XVII. Book. 3
WHen from the harmless Turt^e, and the Snake,
Their most commended properties we take,
(And, mix them well) they make a composition,
Which yields a temper of the best condition.
Yet, wickedness, or sorrow, does abound,
Where, any one of these, alone, is found:
For, whensoe're the Serpents-braine we find,
With which, there is no Dove like-mockenesse joined,
(Without all peradventure) thence proceeds,
All harmefull fraud, and all injurious deeds.
And, where such meekness as does seem to be
In harmless Doves, divided you shall see
From that discretion, and that policy,
Which in the Serpents head, is thought to lie;
They liable to every wrong become;
And, to it self, make Virtue burdensome.
But, where these two are joined, they procure
A life so sweet, so rich, and so secure,
That, all the powers of Malice cannot shake
Their out-workes, nor within them, terrors make.
Vouchsafe thou oh my God! vouchsafe, in me,
That these two Virtues may united be.
Such Prudence give, as never will disdain
The Dove-like Innocence, to retain.
That meekness, grant me, which delights not,
It self, with indiscretion, to besot:
But, let these two, each other so defend,
And, so, in me continue, till my end,
That, simple p^udence, I may still possess,
Although the World shall count it foolishness.
Where er'e we dwell, the Heavens are near;
Let us but fly, and we are there.

TRANSITUS CELER EST ET AVOLAMUS.


ILLVSTR. XVIII. Book. 3
WHy, with a trembling faintness, should we fear
The face of Death? and, fondly linger here,
As if we thought the Voyage to be gone
Lay through the shades of Styx or Acheron?
Or, that we either were to travel down
To uncouth Deapthes, or up some heights unknown?
Or, to some place remote, whose nearest end
Is farther then Earths limits do extend?
It is not by one half that distance, thither
Where Death, lets in, as it is any whither:
No not by half so far, as to your bed;
Or, to that place, where you should rest your head,
If on the ground you laid your self (even there)
Where at this moment you abiding are.
This Emblem shows (if well you look thereon)
That, from your Glass of life, which is to run,
There Is but one step to Death; and, that you tread
At once, among the Living, and, the Dead.
In whatsoever Land, we live or die,
God is the same; And, Heaven is, there, as nigh
As in that place, wherein, we most desire
Our Souls, with our last breathing, to expire.
Which things, well heeding; let us not delay
Our Journey, when we summoned are away,
(As those enforced Pilgrims use to do,
That know not whither, nor, how far they go)
Nor let us dream that we in Time, or Place,
Are far from ending our uncertain Race.
But, let us fix on Heaven, a faithful eye,
And, still, be flying thither, till we die.
His Pace, must wary be, and slow,
That has a Slippery-way to go.

PEDE TENTIM.


ILLVSTR. XIX. Book. 3
A Travailer, when he must undertake
To seek his passage, over some Frozen Lake,
With leisure, and with care, he will assay
The glassy smoothness of that Icie-way,
Lest he may slip, by walking over-fast;
Or, break the crackling Pavement, by his have:
And, so (for want of better taking heed)
Incur the mischiefs of Vnwary-speed.
We are all travelers; and, all of us
Have many passages, as dangerous,
As Frozen lakes; and, Slippery-wayes, we tread,
In which our Lives may soon be forfeited,
(With all our hopes of Life-eternall, too)
Unless, we well consider what we do.
There is no private Way, or public Path,
But rubs, or holes, or slipp'tinesse it has,
Whereby, we shall with Mischiefs meet; unless,
We walk it, with a stedfast-wartnesse.
The steps to Honor, are on Pinacles
Composed of melting Snow, and Isicles;
And, they who tread not nicely on their tops,
Shall on a sudden slip from all their hopes.
Yea, even that way, which is both sure and holy,
And, leads the Mind from Vanities and Folly,
Is with so many other Path-wayes crossed,
As, that, by Rashness, it may soon be lost;
Unless, we well deliberate, upon
Those Tracts, in which our Ancestors have gone:
And, they who with more haste, then heed, will run,
May lose the way, in which they well begun.
Our Pelican, by bleeding, thus,
Fulfilled the Law, and cured Us.

PRO LEGE ET PRO GREGE.


ILLVSTR. XX. Book. 3
Look here, and mark (her sickly birds to feed)
How freely this kind Pelican does bleed.
See, how (when other Salves could not be found)
To cure their sorrows, she, her self does wound;
And, when this holy Emblem, thou shall see,
Lift up thy soul to him, who died for thee.
For, this our Hieroglyphick would express
That Pelican, which in the Wilderness
Of this vast World, was left (as all alone)
Our miserable Nature to bemone;
And, in whose eyes, the tears of pity stood,
When he beheld his own unthankful Brood
His Favors, and his Mercies, then, contemn,
When with his wings he would have brooded them:
And, sought their endless peace to have confirmed,
Though, to procure his ruin, they were armed.
To be their Food, himself he freely gave;
His Heart was pierced, that he their Souls might save.
Because, they disobeyed the Sacred-will,
He, did the Law of Righteousness fulfill;
And, to that end (though guiltless he had bin)
Was offered, for our Vniversall-sinne.
Let me Oh God! for ever, fix mine eyes
Upon the Merit of that Sacrifize:
Let me retain a due commemoration
Of those dear Mercies, and that bloody Passion,
Which here is meant; and, by true Faith, still, feed
Upon the drops, this Pelican did bleed;
Yea, let me firm unto thy Law abide,
And, ever love that Flock, for which he died.
Be Just; for, neither Sea nor Land,
Shall hide thee from the Royall-hand.

DISCITE IUSTITIAM.


ILLVSTR. XXI. Book. 3
THat, which we call the Seahorse, is a Creature,
Whereby the Priests of Egypt, wonted were,
To typify an Ill-disposed nature;
And, such, as to their Parents, cruel are:
Because, this Monster (as their Authors write)
When strong he grows, becomes so ingrate,
That he pursues, with violent despite,
His old and weakly Sire, which him begat.
Contrariwise, the Storke, they figured, then,
When they occasion had, to signify
The good condition, of those honest men,
Who pleasure take, in works of Piety:
Because, the Storkes, not only harmed none,
But, help their aged Parents in their need;
And, those offensive Serpents, preyed upon,
Which, in the Fennes of Egypt, yearly, breed.
The Royall-Crowne, therefore, supporting thus
That pious Foul, and overtopping, here,
The wicked, and the fierce Hyppotamus,
May serve to comfort, and to keep in fear.
For, it informs, that, if we pious grow,
And love our Princes (who those Parents be,
To whom all Subjects, filial duties owe)
The blessings of their Favors, we shall see.
It shows us, also, that, if we affect
Vnrighteous-wayes, no Wit, or Strength of our,
Nor any Vncouth-place, shall us protect
From being reached, by the Sov'raigne-power.
The way of Justice, therefore, learn thou still,
For love of Goodness, or for fear of Ill.
Take wing, my Soul, and mount up higher;
For, Earth, fulfills not my Desire.

NON EST MORTALE QUOD OPTO.


ILLVSTR. XXII. Book. 3
WHen Ganymed, himself was purifying,
Great Jupiter, his naked beauty spying,
Sent forth his Aegle (from below to take him)
A blessed Inhabitant, in Heaven to make him:
And, there (as Poets feigned) he does still,
To Jove, and other God heads, Nectar fill.
Though this be but a Fable, of their feigning,
The Moral is a Real truth, pertaining
To every one (which harbors a desire
Above the Starry Circles, to aspire.)
By Ga^ymed, the Soul is understood,
That Is washed in the Purifying flood
Of sacred Baptism (which does make her seem
Both pure and beautiful, in God's esteem.)
The Aegle, means that Heavenly Contemplation,
Which, after Washings of Regeneration,
Lifts up the Mind, from things that earthly be,
To view those Objects, which Faith's Eyes do see.
The Nectar, which is filled out, and given
To all the blessed Inhabitants of Heaven,
Are those Delights, which ( Christ has said) they have,
When some Repentant soul begins to leave
Her foulness; by renewing of her birth,
And, slighting all the Pleasures of the Earth.
I ask not, Lord, those Blessings to receive,
Which any Man has power to take, or give;
Nor, what this World affords; for, I contemn
Her Favors; and have seen the best of them:
Nay, Heaven it self, will unsufficient be,
Unless, Thou, also, give Thy self, to me.
Through many spaces, Time does run,
And, ends, where it first begun.

IN SE SUA PER UESTIGIA UOLUITUR.


ILLVSTR. XXIII. Book. 3
OLd Sages by the Figure of the Snake
(Encircled thus) did often expression make
Of Annuall-Revolutions; and of things,
Which wheel about in everlasting-rings;
There ending, where they first of all begun,
And, there beginning, where the Round was done.
Thus, do the Planets; Thus, the Seasons do;
And, thus, do many other Creatures, too.
By minutes, and by hours, the Spring steals in,
And, rolleth on, till Summer does begin:
The Summer brings on Autumn, by degrees;
So ripening, that the eye of no man sees
Her Entrances. That Season, likewise, has
To Winter ward, as leasurely a path:
And, then, cold Winter wheeleth on amain,
Until it bring: the Spring about again,
With all those Resurrections, which appear,
To wait upon her coming, every year.
These Roundells, help to show the Mystery
Of that immense and blessed Eternity,
From whence the CREATVRE sprung, and, into whom
It shall, again, with full perfection come,
When those Additions, it has fully had,
Which all the several Orbs of Time can add.
It is a full, and fairly written Scrowle,
Which up into it self, it self does roll;
And, by Unfolding, and, Enfolding, shows
A Round, which neither End, nor entrance knows.
And (by this Emblem) you may partly see,
It Is that which IS, but, cannot uttred be.
Each Day a Line, small tasks appears:
Yet, much it makes in threescore Years.

NULLA DIES SINE LINEA.


ILLVSTR. XXIV. Book. 3
Here Is but one Line; and, but one Line a Day,
Is all that task our Motto, seems to lay:
And; that is thought, perhaps, a thing so small,
As if it were as good be naught at all.
But, be not so deceived; For, often you see
Small things (in time) great matters, rise to be:
Yea, that, which when the same was first begun,
A Trifle seemed, (and easy to be done)
By long nelect of time, will burdensome,
And, at the last, impossible, become.
Great Clerks, there are, who shall not leave behind them,
One good Weeks work, for Future Times to mind them,
(In Callings, either Humane, or Divine)
Who, by composing but each Day a Line,
Might Authors, of some famous Works appear,
In sixty, seventie, or in eighty year;
To which, ten hundred thousands have arrived
Of whom, we see no sign that ever they lived.
And, with much pleasure, we might all effect,
Those needful Works, which often we neglect,
(Until too late) if we but, now and then
Did spare one hour to exercise the penn.
For, still, one-Line, another diaweth on,
And, Line by Line, great Works at last. are done.
Whereas, dis use, and many days misspent,
Without their Lines, let in discouragement,
Or, bring Despair; which does (...) sot^ish make us,
That we, to no endeavor can berake us.
Mark this, and, labor in some honest Way,
As much as makes, at least, One Line a Day,
Our outward Hopes will take effect,
According to the King's aspect.

AD REGIS NUTUS.


ILLVSTR. XXV. Book. 3
WHen Phoebus with a cheerful eye, beholds
The Flow'r-embroydred earth, and freely spreads
His beams abroad; behold, the Marigolds
Begin to rear their low-dejected heads:
The Tulips, Daysies, and the Heliotropes
Of every kind, their closed Leaves display;
And (as it were) with new-recover'd hopes,
Attend upon the Ruler of the Day.
Again, when either in the West he shrowds
His Rays below this Horizon, or hides
His Face behind the Curtains of the Clouds;
They lose their beauties, and abate their prides.
Thus fares it with a Nation, and their King,
'Twixt whom there is a native Sympathy.
His Presence, and his Favors, like the Spring,
Do make them sweetly thrive, and fructity:
Yea (like fresh Groves, or Flowers of pleasing hew)
Themselves in all their jollity they show;
But, they, if with displeasure, them he view,
Soon lose their Glory, and contemned grow.
All, are not Heliotropes that favored grow,
In Princes Courts; nor Marigolds, that bear
The golden blossoms; but some spring below,
Like Daysie, flowers, that in the Pathwayes are:
Yet all shall feel it, when their Sov'radgues eye
Does frown, or smile, regard, or else neglect:
Yea, it will find them in Obscurity,
By some Disheartning, or some sweet Effect.
Vouchsafe to shine on Me, my Gracious King,
And then my Wi^her'd Leaves, will freshly, spring.
The Right Hand. way, is Virtues Path,
Though rugged Passages it has.

HAC VIRTUTIS ITER.


ILLVSTR. XXVI. Book. 3
I Fany covet knowledge of that Path,
Which thither tends, where Peace her dwelling has,
This Emblem (being well observed) will show
On whether side, it will be best to go.
The Left* hand way, seems to be walked, at ease,
Through Lawnes, and Downs, and green-swath'd Passages;
And, much allures the Traveller, to try
The many Pleasures, which do that Way lie.
The Right-hand-course, is through a Pathlesse-mo^nd
Of newly ploughed, and deep-furrow'd Ground;
Which, as uneasy seems, to be gone,
As, in appearance, rough to look upon.
Yet, this is Virtue's Path: This Way uneven,
Is that, which unto every man is given,
To travail in; and, has a safer ending,
Then those, whereon more Pleasures are attending:
And (though it leads us thither, where we see
Few promises of outward Glories be)
It brings (us when we pass the common fight)
Through easy Tracts, to gain our Hearts delight.
The other Way(though seeming straight, it lies,
To Pleasure's Palaces, before our eyes)
Has many rubs, and perils, which between
Our Hopes, and Us, will always lurk unseene;
Till we are drawn so far, that 'twill be vain,
To seek, with safety, to return again.
This, let us heed, and, still, be careful, too,
Which Course is most concerns us to go.
And, though the Left-hand-way, more smoothness has,
Let us go forward, in the Right-hand-path.
I was erected for a Bound,
And I resolve to stand my ground.

CONCEDO NULLI.


ILLVSTR. XXVII. Book. 3
THe Bounder-Stones, held sacred, heretofore,
Some did so superstitiously adore,
As, that they did not only reverence do them,
But, have ascribed a kind of Godhead, to them:
For, Terminus had many a Sacrifize,
As well as other senseless Deities.
I am not so profane, as to desire
Such Ethnic zeal should set our hearts on fire:
But, wish I could, Men better did regard
Those Bounders, which Antiquity has reared;
And, that, they would not, with so much delight,
There, make encroachments, where they have no righ^*
That, every man might keep his own Possessions,
Our Fathers, used in reverent Processions
(With zealous prayers, and with praisefull cheer)
To walk their Parish* limits, once a year:
And, well known Marks (which sacrilegious Hands
Now cut or break) so bord'red out their Lands,
That, every one distinctly knew his own;
And, many brawles, now rise, were then unknown.
But, since neglected, sacred Bounders were,
Most men Incroachers, and Intruders are:
They grieve each other, and their Dues they steal,
From ^rince, from Parent, and from Commonweal.
Nay, more; these bold Usurpers are so rude;
That, they, on Christ's Inheritance intrude.
But, that will be avenged; and (on his right)
Though such incroach, he will not lose it quite:
For, he is that Bounder, and that Cornerstone,
Who all confines, and is confined, of none.
Where Lovers fitly matched be,
In mutuall-duties, they agree

MANUS MANUM LAUAT.


ILLVSTR. XXVIII. Book. 3
WOuld God, I could as feelingly infus^*
A good effect of what this Emblem shows,
As I can tell in words, what Moralls be,
The use of that, which here you pictured fee.
Most Lovers, mind their Penny, or their Pleasure;
Or, painted Honors; and, they all things measure,
Not as they are, but as they helpful seem,
In compassing those toys, they most esteem.
Though many wish to gain a faithful Friend,
They seldom seek one, for the noblest end:
Nor know they (should they find what they had sought)
How Friendship should be managed, as it ought.
Such, as good Husbands covet, or good Wives
(The dear companions of most happy lives)
Wrong Courses take to gain them; yet, contemn
Their honest love, who rightly counsel them:
And, lest, they unawares the Mark may hit,
They blind their judgments, and befoole their wit.
He, that will find a Friend, must seek out one
To exercise unfeigned love upon;
And, mutuall-duties, must both yield* and take,
Not for himself, but, for his Friendship sake.
Such, as do rightly marry, neither be
With Dowries caught, nor woo a Pedigree;
Nor. merely come together, when they wed,
To reap the youthful pleasures of the Bed:
But, seek that fitness, and, that Sympathy,
Which makes up the perfect'st Amity.
A pair, so matched; l^ke Hands that wash each other,
As mutual helps, will sweetly live together.
When Law, and Arms, together meet,
The World descends, to kiss tho^^ feet.

LEGIBUS ET ARMIS.


ILLVSTR. XXIX. Book. 3
THe Picture of a Crowned king, here, stands
Upon a Globe; and, with outstretched hands,
Holds forth, in view, a Law book, and a Sword:
Which plain and modern Figures, may afford
This meaning; that, a King, who has regard
To Courts for pleading, and a Court of Guard,
And, at all times, a due respect will carry,
To pious Laws, and Actions military;
Shall not be Monarch, only in those Lands,
That are, by Birth right, under his commands:
But, also, might (if just occasion were)
Make this whole Globe of Earth, his power to fear;
Advance his Favorites; and, bring down all
His opposites, below his pedestall.
His conquering Sword, in foreign Realms, he draws,
As often, as there is just, or needful cause:
At home, in every Province of his Lands,
At all times, armed are his Trained bands.
His Royal fleets, are terrors to the Seas;
At all hours, rigged, for useful Voyages:
And, often, be his Navy does increase,
That Wars Provisions, may prolong his Peace.
Nor, by the tenure of the Sword, alone,
Delights he to hold his awful Throne,
But, likewise, labors, Mischiefs to prevent,
By wholesome Laws, and rightful Government.
For, where the Sword commands, without the Law,
A Tyrant keeps the Land in slavish awe:
And, where good Laws do want an Armed power,
Rebellious Knaves, their Princes, will devour.
Faire-shewes, we should not so much heed,
As the Uprightness of the Deed.

NON QUAM FORMOSA SED QUAM RECTA.


ILLVSTR. XXX. Book. 3
WHen we should use a Ruler, or a Square,
Or such like Instruments, as useful are,
In forming other things; we prize not so
The carving, or the colorable show
(Which makes them beautiful in outward sight)
As when, for Usefulness, we find them right.
A warped Bow, though strung with silken threads,
And, crooked Arrows, tipped with Golden heads,
Delight not Archers; tyet, such useless Toys
Be fit enough for Bunglers, and for Boys.
A skillful Artist (in what Art soever,
He seeks, to make his ableness appear)
Will give large Prices, with much more content,
To buy a plain (if perfect) Instrument;
Then, take for nothing (or, for thanks alone)
An useless Tool, though, gay to look upon.
From whence, observe; that, if there must be sought,
When mere Mechanick-workes are to be wrought,
Such Instruments, as rather have esteem
For their true-being, then for what they seem.
Much more, should all those Rules be such, whereby
We go about, our selves to rectify;
And, build up, what in Body, or in mind,
We may defective, or impaired find.
Else peradventure, that we think to mend,
More faulty may become, at later end.
But, hence, I chiefly learn, to take a care,
My Life, and Actions, rather be sincere,
Then seeming such: And, yet, I Will think no shame,
To seem, to be as honest, as I am.
My Substance, and my Light, are spent,
In seeking other men's content.

ALIIS IN SERVIENDO CONSUMOR.


ILLVSTR. XXXI. Book. 3
IF this nigh-wasted Candle, you shall view,
And, heed it well, it may enlighten you
To look with more compassion, on their pains,
Who rob themselves, to multiply your gains.
The Taper burns, to give another light,
Even till it self, it has consumed quite;
And, all the profit, which it thence does win,
Is to be snufft, by every Commer-in.
This is the Lot of some, whom I have known,
Who, freely, all their lifetime, have bestowne
In such industrious labor, as appears,
To further others profits, more then theirs;
And, all their Patrimonies, well nigh spent,
The ruining of others, to prevent.
The wit, the strength, and all the power they had,
(Which might, by probability, have made
Good means to raise them, in this world, as high,
As most, who climb to wealthy dignity)
Even these, they have bestowed, to better them,
Who their endeavors, for their pains, contemn.
These are those Lamps, whose flames, from time to time,
Have through each Age, and through-our every Clime,
To one another, that true Light conveyed,
Which Ignorance, had, else, long since betrayed
To utter darkness. These, despightfull Pride
Often snuffs; and, often, to put them out, has tried.
But, from the brightness of such Lights, as they,
We got our Light of knowledge, at this day.
To them, God make us kinder; and to Him,
More thankful, that we gained such light by them.
The safest Riches, he shall gain,
Who always Faithful does remain.

DITAT SERVATA FIDES.


ILLVSTR. XXXII. Book. 3
THe Horne-of-plenty, which Wealth signifies,
The Hand-in-hand, which Plighted faith implies,
(Together being painted) seem to teach,
That, such as will be honest, shall be rich.
If this be so, why then for Lucre-sake,
Do many break the Promises they make?
Why do they cheat and cousen, lie, and swear?
Why practice they all Villainies that are?
To compass Wealth? And, how do such as they
Enlarge their ill-got Portions, every day?
Or, whence proceeds it, that sometimes we see
Those men grow poor, who faithful seem to be?
Thus, often it proves; and, therefore, Falsehood can,
In likelihood, much more enrich a man,
Then blameless Faith; and, then, the Motto here
Improper to this Emblem, does appear.
But, well enough they suit; and, all is true,
Which these things (being thus united) show.
Should it be then concluded, that all those,
Who poor and honest seem, have made but shows
Of real Faith? And, therefore, plagued have bin
With public lashes, for their private sin?
Indeed, sometime it has succeeded so:
But, know you should, that, most who richest grow,
In Outward-wealth, are very poor in that,
Which brings true Plenty, and a blessed Estate:
And, that, Good men, though poor they seem to be,
Have Riches, which the Worldling cannot see,
Now He, who finds himself endowed with such,
(What e're we think him) is exceeding rich.
Poore-Theeves, in Halters, we behold,
And, great-Theeves, in their Chains of gold.

FVRES PRIVATI IN NERVO PVBLICI IN AVRO


ILLVSTR. XXXIII. Book. 3
IF you, this Emblem, well have looked upon,
Although you cannot help it, yet, bemone
The Worlds black Impudence; and, if you can,
Continue (or become) an honest man.
The poor, and petty Pilferers, you see
On Wheels, on Gibbets, and the Gallow tree
Trust up; when they, that far more guilty are,
Pearl, Silk, and costly Cloth of Tissue, wear.
Good God! how many has each Land of those,
Who, neither limb, nor life, nor credit lose
(But, rather live befriended, and applauded)
Yet, have of all their livelihoods defrauded
The helpless Widows, in their great distress?
And, of their Portions, robbed the Fatherless?
Yet, censured others Errors, as if none
Had cause to say, that they amiss have done?
How many, have assi^ted to condemn
Poor souls, for what was never stolen by them?
And, persecuted others, for that Sin,
Which they themselves, had more transgressed in?
How many worthless men, are great become,
By that, which they have stolen, or cheated from
Their Lords? or (by some practices unjust)
From those, by whom they had been put in trust?
How many Lawyers, wealthy men are grown,
By taking Fees, for Causes overthrown
By their defaults? How many, without fear,
Do rob the King, and God, yet blameless are?
God knows how many! would I did so, too,
So I had power to make them better do.
Whilst thou do, here, enjoy thy breath,
Continue mindful of thy Death.

MEMENTO MORI.


ILLVSTR. XXXIV. Book. 3
WHen thou beholdest on this Burying-stone,
The melancholy Night-bird, sitting on
The fleshlesse ruins of a rotten-Skull,
(Whose Face, perhaps, has been more beautiful,
Then thine is now) take up a serious thought;
And, do as thou art by the Motto taught.
Remember Death: and mind, I thee beseech,
How soon, these Fowls may at thy window screech;
Or, call thee (as the common people deem)
To dwell in Graves, and Sepulchers, by them,
Where nothing else, but Bats, and Owls, appear;
Or, Goblins, formed by Fancies, and, by Fear.
If thou shall be advised, to meditate
Thy lat^er end, before it be too late,
(And, whilst thy friends, thy strength, and wits may be
In likely case, to h^lp and comfort thee)
There may be courses taken, to divert
Thos^ Frights, which, else, would terrify thy heart,
When Death draws near; and help thee pluck away
That S^ng, of his, which would thy Soul dis^ay.
But, i^ thou madly ramble onward, still,
Til t^ou art sinking down that darkesome hill,
Which borders on the Grave (and do b^ginne
To see, ^he Shades of Terror, and of Sin
To fly ^crosse thy Conscience) 'twill be hard
To (...) this Lesson; or, to be prepared
For th^^ sad parting, which, will forced be,
Be^^^ e^hi^ much beloved World, and thee.
Consider this, therefore, while Time thou have,
An^, put not off this Business, till the last.
Do not the golden Mean, exceed,
In Word, in Passion, nor in Deed.

SERVA MODVM.


ILLVSTR. XXXV. Book. 3
AS is the headstrong Horse, and blockish Mule,
Even such, without the Bridle, and the Rule,
Our Nature grows; and, is as mischievous,
Till Grace, and Reason, come to govern us.
The Square, and Bridle, therefore let us heed,
And, thereby learn to know, what helps we need;
Lest, else, (they failing, timely, to be had)
Quite out of Order, we, at length, be made.
The Square, (which is an useful Instrument,
To shape forth senseless Forms) may represent
The Law: Because, Mankind, (which is by Nature,
Almost as dull, as is the senselesse-creature,)
Is thereby, from the native-rudenesse, wrought;
And in the Way of honest-living taught.
The Bridle, (which Invention did contrive,
To ^ule, and guide the Creature-sensitive)
May type fo^^h Discipline; which, when the Law,
Has schooled the Wit, must keep the Will in awe.
And, he that can by these, his Passions bound,
This Emblems meaning, usefully, has found.
Lord, let thy sacred Law, at all times, be
A Rule, a Master, and a Glass to me;
(A Bridle, and a Light) that I may, still,
Both know my Duty, and obey thy Will.
Direct my Feet; my Hands, instruct thou so,
That I may neither wander, nor mis^doe.
My Looks, my Hearing, and my Words confine,
To keep still firm, to every Word of thine.
On thee, let also my Desires attend:
And, let me hold this temper, till mine end.
We then have got the surest prop,
When God, alone, becomes our Hope.

FVLCRVM TVTIS SIMVM


ILLVSTR. XXXVI. Book. 3
I Should not care how hard my Fortunes were,
Might still my Hopes be such, as now they are,
Of helps divine; nor fear, how poor I be,
If thoughts, yet, present, still may bide in me.
For, they have left assurance of such aid,
That, I am of no dangers, now afraid.
Yea, now I see, me thinks, what weak and vain
Supporters I have sought, to help sustain
My fainting heart; when some injurious hand,
Would undermine the Station where I stand.
Me thinks, I see how scurvie, and how base,
It is to scrape for favors, and for grace,
To men of earthly minds; and unto those,
Who may, perhaps, before to morrow lose
Their Wealth, (or their abused Authority)
And, stand as much in want of help as I.
Me thinks, in this new-rapture, I do see
The hand of God from heaven supporting me,
Without those rotten-Ayds, for which I whinde,
When I was of my the other vulgar-minde:
And, if in some one part of me it lay,
I, now, could cut that Limb of mine away.
Still, might I keep this mind, there were enough
Within my self, (beside that cumbring stuff
We seek without) which, husbanded aright,
Would make me Rich, in all the Worlds despite.
And, I have hopes, that, had she quite bereft me,
Of those few rags and toys, which, yet, are left me;
I should on God, alone, so much depend,
That, I should need, nor Wealth, nor other Friend.
True Virtue, firm, will always bide,
By whatsoever sufferings tried.

VIRTUS INEXPUGNABILIS.


ILLVSTR. XXXVII. Book. 3
THis is a well-knowne Figure, signifying,
A man, whose Virtues will abide the trying:
For, by the nature of the Diamond stone,
(Which, Violence, can no way work upon)
That Patience, and long-suffering is intended,
Which will not be with Injuries offended;
Nor yield to any base dejectedness,
Although some bruising Power, the same oppress;
Or, such hard streights, as theirs, that hamm'rings feel,
Betwixt an Anvile, and a Sledge of Steel.
None ever had a perfect Virtue, yet,
But, that most Pretious-stone, which God has set
On his right hand, in beaming-Majestie,
Upon the Ring of blessed ETERNITY.
And, this, is that impenitrable Stone,
The Serpent could not leave impression on,
(Nor sign of any Pathway) by temptations,
Or, by the power of fly insinuations:
Which wond^ous Mystery was of those five,
Whose depth King Solomon could never dive.
Good God! vouchsafe, even for that Diamond-sake,
That, I may of his pretiousnesse, partake,
In, all my Trialls* make me always able
To bide them, with a mind impenitrable,
How hard, or often so'ere, those hamm'rings be,
Wherewith Afflictions must new fashion me.
And, as the common Diamonds polished are,
By their own dust; so, let my errors wear
Each other ou^; And, when that I am pure,
Give me the Luster, Lord, that will endure.
Truth, often oppressed, we may see,
But, quite suppressed it cannot be.

VERITAS PREMITUR NON OPPRIMITUR.


ILLVSTR. XXXVIII. Book. 3
THis is that fruitful Plant, which when it grows,
Where wholesome Water in abundance flows,
Was, by the Psalmist, thought a likely Tree,
The Emblem, of a blessed-man, to be:
For, many ways, it fitly typifies,
The Righteous-man, with his proprieties;
And, those true Virtues, which do help increase
His growing, in the state of Blessedness.
The Palm, (in this our Emblem, figured, thus)
D^pressed with a Stone, does show to us
The power of Truth: For, as this Tree does spread,
And thrive the more, when weights press down the head;
So, Gods eternal Truth (which all the power
And spite of Hell, did labor to devour)
Sprung high, and flourished the more, thereby,
When Tyrants crushed it, with their cruelty.
And, all inferior Truths, the same will do,
According as they make approaches to
The best Perfection; or, as they conduce
To God's due praise, or some such pious use.
Lord, still, preserve this Truth's-integritie,
Although on every side, the wicked pry,
To spy how they may disadvantage it.
Yea, Lord, though Sinners in high place do sit,
(As David says) yet, let them not oppress
Thy Verity, by their imperiousness.
But, make both Her, and her Professors, bide
The Test, like Silver seven times purifide.
That, all Truths lovers, may with comfort see,
She may depre^t, but, not, oppressed be.
They, who but slowly-paced are,
By plodding on, way travail far.

PAS A PAS.


ILLVSTR. XXXIX. Book. 3
THe big-bon'd Ox, in pace is very slow,
And, in his travail, step by step, does go,
So leisurely, as if he tired had bin,
Before his painful Journey did begin;
Yet, all the day, he stiffly ploddeth on,
Until the labor of the day be done:
And, seems as fresh (though he his task has wrought)
As when to work, he first of all was brought.
Meane-while, the Palfray, which more swiftness had,
Has lost his breath, or proves a Resty-jade.
This Emblem, therefore, makes it appear,
How much it profits, to persevere;
And, what a little Industry will do,
If we continue constant thereunto.
For, meanest Faculties, discreetly used,
May get the start, of nobler Gifts, abused.
This, may observed be in many a one:
For (when their course of life was first begun)
Some, whose refined wits, aspi'rd as high,
As if above the Sphaeres, they were to fly:
By Sloth, or Pride, or over-trusting to
Their own Sufficiencies, themselves undo.
Yea and those forward-wits, have lived to see
Themselves inferiors, unto those, to be,
Whom, they did in their jollity, contemn,
As blocks, or dunces, in respect of them.
Then, learn, Great-wits, this folly to prevent:
Let Meane-wits, take from hence, encouragement:
And, let us all, in our Affairs proceed,
With timely leisure, and with comely speed.
Uncertain, Fortunes Favors, be,
And, as the Moon, so changes She.

FORTUNA UT LUNA.


ILLVSTR. XL. Book. 3
Our Author, peradventure, gives us
Dame Fortune (for these Reasons) pictured, thus:
She has a Comely-body, to declare,
How pleasing she does usually appear
To them, that love her Favors. She is blind,
(Or, has still closed eyes) to put in mind,
How blindly, and how heedlesly, she throws
Her Largess, where her Bounty, she bestows.
She stands upon a Ball; that, we may learn,
Of outward things, the tottering, to discern:
Her Ball has wings; that it may signify
How apt her Favors are, away to fly.
A Skarfe displayed by the wind, she bears,
(And, on her naked-Body, nothing wears)
To show, that what her Favorite injoyes,
Is not so much for Usefulness, as toys.
Her Head is hairelesse, all, except before;
To teach thee, that thy care should be the more
To hold her foremost kindness, always fast;
Lest, she do show thee slippery tricks, at last.
And, lastly, that her changing may be shown;
She bears in her Hand a Waynedmoone.
By this Description, you may now descry
Her true conditions, full as well as I:
And, if you, still, suppose her, worth such honor,
You have my leave to woo, and wayt upon her.
Moreover (to her credit) I confess,
This Motto falsely says, her Fickleness
Is like the Moons: For, she has frowned on me
Twelve Moons, at least; and, yet, no Cha^^e I see
Until the Steel, the Flint shall smite,
It will afford nor Heat, nor Light.

ANTE FERIT QUAM FLAMMA MICET.


ILLVSTR. XLI. Book. 3
WHilst by the High-way-side, the Flint-stone lies,
Dry, cold, and hardness, are the properties
We then perceive: But, when we prove it nigher,
We find, that, Coldness does enclose a Fire;
And, that, though Rain, nor cloudie-skie appears,
It will be (many times) bedewed with tears.
From hence, I mind, that many wronged are
By being judged, as they, at first, appear;
And, that, some should be praised, whom we despise,
If inward-Grace, were seen with outward-Eyes.
But, this is not that Moral (we confess)
Which this our Emblem, seems to express:
For (if the Motto speak the meaning right)
It shows, that, hard-afflictions first must smi^e
Our hardened hearts, before it will be seen,
That any light of Grace, in them, has been.
Before the Flint will send forth shining Rays,
It must be stricken, by the Steel, ( it says.)
Another Moral, add we may to this,
(Which, to the Figure, suits not much amiss.)
The Steel, and Flint, may fitly represent
Hard-hearted men, whose minds will not relent:
For, when in opposition, such become,
The fire of Malice, flames and sparkles from
Their threatening Eyes; which else, close hidden rests,
Within the closets of their flintie breasts:
And, flame outright it will not, (though it smokes)
Till Strife break passage, for it, by her strokes.
If any of these Moralls may do good,
The purpose of my pains is understood.
My Wit got Wings and, high had flowne.
But, Poverty did keep me down.

PAVPERTATE PREMOR SUBLEUOR INGENIO.


ILLVSTR. XLII. Book. 3
YOu little think, what plague it is to be,
In plight like him, whom pictured here you see.
His winged-Arme, and his up lifted-eyes,
Declare, that he has Wit, and Will, to rise:
The Stone, which cl^gs his other hand, may show
That, Poverty and Fortune, keep him low:
And, twixt these two, the Body and the Mind,
Such labors, and such great vexations find,
That, if you did not such men's wants contemn,
You could not choose but help, or pity them.
All Ages had (and, this I know has some)
Such men, as to this misery, do come:
And, many of them, at their Lot, so grieve,
As if they knew, (or did at least believe)
That, had their Wealth suffiz'd them to aspire
(To what their Wits deserve, and they desire)
The pr^sent Age. and future Ages too,
Might gain have had, from what they thought to do.
Perhaps I dreamed so once: But, God be praised,
The Clog which kept me down, from being raised,
Was chained so fast, that (if such Dreams I had)
My thoughts, and longings, are not now so mad.
For, plain I see, that, had my Fortunes brought
Such Wealth, at first, as my small Wit has sought;
I might my self, and others, have un^one,
Instead of Courses, which I thought to run.
I find my Poverty, for me was fit;
Yea, and a Blessing, greater than my Wit:
And, whether, now, I rich or poor become,
It Is nor much pleasing, nor much troublesome.
A Mischief, hardly can be done,
Where many-pow'rs are knit in one.

VIRTUS UNITA FORTIOR.


ILLVSTR. XLIII. Book. 3
OBserve the Sheafe of Arrows, figured here;
And, how the power, and fury, of the Bear
(Though he attempt it) no device can find
To break one slender-shaft, while they are joined:
Whereas, were they divided, strength but small,
Like rotten Kexes, would soon break them all.
This Emblem, therefore, fitly does imply
That Safeguard, which is found in Unity;
And, shows, that, when Disunion is begun,
It breeds dangers, where before were none.
The Psalmist, numerous Offsprings, does compare
To Quivers, that with Shafts replenished are.
When Unity has knit them in her hands,
They prove like Arrows in a Giants hands.
And, though, for these, their Foes in wayt have laid,
They shall not be supriz'd, nor made afraid.
Consider this, ye Children of one Sire,
'Twixt whom, is kind ad some contentious fire,
And, reconciled be, left (...), at length,
Consume away the marrow of your strength;
Or, by dividing, of your joyned-pow'r,
Make way for those, who study to devour.
Yea, let us all consider, as we ought,
What Lesson, by this Emblem, we are taught.
For, we are Brethren all; and (by a Blood
More precious, then our natural Brotherhood)
Not knit, alone, but mingled, as it were,
Into a League; which is, by much, more dear,
And, much more dangerous, to be undone,
Then all the Bands, that can he thought upon.
They, best enjoy their Hearts desires,
In whom, Love, kindles mutuall-fires.

AMORE MUTUO.


ILLVSTR. XLIV. Book. 3
WHat may the reason be, that, when Desire
Has kindled in the breast, a Loving-fire,
The Flame, which burned awhile, both clear and strong,
Becomes to be extinguished, ere long?
This Emblem gives the reason; for, it shows,
That, when Affection, to perfection grows,
The Fire, which does inlighten, first, the same,
Is made an equal, and a mutuall-flame.
These burning Torches, are alike in length;
To show, Love equal, both in time, and strength.
They, to each otherward, their Flames extend,
To teach us, that, True-lovers have no end
Pertaining to Self-love; and, lo, between
These Two, one Flaming heart, is to be seen;
To signify, that, they, but one, remain
In Mind; though, in their Persons, they are twain.
He, doubtless, then, who Loved, and, gives over,
Deserves not the Title of a Lover at
Or, else, was unrequited in Affection,
And, was a Lover, with some imperfection.
For, Love, that loves, and is not loved as much,
May perfect grow; but, yet, it is not such,
Nor can be, till it may that object have,
Which gives a Heart, for what it would receive:
And, looks not so much outward, as to heed
What seems within, to want, or to exceed.
Whether our Emblem's Author, thought of this,
You need not care; nor, will it be amiss,
If they who perfect Lovers, would be thought,
Do mind, what by this Moral, they are taught.
Where many-Forces joined are,
Vnconquerable-pow'r, is there

CONCORDIA INSUPERABILIS.


ILLVSTR. XLV. Book. 3
AN Emblem's meaning, here, I thought to conster;
And, this does rather fashion out a Monster,
Then form an Hieroglyphicke: but, I had
These Figures (as you see them) ready made
By others; and, I mean to morallize
Their Fancies; not to mend what they devise.
Yet, peradventure, with some vulgar praise,
This Picture (though I like it not) displayes
The Moral, which the Motto does imply;
And, thus, it may be said to signify.
He, that has many Faculties, or Friends,
To keep him safe (or to acquire his ends)
And, fits them so; and, keeps them so together,
That, still, as readily, they aid each other,
As if so many Hands, they had been made;
And, in One-body, useful being had:
That man, by their Assistance, may, at length,
Attain to an unconquerable strength;
And, crown his honest Hopes, with whatsoever
He seeks for, by a warranted Endeavor.
Or, else, it might be said; that, when we may
Make our Affections, and, our Sense, obey
The will of Reason, (and, so well agree,
That, we may find them, still, at peace to be)
They Will guard us, like so many Armed hands;
And, safely keep us, whatsoere withstands.
If others think this Figure, here, inferres
A better sense; let those Interpreters
Vnriddle it; and, preach it where they please:
Their Meanings may be good, and so are these.
The Hearts of Kings are in God's Hands;
And, as He lists, He Them commands.

IN MANU DEI COR REGIS.


ILLVSTR. XLVI. Book. 3
WHy do men grudge at those, who raised be,
By royal Favor, from a low degree?
Know this* He should be honored, whom the King,
To place of Dignity, shall please to bring.
Why should they blame their Kings, for favoring such,
Whom, they have thought, scarce meriting so much?
God rules their Hearts; and, they, themselves deceive,
Who dream, that Kings exalt, without Gods leave.
Why murmr they at God, for guiding so
The Hearts of Kings, as often they see him do?
Or, at his Works, why should they take offense,
As if their Wit, could teach his Providence?
His just, and his all-seeing Wisdom knows,
Both whom, and why he crowns, or overthrowes;
And, for what cause, the Hearts of Princes, be
Enlarged, or shut; when we no cause can see;
We sometime know, what is well, and what is amiss;
But, of those Truths, the root concealed is;
And, False-hoods, and Uncertainties, there are,
In most of those things, which we speak, or hear.
Then, were not Kings directed by God's hand,
They, who are best, and wisest in the Land,
Might often misguide them, either by receiving
A False report, or, by some wrong-believing.
God's Grace it is, that Good-men raised have bin:
If Sinners flourish, we may thank our Sin.
Both Good and Bad, so like in outsides be,
That, Kings may be deceived, in what they see;
And, if God had not ruled their Hearts aright,
The World, by this time, had been ruined quite.
A Virtue hidden, or not used,
Is either Sloth, or Grace abused.

CELATA VIRTUS IGNAVIA EST.


ILLVSTR. XLVII. Book. 3
THe World has shameless Boasters, who pretend,
In sundry matters, to be skilled so well,
That, were they pleased, so their hours to spend,
They say, they could in many things excel.
But, though they make their hearers to believe,
That, out of Modesty their Gifts they hide,
In them we very plainly may perceive,
Or Sloth, or Envy, Ignorance, or Pride.
When other men's endeavors they peruse,
They either carpe at what they cannot mend;
Or else of Arrogance do those accuse,
Who, to the public view, their Works commend.
If these men say, that they can Poetize,
But, will not; they are false in saying so:
For, he whose Wit a little that way lies,
Will doing be, though he himself undo.
If they, in other Faculties are learned,
And, still, forbear their Talents to employ;
The truest Knowledge, yet, is undiscerned,
And, that, they merit not, which they enjoy.
Yea, such as hide the Gifts they have received,
(Or use them not, as well as they are able)
Are like fair Eyes, of useful sight bereaved;
Or, lighted-Candles, underneath a Table.
Their glorioust part, is but a Painted cloth,
Whose Figures, to the wall-ward, still are hung*
Their hidden Virtues, are apparent Sloth;
And, all their life, is to the public wrong:
For, they do re^pe the Fruits, by many sown,
And, leave to others, nothing of their own.
The Moon, which is decreasing now,
When she returns, will fuller, grow.

REDIBO PLENIOR.


ILLVSTR. XLVIII. Book. 3
I Never, yet, did murmuringly complain,
Although those Moons have long been in the Waine,
Which on their Silver Shields, my Elders wore,
In Battles, and in Triumphs, heretofore.
Nor any mention have I ever made,
Of such Eclipses, as those Crescents had;
Thereby, to move some Comet, to reflect
His fading-light, or daigne his good aspect.
For, when I tell the World, how ill I fare,
I tell her too, how little I do care,
For her despights: yea, and I tell it not,
That, help, or pity, might from her be got;
But, rather, that her Favorites may see,
I know my Waynings, yet, can pleased be.
My Light, is from the Planet of the Sun;
And, though the Course, which I obliquely run,
Often brings my outward Fortunes to the Waine,
My Light shall, one day, be renewed again.
Yea, though to some, I quite may seem to lose
My Light; because, my follies interpose
Their shadows to eclipse it: yet, I know,
My Crescents, will increase, and fuller, grow.
As Soon as in the Flesh, I being had,
I moved on in Courses retrograde,
And, thereby lost my Splendour: but, I feel
Soft motions, from that great Eternal Wheel,
Which mooveth all things, sweetly mooving me,
To gain the Place, in which I ought to be:
And, when to Him, I back return, from whom
At first I came, I shall at Full become.
Be wary, wheresoo're, thou be:
For, from deceit, no place is free.

NUSQUAM TUTA FIDES.


ILLVSTR. XLIX. Book. 3
SOme write (but, on what grounds, I cannot tell)
That they, who near unto the Deserts dwell,
Where Elephants are found, do notice take,
What trees they haunt, their sleeping-stocks to make;
That, when they rest against an halfe-sawne stem,
It (falling) may betray those Beasts to them.
Now, though the part Historical, may err,
The Moral, which this Emblem does infer,
Is overtrue; and, seems to imply,
The World to be so full of Treachery,
As, that, no corner of it, found can be,
In which, from Falsehoods Engines, we are free.
I have observed the City; and, I find
The Citizens, are civil, grave and kind;
Yet, many are deluded by their shows,
And, cheated, when they trust in them repose.
I have been often at Court; where I have spent,
Some idle time, to hear them Complement:
But, I have seen in Courtiers, such deceit,
That, for their Favors, I could never wait.
I do frequent the Church; and, I have heard
Gods judgments, by the Preachers, there, declared,
Against men's falsehoods; and, I gladly hear
Their zealous Prayers, and good Counsels there;
But, as I live, I find some such as they,
Will watch to do a mischief, if they may.
Nay, those poor sneaking Clownes, who seek their living,
As if they knew no manner of deceiving;
Even those, their wits, can (this way) so apply,
That, they will soon cosen, wiser men, than I.
This Day, my Houre-glasse, forth is run;
Thy Torch, to Morrow, may be done.

HODIE MIHI CRAS TIBI.


ILLVSTR. L. Book 3
THere is no Day, nor minute of the Day,
In which, there are not ma^y sent away
From Life to Death; or, many drawing on,
Which, must within a little while be gone.
You, often, view the Grave; you, often, meet
The Buriers, and the Mourners, in the street,
Conveying of some Neighbor, ^o that home,
Which must, e're long, your dewlling place become.
You see the Race, of many a youthful Son
Is finished, e're his Father's Course is done;
And, that the hand of Death, regards neither
Sex, Youth, nor Age; but, mingleth all together.
You, many times, in your own houses, hear
The groa^es of Death, and view your Children, there,
Your lov^ng Parents, or, beloved Wives,
To gasp for breath, and, labor for their lives.
Nay, you your selves, do sometime find the pains
Of Sickness, in your Bowels, and your Veins,
The Harbingers of Death, sometime, begin
To take up your whole Body, for their Inn.
You bear their heavy Aches, on your back;
You feel their twinges, make your heart strings crack;
And, sometime, lie imprisoned, and half dead,
With Age, or with Diseases, on your bed:
Yet you defer your ends; and, still contrive,
For temp'rall things; as if you thought to live
Six Ages longer: or had quite forgot,
That, you, and others, draw one common-Lot.
But, that, you might not, still, the same forget,
This Emblem, and this Motto, here were set.
Finis libri tertij.
THE THIRD LOTTERIE.
1
THe Wreathes of GLORY, you affect,
But, means to gain them, you neglect;
And, (though in doing, you delight)
You do not, always, what is right:
Nor are you grown, as yet, so wise,
To know, to whom the richest Prize
Does appertain; nor what it is.
But, now, you are informed of This. See, Emblem I.

2
Though you are weak, you much may do,
If you will set your Wits thereto.
For, meaner Powers, than you have had,
And, meaner Wits, good shift have made,
Both to contrive, and compass that,
Which abler men have wondered at.
Your Strength, and Wit, unite, therefore,
And, both shall grow improov'd the more. See, Emb. II.

3
Perhaps, thou may be one of them,
Who, Civil Magistrates contemn;
And sleighteth, or else, flouteth at
The Ceremonies of E^^ate.
That, ^hou mai^, therefore, learn to get,
Both better Manners, and more Wit,
The Sword, and Mace, (by some despiz'd)
Is, for thy sake, now moralliz'd. See, Emb. III.

4
By this thy Lot, we may misdoubt,
Thou look not warily about;
But, hudlest onward, without heed,
What went before, or may succeed;
Procuring loss, or discontent,
Which, Circumspection, might prevent.
Therefore, with gratefulness, receive
Those counsels, which our Moralls vive. See, Emb. IV.

5
Thou have, unworthily, repined,
Or, been displeased in thy mind,
Because, thy Fortunes do not seem
To fit thy Worth (in thy esteem:)
And lo, to check thy discontent,
Thy Lot, a Moral, does present;
And shows, that, if thou virtuous be,
Good-Fortune, will attend on thee. See, Emb. V.

6
When thy Desires have good success,
Thine own Endeavors, thou do bless;
But, seldom unto God thou giv'st
Due thanks, for that, which thou receiv'st.
Thine Emblem, therefore, tells from whom
The fruits of good Endeavors, come:
And, shows (if thou to thrive intend)
On whom, thou, always, must depend. See, Emb. VI.

7
It may be, thou art one of those,
Whose Faith, more bold, than fruitful grows;
And (building on some false Decree)
Disheartnest those, that Workers be
To gain (with awfull-joy) that Prize,
Which, unto no man, God denies,
That works in Hope; and, lives by Faith.
Mark, therefore, what thine Emblem says. See, Emb. VII.

8
Thou have been willing, that thy Name,
Should live the life of Honest-Fame;
And, that, thy labors (to thy praise)
Continue might, in future days.
Behold; the Lot, thou hapnest on,
Has shown, how this may well be done.
Pursue the Course, which there is taught,
And, thy desires to pass are brought. See, Emb. VIII.

9
Thou, many things, have well begun;
But, little, to good purpose, done:
Because, thou have a fickle brain,
And, hands that love to take no pain.
Therefore, it chances not amiss,
That, thou have such a Chance, as this:
For, if thou want not Grace, or Wit,
Thou may, in time, have good of it. See, Emb. IX.

10
Whatev'r you seem to others, now,
It was the Harrow, and the Plough,
By which, your Predecessors got,
The fairest portion of your Lot:
And, (that, it may increase your Wit)
They haunt you, in an Emblem, yet.
Peruse our Moral; and, perchance,
Your Profit, it will much advance. See, Emb. X.

11
Much labor, and much time you spend,
To get an able-constant Friend:
But, you have ever sought him, there,
Where, no such precious Jewels are:
For, you, without have searching bin,
To find, what must be found within.
This Friend, is mentioned by this Lot,
But, God knows where he may be got. See, Emb. XI.

12
Thou seek'st for Fame; and, now art shown,
For what, her Trumpet shall be blown.
Thine Emblem, also, does declare,
What Fame they get, who virtuous are,
For Praise alone; and, what Reward,
For such like Studies, is prepared.
Peruse it; And, this Counsel take;
Be virtuous, for mere Virtues sake. See, Emb. XII

13
This Lot, those persons, always finds,
That have high thoughts, and lofty minds;
Or, such as have an itch to learn,
That, which does nothing them concern;
Or, love to peep, with daring eyes,
Into forbidden Mysteries.
If any one of these thou be,
Thine Emblem, lessons has for thee. See, Emb. XIII.

14
If all be true, these Lots do tell us,
Thou should be of those Fidling-fellowes,
Who, better practiced are grown,
In others matters, that their own:
Or, one, that covets to be thought,
A man, that is ignorant of naught.
If it be so, thy Moral shows
Thy Folly, and what from it slowes. See, Emb. XIV.

15
Thou have some Charge, (who e're thou be)
Which, Tendance may expect from thee:
And, well, perhaps, it may be feared,
It Is often left, without regard:
Or, that, thou do securely sleep,
When, thou should watch, more strictly, keep.
Thou know best, if it be so:
Take therefore heed, what is to do. See, Emb. XV.

16
In secret, thou do often complain,
That, thou have hoped, and wrought in vain;
And, think thy Lot, is far more hard,
Than what for others is prepared.
An Emblem, therefore, thou have got,
To show, it is our common-Lot,
To work and hope; and, that, thou have
A Blessing by it, at the last. See, Emb. XVI.

17
That thou have Honesty, we grant;
But, Prudence, thou do often want:
And, therefore, some have injured thee,
Who far more Wise, than honest be.
That, now, Discretion thou may add,
To those good-meanings thou have had;
The Moral of thine Emblem, view;
And, what it counsels, that, pursue. See, Emb. XVII.

18
To your Long-home, you nearer are,
Than you (it may be) are aware:
Yea, and more easy is the Way,
Than you, perchance, conceive it may.
Lest, therefore, Death, should grim appear,
And, put you in a causeless fear;
(Or out of minding wholly pass)
This Chance, to you allotted was. See, Emb. XVIII.

19
In slippery Paths, you are to go;
Yea, they are full of danger too:
And, if you heedfull should not grow,
They Will hazard much, your overthrow.
But, you the mischief may eschew,
If wholesome Counsel, you pursue.
Look, therefore, what you may be taught,
By that, which this your chance has brought. See, Emb. XIX.

20
This present Lot, concerns full near,
Not you alone, but all men here;
For, all of us, too little heed
His love, who for our sakes, did bleed.
It Is true, that means, he left behind him,
Which better teaches how to mind him:
Yet, if we both by that, and th^^,
Remember him, it is not amiss. See, Emb. XX.

21
It Is hoped, you just, and pious are,
More out of Conscience, than for fear;
And, that you will virtuous courses take,
For Goodness, and for Vertue-sake.
Yet, since the best men, sometimes may
Have need of helps, in virtues way,
Those useful Moralls, slight you not,
Which are presented by this Lot. See, Emb. XXI.

22
This Lot pertains unto those,
(And who they be, God only knows)
Who, to the world, have no desire;
But, up to heavenly things aspire.
No doubt, but you, in some degree,
Endowed with such Affections be;
And, had this Emblem, that you might
Encouraged be, in such a Flight. See, Emb. XXII

23
The state of Temp'rall things to show,
Ye have them, still, within your view;
For, every object that we see,
An Emblem, of them, serves to be,
But, we from few things, helps do find,
To keep Eternity in mind.
This Lot, an Emblem brings, therefore,
To make you think upon it more. See, Emb. XXIII.

24
Unless you better look thereto,
Dis-use, and Sloth, will you undo.
That, which of you despayred was.
With ease, might have bin brought to pass,
Had but so much bin done, as may
Be equaled with One Line a day.
Consider this; and, to that end,
The Moral of your Lot attend. See, Emb. XXIV.

M 25
If we mistake not, thou art one,
Who loves to court the Rising-Sunne;
And, if this Lot, thy nature find,
Thou to Preferment have a mind:
If so, learn hence, by whose respect
(Next God) thou may thy hopes effect:
Then, seek to winn his grace to thee,
Of what estate soever thou be. See, Emb. XXV.

26
Thou to a double-path art come;
And, peradventure, troublesome,
Thou find it, for thee to know,
On whether hand thou oughtst to go.
To put thee out of all suspect,
Of Courses that are indirect;
Thy Moral points thee to a path,
Which hardship, but, no peril has. See, Emb. XXVI.

27
You warned are of taking heed,
That, never, you your Bounds exceed;
And, also, that you be not found,
To come within your Neighbors Bound.
There may be some concealed Cause,
That, none but you, this Emblem draws.
Examine it; And, If you see
A fault, let it amended be. See, Emb. XXVII.

28
Your Emblems moral does declare,
When, Lovers fitly matched are;
And, what the chiefest cause may be,
Why, Friends and Lovers disagree.
Perhaps, you somewhat thence, may learn,
Which your Affection does concern.
But, if it Counsel you too late,
Then, preach it at your Neighbors gate. See, Emb. XXVIII.

M 29
Some, urge their Princes on to War,
And weary of sweet Peace, they are.
Some, seek to make them, dote on Peace.
(Till public Danger more increase)
As if the World were kept in awe,
By nothing else but preaching Law.
Thy Moral (if of those thou art)
Does act a Moderators part. See, Emb. XXIX.

30
It Is feared, thou do less esteem,
Upright to be, than so to seem;
And, if thine actions, fair appear,
Thou carest not how soul they are.
Though this be not thy fault alone,
Yet have a care of mending One:
And, study thou, Upright to grow,
As well in Essence, as in Show. See, Emb. XXX.

31
Some, all their time, and wealth have spent,
In giving other men content;
And, would not grudge to waste their Blood,
To help advance the Common-good.
To such as these, you have been thought,
Not half so friendly as you ought.
This Lot therefore befalls, to show,
How great respects, to such, are due. See, Emb. XXXI.

32
You have been tempted (by your leave)
In hope of Lucre, to deceive:
But, much, as yet, you have not swerved
From Faith, which ought to be observed.
If well, hereafter, you would speed,
In dealing-honestly, proceed:
For, by your Emblem, you shall see,
That, Honest-men, the richest be. See, Emb. XXXII.

33
We hope, no person, here, believes,
That, you are of those wealthy Thieves,
Who, Chains of gold, and pearl do wear,
And, of those Thieves, that, none you are,
Which wears a Rope, we, plainly see;
For, you, as yet unchanged be:
But, unto God, for Mercy cry,
Else, hanged you may be, e're you die. See, Emb. XXXIII.

34
You, willing are, to put away,
The thinking on your Latter-day:
You count the mention of it, Folly;
A means of breeding Melancholy;
And, news unfit for men to hear,
Before they come to sixtie-yeare.
But, mind what Counsels now are sent,
And, mend, left you too late repent. See, Emb. XXXIV.

35
Your Wits, your Wishes, and your Tongue,
Have run the Wild grose-chase, too long;
And (left all Reason, you exceed)
Of Rules, and Beines, you now have need.
A Bridle, therefore, and a Square,
Prime Figures, in your Emblem, are.
Observe their Moral, and I pray,
Be Wise, and Sober, if you may. See, Emb. XXXV.

36
Because her Aid makes goodly shows,
You, on the World, your trust repose;
And, his dependence, you despise,
Who, merely, on God's help, relies.
That, therefore, you may come to see,
How pleased, and safe, those men may be,
Who have no aid, but God, alone;
This Emblem, you have lighted on. See, Emb. XXXVI.

37
Some, think your Virtue very much;
And, there is cause to think it such:
For, many ways it has been tried;
And, well the Trial does abide,
Yet, think not, but some brants there are,
Which, your own strength shall never bear.
And, by the Moral of your Lot,
Learn, where, Assistance may be got. See, Emb. XXXVII.

38
Thou have been grieved, and complained,
Because, the Truth has wrong sustained.
But, that, dismayed thou should not be,
Thine Emblem will declare to thee,
That, though the Truth may suffer spite,
It shall not be depressed quite;
But, by opposing, spread the more,
And, grow more powerful than before. See, Emb. XXXVIII.

39
By Rashness, thou have often erred,
Or, else, thou had been more preferred.
But, future errors, to prevent,
Thou to the slow paced Ox art sent,
To learn more Slaydnesse; and, to do
Thy Works, with Perseverance, too.
He that this creatures Virtue scorns,
May want it all, except his Flornes. See, Emb. XXXIX.

40
Dame Fortunes favor seems to be
Much loved, and longed for, of thee;
As if, in what, her hand bestows,
Thou might thy confidence repose.
But, that, her manners may be known,
This Chance, upon thee, was bestowne.
Consider well, what thou have got,
And, on her flattrings, dote thou not. See, Emb. XL.

41
The Steel and Flint, declare, in part,
The Temper of a Stony-heart;
And, show, that thence, no Virtue flows,
Till it be forced out, with blows.
Some other, Moralls thou may learn,
Thereby, which will thy good, concern:
Mark, therefore, what they do declare,
And, mind it, as occasions are. See, Emb. XLI.

42
Thou think thy Wit, had made thee great,
Had Poverty not been some let:
But, had thy Wealth as ample been,
As, thou thy Wit, did overweene;
Instead of thy desired Height,
Perhaps, thou had been ruined quite.
Hereafter, therefore, be content,
With whatsoever God has sent. See, Emb. XLII.

43
To Discord, thou art somewhat prone,
And, think thou may subsist alone;
Regarding not how safe they bide,
(...) last, in Concords bands, are tide.
(...) that thou may the better heed,
What Good, from Union does proceed,
An Emblem is become thy Lot,
From which, good Caveats may be got. See, Emb. XLIII.

44
Thou would be loved; and, to that end,
Thou do both Time, and Labor spend:
But, thou expect'st (as we believe)
More Love, than thou do mean to give.
If so, thou, then, art much to blame:
For, Love affects a muturall-flame;
Which, if it fail on either side,
Will never, long time, true abide. See, Emb. XLIV.

45
If all your powers, you should unite,
Prevail in your Desires, you might:
And, sooner should effect your ends,
If you should muster up your Friends.
But, since your Genius does suspect,
That, you such Policy neglect,
Your Lot presents to your view
An Emblem, which instructs you. See, Emb. XLV.

46
Because, thou may be one of them,
Who dare the deeds of Kings condemn;
(As if such eyes as theirs and yours
Could view the depth of Sov'raigne powers;
Or, see, how in each Time, and Place,
God rules their hearts, in every case.)
To check thy sauciness, in this,
An Emblem comes not much amiss. See, Emb. XLVI.

47
Of many goodly parts thou vauntst;
And, much thou have, though much thou wantst:
But, well it were, that, less, thou had,
Unless more use thereof thou made.
That, therefore, thou might come to see,
How vain unpractiz'd virtues be,
Peruse thine Emblem, and, from thence,
Take useful heed of thy Offense. See, Emb. XLVII.

48
By this thy Lot, it may appear,
Decayed thy Hopes, or Fortunes are.
But, that, thou may no courage lose,
Thine Emblem, by example, shows,
That, as the Moon does from the Waine
Return, and fill her Orb again:
So, thou thy Fortunes may renew,
If, honest Hopes, thou shall pursue. See, Emb. XLVIII.

49
Some Foes, for thee, do lie in wait,
Where thou suspectest no Deceit;
Yea, many a one, thy harm intends,
Whom thou do hope will be thy Friends:
Be therefore, heedfull, whom to trust;
What walk thou take, and what thou do;
For, by thine Emblem, thou shall see,
That, wariness, will needful be. See, Emb. XLIX.

50
It seems, by drawing of this Lot,
The day of Death, is much forgot;
And, that, thou needst a faithful Friend,
To mind thee of thy latter-end.
Vnheeded, therefore, pass not by,
What now thine Emblem does imply;
So, thou shall hear (without affright)
Death's message, though it were to night. See, Emb. L.

51
Thou seek'st by fickle Chance, to gain,
What thou by Virtue might attain.
Endeavor well, and, nothing shall
To thee, unfortunately fall:
For, every variable Chance,
Thy firm contentment, shall advance.
But, if thou, yet, remain in doubt,
Turn Fortunes-wheele, once more, about.
52
Thy Lot, no Answer will bestow,
To that, which thou desir'st to know;
Nor can thou, here, an Emblem find,
Which to thy purpose is inclinde.
Perhaps, it is too late to crave,
What thou desire, now to have:
Or, but in vain, to mention that,
Which thy Ambition aymeth at.
Then, take it not in evil part,
That, with a Blanck, thou answered art.
53
Although you now refused not,
To try the Fortune of your Lot;
Yet, you, perhaps, unwilling are,
This company the same should hear,
Lest, some ha^sh Moral should unfold
Such tricks, as you could wish untold.
But, lo, you need not stand in awe;
For, it is a Blanck, which now you draw.
54
It proves a Blanck; for, to what end,
Should we a serious Moral spend,
Where, teachings, warnings, and advise,
Esteemed are of little price?
Your only purpose, is to look
Upon the Pictures of this Book;
When, more discretion you have got,
An Emblem shall attend your Lot.
55
You might have drawn an Emblem, here,
In which your manners pictured were:
But, some will vex, when they shall see
Themselves, so painted out to be,
And, blame this Book as if it had
By some unlawful Art been made:
(Or, was contrived, that, to their shame,
Men, on themselves, might L^bels frame)
And, lest you may be so unwise,
Your Lot, an Emblem, now, denies.
56
Because, Good Chances, others drew,
To try these Lots, it pleased you.
But, had you such an Emblem found,
As fits you rightly, you had froun'd;
Or, inwardly, you would have chase,
Although you outwardly had laughed.
You, therefore, very glad may be,
This proves a Blanck; and, so may we.
FINIS.
A COLLECTION OF EMBLEMES, ANCIENT AND MODERN: Quickened With METRICALL
ILLVSTRATIONS, both Moral and (...): And disposed into LOTTERIES,

That Jnstruction, and Good Counsel, may be furthered by an Honest and
Pleasant Recreation.

By GEORGE WITHER.

The fourth Book.



LONDON,

Printed by AUGUSTINE MATTHEW'S. MDCXXXIV.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE PHILLIP, Earl of PEMBROOKE, and M^VNTGOMERIE, etc.
Lord Chamberlain of the Household, Knight of the most honorable Order of the
Garter, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privie-Councell.
My Honorable LORD,
THough, Worthless in my own repute I am;
And, (though my Fortune, so obscures my Name
Beneath my Hopes; that, now, it makes me seem
As little worth, in other men's esteem,
As in mine own;) yet, when my Merits were
No better, than, to most, they now appear,
It pleased some, even some of those that had
The Noblest Names, (and, those of whom was made
The best Account) so lowly to descend,
As, my well-meaning Studies, to befriend.
Among those WORTHIES, I may both bemone
(My self in HIM) and memorize, for One,
Your much renowned BROTHER, as a Chief
In bri^ging to my waned Hopes, relief;
And, in my Faculties, were I as able
To honor Him, as he was honorable,
I would have shown, how, all this Emperie
Has lost a Friend, in HIM, as much as I.
To ME, so freely, of his own accord
It pleased HIM, his Favors, to afford;
That, when our learned, and late Sov'raigne-Prince,
(By others misinformed) took offense
At my Free Lines; HE, foun'd such Means and Place
To bring, and reconcile me to his Grace;
That, therewithal, his Majesty bestowed
A Gift upon me, which his Bounty showed:
And, had enriched me; if, what was intended,
Had not, by othersome, been ill befriended.
But, as I long time, suffered have by those
Who labored much, my thrivings, to oppose:
So, I my self, (although not out of pride,
As many think it) have so much relide
Upon the Royall-Gift, neglecting so
To fortify the same, as others do
By making Friends; that my estate grew less
(By more than twice five hundred Marks decrease)
Through that, which for, my profit was bestowne.
And, I, ere this, had wholly been undone;
But, that the Wealth, which I rely on, most,
Consists in things, which never can be lost.
Yet, by this Loss, I have Occasions had
To feel, why other men are often sad.
And, I, (who blushed, to be troublesome
To any Friend) thereby, almost am come
To such a pass; that, what I wish to have,
I should grow impudent enough to Crave,
Had not impartial Death, and wasting Time,
Of all my Friends quite worn away the Prime;
And, left me none, to whom I dare present
The meanest suite withom encouragement:
Although, the greatest Boon, I would implore,
Should cost them, but a Word, or little more.
Yet, some there are, no doubt, for whose respect
I might endeavor, with no vain effect;
Had I but cause, to have as high esteem,
Of mine own Merits, as I have of them.
And, if your Honor should be so inclined,
As I desire; I, now am sure to find
Another Pembrooke, by whose aid sustained,
I may preserve, what by the Last I gained.
To make adventure, how it will succeed,
I now am come. And lo, my LORD, instead
Of better Advocates, I first begin,
Mine EMBLEMS, by these Lines, to Usher in;
That, they, by their admittance may effect
For Me, and for themselves, your kind respect.
That, which in them, best Worthy you shall find,
Is this; that, they are Symptoms of a Mind,
Affecting honesty: and of a Heart,
So truly honoring a true desert,
That, I am hopeful made, they will acquire
As much respect as I can well desire:
And, SIR, your Candor, your known Courtesies,
With other praisefull Virtues, make me rise
To this Belief; that, YOU by favoring me
Hereafter, may as highly honored be,
As by some former Bounties; and increase
My Future Merit, by your Worthiness.
However, what I am or shall be known
To Be, by Your Deservings, or mine own,
You may command it; and, be sure to find
(Though false my Fortunes prove) a Faithful Mind.
Thus, unfainedly, professes Your Honors truest Honourer, GEO: WITHER.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, HENRY, Earl of HOLLAND, etc. Captain of the Guard;
Lord-chiefe-Iustice in Air of all his Majesty's Forests, Parkes and Chases on
this side Trent; Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, and one of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel.
Right Noble SIR,
HAving, of late, some Cause, to overlooke
That thankful Register, wherein I book
My noblest Friends; I found so many Names
Possessing nothing, but their honored Fames,
(Whose living Persons, we enjoyed, here,
A while ago;) that, I began to fear,
I might grow Friendlesse; (having now so few)
Unless I sought, their Number to renew.
By some Disasters, also, gaining proof,
How much this Course would make for my behoof;
I called my Wits to Counsel, Where, and How
I might, with hopefulnesse, begin to sow
The seeds of such a Blessing: And, me thought
Within me, something said: Where should be sought
What thou so gladly would renewed find,
But, from some BRANCHES of the selfsame kind;
Whose fair Aspects may seem to promise fruit,
According to the Virtues of the Root?
As Soon as Fancy had informed me so,
Your Lordship, came to my remembrance, too,
With what our Soveraigne's Favor, Vulgar Fame,
Or, your own Merits, adds to your Name.
Which, having weighed, no doubts at all I had
Of Worth in YOU; But, rather, doubtings made
That, all my Wits would insufficient be,
To make that Worth, become a Friend to me.
For, I have often observed, that, Favor shunnes
The best Desert, if after her, it runs.
Yet, who can tell what may befall? thought I:
It is no great Adventure, if I try
Without success: And, if, I gain my End,
I am assured of a Noble-Friend.
His honorable FATHER, deemed me worth
So much respecting as to seek me forth,
When, I was more Obscure: And, ME, for naught
(...) to Befriend me, forth HE sought.
(...) wherefore, of his SON, should I suspect
(...) seeking HIM) he can my love reject?
(...) Cou^tesie does always, there, abound,
(...) such a lovely Personage is found?
My LORD, these were my Fancies: But I take them
To be of no more worth, than, you shall make them
By your Acceptance: Nor, is it my intent
To Court you, with a fruitless Complement:
But, to attempt your Favor with a mind,
As readily, and really, inclinde
To serve you, when my services may steed;
As to expect your Favors, in my need.
For, had my Fates enabled me so much,
I should more willingly have sought out such
On whom I Courtesies might have bestowne,
Than, seek to cure Misfortunes of mine own.
No doubt, but, every day, your Lordship hears
Inventions, which may better please your ears
Than these I now present; And, yet you might
(For ought I knew) find profit, or delight,
By our plain EMBLEMS, or some uses in them,
Which from your Honor, some respects may win them;
Even for that good Morality, which they
To Vulgar Understandings will convay.
But, Truth to speak, the chiefest cause which drew
My mind, to make them PRESENTS, for your view,
Was, but to take Occasion to profess,
That, I am Servant, to your WORTHINESS.
In which, if YOU are pleased; All is got
At which I aimed: And, though you like it not,
It shall but teach Me (for the time to come)
To take more heed, where I am troublesome.
And, I shall be, nevertheless, your Honors to be commanded, as becomes
your Servant, GEO: WITHER.

Whilst I, the Sunne's bright Face may view,
I will no meaner Light pursue.

NON INFERIORA SECUTUS.


ILLVSTR. I. Book. 4
WHen, with a serious musing, I behold
The grateful, and obsequious Marigold,
How duly, every morning, she displayes
Her open breast, when Titan spreads his Rays;
How she observes him in his daily walk,
Still bending toward him, her tender stalk;
How, when he down declines, she droopes and mournes,
Bedow'd (as 'twere) with tears, till he returns;
And, how the vailes her Flowers, when he is gone,
As if she scorned to be looked on
By an inf^riour Eye; or, did contemn
To wayt upon a meaner Light, then Him.
When this I meditate, me-thinkes, the Flowers
Have spirits, far more generous, then ours;
And, give us fair Examples, to despise
The servile Fawnings, and Idolatries,
Wherewith, we court these earthly things below,
Which merit not the service we bestow.
But, oh my God! though grovelling I appear
Upon the Ground, (and have a rooting here,
Which hales me downward) yet in my desire,
To that, which is above me, I aspire:
And, all my best Affections I profess
To Him, that is the Sun of Righteousness.
Oh! keep the Morning of his Incarnation,
The burning Noone-tide of his bitter Passion,
The Night of his Descending, and the Height
Of his Ascension, ever in my sight:
That imitating him, in what I may,
I never follow an inferior Way.
The Earth is God's, and in his Hands
Are all the Corners of the Lands.

IN MANU DOMINI OMNES SUNT FINES TERRAE.

ILLVSTR. II. Book. 4
LOng since, the sacred Hebrew Lyrick said,
(A Truth, which never justly was denayd)
That, All the world is God's; and that his hands
Enclose the limits of the farthest Lands.
The self same Truth affirms, that likewise, there,
By him, their clodds, and furrows watered are,
And, that with dewes and showers, he does so bless
The dwellings of the barren Wilderness,
That, those Inhabitants (whom some conceived,
Of useful, and all pleasant things bereaved)
Their labors, with advantage, do employ,
And, fetch their yearly Harvests home, with joy.
Why then should we, that in God's Vineyard live,
Distrust that all things needful he will give?
Why should his Garden doubt of what it needs,
Since he often waters barren Rocks and Weeds?
Why should his Children, live in slavish fear,
Since he is kind to those that strangers are?
Or, whither from his presence, can we fly,
To whom the furthest hiding place is nigh.
And, if I may, from lower objects clime,
(To questioning, in matters more sublime)
Why should I think, the Soul shall not be fed,
Where God affoords, to Flesh, her daily Bread?
Or, dream, that he, for some, provided none,
Because, on us, much Mercy is bestowne?
It Is true enough, that Hell devoureth all,
Who shall be found without the Churches pale;
But, how far that extends, no Eye can see,
Since, in Gods hands, Earth's farthest Corners be.
By seeming other than thou art,
Thou do perform a foolish part.

QUOD NON ES NE VIDEARE CAVE.

ILLVSTR. III. Book. 4
THe World is much for Shows, and few there are
So diligent to be, as to appear;
Although a little travail more, would make them
Those men, for which, the lookers on mistake them.
Some, have so toyled, and consumed so much,
To get a false repute of being Rich,
That, they have spent far more, than would have bought,
The substance of the shadow, they have sought;
And, caused those, who deemed them rich before,
To know them, to be miserably poor.
Some others, would so feign be counted Wise,
That, they consume in Curiosities,
In Sophistries, and superficial shows,
More precious Time, than would have made them those,
They long to seem, (had half that means been spent,
In seeking Wisdom, with a pure intent)
Whereas, the glorioust purchases of such,
(Though by their Peers they seem applauded much)
Are still so vain, that little they possess,
But fruitless leaves, of learned foolishness:
Yea, by affecting more than is their due,
They lose even both the substance, and the show;
And, so, instead of honors Crown, have worn
The Coxcombes, of a well-deserved scorn.
But, of all Fooleries, the grossest Folly
Is theirs, who wear those garbes of seeming-holy,
Which pain them sore, yet make them still appear,
To God and Men, as wicked as they are.
Be, therefore, what, to be, thou have professed;
But, be not of this last, of all the rest.
Pursue thy Works, without delay,
For, thy short hours run fast away.

FESTINAT DECURRERE.

ILLVSTR. IIII. Book. 4
THough this be but the picture of that Glass,
By which thou measur'st how thine hours do pass.
Yet, slight it not; for, much 'twill profit thee,
To ponder what the Morals of it be.
And, it is an Emblem, whence the Wise may learn,
That, which their persons, nearly does concern.
The brittle Glass, serves fitly to express
The Body's frailty, and much crasinesse.
Four Pillars, which the glassie work empale,
Instruct thee, that the Virtues Cardinal,
To guard the Manhood, should be still employed,
Lest else the feeble fabric be destroyed.
The Sand, still running forth, without delay,
Does show, that Lifetime, passes fast away,
And, makes no stop: yea, and the Motto too,
(Lest thou forgetful prove) informs thee so.
By viewing this, Occasion, therefore, take,
Of thy fast-flying Hours, more use to make;
And, heedfull be, to shun their common crime,
Who take much care to trifle out the time;
As if it merited their utmost pain,
To lose the gemme, which most they seek to gain.
Time-past is lost already: Time-to-come,
Belongs, as yet, thou know not unto whom.
The present-houres are thine, and, only those,
Of which thou have Commission to dispose;
And, they from thee, do fly away so fast,
That, they are scarcely known, till they are past.
Lord, give me grace, to mind, and use Time so,
That, I may do thy work, before I go.
Repent, or God will break the thread,
By which* thy doom hangs over thy head.

ABRUMPAM.

ILLVSTR. V. Book. 4
Mark well this Emblem; and, (when in a thread,
You see the Globe, there, hang above their head,
Who in security, beneath it sit)
Observe likewise, the Knife, that threatens it;
The smallness of the Twine; and, what a death
Would follow, should it fall on those beneath:
And (having well observed it) mind, I pray,
That, which the word about it, there, does say:
For, it includes a Caveat, which we need
To entertain, with a continual heed.
Though few consider it, we find it thus
(Throughout our lives) with every one of us.
Destruction hangs in a single thread,
Directly over every Sinner's head.
That Sentence is gone forth, by which we stand
Condemned to suffered death. The dreadful hand,
Of God's imp^rtiall Justice, holds a Knife,
Still ready, to cut off our thread of life;
And, it is his mercy, that keeps up the Ball
From falling, to the ruin of us all.
Oh! let us mind, how often we have bin,
Even in the very act of Deadly-sinne,
Whilst this hung over us; and, let us praise,
And love him, who has yet prolonged our days:
Yea, let our thankfulness, bring forth such fruit,
As, to the benefit may somewhat suit:
For, though a sudden Death may not ensue,
Yet, (since Times Axe, does every minute hew
The Root of Life) the Tree, e're long, must fall;
And, then perhaps, too late, repent we shall.
When woe is in our selves begun,
Then, whither from it, can we run?

HINC DOLOR INDE FUGA.

ILLVSTR. VI. Book. 4
Poor Heart, why do thou run so fast? and why,
Behind thee do thou look, when thou do fly?
As if thou seem'dst in thy swift flight, to hear
Those dangers following thee, which thou do fear?
Alas! thou labour'st, and thou runn'st in vain,
To shun, by flight, thy terrors, or thy pain;
For, lo, thy Death, which thou have dreaded so,
Clings fast unto thee, wheresoere thou go:
And while thou toyl'st, an outward-ease to win,
Thou draw'st thine own destruction further in;
Making that Arrow, which but pricks thy hide,
To pierce thy tender entrails, through thy side.
And, well I may this wounded Heart bemoane;
For, here, me thinks, I Am taught to look upon
Mine own condition; and, in him, to see
Those deadly wounds, my Sins have made in me.
I greatly fear the World, may unawares
Entangle me, by her alluring snares:
I am afraid, the Devil may inject
Some poisonous fume, my Spirit to infect,
With ghostly Pestilence; and, I assay,
To fly from these, with all the powers I may.
But, oh my Flesh! this very Flesh I wear,
Is worse to me, than Worlds, and Devils are:
For, without this, no power on me, they had.
This is that Skirt, which made Alcides mad.
It is a grief, which I shall never cure,
Nor fly from, whilst my lifetime does endure:
From thence, oh Lord, my greatest sorrows be;
And, therefore, from my Self, I fly to Thee.
When Magistrates confined are,
They revell, who were kept in fear.

CAPTIVUM IMPUNE LACES SUNT.

ILLVSTR. VII. Book. 4
A Tyrannous, or wicked Magistrate,
Is fitly represented by a Catt:
For, though the Mice a harmfull vermin be,
And, Cats the remedy; yet, often we see,
That, by the Mice, far less, some house-wives leese,
Then when they set the Catt to keep the Cheese.
A ravenous Cat, will punish in the Mouse,
The very same Offenses, in the house,
Which he himself commits; yea, for that Vice,
Which was his own (with praise) he kills the Mice;
And, spoyleth not another life alone,
Even for that very fault which was his own,
But feeds, and fattens, in the spoil of them,
Whom he, without compassion did condemn.
Nay, worse than so; he cannot be content,
To slaughter them, who are as innocent,
As he himself; but, he must also play,
And sport his woeful Prisoners lives away;
More torturing them, 'twixt fruitless hopes and fears,
Than when their bowels, with his teeth he tears:
For, by much terror, and much cruelty,
He kills them, ten times over, e're they die,
When, such like Magistrates have rule obtained,
The best men wish their power might be restrained:
But, they who shun enormities, through Fear,
Are glad when good-men out of Office are.
Yea, whether Governors be good or bad,
Of their displacings wicked-men are glad;
And, when they see them brought into disgraces,
They boldly play the Knaves before their faces.
Lo, here is all, that he possessed,
Which once was Victor of the East.

RESTAT DE VICTORE ORIENTIS.

ILLVSTR. VIII. Book. 4
WHen he, who by his conquering Arm, possessed
The rich, and spacious Empires of the East,
Felt his approaching end; he bade them bear
A Shirt throughout his Army, on a Spear,
Proclaiming, that of all his large estate,
No more was left him, then, but only that:
Perhaps intending, thereby, to express,
A sorrow for his wild Ambitiousnesse;
Or, hoping, by that Spectacle, to give
Some good Instructions unto those that live.
However, let it serve us, to declare,
How vain their toylings, and ambitions are,
Who rob themselves, and other men of rest,
For things that are so little while possessed.
And, if that powerful King, could nothing have,
That was of use, to carry to his Grave,
(Of all his conquered Kingdoms) but, one Shirt,
Or, Winding sheet, to hide his Royal dirt;
Why should we pinch, and scrape, and vexed become,
To heap up Riches, for we know not whom?
Or, macerate the Flesh, by raising strife,
For more, than will be useful during life?
Nay, even for that, which sometimes shortens breath,
And mak^s us, also, wretched after Death.
Let me, oh God! my labor so employ,
That, I, a competencie may enjoy.
I ask no more, than may Life's want supply,
And, leave their aue to others, when I die.
If this thou grant, (which nothing doubt I can)
None ever lived, or died a richer man.
When Hopes, quite frustrate were become,
The Wither'd-branch did freshly bloome.

INSPERATA FLORUIT.

ILLVSTR. IX. Book. 4
It Is true, a wither'd-branch I am, and seem
To some, as void of Hopes, as of esteem;
For, in their judgments, I appear to be
A saplesse Bough, quite broken from the Tree,
(Even such as that, in this our Emblem, here)
And, yet, I neither feel Despair, nor Fear;
For, I have seen (e're now) a little Spray,
(Rent from her Stem) lie trodden by the way,
Three months together; which, when Spring drew on,
To take an unexpected Root begun;
(Yea, grew to be a Tree) and, growing, stood,
When those great Groves, were felled for firing-wood,
Which once had high esteem; and sprung unhurt,
While that poor Branch, lay slighted in the dirt.
Nay, I have seen such twiggs, afford them shade,
By whom they were the meanest shrippings made,
Of all the Wood; And, you may live to see,
(For ought yet known) some such event in me.
And, what if all who know me, see me dead,
Before those hopes begin to spring and spread?
Have therefore they that hate me, cause to boast,
As if mine expectations I had lost?
No sure: For, I, who by Faith's eyes have seen,
Old Aarons withered Rod, grow fresh and green;
And also viewed (by the selfsame Eyes)
Him, whom that Rod, most rightly typifies,
Fall by a shameful Death, and rise, in spite
Of Death, and Shame, unto the glorioust height.
Even I, believe my Hope shall be possessed,
And, therefore, (even in Death) in Hope I Will rest.
True Virtue, whatsoere betides,
In all extremes, unmoov'd abides.

NESCIT LABI VIRTUS.

ILLVSTR. X. Book. 4
WHen, in this Emblem, here, you have espide,
The shape of a triangled Pyramide,
And, have observed well, those mighty Rocks,
Whose firm foundation bides the dreadful shockes
Of angry Neptune; you may thereby see,
How firmly settled, Virtues real be.
For, as the raging Seas, although they roar,
Can make no breach upon the Rockie shore;
And, as a true triangled Pyramide,
Stands fast, and shows alike, on every side:
So, howsoever Fortune, turns or winds,
Those men, which are endowed with virtuous minds,
It is impossible, to drive them from
Those Forms, or Stations, which those minds become.
And, as the raging Sea, with foming threats,
Against the Rock^e-shore, but vainly beats;
So, Envy shall in vain, loud blustrings make,
When virtuous resolutions they would shake.
For, Virtue, which receives an overthrow,
Was Virtue, not indeed, but in the show.
So far am I, oh Lord! from laying claim
To have this Virtue, that, I do but aim
At such perfection; and, can come no nigher
As yet, than to obtain it in desire.
But, fix thou so, this weak desire of mine,
Upon the Virtues of thy Rock divine,
That I, and that invaluable Stone,
May be incorporated into One:
And, then, it will be neither shame, nor pride,
To say, my Virtues, will unmoved abide.
The motion of the World, this day,
Is moved the quite contrary way.

HODIE SIC VERTITVR ORBIS.

ILLVSTR. XI. Book. 4
WHat was this Figures meaning, but to show,
That, as these kind of Shellfish backward go,
So now the World, (which here does seem to take
An arseward Journey on the Cancer's back)
Moves counterwise; as if delight it had,
To run a race, in Courses retrograde:
And, that, is very likely to be true,
Which, this our Emblem, purposes to show.
For, I have now, of late, not only seen,
What backward motions, in my Friends have been;
And, that my outward Fortunes and Affairs,
Do of themselves, come tumbling down the stairs:
But, I have also found, that other things,
Have got a wheeling in contrary Rings;
Which Regresse, holding on, it is like that we,
To Jews, or Ethnicks, back shall turned be.
Some punie Cl^rkes, presume that they can teach
The ancient holy Doctors, how to preach.
Some Lucks, learn their Pastors how to pray.
Some Parents, are compelled to obey
Their Sons; and, so their Dignity to lose,
As to be fed and clothed, at their dispose.
Nay, we have some, who have assayed to draw,
All backward, to the Bondage of the Law;
Even to those abrogated Rites and Days,
By, which, the wandering Jew marks out his ways.
And, to pursue this Round, they are so heady,
That, they have made themselves, and others giddy.
Do thou, these froward Motions, LORD, restrain;
And, set the World in her due course again.
Invincibilitie is there,
Where Order, Strength, and Union are.

VIS NESCIA VINCI.

ILLVSTR. XII, Book. 4
FRom these well-ordered Arrows, and the Snake,
This useful Observation you may make;
That, where an able Prudence, does combine
Vnited-forces, by good Discipline,
It makes up a power, exempted from
The fear, or peril, to be overcome:
And, if you covet safety, you will seek
To know this Ward, and to acquire the like.
For, doubtless, neither is it in the force,
Of iron Charets, or of armed Horse,
In which, the King, security may find,
Unless the Riders be well Disciplinde.
Nor, lies it in the Soldiers common Skill
In warlike Postures; nor in theirs, who drill
The Ranks and Fyles, to order them aright,
According as Occasion makes the Fight.
But, men must use a further Prudence too,
Or else, those vulgar-Arts will all undo.
For, these, are only Sciences injoynd,
To order well the Body, not the Mind:
And, men best trained in these (often times) we see,
The Hare-brain'dst-fooles, in all our Armies be.
To strength, and skill, unite we must, therefore,
A manly Prudence, comprehending more,
Than all these Powr's: even such, as when she please,
To all her ends, can use and manage these;
And, show us how to cure, or to prevent
All Hazards; or, withal to be content.
He that is thus armed, and trusts in God alone,
May be opposed, but, conquered of none.
When thou art shipwrackt in Estate,
Submit with patience, unto Fate.

QUO FATA TRAHUNT.

ILLVSTR. XIII. Book. 4
WHen I beheld this Picture of a Boat,
(Which on the raging Waves does seem to float)
Forced onward, by the current of the Tide,
Without the help of Anchor, Oar or Guide,
And, saw the Motto there, which does imply,
That she commits her self to Destiny;
Me thinks, this Emblem sets out their estate,
Who have ascribed every thing to Fate;
And dream, that howsoever the business go,
Their Work, nor hinders, neither helps thereto.
The leaking Ship, they value as the sound:
He that is to hanging borne, shall never be drowned;
And, men to happiness ordained (say these)
May set their Ship to float, as Fate shall please.
This Fancy, springing from a mis-beleeving
Of God's Decrees; and, many men deceiving,
With shows of Truth, both causes much offense
Against God's Mercies, and his Providence;
And brings to pass, that some to ruin run,
By their neglect of what they might have done.
For, Means is to be used, (if we desire,
The blessing of our safety to acquire)
Whose natural effects, if God deny,
Upon his Providence we must rely,
Still practicing what natural aids may be,
Until no likely aid untride we see.
And, when this Non plus we are forced unto,
Stand still, we may, and wayt what God will do.
He that shall thus to Fate, his fortunes leave,
Let me be ruined, if She him deceive.
The best, and fairest House, to me,
Is that, where best I love to be.

OIKOS PHILOS OIKOS APISTOS.


ILLVSTR. XIV. Book. 4
THey are not Houses builded large and high,
Seel'd all with Gold, and paved with Porphyrie,
Hung round with Arras, glazed with Christall-glasse,
And covered over with plates of shining Brass,
Which are the best; but, rather, those where we
In safety, health, and best content, may be;
And, where we find, though in a mean Estate,
That portion, which maintains a quiet Fate.
Here, in a homely Cottage, thatcht with reed,
The Peasant seems as pleasedly to feed,
As he, that in his Hall or Parlour dines,
Which Fret-worke Roofes, or costly Cedar Lines:
And, with the very same affections too,
Both to, and from it, he does come and go.
The Tortois, doubtless, does no house-roome lack,
Although his House will cover but his back;
And, of his Tub, the Cynicke seemed as glad,
As Alexander was of all he had.
When I am settled in a place I love,
A shrubby hedge-row, seems a goodly Grove.
My liking makes Palaces of Sheds,
And, of plain Couches, carved Ivory Beds:
Yea, every path, and pathlesse walk, which lies
Contemned, as rude, or wild, in others eyes,
To me is pleasant; not alone in show,
But, truly such: For, liking makes them so.
As pleased in theirs, the Snailes, and Cocles dwell,
As does a Scallop in his pearly shell:
For, that commends the House, which makes it fit,
To serve their turns, who should have use of it.
The King, his power from God receives:
For, he alone the Scepter gives.

DEUS DAT CUI VULT.


ILLVSTR. XV. Book. 4
THe Gift of Kingdoms, Children, and good-Wives,
Are three of God's most choice Prerogatives,
In temp'rall Blessings; and, of all these three,
The gifts of Kingdoms, his rar'st Favors be:
For, in five hundred Millions, there is not one,
Whom this high Honor is conferred upon;
Nor is there any known Estate on earth,
(Whereto we come, by Merit, or by Birth)
Which can, to any man assurance bring,
That, he shall either live, or die a King.
The Morning-Starre, that is Heir unto a Crown,
Often sets, before the shining-Sunne is down;
And, some, that once a glorious Empire swayd,
Did lose their Kingdoms, e're their heads were laid.
The greatest earthly Monarch has no power,
To keep his Throne one minute of an hour,
(Use all the means, and policies he can)
If God will give it to another man.
He, when Belshazzar was in highest estate,
His Kingdom to the Persians did translate.
King Saul, and Rehoboam, could not stay
The Royalties, which God would give away;
And, He that was the proudest of the rest,
God, changed from a King, into a Beast.
Nor is there any man so mean, but he,
When God shall please, an Emperor may be.
Some, from the Pot kil^e, from the Sheep cote, some,
He raised has, great Princes to become:
Yea, he over heaven and earth, has reared his Throne,
That was on earth, the most despised one.
Her favors, Fortune, often imparts,
To those that are of no deserts.

INDIGNUM FORTUNA FOVET.


ILLVSTR. XVI. Book. 4
WOuld you not laugh, and think it beastly fine,
To see a durtie, and ill-favored Swine,
Wear on her snout, a Diamond, or a Pearl,
That might become the Lady of an Earl?
And hold it head, as if it meant to show
It were the Pigg of some well-nurtur'd Sow?
Perhaps, you think there be not any where
Such Antickes, but in this our Emblem here.
But, if you take these Charms, and then go forth
Among some troops, which pass for folks of worth,
You shall discover, quickly, if you please,
A thousand sights, as mimicall as these.
Here, you shall see a noble Title worn,
(That had not mis-beseem'd one better borne)
By him, whose virtues are of little price,
And, whose estate, was gotten by his Vice.
You shall behold another Mushrome, there,
Walk with our Lords, as if he were their Peer,
That was well known, to be but the other day,
No fit companion for such men as they;
And, had no other means to climb this height,
But Gaming, or to play the Parasite.
Yet (though he neither has his Trade, nor Lands,
Nor any honest In come, by his hands)
He, often consumes at once, in Games or Cheer,
More than would keep his Better all the year.
Yea, many such as these, thou should behold,
Which would be vexed, if I describe them should:
For, thus, unworthily, blind Fortune flings,
To Crows, and Geese, and Swine, her precious things.
The best good-turnes that Fools can do us,
Prove disadvantages unto us.

STULTORUM ADIUMENTA NOCUMENTA.


ILLVSTR. XVII. Book. 4
A Fool, sent forth to fetch the Goslings home,
When they unto a Rivers brinck were come,
(Through which their passage lay) conceived a fear
His Dames best Brood, might have been drowned there;
Which, to avoid, he thus did show his wit,
And his good nature, in preventing it.
He, underneath his girdle, thrusts their heads,
And, then the Coxcombe through the water wades.
Here learn, that when a Fool his help intends,
It rather does a mischief, then befriends;
And, think, if there be danger in his love,
How harmefull his Maliciousness may prove:
For, from his kindness, though no profit rise
To do thee spite, his Malice may suffice.
I could not from a Prince beseech a boon
By suing to his Iester or Buffoone:
Nor, any Fools vain humor, sooth or serve,
To get my bread, though I were like to starve.
For, to be poor, I should not blush so much,
As if a Fool should raise me to be rich.
Lord, though of such a kind my faults may be,
That sharp Affliction still must tutor me,
(And give me due Correction in her Schools)
Yet, oh preserve me from the scorn of Fools.
Those wicked Fools, that in their hearts have sed*
There is no God; and, rather give me Bread
By Ravens, LORD, or in a Lions Den,
Then by the Favors of such foolish men:
Lest, if their dainties I should swallow down,
Their smile might more undo, me, then their frown.
Though weakness unto me belong,
In my Supporter, I am strong.

TE STANTE VIREBO.


ILLVSTR. XVIII. Book. 4
ALthough there be no Timber in the Vine,
Nor strength to raise the climbing Ivie-twine,
Yet, when they have a helper by their side,
Or, prop to stay them, like this Pyramide,
One root sometime, so many Sprayes will bear,
That, you might think, some goodly Grove it were:
Their tender stalks, to climb aloft, are seen;
Their boughs are covered with a pleasant green;
And, that, which else, had crept upon the ground,
Has tops of lofty trees, and turrets crowned.
This Emblem, fitly shadows out the Natures
Of us, that are the Reasonable-creatures:
For, we are truly by our nat'rall-birth,
Like Vines undrest, and creeping on the earth;
Nor free from spoiling, nor in case to bear
Good fruits, or leaves, while we are grovelling there.
But, if newborn by Grace, straight borne are we,
From earthly creepings, by that Living-tree,
Which, here, was planted, merely to this end,
That, by his power, our weakness might ascend.
And, he our frailty to himself so takes,
So, of his might, the partners us he makes;
That, he, in us, does seem to hide his powers,
And, make the strength he gives, appear as ours.
Continue, Lord, this Grace, and grant we may,
Firm hold, on our- Supporter, always lay:
So climbing, that we nor neglect, nor hide
His Love; nor over-climbe it, by our Pride.
Thus, our yet staggering weakness, shall at length,
Be fully changed into perfect Strength.
Be wary, whosoever thou be,
For, from Loves arrows, none are free.

FERIO.


ILLVSTR. XIX. Book. 4
GOod Folks, take heed; for, here is a wanton Wagge,
Who, having Bows and Arrows, makes his bragg
That, he has some unhappy trick to play;
And, vows to shoot at all he meets to day.
P^ay be not careless; for, the Boy is blind,
And, sometimes strikes, where most he seems kind.
This rambling Archer spares nor one, nor other:
Yea, otherwhile, the Monkey shoots his Mother.
Though you be little Children, come not near;
For, I remember (though it be many a year
Now gone and past,) that, when I was a Lad,
My Heart, a prick, by this young Wanton had,
That, pained me seven years after: nor had I
The grace (thus warned) to escape his waggery;
But many times, even since I was a man,
He shot me, oftener then I tell you can:
And, if I had not been the stronger-hearted,
I, for my over-daring, might have smarted.
You laugh now, as if this were nothing so;
But, if you meet this Blinkard with his Bow,
You may, unless you take the better care,
Receive a wound, before you be aware.
I fear him not; for, I have learned how
To keep my heart strings from his Arrows now:
And, so might you, and so might every one
That vain Occasions, truly seeks to shunn.
But, if you slight my Counsels, you may chance
To blame at last, your wilful ignorance:
For, some, who thought, at first, his wounds but small
Have dyed by them, in an Hospital.
On whether side soever I am,
I, still, appear to be the same.

QUOCUNQUE FERAR.


ILLVSTR. XX. Book. 4
THis Cube, which is an equall-sided-square,
Does very well, in Emblem-wise, declare
The temper of that virtuous minded man,
Whose resolutions nothing alter can.
For, as the Cube, which way soever placed,
Stands ever in one posture, firmly fast,
And, still appears the same in form and size,
Upon what side or part soever it lies:
So, men well formed by the Word divine,
And, truly squared by virtuous Discipline,
Will keep (though changes them shall turn and wind)
The form and firmness of an honest-minde.
If, digging deep, his Fortunes lay him, there,
Where he his own, and others weights must bear,
(There* many years compelling him to lie,
Oppressed with dis-respect or poverty)
He keeps the place to which he stands enjoined,
And brooks his chances with a constant mind.
If she remoove him thence, and set him up
On temporal Prosperities high top,
The Squarenesse of Plain dealing he retains,
And, in the same integrity remains:
Nor coveting vain Wealth, or false esteems;
Nor, being any other than he seems.
Although by Nature, we are wondrous hard,
Lord, let us into such like Stones be squared:
Then, place us in thy spiritual Temple, so,
That, into one firm Structure, we may grow;
And, when we, by thy Grace, are fitted thus,
Dwell Thou thy self, for evermore, in us.
Deformity, within may be,
Where outward Beauties we do see.

BELLA IN VISTA DENTRO TRISTA.


ILLVSTR. XXI. Book. 4
Look well, I pray, upon this Beldame, here,
For, in her habit, though she gay appear,
You, through her youthful vizard, may espy
She Is of an old Edition, by her Eye:
And, by her wainscot face, it may be seen,
She might your Grandams first dry-nurse have been.
This is an Emblem, fitly shaddowing those,
Who making fair, and honest outward shows,
Are inwardly deformed; and, nothing such,
As they to be supposed, have strived much.
They choose their words, and play well-acted parts,
But, hide most loathsome projects in their hearts;
And, when you think sweet Friendship to embrace,
Some ugly Treason, meets you in the face.
I ha^^ a painted Brow; I much dislike
A Mayden-blush, daubed on a furrowed Cheek:
And, I abhor to see old Wantons play,
And, suite themselves, like Ladies of the May.
But, more (yea, most of all) my soul despises
A Heart, that in Religious forms, disguiseth
Profane intentions; and arrayes in white,
The coale-blacke conscience of an Hypocrite.
Take heed of such as these; and, (if you may)
Before you trust them, tract them in their way.
Observe their footsteps, in their private path:
For, these (as it is believed, the Devil has)
Have cloven feet; that is, two ways they go;
One for their ends, and the other for a show.
Now, you thus warned are, advise embrace;
And, trust nor gaudy Clothes, nor painted Face.
My Hand and Heart, in one agree,
What can you more desire of me?

EN DEXTRA FIDESQUE.


ILLVSTR. XXII. Book. 4
A Heart with Hand-in-hand, united thus,
Makes here an Emblem not unknown to us;
And, it is not hard for any Vulgar wit,
Without a Comment, to interpret it.
But, though of every man confessed it be,
That Hand and Heart together should agree;
And, that, what we in outward show express,
Performed should be, with inward heartinesse.
(Since, now the World, to such a pass is grown,
That, all is not considered, which is known)
I cannot think it altogether vain,
To speak of that, which may appear so plain.
When thou do reach thy hand unto thy friend,
Take order, that thy heart the same intend:
For, otherwise in Hand, or Heart, thou lie,
And, cuttest off a Member, e're thou dyest.
Some, give their Hearts (as many Lovers do)
Yet, are afraid, to set their hands thereto.
Some give their Hands; and, then by many a deed,
To ratify the gift, they dare proceed;
Yet, keep their tongues from saying what they meant,
To help excuse their hearts, when they repent.
Yea, some can very cunningly express,
In outward show, a winning heartinesse,
And, steal the dear affections they have sought,
From those, to whom they meant, nor promised ought.
Then, will they, if advantage come thereby,
Make all their Deeds, for want of Words, a ly.
Among Dissemblers, in things temporal,
These Raskalls are the ver'est Knaves of all.
No Emblem, can at full declare,
How fickle, Minds-unconstant are.

VARIUM ET MUTABILE SEMPER.


ILLVSTR. XXIII. Book. 4
SOme, think this Emblem serves to express
No more, but only Women's fickleness;
And, they will most desire to have it so,
Who, like those best, that most inconstant grow.
Although my Fortunes were, in some things, bad,
I never in my life, experience had
Of an inconstant woman: Wherefore, then,
Should I condemn the Females, more than men?
I hear some talk, that Women fickle be:
And so I think; and so I know are we.
And (being put together) say I dare,
That, they and we, in equal manner, share
A giddiness, and fickleness of mind,
More wavering, than a Feather, or the Wind.
The Woman, here, is placed, to typisie
A mind distracted with much levitie:
Not, that the woman's Wav'rings are the more;
But, for this cause: Most Vices, heretofore,
And Virtues too, our Ancestors did render,
By words declined in the female-gender.
The winged-Ball, (whose tottering Foundation,
Augments the causes of our variation)
Means, here, those useless, and vain temp'rall things,
That come and go, with never-staying wings;
And, which (if thereupon our hearts we set)
Make Men and Women, the Vertigo get.
Hereafter, then, let neither Sex accuse
Each other; but, their best endeavors use,
To cure this Malady in one another,
By living well, and lovingly together.
He that enjoyes a patient Mind,
Can Pleasures in Afflictions find.

GAUDET PATIENTIA DURIS.


ILLVSTR. XXIV. Book. 4
WHat means this Countrey-peasant, skipping here
Through prickling Thistles with such gamesom cheer?
And, plucking off their tops, as though for Posies,
He gathered Violets, or toothlesse Roses?
What means it, but only to express
How great a joy, well-grounded Patientnesse
Retains in Suff^rings? and, what sport she makes,
When she her Journey through Affliction takes?
I, often have said (and, have as often, been thought*
To speak a Paradox, that savours naught
Of likely truth) that, some Afflictions bring
A Honey bag, which cures every Sting
(That wounds the Flesh) by giving to the Mind,
A pleasing taste of Sweetnesses refined.
Nor can it other be, except in those,
Whose Better part, quite stupifyed grows,
By being Cauterized in the Fires
Of childish Fears, or temporal Desires.
For, as the Valiant (when the Coward swounds)
With gladness lets the Surgion search his Wounds;
And, though they smart, yet cheerfully indures
The Pla^sters, and, the Probe, in hope of Cures:
So, Men, assured that Afflictions pain
Comes not for vengeance to them, nor in vain;
But, to prepare, and fit them for the place,
To which, they willingly direct their pace;
In Troubles, are so far from being sad,
That, of their Suffering, they are truly glad.
What ever others think, I thus believe;
And, therefore, joy, when they suppose I grieve.
All is not Gold, which makes a show:
But, what the Touchstone finds so.

SIC SPECTANDA FIDES.


ILLVSTR. XXV. Book. 4
WHen Silver Medalls, or some coins of Gold,
Are by the Goldsmiths either bought or sold,
He does not only search them with his Eye,
But, by the Scale, their weight will also try;
Or, by the Touchstone, or the Test, assay
The trueness of them, and their just Alay.
Now, by their wariness, who thus proceed,
We fairly are admonished, to heed
The faithfulness of him we make our Friend;
And, on whose love we purpose to depend:
Or else, when we a Jewel think to get,
We may be cheated by a Counterfeit.
All is not Gold that glisters: Otherwhile,
The Tincture is so good, it may beguile
The cunningst eye: But, bring it to the Touch,
And, then, you find the value not so much.
Some, keep the Tincture, brooking, likewise, well
An ordinary Touch; but, yield a Smell,
Which will discover it, if you apply
Unto your Nose, that piece of Chymistrie.
Sometime, when there is enough to give content,
In Color, in the Touch, and in the Scent;
The Bulk, is more than answers Gold in weight,
And, proves it a sophistical deceit.
Nay. some, is fully that which you desire,
In all these Properties; and, till the fire
Has made assayes, you will think you might be bold
To pawn your life, it had been Ophir-gold:
But, to be false, the Metall's then descride;
And, such are many Friends, when they are tried.
Apollo shoots not every day,
But, sometime on his Harp does play.

NON SEMPER ARCUM TENDIT.


ILLVSTR. XXVI. Book. 4
THere are a sort of people so severe,
That, foolish, and injurious too, they are;
And, if the world were to be ruled by these,
Nor Soul, not Body, ever should have ease.
The Six days, (as their wisdoms understand)
Are to be spent in Labor, by command,
With such a strictness, that they quite condemn
All Recreations which are used in them.
That, which is called the Sabbath, they confine
To Prayers, and all Offices-divine,
So wholly, that a little Recreation,
That Day, is made a mark of Reprobation:
And, (by this means) the reason is to seek,
When their poor Servants labor all the week,
(Of which, they will bate them nothing) how it ties
Them, to observe the sixe-fold Sacrifice
By some enjoined; and gives them such due Rest,
As God allowed, both to Man and Beast.
He, gave the Woods, the Fields, and Meddowes, here,
A time to rest, as well as times to bear.
The Forest Boasts, and Herds, have hours for play,
As well as time to graze, and hunt their prey:
And, every Bird some leisure has to sing,
Or, in the Air, to sport it on her wing.
And, sure, to him, for whom all these were made,
Less kindness was not meant, then these have had.
The Flesh will faint, if pleasure none it knows;
The Man grows madd, that always muzing goes.
The Wisest men, will sometimes merry be:
And, this is that, this Emblem teaches me.
Live, over mindful of thy dying;
For, Time is always from thee flying.

VIVE MEMOR LETHI FUGIT HORA.


ILLVSTR. XXVII. Book. 4
THis vulgar Figure of a winged glass,
Does signify, how swiftly Time does pass.
By that lean Scull, which to this houre-glasse clings,
We are informed what effect it brings;
And, by the Words about it, we are taught
To keep our lattter ending still in thought.
The common houre-glasse, of the Life of Man,
Exceeds not the largeness of a span.
The Sand-like Minutes, fly away so fast,
That, years are out, e're we think months are past:
Yea, many times, our nat'rall-day is gone,
Before we looked for twelve a clock at Noone;
And, where we sought for Bea^tie, at the Full,
We find the Flesh quite rotted from the Skull.
Let these Expressions of Times passage, be
Remembrancers for ever, Lord, to me;
That, I may still be guiltless of their crime,
Who fruitlesly consume their precious Time:
And, mind my Death, not with a slavish fear,
But, with a thankful use, of lifetime, here:
Not grieving, that my days away do post;
But, caring rather, that they be not lost,
And, laboring with Discretion, how I may
Redeem the Time, that is vainly slipped away.
So, when that moment comes, which others dread,
I, undismayed, shall climb my dying bed;
With joyful Hopes, my Flesh to dust commend;
In Spirit, with a steadfast Faith ascend;
And, whilst I living (...), to sin so dye,
That dying, I may live eternally.
In every Storm, he stands fast,
Whose dwelling, on the Rock is placed.

MEDIIS TRANQUILLUS IN UNDIS.


ILLVSTR. XXVIII. Book. 4
WHat thing soever some will have expressed,
As typified by this Halcyons-nest,
I shall not think this Emblem ill-appli'd,
If, by the same, the Church be signified.
For, as it is (by some) affirmed of these,
That, whilst they breed, the fury of the seas
Is through the world alayd; and, that their Brood
Remains in safety, then, amidst the flood:
So, when the Christian Church was in her birth,
There was a general Peace throughout the earth;
And, those tumultuous Waves, which after that
Began to rise, and be enraged thereat,
Were calmed so, that He was borne in peace,
From whom, the faithful Offspring did increase.
They, likewise, on a Rock, their dwellings have,
As here you see; and, though the raging Wave,
Of dreadful Seas, has beaten, ever since,
Against the Fortress of their strong defense,
Yet, still stands; and, safe, it shall abide,
Even in the midst of all their foming pride.
Upon this Rock so place me, oh my God!
That, whatsoever Tempests be abroad,
I may not fear the fury of my Foe;
Nor be in danger of an overthrow.
My life is full of Storms; the Waters roll,
As if they meant to swallow up my soul.
The Tides oppose; the furious winds do roar;
My Cable's weak, my tacklings, Lord are poor,
And, my frail, vessel cannot long endure;
Yet, reach to me thy hand, and I Am secure.
That Is Friendship, and true-love, indeed,
Which firm abides, in time of need.

BONA FIDE.


ILLVSTR. XXIX. Book. 4
That Is Love in earnest, which is constant found,
When Friends are in Affliction, or in Bands;
And, their Affection merits to be crowned,
Whose hearts are fastened where they join their hands.
It Is easy to be friendly, where we see
A Complement or two will serve the turn;
Or, where the kindness may requited be;
Or, when the charge is with a trifle borne.
It is as easy too, for him to spend
At once, the full Revenues of a year,
In Cares, for entertainment of his Friend,
Who thinks his glory, is expensive-cheere:
For, it is his pleasure; and, if none should come
Like fashionable-Friends, for him to court,
He would with Rogues, and Canters, fill the Room,
Or, such as should abuse, and flout him for it.
But, hard it is, to suffer, or to spend
For him (though worthy) that is of mean estate,
Unlikely our occasions to befriend,
Or, one unable to remunerate.
Few men are liberal, whom neither Lust,
Vain glory, Prodigality, nor Pride,
Does forward into foolish Bounty thrust;
As may, by Observation be espide.
For, when a slender Bounty would relieve
Their virtuous Friend, whose wants to them are known,
To their Buffoone, a Knights estate they will give,
And, think on the other trifles ill-bestowne.
Yet, this I Will say; and, give the Devil his due;
These Friends, are to their lusts, and humors, true.
The Sword has place, will War does cease
And, useful (...), in time of Peace.

PACISQUE BONUS BELLIQUE MINISTER.


ILLVSTR. XXX. Book. 4
THe Sword, to be an Emblem, here, we draw,
Of the Authority, which keeps in awe
Our Countries Enemies; and, those that are
The Foes of Peace, as well as those of War;
That, Peace may give the Law of Arms her due,
And, War, to Civill-pow'rs, respect may show.
For, Kingdoms, nor in War not Peace, can stand,
Except the Sword have always some command:
Yea, that, for which our foreign Spoyl^rs come,
Domesticke Foes, will else devour at home;
And, stranger-drones the peaceful Bees will harm,
Unless with warlike stings, themselves they arm.
Considering this, let none be so unwise,
The Swords well used protection to despise:
Or, think the practice of this double-guard,
In any place, or age, may well be spared.
Let not the Sword-man slight the powerful Gown;
Nor Gowne-men cast the Sword out of their Town,
Because it terrifies, or draws Blood;
For, otherwhile Phlebotomy is good:
And, thought to kill a Lowse, the Ban^ans fear;
(Though Anabaptist^ love no Sword to wear)
Yet, being drawn, to fright, or cut off Sin,
It may be brandished by a Cherubin.
However, from the Sword divide not you
(In any case) the peaceful olive bough:
That is, let Peace, at all times, be that End,
For which, to draw the Sword you do intend;
And, for well-doing, be as ready, still,
To give rewards, as blows, for doing-ill.
A Fortune is ordained for thee,
According as thy Labors he.

PAR SIT FORTUNA LABORI.


ILLVSTR. XXXI. Book. 4
THe Spade, for Labor stands. The Ball with wings,
Intends flitting rowling-wordly-things.
This Altar-stone, may serve in setting forth,
Things firmer, sollid, and of greater worth:
In which, and by the words enclosing these
You, the^e, may read, your Fortune, if you please.
If you, your Labor, on those things bestow,
Which roll, and flutter, always, to and fro;
It cannot be, but, that which you obtain,
Must prove a wavering, and unconstant gain:
For, he that sows Vanity, shall find,
At reaping-time, no better fruit then Wind,
Your hours, in serious matters, if you spend,
Or, such, as to a lasting purpose tend,
The purchase of your pains will ever last;
And, being you Pleasure, when the Labor's past.
Yea, though in tears, your Seed-time you employ,
Your Harvest shall be fetched home, with joy.
If much be wrought, much profit will ensue;
If little, but a little meede is due.
Of nothing, nothing comes: On evil deeds
An evil conscience, and, ill fame succeedes:
An honest-life, still finds prepared for it
Sweet Hopes in Death; and, after, good-report.
Of Sex, or of Degree, there is no regard:
But, as the Labor, such is the reward.
To worke-aright, oh Lord, instruct thou me;
And, grouud my Works, and buildings all on thee:
That by the fiery Test, when they are tried,
My Work may stand, and I may safe abide.
Let none in troublous times repine;
For, after Storms, the Sun will shine.

POST NUBILA PHOEBUS.


ILLVSTR. XXXII. Book. 4
DIscourage not your selves, although you see
The weather black, and storms prolonged be.
What though it fiercely raines, and thunders loud?
Behold, there is a Rainbow in the Cloud,
Wherein, a trustfull promise may be found,
That, quite, your little-worlds, shall not be drowned.
The Sunshine, through the foggy mists appear,
The lowering Sky, begins again to clear;
And, though the Tempest, yet your eyes affright,
Fair weather may befall you, long ere night.
Such comfort speaks our Emblem, unto those,
Whom stormy Persecution does enclose;
And, comforts him, that is for the present sad,
With hopes, that better seasons may be had.
There is nor trouble, sorrow, nor distress,
But mitigation has, or some release.
Long use, or time, the storm away will turn,
Else, Patience makes it better to be borne.
Yea, sorrows lowering days, will come and go,
As well as prosperous hours of Sunshine do;
And, when' it is past, the pain that went before,
Will make the following pleasure seem the more.
For, he, has promised, whom we may believe,
His blessing, unto those that mourn and grieve;
And, that, though sorrow much dejects their head,
In every need, we shall be comforted.
This promise I believe; in every grief,
Perform it, Lord, and help my unbelief:
So, others viewing how thou cheerest me,
Shall, in all sorrows, put their trust in thee.
For whatsoever, Man does strive,
The Conquest, God alone, does give.

OMNIS VICTORIA A DOMINO.


ILLVSTR. XXXIII. Book. 4
WHen on the Sword, the Olive Branch attends,
(That is, when bloody Wars, have peaceful Ends)
And, whenever Victories are gained;
This Emblem shows, by whom they are obtained:
For, that all Victory, does only from
The powerful hand of God-Almightie, come,
The Boughs of Bays and Olives, do declare,
Which round the Tetragrammatan appear.
Nor must we think, that God bestows, alone,
The Victories of War, on any one;
But, that, when we contend in other things,
From him, the event that is wished for, also springs.
This being so, how dare we, by the Laws,
Or, by the Sword, pursue a wicked Cause?
How dare we bring a matter that is unjust,
Where he (though few perceive him) judge it must?
Or, prosecute with fury, or despite,
Against the person of his Favorite?
What Fools are they, who seek the Conquest, by
Oppression, Fraud, or hellish Perjurie?
How mad are those, who to the Wars prepare,
For nothing, but to spoil and murder there?
Who, nor engaged by Faith to their Alies,
Nor urged by any private injuries,
(Nor sent, nor tolerated, by their Prince,
Nor caring whether side has given offense)
Run rambling through the World, to kill and slay,
Like needy Butchers, for two groats a day?
These men may side, where Conquests, God bestows;
Yet, when the Field is won, these men do lose.
Since overmuch, will over-fill,
Power out enough; but do not spill.

NE QUID NIMIS.


ILLVSTR. XXXIV. Book. 4
IT is this Emblems meaning, to advance
The love and practice, of true Temperance.
For, by this Figure (which does seem to fill,
Until the liquor overflow, and spill)
We are, as by example, taught to see
How fruitless our Intemperancies be:
Thus by the Rule of Contrarieties,
Some Virtues, best are shown to vulgar eyes.
To see nastie Drunkard, reele and spew,
More moves to Soberness, than can the view
Of tweatie civil men; and, to behold
One Prodigal, (that goodly lands has sold)
Stand torn and louzie, begging at the door,
Would make Intemperance abhorred more,
(And, manly Soberness, much better, each)
Than all that six Philosophers can preach:
So, by the Vessels overflowing, here,
True Moderation does more praised appear,
Than by the mean it self: And, without sin,
That Is pictured, which to do, had wicked bin,
For, though to virtuous ends; we do deny
The Doing-ill, that Good may come thereby.
From hence, let us be taught, that careful heed,
Whereby we should both Mind and Body, feed.
Let us, of our own selves, observe the size;
How much we want, how little will suffize;
And, our own longings, rather leave unfill'd,
Than suffer any portion to be spilled:
For, what we mar, shall to account be laid,
And, what we wisely spend, shall be repayd.
They pass through many storms, and streights,
Who rise to any glorious heights.

PER ANGUSTA AD AUGUSTA.


ILLVSTR. XXXV. Book. 4
THis Tree, which here does largely seem to grow,
(And spreads above, though straightened in below)
Through adverse Winds, and many a Winters blast,
Has gained a fair proportion at the last;
And, from a lowly shrub, is grown to be
A well-esteemed, and a goodly Tree.
Thus, has it chanced unto many a man:
And, he that first in misery began,
(So poor and mean, that very few or none
Have judged him to be worth the looking on)
Even he, through scorns, through wrongs, and poverty,
Has crept, and screwed, and raised himself so high,
That, he has placed been among the prime,
Of those, who seemed the Worthies of the time;
Yea, overtopt and awed, the best of those,
Who sought to curb him, when he first arose.
This, I have seen; And, as we seldom find
A Tree grow fair, that cannot brook the Wind,
Or, must be housed at Winter; or, on whom
The Gardners pruning-knife, did never come:
So, I have rarely known those men to rise
To any good, or noble qualities,
Who feel not, first some hardship, or some storm,
To prune, to discipline, and to reform
Their wits and manners. For, prosperity,
Ease, plenty, and too large a liberty,
Does often blast them, and, sometime bereave them,
Of what their Predecessors worth's, did leave them.
Let, therefore, no man, fear when this he knows.
Although in tempests, and through streights he goes.
God, ever will be present, there,
Where, of one Faith, and Mind they are.

FIDUCIA CONCORS.


ILLVSTR. XXXVI. Book. 4
A Fixed Palm, (whose Fingers do appear,
As if displayed, and advanced they were)
Intended by our Author, here, we see,
To sha^dow out agreeing-Minds, that be
Established in one Trust. And, well it may,
That Virtue, of the holy Church display.
For, as our hands, the better means can make,
To gain, as well as to retain, or take,
The benefits we seek; when we intend,
Our differing Fingers, all, to work one end:
So, when the Church of Christ (wherein we find
A diffrence of Degrees) shall with one mind,
Pursue a faithful hope; they will soon obtain,
That wished benefit, they seek to gain:
For, when but two or three shall in Gods name,
Req^est a blessing, he will grant the same.
Let all thy several Churches, LORD (that stand
Like many Fingers, members of one Hand)
Thy Will Essential with joint love obey,
Though circumstantially, they differ may.
Some have the larger Circuit, some are stronger,
Some are of short continuance, some of longer;
But, though their Gifts may differ, yet provide,
That, still, on one Foundation, they may bide;
And, that, all those, who in one Faith agree,
May, in one Band of Love, united be:
Till our confined Wisdom comes to know,
That, many things, for which we wrangle so,
Would further that, whose hindrance we do fear,
If more our Faith, and l^sse our Discord were.
Protect me, if I worthy be;
If I demerit, punish me.

PRO ME SI MEREOR IN ME.


ILLVSTR. XXXVII. Book. 4
THis Emblem, forth unto your view has set,
A Sword, together with a Coronet;
To show the prudent Reader, what Reward
For ill, and for well doing is prepared;
That they, who heretofore, amisle have done,
May learn, their threatened punishments to shun:
That they, whose Actions warrantable were,
May, in their honest Courses, persevere:
And, that those men, who great and powerful be,
Should punish and reward, as cause they see.
Men are of differing tempers: Some, are won
By promises, and gentle means alone:
Some, moved are by shame; and, some through dread,
To be in purse, or body punished.
And, some, their duties are allured to do,
No way, but by a mixture of these two.
They, therefore, neither Wise, nor Honest be,
Who dandle all Offenders on their knee;
Or, punish only with a God-forbid;
Or, Do not so, my sons, as Ely did.
Nor wiser ought, are they, nor honester,
Who always fright, and threaten those that err;
No mercy joining, to the chastisement
Of them, whose faults are worthy to be shent.
Nor are they less to blame, who carry Swords,
To punish errors; but, nor looks, nor words,
To cherish well deservings: And, in this,
Most men, that punish others, do amiss.
Sure, if the Sword misdoing, may pursue,
For doing-well, the Coronet is due.
The Tongue, which every secret speaks,
Is like a Barrel full of leakes.

HAC ATQUE ILLAC PERFLUIT.


ILLVSTR. XXXVIII. Book. 4
THe Barrel, from whose bottom, sides, and b^ng,
The liquor (as in this our Emblem) flows,
May fitly typifie the babbling Tongue,
Of him that utters every thing he knows.
For, such as are their taskes, who strive to fill
An ever-leaking Vessel, to the brim;
Even such are his, who labors to still
A tatlers tougue; for, pains are lost on him.
This Figure, also, serves to express,
The trustlesse nature of a whorish woman;
For, she to all displayes her wantonness,
And, cares to keep her secresies, from no man.
Within her bosom, nothing long she keeps,
But, whatsoever she conceives or knows,
Straight, from the heart, up to her tongue, it creeps;
And, round about the City, then, it goes.
Be warned therefore, and commit thou not
Thy person, state, or fame, to such as these;
Lest, they thy Reputation do bespot,
Consume thy Substance, or thy Mind disease.
But, most of all, be wary, lest the crime,
Which here we do reproove, thy mind infect:
For, Vice, like weeds, will grow in little time,
And, out-grow Virtues, if we them neglect.
The surest way to keep such errors out,
And, in our selves true Virtues to maintain;
Is, to be hoopt with Temperance, round about,
And, our out-flowing humors to restrain.
If thus we practice, 'twill prevent the wrongs
Of our own errors, and of others tongues.
How ever thou the Viper take*
A dangerous hazard thou do make.

UT CUNQUE.


ILLVSTR. XXXIX. Book. 4
THis Figure warnes us, that we meddle not
With matters, whereby nothing may be got,
Save harm or loss; and, such as once begun,
We may, nor safely do, nor leave undone.
I should be loath to meddle in the strife
Arising 'twixt a Husband, and his Wife;
For, Truth concealed, or spoke, on either side,
May one or the other grieve, or both divide.
I would not with my most familiar Mate,
Be Partner in the whole of my estate;
Lest I, by others errors, might offend,
Or, wrong my Family, or, lose my Friend.
I would not, willingly, in my distress,
From an unworthy hand, receive redress;
Nor, when I need a Surety, would I call
An Unthrift, or a roaring Prodigal:
For, either these I thanklesly must shun,
Or, humor them, and be perhaps undone.
I would not hear my Friend unwisely prate
Those things, of which I must inform the State:
And, seem unfriendly; or, else leave to do,
That, which a stronger Band obliges to.
Nor would I, for the world, my heart should be
Enthrald by one, that might not marry me;
Or, such like passions, be perplexed in,
As hang betwixt a Virtue, and a Stone;
Or, such, as whether way soever I went,
Occasioned guilt, or shame, or discontent:
For, howsoever we manage such like things,
We handle winding Vipers, that have stings.
The gaining of a rich Estate,
Seems, many times, restrained by Fate.

FATA OBSTANT.


ILLVSTR. XL. Book. 4
OBserve this Wheel, and you shall see how Fate
Does limit out to each man, that Estate
Which he obtaines; Then, how he does aspire
To such a height; and, why he mounts no higher:
For, whatsoere their Authors understood,
These Emblems, now, shall speak as I think good.
The Cornucopias fastened to a Round,
Thus fixed, may show, that Riches have their bound;
And, can be raised, by man's power or wits,
No higher than Gods Providence permits.
The placing of them on that Wheel, does show,
That, some wax Poor, as others Wealthy grow:
For, look how much the higher, one does rise,
So much the lower, still, the other lies;
And, when the height of one is at an end,
He sinkes again, that others may ascend.
The many stops, which on this Wheel you spy,
Those many obstacles may typisie,
Which bar all those that unto Wealth aspire,
From compassing the Round of their desire.
The want of Wit, from Riches, barreth some;
Some, cannot rich, because of Sloth, become.
Some, that are wise, and painful, are denied
Increase of wealth, through Pleasure, or through Pride.
Some, lose much profit, which they else might make,
Because of Conscience, or for Credit sake.
If none of these did hinder, we have store,
That might be Rich, who, yet, are very Poor.
And, these, indeed, do come to be those Fates,
Which keep most men, from getting large Estates.
In all thine Actions, have, a care,
That no unseemlinesse appear.

VT NE QUID DEDECEAT.


ILLVSTR. XLI. Book. 4
THe Virgin, or the Wife, that much desires,
To please her Lovers, or her, Husband's Eyes,
In all her costl'est Robes, her self attires;
And, seeks the coml'est Dress, she can devise.
Then, to her trusty Looking-glass, she goes,
(Where, often, she her person turns and winds)
To view, how seemly her attiring shows;
Or, whether ought amiss therein she finds.
Which praisefull Diligence, is figured thus
In this our Emblem; that, it may be made
A documentall sign, remembering us,
What care of all our Actions, must be had.
For, he that in God's presence would appear
An acceptable Soul; or, gracious grow
With men, that of approved conditions are,
Must by some faithful Glass, be trimmed so.
The good Examples of those pious men,
Who lived in elder times, may much avail:
Yea, and by others evils, now and then,
Men see how grossly, they themselves, do fail.
A wise Companion, and, a loving Friend,
Stands nearer, than those ancient glasses do;
And, serves well to such an useful end:
For* he may be thy Glass, and Fountain too.
His good Example, shows thee what is fit;
His Admonition, checks what is awry;
He, by his Good-advise, reformeth it;
And, by his Love, thou mend'st it pleasedly.
But, if thou do desire the perfect'st Glass,
Join to the Morall-Law, the Law of Grace.
We, bring the Honey to the Hive;
But, others, by our labors thrive.

NON NOBIS.


ILLVSTR. XLII. Book. 4
THe pretty Bees, with daily pains contrive
Their curious Combs, and from the flowery Fields,
Do bring that pleasant sweetnes^e to their Hive,
Which Nectar, and Ambrosiack dainties, yields,
Yet, when themselves with labors they have tired,
The following Winters famine to prevent,
For their good service, either they are fired,
Or, forth into an empty Hive are sent:
And, there, with slender diet they are served,
To leave another Summers work, to those
Who take no care, though all the swarm be starved,
If weak and quite past labor once it grows.
As with such Bees, it fares with many a one,
That, spends his youthful time in honest thrift;
And, by the Waspe, the Hornet, or the Drone,
Of all their labors, they are soon bereft.
Sometime, the bordring Flies, much wrong this brood,
Through idle visitings; or, them despoyle,
By making friendly shows of neighborhood;
When, all their Complements, are naught but guile.
Sometime, their powerful Foes do rob them quite;
Sometime, their Lords, or Landlords, with pretense,
Of claiming only what is just and right,
Oppress them without mercy, or defense.
Thus, by one course or other, daily, some
(That are laborious in an honest way)
The prey of Pride, or Idleness become:
And, such as these, may therefore truly say,
That, whatsoever they to pass have brought,
Not for themselves, but others, they have wrought.
God, by their Names, the Stars does call;
And, he is Ruler of them all.

ASTRA DEUS REGIT.


ILLVSTR. XLIII. Book. 4
SOme say, and many men do these commend)
That, all our deeds, and Fortunes do depend
Upon the motions of celestial Sphere^;
And, on the constellations of the Stars.
If this were true, the Stars, alone, have bin
Prime cause of all that is good, and of all sin.
And, 'twere (me thinks) injustice to condemn,
Or, give rewards to any, but to them.
For, if they made me sin, why for that ill,
Should I be damned, and they shine brightly, still?
If they enforced my goodness, why should I
Be glorified for their Piety?
And, if they neither good nor ill constrain,
Why then, should we of Destiny complain?
For, if it be (as it is) absurd to say,
The stars enforce us (since they still obey
Their just Commander) 'twere absurder, far,
To say, or think, that God's Decree it were,
Which did necessitate the very same,
For which, we think the stars might merit blame.
He made the stars to be an aid unto us,
Not (as is fondly dreamed) to help undo us:
(Much less, without our fault, to ruinate,
By doom of irrecoverable Fate)
And, if our good Endeavors, use we will,
Those glorious creatures will be helpful still
In all our honest ways: For, they do stand
To help, not hinder us, in God's command;
And, he not only rules them by his powers,
But, makes their Glory, servant unto ours.
Who, Patience tempts, beyond her strength,
Will make it Fury, at the length.

FUROR FIT LAESA SAEPIUS PATIENTIA.


ILLVSTR. XLIIII. Book. 4
ALthough we know not a more patient creature,
Than is the Lamb, (or, of less harmfull nature)
Yet, as this Emblem shows, when childish wrong,
Has troubled, and provoked him overlong,
He grows enraged; and makes the wanton Boys,
Be glad to leave their sports, and run their ways.
Thus have I seen it with some Children fare,
Who, when their Parents too indulgent were,
Have urged them, till their Doting grew to Rage,
And, sh^t them wholly from their Heritage.
Thus, many times, a foolish man does lose
His faithful Friends, and justly makes them foes.
Thus, froward Husbands; and, thus, peevish Wives,
Do fool away the comfort of their lives;
And, by abusing of a patient-Mate,
Turn dearest Love, into the deadliest Hate:
For any wrong may better be excused,
Than, Kindness, long and wilfully abused.
Put, as an injured Lamb, provoked, thus,
Well typisies how much it moves us,
To find our Patience wronged: So, let us make
An Emblem of our selves, thereby to take
More heed, how God is moved toward them,
That, his long suffering, and his Love contemn.
For, as we somewhat have of every Creature,
So, we in us, have somewhat of his Nature:
Or, if it be not said the same to be,
His Pictures, and his Images are we.
Let, therefore, his long-suffring, well be weighed,
And, keep us, to provoke him, still afraid.
He that is blind, will nothing see,
What light soever about him be.

COECUS NIL LUCE IUVATUR.


ILLVSTR. XLV. Book. 4
IT is by some supposed, that our Owls,
By Daytime, are no perfect sighted Fowls;
And, that, the more you do augment the light,
The more you shall deprive them of their sight.
Nor Candles, Torches, nor the Sun at noone,
Nor Spectacles, nor all of these in one
Can make an Owlet in the daytime see,
Though none, by night, has better eyes than she.
This Emblem, therefore, sets their blindness forth,
Who cannot see, when an apparent worth
Illustrates virtuous Men; yet, seem to spy
Those faults, where with ill-willers them belie.
The blind^esse, also, well it may declare,
Of Heretics, who Eagle sighted are,
In Sophistries, and in the cloudie night,
Of those dark Errors, which delude the sight;
Yet, cannot see the Rays of Truth divine,
Though, brighter than the Day light, she does shine.
It, likewise, very fitly typifies,
Those, in our days, who spy out mysteries,
Beyond the Moon; yet, cannot gain the view
Of that, which common Reason proves true:
And, therefore, only, cry it (madly) down,
Because, by Reasons light, it may be known.
These, when 'twas offered, first, the light refused;
And, they have now the darkness which they chused.
Till, therefore, God shall offer Grace again,
Man strives to set up Lights, to these, in vain:
For, what are Lights to those who blinded be?
Or, who so blind, as they that will not see?
None knows, until the Fight be past,
Who shall be Victor, at the last.

INTER UTRUMQUE VOLAT.


ILLVSTR. XLVI. Book. 4
WHile these two Champions for the Conquest fight,
Betwixt them both Victoria takes her flight,
On doubtful wings; and, till the fray be past,
None knows* to whether, she the Wreath will cast.
Which Emblem serves, not only, to express
The danger, and the issues doubtfulnesse,
In all Contentions; but, may warn us too,
That, we no strivings rashly undergo;
Since they, who long with painful skill have strived
Of likely Conquests, are at length deprived.
Force, much prevails; but Slight and Wit has pow'^.
Sometime, to hurl down Strength upon the floor.
Sometimes again, our Ingineeres do fail;
And, Blows, do more than Stratagems, prevail.
Though, I, upon mine honest-Cause depend,
Another may overthrow it, by his Friend:
And, he that boasts of his Patrons grace,
May lose his hopes, if Bribing come in place.
To say the Truth, in whatsoever Cause,
We by the Sword contend, or by the Laws,
There Is no event or issue more assured,
Than this, that, loss to both shall be procured:
And, that, sometime, as well an innocent,
As guilty-cause, may find an ill event.
Let, therefore, our endeavors be, to strive,
Who, shall hereafter, least occasion give
Of those contentions, and of those debates,
Which hurt our honor, safety, or estates:
That, we, a Conquest, may be sure to gain,
And, none repine, at that which we obtain.
Why should I fear the want of Bread?
If God so please, I shall be fed.

SI DEUS VOLUERIT.


The blessed Psalmist, fitly did express,
By grinning-dogs, which howling roame by night,
To satisfy their grudging appetite.
Here, therefore, by an Emblem, we are shown,
That, God, (who as he lists, bestows his own)
Providing so, that none may be unfed,
Does offer to the Dogs, the Childrens bread.
And, by this Emblem, we advised are,
Of their presumptuous boldness to beware,
Who bound God's Mercy; and, have shut out some
From hope of Grace, before the Night is come:
Since, to the Dogs, his meat is not denide,
If they return, (though not till Evening tide.)
Moreover, we, some notice hence may take,
That, if provision, God, vouchsafes to make,
For Lions, Dogs, and Ravens, in their need,
He will his Lambs, and harmless Turtles feed:
And, so provide, that they shall always have
Sufficient, to maintain the Life he gave.
I must confess, I never merit shall,
The Crummes, which from thy Childrens table fall:
Yet, thou have often, and freely fed me, Lord,
Among thy Children, at thy Holy-board:
Nor have I, there, been filled with Bread alone;
But, on the blessed Body of thy Son,
My Soul has feasted. And, if thou do grant
Such favors, Lord! what can I fear to want?
For, doubtless, if thy Son thou please to give,
All other things with him, I shall receive.
All Flesh, is like the withered Hay,
And, so it strings, and fades away.

OMNIS CARO FOENUM.


ILLVXTR. XLVIII. Book. 4
THis Infant, and this little Trusse of Hay,
When they are moral zed, seem to say,
That, Flesh is but a tust of Morning Grass,
Both green, and withered, ere the daylight pass.
And, such we truly find it; for, behold,
As^oone as Man is borne, he waxes old,
In Griefs, in Sorrows, or Necessities;
And, withers every hour, unti^l he dies:
Now, flourishing, as Grass, when it is grown,
Straight perishing, as Grass, when it is mowne.
If, we with other things, man's Age compare,
His Life is but a Day (For, equaled are
His Years with Hours: His Months, with Minutes be
Fit parallels; and, every breathing, we
May term a Day) yet, some, even at the Night
Of that short Day, are dead, and witherd quite.
Before the Morning of our lives be done,
The Flesh often fades: Sometime, it grows till Noone:
But, there is no mortal Flesh, that will abide
Vnparched longer, than till Evening-tide.
For, in it self, it always carries that,
Which helps so, it self to ^uinate;
That, though it feel, nor storm, not scorching flame,
An inbred Canker, will consume the same.
Considering well, and well remembering this,
Account the Flesh no better than it is:
Wrong not thine everlasting Soul, to cherish
A Gourd, which in a moments time will perish.
Give it the tendance, fit for fading Crops;
But, for Hay harvest, lose not better hopes.
Make use of Time, that is coming on;
For, that is perished, which is gone.

PERIT QUOD ELAPSUM EST.


ILLVSTR. XLIX. Book. 4
THis Glass declares, how Time does, pass away;
And, if the Words, about it, rightly say,
Thy Time that is, gone, is lost: and, proof will show,
That, many find both Words, and Emblem, true.
How f^st their Time departs, they best perceive,
From whom it steals, before they take their leave,
Of what they love; and, whose last hour is gone,
Before their chiefest businesses are done.
How fast it slides, even they are also taught,
(Too late, perhaps) who never kept in thought
Their ending-day; but, always did presume,
Or, largely hope upon the Time to come;
The present-howres, nor thankfully enjoying,
Nor, honestly, nor usefully employing.
That years expired, are lost, they likewise find:
For, when their understanding brings to mind,
How fondly (or, how ill perchance) they spent
Their passed age; they see, with discontent,
The Time, not only lost, but, worse than so;
Lost with a thousand other Losses more:
And, that, when they shall need it, wealth nor power,
Can purchase them, one minute of an hour.
Consider this, all ye that spend the prime,
The nonne-tide, and the twilight of your Time,
In childish play-games, or mere worldly things;
As if you could, at pleasure, clip Times wings,
Or turn his Glass; or, had a Life, or twain
To live, when you had fooled out this in vain.
Short is the present; lost Times-passed be;
And, Time to come, we may not live to see.
The Garland, He alone shall wear,
Who, to the Goal, does persevere.

PERSEVERANTI DABITUR.


ILLVSTR. L. Book. 4
AN Arm is with a Garland here extended;
And, as the Motto says. it is intended,
To all that persevere. This being so;
Let none be faint in heart, though they be slow:
For, he that creepes, until his Race be done,
Shall gain a Wreath, as well as they that run.
This being so; let no man walk in doubt,
As if Gods Arm of Grace were stretched out
To some small number: For, whoever begins
And perseueres, the profer'd Garland winns:
And, God respects no persons; neither lays
A stumbling block in any of our Ways.
This being so, let no man think it enough
To set his hand, a little, to the Plough,
And, then desist; but, let him still pursue,
To do that Work, to which that Wreath is due:
For, nor on Good beginners, nor on those
That, walk halfe-way, (much less on him, that goes
No stepp at all) will God this gift confer;
But, only, unto those that persevere.
LORD, by thy Grace, an entrance I have made
In honest Paths; and, thy assistance had,
To make in them, some slow proceedings too.
Oh grant me, full ability, to do
Thy sacred Will; and, to beginn, and end
Such Works, as to thy glory, still, may tend.
That ( Walking, and continuing in the Path,
Which evermore, thine approbation has)
I may that Garland, by thy grace, obtain,
Which, by mine own desert, I cannot gain.
Glory be to God.
THE FOVRTH LOTTERIE.
1
THou, of a noble mind, art thought,
Which, heavenly things, has chiefly sought.
And, scorn'st thy virtue to debase,
By loving those of lower place.
If so, thine Emblem does express
Thy Wisdom, and thy worthynesse.
But, if to earthward thou incline;
Thence, learn Affections more Divine. See Emb. I.

2
Some words or thoughts, perhaps, of your
Have wronged Gods providence, or Pow're:
Else, you (it may be) to some place,
Confine his unconfined Grace;
Or, think, he never takes care,
Of any Realm, but where you are.
Your Lot, now, therefore, does provide,
To have your Judgment rectifide. See, Emb. II.

3
Thou may be wise, but, there is, yet,
Some crack, or failing in thy wit:
For, thou do personate a part,
That, shows thee other, then thou art.
Thine Emblem, therefore, does declare,
What Habit, such deserve to wear,
And, that, he merits Asses ears,
Who is not, that, which he appears. See, Emb. III.

4
You have, as yet, much work to do,
But, yoo have little time thereto:
That, little, flies away with speed,
And, you the Loss, as little heed.
Lest, therefore, all your time be gone,
Before you duly think thereon,
A memorandum you have got,
By drawing, of this luckie Lot. See, Emb. IV.

5
Though you, perhaps, no peril dread,
A mischief hangs above your head;
By which, you (taking little care)
May perish ere you be aware.
To mind you, therefore, to eschew
Such Miseries as may ensue;
Your Lot, this warning Emblem sent;
Observe it, and your harms prevent. See, Emb. V.

6
Thou fly'st, in hope, to shun thy grief;
Thou changest place, to seek relief;
And, many blameless things are shent
As, causers of thy discontent.
But trouble, now, no more thy mind,
The root of thy disease to find;
For, by thine Emblem, thou shall see,
The Fountain, whence thy torments be. See, Emb. VI.

M 7
Thou art, or else thou were, of late,
Some great, or petty, Magistrate;
Or, Fortune thereunto, perchance,
In time to come, will thee advance.
But, by thine Emblem, thou shall see,
That, when restrein'd, thy power shall be,
Offenders, thereof will be glad,
And skoffe the pow're which thou have had;
Observe it; and be so upright,
That, thou may laugh at their despite. See, Emb. VII.

8
Promotion thou do much desire,
And, spacious Fortunes to acquire;
As, if thou thoughtst, thou might attain,
True Blessedness, by such a gain:
To show thee, therefore, what event,
What happiness, and what content,
Such things, will bring us, at the last,
An useful Object, now, thou have. See, Emb. VIII.

9
Disheartened be not, though thou see,
Thy Hopes, quite frustrate seem to be;
For, many Hopes, appearing past,
Have, been renewed again, at last;
And, grew far greater, then before,
When, they seemed lost, for evermore.
Examples, therefore, now are brought,
That, still, to Hope, thou may be taught. See Emb. IX.

M 10
Most men desire to gain the Fate,
Which keeps them safe, in every state;
And, you, no doubt, would feign provide;
A Station, which might firm abide.
If so you mean; your Let has brought,
Some news of that, which you have sought:
For, by your Emblem, you may see,
What men shall most unmooved be. See, Emb. X.

11
You seem, to wonder, much of late,
That, some go backward in Estate,
Who seem to thrive; and, why, we find,
Those Friends, who seemed very kind,
(And, forward, good respects to show)
Do, now unkind, and froward grow.
But, when your Emblem you shall see,
No wonder, then, such things will be. See, Emb. XI.

12
Thou seekst a Conquest; or, (at least)
Of such a Pow're to be possessed,
As none can conquer; And, bohold,
Thou, in an Emblem, shall be told
The means to get thy hearts desire.
Yet, know, that if thou come no nigher,
Then but to know the means of bliss,
The farther off, the blessing is. See, Emb. XII.

13
Thou liv'st as one who thinks, that, Fate
All Actions did ne^essitate;
And, that to do, or leave undone,
Thy Businesses, came all to one.
If thus thou think, perhaps, this Chance;
May help to cure thine Ignorance;
And, show, when 'twill be, wholly, fit
To Fate, our matters, to commit. See, Emb. XIII.

14
Thy Neighbors house when thou do view,
Welfurnisht, pleasant, large, or new,
Thou think good LARES, always dwell,
In Lodgings that are trimmed so well.
But, by thine Emblem, thou art shown,
That (if thou lov'dst what is thine own)
Thatcht Roofes, as true Contentments yield,
As those, that are with Cedar seeld.
Vain Fancies, therefore, from thee cast;
And, be content with what thou have. See, Emb. XIV

15
Thou seek'st Preferment, as a thing,
Which East, or Westerne-winds might bring;
And, think to gain a temp'rall Crown,
By Powers and Virtues of thine own:
But, now thy Lot informs from whom,
The Scepter, and preferments come;
Seek, thence, thy lawful hopes fruition,
And, cherish not a vain ambition. See, Emb. XV.

16
This Lot, though rich, or poor, thou be,
Presents an Emblem, fit for thee.
If Rich, it warnes not to be proud;
Since, Fortunes favors are allowed
To Swinish-men* If thou be poor,
Deject thou not thy self, the more;
For, many worthymen, there are,
Who, do not Fortunes Jewels wear. See, Emb. XVI.

17
Thou, do not greatly care, by whom
Thy wealth, or thy Preferments, come:
So, thou may get them, Fool or Knave,
Thy prayers, and thy praise may have;
Because thou do nor fear, nor dream,
What disadvantage comes by them:
But, by thine Emblem, thou shall see,
That, Mischieves, in their favors be. See, Emb. XVII.

18
You boast, as if it were, unknown
The power you have were not your own:
But, had you not an able Prop,
You could not bear so high a Top;
And, if that Aid forsake you shall,
Down to the ground, you soon will fall.
Acknowledge this; and, humble grow,
You may be, still, supported so. See Emb. XVIII,

19
This Lot of yours does plainly show,
That, in some danger now you go.
But, wounds by Steel, yet, fear you not;
Nor Pistoling, nor Cannon-shot;
But, rather, dread the shafts that fly,
From some deepe-wounding wantons eye.
Your greatest perils are from thence;
Get, therefore, Armor of defense. See Emb. XIX.

20
Thy Virtues, often, have been tried,
To find what proofs they will abide:
Yet, think not all thy Trialls past,
Till thou on every side art cast;
Nor, fear thou, what may chance to thee,
If truly, square, thy dealings be:
For, then, what ever does befall,
Nor harm, nor shame, betide thee shall. See, Emb. XX.

21
Fine Clothes, fair Words, entising Face,
With Maskes of Piety and Grace,
Often, cheat you, with an outward show,
Of that, which prooveth nothing so.
Therefore, your Emblems Moral read;
And, ere too far you do proceed,
Think, whom you deal withal to day,
Who, by fair shows, deceive you may. See, Emb. XXI.

22
You, are accused of no man, here,
As, if to any, false, you were
In word, or Deed; and, wish, we do,
Your Conscience may acquit you too,
But, if your self you guilty find,
(As, unto such a fault inclined)
The crime, already past, repent;
And, what is yet undone, prevent. See, Emb. XXII.

M 23
You have delighted much, of late,
Against Women's fickleness, to prate;
As if this frailety you did find,
Entailed, alone, on Womankind:
But, in your self, there is now and then,
Great proofs, of wavering minds, in men:
Then, jugde not faults which are unknown;
But, rather learn to mend your own. See, Emb. XXIII.

24
At you Afflictions, you repine,
And, in all troubles, cry, and whine;
As if, to suffer, brought no Joy;
But, quite, did all contents destroy.
That, you might, therefore, patient grow,
And, learn, that Virtues pow're, to know,
This Lot, unto your view, is brought:
Peruse, and practice what is taught. See, Emb. XXIV.

25
On out side Friends, thou much relist,
And, trustest, often, before thou try'st;
By which, if Cousnage thou escape,
Thy Wit we praise not, but thy Hap:
But lest by trust, (e're trial due)
Thou, overlate, thy Trusting sue;
Observe the Moral of thy Lot,
And, look that thou forget it not. See, Emb. XXV.

26
By this your Lot, it should appear,
That, you your self are too severe;
Or, have, by some, persuaded bin,
That, every Pleasure is a sin.
That, wiser therefore, you may grow,
You have an Emblem, now, to show,
That, He, whose wisdom all men praise,
Sometime, lays down his Bow, and plays. See, Emb. XXVI.

27
Thou little heedst how Time is lost,
Or, how thine Hours away do post;
Nor art thou mindful of the day,
In which thy life, will breath away.
To thee this Lot, now therefore, came,
To make thee heedfull of the same.
So, of thy Duty, let it mind thee,
That, thou may live, when Death shall find (thee. See, Emb. XXVII.

28
A safe-abiding, would thou know,
When Seas do rage, and winds do blow?
If so; thine Emblem shows, thee, where
Such Privileges gained are.
Observe it well; then, do thy best,
To be a Yongling, in that nest
There Moraliz'd: and, mock thou not
At what is taught thee, by this Lot. See, Emb. XXVIII.

29
Believe not, always, as thy Creed,
That, Love-profest, is Love-indeed;
But, their Affections entertain,
Who in thy need, firm Friends remain.
Perhaps, it much may thee concern,
This Lesson, perfectly, to learn.
Thine Emblems moral, therefore view,
And, get true Ertends, by being true. See, Emb. XXIX.

30
The Consciences, of some, afford
No Lawful use unto the Sword:
Some dream, that, in the time of peace,
The practice of all Arms may cease;
And, you, perhaps, among the rest,
With such like fancies are possessed.
However, what your Moral says
Observe; and, walk in blameless ways. See, Emb. XXX.

31
A better Fortune you might gain,
If you, could take a little pain:
If you have Wealth, you should have more,
And, should be Rich, (though you are poor)
If to the longings you have had,
A true endeavor you would add:
For, by your Emblem, you may see,
Such, as your Pains, your Gains will be, See, Emb. XXXI.

32
When any troublous Time appears,
Your Hope is overcome, with fears,
As, if with every Flood of Rain.
The World would quite be drowned again,
But, by your Emblem, you shall see,
That, Sunshine, after Storms may be:
And, you this Lot, (it may be) drew,
In times of need, to comfort you. See, Emb. XXXII.

33
When, you to ought, pretend a right,
You think to win it by your might.
Yea, by your strength, your purse or friends,
You boast to gain your wished Ends.
But, such Presumptions to prevent
You to an Emblem now are sent
That, shows, by whom he Victor grows,
That winnes, by giving overthrowes. See, Emb. XXXIII.

34
If, truly temperate, thou be,
Why should this Lot, be drawn by thee?
Perhaps, thou either do exceed,
In costly Robes; or drink, or feed,
Beyond the mean. If, this thou find,
Or, know, in any other kind,
How thou offendest by excess,
Now, leave off, that intemp'ratnesse. See Emb. XXXIV

35
Thou hop'st, to climb, to honored heights,
Yet, would not pass through storms or streights;
But, shun'st them so, as if there were
No way to bliss, where troubles are.
Lest, then, thou lose thy hop'd-for praise,
By, seeking wide, and easy ways;
See what thine Emblem does disclose.
And, fear not every wind that blows. See, Emb. XXXV.

36
Sometimes, it may be, thou do find,
That, God, thy p^ayers, does not mind,
Nor, heed, of those Petitions take,
Which, men and Congregations make.
Now, why they take so ill effect,
Thou, by our Moral, may collect:
And, by the same, shall also see,
When, all thy suits will granted be. See, Emb. XXXVI.

37
Thou, have been very forward, still,
To punish those, that merit ill;
But, thou did never, yet, regard
To give Desert, her due Reward.
That, therefore, thou may now have care,
Of such Injustice, to beware,
Thine Emblem, does to thee present,
As well Reward, as punishment. See, Emb. XXXVII.

38
Thou, either have a babbling tongue,
Which, cannot keep a secret, long;
Or, shall, perhaps, endangered grow,
By such, as utter all they know.
In one, or other, of the twain,
Thou may be harmed; and, to thy gain,
It may redound, when thou shall see,
What, now, thine Emblem, counsels thee. See, Emb. XXXVIII.

39
By this, thy Lot, we understand,
That, somewhat, thou have took in hand,
Which, (whether, further, thou Proceed
Or quite desist) will danger breed.
Consider, then, what thou have done,
And, since the hazard is begun,
Advised be to take the Course,
Which may not make the danger worse. See, Emb. XXXIX

40
The Destinies, thou blamest, much,
Because, thou can not be so rich,
As others are: But blame no more
The Destinies, as heretofore;
For, if it please thee to behold,
What, by thine Emblem, shall be told,
Thou, there, shall find, which be those Fates,
That, keep men low, in their estates. See, Emb. XL.

41
Thou think, that thou from faults art free;
And, here, unblamed thou shall be.
But, if to all men, thou will seem
As fair, as in thine own esteem,
Presume thou not abroad to pass,
Until, by every Looking-glass,
Which, in thy Moral, is expressed,
Thou have, both Mind, and Body dressed. See Emb. XLI.

42
Some, labor hardly, all their days,
In painefull-profitable ways;
And, others taste the sweetest gain,
Of that, for which these took the pain:
Yet, these, they not alone undo,
But, having robbed, they murder too.
The wrongs of such, this Emblem shows,
That, thou may help, or pity those. See, Emb. XLII.

43
Thou, often have observed with fears,
The aspects, and motions of the Stars,
As if, they threatened Fates to some,
Which, God could never save them from*
If this, thy dreaming Error be,
Thine Emblems Moral shows to thee,
That, God retraines the Starry-Fates,
And, no man's harm, necessitates. See, Emb. XLIII.

44
Thou, have provoked, over long,
Their patience, who neglect the wrong;
And, thou do little seem to heed,
What harm it threats, if thou proceed.
To thee, an Emblem, therefore, shows,
To what, abused-Patience grows.
Observe it well; and, make thy Peace,
Before to Fury, Wrath increase. See, Emb. XLIV.

45
Thou have the helps of Natures light;
Experience too, does aid thy sight:
Nay more, the Sun of Grace-divine,
Does round about thee daily shine;
Yet, Reasons eye is blind in thee,
And, clearest Objects cannot see.
Now, from what cause, this Blindness grows
The Moral of the thine Emblem shows. See, Emb. XLV.

46
Thy cause, thy Money, or thy Friend,
May make thee forward to contend;
And, give thee Hopes, that thy intents,
Shall bring thee prosperous events.
But view thy Lot; then, mark thou there.
That Victories uncertain are;
And rashly venture not on that
Whose End may be, thou know not what. See, Emb. XLVI.

47
To them who grudgingly repine,
As Soon as their estates decline,
This Lot pertaines; or, unto those,
Who, when their neighbor needy grows,
Contemn him; as if he were left,
Of God; and, of all hopes berest.
If this, or that, be found in thee,
Thou, by thy Moral, taught shall be,
That, there is none to ill b^ sped;
But may have, hope, he shall be fed. See, Emb. XLVII.

48
Thy Flesh thou love, as if it were,
The chiefest Object, of thy Care;
And of such value, as may seem,
Well meriting, thy best esteem.
But, now, to banish that conceit,
Thy Lot an Emblem brings to sight,
Which, without flattery, shows to thee
Of what regard it ought to be. See, Emb. XLVIII.

49
It may suspected be thou have,
Misspent the Time, that is gone and past;
For, to an Emblem thou art sent,
That Is made, such folly to prevent:
The moral heed; Repent thy Crime;
And, Labor, to Redeem the Time. See, Emb. XLIX.

50
With good applause thou, have begun,
And, well, as yet, proceedest on:
But, e're the Laurel, thou can wear,
Thou to the End must persevere.
And, lest this duty, be forgot,
Thou have a Caveat, by this Lot. See, Emb. L.

51
Although, this time, you drew it not,
Good Fortune, for you, may be got.
Perhaps, the planets ruling now,
Have cast no good Aspects on you.
For, many say, that, now and then,
The Stars look angerly on men:
Then, try your Chance again, anon;
For, their displeasure soon is gone.
52
If by your Lot you had been praised
Your mind, perchance, it would have raised,
Above the mean. Should you receive
Some check, thereby, It would bereave
Your Patience: For, but few can bear,
Reproves, which unexpected are.
But, now prepared you have been,
To draw your Lot once more begin;
And, if another Blancke you get,
Attempt your chance, no more, as yet.
53
To cross your hopes, Misfortune sought;
And, by your Lot, a Blanck has brought:
But, he who knew her ill intent,
Has made this Blanke her spite prevent;
For, if that Number you shall take,
Which these two figures, backward, make,
And view the place to which they guide;
An Emblem, for you, they provide.
54
These Lots are almost Ten to One
Above the Blankes; yer, thou have none.
If thus thy Fortune still proceed,
It Is T^^ to One if well thou speed.
Yet, i^ thou do not much neglect,
To do, as Wisdom shall direct,
It is a Thousand unto ten
But all thy Hopes will prosper, then.
55
It seems, Dame Fortune, does not know,
What Lot, on thee, she should bestow;
Nor, can thou tell, (if thou might have
The choice) what Fortune, thou should crave.
For, one thing, now, thy mind requires;
Anon, another it desires.
When Resolution thou have got,
Then, come again, and draw thy Lot.
56
The Chance, which thou obtained have,
Of all our Chances, is the last;
And, casting up the total sums,
We find thy Game, to Nothing comes.
Yet if it well be understood,
This Chance may chance to do thee good;
For, it inferres what Portion shall,
To every one, (at last) befall;
And warnes, while something* is enjoyd,
That, well it (always) be imployd.
FINIS.
A Table for the better finding out of the principal things and matters,
mentioned in these Four Books.
A.
Adversity. page 16. 17. 26. 30. 240. 243 Aegle. 6. 3^ 112 Affection. 7. 33.
34. 83. 162 Affliction. 16. 17. 44. 47. 70. 81. 108. 240. Agreement in Desire.
34. Age. 44. Ambitions (...) 216. Ambition. 69. Anchor. 39. 72. Annual
revolutions. 157. Anvils and Hammer. 17. Appearances dece^e. 175. Apollo. 234.
Archer. 25. Armor. 111. Arts. 1. 80. Action. 9. Arms. 3. 32. 80. Authority.
137.
B.
BAll. 7. Beginning. 10^. Best men not best favored. 224. Bear. 23. Bees. 23.
90. 250. Beauty. 40. Blabs. 246. Blessings long enjoyed. 70. Bounds. 161. A
Bore. 110. Borrowed worth. 14. A Bow bended. 39. Bridle. 169. A Broken-heart
7^. Busy-bodies. 148. Butterfly and Spider. 18.
C.
CAndle and Fly. 40. Carnal affections. 43. Caduceus. 9. 88. Ceremonies of
estate. 137. Centaure. 103. A Child. 45. Christian confidence. 81. Church.
111. 136. Christ the true Pelican. 154. The Circular motion of things. 45.
Circumspection. 138. Clamor. 63. Cleargie-men. 149. Constancy. 2. 81. 143.
Cock. 71. Comeliness. 249. Good Companions. 249. Constant resolution 24.
Consideration. 9. Contempt of earthly things. 1^. Contention. 34. 71.
Contention hazzardous. 254. Contemplation. 45. 105. 156. Concord. 63.
Consolation. vid. Comfort. Comfort. 70. Comfort sweetened by troubles. ibid.
Constellations. 31. 74. 251. Contentment. 86. Cornerstone. 161. Coronet. 255.
Cornucopia 9. 88. 166. 248. Corporeal virtues. 80. Covetousness. 216.
Crocadile. 112. Craft. 136. Crown. 47. 78. 81. Cross. 47 75. 81 Crosses 47.
Curiosity 147. Cupid 227. Cynthia 24.
D.
DAnger hangs over all 213 Death 1. 21. 45. 48. 94. 168. 184. 235. Deaths head
21 Deliberation 72 Delay 18 Degrees. 29. 49. 117. Deceit in all places. 180.
Despair is not to be admitted. 217. 221. 240. Destiny. vid. Fate. Decrees of
God. 95. Our Destruction is of our selves. 214. Desires best object. 209.
Devotion. 41. Diamond. 171. Diana. 24. Divine assistance. 170. Dissimulation,
211, 228, 230 Discord. 177. Discretion. 151. Dogs. 255. Dolphin. 72. Dove.
150. Drowsinesse. 9. Drones. 250.
E.
EArthly things. ^5. Endurance 23. 26. Endeavor continued. 29. Envy 97. End.
102. Equality. 34. 48. Equivocation. 38. Estridge. 36. Eternity. 102. 157.
Everlasting. 102. Excess. 68. External Blessings. 88.
F.
FAith 13. 66 Faith infringed. 38. 99. Fate 74. 95. 221. 251. Fatal necessity
251 Falsehood 99 Fame 146. Fair shows deceitful 233. 229 Face 39 Fighters 71
Fickleness vid. Inconstancy Filial pierie 155. Fire on an Altar 15.
Fierie-triall 30 Flesh is hay 256 Flying-Ball 71. 101 Fly and the Candle 40
Flower of the Sun 159. Fools, who the greatest 211 Fools favors
mischievou^ 225 Fortune 6. 88. 101. 109. 139 174. 224 Fraud in all (...) (...)
(...) Frequencie 45 Fulness 64 Fury begotten by abused patience 252.
G.
GAnimed 156. Light Gains 50. Glory 5. 92. God 140. 152. 170, 210, 223 255
Gods prerogatives 223 Gods decrees ^5. 142 Gospel preachect ^^ Good works 135.
Governors 37 Government ^^^ Goblins about Graves 43 Grace 31, 74. 104, 226
Grave 21 Grief 26 Groves 3^. Great things from small beginnings 46. 9^ Gryphon
139 Guile vid. Fraud and Deceit Guiltiness 66, 69.
H.
Have 19, 49 153 Hammer and Anvile, 17 Halter 66, Halayon. vid. Kings Fisher
Harvest 44 Harlots 27, 246 Harmlesnes vid. Innocence Hazzardous enterprises 247
Harmony vid. Music Hard-hearted men 175 Hardship 243 Heed 19. 49, 153
Heliotrope 159 Heaven 152 Hellen 27 Hyppocrisy 20, 77, 211, 129 Hyppoc^i^^ 229
Honour^^, 153 Hope 13, 16, 39,, 44, 73. 106 150, 217 Houses which are best 222
Honey 23 Howreglasse 21, 212 Hunger 64. Husbands 162 Humility 147 Hyppotamus 155
I.
IAnus 138. Idleness 5. 92 Innocence 9. 111. 151 Infant 45 Encroachments 161
Invincibility 220 Inconstancy 231 Intemperance 242 Industry 5 Impiety 155
Imprsonme^t better than a worse mischief 96 Joys sweetened by afflictions 70
Iteration 29 Justice 66. 69, 155 Just dealing, 100 Ixion 69
K.
KIngsfisher 2^6 Kings 32, 37, 78, 137, 159 16^, 180 Kingdoms 67 A Kingdoms
glory 78 Knowledge 1, 79, 103
L.
Labor 5, 29, 143, 150, 229, Labor in vain 11. Lamb 252. Law 3. 163 169
Leisure and heed 19. 49 107 Learn to die 94 Learning 87 A Line a day. 158
Liking makes indifferent things excellent 2^2 A Little and little makes a
mic^^se 50. 158 Life 21. 45 Love the best Musician, 82 Love 7, 33, 34, 38.
Losses 50. Losses may he recovered 182 Looking-glasses 241.
M.
MAlefactors 66 Mat^ 80. Marriages, 83. Magistrates out of office 215. A Made.
137 Man his own enemy 214 Mercy, offered to all 255 Merit 139 Measures 100
Medlers, vid. Busybodies, Meditation best in the night ^ Means, not to be
neglected (...) Means, not the only ground of Hope 13 Mercury 9 The Mean
169 Military exercise 32 Misfortune may be profitable, 96 Mortality 8. 45
Moon 111. 182 Monuments 142 Mutual affection 24. 163. 781. Music 69
N.
NAture and Grace 104. 144 Nature needs a supporter.226 Necessity 64 Night
helpful to Meditation 9
O.
Oaths 28 Obscurity profitable 73 Occasion 4 Offenders 215 Old men may learn
87 Opportunity 4 Oppression 98 Opposition 63 Order 220 Outward appearances 175
Oil 9. 63. 79. 168 Ox 173
P.
Pain 23 Palmetree 172 Patience 23. 63. 252 Patriots 165 Pallas 9. 80 Parents
15 A Pastoral charge 149 Peace 9. ^38 Perjurie 38 Pegasus 105 Perseverance 19.
14^. 175. 258 Pelican 154 Piety 8. 41. 155 Piguley Spirits 14 Planets 31
Planting 35 Pleasure 22. 23. 38. 68 Plenty 64 Plaine-dealing 228 Poetical
Liberty 148 Poets Horse, vid. Pegasus Power 103. 179 Power divine 210. Policy
80 Posterity 35 Poor Thieves 167. Poverty 176 Cause of poverty. 248 Praise
146 Practice 66. 158 Preaching 89 Preferment 68 Prelates 41 Priests. ibid. Pride
to be avoyed 8 Princes 155 Profit causes contention 71. Procession 165.
Prosperity 12.16 Protection divine 245 Promotion is of God 223 Prudence
74.142.151 Purity 41 Punishment and reward 245 Pyramus 33.
Q.
Qvarrellers 71.
R.
Rashness 9.19 Redeem the time 23.257 Recreation 234 A well Resolved man 228
Restraints from being Rich 248 Resolute constancy 24* Repine not at mi^fortunes
96 Reputation 140 Repentance to be hastened 213 Retiredness 72.79 Revolutions
of things 45 Reward 135.139.141.229.258 Reward and punishment 243 Riches 1.98
Rich Thieves 197 Rod. 93. Royal favor. 159.
S.
SAcred callings 41 The best Sacrifice 77. Salamander 30 Scepter 79 Scepter and
Spade 48 Seahorse 155. Self perdition 68.214 Self love 35 Shepherds crook
149 Ship 13.37 Sisyphus 11 Sin 66.69. Silence 73 Simplicity 151 Sincerity
^^8, 230 Sive 2^ A Skeleton ^ Sloth 9.181. Slownesse 19 Slow pace goes far
173 Small beginnings 46.50 Snake 5.9.45.47.74.101.102 142. Snaile 19 Sophisters
38 Sober knowledge 147 Sorrow 24 79 Soveraigntie is of God, 21.22 Spade 5
Spider 18 Squirrell 26.136 Staidness 72.153 Stars 31.74.251 Statesmen 15
Steresman 37 Steadfastness. vid. Constancy. Stews 27 Storke 149.155 Strength
80.103.136 Students 15 Studiousnesse 146 Suffering 23.47.81.171.232
Sufficiency 86 Sunnshine after storms 240 Swearing. 38. Swine 38.110. Sword
66.137.163.238.245
T.
TAlents hidden 76.181 A Tatler, 246. Tennis-ball, 16 Terrene pomp 98
Temperance 169.242 Terminus 161 Thieves 167 Thisbe 33 Time. 4.102.157.212.235
257 Titles, ill placed 224. Tongue 42 Tortois 86 Touchstone 229 Transitory
things 85 Trial 30 Try e're thou trust. 84.233 Truth 172 Turtle. vid. Dove.
V.
Vanity of earthly things 98 Vain hopes. 69 Vain shows 20 Vengeance 66
Virtue. 1.^.6.22.30.88.97.101.109.111.139.171.218. Vice 22.104.224. Victory
uncertain 252 Victory is of God 241. Viper 247 Unanimity 67 Unchastity 15
Unity 67.177 Unity of faith 244 Universal Grace 210.258 Unprofitable gifts
76 Uprightness of heart 91
W.
VVAnton women 7 War 90, 238 Wast 35 Weariness 9.84.153 Watchfulness 79
Watchmen 149 Way of Virtue 160 Weapons ^41. Wealth 68.166. Weights 110.
Welldoing 135 Weakness needs a suporter 222 Wisdom 1.2, 31.103.142.145.
Wit 1, 64.136.167 Wives 172 Whoredom. 27 Whore. vid. Harlot Woods decayed 35
Woman 93.231 World goes backward 219.
Y.
YOuth. 22.44.
A Supersedeas to all them, whose custom it is, without any deserving, to
importune Authors to give unto them their Books.
It merits nor your Anger, nor my Blame,
That, thus I have inscribed this Epigram:
For, they who know me, know, that, Books thus large,
And, fraught with Emblems, do augment the Charge
Too much above my Fortunes, to afford
A Gift so costly, for an Aierie-word:
And, I have proved, your Bigging Quality,
So forward, to oppress my Modesty;
That, for my future ease, it seems fit,
To take some Order, for preventing it.
And, peradventure, other Authors may,
Find Cause to thank me for it, another day.
These many years, it has your Custom bin,
That, when in my possession, you have seen
A Volume, of mine own, you did no more,
But, Ask and Take, As if you thought my store
Encreast, without my Cost: And, that, by Giving,
(Both Pains and Charges too) I got my living;
Or, that, I find the Paper and the Printing, a
As easy to me, as the Books Inventing.
If, of my Studies, no esteem you have,
You, then abuse the Courtesies you crave,
And, are Unthankful, If you prize them ought,
Why should my Labor, not enough be thought,
Unless, I add Expenses to my pains?
The Stationer, affoords for little Gains,
The Books you crave: And, He, as well as I
Might give away, what you repine to buy:
For, what he Gives, does only Money Cost,
^et mine, both Money, Time, and Wit is lost.
What I shall Give, and what I have bestowed
O^ Friends, to whom, I Love, or Service owed,
I prudge not; And, I think it is from them,
Sufficient, that such Gifts they do esteem:
Yea, and, it is a Favor too, when they
Will take these Tristles, my large Dues to pay;
(Or, Ask them at my hands, when I forget,
That, I am to their Love, so much in debt.)
But, this inferres not, that, I should bestow
(...) like on all men, who, my Name do know;
(...) have the Face to ask: For, then, I might,
Of Wit and Money, soon be beggered* quite.
So much, already, has been Begged away,
(F^r which, I neither had, nor look for pay)
As (...) valued at the common Rate,
(...) hundred Crowns, in my Estate.
Which, (if I may confess it) signifies,
That, I was same more Liberal, than Wise.
But, for the time to come, resolved I am,
That, till without deny all (or just blame)
I may of those, who Cloth and Clothes do make,
(As often as I shall need them) Ask, and Take;
You shall no more befoole me. Therefore, (...)
Be Answered, And, henceforward, (...)
A Direction, showing how they who are so ^isposed, shall (...) out their
Chance, in the (...).
Turn abo^t one of the (...) the Figures, which are in the following Page,
(...) your eyes thereupon, to observe where it slays (...). If it be the
upper Figure, whose Index you moved; then, that Number whereupon it rests, is
the number of your Lot, or Blancke.

This being known, move the other Index in like manner, and that Quarter of
the said Figure whereon the same stands (when your hand is taken away) show
(...) which of the four Books, or Lotteries, that Chance is to be expected,
whereunto your Number does send you, whether it be Lot, or Blancke. If it be
any Number above Fifty, it is a Blancke Chance, and you are to look no
further. If it be any of the other Numbers, it sends you to the Emblem
answering to the same Number, in the Book next before the time Lotterie.

If the letter M. be plac^d before the allotted Number; then, that Lot is proper
only to a (...) stand before it, it is proper only to a Woman: If there be
(...) it (...) to both Sexes: And, therefore, when a (...) on a Chance
impertinet to their proper Sex^* (...) to take the next Chance which pertains
properly (...) it be Blancke or Lot; the trial whereof, I have that (...),
without the use of Dice; (...) by bringing them into fight, they might,
sometimes, occasion worse Gaming.

If King, Queen, Prince, or any one that springs
From Persons, known to be derived from Kings,
Shall seek, for Sport sake, hence to draw their Lot;
(...) Author says, that, he provided not
(...) such (...) those; Because, it were too much
(...) we find ou^ Fortunes, fit for such,
(...) (as (...) thinks) should rather, Aid supply
(...) his evil Fortunes by.
To them, (...) therefore p^^sed is to give
(...) and this large Prerogative;
(...) thy shall ch^s^ from hence, what Lots they please,
(...) the^^ (...), if they like not these,
(...) Personages, of High degree,
^pan^ profess our Authors friends (...) be,
(...) some, blemise, have; that ^ill, they find
(...) to their mind,
(...) to try
(...) And, ev'rytime apply
(...) th^se,
(...)
(...)
(...)
WEST 3. Book. NORTH 4. Book. SOVTH 2. Book. EAST 1. Book.





