A VIEW OF THE MARGINAL NOTES OF THE Popish Testament, translated into English
by the English fugitive Papists resiant at RHEMES in France. By George Wither.

Psalm. 19. verse. 7. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul, the
testimony of the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom to the simple.

Augustine in epistolam Johan. tract. primo. Johannes maluit se ponere in
numero peccatorum, vt Christum haberet aduocatum: quam ponere se pro Christo
aduocatum, and inueniri inter damnandos superbos:

John had rather place himself in the number of sinners, that he might have
Christ to be his advocate: than to let himself in steed of Christ to be an
advocate, and so to be found amongst damnable proud men.

Printed at London by Edm. Bollifant for Thomas Woodcocke.

TO THE MOST-REVEREND FAther in God, JOHN Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate
and Metropolitan of England, GEORGE WITHER wishes abundant increase of all
heavenly and spiritual blessings.
IT is the manner, use, and custom of all that set forth any thing to be
seen and read of others, to set down some reasons that moved them to take
such pains, and to publish their labors. In the year of our Lord, one
thousand, five hundred, eighty two, a testament translated into English, at
Rhemes in France, was published in print, by the English fugitive Papists
resiant there. The censure, view, and examination whereof, has ever since been
heartily looked, or rather longed for, of all both rich and poor, high and low,
that fear God and love his truth. But by what occasion I cannot tell, it has
been hitherto delaied. Whereupon I thought it would not be amiss, neither
misliked, if some thing in the mean space might be done, toward the
satisfaction of the well affected, and the repressing of the triumphs of the
contrary. Therefore at my return from London, from Michaelmasse term last
past, I took in hand to discover the loose, corrupt, unjust, and untrue
dealing of our Rhemists in their marginall notes. Which if I could effect, and
bring to pass before an answer to their whole work came forth, I did suppose
that it would somewhat diminish the grief of many good men, and make them the
more patiently to expect and wait for the censure of the whole work. And
again, if it should happen, that by reason I took it in hand so late, that I
^ould not compass it, or bring it to pass, before the censure of the whole
work were in press, yet I did think, that because that work could not be
but very great, and therefore chargeable; that it would not be thought amiss
of, if some part were answered by it self, which the poorer, and those which
either were unable, or unwilling to be at charges with the other, might attain
and have with small cost. Now having by the favor of God gone through it, I
thought that I could not choose a better patron for it, than your Grace, whom
God has advanced to the highest Ecclesiastical place and dignity in our
Church of England. For some make the dedication of their works, testimonies of
old friendship and familiarity, and as it were monuments of their old long
continued love. Which cause if there were no more, were sufficient, considering
the love, wherewith you have embraced me these thirty years and upwards.
Others do it to witness their mindfulnes of their duty to them that be in
honorable place and calling. And why should not I heerin also imitate them,
since it has pleased God, leaving me in a mean place, so highly to advance
you? Others to get the fau^^able patronage and defense of their works by high
dignity and authority, against all maleuolous cauillers and backbiters,
whereof this wicked world is always full. And here of both I stand in great
need, having the whole band of Popish sophisters in this against me, and also
none can better protect and defend me, than you, either for learning and
judgment, or for power and authority, wherewith God has endued you. Their
whole work consists altogether of lieng, fraud, and deceit, which I thought
not unmeet in some part to touch, disclose, and make manifest in this mine
Epistle. First in their Preface, then in their Translation, after in their
collected and concluded Annotations: lastly, in their thick and threefold
allegations of the fathers. In which I will use all possible brevity and
shortness; for that my purpose is but to give a little small taste of their
foul and shameless dealings, whereby the sincerity of their dealing in the
rest may be the easilier and better gessed at. The first part of their Preface
maintains against the whole course of the Scriptures, and against all
authority of the ancient primitive Church, that it is not necessary for all
Christians to have, and read the Scriptures in a known vulgar tongue. Deuteronomy. 6.
verse. 7. 8 9.
Which if it were true, why are all men commanded continually to talk of them,
and to write them upon the doors, walls, Psalm. 1. verse. ^.
and posts of their houses, and how should they meditate in them day and night?
How should fathers teach them to their children, Psalm. 78. v. ^^.
and they again to their children? Psalm. 19. ve^. 7.
The Scriptures give wisdom to the simple, why then shall not the simplest
seek in them to wax wise? John 5. v 39.
If life be to be found in the Scriptures, why shall not all search them that
look for life? Romans v. 1^. v. ^.
If they be written for our learning, why should it not be as lawful to learn
by reading, as by hearing? The Co^stitutions which they sundry times allege,
Cleme^. l. b. 1. cap. ^.
as ordained by the Apostles, do appoint Lay men to read the Law, the books of
the Kings, Epistla ad Marcellam.
the Psalms and the Gospel. Saint Hierome commends poor plough men,
because at the plough tail in their work and labor, they could sing the
Psalms. Our Rhemists add of their own (believe them if you list) to salve
the matter withal, that they sang in a language they understood not, and
wherein they could not read those Scriptures. Saint Chrysostom exhorted the
common people to get them Bibles, In the homily* quoted in their epistle.
and Testaments, and refuted the same objections, which the Papists at this day
make to the contrary. But our Papists tell us that he dealt like a pulpit man,
and therefore his rules must not be general, but serve for his own people,
which he preached unto. As who should say the pulpit were not as meet a place,
to deliver the rules of religion, and a general truth in, as the schools.
They add, that every artificer deals in the hardest, and deepest matters of
religion, omitting the more easy, that they presuppose no difficulties, that
they ask for no expositor, that they feel no depth of Gods science in
Scripture, that manners, and life are nothing amended, that private fantasies,
and not the sense of the Church, and doctors thereof, in interpreting the
Scriptures is followed. And whosoever knows the state, and condition of the
Church of England, knows all this to be an beape, and dunghill of lies packed
together. If their commendation of their Churches moderation, in not wholly
condemning, nor forbidding generally vulgar translations, be not a lie* then
Master Harding, In the fifth part of his answer to the apology, Chap. 16.
(...).
and such other like of their side, have abused us, in telling us, that the
malepartnesse of Heretics made the Church altogether to forbid the vulgar
translations. Their accusations of our translations, have already been so well
answered by Master Doctor Fulke to Martinius, that I need not to touch them.
Their reasons likewise being both many, and frivolous, whereby they go about to
prefer their vulgar latin version, before the text in the toongs, wherein they
were first written, I leave to him, or them, which shall answer the whole
preface in order as it lies: only three things, I will admonish men to
consider of, in them. First that they tend not so much to give credit to the
vulgar text, as to discredit al texts whatsoever, to the end that either men
might have nothing to ground their religion certainly on, or else to make
their Church of Rome their only stay. Secondly, that they confess the Fathers
in this point to be against them, namely whose opinions are that the Latin text
should yield to the Greek, and Hebrew: but they think to avoid it with a sly
shift, that they meant the true, and uncorrupted text, as it was in their
days, and times. But Lodouicus Viues a learned man, living in the days of
Henry the eight, in his annotations upon Saint Augustine de ciuitate Dei, Iib.
14. cap. 8.
tells us, that to his time (a few unlearned dolts excepted) all men
preferred the texts in their original toongs, Lib. 15. cap. 13.
before the others translated out of them. Therefore either our good Masters of
Rhemes must tell us of some great corruptions that have crept in of late years
into the Greek, and Hebrew texts, or else they can not blame us for not
crediting them against the learned of all ages before us, old and new, one, and
others. Thirdly, that the Council of Trent goes not so far as our new Masters
of Rhemes: For they prefer it only before all Latin translations, making it
amongst them the only autenticall text: In which it is plain that either the
Pope, or the Council might, and did err. For Erasmus dedicated his
translation to Pope Leo, and under his approbation many men took it for
autenticall, and now your Council judges it not autenticall, therefore either
Leo, or they judged amiss, take whether they will. Thus much for their
Preface. Their Translation (how much soever they brag of pains, care, and
conscience to deal sincerely) is fraudulently framed to make poor men think
the Scriptures to be more obscure and dark a great deal, than they are, and
so to fray them (as much as in them lies) from taking pains to read them. I
note this only, not because it is not full of other corruptions, and
partialities, but because leaving them to the censurer, or censurers thereof, I
take that which every blind man may see, that they have studied therein for
nothing less, than perspicuitie, and plainnes. For they have both hunted for
words of purpose, which the people do not understand, as superstantiall,
didrachmes, cense, stater, scandal, scandalized, Corbanah, euangelized,
scenopegia, paraclete, John 2. v. 4.
prepucie, Neophyte, depositum, gratis, and such like: And also left their
sentences imperfect, John. 21. verse. 22.
halt, maimed, and without sense, and all to strike simple persons in a maze,
As what is to me and the woman? and this man what? Romans 5. verse. 18.
As by the offense of one unto al men to condemnation, and such like, which in
English have no sense. Their collections, and conclusions how weak and
frivolous they are, though it will sufficiently appear in mine answers to
their marginal notes; yet I hope it will not be amiss, if some also be noted
down here. These shall be of two sorts, one so gross that every simple man may
see the vanity of their collections: the other more cunningly, but yet
deceitfully gathered. The deceit of the later sort is also double, either
grounded upon wilful, and slanderous misreporting of our assertions, or else
upon aequiuocations, and ambiguitie of words, wherewith it seems they delight
them selves greatly, and think it a wonderful piece of learning to deceive
their poor, simple and credulous followers. The first sort void of all show of
probable consequence, are throughout their Testament very many. But to avoid
tediousnes, I will content me here with a very few. Verse. 23.
In the first of Matthew. Our Savior Christ borne in marriage, yet of a Virgin,
honoreth both states, and withal teaches us that virginity, and continent
life are preferred before marriage. In the second of Matthew upon the murdering
of the children, Verse. 16.
by this we learn, what credit is to be given to the Church in canonizing
Saints, and celebrating their holydaies, Verse. 8.
etc. In the third Chapter, upon those words. Yield therefore fruit worthy of
penance. John preaches satisfaction by doing worthy fruits, and works of
penance. Verse. 2.
Both in the third and fourth chapter, upon John's preaching in the desert, and
Christ's going into the desert, to be tempted of the di^ell, they gather a
warrant for popish Heremites, that make a profession to live out of the
society and company of men continually, Verse. 21.
and so to end their days. In the sift of Matthew upon these words, except
your justice do abound, etc. whereby we see (say they) salvation, life and
justification not to come of only faith, or imputation of Christ's
righteousness. Verse. 13.
In the sixth chapter, upon these words, Lead us not into temptation, they say
that Beza according to the Caluinistes opinion, says that God leads into
temptation, therefore he makes God the author of evil. Verse. (...).
In the seventh chapter upon these words, Lord, Lord. These men have faith,
otherwise they could not invoke, therefore to believe is not enough. I could
have drawn out a great number as bad, or worse than these, but I will here
stay. For I have given a sufficient taste, what might be done in the most part
of their Testament, almost in every chapter. Now concerning their double
deceit before spoken of, whereof the first is grounded upon malice, which
blinds them, and makes them wilfully against their own conscience and
knowledge to mistake and misreport our assertions. One common cavil, is the
finding fault with our translating of (...), and (...), repentance, Verse. (...).
and to repent, and amend, Matthew. 11. and repeated in many other places, which
is grounded upon this slander, that because we do not allow that the fruits of
repentance be works satisfactorie for sin, therefore we do not teach at al
those testimonies of hearty, and unfeigned repentance. Another cavil very common
also rises upon that, because we confess (as the holy Ghost has taught us in
the Scriptures) that God is the author of every act, therefore they gather
also that he is the author of every sin, or evil. Which malicious
collection, though it have been ten thousand times answered, and that fully,
yet they cease not still odiouslie to object it. And because we deny that
Christ after his death went into Limbus Patrum, Acts 2. verse. ^7.
as they without al warrant of the word imagine, therefore they maliciously
give out that Calvin and his followers deny an article of the Faith, 1. Peter.
3. ver. 19.
and therefore conclude them to be infidels. In all their notes touching
justification by faith, they deal with us, as though we ascribed justification
to an idle faith, which works not by love, and upon that false ground, they
gather many things against us, as shall appear in mine answer to their notes.
But all that are wise, and have eyes to see, do perceive, that in this manner of
dealing, they do but utter their own shame, in making no conscience of
cogging, lieng, and slaundering, and in steed of battailing with their
enemies, they make themselves sport with their own shadows. Now to their
amphibologies, and aequiuocations; which are also to long to pursue. The
Rhemists upon the fifth to the Galathians confess, that Paul when he ascribes
justification to faith, speaks of such a faith as works by charity, and
yet in all their notes against justification by faith, they dally, and play,
and dazel the eyes of the simple with the ambiguitie of the word, being
diversely in diverse places taken. The like dealing they use about the words of
justice, and justification, which when they know them to be diversely taken, and
in sundry senses, yet they delude with the sound of the words those, who for
simplicity are not able to discern the diversity of the sense. I will not
heap up here more of these examples, a number will offer themselves in reading
of mine answers. The alleging of the Fathers thick and threefolde, is for two
fraudulent respects. One is, that those which are doubtful to what religion
they may incline, and to which side to cleave, may continue doubtful, and
without resolution still, whiles both our adversaries, and we allege Fathers,
and accuse one another of corrupt dealing in them, and they poor souls not
able to repair to the Fathers to see whether side deals truly. The second
is to continue the false persuasion of their credulous followers, in thinking
that all antiquity makes for popery. To these two ends it is, that their
allegations are so many. First therefore to avoid this their fraud, it is to be
noted, and observed, that a marvelous number of their allegations, touch no
point, nor matter in controversy betwixt us. As for example, Mat. 2. ver. 16.
they allege Origin to prove that the innocent children murthred by the
commandment of Herod, Mat. 3. ver. 10.
have been honored for martyrs. Augustine to prove that not to do good is
damnable. Mat. 3. verse. 8.
Hierome to prove that fasting, prayer, and alms are fruits of repentance, or
as they term it, penance, Cyprian to prove that they are false martyrs, Mat.
5. ver. 10.
that suffer not for justice. Chrysostom to prove that by the church the
governors thereof be understood. Mat. 18. verse. 17.
Ambrose to prove that God has left to his church authority as well to loose,
Mat. 18. verse. 18.
as to bind. Which kind of proofs for matter not denied, if they had been
omitted, and left out, the great glorious show of Fathers had been blemished,
and their camp very nigh half dissolved. Next is to be marked, that if they
catch any thing that makes for them in any Father, they never look how
rightly the Father collecteth it, and by what good reason he warranteth it, it
is with them sufficient that he says it. August. epist. 19.
But Augustine teaches us to give that reverence only to the canonical
Scriptures, to believe. whatsoever they say. And for others of what learning or
holiness soever, not to believe because they speak, but because they prove
that which they speak, either by the word it self, or by good reason grounded
upon the same word. And here also because they are wont to triumph that we
make this a color to reject the Fathers, when they make against us, it is to
be remembered that they themselves do not without exception admit the Fathers.
Hos. de side and symbolo ca. 19.
But they appoint an other rule to try them, and their saiengs by, that is,
the decrees, and determinations of their own church. Thirdly it is to be noted
that they allege those books very often, wherein they know that the Father
which wrote them, was far ouercarried with heat of contencion, that they
themselves will not, nor dare not defend many things that passed them, as
Hieroms books against Iouiuian, and Vigilantius. Fourthly it is not to be
passed over, how they abuse Augustine in leaving those books which he wrote
against the heretic Pelagius, Retract. lib. 1. cap. 23.
concerning the question of Freewill, and alleging testimonies out of other
books, wherein he himself did confess, that he did err of ignorance. Fifthly
they force diverse, and sundry to serve their turns, whether they will, or no.
Sixthly to make the greater show, they furnish out their number with such as
they know to have been burnt on the face for forgerie, and cite them under the
reverend names of Clemens, and Dionisius Areopagita, and such like. Finally it
is not to be passed over, that they for the corroborating, and proouing of the
usurped primacie of the bishop of Rome, they hunt for speeches of the Fathers
spoken in extolling Peter, or in commending the faith, then professed at Rome,
or else the excellent learning, and virtue of some notable bishops there, which
then governed that church, and them they rack, and set on the tenters to
prove that, which they never thought of, that is, the universal power, and
authority, which the bishop of Rome now claims. The practice of the primitive
church does best declare, both what the Fathers meant, and also what power and
authority he had. In that it is manifest that he was a bishop as other
bishops, Hieronimu^ Euagr^o. Nicenum concilium canone 6.
afterward by consent of men a patriarch limited as other patriarchs, a
subject to the Emperor in commission under him as a delegate, that men might
appeal from him, and that the Emperor might, and did appoint in such cases of
appeal delegates to affirm, or reuerse the bishop of Romes former sentence
and judgment. August nus ad Epistola Parmemam libro pr^mo cap 5. and contra
literas Petiliam lib. 3. cap. 25.
So far was he from that universality of power, which he has heertofore
usurped, and yet challenges. But why should I dwell so long in these matters,
and exceed the length of an Epistle, seeing they have brought nothing of any
weight, in any matter of controversy, but it has been (and that they know
well enough) often, and fully answered by diverse, and sundry already? But
because being fugitives, and having no honest ordinary vocation to occupy
themselves about, they never make an end of writing, wherein they do nothing
but set new colors on old matters, to make their senseless followers believe,
that they bring in new allegations, never before answered: Therefore (under
your Graces correction be it uttered) I would wish that our controversies being
drawn into a sum, might by your authority be divided, to so many learned men,
as your Grace shall think convenient and competent for that purpose, to
examine, and to reduce and bring into the best frame and form they can, all
the arguments of the adversaries, and to each several argument the answer, as
plainly and briefly as it can be comprised, which being done, and compiled
into one, or two volumes, whatsoever they write hereafter, except they bring
(which I think impossible) some new thing heretofore unheard of, to be
referred to those volumes for answer, and so to cease troubling the world with
more books. Touching mine answers to their marginall notes (I hope it will
appear) that I have studied with as much brevity, and plainnes as I could
possibly, to discipher their vanity, and trifling, wherewith they have
blotted, and blurred their margents of their Testament. Their translation, and
larger annotations, though many times great occasions are offered to carpe at
them, yet as near as I could possibly, I have left them untouched, to him, or
them (whosoever he or they be) that of purpose shall deal with that matter. To
the end that my truth, and simplicity of dealing may the better appear to the
Reader, of what sort soever he be, I have set down the text, whereupon their
notes are gathered, according to their own translation, and their notes, word,
forword, and then mine answers. By which doing, I hope it will well appear,
that when out of their most partial translation, which they of purpose have
framed for their best advantage, the things which they gather, will not follow*
nor be confirmed: that they are utterly destitute of all help of the
scriptures, how soever they labor to wring them to their purpose. But
concerning mine own doing this shall suffice. If this which I have done, shall
by you (most reverend father) be judged to be profitable for the church and
people of God, I have that which I desire. The Lord God bless, keep, and
preserve you. At Dunburie the xij. of April. 1588.

A view of the marginall notes of the Popish Testament, translated into English
by the English fugitive Papists resiant at Rhemes in France.
Matt. 1. ver. 2^
The text.
ANd she shall bring forth a son: and thou shall call his name Jesus.

The note.
Jesus an Hebrew word, in English Savior.

The answer.
If you would assign us none other Savior, neither in part nor in whole, our
controversies were at an end, we should not need to fill the world with our
pamphlets.

Matt. 2. 16.
The text.
Then Herod perceiving that he was deluded by the Sages, was exceeding angry:
and sending, murdered all the men children that were in Bethlehem, and in all
the borders thereof, from two years old and under.

The note.
The martyrdom of holy Innocents, whose Holy Day is kept the 28. of December.

The answer.
You studied (no doubt) hard for this note, or else so learned a matter could
not have passed your pen. That these children were murdered for Christ's
cause, I well perceive, and yet because their death was not a voluntary
testimony to the truth, I see not any just reason to account them Martyrs:
Howbeit it is not a matter worth the contending about.

Matt. 3. 10.
The text.
Every tree therefore that does not yield good fruit, shall be cut down, and
cast into the fire.

The note.
It is not only damnable to do evil: but also not to do good. Aug. Sermon
6^. de temp.

The answer.
You do well to cite Augustine for this, and we believe it, not because he
says it, but because this text does enforce it. And you must either tell us
what evil doing is smaller, then not doing good, or else your venial sins
must be quite banished the country.

Matthew. 5. 26.
The text.
Be at agreement with thine adversary betimes whiles thou art in the way with
him: least perhaps the adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge
deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison.

The note.
This prison is taken of very ancient Fathers for Purgatory: namely, Saint
Cyprian epist. 52. ad Anton. nu. 6.

The answer.
And what need Fathers for this? Is it not enough that your holy father of
Rome takes it so? The fathers might err, he can not err. If this prison be
purgatory, then no man can pass out of it without paying the last farthing.
And if that be so, the sale of pardons, and such pelte is marred. For how can
pardon take place where payment is so peremptorily required? But Cyprian takes
it for purgatory, I have looked into the place by you quoted, and find it not
so: only he touches there this present place, but neither his words, nor the
circumstances of the place before, nor after do enforce any meaning of your
purgatory that I can see. In quest. ex nouo and veteri testamento, cap. 70.
Therefore it argues either great negligence in you, in not searching, or
great penury of fathers so applying this place: De salutaribus documentis cap.
64.
if you searching could find none more plain for your turn than this.
Augustine expounds this place of hell plainly and flatly. Eusebius de
preparatione Euangelica. lib. 11. cap. 20.
As for your purgatory, Plato the Ethnicke philosopher of great fame, was the
first founder thereof that I have read of.

Matthew. 5. 43.
The text.
Thou shall love thine neighbor, and hate thine enemy.

The note.
So taught the Pharisees; not the law.

The answer.
So say we to them that turn precepts to counsels, so teach the papists, and
not the Gospel.

Matthew. 5. ^5.
The text.
Who makes his sun to rise upon good and bad, and raineth upon just and
unjust.

The note.
We see that the temporal prosperity of persons, and countries is no sign of
better men, or truer religion.

The answer.
Therefore the Popes long continued roll of succession, is no good argument to
approve his religion, nor his present prosperity, his goodness, and
holiness.

Matthew. 6. 11.
The text.
Give us to day our supersubstantiall bread.

The note.
In Saint Luke the Latin is, panem quotidianum, daily bread, the Greek being
indifferent to both, (...).

The answer.
You do in this according to your common custom, that which is most obscure,
farthest from the peoples understanding, and may best serve you to dally
withal, that you make choice of.

Matthew. 6. 31.
The text.
Be not careful therefore, saying what shall we eat, or what shall we drink,
or wherewith shall we be covered? For all these things the heathen do seek
after.

The note.
They seek temporal things only, and that not of the true God, but of their
idols, or by their own industry.

The answer.
To contend with you about the heathen it were but a folly. It is manifest
that many of them looked for immortality of the soul, and felicity after
this life, as their Elisij campi do testify. But for seeking either by your
own industry, or by them which are no gods, you and they may be coupled
together. For you be right cousin germans, and therein you give them not
place an inch.

Matthew. 7. 11.
The text.
If you then being naught, know how to give good gifts to your children, how
much more will your Father which is in heaven, give good things to them that
ask him.

The note.
These good things are graces and all spiritual gifts, and whatsoever
pertains to the health of the soul.

The answer.
If al these things be given us of God, and so are of his frank and free
liberality, then with what face teach you, that your own merits must get us
heaven, and gain us the salvation of our souls.

Matthew. 9. 2.
The text.
And Jesus seeing their faith, said to the sick of the palsy, etc.

The note.
We see that the faith of one helps to obtain for another.

The answer.
It is very true that there is mutual help given by the faithful whiles they
live one to another, ^am. 5. 15, 16. Romans 1. 1^.
both by prayer to obtain good things at Gods hand, and also to comfort and
confirm one another mutually in faith, and all goodness: but what makes this
for that which you teach fools to look for, that is, help by them which are
dead and gone.

Matthew 9. 15.
The text.
But the days will come when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and
then they shall fast.

The note.
Christ signifies that the Church shall use fasting days after his Ascension.
Epiphanius in Compend. fid. Cath. August. epist. 80.

The answer.
Christ does not prescribe any certain day, or days every week to fast in,
howsoever occasions do fall out: neither does he appoint men when they fast,
to abstain from one kind of meat, and to fill their belly with another:
your fathers you might have spared. As Thursdayes.
The fasting days there set down by Epiphanius under the name of Apostolical
tradition, for verifying and fulfilling this place, August. epist. ^6.
your church observes not. As for Augustine, he knew of no such tradition
that is of any days appointed by Christ, or his Apostles to fast in.

Matthew. 9. 32.
The text.
But Jesus turning and seeing her, said, have a good heart daughter, thy faith
has made thee safe.

The note.
Lo, her devotion to the hemme of his garment, was not superstition, but a
token of greater faith: so is the devout touching of holy relikes.

The answer.
It is true that her devotion was not superstition, but a token of faith mixed
with many infirmities, which infirmities it pleased Christ (for such is his
mercy toward his) not to impute, but to forgive. And where you draw from this
example an approbation of your superstitious touching holy relikes, you do
amiss. For her act is not set down for a common rule for others to follow,
and though it were, yet it could not serve, but where the principal things to
be considered of are alike, which will far disagree in any relike that you can
name used in Popery.

Matthew. 9. 34.
The text.
But the Pharisees said, in the prince of devils he casts out devils.

The note.
In like manner say the heretics, calling all miracles done in the Church, the
lying signs of Antichrist.

The answer.
It is but vain to quarrel with you, for giving us the odious names of
heretics, and usurping to your synagogue of Satan the glorious name of the
Catholic church. We do not call all miracles done in your synagogue lying
signs, for God diverse times by miracles has disclosed the impiety, and
hypocrisy of your Antichristian captains of Rome, as the miraculous
discovery of six thousand infants heads before murdered by adulterous
priests, Huldericus Augusta. episcopus in epist. ad papam Nicholaum. Nicholaus
Clemangis.
constrained to single life in the days of Gregory the great, and the
appearing of an owl in a council holden at Rome, by pope John the xxiiii.
after the mass of the holy Ghost solemnly song at the beginning of the
council, and such like. But those which either by the illusion of the devil
have been done, or by your ancestors fained to be done, to uphold popish
corruptions contrary to the manifest truth of the word, whereof some are
babish, some ridiculous, some so foul and filthy as that they would loathe
any honest ear to hear, we do, and may well call lying signs of Antichrist.
Of these whosoever vouchsafes to waste some time in your legenda aurea, or in
promptuario exemplorum, or in mill miraculis beat. Mart. or such like books,
shall find store to your shame.

Matthew. 10. 5.
The text.
Into the way of the Gentiles go ye not, and into the cities of the Samaritans
enter ye not.

The note.
They have here commission to preach only in Israel: the time being not yet
come to call the Gentiles.

The answer.
Whereby we see the depth of the counsel and wisdom of God to be such, as no
man can render a reason of, and that in his wisdom he sometime withdraws
the light of his Gospel, and communicates it in comparison but to a ^ewe, and
sometime again he causes it to shine forth brightly, and the knowledge of it
to spread far abroad.

Matthew. 10. 16.
The text.
Be ye therefore wise as serpents, and simple as doves.

The note.
Wisdom and simplicity both necessary in preachers, Bishops, and priests.

The answer.
But you join wisdom and double dealing together, and hold it for a
principle, that you are not bound to deal simply and truly with your
adversaries, Concilium Constantiense sessione 19.
as both that conclusion of the council of Constance, that faith given to
heretics is not to be kept, and also the continual practice of your church
does very well testify. And you do well in reckening bishops and priests
beside preachers, because skant the tenth or tithe of your bishops and priests
were wont to preach.

Mat. 10. 28.
The text.
And fear ye not them that kill the body, and are not able to kill the soul.

The note.
A goodly comfort for christians and catholics, and all good men, in the
persecutions of Turk, of heretics, of all wicked men.

The answer.
Which comfort did animate and encourage all those, whom you have burnt and
killed for religion, to testify the truth against you, with loss of their
lives, and shedding of their blood.

Mat. 10. 41.
The text.
And he that receives a just man, in the name of a just man, shall receive the
reward of a just man.

The note.
The reward for harboring and helping any blessed just person suffering for his
justice and conscience.

The answer.
To this we agree, but your meaning we are far from. For your meaning is, that
wheresoever reward is expressed, there also merit of work should be
understood. As if it were not possible for God to be more bountiful in
rewarding, than we are meritorious in deserving. Otherwise it were a simple
silly reward, that a cup of cold water could deserve.

Mat. 12. 7.
The text.
And if you did know what it is, I will mercy, and not sacrifice: you would
never have condemned the innocents.

The note.
See the annotation chap. 9. verse. 13.

The answer.
You are loath your note should pass vnuiewed, and therefore you make this
reference. Well we have seen it, and find that, which any young schooler with
very small study would have set down. The best commendation it deserves,
is, that it sauoreth not so much of your usual corruption, as commonly your
notes do. Other thing it has not worth the nothing down.

Mat. 12. 25.
The text.
Every kingdom divided against it self, shall be made desolate: and every
city or house divided against it self, shall not stand.

The note.
Therefore the kingdom of heretics can not possibly stand, because it is
always full of division and dissension.

The answer.
If all heresies and sects in the whole world be raked out, and al their
contentions, and strifes numbered, yet neither in number, nor in weight can they
exceed the strifes that have been, and are among our popish heretics
themselves. Wherefore as their kingdom has already begun to fall, so it is
not like to endure.

Mat. 12. 33.
The text.
Either make the tree good, and his fruit good: or make the tree evil, and
his fruit evil.

The note.
It is a man's own free will, and election, to be a good tree, or an ill tree,
to bring forth good fruits or bad. So Augustine upon this place. Lib. 2. cap.
4. de Actis cum Foelice Manichaeo.

The answer.
I marvel not that peevish papists hold this, for their own consciences do
testify to them, that the best ground they have for being such trees, as
papists may be, is the corrupt motions of their own will, and choice. But we
know that no man comes to Christ, John 10. 29.
but whom the father draws, John 15. 16.
and he has no sheep but those whom his father has given him, and of them he
pronounces they make not choice of him, but he of them. As for Augustine he
wrote scant advisedly of freewill, till Pelagius did awake him. Retract. primo,
cap. 23.
For till then as he himself confesses, he had not diligently sought nor yet
found, what the election of grace meant. Therefore in the matter of freewill, if
you bring any thing, that Augustine wrote before he wrote against Pelagius, you
do but abuse men with his name against his mind, which in this shall appear
thus. The question between the Manichees and Augustine was, what was the
original cause of evil? The Manichean makes two eternal, incommutable
natures, one good, the other evil, one the author of good, the other the
author of evil. On the contrary part, Augustine makes freewill the original
cause of evil. The Manichean amongst other scriptures, wrested to his purpose
to prove his two natures, uses this of the two trees good and bad. Augustine
to take away his application of this text answers, that it was the will of man
that made him a bad tree, and that it was in his choice whether he would be
good, or bad. After this arises Pelagius, of whom the papists have learned
their freewill: he for his defense catches at speeches used by Augustine
against the Manicheans. Augustine replieth, that though some speeches used
against the Manicheans might seem to favor the error of freewill, yet other
speeches of his, even in those his books against the Manicheans, will
sufficiently clear him from any such meaning, De natura and gratia cap. 67.
and therefore gives men this rule, that that, which in those books, and in
that question he spoke of will to do well, he spoke of the will of man in which
man was first created, Retract. lib. 1. cap. 9.
and not otherwise. Thus we see that our Rhemists learned this of their
captain Pelagius; and that they go about by Augustine to prove that which he
meant not, that is, the freedom of our wills now.

Matt. 13. 13.
The text.
Therefore in parables I speak to them: because seeing, they see not, and
hearing they hear not, neither do they understand.

The note.
When Gods word is preached they properly have ears to hear, that have hearts
to obey, and they hearing do not hear, which hear by sense of their body,
and obey not by consent of their hearts. August. de done perseuerantiae, cap. 14.

The answer.
We like Augustines exposition very well, and pray to God most heartily for
you, that he in mercy will vouchsafe to withdraw from you, that his heavy
judgment, which most manifestly has lien upon you, and to give you now at
length ears to hear, and eyes to see withal, which hitherto you have most
dangerously wanted.

Matthew. 13. 39.
The text.
And the enemy that sowed them is the devil.

The note.
Not God then, but the devil is the author of all evil.

The answer.
In this we consent, saving that we know you have a malicious meaning, to make
your blind ignorant followers believe that we hold God to be the author of
evil, which assertion we and every one of us do with all our hearts abhor,
and detest, as most wicked, and blasphemous.

Matthew. 13. ^8.
The text.
Which when it was filled, drawing it forth, and sitting by the shore, they
choose out the good into vessels, but the bad they did cast out.

The note.
Here also are signified good, and bad in the church.

The answer.
No man does deny but that in the outward account of the church so long as it
is in this vale of misery, many hypocrites are, and yet in truth, and in the
judgment of him that cannot be deceived in discerning his, never of the church.

Matthew. 14. ^.
The text.
And the king was stricken sad: yet because of his oath, and for them that sat
with him at table he commanded it to be given.

The note.
A wicked and a rash oath, and more wickedly fulfilled: because an unlawful oath
binds no man.

The answer.
That a wicked rash oath binds no man to performance, we easily consent. But
this can be no cloak for the manifold periuries, which your company have
committed many ways: but most specially in breaking the lawful oath of
obedience to their lawful prince, not rashly, but with good advise and
deliberation made by the most part of them.

Matthew. 14. 1^.
The text.
And his disciples came and took the body, and buried it, and came and told
Jesus.

The note.
Saint John's disciples at this time had well learned their duty toward Christ.

The answer.
Two things commendable in John's disciples are here set down unto us: Their
expressing of their love toward their master and teacher in burying his body,
and their repair to Christ. But how much, and how greatly they had pr^fited in
the doctrine which their master had taught them, that appears not.

Matthew. 14. 31.
The text.
And incontinent Jesus stretching forth his hand took hold of him, and said
unto him, O thou of little faith.

The note.
Notwithstanding the infirmities of them that govern the Church, yet Christ
sustaineth them and holds them up yea and by them, whatsoever they are he
vpholdeth, and preserves his Church.

The answer.
Far fetched, and dear bought is good for ladies. Christ saved Peter from
drowning, notwithstanding the weakness of his faith: Therefore he must needs
save the Pope, whatsoever infirmities be in him. Other, or better consequence
than this, out of this place I am sure you can make none. For that you do not
mean all that govern any part of the Church, I gather, both because you
reason from Peter, and also because you grant that any particular bishop may
err. Now if your consequence be true, then tell me how Christ uphold your pope
John against the council of Constance, Session 12.
who deposed him. And if he were not before that Council the chief governor of
your Church, tell me who was. And if Christ did not uphold him, and by him your
church, tell me when you gat again restitution of your supposed privilege,
once broken. This example therefore serves more aptly to encourage men to
follow Christ, to do whatsoever he commands, with whatsoever dangers it be
accompanied, because Christ will not ^aile them that walk in holy obedience to
his will, how weak, frail, and full of infirmities soever they be, but as at
the pinch he aided Peter, so will he them.

Matthew. 14. 36.
The text.
And they besought him, that they might touch but the hemme of his garment, and
whosoever did touch it were made whole.

The note.
See before cap. 9. v. 20.

The answer.
You trouble us with your references, your note has been already considered
of, and received answer in his due place.

Matthew. 15. 28*
The text.
Then Jesus answering said to her, (o woman) great is thy faith, be it done to
thee as thou will: and her daughter was made whole from that hour.

The note.
It were a strange case that Christ should commend in this woman a sole faith
without good works, that is to say, a dead faith, such as could not work by
love, and which Saint James doubted not to call the faith not of Christians but
of devils. August. de fide and operibus. cap. 16.

The answer.
It were a very strange case if papists should leave lying, fraud and deceit.
For who sees not, that the end and purpose of your note is, to make men
think, that your adversaries attribute much to a dead faith, that cannot work
by love: And if there be any that does so, name him. And if in truth you cannot
name any, then what are ye? Because we say that faith only justifies, must it
needs therefore be a dead faith? Because the eye only sees, must it needs
be pulled out of the head, and be without all other organs and instruments of
the body? Who sees not the folly of this? We with Augustine affirm, that
Christ saw in this woman whose faith he praised, a wonderful work of love.

Matthew. 15. 36.
The text.
And taking the seven loaves and the fishes, and giving thanks, he brake, and
gave to his disciples, and the disciples gave to the people.

The note.
Here we see again that the people must not be their own caruers, nor
receive the sacraments or other spiritual sustenance immediately of Christ, or
at their own hands, but of their spiritual governors.

The answer.
This collection is very loosely gathered. The disciples gave bread and fish to
the peole, ergo it is not lawful for the people to receive any spiritual
sustenance immediately from Christ, but only from them, that are their
governors under Christ. I think if we make a consequence from bodily
sustenance to the sustenance of our souls, that then it follows better thus:
That as this people when they were at home provided themselves for their bodily
sustenance, and here being abroad they receive it provided for them, at the
hands of the Apostles: so also it is lawful for men at home to receive
spiritual sustenance by their diligent reading, and abroad to receive it at
the hands of their ordinary pastors and teachers in their open meetings, by
hearing the word preached and taught.

Matthew. 16. 18.
The text.
And I say unto thee, that thou art Peter, etc.

The note.
That is a rock.

The answer.
Your reasons drawn from this place, to stablish the tyranny of Antichrist,
have often been answered. 1. Cor ^. 11.
And because here no reason is framed, we say with the holy Apostle Paul, that
we know none other rock or foundation to build Christ's Church upon, but Christ
himself.

Matthew. 16. 23.
The text.
Who turning said to Peter, go after me Satan, thou art a scandal unto me.

The note.
This word in Hebrew signifies an adversary, as 3. Regum. 5. v. 4. and so it
is taken here.

The answer.
We will not impugn your qualification of the word: and lessen Saint Peter's
rebuke, as much as you can, yet this we may see evidently, that men are but
unstaid, and unstable rocks to build the Church upon: and except the Pope be
better privileged than Peter was, sometime he may be an adversary and a
(...)* I will not ^ay a devil.

Matthew. 17. 24.
The text.
And when they were come to Capernaum, there came they that received the
Didrachmes unto Peter, and said unto him: your master, does he not pay the
Didrachmes?

The note.
These didrachmes were pieces of money, which they paid for tribute.

Matthew. 1^. 27.
The text.
And that fish which shall first come up, take, and when thou have opened his
mouth, thou shall find a stater: take that, and give it for me and thee.

The note.
This stater was a double didrachme, and therefore was paid for two.

The answer.
To these two notes, I give but one answer, for they reserved these strange
words in the text, because English ears are not acquainted with them, and
other matter there is not in these notes worth the observing.

Matthew. 18. 4.
The text.
Whosoever therefore shall humble him self as this little child, he is the
greater in the kingdom of heaven.

The note.
Humility, innocence, simplicity commended to us in the state and person of
a child.

The answer.
But none of them embraced by you, as appears. Your Pope can abide no peer,
he must be above all, you puff up your selves with the proud pharisie, in
confidence of men's merits; what innocents you are, a number of you executed for
confessed treason, do declare: simplicity cannot stand with the continual
practice of your Church, which of long time has loved nothing less, then
plain dealing, as both our eyes have seen, and all stories do testify.

Matthew. 18. 17.
The text.
And if he will not hear them tell the Church.

The note.
That is (as Saint Chrysostom here expounds it) tell the prelates, and
chief pastors of the Church, for they have jurisdiction to bind, and loose
such offenders by the words following, verse. 18.

The answer.
We agree with Chrysostom because the circumstances of the place, and matter
do require it so to be expounded, that here by the Church the governors
thereof are meant, and that they have power to bind and loose, and therefore is
a good warrant for our Church discipline against Papists, and all other
scornful contemners, and despisers of the same.

Matthew. 18. 19
The text.
Again I say to you, that if two of you consent upon earth, concerning every
thing whatsoever they shall ask, it shall be done to them of my father, which is
in heaven.

The note.
All joining together in the unity of Christ's Church in Councels, and Sinods,
or public prayers, is of more force than of any particular man.

The answer.
It is true that the unity and agreement of Gods Saints joined in prayer, and
the consent of many governors of the Church in executing discipline, is of more
force than if the same be done of a very few. And yet your proud prelate of
Rome will have his doings being but one, stand and be of force against all
consent whatsoever.

Matthew. 19. 11.
The text.
Not all take this word, but they to whom it is given.

The note.
(...) capiunt.

The answer.
This most plainly shows, that the virtue of continency is not in every man's
will, but a rare gift of God, and that therefore they not only deal rashly,
but also directly against Gods will, and pleasure that vow perpetual single
life. And I do not doubt but that your other annotations shall shortly be
answered.

Matthew. 19. 17.
The text.
But if thou will enter into life, keep the commandments.

The note.
I see not, says Saint Augustine, why Christ should say, if thou will have
life everlasting, keep the commandments, if without observing of them by
only faith, one might be saved. Augustine de fide and operi. cap. 1^.

The answer.
Augustine in that place, speaks not against those that ascribe justification
to a true and a lively faith, but against the papistical opinion of them, which
understood by them, that build upon Christ hay and stubble, such Christians as
live wickedly, whom they affirmed, that they should pass through purgatory
fire, and so be partakers of salvation through the merit of their foundation.
Against these Augustine replieth, that he sees not to what purpose Christ
should exact the keeping of the commandments, if such a faith, that is, a bare
profession of Christianity, might save. What is this against that faith which
works obedience in believers, as it is written. Hebr. 11 9.
By faith Abraham obeyed God: who then sees not your vanity in applying
against us, that which was spoken against the patrones of purgatory?

Matt. 19. 24.
The text.
And again I say to you, it is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a
needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven.

The note.
Saint Mark expounds it thus, rich men trusting in their riches. cap. 10.
verse 24.

The answer.
This (as far as I now remember) is the first note save one, given us by
conference of places of Scripture. And if this kind of gathering were more in
use with you, we should have a great many fewer controversies betwixt us.

Matt. 19 29.
The text.
And every one that has left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or
mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my names sake, shall receive an
hundred fold, and shall possess life everlasting.

The note.
Hereof is gathered that the Apostles amongst other things left their wives
also to follow Christ. Hierom. lib. 1. aduer. Iouinianum.

The Answer.
The Apostles were never taught by Christ to leave those duties unperformed,
which God had imposed upon men, therefore not their duties toward their
wives. Further, to leave these things, was not absolutely to leave either
possession, or use of them, but only so to bridle them selves, as that the
having of these things were no withdrawing of them from cleaving to Christ, and
following their calling. Matthew. 9. 10.
For Matthew had still his house, in which he feasted Christ. John 11. 1.
Lazarus and his sisters dwelt in their own at Bethania: Matthew. 27. 57.
Joseph was rich, and yet a disciple: and if Peter's wives mother were cared
for, Matthew. 8. 14.
and healed of her fever, it is not likely that her daughter was cast off.
Further, what say you to the canons, Canon. 6.
which you say are the Apostles, which forbid priests to leave their wives
under pretense of religion. But you tell us that Hierome gathers it: what
then? must we therefore of necessity believe it. He tells us in the same
book that the end of marriage is death, and the end of single life is life:
and I am sure you therein believe him not. But this is your practice, such
absurd collections as you are ashamed to set down as your own gathering, ye
gladly shroud under the name of some Father, to abuse your followers with.

Matthew. 20. 11.
The text.
And receiving it, they murmured against the good man of the house, saying.

The note.
The Jews are noted for envying the vocation of the Gentiles, and their
reward equal with them selves.

The answer.
It is true that the Jews envied the calling of the Gentiles, as the papists
at this day can not abide that reformed Christians take the name of Catholic
christians, and Church of God: but that by this murmuring that envying of
equality of reward is meant, is your bare surmise, which you can not prove.
For the purpose of the parable is nothing else, but to show that it is free for
God, to reward whom he will, though they deserve it not.

Matthew. 20. 25.
The text.
And Jesus called them unto him and said, you know that the princes of the
Gentiles over rule them, and they that are the greater, exercise power against
them.

The note.
Superiority is not here forbidden amongst Christians, neither
ecclesiastical, nor temporal: but heathenish tirannie is forbidden, and
humility commended.

The answer.
Christ here distinguishes the regiment of his church from civil government,
and denies that any of the Apostles shall be advanced over his fellow apostles
in dignity, as kings over their subjects, which ^latlie strikes down your
supposed primacie of Peter. Urbanus sextus drowned five Cardinals. Sergius
tertius dug pope Formosus out of his grave.
As for heathenish tirannie the popes of Rome have exceeded all that ever went
before them, for they have not only put their Cardinals into sackes, and
thrown them into the sea, but also they have not suffered one another to rest
in their graves.

Matthew. 21. 12.
The text.
And Jesus entered into the temple of God, and cast out all that sold and bought
in the temple.

The note.
How much the abuse of the churches, by marchandizing, walking, or other
profane occupying of them, displeases God, here we may see.

The answer.
Profane occupying of the church displeases God, but here is a further thing
meant, namely, buying and selling under pretense of religion and service of
God, as here the selling of such things as perteined to the service of the
temple, and with you the selling of masses, diriges, trentals, and pardons, and
such like stuff. Where covetousness of sacrificing priests, is the express
cause of profaning the temple, which you s^ilie pass over, because it
touches your selves very nighlie.

Matthew. 21. 19.
The text.
And seeing a certain fig tree by the way side, he came to it: and found
nothing o^ it, but leaves only.

The note.
The Jews having the word of the law, and not the deeds, were the fig tree
full of leaves and void of fruit. Aug. de verb. dom. sermon. 44.

The answer.
In the fig tree he did set out what end and issue remains for hypocrites,
which make a show of that which they have not.

Matthew. 22. 10.
The text.
And his servants going forth into the ways, gathered together all that they
found, bad and good, and the marriage was filled with guestes.

The note.
Not only good men be within the church, but also evil men against the
heretics of these days.

The answer.
To which we answer that though in the outward participation of the word and
sacraments, many wicked are joined with good, yet in truth none are of the
church but such as to whom the promises of remission of sins, and resurrection
to life eternal do pertain. And also we say that this is a frivolous
collection, drawn from the outward calling to the truth of being in the
church. For many are called, but few chosen. Further nothing can justly be
gathered out of this parable but that the Jews, which were first called, made
themselves unworthy of their calling, and that in calling the Gentiles into
their rooms, and place, there was no respect had, how bad they were before
their conversion. But the grossest sinners for the most part, did soonest and
gladliest receive the promise of grace, and favor offered in Christ. And they
that rack the calling, and coming beyond this: rack it beyond the meaning of
Christ. And the bad that come without amendment, shall be sure to be served, as
he that came without his marriage garment.

Matthew. 23. 5.
The text.
But they do all their works, to be seen of men. For they make broad their
philacteries, and enlarge their fringes.

The note.
These philacteries were pieces of parchment, wherein they wrote the ten
commandments, and folded it, and carried it on their fordhead before their
eyes, imagining groslie and supersticiouslie, that so they fulfilled that which
is said. Deuteronomy. 6. They shall be immooueable before thine eyes, Hierom in 23.
Mat.

The answer.
It is well that you so diligently tell us the meaning of the word
philacteries, but the simpler sort must take it upon your own credit, for they
can not look into Hierom for it. But this they may see, that the Pharisees
neither in apparel, nor otherwise hunted more for estimation of holiness
amongst men, than your sectaries (I should have said) religious, do most
manifestly.

Matthew. 23. 37.
The text.
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the prophets, and stonest them that were
sent to thee, how often would I gather thy children, as the hen does gather her
chickens under her wings, and thou would not.

The note.
Freewill.

The answer.
It is true that men of their own will do freely, and frankly sin, and
refuse grace, but this is their greatest slavery, and bondage that can be. For
so they show themselves slaves of sin. And therefore if that be the freedom of
will you so much contend for, you may take it to your selves.

Matthew. 24. 11.
The text.
And many false prophets shall rise, and shall seduce many.

The note.
There were in the people false prophets, as among you also shall be lieng
masters, which shall bring in sects of perdition, 2. Peter. 2.

The answer.
If lieng, and denieng the benefit of Christ's death, by which we were bought,
be good, and true notes to know false prophets by, as they are for that purpose
there by Peter delivered, then all the governors of the popish church be false
prophets. Their lies are so gross, as that they themselves are ashamed of
them, and how they give to others, the glory of our redemption only due to
Christ, he knows nothing that knows not.

Matthew. 24. 23.
The text.
Then if any man shall say to you, Lo here is Christ, or there: do not believe
him.

The note.
Whosoever draws Christ, or his Church from the communion, or fellowship of
all nations Christened, to one corner, town, or country believe him not.
Augustine de unit Ecclesiae. cap. 3.

The answer.
Augustine there teaches us to seek the church in the Scriptures, not at
Rome, but diffused euerywhere thorough the whole world. They therefore that
lead us to Rome to seek Christ and his church there, by this rule of
Augustine are not to be believed, because Rome is but one little corner,
country, or rather town of the world. We embrace that doctrine, which the
Apostles planted in all nations, and we hold that God since the calling of the
Gentiles, has had always his church generally dispersed thorough the world,
though in all places, and in all times not alike, and though to us, which live
at this time, and in one corner of the world, a great number of the churches
children, or rather particular churches, have been, and are hidden, and
unknown. But this we know, that Rome sometimes a faithful city, is now, and
has been many years become a harlot.

Matthew. 24. 30*
The text.
And then shall appear the sign of the son of man in heaven.

The note.
This sign of the son of man is the holy cross, which then shall appear
to the Jews to their confusion. Chrysostom. in Matt. homilia 77. It shall be no
less confusion to heretics which can not abide the sign thereof.

The answer.
This is but Chrysostomes conjecture, for neither he nor you can bring any good
reason why it should be so. The glory and majesty wherein he shall come set
out in the words immediately following, by all reasonable conjecture should make
plain the words before, and declare what was meant by the sign of the son of
man. What heretics you mean that cannot abide the sign of the cross, I know
not. The idolatrous abusing of the cross in popery, and the attributing to
the sign thereof the virtues which it cannot have, that no good Christians can
abide, who yet have learned to glory in nothing, but in the cross of Christ.

Matt. 25. 8.
The text.
And the foolish said to the wise, Give us of your oil: because our lamps are
going out.

The note.
If we be not in the favor of God, and have not our own merits, we shall not
be helped by other men's deserts at the day of judgment.

The answer.
If the favor of God might so easily be procured or promerited, as some
papists write by saying of Aue Maria, Mill miracula beatae Mariae.
or offering to our Lady a taper, or serving some saint, I think few would
die out of the favor of God. But to that, which I take to be your meaning, if
men be in the favor of God, and have some merits of their own, then they may
be helped by other men's deserts. Which collection is tied to this place with
points. For though we should understand as you do, by oil, meritorious works,
yet the quite contrary is flatly heerof gathered. First they are here
condemned for fools that go a borrowing, or seek help at the merits of
others. Then they that b^ wise dare spare none from themselves, for fear of
wanting themselves. And from whence then may men get that supply of merits,
when they which are wisest and best, can spare none. But because you have no
manifest scriptures to warrant your merits, you delight to draw, and strain
parables perforce to your purpose. For the meaning of that parable is nothing
else, but that they which during life, and the time which God grants them
here, neglect the ordinary means, which God has appointed for their
salvation, shall wish for it then when it is too late, and when they cannot have
it.

Matt. 23. 20.
The text.
Lord, five talents thou did deliver me, behold I have gained other five
besides.

The note.
Freewill with Gods grace does merit.

The answer.
It pleases God in mercy to reward liberally his servants, which use the
gifts, which God has bestowed on them, to the honor of God, and benefit of his
Church. What makes this either for free will, or for merits.

Matt. 25. 26.
The text.
And his Lord answering, said to him: Naughty and slothful servant, thou
did know that I reap where I sow not, etc.

The note.
A terrible example for all such as do not employ the very lest gift of God to
his glory.

The answer.
If this were as well weighed of you, as it is written: you would not waste
your gifts upon advancing the man of sin, and child of perdition, the proud
Antichrist of Rome, who vaunteth himself above all that is called God.

Matt. 25. 34.
The text.
Come ye blessed of my father, possess you the kingdom prepared for you from
the foundation of the world.

The note.
This kingdom then is prepared for those only that do goodworks: as Christ
also signifies else where, saying that it is not in his power to give it
otherwise. See the annotations chap. 20. verse 23.

The answer.
This note might be passed over, if the corrupt meaning of them, which give it
were not manifest. Therefore this we say, that whosoever by believing in the
name of Christ have power to become the sons of God, Ephesians. 14. ^
they also are fruitfully replenished with all manner of good works, as time,
place, occasion, and other circumstances do serve, which serves not in all
alike. For the thief upon the cross being now ready to die, Luke 23. 43.
and having spent lewdly his former life, and therefore not having means to
show forth his faith, otherwise than by confession, is promised to be partaker
of the kingdom of Christ. Ezec. 18. 22.
And at what time soever a sinner truly repents him of his sins, God
puts all his sins out of remembrance, how then can he be accursed or
excluded out of the kingdom of heaven? But our papists must either merit al at
Gods hand, or else they must have nothing. Your note to which you refer us shall
be considered of amongst your other larger annotations.

Matt. 26. 33.
The text.
Amen I say unto you, whersoeuer this Gospel shall be preached in the whole
world that also which she has done, shall be reported for a memory of her.

The note.
Heerby we learn that the good works of saints are to be recorded, and set
forth to their honor in the church after their death, whereof rise their
holidaies and commemorations.

The answer.
Hereby we learn, that through Gods great goodness the memory of the just
shall be blessed and eternal. Proverb. 10. 7
Their holidaies afterward Psalm. 112. 7.
grew (especially in such sort as they were in time of popery solemnized) when
the devil by his false Apostles entised men to give to saints that honor which
might not be lawfully given to men.

Matthew. 26. 27.
The text.
Drink ye all of this.

The note.
See the margent note. Mark 14. verse 23.

The answer.
It shall be seen and answered as it comes in course.

Matthew. 26. 31.
The text.
Then Jesus said to them, All you shall be scandalized in me, in this night.

The note.
The nocturne of mattens in the Churches service answers to this night part
of our Saviors passion, and so consequently the other canonical hours to the
rest.

The answer.
This is a clearkly note, you are well skilled belike in your Church service.
What your nocturne of mattens means whether morning prayer at night, or any
other mystery I can not tell. For I have not taken pains, neither in your pia,
nor in your portuise. But amongst other mockeries in your Church service used,
I remember that on maundy thursday at night, we went from your sacred
ceremonies in the Chapel, to the College hall, where our maundy was
provided, and there whilst a boy read on the Bible to these words rise and go
hence, we eat and drink so fast, that he sang to deafe^men, but when he came
to those words: with our mouths full, to the Chappel^we hied again: to make
an end of your fooleries, which at that time were very many, God forgive it us.

Matthew. 26. 74.
The text.
Then he began to curse, and swear that he knew not the man.

The note.
To this time the lauds do answer in the Church service.

The answer.
This is such profound gear that I know not what to say to it. For I am not
skillful in their Church service, and I can spend my time better, then now to
seek skill therein.

Matthew. 27. 6.
The text.
And the chief priest having taken the silver pieces said, It is not lawful to
cast them into the Corbanah, because it is the price of blood.

The note.
This Corbanah was a place about the temple which received the peoples gifts or
offerings. Mark 12. verse. 42.

The answer.
If you would have vouchsafed to have translated in this place Corbanah into
English, neither your note, nor your reference should have needed. Neither do
I think that you can give any good reason, why you do not translate it
treasury. As for your reference, it shall be considered of in your larger
annotations.

MARK.
Mar. 1. 4.
The text.
John was in the desert baptizing, and preaching the baptism of penance unto
remission of sins.

The note.
John's baptism put them in hope only of remission of sins as a preparatiue to
Christ's sacrament, by which sins were in deed to be remitted, Augustine lib. 5.
de baptismo cap. 10.

The answer.
In the Scriptures we learn, Matthew. 21. 25.
that John's baptism was from heaven, Luke 7. 30.
the counsel, and ordinance of God, that John was a minister thereof for that
purpose sent of God, John 1. 33.
that the hope of remission of sins was grounded on the promises of God, which
deceives not, John 1. 26.
that John was the minister of the outward element, and Christ the giver of the
inward grace. Matthew. 3. 11.
Finally, the element is the same, the doctrine is the same which the Church of
God now uses: How then ran your brains on a difference? For sooth Augustine
makes this difference. You may be a shamed to allege Augustine for that,
whereof he was not resolved. The Donatistes did rebaptise such Christians as
they wan to their congregation from Christ's Church, in defense of which dotage
they alleged for them selves the example of Paul, who (as they supposed) did
rebaptise those that were once before baptized of John. Which objection did
trouble saint Augustine not a little, so that he wist not well how to shift it.
August. de vnico baptismo. cap. 7.
For sometimes he doubts whether they were baptized with the baptism of John,
or no, or whether they did but feign that they were so baptized: sometimes he
says that those which John baptized had not their sins forgiven them, yet he
adds, that he will not contend with them that think they were indeed
remitted: Which argues Augustine in this matter not to be resolute.

Mark. 1. 15.
The text.
The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of heaven is at hand, be penitent, and
believe the Gospel.

The note.
He does not preach belief, or faith only, but penance also.

The answer.
And I pray you who ever preached faith without repentance. If we be taught to
believe the promise of remission of sins, we be taught also that that promise
is not made but to the penitent. And so you sever things inseparable. The word
penance you do but blear the eyes of the simple withal, to make them imagine
of a satisfaction. But that your dealing has been already learnedly laid out
by Master Doctor Fulke against Martinius, to whom I refer you.

Mark. 1. 44.
The text.
And he says to him, see thou tell no body: but go show thy self to the high
priest, and offer for thy cleansing the things that Moises commanded, for a
testimony to them.

The note.
Our Savior even when he healed the leaper by extraordinary miraculous power,
would not yet break order, but sent the party to the priest.

The answer.
The orders, which God has appointed to his Church, are with all reverence and
diligence to be observed, and our care is to keep them. You cannot justly
accuse our Church of any wilful, or willing breach of them.

Mark. 2. 5.
The text.
When Jesus had seen their faith, he says to the sick of the palsy, son,
thy sins are forgiven thee.

The note.
Our Lord is moved to be merciful to sinners by other men's faith and desires,
and not only by the parties own means always.

The answer.
This note is once answered already Matthew 9. And now again we say, that
amongst the manifold means which God uses in preventing us with grace and
favor, this is not the least, that he makes amongst men living, one an
instrument of an others salvation, even then often times when they that have
their salvation procured, least think of it. What is this to confidence in
dead men's prayers and help, which you draw yours to, as much as in you lies.

Mark. 2. 20.
The text.
The days will come when the bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then
shall they fast in those days.

The note.
He foretells that fasting shall be used in the church, no less then in the
old law, or in the time of John the Baptist. See Matt. c. 9. verse 15.

The answer.
This note also has already been answered in the place to which you refer
us. And for further answer we say, that Christ does not prescribe that men
under color of fasting, shall abstain from one kind of meat as profane,
and fill their bellies with another sort as more holy: neither does he
prefer fish and fruit before flesh, eggs and whit meat, in abstinence from
which, the common fast of papists does consist and stand. Otherwise fastes
commanded by Christ to his church, both public and private are in use with
us, as place, time, and occasion serves.

Mark. 2. 28.
The text.
Therefore the son of man is Lord of the Sabbath also.

The note.
The maker of the Law may abrogate or dispense, when and where for just cause
it seems good to him.

The answer.
This note is true though it come out of season, but the pope is not the maker
of Gods law, therefore he can not abrogate it, or dispense with it, as he
takes upon him most presumptuously.

Mark. 3. 10.
The text.
For he healed many, so that there preased in upon him for to touch him, as
many as had hurtes.

The note.
The only touching of Christ's holy person, or any part of his clothes, or
whatsoever belonged to him, did heal all diseases.

The answer.
This note needed no reply, if there were no secret serpent lurking under the
grass, but because it is well known that by this and such like places, the
papists seek to maintain their relikes, and the gainful merchandise that
thereupon does follow, therefore we answer that these miracles were so many
confirmations of the doctrine of Christ at the first spreading of it, which
after the doctrine sufficiently confirmed, August. Retra^^ationum 1. cap. 13.
ceased, and therefore none is not to be looked after. Besides it is apparent
that then the virtue and power, Act. 3. 12. and 16
whereby those miracles were performed, Mark. 5. 30.
were neither in any other person or thing, but only in the person of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Mark. 3. 21.
The text.
And when they had heard of it, they went forth to lay hands on him, for they
said, that he was become mad.

The note.
See here the conceit of worldly friends, who think the zeal of religion
madness, and therefore count them mad, that are zealous in Gods cause and for
the Catholic faith: and the more zealous the more mad.

The answer.
Always worldly wise men thought the profession of Christian truth madness,
or folly: and godly wise men do think the like of them, that are zealous
they wot not for what, and can give none other reason of their faith, but they
believe as the church believes, which implicate faith you count Catholic, and
allow very well in your blind followers.

Mark. 4. 11.
The text.
And he said unto them; To you it is given to know the mystery of the kingdom
of God: but to them that are without, all things are done in parables, that
seeing, they may see and not see.

The note.
Such as be out of the Church, though they hear and read never so much, they
can not understand. Bid. in 4. Marci.

The answer.
This note of Bid is manifestly collected out of this place, and therefore we
accept of it. And we marvel the less at your gross ignorance and
blindness, though you count your selves great clarks, because you have severed
your selves from the true church of God.

Mark 4. 21.
The text.
And he said to them, Comes a candle to be put under a bushel or under a
bed? and not to be put upon the candlestick.

The note.
Christ came not to teach his doctrine in corners, and hucker mucker as
heretics do, but to lighten the whole world therewith.

The answer.
It is true that the same doctrine, which Christ taught in private houses and
places, he taught also in the Temple and synagogues. And what heretics they
be, that teach not openly where they may be suffered, and seek not to make
their heresy as common as they can, I know not. And if teaching in corners,
and hucker mucker that doctrine, which can not be openly suffered to be
taught, be always a necessary note of heresy, then how excuse you Campion and
your other champions here in England from being heretics, for they taught in
corners.

Mark. 5. 12.
The text.
And the spirits besought him, saying: Send us into the swine, that we may
enter into them.

The note.
It is not without mystery, that the devils desired, and Christ suffered them
to enter into the s^ine, signifieng that filthy livers be meet dwelling
places for devils. August. tracta. 6. in epist. Iohannis.

The answer.
This mystery opened by Augustine, we well accept of, and ad, that if your
own stories say true, then in all the world, where is there a more fit place
for the devils dwelling than at Rome, and with whom there, John 13. sl^ine
being taken in adultery.
rather than with the Popes good grace, and his carnal college of Cardinals?
Such is the beastly filthiness reported of them by all stories, and not denied by
your selves.

Mark. 5. 32.
The text.
Why make you this ado and weep: the wench is not dead, but sleeps.

The note.
To Christ that can more easily raise a dead man, than we can do one that is
but asleep, death is but a sleep. Aug. de verb. Dom. ser. 44.

The answer.
But that otherwise we should not have understood, nor your ignorant followers
have marvelled at your great reading, you needed not to have quoted your Doctor
for this.

Mark. 6. 13.
The text.
And going forth they preached that they should do penance, and they cast out
many devils, and anointed with oil many sick, and healed them.

The note.
A preparatiue to the sacrament of extreme unction. Iam. 5.

The answer.
Of whom learned you this. Your Pope has coined that sacrament, and others mo
of his own authority. And you his flatterers would wring it out of the
miraculous dealing of Christ's Apostles, and others in the primitive church
before miracles ceased.

Mark. 6. 17.
The text.
For the said Herod sent and apprehended John, and bound him in prison, for
Herodias the wife of Phillip his brother, because he had married her.

The note.
He might and should by Moises law have married his brothers wife, if he had
been dead without issue: but this Phillip was yet alive, and had also this
daughter that danced.

The answer.
The case was manifest. And so was that of Henry the eight, who married his
brothers wife, when he was dead, but not to stir up issue to his brother. Which
marriage was condemned for unlawful by the greatest number of Divines and
Lawyers of your own Church. But for all that Pope Clement could salve the
matter, and make that which was naught good: such is the presumptuous power
that Antichrist takes upon him.

Mark. 7. 6.
The text.
This people honoreth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me, etc.

The note.
They that say well, or teach and preach well, and have Christ and his word,
and live naughtily, be touched in this place.

The answer.
This place does most properly touch our hypocritical papists, whatsoever show
of life they make, because a great part of their doctrine is devised by men,
and is in truth nothing else but precepts of men.

Mark. 7. 15.
The text.
But the things that proceed from a man, those are they which make a man common.

The note.
See the first annotation upon this chapter.

The answer.
Your first annotation is, that common and unclean is al one, a profound note,
and therefore needed such reference.

Mark. 8. 2.
The text.
I have compassion upon the multitude, because lo three days they now endure
with me, neither have what to eat.

The note.
Great feruor and devotion in the good people, and exceeding force in our
masters preaching, that made them abide fasting so long to hear his divine
sermons.

The answer.
But for entering into unnecessary contentions, it might be easily showed,
that a great number of this people followed not of devotion, but for other
considerations: Though their pains and long tarieng with Christ to hear him
be commendable.

Mark. 8. 2^.
The text.
And they come to Bethsaida: and they bring to him one blind, and desired him
that he would touch him.

The note.
Our Savior Christ used to work much by touching, that we may learn not to
contemn the corporal and externe application of holy things, nor to
challenge by the spirit and faith only, as heretics do.

The answer.
Our Savior Christ many times to declare his mere omnipotency, healed by his
word, without any externe application of anything. Other times applieng
himself to the infirmity and weakness of them, with whom he had to do, used
some external application, not to bring into estimation, or reverence,
spittle, clay, oil, or such like, much less your rotten relikes as you
imagine: but to teach us (wherein we may) to bear with the infirmities one of
another. We challenge nothing by spirit, and faith only, but that that, which
we have good warrant for. And we do most reverently esteem and use all outward
helps, props, and stays of our faith appointed of God, and warranted in his
word, as public and private reading and hearing of his word, the frequenting
of the Church assemblies, public and private prayers, administration of the
sacraments, and such like.

Mark. 9. ^.
The text.
And after six days Jesus takes Peter, James and John, and brings them
alone into a high mountain apart, and was transfigured before them.

The note.
See the annotations upon the 17. of Saint Matthewe.

The answer.
Your annotations shall be answered by some other, I am loathe to be drawn from
your marginall notes.

Mark 9. 4.
The text.
And there appeared to them Elias with Moises: and they were talking with Jesus.

The note.
The Law and the Prophets join with Christ and his Gospel: the one signified
by Moses, the other by Elias, by whose apparitions also we may learn that
sometime there may be personal intercourse betwixt the living and the dead,
though not ordinarily.

The answer.
That the testimony which the Law and Prophets do bear to Christ, is
signified by the appearing of Moses and Elias, I easily consent. The
possibility of intercourse personal betwixt the living and dead, because all
things are possible to God, I will not contend with you about it: but that
which you note it for to give credit to the fables and tales forged for
purgatory, is never the more likely. But it is possible for all that, that
they may be lies.

Mark 9. 29.
The text.
And he said to them, This kind can go out by nothing, but by prayer and
fasting.

The note.
Note the great force of prayer and fasting.

The answer.
The force thereof (God be praised) we have had great experience of, as well for
that the prayers and tears of the poor afflicted in Queen Mary's time being
heard of God, threw out so many popish devils out of England, as that also by
the same weapons, the devils vicar of Rome is kept from working his will, and
satsfying his malice amongst us.

Mark 9. 41.
The text.
For whosoever shall give you to drink a cup of water in my name, because
you are Christ's: Amen I say to you, he shall not loose his reward.

The note.
Reward for alms deeds, whereby it is evident that they be meritorious.

The answer.
If the reward be measured by the merit, the reward for giving a cup of water
should skant be worth the receiving. But make much of this evidence, for
though it be bad, it is as good as the best ye have.

Mark 9. 42.
The text.
And whosoever shall scandalize one of these little ones believing in me: it is
good for him rather if a millstone were put about his neck, and he were cast
into the sea.

The note.
To give scandal by our life to the weak in faith, is a great sin, specially
in priests, preachers, and princes.

The answer.
Your seeking for terms to the multitude unknown and out of use, is (as you
term it) a great scandal or offense to obscure and darken of purpose the
scriptures of God, and therefore in you a great sin.

Mark 10. 9.
The text.
That therefore which God has joined together, let not man separate.

The note.
The obligation betwixt man and wife is so great, that during life it can not
be broken.

The answer.
The text does not teach that it can not be broken, but that it ought to be
inviolable. That it is broken by them, which after marriage have carnal
copulation with an harlot, 1. Cor. 6. 16.
it is manifest, for they make themselves one flesh with an harlot. And how
there can be more than two in one flesh, I know not.

Mark 10. 16.
The text.
And embracing them, and imposing hands upon them, he blessed them.

The note.
Our Savior gave the children his blessing.

The answer.
Whereby we see he accepts of poor infants, and declares his love and
favor which he bears to them. But magical virtue and force which you
commonly imagine in the word of blessing, I see none.

Mark 10. 18.
The text.
Good master, what shall I do that I may receive life everlasting. And Jesus
said to him, why call thou me good? none is good but one, God. Thou know
the commandments.

The note.
Note that the keeping of Gods commandments procures life everlasting.

The Answer.
Note that this young man had been instructed by the scribes and pharisees, as
you also now teach your followers: namely, to procure life by his deeds, as
appears by the question which he propounded to Christ. Note also that Christ's
answer is fit for the question, for there is none other means by our deeds to
attain life, then the perfect and exact obedience of Gods commandments. Note
further in his answer to Christ, how foolishlie he was besotted with the
opinion of his obedience, and note lastly, how Christ laid open his
hypocrisy to him, whereby it did manifestly appear, that he neither loved
God, nor his neighbor so well as him self. Therefore our own righteousness
and obedience failing us, God has provided a remedy for us, the
righteousness of faith, that is to say, the righteousness and obedience of our
Christ imputed to believers.

Mark 10. 21.
The text.
And Jesus beholding him, loved him, and said to him, One thing is wanting unto
thee, go sell whatsoever thou have, and give to the poor.

The note.
This is a counsel of perfection, (not a precept) which the religious
professing and keeping voluntary poverty, do follow.

The answer.
Be Gods commandments now become imperfect, that perfection wanting in the
commandments must be sought for in counsels? Psalm. 19. 7.
Then how was the Law of the Lord a perfect Law? This was a commandment given
him to bewraie how far he was from that he vaunted of, and to bring him to see
that he had not kept the commandments in such perfection, as before he
imagined. Your voluntary poverty has neither warrant by this, nor any other
place of scripture.

Mark. 10. 29.
The text.
Amen I say to you, there is no man, which has left house, or brethren, or
sisters, or father, or mother, or children, or lands, for me and for the
Gospel, that shall not receive an hundred times so much now at this time, etc.

The note.
Exceeding happy be they that can forsake their temporal things for religion.

The answer.
Because God has promised to recompense them both here and in the life to
come.

Mark. 11. 8.
The text.
And many spread their garments in the way, and others did cut down boughs
from the trees, and strawed them in the way.

The note.
All these voluntary duties ^^ere grateful to our Savior, and so be the like
done to him in the blessed Sacrament.

The answer.
You have gotten a good warrant for setting the Sacrament on horse back, as
they say your holy father does at Rome, but for prisoning him in a p^^e, and
trussing him upon every altar in a string, you must fetch your president from
Annas, Caiphas, and Pilate, and not from this people. But I pray you, were you
in good earnest, when you made this note, or do you think, that those duties
ought, or might be done to him in the Sacrament, that ought, and might be done
to him, when he was in body here conversant amongst us. If you affirm it, we
shall find you deny it again with an other breath. And if you dare not affirm
it, then what is become of your note. But you care not what you speak, so as
you may stir up men to idolatrous blind devotion toward your breaden God.

Mar. 11. 22. 23
The text.
And Jesus answering said to them, have faith of God. Amen I say to you, that
whosoever shall say to this mountain, be taken up, and be cast into the sea,
and shall not stagger in his heart, but believe that whatsoever he says, shall
be done: it shall be done to him.

The note.
Faith of God is to believe that he is able, and that he will do it if it be
expedient, and no impediment on our part.

The answer.
The impediment on our part here set down is staggering, which you under
pretense of humility do teach your followers, and so consequently you teach
them to be doubtful of the truth of Gods promises: which how it can stand with
the faith of God, no wise man can see.

Mark. 11. 26.
The text.
If so be that you will not forgive, neither will your father that is in
heaven, forgive you your sins.

The note.
God never forgiueth sins to him that pardons not his enemies, from his heart.
Whereby it is evident that more is required than faith only.

The answer.
Who ever denied all virtues to be requisite for Christians. If you did not
know your own scholars to be so blind and ignorant, as that they understand
not the state of the question of justification by faith, you would never thus
slightly deal, and put us to unnecessary labor, and pains. Faith alone
embraces the promise of remission of sins. This faith works in us amongst
other things a readiness to forgive. So though more is requisite, yet faith
alone embraces Christ our righteousness, and the promises in him, and with him
offered. The other things required are necessary consequents of faith, and
therefore so many testimonies to us, and others of true believing.

Mark. 12. 1.
The text.
A man planted a vineyard and made an hedge about it, and dug a trough, and
built a tower, etc. unto the tenth verse.

The note.
The man is God the father. This vineyard (as Esaie said 5. 1.) is the house of
Israel. The servants sent are Moses and the Prophets, whom the Jews did
diversely afflict and persecute. His son is Christ our Savior, whom the
Jews crucified out of the city of Jerusalem, as it were casting him out of
the vineyard. The Jews and their guides to whom the vineyard was set
destroyed, and Gods vineyard given to the Apostles and their successors in the
Gentiles.

The answer.
These notes we allow, and like of, and from thence we gather that no place, no
people, nor no succession of persons can be so priuileged, but that the like
may happen to them as has done to the Jews. For you can not show better
promises for your popes then were made to the high priest of the Jews, nor
greater privileges for Rome, then for Jerusalem, nor for the nation of the
Latins such prer^gatiues, as the Jews had: which notwithstanding God has
revenged upon them, the blood of his saints; by cutting them off from the true
Olive. And does not the blood of Gods saints shed in every corner of his
church cry now to him for vengeance? Or will not he that spared not the
natural branches of the Olive, cut off for the like causes those that are but
graffed into the others room? I would that Gods severe judgments toward the
Jews would make you beware, and take heed in time.

Mark. 12. 10.
The text.
The stone which the builders rejected, the same is made the head of the corner.

The note.
Christ is become the corner stone of the Synagogue and the church, in which
the faithful both of the Jews and Gentiles are contained.

The answer.
And how chance you erect an other stone, to unite and couple believers in?

Mar. 12. 33.
The text.
And that he be loved from the whole heart, and with the whole understanding,
and with the whole soul, and with the whole strength: And to love his
neighbor as him self is a greater thing then all holocausts and sacrifices.

The note.
This excellency of charity teaches us, that faith only is not sufficient.

The answer.
The eye only suffices to see withal, and yet it were not sufficient for a
man to have the whole body an eye. So faith only suffices a Christian man
for justification: And yet without other virtues, which necessarily follow
faith, a Christian were not sufficiently be wtified. You should therefore have
done well to show, for what only faith is not sufficient, whither for
justification, or for sanctification.

Mar. 12. 44.
The text.
Amen I say to you, that this poor widow, has cast in more than all that have
cast into the treasury.

The note.
God does accept alms that are correspondent to every man's ability; and the
more able, the more must a man give.

The answer.
God loves a cheerful giver. For if there be a willing mind, 2. Cor. 8. 12.
it is accepted according to that a man has, 2. Cor. 9. 7.
and not according to that he has not.

Mar. 13. 7.
The text.
And when you shall hear of wars, and bruits of wars, fear not, for these
things must be, but the end is not yet.

The note.
Great wars toward the latter end.

The answer.
A token that the end draws near, and yet it is not to be forgotten that
your Pope is he, that sets nations together by the ears, and delights in
war, and bloodshed.

Mar. 13. 9.
The text.
But look to your selves, for they shall deliver you up in Counsels, and in
Synagogues shall you be beaten, and you shall stand before presidents and kings
for my sake, for a testimony unto them.

The note.
Much persecution of the faithful and Catholic men in the latter end.

The answer.
Your Church of Rome has long been, and is now still the persecuting
Synagoge, and therefore very unlike the Catholic Church of faithful
persecuted men.

Mar. 13. 12.
The text.
And brother shall deliver brother unto death, and the father his son: and
the children shall arise against the parents, and shall work their death.

The note.
Great tr^cherie and many false brethren at the same time.

The answer.
Your principle so continually in the popish Church practiced of not keeping
faith, and promise made to those whom you account heretics, is the root of
treachery and treason, and the very nurse and cherishing of falsehood in
pretended brotherhood. As appeared in the marriage of the King of Navarre with
the French Kings sister.

Mar. 13. 13.
The text.
But he that shall endure to the end, he shall be saved.

The note.
Constancy and perseverance necessary in time of persecution.

The answer.
And therefore that comfortable assurance, that nothing can separate us, from
the love wherewith God has embraced us, Romans 8. 38.
which is the root of constancy, is necessary for Christians, though Papists
be thereof quite destitute.

Mar. 13. 20.
The text.
And unless the Lord had shortened the days, no flesh should be saved: but for
the elect which he has elected, he has shortened the days.

The note.
Antichrists reign shall be three years and an half, Daniel 7. Apocalipse,
13.

The answer.
Out of this text nothing can be gathered for the shortness or length of
Antichrists reign: Therefore this note follows not of this text: Christ has
shortened the days, therefore Antichrists reign shall be but three years and
an half. You had need to get tough glue or else this will not hold together.
But Daniel and the Apocalipse shall help. Your mighty demonstrations out of
those places have been already learnedly confuted by Master Whitakers, and we
shall have better cause to consider of them when we come to your notes upon the
Apocalipse.

Mar. 13. 32.
The text.
But of that day or hour no man knows, neither the Angels in heaven, nor the
Son, but the Father.

The note.
Not as though himself knew not, as the heretics Agnoitae held: but because
he knew it not for to teach it others, as being not expedient, Ambrose de fide
lib. 5. cap. 8.

The answer.
It is marvelous that we may not attribute to Christ, that which he
attributes to him self. And though it be true that therefore it is not
revealed, because it is not expedient for us to know it, yet it follows not
that Christ as man knew it. Ambrose believes rather this place to be
corrupted, because some ancient Greek copies had not those words, the son
of man, and brings diverse reasons to prove that Christ could not be ignorant
of that day. But if the place be true, then he thinks that Christ did but
feign ignorance, because his disciples requested that which was not profitable
for them to know. This shift Ambrose was driven to, because he knew not how
else to shift of the reasons that the Arrians gathered out of this place,
against the divinity of Christ.

Mark. 14. 7.
The text.
For the poor you have always with you, and when you will you may do them
good: But me you have not always.

The note.
We have not Christ here needing our alms, as when he conuersed upon the earth.

The answer.
And why have we here no doctors? Because this shift to expound this text so,
that it should not make against the bodily presence of Christ in the
Sacrament, is a late devise. It is true that if he be not here in body, then
it is not possible for him to need relief. But let us see how your faith in
this point agrees with the ancient Christian Catholic faith. Augustine
wills Dardanus to hold this Christian confession: ^pistol. 57.
That Christ rose from the dead, ascended into heaven, sits at the right
hand of the Father, and shall come from none other place, but from thence to
judge the quick, and the dead, and that he shall so come (as the angels voice
testified) even as he was seen go into heaven, that is, in the same form, and
substance of flesh to the which he truly gave immortality, and took not away
nature. According to this form he is not to be thought diffused every where.
Fulgentius affirms that Christ according to the humane nature is comprehended
in a place, Ad Thrasimundu^ regem lib. 2. cap. 5.
absent from heaven when he was upon the earth, and forsaking the earth, when
he ascended into heaven. Libro. 1. cap. 3.
Uigilius writing against the heretic Eutiches says, that Christ is with us,
and not with us. For those, whom he left, and from whom he departed in his
humanity, he did not leave, nor forsake in his divinity. By form of a
servant, which he took from us into heaven, ^ib. 4. cap. 4.
he is absent from, etc. And in another place when he has proved him to be
every where according to his divinity, and but in one place at once according
to his humanity, he concludes thus: This is the faith and confession
Catholic, which the Apostles delivered, Martyrs did confirm, and the
faithful hitherto have held. And concerning these very words, Tract. in 8.
(...). Io. 50.
Me you shall not have always, Augustine expounds them simply to be meant of
his bodily absence from the earth. Now let our papists tell us, how their faith
can be Christian, and Catholic, being directly against that, which in these
fathers days was Christian and Catholic.

Mark. 14. 23.
The text.
And taking the chalice, giving thanks, he gave to them, and they all drank of
it.

The note.
All drank, to wit, all the twelve, for more were not present. Wherebie it is
evident that the words in Saint Matthew (26, 27) Drink ye al of this, were
spoken to all the apostles only, which here are said that they all did drink.
And so it is no general commandment to all men.

The answer.
And why have we not here one doctor to say for you, that Drink ye all, is
not so general a commandment, as Take and eat? Can that be a catholic
exposition, which is contrary to all expositions of catholic expositors for
many hundred years after Christ? Take and eat stretches to lay men, as the
practice of your church does show. And, Drink ye all, that must be restreined
to priests, because no more but ye Apostles were present. And if that cause be
of force, why shall it not restrain the other commandment also, Take and eat
to priests only? But the holy Ghost foreseeing what popish corruptions the
devil would bring into the Church, did before hand (the more fully to prevent
the devils fraud herein) direct the pens of the Evangelists in the giving of
the cup, to express the universal sign, all, where in delivery of the
bread, he is content with an indefinite speech, take and eat. Here all
antiquity is utterly against popery. Their doctrine of concomitance was not
in the fathers days hatched, neither had they wit enough to foresee the danger
of spilling, and hanging in lay men's beards, and such other deep
considerations as the pope picked out long after out of his night cap.

Mark. 14. 25.
The text.
Amen I say to you, that now I will not drink of the fruits of the vine,
until that day, when I shall drink it new in the kingdom of God.

The note.
See annotations upon Matthew chap. 26. verse. 29.

The answer.
Your annotations are not worth the looking on: yet such as they are, they
shall receive answer by themselves.

Mark. 14. 64.
The text.
Who all condemned him to be guilty of death.

The note.
Here we may see that they were worthily reprobated, and forsaken, according to
our saviors prediction, by the parable Mark. 12. The kingdom of God shall be
taken from you, etc.

The answer.
Their successors in impiety, blasphemy and cruelty Annas and Caiphas of
Rome, and their adherents cannot be in better estate, for they with no less
consent, and unity, have condemned Christ in his members, and his truth for
heresy and blasphemy.

Mark. 14. 66.
The text.
And when Peter was in the court beneath, there comes one of the woman
servants of the high priest.

The note.
He fears not afterward Rome the lady of the world, that in the house of
Caiphas was afraid of the high priests wench. Leo in natiuitate Petri and Pauli
sermon 1.

The answer.
In this weak fearefulnes of Peter we may see our own frailty, and in the
change that God after made in him, when he had endued him and others with
virtue from above, the power by which God can and does work in weak and
frail vessels. Rome was the lady of the world, therefore not the head of the
church, a place fearful to the godly, or else Peter's valor in not fearing of
it had not been commendable.

Mark 1^. 29.
The text.
And they that passed by blasphemed him, wagging their heads, and saying, Vah,
he that destroys the temple, and in three days builds it, save thy self
coming down from the cross.

The note.
So say heretics of the blessed Sacrament, if it be Christ, let him save him
self from all injuries.

The answer.
We, whom it pleases you to call heretics, learn not from the scornful
Jews, ^udg. 6. 31.
but from good Ioash the father of Gedeon, that your bread is not God, because
it can not plead for it self, nor revenge it self. But you have a god and a
religion alike, both of your own creation.

Mark 15. 34.
The text.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

The note.
See Matthew. cap. 27. 46. the blasphemous exposition of Calvin, and his
followers, and take heed thereof.

The answer.
See the exposition, reap comfort thereof, and learn with heart and mind to
detest and abhor the impudent and shameless pens of lying papists.

Mark 16. 7.
The text.
But go, tell his disciples and Peter, that he goes before you into Galilee.

The note.
Peter is named in special (as often else where) for prerogative.

The answer.
A poor prerogative it is that can be picked out of his special naming. But
to grant that he had some petit prerogative, what is that to those, which you
challenge to his pretended successors?

LVKE.
Luke 1. 10.
The text.
And all the multitude of the people were praying without at the hour of the
incense.

The note.
We see here that the Priest did his duty within, the people in the mean time
praying without, and that the priests functions did profit them, though they
neither heard nor saw his doings.

The answer.
You would feign find warrant for your chauncels, and as gladly would you
prove that your masses mumbled in a corner were profitable, not only to
them, which being present understand not, but to those also, which neither
hear nor see them, but you must seek better proof, than the abolished
figures of the old law. For by this division of priest and people in sundry
places of the same temple, is nothing else taught us, but that heaven is shut to
us by reason of our sins, and that we can not enter into the presence of God
there, but in the person of our Priest, our Mediator, and that in him, and by
him our prayers are accepted, as at large the Apostle in the Epistle to the
Hebrews does teach us. But if you would prove any thing for your selves, show
us that either priest or people prayed in a tongue they understood not, or that
either in the temple or in the synagogues, the scriptures were read in a
strange language. Or that they which read, were shut up in some odd corner of
the synagogue, where that which they read could not be heard of the people. If
you could find warrant for any of these, then you had some defense for your
ordinary church service: but because you want this, therefore you fly to the
figures of the old law, to wring out of them that which never was to be learned
by them. But in this dealing you do but bewray your penury.

Luke. 1. 15.
The text.
For he shall be great before our Lord, and wine and sicer he shall not drink.

The note.
This abstinence foretold and prescribed by the angel, shows that it is a
worthy thing, and an act of religion in Saint John, as it was in the
Nazarites.

The answer.
The abstinence foretold and prescribed, showed that sanctimonie should not be
wanting in him, neither in deed nor in outward show, but that he should live as
a man wholly dedicate to God. The prescription and appointment of God, makes
the act good, because it was a testimony of holy obedience. But what makes
this for your will worships, whereof you have no warrant but your own wisdom?

Luke 1. 20.
The text.
And behold, thou shall be dumme, and shall not be able to speak until the
day, wherein these things shall be done: For because thou have not believed my
words, which shall be fulfilled in their time.

The note.
Zachary punished for doubting of the Angels word.

The answer.
And think you papists to escape the punishment of God, for teaching men to
doubt of the truth of Gods promises?

Luke 1. 28.
The text.
Hail full of grace, our Lord is with thee: Blessed art thou amongst women.

The note.
The beginning of the Aue Marie. See the rest, verse 42.

The answer.
A profound note. Mary took it for a salutation, but the church of Rome have
used it as a prayer.

Luke. 1. 34.
The text.
And Marie said to the Angel; How shall this be done? Because I know not man.

The note.
She doubted not of the thing as Zachary, but inquired of the means.

The answer.
If you would have given to every man his due praise, I do not doubt, but you
might have quoted Master Beza, for you borrowed this out of his annotations.

Luke. 1. 38.
The text.
And Marie said, Behold the handmaid of our Lord, be it done to me according to
thy word.

The note.
At this very moment when the blessed virgin gave consent, she conceived him
perfect God and perfect man.

The answer.
That she conceived him perfect God and perfect man, is by many places well
warranted. But concerning the very moment of the time, when she conceived, I
take it to be one of Gods secrets, which he has kept to himself, and which
the holy Ghost has not revealed, because it is not necessary for us to know.

Luke. 1. 41.
The text.
And it came to pass as Elizabeth heard the salutation of Marie, the infant
did leap in her womb.

The note.
John Baptist being yet in his mothers womb, reioiced and acknowledged the
presence of Christ and his mother.

The answer.
What sense the child had in his mothers womb of the presence of Christ I know
not, and yet I doubt not, but it was the secret force of Gods holy spirit that
caused that motion in the child. But if your note be true, then grace was
conferred upon this child, before he was partaker of any sacrament, except you
will say, that the joyful acknowledging of the presence of Christ may be
without grace.

Luke. 1. 46.
The text.
My soul does magnify our Lord.

The note.
Magnificat at Euensong.

The answer.
I think your meaning is that Magnificat is used at Euensong, and not that our
Lady sang Euensong, or that it was here appointed to be song at Euensong.

Luke. 1. 48.
The text.
Because he has regarded the humility of his handmaid. For behold from
henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.

The note.
Have the Protestants always had generations to fulfill this prophecy, or do
they call her blessed, that derogate what they can from her graces, blessings,
and all her honor?

The answer.
The Protestants had their generations before any papists were in the world. And
as they give to the blessed virgin all honor that is due to her: so neither
she, nor they can abide, that you should rob God of his honor to give it her.

Luke. 1. 80.
The text.
And the child grew, and was strengthened in spirit, and was in the deserts
until the day of his manifestation to Israel.

The note.
Mark that he was a voluntary Eremite, and chose to be solitary from a
child, till he was to preach to the people: insomuch that antiquity counted
him the first Eremite.

The answer.
You do but bleare the eyes of the ignorant with the likeness of the name:
Antiquity never knew what the profession of your Eremites meant. And if you
vouchsafed to give us a definition of Eremites, then we should easily exclude
from it, either John, or your superstitious hipocriticall Eremites. For it is
one thing to live in a desert, as John did, it is another thing to live without
society and company, as yours do, and John did not. And further you must
prove that he shut up himself to satisfy for his sins, and that he was a
pattern, or example for others so to do, without further warrant, or vocation.
Which because you cannot do, John will not serve for a shield or defense for
your Eremites.

Luke. 2. 1.
The text.
And it came to pass in those days, there came forth an edict from Caesar
Augustus, that the whole world should be enrolled, etc.

The note.
In the year from the creation of the world 5199. from Noes stood 2957. from
the nativity of Abraham 2015. and from Moses and the coming forth of the
people of Israel out of Egypt 1510. from David anointed king 1032. from the
first Olimpias 800. from the building of Rome 752. hebdomada 63. according to
the prophecy of Daniel, c. 9. that is, in the year 440. or thereabouts in the
sixth age of the world, when there was an universal peace in all the world, the
eternal God and son of the eternal father, meaning to consecrate and
sanctify the world with his most blessed coming, being conceived of the holy
Ghost, nine months after his conception, Jesus Christ the son of God is borne
in Bethlehem of Judah, in the year of Caesar Augustus 42. Vsuard in
martyrologio Decembris 25. according to the common ancient supputation.

The answer.
It is but a folly to endeavor to reduce them to truth, that wittinglie and
wilfully do deceive, and are deceived, for so a man should be but sure to loose
his labor. Those that be desirous to know the true supputation of these times,
have already in the English bibles the true sum of these years, according
to the truth of the Hebrew. As for your Chronographie with the author thereof,
may have some commendation for the pains he bestowed about it, and not for the
truth that is in it. But we can not marvel that those, in whom there is no
love of truth, be given over to believe lies.

Luke 2. 35.
The text.
And thine own soul shall a sword pearce, that out of many hearts
cogitations may be revealed.

The note.
Simeon prophesied not only of Christ, but of our blessed Lady, of all her
sorrows, wherein she was always partaker with our Savior, from his flight
into Egypt even to his death.

The answer.
God by Simeon forewarned the blessed virgin, that notwithstanding the great
prerogative which God gave her to be the mother of God, and whereof no doubt
she was exceeding joyous: yet she should not look for worldly happiness, but
prepare her self to be partaker of the cross and sorrow with her son.

Luke 3. ^.
The text.
And he came into all the country of Jordan, preaching the baptism of penance
unto remission of sins.

The note.
Penance prepares the way to Christ.

The answer.
It is very true, that the knowledge of our sins with the sight of Gods
wrath and indignation against them, joined with an wholesome grief and sorrow
therefore, makes men earnestly to seek how to escape the severe justice of
God, and to obtain remission and pardon of their sins, which when they can
find no where else, they are constrained to embrace the promises of mercy
offered them in Christ. But if your imagined satisfaction for sins by penance
be true, the preaching thereof were a way to keep a man from Christ, and to
make men to rest in themselves.

Luke 3. 8.
The text.
Yield therefore fruits worthy of penance.

The note.
Fruits of penance be works satisfactorie.

The answer.
Men may be satisfied for offenses made toward them, by the fruits of penance
or repentance, but that God also may be so satisfied, all the papists in the
world are never able to prove* For if men by their works might satisfy for
their sins, then what need they seek for remedy out of them selves, and to
what purpose is the death and satisfaction of Christ? But it is no marvel
though you hold this fast, for it is one of the best things that the Pope has
to heat his kitchen with.

Luke 3. 9.
The text.
Every tree therefore that yields not good fruit, shall be cut down, and
cast into the fire.

The note.
A man without good works is unfruitful, and shall be cast into everlasting
fire.

The answer.
If by good, you did not imagine meritorious or satisfactory, we should easily
condescend to you in this note, for all faithful are fruitfullie replenished
with every good work, as time, place, occasion, and other circumstances serve.

Luke 3. 11.
The text.
He that has two coats, let him give to him that has not: and he that has
meat, let him do likewise.

The note.
Alms counseled or enjoined for sins, and to avoid damnation.

The answer.
In this note there are almost as many popish corruptions, as words. For by
alms counseled, you would have men to understand, that it is matter of
greater perfection then the commandments of God. By the word inioined, you
would have yours to think, that John enjoined this as a parcel of penance,
that it might seem to warrant the penances imposed by your ghostly fathers in
your ear shrift. For sins and to avoid damnation, by these you would teach
the giving of alms to be meritorions and satisfactorie for sin, but S. John
never taught any other means to take away sins, but the lamb of God: but
with you, John 1. 29.
whosoever teaches or advises any good thing to be used of man, teaches
satisfaction and merit.

Luke 3. 15.
The text.
And the people imagining, and all men thinking in their hearts of John, least
perhaps he were Christ.

The note.
John was so holy, that many might by error easily think he was Christ.

The answer.
In that many were ready to have accepted John for Christ, who afterward
would not receive Christ him self, appears the natural corruption of man, by
which he is prone and ready to err and to be deceived, and also the
negligence of men that did but superficially look over that, which was
foretold of either of them by the Prophets, whereby they might easily have
been discerned and known asunder.

Luke 3. 16.
The text.
I in deed baptize you with water, but there shall come a mightier than I,
whose latchet of his shoes, I am not worthy to unloose, he shall baptize you
in the holy Ghost and fire.

The note.
How say then the heretics that the baptism of Christ is of no greater virtue
than John's?

The answer.
You delight by ambiguitie of words to beguile the simple. If by Christ's
Baptism you mean the baptism used in the church of Christ, then we say that
the baptism of Ihon, and it is all of one virtue. But if you mean by Christ's
baptism the inward and invisible operation in baptism, which is Christ's
proper work, then we say that the baptism of Christ is greater, not only
than John's Baptism, but also then the baptism of any other minister. So if in
baptizing John be compared with Christ, he must as a servant give place to his
Lord, but if his ministry therein be compared with the ministry of others,
Christ's ministers, we say, and are ready to prove, that they are of equal
force, and virtue.

Luke 3. 36.
The text.
Who was of Cainan.

The note.
Beza boldly wipeth out of this Gospel, these words, who was of Cainan: though
all the Greek copies, both of the old Testament, and of the new, have the
words with full consent. Whereby we learn the intolerable saucines of the
Caluinists, and their contempt of holy Scripture, that dare so deal with the
very Gospel it self.

The answer.
If this be such intolerable boldness of Beza as you account it to correct the
Greek by the Hebrew, and to prefer the authority of Moses and the Hebrew
text, then condemn Saint Augustine, who taught that boldness to him, and
others, De Ciuitate dei, libro. 15. cap. 13. and 14.

Luke 4. ^.
The text.
And Jesus full of the holy Ghost, returned from Jordan and was driven in the
spirit into the desert, Forty days, and was tempted of the devil.

The note.
The churches fast of forty days (called Lent) comes of this, and is an
apostolical tradition. Clem. Constit. Apost. Lib. 5. cap. 13. Hier. ep. ad
Marcel. adu. erro. Montani. Leo sermon. 6. and 9. de Quadragesima.

The answer.
Now the example of Christ, and the authority of the Apostles must confirm
our Lenten fast of forty days. Two weighty reasons, and therefore need to be
well considered of. Christ's fast was miraculous, and therefore they that
propound this for an example to imitate, may as well appoint us to imitate him
in commanding both wind and sea. But the apostles appointed it, as Clement,
Hierome, and Leo say. Clemens is a counterfeit, and he and Hierom name
Quadragesima, but what number of days they meant thereby, that appears not.
But the impudency of them appears that obtrude under the name of Clemens
constitutions Apostolical, that which their own church observes not, but
rejects. But that your forty dais fast was not an apostolical tradition,
appears many ways: First for that the heretic Montanus (as Eusebius
testifies) was the first that appointed certain times and days to fast in.
Ecclesiastica historia lib. 5. cap. 18.
Secondly because Augustine knew not of any days, Epistola. 86.
or times appointed by the Apostles, to be kept as fasting days. Thirdly
because the observation of fasting days, and namely of fasting before Easter,
was free, and was diverse according as every particular church saw good. Which
Augustine seeing when he was yet but a nouice in Christ, asked the advice of
Saint Ambrose, who willed him to do as he saw him do: and afterward explaining
his mind, willed him to frame himself therein to the manner of each church that
he should come to, so should he neither give nor take offense. Ecclesiastica
historia lib. 5. cap. 24.
Irenaeus (as Eusebius reports) wrote to Uictor bishop of Rome, of the great
variety of the churches fasting before Easter, which dissent in fasting did
not, says he, Epiphanius in compend. fide^.
break their consent in faith. The churches where Epiphanius was conversant,
kept their fast of Quadragesima but seven days before Easter. The church of
Rome kept it three weeks before Easter, as the Tripartite story tells us.
Finally, Lib. 9. cap. 38.
the liberty and diversity of the churches in keeping of it was so diverse and
great, that Socrates (one of the authors of the tripartite story) marueileth
that in such difference of time, and days, the name of Quadragesima in all
places remained one. Now see how truly you thrust upon us under the name of
Apostolical tradition, that which neither your church of Rome, neither yet the
most part of Christ's church did observe, and keep for four hundred years
after Christ, that is your forty days fast.

Luke 4. 8.
The text.
Thou shall adore the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

The note.
See the annotations in Saint Matthew. cap. 4. verse. 11.

The answer.
We have seen your annotation not worth the looking on which shall receive
answer with his fellows.

Luk 4. 10.
The text.
For it is written, that he has given his Angels charge of thee, that they
preserve thee: and that in their hands they shall bear thee up, least perhaps
thou knock thy foot against a stone.

The note.
If the devil allege Scripture against Christ, no marvel that heretics do
so against Christ's church.

The answer.
They no doubt be heretics, which do not think that to be the best way, to
refel the devilish wresting of scriptures, which Christ himself used, that is,
by the Scriptures. Therefore papists flieng that trial, and taking upon them to
devise wiser, and better means, then Christ gave example of, cannot choose but
be presumptuous proud heretics.

Luk^. 4. 16.
The text.
And he came to Nazareth, where he was brought up: and he entered according to
his custom on the Saboath day into the Synagogue: and he rose up to read.

The note.
Our Savior Christ used to preach in their synagogues.

The answer.
You might have added on the Saboath days, and have set down that your Romish
Church spends the saboth in a few superstitious, and idolatrous actions: and
that those being done then their people sit down to eat, and drink, and rise
again to play, and so a great part of their Saboath they consume in lasciu^ous
wantonness. As for preaching they were wont to keep it for high days.

Luke. 4. 22,
The text.
And al give testimony to him: And they marvelled in the words of grace that
proceeded from his mouth.

The note.
He had marvelous grace, and an extraordinary force in moving the hearts of
his hearers.

The answer.
But the hardness of their hearts the more appeered, in that so few of them were
pierced, and truly converted. And because the same corruptions rest in us,
which were in them, we see that it is not the excellency of any man's gifts,
that can truly win to God, except he by his almighty power inwardly work a
reformation, and create new hearts, and renew right spirits in us.

Luke. 5. 1^.
The text.
And he commanded him, that he should tell no body, but go show thy self to
the priest, and offer for thy cleansing as Moses commanded for a testimony to
them.

The note.
See Saint Matthew cap. 8. 4.

The answer.
Your references are not worth the looking on, as will appear when they
receive answer together.

Luke. 5. 3^.
The text.
I came not to call the just, but sinners to repentance.

The note.
Christ came not to call those which presume of their own justice, and that
count them selves to have no need of Christ.

The answer.
Then Christ came not to call Papists, for they can merit heaven by their own
inherent justice, which if it be not a proud presumption, then I know not what
presumption means. And though in word they will seem to need Christ, yet
that need can not stand with the rest of their doctrine.

Luke. 5. 33.
The text.
Why do the disciples of John fast often, and make obsecrations, and of the
pharisees in like manner, but thine do eat and drink?

The note.
See Saint Matthew annotations, c. 9. 15.

The answer.
We have seen it, and answered it before.

Luke. 6. ^*
The text.
And it came to pass on the sabbath Second-first, when he passed through the
corn his disciples did pluck the ears, and did eat, rubbing them with their
hands.

The note.
Saint Hierom (Epist. 2. ad Nepotianum) writes of himself, that being at
Constantinople he asked his master Gregory the Nazianzene, the famous Doctor,
then bishop there, what sabbath this was: Who by his answer declared, that it
was very hard to tell. Neither is it yet known to the best learned. Yet the
Protestants are wont to say, All is very easy.

The answer.
If Papists made any conscience of lieng and standering, a great many of our
controversies would quickly be at an end. Who ever said or wrote, that all is
easy. But we do not under pretense of hardness and difficulty, fray poor men
from searching after, and seeking Christ in the Scriptures, as you do: but
exhort men so use more care and diligence, to study them with humility, and
to use all helps which God has lent them. And that this was Saint Ieroms mind
may appear, that in his Epistles he vouchsafes the answering and opening of
many a question, and that to women, whom he does not dissuade or discourage
from reading.

Luke. 6. ^0.
The text.
And to every one that asks thee, give.

The note.
That is, to every one justly asking. For that, which is unjustly asked, may
justly be denied, Augustine libro 1. cap. 40. de sermon Dom. in monte.

The answer.
He justly asks, whom need drives to ask. And we cannot justly deny, if
God have so blessed us, that we may spare that which is asked. But the
contributions of papists to maintain traitors abroad, are neither justly
required, nor justly given.

Luke. 6. 48.
The text.
Every one that comes to me, and hears my words, and does them, I will show
you to whom he is like. He is like a man building an house that dug deep,
and laid the foundation upon a rock.

The note.
He builds rightly and surely, that has both faith and good works: he
builds on sand, that trusts to his faith or reading, or knowledge of the
scriptures, and does not work or live accordingly.

The answer.
Against vain boasters and flatterers of themselves no doubt Christ speaks,
and not against true believers. For true faith works by love, and therefore
endeavor of obedience is his inseparable companion.

Luke. 7. 6.
The text.
Lord, trouble not thy self. For I am not worthy that thou should enter
under my roof.

The note.
See the annotations upon S. Matthew, cap. 8. 8.

The answer.
Ye do but cumber us with these references, which when we see them, are to
small purpose, and shall be answered with your other annotations.

Luke. 7. ^3*
The text.
The poor are euangelized.

The note.
Pauperes euangelizantur, that is, to the poor the Gospel is preached, and
they receive it.

The answer.
It had been no more shame for you to have learned of us to translate plainly,
then for to learn of us to note aptly and truly, according to the sense and
meaning of the words. For it is true, that the poor receive the glad t^^ings
of the Gospel. But the proud pope, his rich cardinals, his fat greasy
shauelings, wallowing in the wealth of this world, and puffed up in a proud
conceit of themselves, as they are not poor, so are they not apt to receive
the Gospel.

Luke. 7. 25.
The text.
But what went ye forth to see? a man clothed in soft garments? Behold they
that are in costly apparel, and delicacies are in the house of kings.

The note.
Mark this well concerning John's apparel and diet. See the annotations upon
Saint Matthew, cap. 3. 4.

The answer.
Concerning John's apparel, we see nothing here but that it was not courtly.
Concerning his diet here is nothing at all. We have looked for the annotations
to which you refer us, and have lost our labor, for we can find none upon that
verse.

Luke. 7. 30.
The text.
But the pharisees and the lawyers despised the counsel of God against
themselves, being not baptized of him.

The note.
As they that contemned John's baptism, despised Gods counsel and wisdom; so
much more they which make no account of the sacraments of the church, despise
Gods counsel and ordinance touching their salvation to their own damnation.

The answer.
Your note is true. But you under the color and name of sacraments, do obtrude
to the people that whereof God was never author, but which rests, and is
founded upon your own counsel and wisdom, which we despise, Romans 8. 7.
because we know it to be enimitie against God.

Luke. 7. 37.
The text.
And behold a woman that was in the city, a sinner, as she knew that he was
set down in the pharisees house, she brought an alabaster box of ointment,
and standing behind besides his feet, she began to water his feet with
tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and
anointed them with the ointment.

The note.
A perfect pattern of true penance in this woman, who sought of Christ with
open tears, and other strange works of satisfaction and devotion, remission of
her sins.

The answer.
This shows your want of due and sound proof for men's satisfieng for their
sins, when you scrape here for satisfaction. I pray you which call you a
satisfactorie work? her tears, her wiping his feet with her hair, or her
cost in anointing of Christ. As repentance is fained, whereof no fruits can
appear: so it is a gross forgerie, to imagine the outward testimonies of true
repentance, to be so many satisfactions for sins. Draffe is good enough for
swine, and any thing you offer is truth amongst your followers.

Luke. 7. 47.
The text.
For the which I say to thee, Many sins are forgiven her, because she has
loved much. But to whom less is forgiven, he loves less.

The note.
Not only faith (as you may perceive) but love or charity obtains remission
of sins.

The answer.
And how may we perceive it? Forsooth love is the cause that she has many
sins forgiven her. This collection is but grating upon a word, contrary to
the plain sense of the place. For if they love more, that have more forgiven,
and they less to whom less is forgiven: then it is manifest that love is a
consequent of forgiveness, and not a cause. And therefore you do but abuse men
with the Conjunction causall, which is here, as diverse times elsewhere, a note
of consequence, as it is plain by the words immediately following: But to whom
less is forgiven, he loves less. So, according to the proportion of
forgiveness, the proportion of love follows.

Luke. 7. 49.
The text.
And they that sat together at the table, began to say within them selves, who
is this that also forgiueth sins?

The note.
As the Pharisees did always ca^pe Christ for remission of sins upon earth,
so the heretics reprehend his church, that remitteth sins by his authority.

The answer.
It appears by the Pharisees bus^e carping, that it was a received truth,
that only God could pardon offenses committed against God. And they ought
thereby to have espied their own error, in imagining that Christ was no more
but a mere man. Such remission as Christ gave his church power to use, is in
daily practice amongst us, and for my part I know no professor of the Gospel
that finds fault with it, but your proud presumption beyond any authority
given to the church of God, in binding whom you list, and loosing whom please
you, with your gainful merchandise made thereof, that with all our hearts we
abhor and detest.

Luke 8. 10.
The text.
To you it is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God, but to the
rest in parables: that seeing they may not see, and hearing they may not
understand.

The note.
See the annotations upon Saint Matthew, cap. 13. 14.

The answer.
We have already given answer to that annotation.

Luke 8. 13.
The text.
For they upon the rock, such as when they hear with joy receive the word:
and these have no roots, because for a time they believe, and in the time of
tentation they revolt.

The note.
Against the heretics that say, faith once had cannot be lost, and that he
which now has not faith never had.

The answer.
If either you had the fear of God before your eyes, or else regarded your own
estimation before men, you would not thus without all cause cavil. We say that
those whom God by his own will has begotten, by the word of truth which is an
incorruptible seed, to believe in the name of his son, and so to become the
children of God, it is impossible that their faith should be quite lost, and
that he which has not this faith, never yet had it, what is this to the faith
here spoken of, which is for a time a joyful, and ready accepting of the
doctrine preached, and is therefore improperlie called believing, because it
has some similitude with true believing. But you make of the Scriptures an
exercise to whet your wits, to wrangle and cavil, for such is your reverence
toward them.

Luke 8. 21.
The text.
Who answering, said to them, My mother and my brethren are they that hear the
word of God and do it.

The note.
He did not here speak disdainfully of his mother, but teaches that our
spiritual kindred is to be preferred before carnal cognation. Hilar. in 12. Mat.

The answer.
This needless citing of the fathers you use to deceive the simple withal,
and to make them imagine that your adversaries hold that Christ spoke
disdainfully of his mother. For they do not think that you use this and other
authorities, but only where you need, by that means to win some credit to
that which you write, which in this matter was altogether needless.

Luke 8. 24.
The text.
And they came and raised him, saying, Master, we perish.

The note.
See the annotations upon Saint Matthew, cap. 8, 24.

The answer.
We have for your pleasure lost so much labor, as to look into the place, and
there find no such matter.

Luke 8. 43.
The text.
And there was a certain woman in a flux of blood for twelve years past, etc.

The note.
See the annotations upon Saint Matthew, cap. 9. 19.

The answer.
Your annotation is seen, and shall be considered of in the answer to the rest.

Luke 8. 45.
The text.
And all denying, Peter said, and they that were with him, Master, the
multitudes throng and press thee, and do thou say, Who touched me?

The note.
It is an evident sign of prerogative, that Peter only is named so often as
chief of the company. Mark 1. 36. Acts 5. 29. Luke 9. 32. Mark 16. 7. 1.
Cor. 15. 5.

The answer.
It is a very silly argument, Peter only is named, ergo he is named as chief
of the company: It is a poor prerogative that can be won for Peter by such
kind of reasoning. The Apostles amongst whom he was conversant, knew nothing
of this his prerogative and superiority, as appears by their reasoning of
the case diverse times, which of them should be greatest or chief. And
therefore it is plain and evident that you want better helps, when you are
feign to stay up Peter's authority with such weak proppes.

Luke 8. 50.
The text.
And Jesus hearing this word, answered the father of the maid, Fear not,
believe only, and she shall be safe.

The note.
See the annotations upon Saint Mark cap. 5. 36.

The answer.
We have looked and see there a great piece of learning: Forsooth that is an
usual speech to say only do this, when we mean cheefely. To which we reply,
that it is most usual to say only do this, when we require only that, which
we speak of and no more. And again, it is a very silly shift for you to
fl^e to cheefely, in steed of only, when in other places you will have
charity cheefely required, and prefer if greatly before faith.

Luke 9. ^*
The text.
And calling together the twelve apostles, he gave them virtue and power over
all devils, and to cure maladies.

The note.
To command devils and diseases either of body, or soul, is by nature proper
to God only: but by gods gift, men also may have the same, even so to forgive
sin.

The answer.
And why do you not say even so to create heaven and earth, men, and angels?
God does impart to men, whatsoever pleases him to give, and to bestow, and
not what it pleases proud men to challenge. Show to us that God has given any
man authority to sell remission of sins. Otherwise I have already answered,
that we use this authority of remitting sins, so far forth as God has
given it.

Luke 9. 5.
The text.
And whosoever shall not receive you, going forth out of that city shake of
the dust also of your feet for a testimony upon them.

The note.
A great fault to reject the true preachers, or not to admit them into house
for needful harbor and sustenance.

The answer.
But no fault, to reject traitorous and undermining papists, who secretly stir
up subjects to murder their sovereigns, the Lords anointed, and to seek the
subversion and destruction of their own country.

Luke 9. 16.
The text.
And taking the five loaves, and the two fishes, he looked up to heaven, and
blessed them: and brake, and distributed to his disciples, for to set before
the multitude.

The note.
Here you see that he blessed the things, and not only gave thanks to God. See
annot. Mark. cap. 8. 7.

The answer.
Who can better tell what is meant by blessing, then the holy Ghost himself,
who in the fifteenth of Matthew, and in the sixth of John expresses the same by
giving of thanks? Neither is there any cause, or reason in this place, why any
farther matter should be thought, or imagined to be meant by blessing. And as
for the several blessing of the bread first, and then the fishes afterward, is
but your dream, without warrant. Your annotation shall be considered of with
the residue of the same sort.

Luke 9. 17.
The text.
And they did all eat, and had their fill.

The note.
The miraculous providence of God toward such as follow Christ into deserts,
prisons, banishment, or whether soever.

The answer.
Many things besides may be noted, as to give thanks to God for his gifts,
though they seem never so small, or course, and to mark that he can make so
small a matter, to suffice great multitudes, and such like.

Luke 9. 41.
The text.
And Jesus answering said, O faithles and perverse generation, how long shall I
be with you and suffer you?

The note.
Incredulity hinders the effect of exorcismes, and other miraculous power
given to the church.

The answer.
The power of myraculous working was granted to the church but for a time, for
the better confirming of men in the doctrine then delivered. The doctrine
continuing one and the same, new miraculous confirmations are not to be looked
for. Yet exorcismes in your church are very common, and how bad soever your
popish priests are, yet they must work, or else you beguile both your selves,
and others.

Luke 9. 46.
The text.
And there entered a cogitation into them, which of them should be greater.

The note.
Desire of pre-eminence is an humane infirmity often even among the good.
Against which Christ teaches humility, but forbids not superiority.

The answer.
Ambition in truth is a disease very common, and good men very often have been
therewith infected. But for pride, and pre-eminence ambiciously sought, and
tyrannously kept, the pope has no peer, the devil and great Turk only
excepted. But by this it appears that the Apostles knew not, which of them
Christ had appointed to be greatest.

Luke 9. 50.
The text.
And Jesus said to him, prohibit not. For he that is not against you, is for
you.

The note.
There be some that follow not Christ precisely in life and doctrine, of whom
we may make our advantage, toi^^e propagation of Christ's honor, and religion,
when they do any thing for the advancement thereof, of what intention soever
they do it.

The answer.
If you preached Christ and not your selves, you might be the better borne
with. So his honor were advanced, your intentions needed the less to be looked
unto. But now you advance the power of the pope, the ability of freewill, and
the valor of merits, into the place of Christ the power of God to salvation to
believers, and therefore are justly prohibited.

Luke. 9. 58.
The text.
Jesus said to him the foxes have holes, and the fowls of the air nests: but
the son of man has not where to repose his head.

The note.
This man would have followed him for temporal commodities, and therefore was
not suffered.

The answer.
This man then was meet to have made a papist. For it is plain, and evident
that there was never any religion in the world devised so gainefull, and so
apt, and meet to bring in all manner of worldly commodities to the teachers
thereof, as popery.

Luke 10. 1.
The text.
And after this our Lord designed also other seventy two: and he sent them two
and two before his face, into every city and place whether himself would come.

The note.
As the twelve Apostles did represent the higher degree of the clergy, called
bishops: So these seauentie two bear the figure of the inferior clergy
called priests, Beda.

The answer.
It is apparent and evident, as well by the scriptures, as by testimony of
antiquity, that at the first there was no such distinction of higher, and
lower orders, of clergy men called bishops, and priests, but that they were
al one, till for the better order of government some one among a multitude of
priests, Hieronima E^agrio.
being chosen to govern, guide, and direct the rest, had the name of bishop
for distinctions sake given to him. And therefore this prefiguring, or
representing that, which then was not thought of, is but a dream of Master
Beda. But I marvel that Master Beda found no more of your clergy orders
there prefigured, especially the pope, and his cardinals, belike the one was
not grown then to his full height, and the other scant hatched.

Luke 10. 12.
The text.
I say to you, it shall be more tolerable for Sodom in that day, then for
that city.

The note.
Difference of pains and damnation in hell according to the difference of
demerits, August. Lib. 5. cap. 5. contra Iulianum.

The answer.
It was needless for you in this matter, to quote your doctor, considering
that in it, at this day (so far I know) you have none adversaries. I hope you
do not take hell for purgatory, nor make any of the differences temporal, and
then I see no great cause to contend with you. Howbeit in citing the place of
Augustine either you dealt very negligently, or else you trusted your note book
too well, for in the place you send us to, Augustine has no such thing.

Luke 10. 13.
The text.
Woe be to thee Chorozaim, woe be to thee Bethsaida: for if in Tire and Sidon had
been wrought the miracles, that have been wrought in you, they had done
penance, sitting in sackcloth, and ashes long ago.

The note.
True penance not only to lead a new life, but to punish the body by such
things as here be recorded for the ill life past.

The answer.
Who ever denied that penitent men should show outward tokens of the greatness
of their inward sorrow conceived for their sins, or that they should not
punish their body, to the end that by not satisfieng the lusts, and desires
thereof, it may be the less rebellious, and more obedient to the spirit. But
all this is far from that which you imagine, concerning satisfieng by that
means, for ill life past.

Luke 10. 16.
The text.
He that hears you, hears me: and he that despises you, despises me: and
he that despises me, despises him that sent me.

The note.
It is all one to despise Christ, and to despise his priests and ministers in
the catholic church, to refuse his doctrine and theirs.

The answer.
I will not quarrel with you about your word priests, though I justly might,
being taken of you for sacrificers. But I return your note against your self,
that therefore you despise Christ, and his doctrine, because you despise us,
whom Christ has sent to be teachers of his people in the Catholic Church.

Luke 10. 35.
The text.
And the next day he took forth two pence, and gave to the host, and said,
have care of him: and whatsoever thou shall supererogate, I at my return will
repaie thee.

The note.
Saint Augustine says that the Apostle (1. Cor. 9) according to this place did
supererogate, that is, did more than he needed, or was bound to do, when he
might have required all duties for preaching the Gospel, but would not. Lib. de
oper. monachor. cap. 5. whereof it comes that the works which we do more than
precept, be called works of Supererogation: and whereby it is also evident
against the protestants, that there be such works. See Optatus lib. 6. contra
Parmenian. How aptly he applies this parable to saint Paul's counsel of
virginity, (1. Cor. 7.) as to a work of supererogation.

The answer.
If your doctrine be true in this point, then Christ did a work of
Supererogation, when he suffered death for us, that is to say, a work more
then he needed to do. For if we can do more then is commanded, we may have
life by our deeds, and so Christ might have spared his pains he took for us:
besides, it were strange, if any thing that makes to the glory of God, and
salvation of men's souls, should be a work more than needs, or not within
compass of Gods commandments. But Augustine says that Paul did a work of
Supererogation, when he served as Christ's soldier without taking wages as he
might: you do great violence to Augustine in that place, by grating upon a word
to make him serve your purpose against his will, when his whole scope is
nothing else, but to show that Paul abstained from that, which was free for him
to take for his pains, and that he labored for his living, whereupon he
concludes, the labor of monks to be lawful against idle monks, which
because they would live on the sweat of other men's brows, not only refused to
labor, but also maintained, that it was unlawful for them to labor.

Luke 11. 20.
The text.
But if I in the finger of God do cast out devils: surely the kingdom of God
is come upon you.

The note.
This finger is the spirit of God, Matthew. 12. 18.

The answer.
As by the only power of Gods spirit, the devil was then thrown out of his
possession in the first propagating and spreading of the kingdom of Christ, by
the preaching of his word: even so again in these late years, by the like
mighty working of Gods spirit with the ministry of the word, Satan, who
reigned by his vicar general of Rome, has been expulsed out of a great part
of his possession.

Luke 11. 28.
The text.
But he said, yea rather, blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep
it.

The note.
The said mother of God in that also was blessed, that she was the temporal
means and minister of the incarnation, but much more blessed, in that she
continued the perpetual keeper of his word. Beda. August. tract. 19. in
Iohannem.

The answer.
You love and delight to show your reading in matters needles. Who knows not,
that it was an exceeding blessing of God to the virgin Marie, that he
vouchsafed to choose her to be the mother of his only begotten son? Also who
are there that confess not, that the greatest blessing of all, is to be the
child of God, whereof the obedient keeping of the word is a testimony?

Luke 11. 32.
The text.
The men of Niniue shall rise in the judgment with this generation, and
condemn it, because they did penance at the preaching of Jonas, and behold,
more then Jonas here.

The note.
(...), Mark that the great penance of Ninevites (Ionae 3.) is here
expressed by this Greek word. See annotations Matthew. 3. 2.

The answer.
The outward testimonies of true repentance showed forth by the Ninevites,
were not works of satisfaction as you imagine. And it is true, that they which
wax wiser especially in knowing and eschewing sin, will show it as well by
humbling them selves before God for their sins past, as also by a more
careful and diligent heed to their ways after.

Luke 11. 47.
The text.
Woe to you that build the monuments of the prophets, and your fathers did kill
them.

The note.
Not the building of the Prophets monuments is condemned, but their imitation
of their fathers that slew the prophets. Ambrose.

The answer.
Here is an high point of learning that you bring Ambrose for. We know that
the memory of Gods saints is precious in his sight: But in this you resemble
your fathers the Jews. For the saints of God long ago dead, you will seem to
honor and esteem. But toward the saints alive you are as cruel and
outrageous, as ever were your fathers. And therefore God must in justice require
of you the blood of all his saints shed since the beginning of the world to
this day.

Luke. 12. 5.
The text.
But I will show you whom you shall fear: Fear him who after he has killed
has power to cast into hell.

The note.
The fear of hell also is profitable: contrary to the Protestants, teaching
security of salvation, and that fear of hell makes men hypocrites.

The answer.
Your ordinary lieng shows whom in conditions you resemble, and whose
children year. What protestant has taught that the fear of hell is utterly
unprofitable? We assign many profits which it brings: First, the wicked many
times with the fear thereof are terrified and bridled, that they run not so
headlong to the execution of their wicked desires, as otherwise they would.
Secondly, the elect and chosen children of God being by nature as other men
corrupt, are many times at the first by the fear of hell, driven to seek
Christ their only remedy and deliverer. Thirdly, they are strengthened
against the fear of man, when they see the eschewing of bodily death would
bring eternal death. It is manifest therefore that that which you charge us
with, is your malicious collection, and not our doctrine. But our doctrine is,
that they which by faith have power to become the children of God, do show
forth their obedience of mere love and reverence to God their father, and
that they would so do, though there were no hell to punish disobedience in. And
that they who would not show any obedience, but for fear of hell, are
hypocritical slaves, doing some duty, not for dutifulnes, but only for fear
of punishment.

Luke. 12. 17.
The text.
What shall I do, because I have not whither to gather my fruits?

The note.
Give it to the poor, that should thou do, says saint Basil.

The answer.
You might as well have alleged saint Paul, but that so you should not reap
that which you hunt after, that is, the estimation of great clarks for great
reading amongst your ignorant unskillful followers. But if saint Basil had
been of your religion, he would have taught the rich man to have founded
abbeies, n^^neries, priories, and chauntr^^s for his souls health, or else to
have bestowed his superfluity in gilding roodlofts, and finding of lights, and
such other toies. For with you these things consume the portion of the poor.

Luke. 12. 20.
The text.
And God said to him, Thou fool, this night they require thy soul of thee:
and the things that thou have provided whose shall they be?

The note.
A goodly warning for all rich men.

The answer.
So it was. But if the practice of your popish church were well warranted,
there had been no cause at all to have pronounced him a fool. For, for money
he might have been canonized, and made a saint, and whatsoever masses,
diriges, pardons, and such like popish pelfrie might have done, he should be
sure of it, because he left enough to pay well for it.

Luke. 12. 22.
The text.
And he said to his disciples, therefore I say to you, Be not careful for your
life, what you shall eat: nor for your body what you shall do on.

The note.
He forbids not competent providence, but too much carefulnes. See annot.
upon S. Matthew, c. 6. v. 25.

The answer.
It is very true that men not marking the providence of God, but hanging
altogether upon their own provision, do think themselves never to have cared
sufficiently, til they have scraped together provision for a long time
aforehand. Against which Christ does arm his with the due consideration of
Gods providence. Touching your annotation, you are disposed to send us to seek
that which is not to be found.

Luke. 12. 32.
The text.
Fear not little flock, for it has pleased your father to give you a
kingdom.

The note.
It was little at the beginning, and is still in comparison of all the
reprobate: but in it self very great, as in the parable of the great tree that
grew of the little mustard seed, Matthew. 13.

The answer.
Your note in words is true, though in your meaning not true. For we doubt not
but that you mean, that this greatness is always visible to the world, which
we deny, and you are not able to prove.

Luke. 12. 35.
The text.
Let your loins be girded, and candels burning in your hands.

The note.
To girde our loins is to keep chastity and continency. Greg. ho. 10.

The answer.
Your exposition though it be Gregory's, it is far fetched, and the farther
from truth, because you imagine no chastity but in single life. By which
collection it should follow that no married men should be aptly prepared, or
furnished to wait for the coming of Christ. And so consequently one of the
sacraments of your church excludes men, from waiting for the glorious coming
of our Lord, and Savior. Surely married men are much beholding to you.

Luke. 12. 51.
The text.
Think you that I came to give peace on the earth: no I tell you, but
separation.

The note.
He means the naughty peace that is between worldlings, and sinners, the
agreement that is in infidelity, in heresy, or in any other wickedness. He
came to break this peace. See annotations Mat. 10. 34.

The answer.
It is sure that the knowledge, and embracing of Christ does disturb the
former agreement we had in darkness, and ignorance: and therefore no marvel
though in this light of the Gospel which God has raised there be many
dissentions. Your note like the rest shall be censured with his fellows.

Luke. 13. 3.
The text.
No, I say to you: but unless you have penance, you shall likewise perish.

The note.
Or as it is uttered in other places do penance. (...). the which in the new
Testament signifies perfect repentance. See annotations Mat. 3, 3. 11. 21.

The answer.
We do not doubt but that the Evangelist using that word (...) meant true, and
perfect repentance. But this is that we deny, and you should prepare your
selves to prove, that men can not be truly, or perfectly repentant, except
either they have some penance inioined them, or else assume to themselves some
penance, whereby they may satisfy to God for their sins in the whole, or in
part. Which except you do prove, your labor about the signification of the
word is but mere wrangling. Your annotations shall receive answer by
themselves.

Luke. 13. 6.
The text.
And he said this similitude, A certain man had a fig tree planted in his
vineyard, and he came seeking for fruit on it, and found none.

The note.
The fig tree with only leaves and no fruit is the Jews Synagogue and every
other people or person, which has faith and fair words, and no good works.

The answer.
By your continual separation of faith from works, your meaning is to make
your followers believe, that we teach that men may be justified by an idle and
fruitless faith. Wherein your own conscience does witness to you, that you do
us great injury. The Jews Synagogue had a show of works, but no true faith,
and therefore that (as you confess) being signified by the fig tree, your
hypocritical confidence in works, whereby you and they sought to establish
your own righteousness, is flatly by this parable condemned.

Luke. 13. 19.
The text.
It is like to a mustard seed, which a man took, and cast into his garden,
and it grew: and became a great tree, and the fowls of the air rested in the
boughs thereof.

The note.
See annotations, Matthew. 13. 31.

The answer.
Your references are neither rightly quoted, for upon the 31. verse there is
nothing noted, and upon the next verse there is nothing said, which might not
have been set down of any scholar never so mean. For what Christian, that
has made any progress at all in Christ's school, can be ignorant of the
beginning, and increase of the church of Christ?

Luke. 13. 24.
The text.
But he said to them, Strive to enter by the narrow gate, because many, I say
to you, shall seek to enter, and shall not be able.

The note.
Christians must in their lives seek the strait way, but in religion the
ancient common way.

The answer.
If by ancient and common, you mean that religion which Adam received of God,
and by him was delivered to all mankind, and which Christ delivered to his
whole church, then we accord with you, that it is that, which we are to follow,
and to strive for. But if you mean that, which for some ages has been
common, and therefore bears some show of antiquity, then we dissent from
you. Because whiles you seek to establish your popery, you are not ashamed to
make Christ to exhort men either to supersticious Iudaisme, or to idolatrous
Gentilisme. For at that time there were none other religions commonly received,
and embraced but these: and neither of them both, but did bear a greater show
of antiquity, then in truth ever did popery.

Luke. 13. 30.
The text.
And behold, they are last that shall be first, and they be first that shall be
last.

The note.
The Gentiles coming into Gods favor later, are preferred before the Jews
which were first.

The answer.
This note must have a favorable exposition. And we take it that the preferment
you mean, is our graffing into the true olive, whence they were cut out. And
then we reason thus: If the Church of the Jews once flourishing, might
afterward decay, and that people falling away, give room and place to such
nations, as God made himself known unto in Christ long after them: then why
may not the Romans, though their faith was once commended, and praise worthy,
be in like case shaken of also?

Luke. 13. 34.
The text.
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the prophets, and stonest them that are
sent to thee, how often would I gather thy children, as the bird does her
brood under her wings, and thou would not.

The note.
The Jews lost their pre-eminence, by their own freewill and not by Gods
causing: who ceased not to call and cry upon them, and they would not hear:
Whereby freewill is plainly proved.

The answer.
If you had proved that the Jews had by their own will merits deserved, and
therefore obtained at Gods hand, that their pre-eminence, whereby they were
preferred before all nations upon the earth, you had plainly proved freewill.
But when you can find none other freedom of will but to sin, and to refuse
obstinately Gods gracious calling, and crieng to them by his ministers and
messengers, you sufficiently confute your selves, and plainly prove what
thraldom you are in by your freedom of will. And where you say, that they
lost not their pre-eminence by Gods causing, Romans 11. 32.
you speak directly against the Apostle Paul, who says that God concluded or
shut them up into incredulity.

Luke. 14. 14.
The text.
But when thou make a feast, call the poor, feeble, lame, and blind, and
thou shall be blessed, because they have not to recompense thee: for recompense
shall be made thee in the resurrection of the just.

The note.
Reward for charitable deeds, and that they may be done for reward against our
adversaries.

The answer.
What adversaries be they, that deny that God rewards works proceeding of
love? Or that it is not lawful for men to look for reward since God has
promised it? This is only denied, that works be therefore meritorious, because
they be rewarded, or that the children of God do work in respect of reward
only, or principally, but in respect of duty and obedience to God. But
papists consider not, or at the least way regard not, that the lieng tongue
kills the soul.

Luke. 14. 18.
The text.
And they began all at once to make excuse. The first said to him, I have
bought a farm, and I must needs go forth and see it, I pray thee hold me
excused.

The note.
Worldlines, wealth, and voluptuousnes are the things that specially hinder men
from God.

The answer.
And yet none of these so great an hinderance, as is the veil of hypocrisy,
and the trust and confidence in our selves, and in our own works. Which was the
cause that the grossest sinners came sooner to Christ, than the proud popish
pharisees.

Luke. 14. 26.
The text.
If any man come to me, and hates not his father and mother, and wife and
children, and brethren and sisters, yea and his own life besides: he cannot be
my disciple.

The note.
No creature so dear unto us, which we must not hate or forsake, if it hinder
us, and in that respect that it hinders us from Christ, or his Church, and
our salvation.

The answer.
In this we consent. And a great number of us have not only forsaken all our
friends, how dear to us soever, but also given over our selves and our golden
years to prison, pains, torments, and most bitter death, rather than to leave
and forsake Christ's catholic Church, and our salvation.

Luke. 14. 33.
The text.
So therefore every one of you that does not renounce all that he possesses,
cannot be my children.

The note.
He that is a right Christian man must make his account, that if he be put to
it (as he often may be in times of persecution) he must renounce all that ever
he has, rather than forsake the catholic faith.

The answer.
Wherefore all true and sincere Christians must arm themselves rather to abide
whatsoever extremities may befall them, than to be drawn to embrace the faith
now professed at Rome, which never was catholic.

Luke. 15. 4.
The text.
What man of you having an hundred sheep: and if he had lost one of them, does
he not leave the ninety nine in the desert, and goes after that which was
lost until he find it?

The note.
This man is our Savior Christ, whose care and travail in searching and
reducing sinners to repentance, all spiritual men especially should follow.

The answer.
You follow fair. If there be any whom you think straied from you in places
where you are of power, in steed of seeking, finding, and laying on your
shoulders, you, I say, make shorter work, that is, you cut their throtes, or
roste them alive, which is a plain evidence that you are woolues, and not
shepherds.

Luke. 15. 8.
The text.
Or what woman having ten groats, if she leese one groat, does she not light a
candle, and sweep the house, and seek diligently until she find?

The note.
This woman is the Catholic church, who also seeks continually her lost
children.

The answer.
Therefore your church can not be the Catholic church, for such children as
she supposes that she has lost, she procures their destruction: witness the
massacres in France, and the monstrous cruelties in other places showed. So
far off is she from seeking any for their good.

Luke 15. 11.
The text.
A certain man had two sons: and the younger of them said to his father,
Father, give me that portion of substance that belongs to me, etc.

The note.
The prodigal son is a parable both of the Gentiles conversion, and also of
every dissolute sinner penitentlie returning to God.

The answer.
God, if it be his good will, make you truly penitent, that it may be a
parable of your conversion also.

Luke 15. 20.
The text.
And when he was yet far of, his father saw him, and was moved with mercy,
and running to him fell upon his neck, and kissed him.

The note.
Gods wonderful and tender mercy toward penitent sinners.

The answer.
Gods works are wonderful, but his mercy is above all his works.

Luke 16. 9.
The text.
Make unto you friends of the mammon of iniquity, that when you fail, they
may receive you into the eternal tabernacles.

The note.
Mammon (says Saint Hierome q. 6. ad Algas.) in the Syriake tongue signifies
riches, mammon of iniquity, because they are often ^ll gotten, or ill
bestowed, or occasion of evil, or at the least worldly, and false, and not
the true heavenly riches.

The answer.
And yet your religion is altogether framed of purpose, to gain mammon of
iniquity, which you esteem above all heavenly riches: and spend it you do
not, but to the disquieting and troubling of the whole world.

Luke 16. 23.
The text.
And lifting up his eyes when he was in torments, he saw Abraham a far off,
and Lazarus in his bosom, etc.

The note.
Lazarus in Abraham's bosom and rest, but both in hell, and not in the kingdom
of heaven before Christ. Hierom. epist. 3. Epitaph. Nepot.

The answer.
You wrestle in vain for a third place, for though your error therein be
somewhat ancient, and have some favor of the old writers, yet they are so
uncertain and so diverse in that matter, dissenting both from them selves, and
one from another, not knowing where to place this third place, or what to make
of it, that no wise man will wander after such uncertain steps, as they lead
him in. Hierome takes this place to be paradise, Ad Paulam super obitu
Bl^sill^e.
and Hierome takes this place not to be paradise in this place by you quoted:
and if your own author be not constant, what shall we think of the rest?
Epistola 57.
Augustine can not tell whether the bosom of Abraham be paradise or hell, but
in reasoning the case, he delivers three reasons why it should not be hell:
first, because hell is named in the text in the death of the rich man, and not
named in the death or rest of Lazarus. Secondly, because it is hard to find
the name of hell in scriptures taken in good part, for a place of joy and rest:
so that if the scriptures had said, that Christ had gone into Abraham's bosom
after death, Epistola 99.
and had not told of the loosing of the sorrows of death, he would have
marueiled that any durst have been so bold, as to have affirmed that he
descended into hell. Thirdly, the great and wonderful distance here mentioned
betwixt hell and Abraham's bosom, it were too long, and not agreeing with the
brevity which I have hitherto used, to rippe up the disagreeing judgments of
the fathers, whether Abraham's bosom be parcel of heaven or hell, or whether
it be above us or beneath us, for so always it is, when men are vncertainlie
carried after the vanity of their own mind and conceit, they wot not whither
them selves. How much better had it been for them and you to hold fast that,
Hipognosticon (...). 5.
which saint Augustine calls the faith of the Catholics: namely, that the
kingdom of heaven is a place of joy for the faithful, and hell a place of
punishment for infidels and apostataes, and that a third place either for rest
or punishment is unknown, and no where found in scriptures. These two places
are here lively described, for the rich man went to hell, a place of
torments: but Lazarus was carried into Abraham's bosom, a place of joy and rest.
Heaven is called Abraham's bosom, because that God gave him that honor to be
father of the faithful, therefore his children are said to be gathered into
his bosom, when together with him they are crowned with heavenly joy and
rest, the reward of his and their faith.

Luke. 16. 25.
The text.
And Abraham said unto him, Son, remember that thou did receive good things
in thy life time, and Lazarus likewise evil: but now he is comforted, and thou
art tormented.

The note.
To be in continual pleasures, ease, wealth, peace, and prosperity in this
world is perilous, and a sign of pains in the next. Saint Hierome.

The answer.
You have cited Saint Hierome at randon in a cause needless, we have learned
of the Apostle that God does chastise every child whom he receives, Hebr. 12.
6.
and that they, which in this life escape his rod, are bastards and not
children. Seeing then Hieroms speech is warranted by the word, we acknowledge
with you, that continual pleasures, ease, wealth, peace and prosperity are
perilous, and betokens that God deferreth the punishment of such to the next
life.

Luke. 16. 29.
The text.
And Abraham said to him, They have Moses and the Prophets: let them hear
them.

The note.
Abraham had knowledge of things in earth, which were not in his time, as that
they had Moses and the prophets books, which he never saw. Augustine. de cura
promortuis. cap. 14.

The answer.
Augustines judgment is, that the dead know no more what we do here, then we
know what they do there, against which his judgment he obiecteth this, which
you boldly put down for his assertion. To which he answers, that this
knowledge was extraordinary, either by relation of Moses and the Prophets now
dead and with Abraham, or by ministry of Angels, which serve men here, who
reveal to saints there so much as it pleases God to let them know. What is
this then to any ordinary knowledge of our affairs here? Which is the thing
that you would feign persuade men, to encourage them forward in invocation of
dead me^, which you may the easilier get at their hands, if you can assure
them, that the saints departed know their necessities, and hear their prayers.
But how much better and trulier might you have noted, that God denies to
those, to whom he has granted his word, extraordinary instruction by the
dead, which would overthrow the credit of those fables, whereupon your
purgatory is grounded.

Luke 17. 1.
The text.
And he said to his disciples, It is impossible that scandale should not come:
but woe to him by whom they come.

The note.
Not of mere necessity, for then it were no fault: but presupposing the great
wickedness of men, it is impossible but there shall be scandales, and therefore
it follows, woe to him by whom they come.

The answer.
If it were such necessity as should exclude will, then there were no fault,
but now as scandals (as you term them) are necessary, so you wilfully and
wittinglie run into them, and therefore woe to you. To omit all other, the
seeking to murder the Lords anointed, our most gracious sovereign, an
horrible offense, answer it and excuse it if you can.

Luke 17. 19.
The text.
And he said to him, Arise, go thy ways, because thy faith has made thee safe.

The note.
And yet we see here, it was not only faith, but also his thankefulnes and
returning to give glory to God.

The answer.
We see here two things. First, the impudent boldness of papists, that dare
control the speech of our Lord and Savior Christ. Secondly, that though
faith be accompanied with many other virtues, yet Christ ascribes the
receiving and embracing of safety, and such benefits as proceed from God to
men, to faith only and alone.

Luke 17. 21.
The text.
The kingdom of God comes not with observation: neither shall they say, lo
here, or lo there, for lo, the kingdom of God is within you.

The note.
Whiles they look and ask for a temporal kingdom in pomp and glory, lo
their king and Messiah was now among them, whose spiritual kingdom is within
all the faithful that have dominion over sin.

The answer.
If the kingdom of God comes not with observation, then how say you that it
must always have a visible and a known succession of bishops in a place
certain, which is directly against this speech of Christ.

Luke. 17. 23.
The text.
And they will say to you, Lo here, and lo there, Go not, neither do ye follow
after.

The note.
No man must run out of the Church after schismatikes, to hear them preach
Christ in corners, Christ's doctrine being open in all the world. See annot.
Matthew. 24. 23.

The answer.
But all they are schismatikes, who have divided themselves from the doctrine
which Christ and his Apostles openly delivered to the whole world, and
therefore whether they preach openly, or in corners, men may not hear them,
nor go after them. But you papists teach that, whereof there is no
commandment, no doctrine, no example in the whole doctrine of Christ and of
his Apostles: therefore no man ought to go after you. Your annotation is
already answered.

Luke. 18. 1.
The text.
And he spoke a parable to them, that it behooued always to pray, and not to
be weary.

The note.
We should always pray by faith, hope, and charity, and by working the things
that be acceptable to God: though special times of vocal prayers in the
canonical hours be assigned, for the stirring us up to God through external
signs of devotion.

The answer.
That those which pray ought to be furnished with all things that may beautify
a Christian we deny not, and that the prayers of Christians ought to be
continual without ceasing we affirm, because their needs and necessities are
continual. But the special thing required, that their prayers may be heard,
and petitions granted, is faith. That in the great dulnes and negligence of
Christians, times of prayer be appointed for the better stirring up of men
thereto, we think it very necessary. What you mean by external signs of
devotion I know not, you have so many superstitious toies, as crossings,
beads, and such like.

Luke. 18. 11.
The text.
The pharisie standing prayed thus with himself: God, I give thee thanks that
I am not as the rest of men, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, as also this
publican, I fast twice a week, I give tithes of all that I possess.

The note.
To take pride of fasting, tithing, or any goodworke, is naught, though the
works themselves be very good.

The answer.
And how can men avoid pride, and carry an humble mind that are instructed by
you, or that believe your doctrine, will it not (think you) puff up a man in
pride, to be persuaded that his works deserve heaven, and life everlasting?
This prayer of the pharisie does plainly show, that the opinion of the
pharisees, and of the papists touching grace and works were all one, and the
very same. And how then shall it not work the same effect in you that it did
in the pharisie? And here by the way is to be noted, whence you papists
learned to keep two fasting days every week.

Luke. 18. 13.
The text.
And the publican standing a far of, would not so much as lift his eyes toward
heaven: but he knocked his breast, saying; God be merciful to me a sinner.

The note.
So do the priests and people at the holy altar knock their breasts, and say
with the humble publican, Deus propitius, Aug. psalm. 31. concione 3.

The answer.
To what purpose do you cite Augustine? To prove what your priests do now
adays? he cannot tell. Or to prove the antiquity of your altars. Therein you
do but delude men with the name, whereas in the things there are great
differences. Or to prove that Deus propitius was then in the church service.
If you had now nothing therein that then was, it were hard. That does neither
prove your mass, nor your mattens in a strange tongue. As for the people they
come not near the altar, but some poor boy for the most part is feign to be
spokesman for them.

Luke. 18. 17.
The text.
Amen I say to you, Whosoever receives not the kingdom of God as a child
shall not enter into it.

The note.
In matters of faith and religion we must be as humble and obedient to the
catholic church, as young children to their parents.

The answer.
By the catholic church you understand the pope and his college of cardinals,
to whom you would have men so childishly obedient, as to believe whatsoever
they shall tell them, though they call chalk cheese. But how agrees this with
S. Paul, 1. Cor. 12. 14.
which will not have us children in understanding, Ephesians. 4. 14.
but of ripe age, to the end we may be constant, and not wavering in the faith
and knowledge of Christ, neither carried about with every puff of doctrine?

Luke 18. 20.
The text.
Thou know the commandment, thou shall not kill, etc.

The note.
Not faith only, but also keeping the commandments purchase life everlasting.
See annotations Matthew. 19. 16.

The answer.
You love to repeat one thing often. Your notes upon this have twice been
answered already. And now the third time, I pray you tell us how ye gather
this, or what necessity there is of any such consequence upon this place? You
know, and it is of all hands granted, that he which fulfilleth the Law, shall
live by the Law. Also you know that the Apostle concludes, Gala^. 3. 1^.
that therefore none live by the Law, because no man performs all things that
are written in the Law. This man would know by what doing a man should possess
life. Christ answers his question aptly, and fitly by keeping the
commandments. Does it follow therefore that a man can keep the commandments,
and so have life? But it appears that the Jewish teachers had besotted this
young man, as they had done a multitude of others, to make them seek
righteousness, and life, where it could not be found, that is in themselves, and
in their own obedience. Even as you popish pharisees, do now a days bewitch
men with an opinion of inherent justice, whereby they may deserve heaven.

Luk* 18. 22.
The text.
Yet one thing thou lackest: Sell all that ever thou have, and give to the
poor, etc.

The note.
This is not a commandment or precept, but counsel which the religious do
follow. See annot. Matthew. 19.

The answer.
Now have we the works of Supererogation of religious papists, which observe
not only commandments, but counsels. But to let you to assume that, which no
man needs to grant you, that is, that this is no commandment: I pray you why
does not the pope, his cardinals, archbishops, bishops, abbots, priors, moonks,
priests, obey this counsel, and sell their possessions, and give the money
raised thereof to the poor? Be not these amongst your religious men? But this
would grieve them worse then it grieved this rich man. As for your other
orders, which live by the spoil of the poor, and maintain themselves in
idleness by begging, they have nothing to sell, for the possess nothing. And so
it falls out, that your note is a thrasonicall brag, and that none of you
set store by Christ's counsel, which none of you do follow, or seek to observe.

Luke 18. 29.
The text.
Amen I say to you, there is no man that has left house, or parents, or
brethren, or wife, or children for the kingdom of God, etc.

The note.
The Apostles amongst other things left their wives also, as Saint Hierome
notes out of this place. Libro 1. adu. Iouinianum.

The answer.
I marvel you have no more copy of fathers for this matter. Your note and the
authority of Hierome has been already answered. Yet for farther answer we
say, that in that sense in which you take it, it was utterly unlawful, against
the commandment of God, and doctrine of the holy scriptures, for the apostles
to leave their wives. Also if we may believe Hierom, none of the Apostles had
wives, but only Peter, and then how could they leave that, which they never
had? Reconcile I pray you Hierome to himself.

Luke 18. 30.
The text.
And shall not receive much more in this time, and in the world to come life
everlasting.

The note.
Life everlasting the reward, for leaving or loosing willingly our goods for
Christ's sake.

The answer.
Whereby it more then manifestly appears, that the reward is the mere
liberality of God the giver, and not the merit of the receiver.

Luke 19. 1^.
The text.
And he said to him. Well fare thee good servant, because thou have been
faithful in a little, thou shall have power over ten cities. And the second
came, saying, Lord thy pound has made five pounds. And he said to him. And be
thou over five cities.

The note.
Mark here against the adversaries, that the reward of these two good
servants be diverse, and unequal, according to the diversity or inaequalitie
of their gains, that is their merits. And yet one receives the penie, Mat. 20.
9. as well as the other, that is heaven, or life everlasting.

The answer.
Well marked without a considering cap. First you love to wring that out of
parables, which you can not prove by plain, and evident testimonies of the
scripture. Next it is not in question between us, whether there be any
inequality of rewards, according to the inequality of men's doing, but whether
we may for our deeds (or as you call them merits) challenge justice, life,
heaven and such like, as due debts to us, for them, or for the deserts of them.
Thirdly if your own note were true, that though the one deserved scant half
so well, as the other, yet he is rewarded with heaven, and life everlasting as
well as the other, it plainly declares that whatsoever difference there was
in other blessings, yet heaven, and life are not merited, but proceed from the
liberality of the giver, otherwise both could not in so great inequality of
merit, be equally partakers of it. And how the penny which envious men which
grudged against the mercy, and liberality of God were partakers of, must needs
be the kingdom of heaven, Let them tell that can, for I can not.

Luke 19. 23.
The text.
And why did thou not give my money to the bank, and I coming might certes
with usury have exacted it?

The note.
See Matthew. 27, 29.etc.

The answer.
I do not know what you mean by these references, but to make us trouble our
selves with seeking that, which is not to be found.

Luke 19. ^3.
The text.
For the days shall come upon thee, and thine enemies shall compass thee with a
trench, and enclose thee about, and straiten thee on every side, etc.

The note.
This was fulfilled 40. years after the death of Christ by Titus and
Vespasianus, when besides incredible miseries of famine, and other distresses
there perished eleven hundred thousand, and were taken captives 97000. the
siege beginning in the very same feast, and greatest solemnity of Easter, when
they put Christ to death. Eusebius. lib. 3. hist. cap. 6, 7, 8. Joseph. lib. 7.
cap. 17.

The answer.
It can not be chosen but men of such great reading, have read the destruction
of Jerusalem, but I marvel that you give Rome no warning, to take heed of
the like plague.

Luke 20. ^.
The text.
Tell us in what power thou do these things? or who has given thee this
power?

The note.
See annotations, Matthew. cap. 21. 23.

The answer.
We have seen it, and answer that God of his goodness has furnished us with
gifts, his church has called us to the ministry of the word, and God has
given testimony thereunto by blessing our labors.

Luke. ^0. 9.
The text.
A certain man planted a vineyard, and let it out to husbandmen, and he was
from home a long time.

The note.
See the marginall annotations, Mark. 12.

The answer.
They are already answered.

Luke* 20. 25.
The text.
And he said to them. Render therefore the things that are Caesar's to Caesar,
and the things that are Gods to God.

The note.
So duties must be done to princes, that our duty to God be not neglected. See
annotations, Matthew. cap. 22. 15.

The answer.
Still you trouble us with reference to places where you have said just
nothing. Upon the 21. verse you have noted somewhat though to small purpose, as
shall appear when your large annotations are answered. In the mean space you
give duty neither to God, nor your prince, but to him to whom you owe none,
that is, to the proud prelate of Rome.

Luke. 20. (...)*
The text.
But they that shall be counted worthy of that world, and the resurrection
from the dead, neither marry nor are married, etc.

The note.
The Greek (...) imports also this much, they that are made worthy, to wit,
by the grace of God, and so they are in deed worthy: as also in the next
chapter, verse 36, and 2. Thessalonians, 1. 5.

The answer.
Why do ye not expressly say, that they are made worthy by their own
demerits? For that I know you will have joined with the grace of God, neither do
you account any indeed worthy, but by their own inherent justice. And if it
were not for these foolish imaginations of yours, your note were tolerable. But
of these you keep silence, because you know not how to wrest the text to them.

Luke 21. ^*
The text.
These things which you see, the days will come wherein there shall not be
left a stone upon a stone, that shall not be destroyed.

The note.
This was fulfilled 40. years after the death of Christ, the 19. of August,
being the very month and day, wherein the Babylonians burnt it, from the first
building thereof by Solomon 1130. years, from the reedifieng of it, under
Cyrus 639. Joseph. de bello Iudaico, lib. 7. cap. 10.

The answer.
This is a matter of Chronographie, and therefore I will not bestow pains to
examine your diligence therein.

Luke 21. 8.
The text.
Who said, See you be not seduced, for many will come in my name, saying, that
I am he. And the time is at hand, go not therefore after them.

The note.
Many false prophets, and heretics. See annot. Mat. 24. Mark. 13.

The answer.
As many as go about to tie the Church of Christ to Rome, and to persuade all
men to be partakers of the cup of fornications of the whore of Babylon. Your
notes as I take it are already answered.

Luke 21. 12.
The text.
But before all these things they will lay hands upon you: and persecute you,
etc.

The note.
Great persecution of catholic men.

The answer.
These catholics never knew, what the supremacy of the bishop of Rome meant.

Luke. 21. 37.
The text.
And the days he was teaching in the temple, but the nights going forth, he
abode in the mount that is called Oliuet.

The note.
Solitarines or eremitage (as S. Gregory Nazian says) is a goodly thing.
This does the mount Carmel of Helias teach, John's desert, and that mount unto
which Jesus often retired, and was quietly alone with himself. Ser. 26. de
amore pauperum.

The answer.
Gregory Nazian never imagined or thought of any such superstitious persons,
as your eremites be: neither for such solitarines as they use can any thing be
soundly brought from these examples.

Luke. 22. 20.
The text.
This is the chalice the new testament in my blood, which shall be shed for you.

The note.
The Greek is here so plain, that there was very blood in the chaliceshed
for us, that Beza says it is a corruption in the Greek. See the annotations
upon this place.

The answer.
The Greek is so plain, that no papists of you can by any necessary
consequence prove out of this place that very blood is in the cup. The defense
of Master Beza, and a more full answer to your cavil about this place, I refer
to the learned answer of that reverend man master Doctor Fulke against
Martinius.

Luke. 22. 30.
The text.
And I dispose to you, as my father disposed to me a kingdom, that you may eat
and drink upon my table in my kingdom, and may sit upon thrones, judging the
twelve tribes of Israel.

The note.
Straight after the former loving check and admonition he promises to them
all that have been partakers with him of his miseries in this life, greater
pre-eminence in heaven, than any potentate can have in this world, and
therefore that they need not be careful of dignity or supremacy.

The answer.
If Christ had appointed Peter in supreme authority over the rest, how
happened that the Apostles were still ignorant of it, and contended still amongst
themselves for superiority, so that Christ is feign still to give them new
checks and new admonitions for that matter? Further, touching the loving
promise of Christ wherewith he comforted them, they had been much to blame if
they would have doubted of it, as you teach other Christians to doubt of his
promises.

Luke. 23. 45.
The text.
And the sun was darkened: and the veil of the temple was rent in the mids.

The note.
This eclipse was seen and woondered at, as a thing above nature of Dionisius
Areopagita at Thebes, when he was yet a pagan. Dionis. ep. ad Policarp. and
epist ad Apollophanem.

The answer.
The judgment of men concerning this eclipse is diverse, some think that it was
universal, others because the stories which do diligently and exactly set out
the notable things of those times, do not mention it, think that therefore it
was but in Iewrie only. And the authority of Dionysius, whom men know to be a
counterfeit, does nothing move them to the contrary. But whether it were
universal or particular, all consent that at that time it must needs be a
work above nature, and therefore wonderful and miraculous. And if you had
respected the benefit of your reader, rather than the maintenance of the
vaineglorious opinion of your much reading, you in the margent, in steed of
citing a bastard authority, would have given us some good lesson or
observation, what that so wonderful work of God at that time might betoken.

Luke. 24. 1.
The text.
And in the first of the sabbath very early they came to the monument, carieng
the spices which they had prepared.

The note.
That is, first after the sabbath, which is (says saint Hierom, q. 4. ad
Hedibiam) dies Dominica, our Lords day wherein he arose. For the week is
divided into the sabbath, and the 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. of the sabbath. And the
Apostle (1. Cor. 16. 2.) commanded a collection of money to be made on the
first of the sabbath. Whereby we learn both the keeping of Sunday, and the
churches count of days by the 2. 3. 4. of the sabbath to be Apostolical,
which saint Siluester afterward named 2. 3. 4. feriam, etc. Breuiar. Roman.
December. 31.

The answer.
That our Lords day in common speech called sunday is meant by the first of the
sabbath, and that the observation of that in the churches of Christians was
instituted by the Apostles is clear, their reckoning of the other days they
left free to every country their manner. If your church had had nothing
apostolical left in it, your defection had been without all color plain and
gross. But now these, and such like silly remnants, as they serve somewhat to
shadow and to hide you, so are they horribly poisoned with a multitude of trash
of your own devising and bringing in.

Luke. 24. 46.
The text.
And he said unto them, that so it is written, and it behooued Christ to
suffer, and to rise again from the dead the third day: and penance to be
preached in his name, and remission of sins unto all nations beginning from
Jerusalem.

The note.
As he shall be Anathema (says Saint Augustine) which preaches that Christ
neither suffered nor rose again, because we learn by the Gospel that it
behooued Christ to suffer, and to rise again the third day: so he shall also
be anathema, whosoever preaches the church to be else where then in the
communion of all nations: because by the self same Gospel we learn in the
words next following, and penance to be preached in his name, and remission of
sins through out all nations. Aug. epist. 48.

The answer.
How happened it, that in so many conflicts as Augustine has with the
Donatists, that he never does pronounce Anathema against them, for appealing
from the sentence of the Bishop of Rome? And why does he never urge against
them, that the bishop of Rome could not in giving sentence and judgment err?
For if he had believed the principles of popish divinity, these had been very
material points against the Donatists. But in this anathema here by you
rehearsed, he does as directly strike the Romanists as the Donatists. For Rome
has rent her self from the churches of the East parts, and also from as many
of the West, as do not consent to her abominations and fornications: so that
whosoever at this day do place Gods church there, does forsake the communion
of the church of all nations, which was, is, and shall be. And if Augustine
were alive again now, he would impugn the church of Rome with the same
reasons that he used against the Donatists then.

JOHN.
John 1. 15.
The text.
This was he of whom I spoke, He that shall come after me, is made before me,
because he was before me.

The note.
He is preferred and made of more dignity and excellency then I, because he
was before me and all things eternal God.

The answer.
I know that diverse and sundry good men, and excellent interpreters of the
scriptures do explane this as you do, yet notwithstanding I rather assent to
them, which do not refer it to the time, or eternity of Christ's being, but to
the dignity and excellency of his person.

John 1. 22.
The text.
Art thou the prophet? and he answered, no.

The note.
Belike the Jews ignorantly understood not the place in Deuteronomie of
Christ, and therefore they ask also, whether he be the prophet there spoken
of. See also cap. 7. 40.

The answer.
Whether the Jews had in this their question reference to that place of
Deuteronomie, or no, it is uncertain, neither can any proof be made of it
but coniecturall. The like I say to your other place, cap. 7. 40. and yet we do
not doubt of their blindness and ignorance in not understanding the Scriptures,
which appears manifestly in their reply to John, after he had told them, I am
the voice of one crying, etc.

John 1. 26.
The text.
John answered them, saying, I baptize in water: but there has stood in the
midst of you, whom you know not, etc.

The note.
He does often here signify the great difference of his baptism and of
Christ's, as of his person and Christ's. See annot. Matthew. 3.

The answer.
We have often answered, that you do but bleare the eyes of the simple with
the name of Christ's baptism, which they take for the baptism of every
minister in the church, and being so taken, there is no difference between
John's baptism and it. Otherwise in this place and in the like, John
considers of him self as of a servant or minister, and of Christ, as of his
master, and Lord, and attributes to him self the outward work and washing in
baptism, and to Christ the inward grace and workmanship. In which comparison
we learn the general difference between all ministers and Christ, their work
and his. Your annotations are seen, and they are like your selves,
slanderous, lying, untrue, and shall be answered in the general answer to
your annotations.

John 1. 41.
The text.
He finds his brother Simon, and says to him, we have found Messiah, which
is being interpreted, Christ.

The note.
Messiah in Hebrew, in Greek Christ, in English anointed, to wit, with the
spiritual oil of grace above his brethren. Psalm 44.

The answer.
You must needs exempt the pope from amongst the brethren of Christ, for he is
not Christ's inferior in grace, if that which is attributed to him by popish
parasites be true.

John. 1. 42.
The text.
And Jesus looking upon him, said, Thou art Simon the son of Iona: thou shall
be called Cephas, which is interpreted Peter.

The note.
Cephas in Siriacke, and Peter in Greek, in English Rock. See Matthew 16. 18.

The answer.
I marvel that Paul knew not this mystery: 1. Cor. 3. 11.
for he taught to build upon Christ and not upon Peter. 1. Peter. 2. 3.
And Peter though he make all believers lively stones, yet teaches none other
chief stone but our Lord and Savior Christ.

John. 2. 9.
The text.
And after the chief steward tasted the water made wine, and knew not whence
it was, but the ministers knew that had drawn the water, etc.

The note.
He that sees water turned into wine, needs not to dispute or doubt how
Christ changed bread into his body.

The answer.
He that sees and knows the perpetual phrase and manner of speaking of the
holy Ghost touching sacraments, will wonder that men should be so blind, or
else so wilful as to dispute and contend for such a change of bread into the
body of Christ, as neither can stand with that phrase of speech, nor with the
nature of a sacrament, neither yet with the articles of our belief.

John. 3. 8.
The text.
The spirit breaths where he will, and thou hear his voice, but thou
know not when he comes, and whither he goes.

The note.
We follow rather saint Augustine, and those ancient fathers which most
commonly understand this place of the holy Ghost, and not of wind, although
both be good.

The answer.
And we do follow saint Augustine, and those fathers which do interpret this to
be meant of the wind, because both the hearing of the sound of it, and the
force of the comparison, which must needs be betwixt things diverse, does
enforce it to be the truer.

John. 4. 1.
The text.
When Jesus therefore understood that the pharisees heard that Jesus makes mo
disciples, and baptizeth than John, (howbeit Jesus did not baptize, but his
disciples) he left Iewrie, and went again into Galile.

The note.
He did not baptize ordinarily, yet that he did baptize his Apostles, saint
Augustine thinks it very probably. Epist. 108.

The answer.
Augustine doubts not, but that the Apostles of Christ were baptized either
by Christ, or by John before they took upon them to baptize, but by whether he
is not resolute, neither is it material. But that some of them were by John
baptized it is manifest, because they were John's disciples before they were
Christ's Apostles. John. 1. 37.


John. 4. 7.
The text.
There comes a woman of Samaria to draw water, Jesus said to her, Give me to
drink.

The note.
This woman is a figure of the church not yet justified, but now to be
justified, August. tract. 15. in Iohannem.

The answer.
You willingly follow allegories, because many times they are far fetched, and
serve you to dally withal: howbeit I do not see to what use this may serve
you. I do not think that you your selves do think, that this woman's five
husbands were either the five books of Moses, or her five senses, which
notwithstanding Augustine affirms in the same treatise. The lessons which the
plain letter do give do both more edify, and are more safe.

John. 4. 9.
The text.
How do thou being a Jew, ask of me to drink, which am a Samaritane woman?
For the Jews do not communicate with the Samaritans.

The note.
There were many other causes why the faithful Jews could not abide the
Samaritans, but their precise abstaining from their company and conversation,
was their scismaticall temple and service in mount Garizim.

The answer.
It is very true that those which make a scisme, and continue therein, are not
to be communicated with of faithful Christians, and yet I think in that
corrupt state of the Jewish church, the other causes were rather stronger than
that.

John. 4. 10.
The text.
If thou did know the gift of God, and who is he that said to thee, Give me
to drink* thou perhaps would have asked of him, and he would have given
thee living water.

The note.
He speaks of his baptizing in the holy Ghost. See John 7. 39.

The answer.
He speaks of giving his holy spirit to them that in faith ask and require
it.

John. 4. 39.
The text.
And of that city many believed in him of the Samaritans for the words of the
woman giving testimony, that he told me all things whatsoever I have done.

The note.
This woman mystically being the church, it is here signified that they,
which at the first believe because the church teaches so, afterward be much
confirmed finding it in the Scriptures also, and by other instructions.

The answer.
It is here signified by what weak and unlikely instruments God can work, in
drawing men to the knowledge of him self, and embracing his mercies and graces
offered. And further we learn, that as the authority and credit of this
woman, by whom the Samaritans were first converted, was not greater therefore
then the credit and authority of our Savior Christ, by whom the Samaritans
were now confirmed: so the authority of the church first drawing men to
believe, is not greater then the authority of the scriptures, by which men be
after confirmed in the truth of their belief. As for your addition of other
instructions, if you mean thereby your unwritten verities, or some such like
stuff, you might have kept it for your own stoore.

John 5. 6.
The text.
And there is at Jerusalem, upon probatica a pond which in Hebrew is surnamed
Bethsaida, having five porches.

The note.
By our Latin text and the Greek, this miraculous pond was in or upon
probatica, that is, a place where sheep to be sacrificed were kept: but by
other Latin copies Saint Hierome and some Greek fathers, probatica is the very
pond it self, so called, because the sheep of sacrifice were there washed.

The answer.
Whether the pond were probatica, or in, or upon probatica, whether sheep were
sold there, washed there, or kept there, it is not material nor worth the
contending for.

John 5. 29.
The text.
Marvel not at this, because the hour comes, wherein all that are in the
graves shall hear his voice, and they that have done good things shall come
forth into the resurrection of life.

The note.
Not faith only, but good and ill deeds shall be counted, and accordingly
rewarded, at the day of judgment.

The answer.
And who denies this, and yet then the only instrument of uniting us to
Christ our righteousness, shall be faith only and alone.

John 5. 39.
The text.
Search the scriptures, for you think in them to have life everlasting: and
the same are they that give testimony of me.

The note.
Catholics search the scriptures, and find there Peter's and his successors
primacie, the real presence, the priests power to forgive sins,
justification by faith and good works, virginity preferred before matrimony,
breach of the vow of continency damnable, voluntary poverty, penance, alms,
and good deeds meritorious, diverse rewards in heaven according to diverse
merits, and such like.

The answer.
Whom have we here? Thraso, or Gnato? For this can not proceed, but either
from a vainglorious vaunter, or from a filthy flatterer. You catholics may as
e^silie wring water out of a flint, as find in the scriptures that, which is
not in them, as in the particulars which you have reckoned, in their particular
places are, or shall be showed. And to the end your credulous followers may be
the less able to epsy your fraud herein, you have hitherto kept them safe
from searching the scriptures, and now, when by Gods good benefit you can no
longer keep them from the scriptures, you have sent them the scriptures in
their mother tongue, not to the end they should search, but corrupted, and of
purpose obscured and darkened, to the end to terrify and fear men from
searching: for if with humility and hearty desire of truth, they would
diligently search the scriptures, the testimonies of them would drive them to
leave you, and to fly to Christ for life.

John 5. 43.
The text.
I am come in the name of my father, and you receive me not: if another shall
come in his own name, him will you receive.

The note.
He means specially Antichrist, then how can the pope be he, seeing the Jews
receive him not.

The answer.
He means any false and forged Christ, and not Antichrist, of which sort it
is well known, there were diverse both before, and after Christ, whom the Jews
were very ready to embrace. And it is manifest, that they were not only
ready to receive such impostors and seducers, as vaunted them selves to be
Christ, but also by a solemn embassage the provoked and procured, (as much as
in them lay) John Baptist to have, John 1. 19.
and take that honor upon him. Further, you forget that which some of you have
much contended for, namely, the force of the Greek article, by addition
whereof in other places, you will enforce Antichrist to be meant of some
particular man, but here that must be meant of Antichrist, which neither has
article added, nor yet can possibly with any probability be restrained to
any one particular person. Thus may your holy father be Antichrist still, for
any let that is in this place.

Ioh. 6. 23.
The text.
But other boats came in from Tyberias beside the place where they had eaten
the bread, our Lord giving thanks.

The note.
These words do plainly import, that the giving thanks was an effectual
blessing of the bread, and working the multiplication thereof.

The answer.
These words do plainly import, that the blessing which the other Evangelists
speak of, was nothing else, but prayer and thanksgiving, by the which the
creatures of God are sanctified, to the use and behoof of men.

Ioh. 6. 32.
The text.
Amen, Amen, I say to you, Moses gave you not the bread from heaven, but my
father gives you the true bread from heaven.

The note.
Why we keep the Hebrew^word Amen and translate it not, See the annot. cap. 8.
verse. 34.

The answer.
This is a cloak for the rain, if you had only abstained from translating
such words, as use has upon occasion made common to other toongs, we would not
greatly blame you, but your hunting, and seeking under that, and the like
pretenses, to leave things as dark, as you can, is that, which men do justly
condemn in you.

Ioh. 7. ^,
The text.
And the festiual day of the Jews Scenopegia was at hand.

The note.
Scenopegia (Leuit. 23. (...)) is the feast of Tabernacles which the Jews
kept, from the seventh of October, for eight days together by Gods
commandment, for a memory that their fathers dwelt by Gods protection forty
years in tabernacles, or tents, and not in houses, coming out of Egypt, See
Leuit. 23. 34.

The answer.
You might have kept your margent vnblotted, if it had stood with your
pleasure, to have translated Scenopegia. The place in Leuiticus would
sufficiently have showed the cause of the institution.

Ioh. 7. 17
The text.
If any man will do the will of him, he shall understand of the doctrine,
whether it be of God, or I speak of my self.

The note.
The way to come to know the truth is to live well.

The answer.
The way to come to know, and understand the truth, is wholly to renounce, and
resign our own will, and to give our selves over wholly to the obedience of
God. For the Lord himself will teach the humble, Psalm. 25. 9. 12.
and meek: even them that fear him.

Ioh. 7. 18.
The text.
He that speaks of himself, seeks his own glory.

The note.
It is spoken of Antichrist specially, and it is true in all heretics,
Augustine. tract. 29. in Euangelium Io.

The answer.
If ever it was verified of any, it is most true of the bishop of Rome. The
seeking of his glory, is the cause of all the mischiefs wrought by wars, in
the world at this present. If we will not therefore be snarled in the snares of
Antichrist, we must seek his only glory that created us, as in the same
treatise Augustine does advise us.

Ioh. 7. 20.
The text.
The multitude answered and said, thou have a devil, who seeks to kill thee?

The note.
No marvel, when these speak thus to Christ himself, if ^eretikes call his
vicar Antichrist.

The answer.
No marvel though sincere Christians be esteemed, regarded, and spoken of by
papists, and atheistes, as Christ him self was by the Jews. As for any vicar
of Christ, we know none, but every prince, and magistrate within his own
dominion, and every pastor in his own flock.

Ioh. 7. 39.
The text.
And this he said of the spirit that they should receive, which believed in
him: for as yet the spirit was not given because Jesus was not glorified.

The note.
This was fulfilled on Whit sunday Acts 2. and afterward always by imposition
of hands in the Sacrament of Confirmation visibly in the primitive church, and
inuisibly to the end of the world.

The answer.
Your sacrament of confirmation, who instituted it? What promise was given to
it? What signs were appointed? What signification had they? Who were
authorized to minister it? Whether the bishop alone? Or every priest?

John. 7. 50.
The text.
Nicodemus said to them, he that came to him by night, who was one of them,
does our law judge a man, unless it first hear him, and know what he does?

The note.
Christ has always some good even amongst the wicked, which secretly serve
him, and by wise delays, auert the execution of unjust laws against him and
his people, as Nicodemas and Gamaliel.

The answer.
Christ has his amongst every sort of men, and often works great benefit to
his church by the weakest of those that bear good will to his truth.

John. 8. 7.
The text.
He that is without sin of you, let him first throw the stone at her.

The note.
We cannot conveniently reprehend or condemn other men's faults if our selves
be guilty of the same, or other greater. Cyrill. in Io. See annot. Matt. 7. 1.

The answer.
You are great clarks, that are so liberal of your fathers in matters*
needless. And yet neither Christ nor Cirill meant that none should reprehend
others, but such as are faultlesse themselves. But only they meant to discover
the hypocrisy of men, which never looking upon them selves, how great soever
their faults be, yet are severe censurers of others.

John. 8. 1^.
The text.
And Jesus said, Neither will I condemn thee. Go and now sin no more.

The note.
Saint Augustine by this example of our master proves, that clergiemen
specially should be given much to mercy: and that they ought often, as the
cause and time require, to get pardon of the secular magistrates for offenders
that be penitent. Epist. 54.

The answer.
How well you follow this which you allege out of Augustine it is manifest, in
that the secular magistrates are stirred up by you to extreme cruelties and
most horrible bloodsheds and murders, as all the world can witness. If ever
mercy were exiled from men, sure it is banished from amongst papists. Which
needs no proof: for in all places where the heresy of popery is favored
and vpheld with the sword of authority, experience teaches it. Your horrible
tragedies my heart pants to think upon, and my pen trembles to record. There
are in all countries so many witnesses of your horrible cruelties, that it is
needless to set down any examples.

John. 8. 26.
The text.
Jesus said to them, The beginning who also speak to you.

The note.
So read S. Cirill, S. Ambrose, and S. Augustine expounding it of Christ's
person, that he is the beginning or cause of all creatures.

The answer.
If you would have had your reading marvelled at, you should here have brought
us some other fathers. For, for these we think you are beholding to Erasmus
and Bezaes annotations, whence you borrowed them. But that you profess of
purpose to follow the old Latin translation, and therefore could not translate
otherwise, it had been no hard matter to have showed, that you willingly err
with them whom you follow.

John. 8. 31.
The text.
Jesus therefore said to them that believed him, the Jews, If you abide in my
word, you shall be my disciples in deed.

The note.
Only faith is not sufficient without perseverance or abiding in the keeping
of his commandments.

The answer.
Only fire is not sufficient to warm a man standing by it without heat, and
in the like order you do but abuse men in diuorcing things inseparable.

John. 8. 36.
The text.
If therefore the son make you free, you shall be free in deed.

The note.
Man was never without free will, but having the grace of Christ his will is
truly made free (as saint Augustine says) from servitude of sin also,
tractatu 41. in Euang. Io.

The answer.
If you mean such freedom of will, as is in thraldom and servitude of sin
to serve sin willingly, we will easily grant that man was never without it.
If you mean otherwise, you abuse saint Augustine for that, he meant not. Yea
when we are freed by Christ, he speaks thus in the same treatise: Partly
liberty, partly servitude, liberty is not yet whole, pure and full, because
full eternity is not yet. It is strange that you are not ashamed to abuse men
thus with the fathers.

John. 8. 39.
The text.
If you be the children of Abraham, do the works of Abraham.

The note.
Not only faith but good works also make men the children of Abraham,
according as saint James also speaks of Abraham's works, cap. 2.

The answer.
If you gather no better consequences at Rhemes, none of mine shall learn
Logike there. How holds this; Do the works of Abraham, if ye be the sons
of Abraham, ergo to do the works of Abraham, make men the sons of Abraham. It
is a shame for children to glory in the goodness, and virtue of their parents,
and not a whit to resemble them therein. This is it that Christ reprooueth the
Jews for. As for James speaks of justifying by works, but of being made the
children of Abraham by works, I find there just, and iumpe nothing.

John. 8. 44.
The text.
You are of your father the devil, and the desires of your father you will do.
He was a man killer from the beginning, he stood not in the verity, because
verity is not in him.

The note.
Augustine compares heretics, in their spiritual murder, by driving
Christian men out of the church, to the devil that drove our parents out of
paradise. Cont. Lit. Petili. lib. 2. cap. 13.

The answer.
The devil did bereave our first parents of their happy estate, by making them
believe they should be more happy, and blessed: even so you with the sweet
name of the church do allure, draw, and entise men from the true catholic, and
universal church, and so bring them to the pit of perdition.

John. 8. 49.
The text.
Jesus answered I have no devil: but I do honor my father and you have
dishonored me.

The note.
He denies not that he is a Samaritane, because he is our keeper or protector,
as the word signifies, and because he is indeed that merciful Samaritane in
the parable of the wounded man, Luke 10. 33. August. tract. 43. in John.

The answer.
Augustine (as some other also of the fathers) is much delighted with
allegories, sometime more then enough. But why did you not spare Augustine
here, where you needed him not, and use him before, in that you knew would be
denied to you, to prove that works make men the children of Abraham, what? is
it not? because you could get no help at his hand?

John. 9. 3.
The text.
Jesus answered, neither has this man sinned, nor his parents: but that the
works of God may be manifested in him.

The note.
Though many infirmities fall for sin, yet not all, some coming for
probation, and some sent, that God by the cure thereof may be glorified.

The answer.
Men are not rashly to be judged of for the afflictions, or the infirmities,
which God lays upon them, or theirs. Considering that God has diverse ends,
and purposes, for the which he scourges his own chosen children, as well as
the ungodly, wicked, and reprobate.

John. 9. 5.
The text.
The night comes when no man can work.

The note.
The time of working, and meriting, is in this life: after death we can deserve
no more by our deeds, but must only receive good or ill, according to the
difference of works here.

The answer.
If this note be true, then how excuse you your selves in making men pay for
your prayers, your pardons, masses, diriges, trentals, and such like trash for
the souls of their friends departed, seeing works after death do them no good,
and seeing they must receive according to that they have done in their bodies,
whether it be good, or bad. Are you not ashamed to cousin your credulous
followers? Your coupling of works and merits, deeds and deserving, is not
worth the noting, because it cannot now besot any, but mere fools.

John. 9. 7.
The text.
Go wash in the poole of Siloe which is interpreted sent.

The note.
This was a figure of baptism, to which al men borne in sin and blindness are
sent for health and sight, Ambrose Lib. 3. cap. 2. de Sacramentis.

The answer.
Still we must see your great reading, and your followers must think that there
is no such clearks in the whole world again. The truth of Ambroses speech
heerin is not worth the discussing, but it is enough to you, that a father
speaks it, if it be not against any thing determined by your church of Rome.

John. 9. 24.
The text.
They therefore again called the man that had been blind and said to him,
Give glory to God, we know that this man is a sinner.

The note.
So say the heretics when they derogate from miracles done by Saints, or
their relikes, pharisaically pretending the glory of God. As though it were
not Gods glory when his saints do it by his power and virtue, yea his greater
glory, that does such things by his servants, and by the meanest things
belonging to them, as Peter's shadow, Act. 5. and Paul's napkin, Act. 9.

The answer.
If by pretense of giving glory to God, the pharisees had not gone about to
derogate from the glory of our Lord and Savior Christ, their words had not
been faulty. We confess that by the smaller and weaker things God works,
the more his glory thereby appears. Yet that makes nothing for your impudent
shameless forged miracles, as in making our Lady a chapel keeper (I will
not say a baude) in a nunnerie xv. years together, to cover the vile life of
Beatrix the Nun, Mill miracula beatae Mariae.
who played the whore so many years together. Do you think that such
miracles as this will make to the glory of God? And yet your books of lies
are full of them.

John. 9. 39.
The text.
And Jesus said to him, For judgment came I into this world, that they that
see not, may see, and they that see, may become blind.

The note.
By this we see that this miracle was not only marvelous and beneficial to
the blind, but also significatiue of taking away spiritual blindness.

The answer.
It is very true that the miracles of Christ were not lik popish miracles,
strange things only to be wondered at, but foretold by the prophet Esaie,
beneficial to the parties, for whom they were done or wrought: and
significatiue, that is, bearing witness to the truth of his doctrine. All which
properties the lying signs and wonders of the popish church want.

John. 10. 1.
The text.
He that enters not by door into the fold of sheep, but climeth up another
way, he is a thief and a robber.

The note.
The thief is the heretic specially, and any other that unlawfully break
in upon the sheep, to kill and to destroy them by false doctrine and otherwise.

The answer.
Popery is a dunghill compacted of the shreds of many heresies, Christ being
the only door, and heaven the fold, provided for the safe keeping of Gods
flock, the papists must needs be thieves and robbers, for that they will
clime into heaven by many ways, besides Christ.

John. 10. 4.
The text.
And when he has let forth his own sheep, he goes before them, and the
sheep follow him, because they know his voice.

The note.
That is the fashion of Jury and other countries, signifiyng that the shepherd
or pastor must teach the sheep, and not they him.

The answer.
Only England have their sheep and other cattle wander abroad harmless,
having no keeper, which in other countries is counted a miracle. Your
signification we accept, and therefore conclude that you are none of Christ's
sheep, because you take upon you to set your shepherd to school. Further, it
is to be noted how continually the scripture calls the sheep of Christ to
the hearkening to his voice, contrary to the papists, who call all to the
harkening to, and obeying of their church.

John. 10. 15.
The text.
As the father knows me, and I know my father, and I yield my life for my
sheep.

The note.
Christ's death was so necessary for the flock, that when he might have
escaped, he voluntarily offered him self to death for his flock.

The answer.
That Christ's death was necessary in word you grant, but when it comes to
peecing of it with other parts of your doctrine, it must stand for a work
needless, else it can not hold together. For if the blood of saint Thomas
could help us to heaven, what needed Christ to have shed his blood for us?

John. 10. 16.
The text.
And other sheep I have that are not of this fold, them also I must bring, and
they shall hear my voice, and there shall be made one fold and one pastor.

The note.
He means the Church of the Gentiles.

The answer.
It is true that Christ made of Jews and Gentiles one fold, and of both he,
and not the pope is the one only pastor and head.

John. 10. 29.
The text.
My father, that which he has given me, is greater then al.

The note.
Another reading is, my father that has given me, etc.

The answer.
In diverse readings you choose that which is most obscure, and can not carry
any true sense, if it be weied with the circumstances of the place, and leave
that which is plain, and carries an inestimable comfort to all that love God,
and best agrees the Greek original.

John. 11. 44.
The text.
Jesus said to them, Loose him, and let him go.

The note.
S. Cyril lib. 7. cap. vlt. in Ioh. and Augustine tract. 49. in Ioh. apply
this to the Apostles, and priests authority of absoluing sinners affirming that
Christ does revive none from sin, but in the church, and by the priests
ministry.

The answer.
We believe that the promise of life eternal pertains to none, but to such
as are or shall be of the Church of God, and that the ordinary means, whereby
God effectually calls men to be of his church, is the ministry of his
word. But we dare not tie God to his ordinary means, since he
extraordinarily called Paul and others. But how well this place is applied to
the ordinary authority of ministers, or priests in absoluing, I will spare
to speak, for reverence of them whom you allege. It is well that the church
has plain evidence of scriptures for the authority of binding and loosing,
for if it staid it self upon the authority of men, wresting such places as
this to that purpose, it were but a poor silly comfort, that the conscience
of a poor penitent sinner, could reap by the churches absolution.

John. 11. 48.
The text.
If we let him alone so, all will believe in him: and the Romans will come, and
take away our place and nation.

The note.
All men but special nations must take heed, that whiles to save their
temporal state, they forsake God: they loose not both, as the Jews did,
August. tract. 49. in Io.

The answer.
Therefore we undergo all the perils and dangers, which by your stirring up,
the force and might of all the popish princes in the world can bring upon us,
rather than to displease God, by giving over his truth, wherewith he has
blessed us: least we should provoke his heavy indignation against us, and so
perish as the Jews have done before us.

John. 12. 3.
The text.
Marie therefore took a pound of ointment of right spikenard, precious, and
anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair, and the house
was filled with the odor of the ointment.

The note.
Of this woman's extraordinary offices of devotion, and how acceptable they
were to Christ, See the annot. Mat. 26.

The answer.
Because those annotations are to receive answer by themselves, therefore I
thought not good to touch them here.

John. 12. 7.
The text.
Jesus therefore said, Let her alone that she may keep it for the day of my
burial.

The note.
The devout offices of balming and anointing the dead bodies of the faithful
are here also allowed.

The answer.
And we do not disallow whatsoever in burial serves either for comfort of
them that be alive, and for the honest and comely bringing the dead to the
grave, being the last duties that men can do to their faithful friends.

John. 12. 8.
The text.
For the poor you have always with you, but me you shall not have always.

The note.
Not in visible and mortal condition to receive alms of you, and such like
offices for supply of my necessity.

The answer.
And why do you not say not in body nor in humanity? Because you would feign
with some color shift of Christ's bodily absence from the earth, for the better
safety and defense of your real presence in the sacrament. You are full of
fathers in matters n^edlesse, why do you not in this place so often repeated
bring us at the least one plain place of some father, affirming that he is not
simply absent in body from us, but only in such sort as you do imagine? Is it
not a secret confession that all antiquity is against you? I marvel that you
are so impudent still to glory and to cry, that your faith has continued
almost xvj. hundred years, when you know that in a number of things you are
not able to bring forth any true authority of half the age.

John. 12. 20.
The text.
And there were certain Gentiles of them that came up to adore in the festival
day.

The note.
We may see there a great difference where a man pray or adore, at home or in
the church and holy places. When the Gentiles also came of devotion a pilgrimage
to the temple in Jerusalem.

The answer.
Now pilgrimages are proved, and that full pithily. For the Gentiles came to
adore at Jerusalem. When you can find such express commandment of God for
running to saint James of Compostella, or our Lady of Walsingham, or visiting
the holy sepulcher, as was for all both Jews and conuerts then to appear
before the Lord at Jerusalem, then your reason will hold. Otherwise it is as
much as if I should say, Deuteronomy. 12. 5.
The Jews and conuerts of the Gentiles obeyed the commandment of God in going
to Jerusalem at the feast days to worship: Ergo it is lawful for me to go a
roging to what place of pilgrimage in the world seems best in mine own eyes
without further warrant. As for the difference of public and private prayer,
and of serving God at home, and in the common assemblies are both known and
practiced amongst us.

John. 12. 40.
The text.
Therefore they could not believe, because Esaias said again, he has blinded
their eyes, and indurated their hearts, etc.

The note.
If any man ask (says saint Augustine) why they could not believe: I answer
roundly, because they would not. Tract. 33. in Io. See annotations Matthew. 13.
15. Mark. 4. 12.

The answer.
It is true that the corruption of man's will is the cause of all evil and
wickedness in man. But here either your printer made a fault, or your note
book deceived you, for it is in 53. treatise* And I muze why you should so
much covet so force Augustine to speak for you, seeing that you know that of
all other he is most earnest in this cause of free will against you. For in the
same place he acknowledges the just judgment of God upon them in leaving them
in blindness, and not helping them to see. And teaches us in inquiring why God
would so leave them, to cry out with the Apostle: O the depth of the riches of
the wisdom and knowledge of God, etc. Which exclamation shows, that
Augustine had an eye to somewhat more than their will, yea and to such a
somewhat, as was not within compass and reach of reason. Your annotations
containing no matter greatly worth the answering, I refer over to the general
answer of them.

John. 12. 42.
The text.
But yet of the princes also many believed in him: but for the pharisees they
did not confess, that they might not be cast out of the synagogue.

The note.
This is the case of many principal men in such countries, where heresy has
the upper hand, who know and believe the Catholic faith, but making choice to
keep man's favor rather then Gods, they dare not confess the same. Such may
pray that God and the world agree together* for else it is seen whose part
they will take.

The answer.
Turn over this matter to those countries where papistrie prevails, for as
there is greater compulsion by cruelty, so also there are more, who knowing
the truth dare not confess it for fear of men. Such God in his good time will
make to know by lamentable experience, what it is to fear man more than God:
and what folly it is, for saving the body a little while, to cast away body and
soul eternally.

John. 13. 2.
The text.
And when supper was done, whereas the devil had now put into the heart of Judas
Iscariot the son of Simon, to betraie him.

The note.
By Supper he means the eating of the Paschall lamb, for the institution of
the blessed Sacrament was after this.

The answer.
This note is true, and therefore shall receive no reply.

John. 13. 29.
The text.
For certain thought, because Judas had the purse, that Jesus had said to him,
Buie those things that are needful for us to the festival day: or that he
should go give some thing to the poor.

The note.
Christ had some provision before hand given him by the collections of the
faithful, which was used both in his own necessities, and bestowed upon the
poor.

The answer.
We learn thereby the use of money, to serve both our own necessity, and the
necessity of others that are poor, and in need and misery. And we see the
great abuse in the contrary in the popish prelates, heaping up great treasures
together, and not spending them, but either riotouslie upon voluptuousness, or
else filthily to maintain wars and troubles in the world.

John. 14. 2.
The text.
In my fathers house there be many mansions, if not, I would have told you.

The note.
These mansions signify differences of glory in heaven. Hierom. libro. 2.
aduer. Iouin.

The answer.
How differences of glory in heaven can be drawn out of this, you your
selves know not, therefore you rest upon Saint Hieroms credit, being loath to
crack your own: you might also have added Augustine upon this place, but I
had rather seek to be sure of a place there, than contend about difference and
diversity of glory there. The place is plain, Christ's meaning is evident,
that there are rooms enough in his fathers house for all that are his:
whatsoever is added to this, is but the dreams of men.

John. 14. 15.
The text.
If you love me keep my commandments.

The note.
It is then possible both to love Christ, and to keep his commandments.

The answer.
To keep is one thing, to fulfill by keeping is another thing. No man denies
that there are good endeavors in those that love Christ, and that in some
measure they observe and keep his commandments, namely, according to the
measure of love which they have obtained. But the perfect and continual
abiding in all things commanded, to which condition do this and live is
annexed, that we say is not possible for us in this vale of misery. And so you
do but deceive men with doubtfulnes of speech.

John. 14. 16.
The text.
I will ask my father, and he will give you another paraclete, that he may
abide with you for ever.

The note.
Paraclete by interpretation is either a comforter or an advocate, and
therefore to translate by any one of them only, is perhaps to abridge the
sense of this place.

The answer.
You would not willingly have any part of the Scripture translated into
English, and therefore no marvel though you seek an excuse for not translating
paraclete. Our translators have translated it comforter, whereby how the sense
of this place is abridged, perhaps you would have told us if you could. But now
having laid all your heads together, and finding nothing that carries any show
of truth, you come in with perhaps it may be abridged, perhaps no wise man will
believe you, but either such as be wilfully blind, or merely ignorant.

John. 14. 26.
The text.
But the paraclete the holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he
shall teach you all things, and suggest unto you all things whatsoever I shall
say to you.

The note.
See the annotations upon the 16. chapter, verse 12.

The answer.
We will see it, and answer it when we come to it.

John. 15. 2.
The text.
Every branch in me not bearing fruit he will take it away.

The note.
Christ has some branches in his body mystical that be fruitless, therefore
ill li^ers also may be members of Christ and the church.

The answer.
If you hold not this fast, your popes and their cardinals may be no members of
Christ, nor of his church. For I suppose you your selves will not undertake to
defend their lives. But having continued fruitless, you cannot deny but that
their end is to be cast of, and so to be reprobates. You know it is one thing
to be in name and outward account a Christian, it is another thing to be in
deed and in the account of him that cannot be deceived. For according to that
account, he that abides in Christ is so far from continuing a wicked life,
that he brings forth much fruit.

John. 15. 2.
The text.
And every one that bears fruit, he will purge it that it may bring more
fruit.

The note.
Man may continually increase in justice and sanctification so long as he
lives.

The answer.
It were not altogether untimely to tell you of your subtle ioining of justice
and sanctification, which you do, because your followers should not be able to
discern betwixt justification and santification, which you continually
confound, justice being common to them both, but in sundry respects. For if
they did epsy the difference, then confidence in inherent justice, which you
maintain them in, would soon vanish away. And yet by experience all good
Christians know, that God of his infinite goodness does make his saints from
time to time more fruitful, and more and more to abound in holiness.

John. 15. 3.
The text.
Now you are clean for the word which I have spoken to you.

The note.
Saint Augustine expounds it of the sacramental word of baptism, and not as
heretics do of preaching only. Tract. 80. in Io.

The answer.
I pray you tell us what heretics they be that deny the sacraments to be
annexed by God unto his word, and that in this work of our purging and making
clean? but you will never leave your lieng. We do not so speak of preaching
only, that we exclude any help which God has given us besides. But you
exclude the word when you tie grace to the outward work of your unpreaching
priests. And you add a number of helps of your own, as salt, spittle, oil,
cream, and such like trumperie, which God never appointed to his church, but
the proud presumption of man has brought in.

John. 15. 7.
The text.
If you abide in me and my words abide in you, you shall ask what thing soever
you will, and it shall be done to you.

The note.
If a scismatike pray never so much, he is not heard, because he remains not
in the body of Christ.

The answer.
I conclude therefore that the prayers of papists are unprofitable, because
they have cut themselves from the ancient catholic church of Christ, and
therefore remain not in his body.

John. 15. 20.
The text.
If they have persecuted me, you also will they persecute: if they have kept my
word, yours also will they keep.

The note.
He foresheweth that many will not obey the churches w^rds, and no marvel,
because they contemned Christ's own precepts.

The answer.
As the Jews cried the temple of the Lord, Ierem. 7. 4.
when they had converted it into a den of thieves, even so cry you, The
church, The church. But as then the prophets showed to them by their manifold
contempts of Gods commandments, that their words were lieng and counterfeit
words: even so we show that your church is the synagog of satan and prove it,
because she will be credited both above the word of Christ, and contrary to the
word of Christ.

John. 16. 2.
The text.
Out of the synagogues they will cast you.

The note.
The heretics translate, Excommunicate you. See what corruption this is, and
the reason thereof Annot. ca. 9. 22.

The answer.
If to excommunicate be to put men from their communion and fellowship in
service, prayer, and sacraments, then this casting out is excommunication, and
so rightly translated. The cause that you in your annotations imagine, that is,
to bring the churches excommunication into contempt is frivolous, and bears
no show of truth, since excommunication amongst us is used as a principal
censure of our church. And you your selves cannot deny, but when hypocrites
have crept into authority, this censure is abused as your confess, saying,
the excommunication of heretics is ridiculous. And I pray you what made the
rulers of the Jews afraid of this casting out? Was it not because in common
estimation they should be esteemed as none of Gods people, and what else is
excommunication, but to make the excommunicate to be esteemed as ethnikes and
publicans?

John. 16. 13.
The text.
But when he, the spirit of truth, comes, he shall teach you all truth.

The note.
If he shall teach all truth and that for ever (as before 14. 16.) how is it
possible that the church can err, or has erred at any time, or in any point?

The answer.
Whosoever follows that truth which the spirit taught the Apostles, and
swarueth not there from does not err. But with you the pope can not err, the
councels cannot err, the multitude of those whom you account the pastors of
your church cannot err. As though Christ by this promise had tied his spirit
to the^, which we deny, Harding against the Apology, 6. part. c. 5. division.
1.
and you are not able to prove. Their errors are as manifest as the light, so
gross and palpable that they may be groped. You know that some of the greatest
learned of your side, are driven to distinguish between the pope and a man,
because as a man he may err, as a pope he cannot.

John. 16. 23.
The text.
Amen Amen I say to you, if you ask the father any thing in my name, he will
give it you.

The note.
Upon this the church concludes all her prayers, per Christum Dominum nostrum,
even those that be made to saints.

The answer.
Is Christ bound to you, must he needs be at your commandment, whither he
will, or no? He promises indeed that if they ask the father any thing in his
name, he will give it. And can you constreine him to give it, if we ask
others? Can your fancy be an assured warrant for it, or from whence else can
you fetch any good ground for it? The commandment of Christ, Romans 8. ^6.
the example of Christ, the doctrine of Christ, and the guiding, and direction
of the holy Ghost, do lead us to pray to none but to God. And what are you?
Or what is your church, that we should believe you against all these?

John. 17. 1.
The text.
These things spoke Jesus, and lifting up his eyes into heaven, he said, Father
the hour is come, glorify thy son, that thy son may glorify thee.

The note.
The father glorifieth the son by raising him from death, exalting him up to
his right hand, making all creatures to bow down at his name and giving him
all power and judgment. The son again glorifieth his father, by making his
honor, which only in a manner was in Ie^rie before, now known to all nations.

The answer.
You papists spoil the son of all glory, first in taking away from his
glorified body, the nature of a body, and so making it no body, Augustine
^pist. 5^.
or nothing. Secondly in giving that to others, for which he is advanced to the
right hand of his father. Thirdly in setting the pope a mortal man above him,
in power, and judgment. You spoil the Father also of his glory, For the pope
can dispense against the new and the old Testament.
by taking the key of knowledge from the multitude, and so (as much as in you
lies) reducing the knowledge of God again to a very few.

John. 17. 11.
The text.
Holy father, keep them in thy name, whom thou have given me: that they may
be one, as also we.

The note.
His petition is specially to keep the apostles and his church in unity and
from schis^^es.

The answer.
It is very true that Christ does commend unto his fathers protection, and
defense, the unity of his church, and children.

John. 17. 19.
The text.
And for them do I sanctify my self: that they also may be sanctified in
truth.

The note.
To sanctify himself is to sacrifice himself by dedicating his holy body
and blood to his father, both upon the cross, and in his holy Sacrament.

The answer.
To sanctify himself, is to separate, and sever himself wholly to the uses of
God his father: which dedication of himself was plainly, and evidently to be
seen in his whole life, and in every action thereof. Which in some sort may
also be called a sacrifice, as also our reasonable service of God, is termed a
sacrificing of our selves. But because the chief part of his priestly (...) in
this life, Romans 12. 1.
was put in execution in his death, in his sacrifice upon his cross, therefore
by way of excellency, the chief point of our sanctifieng by him, is
attributed to the then dedicating of himself to God, for us. But what is this
toward the proouing of the Sacrament, Heb. 10. 10.
to be a sacrifice propitiatory, which for that purpose you do craftily, and
closely couple with the sacrifice on the cresse.

John. 18. 1.
The text.
When Jesus had said these things he went forth with his disciples beyond the
Torrent Cedron, where was a garden, into the which he entered and his disciples,
etc.

The note.
The passion according to Saint John is the Gospel at mass on good Fridaie.
So the passion is read in holy week four times; according to the four
Evangelists, as Saint Augustine also appointed in his church at Hippo. Ser.
144. de tempore.

The answer.
To what purpose is your reading of the Gospels, which very few, or none
understand? Is it not as good for a man to hold his peace, as to speak that
which the hearers understand not? Did Saint Augustine appoint at Hippo, the
Gospels to be read in a language, which the people understood not? We may in
truth much better allege Saint Augustine for the custom of our church, which
at the same time reads the same Scriptures, in the native natural language
of the common people, and also teaches and instructs the people out of the
said Scriptures, as Saint Augustine did, and you commonly do not.

John. 18. 17.
The text.
The wench therefore that was portresse, said to Peter, Art not thou also of
this man's disciples? He says to her, I am not.

The note.
It is all one for a man to deny Christ* and that he is a disciple of Christ,
or a Catholic, or a christian man, when he is demanded. Augustine tract. 113.
in hom. Joan. for so Peter here denies Christ, in denieng him self to be his
disciple.

The answer.
We grant, and we pray to God to give us strength, boldness and courage to
confess him before men, whatsoever danger ensue of it. But here you use a
piece of your accustomed fraud, in putting in the word Catholic, which
Augustine has not: which you did but to deceive them withal, whom you have
untruly persuaded, that there are none other Catholics in the world but your
selves.

John. 18. 35.
The text.
Pilate answered, why am I a Jew? Thy nation and the chief priests have
delivered thee up to me: what have thou done?

The note.
It pleased God that Christ, who was to die both for the Jews and the
Gentiles, should be betrayed by the one, and put to death by the other.

The answer.
Why do ye not say that God did but permit and suffer it? If it were Gods
good pleasure, that it should be so, how was not God the author of it? Do you
not see then by your own confession, that God may be the author of their
fact, though not of the fault thereunto adjoined.

John. 19. 14.
The text.
And it was the parasceue of the Pasche, about the sixth hour, and he said to
the Jews, lo your king.

The note.
He means midday counting from sun rising: for so does the Scripture count
of the hours of the d^ie. Matthew. 20. Mark 15. Luke 23. John 4. Acts 3. (...)
10.

The answer.
Your account of the hours, as it is a matter of small moment, so is it easy:
but we had rather have heard some good reason, why you durst not give us the
english here of Parasceue, and Pasche, but if any had been ready, I am
persuaded we should have had it as well for this, as before for Amen, amen. But
till such time as you better discharge your self thereof, we shall still
think that you would have the scriptures so obscure and dark, that poor men
might be fraied from studieng of them.

John 19. 20.
The text.
This title therefore many of the Jews did read: because the place was nigh
to the city: and it was written in Hebrew, in Greek, and in Latin.

The note.
These three tongues being for other causes most famous before in all the
world, are now also dedicated to God in the triumphant title of the cross of
Christ, and in them the holy Scriptures are more conveniently written, taught
and preserved.

The answer.
I pray you show us by what reason you can collect this dedication out of this
place, or that it is not as convenient also to have the scriptures in other
tongues: it is strange, you go about what you can to discredit the scriptures
written in those tongues. You would if you could abolish knowledge out of the
world, and because you can not do that, you labor to make the grounds of
knowledge uncertain, to the end that the only oracles accounted of in the
world, may be the decrees of your holy father of Rome.

John 19. 23.
The text.
And his coat was without seame, wrought from the top throughout.

The note.
This coat without seame is a figure of the unity of the church. Cyprian de
unit. etc. and Euthi^ius and other write that our lady made it.

The answer.
It is easy for men to devise figures, but when the^ are devised without
ground or warrant, they are but men's fancies. Who made that coat i^ no more
material then who made his other garments.

John 19. 25.
The text.
And there stood beside the cross of Jesus his mother, and his mothers sister,
Marie of Cleophas, and Marie Magdalene.

The note.
The great love, faith, courage and compassion, and sorrows that our Lady
had, who forsook not the cross, and her son, when so many were fled from
him, and his chief Apostles denied him.

The answer.
So long as you do but attribute a truth to our lady, and not adorn her with
that which appertains not to her, you can not heap up too many praises upon
her.

John 20. 1.
The text.
And the first day of the Sabbath Marie Magdalene comes early, when it was
yet dark unto the monument, and she saw the stone taken away from the monument.

The note.
That is the first day of the week as some interpret it, taking saboath (as
sometime it is) for a week. This is our Sunday, called dies dominica, because
of the Lords resurrection. See the marginall annot. Luke 24 1.

The answer.
If you had not here brought a new interpretation, we should not have seen
that you excel also in variety: if you had vouchsafed to have told us in
plain English that Sunday had been called the Lords day, because of the Lords
resurrection, we should have thought you somewhat willing that the people should
learn somewhat: but now that you tell us but in Latin, we think that you
can be content, that they be blind, be blind still.

John 20. 11.
The text.
But Marie stood at the monument without weeping.

The note.
The Sepulchers of martyrs (says Saint Hierome epist. 17.) we do honor every
where, and putting their holy ashes to our eyes, if we may, we touch it also
with our mouth: and be there some, that think the monument wherein our Lord
was laid, is to be neglected, where the devil and his angels as often as they
are cast out of the possessed before the said monument, tremble and roar, as
if they stood before the judgment seat of Christ.

The answer.
We will not strive with you for your author. For though women bear the name
of that epistle, yet I think Hierome was their pen man. But we are not bound
to believe what S. Hierome speaks, further then he proves his speeches by
the word. And we easily believe that the devil might work there strong
illusions to deceive, and to draw people into an admiration of such things, as
God has no where commended to them in his word.

John. 20. 21.
The text.
He said therefore to them again, peace be to you.

The note.
Though he gave them his peace hard before, yet now entering into a new divine
action, to prepare their hearts to grace, and attention, he blesses them again.

The answer.
Christ by repetition of his usual blessing, or salutation, seeks to make his
Apostles being astonished, at his sudden and marvelous coming amongst them
to know, understand, and be assured, who he is.

John. 20. 26.
The text.
Jesus comes the doors being shut, and stood in the midst and said, peace be
to you.

The note.
See the annotations on the 19. verse of this chapter.

The answer.
We have seen stale stuff of it, and refer the answer to him that answers
your other annotations.

John. 20. 29.
The text.
Because thou have seen me Thomas, thou have believed: blessed are they that
have not seen and have believed.

The note.
They are more happy, that believe without sensible argument or sight, then
such as be induced by sense or reason to believe.

The answer.
Because that sensible experience, which Thomas had of Christ, and by which he
was induced to believe the resurrection, was granted but to a few: therefore
generally the happiness of Christians does consist in believing the testimony
of the word preached, without any farther sensible experiments. Yet not
withstanding in matters subject to sense, we are no where commanded to believe
that to be cheese, which is chalk, neither that to be flesh, which our eyes
tell us to be bread.

John. 21. 7.
The text.
Simon Peter when he heard that it is our Lord: girded his coat unto him (for
he was naked) and cast himself into the sea.

The note.
See in Saint Augustine tract. 122. In Io. the great mystery hereof concerning
the church, and in Saint Gregory hom. 24. in Euang. and Saint Barnard lib. 2.
cap. 8. de consi. Peter's primacie here mystically signified.

The answer.
Hungry dogs are glad of dirtie puddings. Our papists have been these 27.
years seeking a needle in a bundle of haie, that is, they have been seeking
the fathers to find the bishop of Rome to be called the universal bishop, or
head of the universal church, and cannot find it. Therefore they hunt for
other things in steed thereof, to bleare the eyes of the simple withal, and
there is nothing so silly, and simple, that they find, but it must serve
their turn. It has been told them, that their reasons hold not, which they
deduce from Peter, to the bishops of Rome. It has been told them also that
primacie is one thing, and the supremacy which they challenge for the bishop of
Rome is an other, being things very far unlike. And yet because they cannot
find better stuff for their purpose they are still feign to find themselves
play with these. But let us see your authorities. The mysteries which Saint
Augustine gathers out of this place, are taken out of the net, thrown out of
the right side, Christ's being on land, the number of the fish, taken, and such
like, which he applies to the church at the resurrection, and neither to the
name, nor authority of Peter. Gregory touches the same mysteries, and adds
only this concerning Peter, that he dr^w the net to land, because the church
was committed to him. And that he drew the elect, to the stability of the
shore, by preaching, writing, and miracles. And then I pray what did Peter
here, that the other apostles did not?

John. 21. 14.
The text.
This now the third time Jesus was manifested to his disciples, after he was
risen from the dead.

The note.
Not the third apparition, but the third day of his apparition, for he appeared
in the very day of his resurrection often, again upon Low Sunday, then this
third time, and Saint Mark saying, Last he appeared, cap. 16. 14. means his
last apparition the first day.

The answer.
A note so true, and so necessarily collected upon the place, so plain for
the capacity of the simple reader, as this, before will hardly be found, and
with you is a very rare bird.

John. 21. 22.
The text.
So will I have him to remain til I come, what to thee? Follow thou me.

The note.
So reads Saint Ambrose in Ps. 45 and sermon. 20. in Ps. 118. Saint August.
tract. 124. in Io. and most ancient copies and service books extant in Latin:
other read, if I will, other if so I will, etc.

The answer.
Against the consent of all copies of the Greek, against the greatest number
of ancient copies of your old translator, against the general consent of the
enterpretors, both Grecians, and Latinists, and especially against the manifest
truth appearing in the circumstances of the text it self, you follow those
copies, which you know to be corrupt, and al to uphold a lie, and a fable. You
enforce Augustine to give you credit against his will, knowing that that which
you allege, is but the fault of the printer, or writer, and not his mind. For
his long doubtful disputation, whether John were dead, or no, does plainly
declare, that he read not as you have set it down. For then he would never
have made doubt of that which Christ so plainly spoke. And again, how can
your reading stand with that, which John says after. Christ said not that he
should not die.

John. 21. 25.
The text.
But there are many other things also which Jesus did: which if they were
written in particular, neither the world it self I think were able to
contain those books, that should be written.

The note.
How few things are written of Christ's acts, and doctrine in comparison of
that which he did and spoke? And yet the heretics will needs have all in
Scripture, trusting not the Apostles own preaching, or report of any thing
that our master did or said, if it be not written.

The answer.
Now for unwritten verities, I pray you for my learning show me one of those
heretics, that hold that all that Christ said, and did, are written in the
Scriptures. If you cannot do that, then you abuse your reader with a lie. We
say, that enough is written in the Scriptures to bring believers to life
eternal, and so has John written before us. John 20. 31.
But it greeueth you that we give not credit to a number of lies, which you
obtrude to us under the name of the apostles. If all that under their names you
have set out be true: how chance their canons, and constitutions are not better
believed, and observed in your Romish church?

Acts of the Apostles.
Act. 1. 1.
The text.
The first treatise I made of al things (O Theophilus) which Jesus began to do
and teach, etc.

The note.
Not al particularly (for the other Evangelists did write diverse things not
touched by him) but all the principal and most necessary things.

The answer.
That Luke did not write all things particularly, we know, but that he
understands by all, all the principal, and most necessary things, that we
can not grant. For the things which the Evangelist John wrote, and the other
Evangelists omitted, were not in any respect of dignity, or necessity
inferior to the other. Therefore we understand by all, neither every
particular act, and doctrine, neither all the principal, and most necessary
things, but the whole and complete story of his life, beginning from his
birth, and ending with his resurrection and ascension.

Act. ^. 5.
The text.
For John indeed baptized with water.

The note.
John's baptism gave not the holy Ghost.

The answer.
Neither yet the baptism of any other priest, or minister.

Act. 1. 5.
The text.
But you shall be baptized with the holy Ghost after these few days.

The note.
The abundant pouring of the holy Ghost, upon them, on Whit sunday, he calls
baptism.

The answer.
Give to every man his due praise and commendation, and confess that you
borrowed this note from Master Beza upon this place.

Act. 1. 13.
The text.
And when they were entered in, they went up into an upper chamber where abode
Peter, and John, James, and Andrew, Philip, and Thomas, Bartholomew, and
Matthew, James of Alphaeus and Simon Zelotes, and Jude of James.

The note.
This visible company was the true church of Christ, which he left, and
commanded to keep together till the coming of the holy Ghost, by him to be
further informed and furnished to gain all nations to the same society.

The answer.
I pray you what company of men upon earth were ever invisible? We will
easily confess that the church upon earth is always visible, as these were
visible. They were but a few: they kept close, and secret together for a time:
the enemies of the church knew not as yet of their assemblies: they did not
glitter, nor shine in the eyes of the world by any worldly authority or
pomp: finally, here is no visibilitie, but such as does well agree to the
secret and hidden church of God.

Acts 1. 14.
The text.
All these were perseuering with one mind in prayer with the women, and Marie
the mother of Jesus, and his brethren.

The note.
The heretics, some in the text, other in the margent translate wives, to wit,
of the Apostles, most impudentlie, knowing in their consciences, he means the
Mary's, and other holy women that followed Christ, as Luke 8. 2. 24. 10 See
Beza and the English Bible 1579.

The answer.
If you had not stirred up the hatred of your blind followers against us, by
the odious names of heretics and impudent men, the rest of your note had not
been worth a rush. First, deny if you can that the Greek here does not as
indifferently signify wives as women, and then let us consider which
translation the circumstances of the place favor must. First, you can not
deny, but that many of the Apostles, and also other believers here gathered
with them were married men, and that they had special care of avoiding
whatsoever might be offensive, or open the mouth of the wicked to speak
evil: which they had had great occasion of, if the Apostles and other
believers had left their own wives, and lived in secret with other women. And
again, who can think that the Apostles and a great many of the other
disciples had not believing wives? And if they had, what reason should move us
to think that they were not more likely to keep their husbands companies,
and to be at the first assemblies of the church of God then other women. If
then Greek word may be so translated, and the circumstances of the text lead
us thereunto, why should you so cry out impudent, and heretics.

Acts 1. 22.
The text.
Therefore of these men that have assembled with us, all the time that our Lord
Jesus went in and out amongst us, beginning from the baptism of John, until
the day that he was assumpted from us, there must one of these be made a witness
with us of his resurrection.

The note.
No small mystery, that the number of twelve Apostles must needs be made up
again.

The answer.
You express not your mystery, and therefore we leave your note as we find
it.

Acts 2. 14.
The text.
But Peter standing with the eleven, lifted up his voice and spoke to them.

The note.
Peter the head of the rest, and now newly replenished with all knowledge and
fortitude, makes the first sermon.

The answer.
If you did not with color of words go about to beguile the ignorant, we would
not stumble at your naming Peter the head of the rest, but now because under
that term you would have men understand that supremacy and superiority which
you challenge for the bishop of Rome, therefore it is not amiss to show how
vain your collection is out of this place. Peter spoke for himself and the
rest, Ergo he is head of the rest. Master Recorder speaks for my Lord Mayor
of London, and his brethren, Ergo master Recorder is above my Lord Mayor and
the bench. And where you say he makes now his first sermon, except you mean
the first after he received the gift of tongues, you are deceived, for he both
preached when Christ was upon the earth, Matthew. 10. 6. Acts 1. 15.
and afterward at the election of another, into the room of Judas.

Acts 2. 27.
The text.
Because thou will not leave my soul in hell, nor give thy holy one to see
corruption.

The note.
Who but an infidel (says Saint Augustine) will deny Christ to have
descended into hell. Epist. 99. As his soul suffered no pains in hell, so
neither did his body take any corruption in the grave.

The answer.
And we also say the like, and teach the people the true meaning and sense of
that article, as our Catechismes do sufficiently for us testify. If any has
seemed to deny it, it has been in that gross and untrue sense, which you
papists take it in, in which sense Augustine believed it not. For he disputing
the matter to and fro, and setting down diverse opinions resolves him self
no way. But he flatly rejects your popish opinion, that he went to the
fathers which were in rest in Abraham's bosom, and urges against it the
loosing of the sorrows of hell, Acts 2. 24.
mentioned in this present chapter. Then they that are loath to believe they
wot not what, must learn of Augustine to examine other men's opinions, and so
by what authority they confirm their judgments, and rest upon that which
they see has good ground and warrant. As for hell in that sense that you take
it in, is true that he suffered no pains there: though all of your side be not
yet resolved what to understand by hell in the Creed, nor whether he suffered
there or no. But that this place of scripture has no reference to that
article, it is plain and evident by the exposition of Peter immediately
following, who can gather nothing to be prophesied in this text, but the short
and quick resurrection of the body of Christ out of the grave.

Acts. 2. 38.
The text.
But Peter said to them, do penance, and be every one of you baptized in the
name of Jesus Christ for remission of your sins: and you shall receive the
gift of the holy Ghost.

The note.
Not only amendment of life, but penance also required before baptism in such
as be of age, though not in that sort as afterward in the sacrament of penance.
Augustine de fide and operibus, cap. 11. and ep. 108.

The answer.
Wherefore do you cite Augustine? To prove a sacrament of penance. Seven
sacraments were unknown in his days. I pray you what penance did Peter
inioine these men? tell if you can: Forsooth not such as afterward was wont to
be inioined in the sacrament of penance. I believe you. But if there were then
a sacrament of penance instituted, how excuse you Peter for inioining penance
not according thereto? And if there were no such sacrament, then tell us in good
earnest when it began, and who had authority to appoint it, and whence he had
that authority? Have they been better replenished with the spirit of God
since, than Peter was? Thus you see the rat perishes by her own bewraieng of
her self. And least your ignorant readers should conceive that saint Augustine
whom you allege does speak in those places of the sacrament of penance, they
are to be admonished, that if they be able to view the places themselves, they
shall be sure to find there no such thing.

Acts. 2. 41.
The text.
They therefore that received his word were baptized, and there were added in
that day about three thousand souls.

The note.
Three thousand were converted at the first sermon, and they were put to the
other visible company and church.

The answer.
Under the name of visible lurketh poison. For thereby you would persuade
yours, that the church of Christ could never lie in corners hidden, and known
to few or none but themselves. Which doctrine of yours if it were true, would
exclude the Apostles after the resurrection being in a house with the door
fast shut to them, John. 20. 19. Acts. 1. 15.
and the congregation of believers gathered secretly together, and keeping
closely in a chamber from being the church of God. Your champion Stapleton, who
for his writing of all English papists has deserved most praise, is driven of
force to confess the hidden and secret church, but that he will have to endure
but a while, whereby he supposes he has salued the matter. Stapleton de
^^tente Ecclesia, cap^te. 2.
But that little while is sufficient to overthrow all your reasons for
perpetual visibilitie in that sense which you take it.

Acts. 2. 42.
The text.
And they were perseuering in the doctrine of the Apostles, and in the
communication of breaking of bread and prayers.

The note.
This was the blessed sacrament, which the Apostles daily ministered to the
Christians at the least in one kind? See chap. 20. 7

The answer.
And why say you at the least in one kind? Was it ever heard of in the world
that the sacram^nt was minist^ed in less than one kind? But you would have
said if you durst for shame, that they ministered but in one kind. And then if
you had had any fathers that favored that exposition, we should also have heard
of them. But your doctrine of concomitance, the groundworke of your half
communion was then not hatched in hell. The fathers were utterly ignorant of it.

Acts. ^. 1.
The text.
And Peter and John went up into the temple at the ninth hour of prayer.

The note.
This makes for distinction of canonical hours and diversity of appointed
times to pray in. See annot. cap. 10. 9.

The answer.
Let people pray in the language which they understand, to him, to whom they
are commanded to offer up their prayers in faith, according to his will, and
then times appointed for prayer may have their right and true use.

Acts. 3. 16.
The text.
And in the faith of his name, this man whom you see and know, his name has
strengthened: and the faith which is by him, has given this perfect health in
the sight of you all.

The note.
This faith was not the faith of the lame man (for he looked only for alms)
nor a special faith of the Apostles own salvation: but the whole belief of
Christian religion.

The answer.
How prove you that this was not the faith of the lame man? Forsooth he looked
for nothing but alms. At the first he did not. What then? Nay he looked not
for alms when they had told him that they had neither gold nor silver to give.
But as he cast away the expectation of alms, so did he greedily embrace the
gift of health, offered him in the name of Jesus Christ. And this is the faith
which Peter here speaks of. If Peter's hearers had so understood the matter
as you take it, they might have concluded, that they needed not believe: other
men's faith might make them safe, Acts. 14. 9.
as it did this man. How happened it that the lame man of Lystra needed his
own faith to be saved or healed? Was not Paul's faith as good as Peter's, if a
man might be healed by another man's faith without his own? The residue of your
note is a riddle. For what is Christian religion? Is it not the embracing of
the promises of salvation by faith? And then how is that distinguished from the
faith or believing of a man's own salvation? But because you papists want the
comfortable assurance of Christians, therefore you devise a new kind of faith
to flatter your selves withal, void of that comfort and assurance.

(...) 3. 21.
The text.
Whom the heavens truly must receive until the times of the restitution of all
things, which God spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets from the beginning
of the world.

The note.
Some heretics foully corrupt this place thus: Who must be contained in heaven,
of purpose (as they protest) to hold Christ in heaven from the blessed
sacrament, Beza. As though his presence there drew him out of heaven. Neither
can they pretend the Greek, which is word for word as in the vulgar Latin, and
as we translate.

The answer.
This babble has been sufficiently played withal already. The Greek being
the mean verb is indifferent to be translated actiuely or passiuely. The
sense in both translations rests one and the same. Prating Martinius made
this quarrel ^tale, and the learned and reverend master doctor Fulke has
cleared it. I pray you show us thus much favor as to give us one sentence of a
doctor for six hundred years after Christ, that tells and teaches us in
plain words that Christ's body may be in many places, and that he is bodily
in the sacrament.

Acts. 4. ^.
The text.
And many of them that heard the word, believed: and the number of the men was
made five thousand.

The note.
Here again we see the proceeding and increase of the church visibly.

The answer.
Here we see the church of God may proceed and increase without a bishop of
Rome, and without his college of cardinals, in which the visibilitie of your
church consists.

(...) 4. 10.
The text.
Be it known to all you, and to all the people of Israel, that in the name of
Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you did crucify, whom God has raised from the
dead, in this same this man stands before you whole.

The note.
The name of Jesus, See annot. Phil. 1. 10.

The answer.
Seeing you have not expressed your popish meaning here, you shall be answered
there.

Acts. 4. 1^.
The text.
And seeing Peter's constancy and John's understanding that they were men
unlettered, and of the vulgar sort, they marvelled, and they knew them that
they had been with Jesus.

The note.
The Apostles constancy and wisdom after the coming of the holy Ghost,
being but idiots, that is, simple, unlettered, and timorous before.

The answer.
The wonderful change and alteration that sensibly appe^red in the Apostles,
did plainly and evidently set forth to us that salvation by Christ now
preached, was set out mightily not by the persuasorie words of man's wisdom,
but by the might, power, and miraculous working of God.

Acts. 4. 19.
The text.
But Peter and John answering; said to them, if it be just in the sight of God,
to hear you rather than God, judge ye.

The note.
Their constancy and courage after their confirmation, being so weak before.
And if any magistrate (...) against God, that is to say, forbid catholic
Christian men to (...) this ^ame must be their answer, though they be whipped
and killed for (...) labor. See cap. 5. 29.

The answer.
The constancy and courage and wise answer of the Apostles is set out for the
learning and encouragement of Christians of all ages and times. But sedition,
rebellion, treason, murdering of princes, pro^^^ing of foreign invasions, and
such like, in which your constancy and courage consists, I pray you of whom
have you learned them?

Acts. 4. 27.
The text.
For there assembled indeed in this city against thy holy child Jesus whom
thou have anointed, Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and people of
Israel, to do what thy hand and thy counsel decreed to be done.

The note.
Christ's death as needful for man's redemption was of Gods determination, but
as of the malice of the Jews it was not his act otherwise than by permission.

The answer.
By a blind distinction void of all reason, you will set the holy Ghost to
school, to learn of you to speak. Herod, Pontius Pilate, the Gentiles, and
the people of Israel assembled to do what Gods hand, and counsel had decreed
to be done. It is plain that they, and all the devils in hell, by their malice
could execute nothing, but the good will, and pleasure of God, to the great
comfort of the godly. So though God be not the author of the malice of men,
yet he can use it, to bring to pass his will, to his praise, honor and glory.

(...)
The text.
For as many as were owners of lands o^ houses, sold and brought the prices of
those things which they sold, and laid it before the feet of the Apostles.

The note.
Note the ardent charity, and contempt of worthly things in the first
Christians: who did not only give great alms, but sold all their lands, to
bestow on the Apostles, and the rest, that were in necessity, according to
Christ's counsel, Matthew. 16 21. Note also the great honor and credit given to
the Apostles, in that the Christian men put all the goods, and possessions they
had to their disposition.

The answer.
The time was such, as wherein an expectation was, that Jerusalem should by the
just judgment of God be destroyed, which ere long followed, and therefore it
had been vain to retain their possessions, the present necessity of the
multitude of believers, which were poor, being not otherwise able to be
supplied, by the abundance of the rich, which were but few, so that this
example neither favors wilful poverty, nor (...) community. The deserved
credit, and honor of the Apostles, is an example to the ministers of the word,
to walk so carefully and uprightly in their calling, as that they may gain the
like amongst the people committed to their charge.

(...)
The text.
And there fell great fear in the whole church, and upon all that heard these
things.

The note.
Hereupon rose great reverence, awe, and fear of the vulgar Christians toward
the holy Apostles, for an example to all Christian people, how to behave
themselves toward their bishops and priests.

The answer.
Nay rather toward their God, who so severely punishes dissembling, lieng, and
hypocritical dealing, as we see in this example of Ananias, and Sapphira.

Act 5. 1^.
The text.
So that they did bring forth the sick into the streets, and laid them in bed
and couches, that when Peter came his shadow at the least might over shadow any
of them, and they all might be delivered of their infirmities.

The note.
Peter's shadow.

The answer.
If you conclude hereof the lieng miracles that you attribute to relikes, frame
you reason we will shape you an answer.

Act. 5. 19.
The text.
But an angel of our Lord by night opening the gates of the prison, and
leading them forth, said.

The note.
An angel leads them out of prison.

The answer.
Here we see, when God will have his Gospel published, the power, and might of
man can not suppress it, prisons, and keepers be not strong enough, to keep
in hold the ministers thereof. And therefore your forcible attempts are but in
vain.

Act. 5. 39.
The text.
For if this counsel or work be of men, it will be dissolved: But if it be of
God you are not able to dissolve them, least perhaps ye be found to resist God
also.

The note.
Time and evident success of Christ's church and religion, prove it to be of
God: no violence of the Jews, no persecution of the heathen princes, no
endeavor of domestical adversaries, heretics, schismatikes, or ill livers,
prevailing against it. As on the other side many attempts have been made by
Arrius, Macedonius, Nestorius, Luther and the like who thought themselves some
body: but after they had played their parts a while, their memory is buried,
or lives only in malediction and infamy, and their scholars come to naught.
Therefore let no Catholic man be scandalized that this heresy holds up for a
time. For the Arrians and some other flourished much longer than these, and were
better supported by princes and learning, and yet had an end.

The answer.
Time, and evident success make as much for Turkish religion, as for popery,
for their continuance have been much alike. But we know that whatsoever is of
God, that men can not dissolve. Hell gates cannot prevail against the church
of God. Experience has taught, and the attempts of enemies of all sorts
frustrated shows, that it is a vain thing to assail the people of God. Of
all other heretics, the papists have been, and are the most dangerous enemies
of the church, which notwithstanding has at all times been miraculou^lie
vpholden by the almighty power of God, even then, when the might, power,
princes, and authority of the world were against it. And we do not doubt, but
as popery by the truth of God has already received a great wound, so it shall
when his good will and pleasure is be killed, destroyed, and take an end. Leave
therefore your kicking against the prick.

Act. 6. 3.
The text.
Consider therefore brethren seven men of you of good testimony, full of the
holy Ghost and wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business.

The note.
The election of the seven first deacons.

The answer.
With whom* and your deacons there is almost nothing common but the bare name.

Act. 6, 7.
The text.
And the word of God increased, and the number of the disciples was multiplied
in Jerusalem exceedingly, a great multitude also of the priests obeyed the
faith.

The note.
Now also the priests and they of greater knowledge, and estimation began to
believe.

The answer.
That the priests believed we see, if it necessarily follow that they were of
great knowledge, and estimation, then they were unlike your ignorant sir John's,
of which sort ten for one of the priests of your church were. But I think the
time and common condition of the leuiticall priests then considered, that it is
likely enough, that most of these were men of small knowledge and estimation.
And this the rather confirms me in that opinion, that we do not read of any
one of these priests here mentioned, to be converted, that proved a famous
teacher in that first church, which could not have been, if many of them had
been of great knowledge and estimation.

Act. 6. 15.
The text.
And all that sat in the council beholding him, saw his face as it were the
face of an angel.

The note.
Such is the face of all constant and cheerful Martyrs, to their persecutors,
and judges.

The answer.
Then burn your Martyrolog, for in the traitors that have been executed in
England, there has not appeered any cheereful face, as I have been credibly
advertised by them that have been present at their deaths.

Act. 7. 16.
The text.
And they were translated into Sichem, and were laid in the sepulcher, that
Abraham bought for a price of silver of the sons of Haemor, the son of
Sichem.

The note.
Translation of saints bodies agreeable to nature, and scripture. And the
desire to be buried in one place more then in another, which the holy
patriarchs also had. Genesis 49, 29. 50, 24. Hebr. 11. 22. has sometime great
causes. Augustine de cura pro mortuis cap. 1. and vlt.

The answer.
The translation of the bodies of the (...), being in them commanding it, and
in others executing (...) and evident testimony of their faith in the (...),
for the inheritance of the land of Canaan, is no (...) for you to ^ake the
(...) children, and saints of God out of their graves, and for lucre and
covetousness, to abuse the world with their bones: whereas to rest in their
sepulchers, is more agreeable to nature and Scriptures. Saint Augustine
speaks not of translation of bodies, but of the desire, that men had for
themselves, or their friends to be buried by this or that martyr, and holy
man, which he thinks a very good motion. But the reasons whereby he seeks to
prove it, to be good, are frivolous, and the objection, which Paulinus brought
out of Paul to the contrary, stands firm and untaken away.

(...)
The text.
This Moses, whom they denied, saying, who has appointed thee prince and
captain? him God sent prince and redeemer with the hand of the angel that
appeered to him in the bush.

The note.
Christ is our redeemer, and yet Moses is here called a redeemer, so Christ is
our mediator and advocate, and yet we may have saints our inferior mediators
and advocates also, See Annot. 1. Io. 2. 1.

The answer.
You would feign find some what to excuse, and hide your intolerable
sacrilege, and robbing Christ of his honor. Moses is called a redeemer in two
respects: One in that he was a figure of Christ, and bare therefore the name of
him, whom he figured. Secondly because he was Gods minister, and instrument
raised to redeem, and deliver the people of Israel from the servitude of
Pharao, and thraldom of Egypt. What is this to those that neither are figures
of Christ, neither yet have delivered us from any temporal bondage? But if you
could, you would leave Christ nothing proper or peculiar to himself. Your
annotation shall elsewhere be considered of.

Act. 7. ^2.
The text.
And God turned, and delivered them up to serve the host of heaven, etc.

The note.
For a just punishment of their former offenses God gave them up to work what
wickedness they would themselves, as it is said of the Gentiles, Romans 1.

The answer.
If neither Jew, nor Gentile, in abominable filthiness have surpassed or
exceeded your holy fathers of Rome, especially in those things against nature,
which every honest ear can not abide to hear once named, then it is manifest
that God also has given them over also into reprobate minds. You know who has
set out a book in praise and commendation of Sodomitrie, is it not an
argument, that where that is suffered they are past all shame?

Act. 7. 45.
The text.
Which our fathers with Jesus receiving, brought it also into the possession of
Gentiles, which God expelled from the face of our fathers till in the days of
David.

The note.
This is Iosue, so called in Greek in type of our Savior.

The answer.
And was Iosue a tipe, and Moises none? You might as well by this example
communicate the name of a savior to Saints, as before the name of a redeemer,
since in respect of saving and redeeming from sins, they are both proper and
peculiar to Christ.

Acts. 7. 55.
The text.
But he being full of the holy Ghost, looking steadfastly into heaven, saw the
glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God.

The note.
The comfort of all martyrs.

The answer.
And of all other true faithful men. Wherefore we pray to God most heartily to
grant us, that casting of all things that hang heavily on us, we may have
our eyes only fixed on the glory that is set before us.

Acts 7. 60.
The text.
And falling on his knees, he cried with a loud voice, saying, Lord, lay not
this sin unto them.

The note.
Eusebius Emissenus says, when he prays for his persecutors, he promises to
his worshippers his manifest intercession and suffrages, in homilia S.
Stephani. And Saint Augustine, Si Stephanus non sic orasset ecclesia Paulum non
haberet. ser* 1. de Stephano.

The answer.
Every one sees that it is a very foolish collection, to gather a promise of
intercession to his worshippers out of this prayer for his persecuters, and
therefore it is not the authority of Eusebi^s Emissenus that can move us,
except he bring better reason with him. But you would have your ignorant
followers to think that Saint Augustine helps you in this case, and
therefore you have set him down in latin, that they might not epsy that his
words make nothing to your purpose: for who ever moved doubt whether Saint
Steuens prayer did obtain at the hand of God, mercy for some of his
persecuters, or else the conversion of the Ap^stle Paul, but what makes that
for the intercession of saints, when they are dead and gone?

Acts 8. 4.
The text.
They therefore that were dispersed, passed through ^uangelizing the word.

The note.
This persecution wrought much good, being an occasion that the dispersed
preached Christ in diverse countries where they come.

The answer.
God turns all things to good to them that love him, Romans 8. 28.
and your persecutions also have had the like effect of spreading the Gospel,
which though you see, and can not but confess, yet you furiously still rage
against God, and stir up what princes you can, to persecute the Gospel and
the professors thereof.

(...) 8. 14.
The text.
And when the Apostles who were in Jerusalem, had heard that Samaria had
received the word of God, they sent to them Peter and John.

The note.
Saepe sibi socium petens facit esse Iohannem, Ecclesiae quia virgo placet.
Arator apud Bedam in Act.

The answer.
How chance you set not down your note in English, did you mean that no
body should know it, but such as could understand latin? If the ministry of
married men had not been as well accepted, and liked of the church then, as the
ministry of others, neither would Philips dealing at Samaria been so well
allowed of as it was, neither yet had saint Peter been a meet messenger to
have been sent about that business. But John was liked of because he was a
virgin, it well appears that neither Philip nor Peter were disliked, because
they were married. But I pray you tell me, what church now may be so bold, as
to send the Pope on their errand, or about their business? Either the Church
then had greater authority then now, and Peter less then his supposed
successors have now, or else the Popes now are prouder, and take more upon them
then he did.

Acts 8. ^7.
The text.
And behold, a man of Aethiopia, an eunuche of great authority under Candace
the Queen of the Aethiopians, who was over all her treasures, was come to
Jerusalem to adore.

The note.
Note that this Ethiopian came to Jerusalem to adore, that is, on pilgrimage.
Wherebie we may learn that it is an accptable act of religion, to go from
home to places of greater devotion and sanctification.

The answer.
All that ever were Jews borne or Jews by conversion, were bound by the law
of God to offer their sacrifices at Jerusalem, Deuteronomy. 16. 16.
and at certain times in person to appear there before him. Now if yo^ can
show any of your places of pilgrimage so by God himself chosen and sanctified
for that purpose, than we yield to you: Otherwise your reason holds not, as
being drawn from worship commanded by God to will worship, that is, worship
devised by men.

Acts 8. 31.
The text.
And he said, Trowest thou that thou understand the things which thou
read? Who said, And how can I, unless some man show me?

The note.
The scriptures are so written, that they cannot be understood without an
interpreter, as easy as our protestants make them. See S. Hierom Epistola ad
Paulinum de omnibus diuinae historiae libris, set in the beginning of Latin
bibles.

The answer.
How easy do protestants make them? Do they not take continual pains to
interpret the scriptures to the people? They are hard, but not all. That it was
not the custom of the church and people of God, to fray men from them because
of the hardness of them (which is the controversy betwixt you and us) appears
in that the eunuch read even those scriptures, which he understood not. And
that God blesses such endeavors of humble hearted Christians appears also, in
that God sent him an interpreter of that which he understood not. And what can
you gather out of Ierom to the contrary of this?

Acts. 9. 4.
The text.
And falling on the ground, he heard a voice saying to him, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me?

The note.
The heretics that conclude Christ so in heaven, that he can be no where else
till the day of judgment, shall hardly resolve a man that would know, where
Christ was when he appeered here in the way, and spoke these words to Saul.

The answer.
We answer shortly and plainly (as difficult a matter as you make of it) that
his body was then in heaven when his majesty appeered, and his voice was
heard upon earth. What can you oppose to this?

Acts. 9. 18.
The text.
And forthwith there fell from his eyes as it were scales, and he received
sight, and rising he was baptized.

The note.
Paul also himself, though with the divine and heavenly voice prostrated and
instructed, yet was sent to a man to receive the sacraments, and to be joined
to the church. Augustine in doctrina Christiana in prooemio.

The answer.
You needed much a doctor for this, which every man confesses, and no man
denies. But it is evident, that you hunt for nothing but vainglorious
estimation.

Acts. 9. 31.
The text.
The church truly through all Iewrie and Galile, and Samaria had peace, and was
edified, walking in the fear of our Lord, and was replenished with the
consolation of the holy Ghost.

The note.
The church visibly proceeds still with much comfort, and manifold increase
even by persecution.

The answer.
God in the midst of persecution sends sometimes peace and rest to his, as he
has done to his church of England, to your great grief (whose rage and fury
God has bridled) and to their singular comfort.

Acts. 9. 36.
The text.
This woman was full of good works, and alms deeds which she did.

The note.
Behold good works and alms deeds, and the force thereof reaching to the next
life.

The answer.
Though this note be but sor^ly collected out of this place, yet we confess,
that the dead resting from their labors, their works follow them, and yet you
never the nigher to the proouing of your merits.

Acts 9. 39.
The text.
And Peter rising up came with them, and when he was come they brought him up
into the upper chamber: and all the widows stood about him weeping, and
showing him the cotes and garments which Dorcas made them.

The note.
The prayers of our alms folk and beads men may do us great good even after
our departure. For if they procured her temporal life, how much more may they
help us to Gods mercy, and to release of punishment in purgatory?

The answer.
You delight your selves with fond and foolish kinds of reasoning. I pray you
show me some rule for the consequence of your reason: Prayers of the living
have sometimes obtained restitution to life of some newly dead: ergo they may
procure release of punishment after death. Your antecedent is confirmed by
manifest examples, the consequent is grounded and rests only upon your mere
imagination, and has not so much as a color of truth.

Acts. 10. 15.
The text.
And a voice came to him again the second time, That which God has purified
do not thou call common.

The note.
Here God first uttered to Peter that the time was come to preach also to the
Gentiles, and to converse with them for their salvation no less than with the
Jews, with full freedom to eat all meats, without respect of the prohibition
of certain made in the old law.

The answer.
Here we see that we know but in part, and that every man has but his
measure in gifts, therefore it is but a vain brag of papists, Platina in vi^ta
Pauli secundi.
that all knowledge rests in the popes breast, except they can prove the pope
now to have more knowledge than Peter then had.

Acts. 10. 30.
The text.
And Cornelius said, Four days since until this hour, I was praying the
ninth hour in my house.

The note.
At the time of prayer specially God sends comfortable visitations.

The answer.
So that God be prayed to and not others: so men's petitions be grounded upon
Gods promises, and so made in faith: so men's minds in prayer be not wandering,
and carried away with bythoughtes: and so they be earnest, and importunate and
give not over forthwith: God does not only grant them the comforts they
pray for, but also often pitieth their ignorance in asking, and grants that
which they could not ask: as here to Cornelius, the knowledge or our Sa^iour
by the ministry of Peter.

Acts 10. 31.
The text.
And behold, a man stood before me in white apparel, and said, Cornelius, thy
prayer is heard, and thy alms deeds are in memory in the sight of God.

The note.
Note these apparitions and visions to Saint Peter, Cornelius and others in the
Scriptures very often, against the incredulity of our heretics, that will
believe neither vision nor miracle not expressed in scripture: these being
believed of Christian men even before they were written.

The answer.
Miracles credibly reported at any time, so they tend to the glory of God,
and confirmation of his truth, delivered to us in his word, we easily admit.
But others that bring with them no profit, or uphold and give credit to
falsehood and untruth, of which sort all, or in a manner all the miracles of the
popish church are, we hold either for lies devised by your selves, or for
illusions of Satan.

Acts. 10. 35.
The text.
But in every nation, he that fears him, and works justice is acceptable
to him.

The note.
Not such as believe only, but such as fear God and work justice, are
acceptable to him.

The answer.
Be there (I pray you) any infidels that work righteousness, if there be,
Hebr. 11. 6.
then what is become of that, without faith it is impossible to please God? If
none can have good works that has not faith, than why also on the contrary
part do ye not grant, that none can have a true and a lively faith, but (as
time and occasion serves) he must show it forth by the fruits and effects
thereof? Your reason from doing to being alone follows not, except you will
say that the tongue speaks not alone, because it is not alone in the head,
but I am weary with often answering this fond cavil.

Acts. 11. 18.
The text.
Having heard these things, they held their peace, and glorified God, saying,
God then to the Gentiles also has given repentance unto life.

The note.
Good Christians hear and obey gladly such truths as be opened unto them
from God by their chief pastors, by vision, revelation, or otherwise.

The answer.
Here are very many things to be noted, which you are very loath to see,
because they shake diverse and principal pillars of your religion. First, the
church might and did call Peter to an account of his doings and doctrine: How
then has the Pope that prerogative that he may not be called in question for
any thing? Secondly, the multitude of the visible church do (notwithstanding
the promise of the holy Ghost) err in a matter of so great importance, as
concerns the salvation of the Gentiles: what prerogative has the church
gotten since, that the multitude thereof may not sometime in some matters err?
Thirdly, the whole church espieth their fault, and yields to the truth at the
teaching and instruction of one. But with you consent of multitude must
prevail, howsoever truth stand.

Acts. 12. 4.
The text.
Whom when he had apprehended, he cast into prison, delivering him to four
quaternions of soldiers to be kept.

The note.
As Peter's person was more notorious than others, and therefore better guarded
than other for fear he should escape: so Gods providence in preserving and
delivering him for the longer government of his church, is very marvelous.

The answer.
We will not reason the matter how notorious the person of Peter was. It is
manifest that as yet he had not been at Rome, neither was possessed of a
triple crown. But this comfort we reap out of this place, that (because the
arm of God is not shortened, nor his power lessened: he watches over his
still, he sleeps not by day, nor slumbereth by night) therefore he will
deliver his as maruellously still from the cruelty of the pope and his
adherents.

Acts. 12. 12.
The text.
And considering, he came to the house of Marie the mother of John, who was
surnamed Mark, where many were gathered and praieng.

The note.
It is much for the praise of these good Christians, that the assembly to Gods
service and prayer was kept in their houses in the time of persecution, and
that the Apostle came thither straight out of prison, as his first refuge. As
now Christian people do much to their commendation in places where heresy does
reign.

The answer.
God increase the number of such Christians, and grant them comfort and defense
against all cruelty and rage of unmerciful papists.

Acts. 12. 17.
The text.
And going forth he went into another place.

The note.
Though God had so miraculously delivered him, yet he would not tempt God by
tarieng among his persecutors, but according to Christ's commandment fled for a
time.

The answer.
Why do you not tell us whether he fled? If he went to Rome and became bishop
there, then belike he was bishop there before he was bishop of Antioch, which is
contrary to the report of your stories. And he hied him marvelous fast, that
was so quickly at Jerusalem again. But to let pass that fable, which carries
no show of truth, Peter did not set men a work to kill and murder Herod, for
the injury offered him, but committed vengeance to him to whom it belonged. As
appears in the report of the death of doctor Parrie.
Of whom then learned the pope and his adherents to set men a work to murder
the Lords anointed, and to give the murderers absolution before hand.

Acts. 12. 23.
The text.
And forthwith an Angel of the Lord struck him, because he had not given the
honor to God: and being consumed of woorms he gave up the ghost.

The note.
Princes that take delight in the flattery and praises of the people so much
that they forget themselves to be men, and to give the honor to God, may be
warned by this example.

The answer.
The example is terrible, and has prevailed with many princes and great
estates, who heerby have been admonished to learn to know themselves. But the
man of sin, the child of perdition, the bishop of Rome I mean, whom you his
flatterers and clawbacks advance above all that is called god, and who most
proudly takes upon him that which was never granted to mortal man, nothing
can make him afraid.

Acts. 13. 46.
The text.
To you it behooves us first to speak the word of God, but because you repel
it, and judge your selves unworthy of eternal life: behold we turn unto the
Gentiles.

The note.
The Jews of their own free will repelling the truth are unworthy of
Christ, and woorthily forsaken. And the Gentiles though they believed specially
by Gods grace and preordination, yet they believe also by their own free will,
which stands well with Gods providence.

The answer.
That the Jews repelled the grace of God offered them, and would none of it,
we manifestly see. That the Gentiles believed also by Gods grace and
preordination, that is also evident by the text it self. For there believed as
many as were preordinate to life everlasting. But that they believe by their
free will also, is your addition without any warrant, because you cannot abide
that faith should be the mere gift and liberality of God.

Acts. 14. 16.
The text.
Howbeit, he left not himself without testimony, being beneficial from
heaven, giving raines and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and
gladness.

The note.
The heathen might by the daily benefits of God have known him at the least to
be their creator, and only Lord, though the mystery of our redemption were
not opened to them.

The answer.
All nations have so much knowledge offered them in the creatures and things
which they see, and are subject to sense, as to make their damnation just, Romans
1. 20.
and themselves void of excuse for ignorance.

Acts. 14. 22.
The text.
And when they had ordained to them priests in every church, and had prayed
with fastings, they commended them to our Lord in whom they believed.

The note.
We see by this first that S. Paul and Barnabas were bishops, having here
authority to give holy orders secondly* that there was even then a difference
betwixt bishops and priests, though the name in the primitive church was often
used indifferently lastly, that always fasting and praieng were preparatimes
to the giving of holy orders.

The answer.
We cannot see by this that Paul and Barnabas were bishops, but that the
Apostles at the first planting of the churches had authority to order them,
and to appoint bishops and pastors to them. Neither do we find here any
mention at all of sacrificing priests, much less any difference between
bishops, and elders that labor in the word, whom we also call priests. Your
last observation that in this example fasting and prayer is commended to us in
the election, choice, and appointing of pastors to particular congregations, is
true.

Acts. 15. 4.
The text.
And when they were come to Jerusalem they were received of the church and of
the Apostles, and Ancients declaring whatsoever God had done with them.

The note.
Ancients here and often in this chapter, are the same that priests verse. 2.
as Saint Hierom takes it also, 1. Peter 5. and the Greek approoueth, being
always one. (...), priests, Hierom in 1. ad Tit. and 4. ad Galatas.

The answer.
For the name of priests, so your sacrificers thereby be not understood, we
stand indifferent. But what reason can you show, why in English you fly the
word Elders, and translate it Ancients.

Acts. 15. 7.
The text.
And when there was made a great disputation, Peter rising up said to them.

The note.
See the annotation verse 28. toward the end.

The answer.
Your annotation shall be answered with the rest.

Act. 15. 9.
The text.
And God which knows the hearts, gave testimony, giving unto them the holy
Ghost as well as to us, and has put no difference between us and them by
faith purifieng their hearts.

The note.
By that faith that works by charity, for a dead faith can not purify the
heart of man, See chap. 16. 31.

The answer.
Who doubts of this. But here is a secret confession by force of truth, of
your manifold cauilling in these notes, in separating those things from a true
lively justifying faith which can not be sundered from it. For if here you
understand that faith which works by charity, why do you not so to, when we
speak of justification by faith?

Act. 15. 23.
The text.
Then it pleased the apostles and ancients with the whole church, to choose men
out of them, and to send to Antioch, with Paul Barnabas, Judas, who was
surnamed Barnabas and Silas, chief men amongst the brethren, writing by their
hands.

The note.
Other latin copies and the Greek read thus, writing by their hand an epistle
containing these things.

The answer.
Whether it be expressly added, or no, the sense is one, seeing their epistle
follows verbatim. But yet this is to be marked, that you make your choice in
variety of copies to follow those, which furthest dissent from the Greek.

Act. 15. 36.
The text.
And after certain days, Paul said to Barnabas, Let us return and visit
our brethren in all cities wherein we have preached the word of our Lord, how
they do.

The note.
Hereof our catholic bishops took up the necessary use of often visiting
their flocks, and cures committed to their charge, for confirmation in faith,
and virtue, and reformation of manners both of clergy, and laity.

The answer.
The apostolical office being universally to spread the truth, (...) to lay
the first foundation of Christian Religion, necessity of doing their duty
compelled Paul and Barnabas to be absent from the churches, which they had
planted. The knowledge of Satan's subtilties, and of human infirmity, caused
this care to visit the churches again, which they had planted, and to
confirm them. Your bishops (I doubt not) would feign be Apostels in seeking
every one to himself a little world to govern: But their care is far unlike,
for they are seldom in their charge, they visit once in three year most
commonly by their deputes, neither to reform life nor manners, but either to
show themselves abroad like lords, or else to fill their purses. This I am
sure they neither learned of Paul nor Barnabas.

Act. 15. 41.
The text.
And he walked thorough Siria and Cilicia, confirming the churches, commanding
them to keep the precepts of the apostles and ancients.

The note.
Not only the things commanded by Christ's express word, or written in the
Scriptures, (as our heretics hold) but whatsoever the apostles and rulers of
the church command, is to be kept and obeyed. So these words repeated again
cap. 16. 4. and that in the Greek, least any man cavil* because here the
Greek has them not.

The answer.
You do well to join apostles with rulers, else no man would believe you. But
I pray you where may we ^inde those things which the apostles have commanded,
and are not expressed in the scriptures? If you obtrude those things which you
falsely call the canons, and constitutions of the apostles, then we bid you
first reform your church by them. For though there be some corruptions in
them, unknown in the apostles time, yet your church if it had no more should
want at least three quarters of her corruptions. It were wonderful if other
men should credit your forgerie which you your selves have small regard to. If
you allege this present text, it is manifest that the precepts which the
apostles commanded to be kept, were sent in writing by the hands of Paul, and
Barnabas, which writing is set down by Luke word for word: How then can you
gather from hence any defense of your unwritten verities, or any credit to
your devises not warranted by the Scriptures?

Act. 16. 4.
The text.
And when they passed through the cities, they delivered unto them to keep the
decrees that were decreed of the Apostels and ancients at Jerusalem.

The note.
Here again they take order, that the decrees and articles of faith agreed
upon in the council of Jerusalem, should be executed and observed, whereby we
see both the great authority of councels, and the diligence that all prelates
ought to have, to see the decrees, and canons of the councels put in execution.

The answer.
In the former note these decrees you did insinuate to be matters unwritten,
and now in this note they are articles of our faith, and so consequently some
articles of our faith are not written. O miserable men! What state are they in
whom you lead? When you pull from them the foundation and groundworke of their
faith? The authority of lawful councels we reverence, as much as is lawful
to reverence men. But by this council we gather that a council may be lawfully
called, though the bishop of Rome call it not, and that it is not needful that
he or his legate a latere should be president in councels, and that it is not
of necessity requisite, that he should confirm and ratify councels. For it is
manifest that no bishop of Rome bare stroke in this council.

Acts. 16. 6.
The text.
And passing through Phrigia, and the country of Galatia, they were forbidden
by the holy Ghost to preach the word in Asia.

The note.
This people had not the Gospel denied unto them altogether, but for a time,
because (as venerable Bede thinks) God foresaw they would not believe, and so
should have bee^ more grievously damned.

The answer.
Modesty requires, that you leave the Lords secrets to himself. The holy
Ghost has not revealed the cause why he forbad them to preach in Asia, and
permitted them not to go into Bithinia, and therefore we are to leave it as a
thing which God has not thought necessary for us to know. But this is
manifest, that the good desires of Gods saints are not in their own power to
bring to pass when they will.

Acts. 16. 12.
The text.
And from thence to Philippie, which is the first city of Macedonia, a Colonia.

The note.
Colonia is such a city where the most inhabitants are strangers, sent thither
from other great cities and states, namely from the Romans.

The answer.
Your interpretation of Colonia we receive as a thing whereof our Grammar boys
are not ignorant.

Acts. 16. 17.
The text.
The same following Paul and us, cried saying: These men are the servants of
the high God, which preach unto you the way of salvation.

The note.
Either the devil was compelled by virtue of Paul's presence to say truth, or
else (as such do often times) he spoke truth now, that they might the more
trust him, and he better beguile them at other times.

The answer.
Your later conjecture I receive as a thing that you can speak in by great
experience, as having learned that piece of cunning of the devil, never to use
truth, but to the end to give color and credit to lies withal.

Acts. 16. 3^.
The text.
Masters, what must I do to be saved? But they said, Believe in the Lord Jesus,
and thou shall be saved and thy house.

The note.
It is none other faith that saves, but that which works by charity. August.
Enchirid. cap. 67.

The answer.
Grant us that that faith is the only hand, whereby we take hold of Christ our
salvation, and then a great part of our controversy is at an end.

Acts. 16. 33.
The text.
And he taking them in the same hour of the night, washed their wounds, and
himself was baptized and all his house incontinent.

The note.
Happy gailers that do mercy toward their godly prisoners, and receive again
by them such spiritual benefits.

The answer.
It was the greatest happiness that could fall upon him, and his house to
receive such under his ^oofe, by whom God so blessed him and his. On the
contrary side, it is a dangerous matter for gailers and keepers to be cumbred
with wicked, seditious, and traitorous Jesuits, and seminary priests.

Acts. 17. 5.
The text.
But the Jews enuieng, and taking to them of the rascal sort certain
naughty men, and making a tumult, stirred the city, and besetting Iasons
house, sought to bring them forth unto the people.

The note.
Zelantes. This is the zeal of heretics, and a lively pattern of their
dealing at this day against the catholic priests and preachers, and the good
Iasons that receive them.

The answer.
Look upon the late story of France, and there you shall see that it is the
practice of you papists, to stir up the rascal sort to misuse, nay to kill and
cut the throtes of Gods dear saints.

Acts. 17. 23.
The text.
For passing by and seeing your idols, I found an altar also whereupon was
written, To the unknown God.

The note.
The adversaries (in the new Testament 1580.) translate your devotions most
corruptly against the nature of the Greek word, (2. These. 2. 4.) and most
wickedly against the laudable devotion of good Christians, calling the pagans
idolatry and superstition their devotions.

The answer.
Here is a blind quarrel, to uphold blind devotion of blind papists. Why may
not that which is devoutly worshipped, be called his devotion that worshippeth?
Except you can prove that the word devotion, ought not to be used but in good
part, which will be hard for you to do. But this fond quarrel has been before
broched by Martinius, and learnedly answered by master doctor Fulke.

Acts. 17. 24.
The text.
The God that made the world, and all things that are in it, he being Lord of
heaven and earth, dwells not in temples made with hands, etc.

The note.
God is not concluded in temples, nor needs them for his necessity of
dwelling, or other uses of indigence. See annot. c. 7. Acts. ver. 48.

The answer.
If God cannot be concluded in temples, much less can he be shut up in pixes,
or expressed by the art of your painters and caruers. Your babish annotation I
pass over to the general answer of the annotations.

Act. 19. 3.
The text.
But he said, in what then were you baptized? Who said in John's baptism.

The note.
John's baptism not sufficient.

The answer.
Conclude this out of the text if you can? You think that these were baptized
again by Paul. And we think that Paul only instructed them in the
doctrine, that John did teach them, whom he did baptize. Your error grows in
referring the participle that signifies, they hearing, to these to whom Paul
speaks to: where as it ought to be referred to them, that heard the doctrine
of John, and were baptized by him. Which reference makes the text plain, and
takes away a number of scruples, and doubts which rise upon the other
reference.

Acts. 19. 4.
The text.
Hearing these things, they were baptized in the name of our Lord Jesus.

The note.
Christ's baptism necessary.

The answer.
And who doubeth of that.

Acts. 19. 6.
The text.
And when Paul had imposed hands on them, the holy Ghost came upon them, and
they spoke with toongs and prophesied.

The note.
Saint Paul ministered the sacrament of confirmation, See ann. c. 8. 17.

The answer.
Saint Paul laid his hands on them, the holy Ghost came upon them, and they
were myraculouslie endued with the gift of toongs. That this was the
ministration of a sacrament we deny, and you have nothing to prove it with
all. Your annot. we refer as we have done the rest.

Acts. 19. 18.
The text.
And many of them that believed came confessing and declaring of their deeds.

The note.
They made not only a geuerall confession, wherein all men show themselves
alike to be sinners, as our protestants do, but every one confessed his proper
deeds and faults.

The answer.
There was then no auricular confession or shrift: Otherwise you slander the
protestants, when you make this difference between them and these believers.
For we hold that confession of sins in particular, is also necessary, as
appears in all enioined penances. But the numbering up of all a man's sins in
particular, as it is impossible, so I hold also unnecessary.

Acts. 19. 21.
The text.
And when these things were ended, Paul purposed in the spirit, when he had
passed through Macedonia and Achaia, to go to Jerusalem saying, After I shall
have been there I must see Rome also.

The note.
Of taking away the Gospel from Jerusalem the head city of the Jews, and
giving it to Rome the head city of the Gentiles.

The answer.
This note is printed in a letter by it self, that it may be noted above all
the rest. Therefore a man would think that it should be soundly and
substancially collected and gathered out of this place. And yet here is nothing
in this text once sounding toward the taking away of the Gospel from one, and
giving it to another. But we may see that you can stretch the text on the
tenters, and make it stretch to what please you.

Acts. 19. (...).
The text.
For one named Demetrius a silver smith that made silver temples of Diana,
procured to the artificers no small gain.

The note.
The protestants translate shrines anno 1577. to make the people think that it
touches the holy shrines of saints: most corruptly, in the Greek signifieng
plainly temples, and that of heathen Gods.

The answer.
What name soever it had by reason of some similitude, or portraiture that it
was framed unto, yet the circumstances of the place are plain, that temple it
was not. But as your shrines and such superstitious toys were gainful to your
workmen, so these brought in daily profit to Demetrius and his company.

Acts. 19. 35.
The text.
And when the Scribe had appeased the multitudes, he says: Ye men of Ephesus,
for what man is there that knows not the city of the Ephesians to be a
worshipper of great Diana, and Jupiters child.

The note.
Here heretics add to the text this word image more then is in the Greek, to
put a scruple into the peoples mind concerning holy images.

The answer.
Small quarrels must serve, where better want. The addition of a substantive
understood to an adjective expressed is, when you you list an heinous fault. I
pray you tell me was it not the image or idol of Diana that was there spoken
of? And may we not now call an image an image? We need not put scruples into
the heads of the people against your holy images, for they detest, and abhor
them. And good cause why: For sacrifices excepted, what madness did the Gentiles
about their images, which you did not about yours?

Acts. 20. 7.
The text.
And in the first of the sabbath, when we were assembled to break bread, Paul
disputed with them, being to depart on the morrow, and he continued the sermon
until minight.

The note.
Saint Paul did here break bread on the sunday, as it is broken in the
sacrament of the body of Christ, and had both before and after the celebrating
a sermon to the people. August. ep. 86. ad Casulalum. Vener* Bed. in 20. Act.

The answer.
To what purpose do you cite here Augustine and Bid? To prove that the
sacrament was here ministered by the Apostle Paul? We confess it, your proof
is superfluous. Or to prove that the sacrament then and there was ministered
under one kind and no more? That is a matter that neither of them ever thought
of. Paul brake bread, does it follow thereof, that he did not minister the cup
also? Your manner of breaking bread was in their days utterly unknown and
unheard of.

Acts. 20. 17.
The text.
And sending from Miletum to Ephesus, he called the ancients of the church.

The note.
That is, priests, as Act. 15. 4. See the marginall annot. there.

The answer.
The word or name of priest being delivered from your abusiue signification, we
abhor not. Your marginall annotat. has been already answered.

Acts. 20. 21.
The text.
Testifieng to the Jews and Gentiles penance toward God, and faith in our Lord
Jesus Christ.

The note.
Apostolic preaching commends not faith only, but penance also to the
people.

The answer.
And we preach repentance and faith, therefore our doctrine is apostolic. But
it is a wonder to see how you dally with faith only, to make the preaching of
justification by faith to be odious amongst the ignorant. And nothing more
plainly bewraieth that you impugn the truth against your own consciences and
knowledge, than your foul dealing in this point. For you know that we preach
somewhat besides faith.

Acts. 20. 28.
The text.
Take heed to your selves, and to the whole slocke wherein the holy Ghost has
placed you bishops to rule the church of God, which he has purchased with his
own blood.

The note.
Bishops or priests (for then these names were sometime used indifferently)
governors of the church of God, and placed in that high room and function by
the holy Ghost.

The answer.
Then those names were always used indifferently: for the distinction grew
after when one was set above the rest, for avoiding of scismes (as saint Ierom
tells) but I pray you tell me what privilege Peter had more than Paul?
Ieronimus E^uagrio.
or Rome more than Ephesus? that ravening woolues might not rise amongst them
that succeeded Peter at Rome, as well as amongst those that succeeded Paul at
Ephesus?

Acts. 21. 9.
The text.
And entering into the house of Phillip the Evangelist, which was one of the
seven, we tarried with him. And he had four daughters virgins that did
prophecy.

The note.
As saint Peter had a wife, but used her not after his calling, as it is noted
else where out of S. Ierom, Luke 4. 38. so it may be said of Saint Phillip
being deacon.

The answer.
It is easy to make a great show of fathers, when one for one and the same
thing is alleged so often, and to no purpose. The Apostles left all, therefore
they left also their wives, says Saint Ierom. And we say they left their
houses also, or else they did not leave all. And if they might so leave their
houses, that it was notwithstanding lawful for them both to retain the
possession of them, and also to have the use of them, for themselves and their
friends, as this place does plainly declare, then much rather might they both
keep and use their wives. As therefore before you dreamed of Peter, so here
you dream of Phillip, that being married me^, they lived not under the rules
and laws that the holy Ghost has given to married men, which is as great an
injury as you can do them.

Acts. 22. 17.
The text.
And now what tariest thou? Rise up, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins
inuocating his name.

The note.
The sacrament of baptism does it self wash away sins (as here is plain)
and therefore does not only signify (as the heretics affirm) that our sins
be forgiven before, or by faith only remitted. Whereby the churches doctrine is
proved to be fully agreeable to the scriptures, that the sacraments give grace
ex opere operato, that is, by the force and virtue of the work, and word done
and said in the sacrament.

The answer.
That we affirm that sacraments only signify is a slander devised by your
selves, as is also the odious name and term of heretics, which you give us.
We know that our God keeps just promise, and therefore does give the things
which he promises, to worthy and meet receivers of his sacraments. Your
plain proof of your churches doctrine, that the sacraments give grace ex
opere operato, proves no such thing, to them which understand the usual
form and manner of sacramental speeches, most commonly used in the scriptures.
And therefore it can deceive but only those, who have made ignorance the
mother of their devotion.

(...).
The text.
And when the blood of Steeuen thy witness was shed, I stood by and consented,
and kept the garments of them that killed him.

The note.
Not only principals but all that consent to the death or vexation of
Christian men for the catholic faith, do highly offend, which the Apostle
confesses here, that Gods mercy may be more notoriously glorified in him
hereby.

The answer.
Though it has pleased God to abridge your power here in England, that your
cruelty could not so show it self as other times it has done, yet no doubt
your good will, and consent has been in those most horrible murders of Gods
witnesses in those countries, where you have soiourned. Therefore I would that
all you counterfeit catholics would earnestly mark this, and while time
serves earnestly repent with Paul, that the greatness of Gods mercy in your,
and by your conuersions might be glorified. This is all the hurt I wish you.

Acts. 23. 3.
The text.
Then Paul said to him, God shall strike thee thou whited wall.

The note.
He said not this through perturbation of mind, or of a passion, but way of
prophecy, that this figurative high priesthood, then ^rimmed like a whited
wall, was to be destroyed, whereas now the true priesthood of Christ was come.
Beda in hunc locum.

The answer.
Although there be both learned, and godly of an other mind, yet for my part I
like Bedaes exposition hereof.

Acts. 23. 16.
The text.
And Paul knowing that the one part, was of Sadduces, and the other of
pharisees, he cried out in the council, men and brethren, I am a pharisee, the
son of a pharisee: of the hope of the resurrection of the dead I am judged.

The note.
Such prudent euasions from danger, are lawful, (which Saint Chrysostom
calls specially in this apostle) the wisdom of the serpent, as otherwise in
his teaching, preaching and patience, he used the simplicity of a dove.

The answer.
Wise and prudent escaping of danger is very lawful, and for that purpose the
wisdom of serpents, is very necessary for the church of God, especially
against the extreme cruelty of papists.

Acts. 23. 1^.
The text.
And the night following our Lord standing by him said, be constant: for as
thou have testified of me in Jerusalem, so must thou testify at Rome also.

The note.
Though God who could not lie had promised that he should go to Rome: yet the
apostle omitteth not humane means to defend himself from his enemies and
otherwise. Neither said he as the heretics called predestinates, Let them do
what they will, they can not hurt me, for I am predestinate to go to Rome. See
his doings and saiengs to save himself in the chapter following.

The answer.
You are good fellows, you can make your self sport in confuting your
shadows. He that were not acquainted with your cogging, and lieng, would
think by this speech of yours that some new heretics, never before heard of,
were lately risen, that held this that you confute. But I pray you where does
these predestinates dwell? What books have they written? By what evidence may
it appear that you truly charge them? For till you show us some that under
pretense of predestination, do refuse the ordinary means which God has
appointed for their safeguard, we can not believe you, but must needs score up
this amongst your lies.

Acts. 23. 18.
The text.
And he taking him, brought him to the tribune, and said, The prisoner Paul
desired me to bring this young man to thee having something to say to thee.

The note.
See the courtesy, and equity of heathen officers toward their prisoners, to
save them from all injury and villainy.

The answer.
And compare on the other side the barbarous and savage cruelty of popish
bishops, and other officers, and keepers toward them that were their prisoners
for the testimony of the truth, in the late days of Queen Marie, and thou
shall evidently see, that popery has exiled from the professors thereof, all
kind of humanity.

Acts 24. 14.
The text.
But this I confess to thee, that according to the sect, which they call
heresy I do so serve the father my God, believing al things that are written
in the law and in the prophets.

The note.
Because Tertullus the Jews orator called Christian religion the sect or (as
it is there verse 5. in the Greek) the heresy of the Nazarens: Saint Paul
answers and shows that it is no heresy. And as for the word Sect in this
place: it is in the Greek, according to the way which they call heresy, as
also Acts. 9, 2. 24, 22. And therefore the word Sect is here so taken. See
annot. cap. 28, 22.

The answer.
By this note we see that you read the Greek text, and otherwise it is utterly
to no purpose. For there is nothing in it, but that every boie, that has
learned his Greek Grammar may see. As for the joy that heretics take of
this, that Christian religion is called here, and else where a sect, or
heresy, it may rejoice papists as much as any other.

Acts. 24. 25.
The text.
And he disputing of justice and chastity, and of the judgment to come, Felix
being terrified answered. For this time go thy way.

The note.
The Apostolic teaching was not of only, and special faith, but of justice
and chastity and judgment, that is to say, of the terror of hell, and other
Gods judgments in the next life answerable to our deeds in this world: by
which the hearers were first terrified, and so induced to penance, how say
heretics that then such things make men hypocrites.

The answer.
If there be any that teach so only, and special faith that they omit to
teach other Christian duties, tell us I pray you, tell us who they be.
Otherwise we shall think this to be an ordinary cast of office with you, to
induce your ignorant followers to think that justice, chastity, and judgment
to come, are not taught now a days. Again if you can show us any that deny
the preaching of the judgments of God to be profitable for the conversion of
men, from wicked ways, tell us that we may also detest them. Yet we say that
they which never learn to yield obedience to God of sonnelike duty, but of
servile fear, are but hypocrites when they are at the best.

Acts. 25. 11.
The text.
But if none of those things be whereof they accuse me, no man can give me to
them, I appeal to Caesar.

The note.
If Saint Paul both to save himself, both from whipping and from death,
sought by the Jews, doubted not to cry for succor of the Romain laws, and to
appeal to Caesar the prince of the Romans, not yet Christened, how much more
may we call for aid of Christian princes and their laws, for the punishment
of heretics, and for the churches defense against them. Augustine epist. 50.

The answer.
It is lawful for man being wronged at an inferior magistrates hand, to seek
for defense, and protection at the hands of the superior, and higher. It is
lawful also for true catholics to use the defense of their own princes, and
sovereigns against the violence of heretics, and to use the benefit of their
laws for the punishment of them. But it is unlawful to seek to set princes
together by the ears one with another, and to constreine other men's subjects,
and their dominions by force of arms, to accept and embrace religion. For this
neither the example of Paul approves, neither yet Augustine allows.

Acts. 25. 19.
The text.
Of whom, when the accusers stood up, they brought no cause which I thought
till of: but certain questions of their own superstition which they had
against him, and of one Jesus deceased whom Paul affirmed to live.

The note.
This whom he terms by contempt one Jesus, has now made all the Roman
Emperors and princes of the world to know him, and has given the seat of the
Caesar's to his poor servants Peter and his successors.

The answer.
Saint Peter never usurped Caesar's seat. Those whom you untruly term his
successors, like traitors have by treason displaced their sovereign Lords, and
by force and fraud set themselves in their place. But that this was given them
by Christ is your surmise, which you can never prove.

Acts. 26. 20.
The text.
Whereupon, king Agrippa, I was not incredulous to the heavenly vision: but to
them first that are at Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and unto all the country of
Jury, and to the Gentiles, did I preach that they should do penance, and turn
to God, doing works worthy of penance.

The note.
Penance often inculcated, and works agreeable to the same.

The answer.
Repentance, which you corruptly call penance, and works worthy of the same,
we inculcate in our sermons oftener, more earnestly, and more fruitfully then
you. And yet we foster no such confidence in the merits of men's works and
doings, as you flatter, and puff up men withal.

Acts. 27. 9.
The text.
And when much time was spent, and whereas now it was not safe sailing, because
the fast now was past, Paul comforted them saying to them.

The note.
It may signify the Jews fast of the seventh month September, after which
the navigations was perilous winter approaching.

The answer.
It is very likely that Luke reckoned the time according to the manner, and
custom of the Jews, and that therefore it is their fast in the feast of
reconciliation, that is here spoken of. Which if you would have vouchsafed to
have cited Master Beza or Master Calvin for, you should have done well, for of
them or one of them you learned this. But whatsoever you reap by them, you
have not any good manners to be thankful to them for it.

Acts. 27. 24.
The text.
Fear not, Paul, thou must appear before Caesar: and behold God has given
thee all that sail with thee.

The note.
Paul (says S. Hierom) had so many souls in the ship given him, that is, so
many men saved for his sake, and after he is with Christ shall he shut his
mouth, and not be able once to speak for them that have believed in his
Gospel? Hierom aduer. Vigil. Whereby he proves, that if God do much for the
merits of saints in this life, much more at their intercession and prayer in
heaven.

The answer.
You should say; Whereby S. Ierom goes about, or indeuoreth to prove: For
every word he speaks is not by and by a proof. What the saints of God do in
heaven for men that are alive, is a secret, which God has kept to himself,
and not revealed to men. Therefore the reasons from their dealings here to
their doings there are blind, having no ground to frame them on, but man's
wisdom. There we do not believe S. Ieroms conclusions, but where he has
better ground for his reasons.

Acts. 28. 1.
The text.
And when we had escaped then we knew that the Island was called Mitilene.

The note.
This island (now Malta) is the seat of the knights of the Rhodes. The
inhabitants whereof have a special devotion to saint Paul: to whom both the
chief church (being the bishops seat) is dedicated, and the whole island (as
they count it) is consecrated. Where the people show yet to strangers, his
prison, and other memories of his miracles.

The answer.
To leave the manifest gross error of your old interpretor in the name
untouched, and to leave your selves, which will amend no errors nor untruths
be they never so manifest: To your note we say, that we easily believe the
inhabitants of Malta to be papists, full of blind and ignorant devotion.

(...).
The text.
For the heart of this people is waxen gross, and with their ears have they
heavily heard, and their eyes they have shut: least perhaps they may see with
their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and be
converted, and I heal them.

The note.
Here also (as Matthew. 13.) it is plain, that they would not see nor hear,
and that their excaecation is to be attributed to themselves, and not to God.
See annot. John. 12, 40.

The answer.
Their excecation as their fault is to be attributed to themselves and none
other: and to God as a just judgment and punishment for their former sins.

ROMANS.
Roman. 1. 5.
The text.
By whom we have received grace and apostleship for obedience to the faith.

The note.
Faith must not be subject to sense, reason, arguing, or understanding, but
must command and be obeyed in humility and simplicity.

The answer.
It is true that every word of the Lord is with reverence to be received,
believed, and obeyed in humility and simplicity, though it be never so far
beyond our capacity, and the reach of our reason, or the compass of our sense
or understanding. But yet so as that we believe not white to be black, sower
to be sweet, neither yet that the whole body of man may be contained within
the compass of two or three inches. For in things subject to sense we are no
where commanded not to believe and trust our senses.

Romans 1. 5.
The text.
In all nations, for the name of him among whom are you also the called of
Jesus Christ.

The note.
Saint Augustine uses this place and the like against heretics which would
draw the common catholic faith of all nations, to some certain countries and
corners of the world. August. ep. 161.

The answer.
Whosoever hold any faith, that was not universally planted by the Apostles in
all nations, and which has not been since generally embraced of all true
Christians, the same hold not the true catholic faith. And therefore the
faith, which the church of Rome at this day holds, is not the true catholic
faith. For what Apostle taught, or what church in their time believed, that
Christ after his ascension was bodily here upon the earth, and that his body
might be in many places at once: in one place having the quantity of a body,
in another place void of all quantity? I would our controversies about the
church and the bishop of Romes authority might be decided by this epistle. For
he is plain in both cases.

Romans 1. 9.
The text.
For God is my witness, whom I serve in my spirit in the Gospel of his son,
that without intermission I make a memory of you always in my prayers, etc.

The note.
He prays without intermission, that omitteth no day certain times of
prayer. Aust.

The answer.
He prays for men without intermission, that being diligent in prayer, is
therein always mindful of them. But your citing now of Augustine to what end
is it, but to make a show of your reading.

Romans 1. 11.
The text.
For I desire to see you, that I may impart to you some spiritual grace, to
confirm you.

The note.
The Romans were converted, and taught by Saint Peter before. Therefore he
uses that speech to confirm them in their faith, Author Commen. apud
Hieronimum. Theodoret. in 16. Romans and Christ.

The answer.
That the Romans to whom Paul wrote were converted before, it is manifest,
but by whose ministry that does not certainly appear. We know that diverse
fathers are of opinion that Peter took pains at Rome, before Paul wrote
thither. But because the time they assign of his coming thither, and of his
continuance there, can neither stand with the scriptures, neither with other
things, which they report of him, there is just cause, why in this point we
should not believe them. But because it is not material by whom they were
converted, I let this pass. But one thing I muse of, and I would feign be
resolved in. Why the holy Ghost, so diligently setting out Paul's writing to
the Romans before he went thither, and Paul's journey thither, his pains, and
diligence there, does not once signify any thing to us of Peter's being there,
seeing there could be nothing more necessary for a christian to know, then
that: If popery be good Christianity, and if by Peter's being there, such
wonderful privileges be left unto the bishops there, as they at this day
challenge.

Romans 1. 17.
The text.
For the justice of God is revealed therein by faith into faith, As it is
written, And the just man lives by faith.

The note.
He means not Gods own justice in himself, but that justice wherewith God
endueth man when he justifies him. Aug. de spir. and lit. cap. 9. Whereby you
may gather the vanity of heretical imputative justice.

The answer.
Whereby you may gather the impudency of the papists, in applieng fathers to
that they meant not. The whole scope and circumstances of the place are against
inherent justice, and for the righteousness of Christ imputed to us. But God
endueth man, with righteousness, when he does justify him. It is true: But that
righteousness whereby he makes men just, is the righteousness of Christ. The
other wherewith he indueth us, which we call sanctification, being gods gift,
is not sufficient to make us just before God, but to declare us just before men.

Romans 1. 23.
The text.
And they changed the glory of the incorruptible God, into a similitude of the
image of a corruptible man, and of fowls, and four footed beasts, and of them
that creep.

The note.
Lo these and the like are the images or idols so often condemned in the
Scriptures, and not the holy images of Christ and his saints.

The answer.
Lo here be popish images manifestly condemned, for you can not deny, for all
the world knows it, that you change the glory of the incorruptible God, into
the image of a corruptible man. There were at that time no images of Christ,
and his saints to speak against. But the reasons by which the prophets, and
apostles condemned the former images of the Gentiles, do beat down also the
images, and idolatry of the papists.

Romans 1. 24.
The text.
For the which cause God has delivered them up unto the desires of their heart,
into uncleanness, for to abuse their own bodies among themselves ignominiouslie.

The note.
Ephesians. 4. 19. he says they have delivered or given up themselves to all
uncleanness. By which conference of Scriptures we learn that themselves, are
the cause of their own sin and damnation, God of his justice permitting and
leaving them to their own will, and so giving them up into passions, etc.

The answer.
By conference of Scriptures we learn, that the matter and cause of sin, and
so consequently of damnation, rests in the wicked themselves, and that God
also in justice punishes sin by sin. As in this chapter God punishes the
idolatrous, with a most filthy sinful life. Peruse over your stories of Rome,
and see, whether ever this judgment of God upon men for idolatris were more
manifestly laid upon any people, then it has been and is upon Rome. And tell
us what other people have set out the praises of Sodomitrie in print most
impudently to the face of all the world.

Romans 2. 7.
The text.
To them truly that according to patience in good works seek glory and honor,
and incorruption; life eternal.

The note.
Good men also according to the merits of their good will shall have their
reward. August. ep. 47.

The answer.
And why do you not add that their good will is the gift of the grace of God,
seeing Augustine adds it? Further, merits with Augustine are taken simply for
works, and not as it commonly sounds with the papist for a desert equivalent
and correspondent to the reward. Lastly, he acknowledges that God rewards
and crowns his own gifts in us. How this can make for your doctrine of
merits I pray you tell us.

Romans 2. (...).
The text.
Thou therefore that teach another, teach not thy self: that preachest,
men ought not to steal, thou stealest, etc.

The note.
It is a shameful and a damnable thing, for preachers, teachers, or other
guides of men's life, to commit the same things themselves, which they reprove
in other.

The answer.
And can the pope and his cardinals be damned? or must we secretly except them?
I pray you tell us whether. For in the whole world it is impossible to find any
man's sins more plain or more monstrous.

Romans 2. (...).
The text.
For the name of God is blasphemed through you among the Gentiles.

The note.
It is a great sin, that by the ill life of the faithful our Lords name
should be ill spoken of among the misbeleeuers, and many withdrawn from the
true religion thereby.

The answer.
I do not take it, that you mean, that murdering of princes, treason,
perjury, sedition, rebellion, to set up popish religion, to be any sin at
all, and yet it makes your profession evil spoken of, and alienateth
therefrom all that carry not bloody minds and hearts.

Romans 2. 25.
The text.
Circumcision indeed profits, if thou observe the law: but if thou be a
preuaricator of the law, thy circumcision is become prepuce.

The note.
Prepuce is the foreskin not circumcised, and therefore signifies the Gentiles,
or the state or condition of the Gentiles, as circumcision the Jews and their
state.

The answer.
You can find in your heart to borrow of master Beza, but not to be thankful
for that he lends you.

Romans 3. 4.
The text.
God forbid, but God is true: and every man a lier: as it is written; That thou
may be justified in thy words, and overcome when thou art judged.

The note.
God only by nature is true, all men by nature may lie, deceive, and be
deceived: yet God by his grace and spirit may and does preserve the Apostles,
and principal governors of his people, and the church and councels in all
truth, though they were and are mere men.

The answer.
If you mean by these principal governors the pope and his cardinals, as I do
not doubt but you do, then we answer: That as they are mere men, so they show
themselves: for they both have erred, Platin^s^^^ that Liber^^ was an Arrian.
and do err. I would feign see one plain place in all the ancient fathers,
that no bishop of Rome can err in says. That position is a late heresy
unknown for a whole thousand years after Christ. And the general consent of
the divines of Christendom against it, till within these two hundred years,
Sessione 34.
as may appear in the council of Basil, where pope Eugenius was condemned
for an obstinate heretic, and therefore deposed.

Romans 3. 14.
The text.
The venim of aspes under their lips.

The note.
Aspidum a little kind of serpents.

The answer.
We acknowledge it.

Romans 3. 22.
The text.
And the justice of God by faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all that
believe in him.

The note.
To believe in him, here compriseth not only the act of faith, but of hope
and charity, as the Apostle explicateth himself. Gilat. 5. 6.

The answer.
I never saw so loose dealing of any, but of such as both willingly deceive
themselves, and labor to beguile others. The Apostle tells that faith
works by charity, and you thereupon conclude, that to believe compriseth the
acts of faith, hope, and charity. How this conclusion follows, neither I
see, neither can you make it evident. But let it he granted you, then how can
you excuse your selves of intolerable lieng and slandering, when almost every
where you speak of the doctrine of justification by faith and believing, as
though hope and charity were from faith exiled and banished. But your shifts
are foul, and manifest slanders where you may, and when by plain evidence of
the text you are beaten from them, then it is not enough for hope and charity
to accompany faith, but they must be also comprised of faith.

Romans 3. 24.
The text.
Justified gratis by his grace, by the redemption that is in Christ Jesus.

The note.
No man attaineth his first justification by the merits either of his faith or
works, but meerelie by Christ's grace and mercy: though his faith and works
proceeding of grace be dispositions and preparations thereunto.

The answer.
Is Pelagius alive again, or why do ye not cite him, that your followers may
know your doctrine to be ancient, and also whom you follow therein? In all that
Augustine wrote against Pelagius and his adherents, let us see somewhat to
justify your note. First, you acknowledge Christ's mere grace and mercy in
our first justification, and then by and by in a manner with the same breath you
overthrow it again, finding in our selves dispositions and preparations
thereunto, which if it be true, then how is it freely and meerlie by his
grace, when that grace is by our selves prevented? But this faith and works
preparatorie proceed out of grace also. I marvel what grace you mean, August.
de peccato originali. cap. 1.
is it not the same that Pelagius deceived the Bishops withal in his
subscription? If it be not that, I know not what to make of it. For to shun
pelagianisme, and yet to maintain your heresy of merits, you make your
doctrine an hoch poch, and a mingle mangle, and by no means will yield your
selves in such order guilty before God, as that he may have the whole glory
of your instification.

Romans 4. 5.
The text.
But to him that works not, yet believes in him that justifies the impious,
his faith is reputed to justice according to the purpose of the grace of God.

The note.
The word reputed does not diminish the truth of the justice, as though it
were reputed for justice being not justice indeed, but signifies that as it
was in it self, so God esteemed and reputed it, as the same Greek word must
needs be taken verse 4. next going before, and 1. Corinthians. 4. 1. and else where.

The answer.
If the faith of Abraham were justice in deed and in it self, and could abide
the rigor of Gods examination, then this imputation or reputation were to it
as to a due debt. How then holds the Apostles opposition of faith to works,
and of debt to grace? Or how comes it imputed or reputed of grace? It is no
favor to repute that to man which is truly and reallie in him. It is one
thing simply to repute, it is another thing of favor to repute, so that your
labor about the signification of the word, is but mere wrangling and
cauilling. Besides, if Abraham had justice reallie and truly in him self,
whether it were by faith or works, how can he be excluded from glorieng, when
he may challenge of God his justification as his due debt? Lastly, this
justice of Abraham, being the same that David describes in an happy, blessed,
or justified man, how is it inherent in the man, when it consists in pardon,
remission, and covering of sin? But you do nothing else but whet your wits to
obscure and darken the glory of the grace of God.

Romans ^. (...).
The text.
And he received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the justice of faith
that is in prepuce: that he might be the father of all that believe by the
prepuce, that unto them also it may be reputed to justice.

The note.
Our Sacraments of the new law give ex opere operato, that grace and justice of
faith which here is commended, whereas circumcision was but a sign and mark
of the same.

The answer.
Liars are not to be believed though they swear, much less you when you bring
but your bare word, for other proof here is none. Circumcision is a seal of
the justice of faith, Ergo our Sacraments of the new law give grace ex opere
operato, or else circumcision was but a sign or mark of grace. These are
strange manners of concluding, and far fetched.

Romans 5. ^.
The text.
By whom also we have access through faith in this grace wherein we stand, and
glory in the hope of the glory of the sons of God.

The note.
Christian men do not vaunt them selves of the certainty of their salvation,
but glory in the hope thereof only, which hope is here insinuated to be given
in our justification, and is afterward to be confirmed by probation in
tribulation.

The answer.
It is wonderful, that you are not ashamed to cut off all assured comforts
from christian men. It were a vain glorious vaunting in deed, if this
certainty stayed upon any matter in us, but when it rests upon the
goodness of God and his gracious promises, it were a piece of infidelity not
to glory and rejoice in it. We will consider therefore the effects and fruits
of faith in believers, as the Apostle sets them down in this place: First
justification, then the sweet and inward feeling of our reconciliation and
atonement with God, which he calls peace toward God. Thirdly, our constant
standing and perseuering in this grace and favor, into the which we are
received. Fourthlie, the joy and reioicing that this breeds through the
assured hope and expectation, that we shall be partakers of the glory of the
children of God, which joy through hope assured, is so great in them that have
a continual eye to the glory set before them, that no trouble nor tribulation
can abridge or break it off, but that our hope and expectation is still more
and more confirmed and assured. But you to overthrow all this, make hope a
doubtful and uncertain expectation of the things which God has promised, and
so call the truth of God into doubt.

Romans 5. 6.
The text.
For why did Christ, when we as yet were weak according to the time die for
the impious?

The note.
The heretics falselie translate of no strength, to take away all free will.
No. Testam. 1580.

The answer.
Rather then you will loose freewill, you will contend for sinners, wicked men,
and enemies of God, and in them there must be a greater force of free will then
in Paul: for Paul was not able of himself to think a good thought, (...).
and yet these are not so weak, but that there is some strength and ability
left in them. For the Greek word here signifies weakness, and does it not
so in the 1. Corinths. 15. verse 43. It is sown in weakness, being spoken of
the dead body of a man? And I pray you tell me, did any strength remain in
dead carcasses, and is not the case alike with the wicked and ungodly? are not
they dead in sin or by sin?

Romans 5. 19.
The text.
For as by the disobedience of one man, many were made sinners: so also by the
obedience of one, many shall be made just.

The note.
Here we may see against the heretics, that they which be borne of Christ,
and justified by him, be made and const^^^ted just indeed, and not by
imputation only: as all that be horn of Adam be unjust and sinners in truth,
and not by imputation.

The answer.
By the obedience of one many shall be made just: Is this obedience in us or
imputed unto us? If it be in us, then it is the obedience of many, but the text
is manifest that this obedience rests in the person of one, that is, of
Christ, and by grace it is imputed unto us and made ours. You do but beguile
the simple, and such as are not able to epsy your fraud with the contrary
part of the Antithesis. For Adams only transgression was sufficient to make al
his posterity sinners, and subject to the just sentence of condemnation. And
therefore death the reward of sin did not only rage and reign over actual
transgressors, Romans 5. 1^.
but also over infants and babes skant borne.

Romans 6. (...).
The text.
For we are buried together with him by baptism into death, that as Christ is
risen from the dead by the glory of the father, so we also may walk in
newness of life.

The note.
Remission of sin, new life, sanctification and justification are given by
baptism, because it resembles in us, and applies to us Christ's death and
resurrection, and ingraffeth us into him.

The answer.
And why do you not say that these are given us by baptism ex opere operato,
for that I know is your meaning? And otherwise we do know that God does truly
exhibit his promised graces to believing receivers.

Romans 6. 17.
The text.
But thanks be to God, that you were the servants of sin, but have obeyed
from the heart unto that form of doctrine, into the which you have been
delivered.

The note.
Here again is signified, that our discharge from the bondage of sin, is by
the Christian faith, and by obedience to the whole doctrine of Christ's
religion: in that the Apostle attributes this their deliverance from sin, to
their humble receiving of the Catholic faith.

The answer.
Here is signified that sanctification, and hearty obedience to the catholic
doctrine, (...) consequents of justification by faith, and so of our freedom
from sin. But that their humble receiving and obeieng that doctrine is the
cause of their deliverance from sin, is your dream, and neither the apostles
speech nor meaning.

Romans 6. 19.
The text.
For as you have exhibited your members to serve uncleanness, and iniquity unto
iniquity: so now exhibit your members to serve justice, unto sanctification.

The note.
He signifies that as when they were subject to sin by continual and often
working wickedness, they increased in iniquity: that so also now being
justified, they may and should by external works of justice increase their
justice and sanctification.

The answer.
Under the ambiguous name of justice you seek to confound justification and
sanctification, to the end you may give the better color to your inherent
righteousness. Therefore to avoid your fraud, I distinctly answer, that as
iniquity is increased by continuance in evil works, so sanctity begun in the
children of God is augmented, and increased by all manner of holy exercises.

Romans ^. 2.
The text.
For the woman that is under a husband, her husband living is bound to the
law: but if her husband be dead, she is loosed from the law of her husband.

The note.
Nothing but death dissolueth the band betwixt man and wife: though for
fornication, one may depart from an others company. Therefore to marry again
is adultery, during the life of the party separated.

The answer.
That death dissolueth the band of matrimony, is in this place manifest: but
that nothing but death dissolueth it, that is your addition, and has no just,
or good ground. If you would vouchsafe to give us a definition of the band of
matrimony, the matter would quickly be made manifest, and plain. In the mean
space your conclusion (which is, that it is adultery to marry again during
the life of the parfie separated) follows after your woonted manner, that is,
like a stragler.

Romans 7. 4.
The text.
Therefore my brethren you also are made dead to the law by the body of
Christ: that you may be an other man's, who is risen again from the dead, that
we may fructify to god.

The note.
Being now baptized, and dead to sin, and engraffed in Christ's mystical body,
you are discharged of the law of Moses and are free in Christ.

The answer.
If you understand this our death to the law, and so consequently our
discharge from it, not absolutely, but as it is the strength of sin, then I
allow and like of your note.

Romans 7. 6.
The text.
But now we are loosed from the law of death, wherein we were detained, in so
much we serve in newnes of spirit, and not in oldnes of the letter.

The note.
By baptism we have not Christ's justice imputed to us, but an inward newnes of
spirit given us, and resident in us.

The answer.
How prove you your negative? Why have we not both? Do not they which are
baptized put on Christ? If they put on Christ, are they not adorned, and
beautified with his righteousness imputed to them? Or does God give Christ to
them, and not the benefits of Christ together with him? Nay this newnes of
spirit given us and resident in us, is a necessary consequent of the former
imputed to us by faith. But you would feign exclude the former, to leave place
alone for your inherent justice.

Romans 7. 8.
The text.
But occasion being taken, sin by the commandment wrought in me all
concupiscence. For without the law sin was dead.

The note.
Sin or concupiscence, which was a sleep before, was wakened by prohibition,
the law not being the cause thereof, nor giving occasion thereunto, but occasion
being taken by our corrupt nature to resist that which was commanded.

The answer.
The corrupt nature of man is prone to do that which is forbidden, no marvel
then though occasion of sinning be taken from whence it is not given. But your
blindness is marvelous, that you can not see this corruption of nature, to be
as well sin, as the cause of sin in all men.

Romans 8. 4.
The text.
For that which was impossible to the law, in that it was weakened by the
flesh: God sending his son in the similitude of the flesh of sin, even of
sin condemned sin in the flesh, that the justification of the law might be
fulfilled in us, who walk not according to the flesh, but according to the
spirit.

The note.
This conuinceth against the churches adversaries, that the law, that is Gods
commandments may be kept, and that the keeping thereof is justice, and that in
Christian men that is fulfilled by Christ's grace, which by the force of the law
could never be fulfilled.

The answer.
Who are so blind, as they which will not see? The text and circumstances
thereof are plain, that whereas it is impossible for any to be justified by
observing or keeping the law, for that it was of no strength or (as you
translate it) to weak for that by reason of the flesh: God has provided a
remedy for that in his Christ, who being sent in our nature, has fulfilled
the law for us, which benefit of his is made ours by grace of imputation, and
so the justification of the law fulfilled in us. This conuinceth that the law
may be kept, not by others, but by Christ, and that the keeping thereof is
justice and our justice, but inherent in Christ, and ours by imputation and
grace, and therefore is not said to be fulfilled of us, but in us.

Romans 8. 14.
The text.
For whosoever are by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God.

The note.
He means not that the children of God be violently compelled against their
wills, but that they be sweetly drawn, moved and induced to do good. August.
Euchiridion, cap. 64. de verb. domini ser. 43. ca. 7. de verb. Apost. ser. 13.
cap. 11. 12.

The answer.
Here you bring authorities thick, where need none. Who ever expounded this
leading of the spirit, of forcible constreining men against their wills? Because
your freewill is denied, you would have your followers to believe, that we make
men blocks and stocks. As for you, you are so far from being led by the spirit,
that you have no sense, nor feeling of it, and therefore dare not say that you
have the spirit of God. And good reason why you should not, because the holy
Ghost has not wrought in you any change, or alteration from your superstitions
follies.

Romans 9. 11.
The text.
For when they were not yet borne, nor had done any good or evil (that the
purpose of God according to election might stand) not of works, but of the
caller, it was said to her, That the elder shall serve the yoonger.

The note.
S. Hierom q. 10. ad Hedibiam. All the Epistle surely to the Romans needs
interpretation, and is enwrapped with so great obscurities, to understand it we
need the help of the holy Ghost, who by the Apostle did dictate these same
things, but especially this place. Howbeit nothing pleases us but that which
is Ecclesiastical, that is the sense of the Church.

The answer.
Saint Hierome did not use this speech to fraie any from reading any part of
the scriptures, and inquiring the sense of them. For he himself seeks to
satisfy the questions propounded, and that to a woman whom he scarcely knew.
That this epistle needs interpretation, and especially the illumination of
that spirit, which caused it to be written, it has common with the rest of the
Scriptures. For the natural man understands not the things of the spirit of
God, which are spiritually discerned. We would be loath to please our selves
with any private interpretation, not received nor allowed of the true church of
God. But you would gladly have this whole Epistle out of the way, and
especially this chapter, because it sets out plainly Gods free election,
and choice without respect or regard had to works, either aforegoing, or
following. Which sense though contrary to the sense of your church, Saint
Hierome holds as the sense of the church then. And therefore he concludes
that question, that Hedibia should for ever hold her peace from inquiring any
causes of Gods will, why he is merciful to one, and severe to another.

Romans 9. 22.
The text.
And if God willing to show wrath, and to make his might known, sustained in
much patience the vessels wrath apt to destruction, etc.

The note.
That God is not the cause of any man's reprobation or damnation, otherwise then
for punishment of his sins, he shows by that he expects all men's amendment
with great patience, and consequently that they have also freewill.

The answer.
The cause and matter of man's damnation is in himself. And yet God did prepare
the wicked, or damned to be vessels of ignominy, or dishonor. It is well that
you rake so diligently amongst the ungodly and reprobate for your freewill: For
they sin frankly and freely. And if you find it not amongst the slaves of
sin, you shall find it no where. But I have told you, and do tell you again
that this freedom to do evil, is the servitude of sin, and that therefore
this freewill cannot do any thing but sin.

Romans 10. 4.
The text.
For the end of the law is Christ: unto justice to every one that believes.

The note.
The law was not given to make a man just or perfect by it self, but to bring
us to Christ to be justified by him.

The answer.
If the law were not given to make a man just, then how can a man be justified
by his own works, and obedience? Again, how then do you hold it possible to
be fulfilled by men, for no doubt it makes just the fulfillers thereof? Though
you bring all your subtle shifts, and euasions together, yet if you hold fast
this note, your inherent justice to make a man just withal, shall be just
worth two strawes.

Romans 10. 5.
The text.
For Moses wrote that the justice which is of the law, the man that has done
it, shall live in it.

The note.
The justice of the law of Moses, went no further of it self but to save a
man from temporal death and punishment prescribed to the transgressors of the
same.

The answer.
Were not the ten commandments part of the law of Moses? And does not Christ
answer the young man that would know by what doing he should have life
everlasting, Keep the commandments? Did the curse of the law from which
Christ delivered us, extend no further than to temporal punishment? Perfect
righteousness brings perfect life. The law is a perfect rule of righteousness:
therefore if it could be fulfilled of us, it should bring us to perfect
eternal life. What means Paul by his opposition of those two sentences; The
just shall live by faith: And he that does these things shall live in them; if
one and the same life eternal be not promised in both, in the one to
believers, in the other to doers? Again, if this your note were true, the law
of it self, and in it self, had been too weak to justify or sanctify, but
saint Paul says not it was too weak in it self, but it was weakened by the
flesh, and therefore could not justify. But as all popery is patched together
of old and new heresies, so this patch was borrowed of the Manicheans.

Romans 10. 13.
The text.
For every one whosoever shall invoke the name of our Lord, shall be saved.

The note.
To believe in him and to invoke him, is to serve him with all love and
sincere affection. All that so do shall doubtless be saved, and shall never be
confounded.

The answer.
If to invoke him be to serve him, then why teach you men to invoke others,
and so consequently to serve others which are but men? And thus whilst you are
loath to attribute salvation to faith alone, but would make it common to works
also, you cut your own throtes, and show your selves to all the world, to be
manifest impostors and deceivers.

Romans 10. 16.
The text.
But all do not obey the Gospel.

The note.
We see then, that it is in a man's freewill to believe or not to believe, to
obey or disobey the Gospel or truth preached.

The answer.
Your sight is sharp, you can see far into a mill stone: no reasonable man can
see how your consequence follows. All do not obey, ergo they have free will
to obey, or not to obey. It is like this: All papists go not whither they list,
ergo no papists are in prison, or restrained of liberty.

Romans 11. 4.
The text.
I have left me seven thousand men that have not bowed their knees to Baal.

The note.
The heretics add here image to the text, as Acts. 19. 35.

The answer.
A very great corruption sure to call an image an image. Your own consciences
do accuse you of gross idolatry, of bowing to the works of your own hands,
and therefore you wince and kick if a man put his hand but nigh the sore. But
I pray you what means the feminine article in the Greek text joined with
Baal? Does it not enforce us to understand the word, Image?

Romans 11. 11.
The text.
I say then, have they so stumbled that they should fall? God forbid. But by
their offense salvation is to the Gentiles that they may emulate them.

The note.
The Jews are not rejected wholly and incurably for ever, but for a part, and
for a time suffered to fall, which God did turn to the Gentiles general good.

The answer.
If you would always borow your notes from such as in simplicity and
singlenes of heart have sought to lead the people into truth, as you have done
this, the blotting of much paper, and the loss of much time might be spared.

Romans 11. 12.
The text.
And if the offense of them be the riches of the world: and the diminution of
them the riches of the Gentiles: how much more the fullness of them.

The note.
If God could, and did turn their fall and sin into the good of the Gentiles,
much more will he work good of their general conversion, which shall be at
length the accomplishment of the church consisting of both the nations.

The answer.
God which does turn all things to the good of those which are his, hasten if
it be his will their conversion, and so the coming of his son, to abolish
Antichrist, and end our miseries.

Romans 11. 20.
The text.
Well. Because of incredulity they were broken, but thou by faith do stand:
be not too highly wise, but fear.

The note.
We see that he which stands by faith may fall from it, and therefore must
live (...) fear, and not in the vain presumption and security of heretics.

The answer.
I see no such thing, but only this, that the severe judgment of God against
others, should make men walk more carefully in their calling, and to fear and
tremble at the sight and view of God heavy judgments: but you as you have not
the spirit of adoption, 1. Ioh. 4. 18.
so you know no fear but servile, which the love of God exileth and banisheth
from it. For the sons of God though they know and are well assured, that they
shall abide in their fathers house for ever, yet fear, tremble, and quake at
every threat of his. Therefore this fear and certainty of salvation are not
opposed one against the other. But to turn home your note to your selves: God
has not spared the Jews, nor Jerusalem, how shall he then spare the Romans and
Rome? Which therefore does aptly agree with the scope and purpose of the
Apostle, because he compares not each particular man with other, but nation
with nation. For many particular men of the Jews were not rejected, and in
other nations multitudes have not the faith, which they profess themselves to
have. And therefore it follows, that as God rejected the Jews, so he may
reject any other nation of the Gentiles. Which is the more diligently to be
considered of you, for that the holy Ghost by the Apostle made special choice
to set down this threat to the Romans, who as you imagine can never err or
fall.

Romans 12. 3.
The text.
For I say by the grace that is given me, to all that are among you, not to be
more wise, than behooves to be wise, but to be wise to sobriety, to every one
as God has divided the measure of faith.

The note.
None must presume to meddle above the measure of God gift, or out of the
compass of his state and vocation.

The answer.
Your note is true. And if your proud Antichrist took not upon him without
this compass, then there had not been at this day so much war and bloodshed,
so many mischiefs and miseries throughout Christendom, as now there is
through his procurement and setting on.

Romans 12. 6.
The text.
And having gifts, according to the grace that is given us, different either
prophecy according to the rule of faith, etc.

The note.
Prophecy is interpretation of the scriptures, which is according to the rule
of faith, when it is not against the right faith, or when it is profitable to
edify charity, as saint Augustine speaks. Lib. 3. doct. Christ. c. 25. and
lib. 1. c. 36. and in effect he says the same, Lib. 12. Confess. cap. 18. unto
cap. 32.

The answer.
How happens it that you have left all Augustines rules of interpreting, and
left us one only rule of your own devising to interpret by, that is, the
sense and understanding of your church of Rome? And if that fail, howsoever it
agrees with the rule of faith, how profitable soever it be to edify withal,
howsoever it be vpholden with most plain and manifest texts of scripture, what
consent of antiquity soever there be for it, you reject it, Rome with you must
be the rule of truth: whatsoever proceeds from thence must be holden for an
oracle.

Romans 1^. 14.
The text.
Bless them that persecute you: bless, and curse not.

The note.
Cursing is a vice whereunto the common people is much given, who often curse
them, on whom they cannot otherwise be revenged: they may see here that it is
a great fault.

The answer.
The common people learned of your holy father of Rome to curse them on whom
they cannot otherwise be revenged. And that they have not espied this to be a
great fault, the fault has been in you, which have kept till now of late this,
and other scriptures from the eyes of the common people, to the end they should
not see it. And we see yet at this day, that this vice there rages and
reigns most, where the people are most ignorant, and most inclined to popery.

Romans 13. 8.
The text.
For he that loves his neighbor has fulfilled the law.

The note.
Here we learn, that the law may be and is fulfilled by love in this life,
against the adversaries saying, it is impossible to keep the commandments.

The answer.
The Apostle here does commend unto us the love of our neighbor, not as a
particular precept, but as a general, comprehending the whole law. Therefore
he that loves as he ought, fulfilleth the law, but that any man (Christ only
excepted) loves his neighbor in that perfection that he ought, neither the
Apostle affirms, nor you can prove. Therefore your adversaries may and do
truly hold, that it is impossible to fulfill the law by exact obedience, and
keeping of the commandments.

Romans 14. 1.
The text.
I know and am persuaded in our Lord Jesus Christ, that nothing is common of it
self, etc.

The note.
Common, that is unclean. See the annotation, Mark 7. 2.

The answer.
An Hebraisme, because they thought that the things used commonly of
uncircumcised nations were unclean, as also they esteemed of the uncircumcised
persons them selves.

Romans 14. 14.
The text.
But to him that supposes any thing to be common, to him it is common.

The note.
Though he wish the weak to be borne withal, yet he utters his mind
plainly, that in deed all the meats forbidden and unclean in the law, are
now through Christ cleansed and lawful for every man to use.

The answer.
As Paul was plain in delivering his doctrine concerning days and meats, so
the papists doctrine thereof is obscure, dark, and doubtful, so that the
greatest number of their simple followers have their consciences snarled and
entangled in days and meats, and know not the indifferency of them.

Romans 15. 4.
The text.
For what things soever have been written, to our learning they are written:
that by patience and consolation of the scriptures we may have hope.

The note.
He means all that is written in the old Testament, Pope Paul the second
esteemed all that were learned for heretics, and d^dwish the Romans to set
their children no longer to school, but till they could write and read,
Platina.
much more all things written in the new Testament are for our learning and
comfort.

The answer.
If both the Scriptures of the old and new Testament be written for our
learning, what means the church of Rome neither to provide teachers in number
sufficient, nor yet to suffer the people to read them in a language that they
may understand: is it not because you are content to have men nusseled in
ignorance, and so spoiled of the comfort which God has provided for them. I
think pope Paul and you be of one judgment.

Romans 15. ^.
The text.
And the God of patience and of comfort give you to be of one mind one toward
another according to Jesus Christ, that of one mind with one mouth you may
glorify God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The note.
Unity in religion commended.

The answer.
Popish unity consists in this, that service be in one language through
Christendom, whether people understand it or no: Otherwise what untie is and
has been in your religion, they that are acquainted with your writers and
stories can tell. As for example your great professor Martinius, whilst he is
carried with an envious stomach to carpe at our English translations, does
condemn yours in more then an hundred places. But I confess howsoever you
have dissented in other things, you have held, and do hold a marvelous unity
against al verity, and that is the cause that not one of you makes any
conscience of lieng. And though there are amongst us also some contentions, yet
they are not about weighty points of doctrine, for therein is a very great
consent, but such as has happened amongst the Apostles them selves, and are
all about bearing with, or rooting out some leauings of yours.

Romans 15. 8.
The text.
For I say Christ Jesus to have been minister of the circumcision, for the
verity of God to confirm the promises of the fathers.

The note.
Christ did execute his office and ministry only toward the people of
circumcision, that is, the Jews.

The answer.
This note is true, but yet so as that in diverse Christ before showed the
calling of the Gentiles.

Romans 15. 25.
The text.
Now therefore I will go to Jerusalem to minister to the Saints.

The note.
He means the holy persons, that having forsaken all their goods for Christ,
were wholly converted to serve the Lord with all their mind. Saint Hierome
against Vigilantius the heretic, reprehending the alms given to such, as do
the heretics also of our time.

The answer.
What heretics of our time find fault with releeuing the needy saints of
God, but you mean them that justly find fault that a great number of roging
Friars, being lusty, and able to get their living by the sweat of their
brows, should be relieved, and so devour and consume that which is due to the
poor, needy, sick and impotent people, contrary to the precept of Paul: He
that labors not, let him not eat. But at Jerusalem there were then none of
those, that professed witfull poverty.

Romans 15. 30.
The text.
I beseech you therefore brethren by our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the charity
of the holy Ghost, that you help me in your prayers for me to God.

The note.
In that the Apostle desires to be prayed for, we may be moved to seek the
same as a great benefit.

The answer.
The prayers of the faithful are very forcible helps to advance forward the
good desires and endeavors of Gods ministers.

Romans 16. 3.
The text.
Salute Prisca and Aquila my helpers in Christ Jesus.

The note.
The only salutation of so worthy a man is sufficient to fill him with great
grace that is saluted. Chrysostom. in 2. Timoth. 4.

The answer.
I marvel you are not ashamed to allege the doctors for that which you your
selves believe not. Can any man by saluting bestow Gods graces, where it
pleases him to salute? The fathers prove the holy Ghost to be God, because
the gifts and graces of God are distributed as he will. And I pray you how much
inferior do you make Paul to the spirit of God, if his salutation be sufficient
to fill with graces, whom it pleases him to salute? Well let your note have
that credit, that Chrysostoms bare word without further matter may give it.

Romans 16. ^.
The text.
Who for my life have laid down their necks, to whom not only I give thanks,
but also the churches of the Gentiles, and their domestical church.

The note.
This domestical church was either that faithful and Christian household, or
rather the Christians meeting together there, and in such good houses to hear
divine service, and the Apostles preaching in those times of persecution.

The answer.
Why do you not in stead of divine service, say mattens and mass? For we now
understand by divine service, that they prayed together in a tongue they
understood, and that likewise some parcel of scripture was read, which was by
their Apostles or pastors interpreted to them. Which how far it disagreeth with
the manner and custom of your church, he that has half an eye may see

Romans 16. 15.
The text.
Salute Philologus, and Iulia, Nereus, and his sister, and Olympias, and all
the saints that are with them.

The note.
The protestants here reason thus: Peter is not here saluted, Therefore he was
never at Rome. See the annotation.

The answer.
You slander the protestants. Their manner of reasoning is not so loose. They
reason thus: Paul who so carefully reckoned and saluted the chief and
principal Christians at Rome by name, would not have forgotten Peter as the
principal and chief, if he had then been there. Therefore it is very likely,
that he was not then there, because he was not then saluted. We know that it is
not material, whether Peter were at Rome or no, or whether he were bishop
there or no. And therefore they are not points that we greatly stick on. But
those that tell the time of his coming thither, and how long he lived, they
are manifestly confuted by the truth of the word, against which no credit of
men can stand. For his being bishop there, the consent is not so great as you
Thrasonically brag of. For some hold that neither he was bishop there, nor made
the first bishop there. Some make Paul as much bishop there as Peter. That
Peter might then be out of the city, ^^emeus. Eusebius lib. 4. cap. 6.
Ecclesiasticae historiae.
either for persecution, or business, or else that being there, Paul might
write other letters, wherein this might be enclosed, are but your surmises,
wanting both testimony of antiquity, and al probability.

Romans 16. 17.
The text.
And I desire you brethren, to mark them that make dissentions and scandals
contrary to the doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them.

The note.
Of the prince of the Apostles says Theodoret upon this place.

The answer.
Why we should think they learned of Peter, I see no reason. But for that
which you would have the simple believe, that by the word which it pleases you
to translate prince, Peter's supremacy above the other Apostles is meant, they
are to be admonished that the fathers give the same name to Paul as well as to
Peter, whereby it appears, that they thought not of any such supreme power or
authority: which also is not only manifest by the continual practice of the
first church, but also by plain speeches of the fathers. Eusebius says,
Ecclesiastica historia. lib. 20. cap. 1.
that neither Peter nor John took upon them to be chief over the Apostles,
but gave the primacie to James whom they made bishop of the Apostles. Cyprian
says, that all the Apostles were equal in authority. Ambrose cannot tell of
Peter and Paul whether of them he may prefer. By this it is evident, De
simplicitate praelatorum sermon. 66.
that the fathers meant not by reverend titles they gave Peter, to exalt him in
authority above the rest.

Romans 16. 18.
The text.
For such do not serve Christ our Lord, but their own belly: and by sweet
speeches and benedictions seduce the hearts of the innocents.

The note.
The special way that heretics have ever had to beguile was and is by sweet
words and gaie speeches, which their sheeps coat see before described
particularly in the annotation upon Saint. Matthew. cap. 7. verse. 15.

The answer.
Is there any way of beguiling that papists want? Did ever any in the world
provide better for their bellies? Did you not make of Saint Peter's keys,
picklockes to rob every man's coffers with them? Extraordinary tokens of
fained holiness where shall a man look for them, if he find them not in your
Jesuits, and friars? filed and fine speeches are your study. And that they
may be more admired, and better able to deceive, you keep from the people the
key of knowledge, you nuzell them in ignorance to the end, they should not be
able to discern words from matter.

1. Corinthians.
1. Cor. 1. 1^.
The text.
And I mean this, for that every one of you says, I certes am Paul's, and I
Apollos, but I Cephas, and I Christ's.

The note.
The beginning of schisms is over much admiring, and addicting men's selves to
their own particular masters.

The answer.
We have one master, that is to say Christ, him we profess to follow, and of
him to learn: others of what godliness or estimation so ever we follow, but so
far forth as they followed Christ. If admiring of men, and addicting men's
selves to particular masters, be the beginning and cause of schisms: Then what
can you say for your Austen friars, your Dominicans, your Franciscans, your
Jesuits, your schoolmen, your Thomists, your Scotists, why they should not go
for schismatikes? Have they not the authors of their their sects in admiration?
Have they not addicted themselves to their particular masters? Antoninus de
Dominico.
Have they not devised a number of untruths to bring their masters into
admiration, and estimation? What though there be some kind of consent amonst
them, yet that excuses them not from being schismatikes, no more then the
consent of Pharisees, Sadduces, and other sectaries of the Jews against
Christ, and his truth, did excuse them.

1. Cor. 3. 2.
The text.
As it were to little ones in Christ, I gave you milk to drink, not meat: for
you could not as yet. But neither can you now verily, for yet you are carnal.

The note.
The church only has truth both in her milk, and in her bread, that is
whether she instruct the perfect or imperfect, who are called carnal. Aug.
lib. 15. cap. 3. contra Faustum.

The answer.
If you went not about with the name of the church to beguile the simple, as
though thereby your church were understood, we needed not to give this any
answer. But now to avoid your deceit we (as we learn of Augustine) admonish
all men by the scriptures to judge of the church, Augustine. de ^^mtate Ecclesie
capite. 4.
least therein being deceived, they in steed of milk and bread receive strong
poison.

1. Cor. 3. 9.
The text.
For we are Gods coadiutors: you are Gods husbandry, you are Gods building.

The note.
A marvelous dignity of spiritual pastors, that they be not the only
instruments, or ministers of Christ, but also Gods coadiutors in the work of
our salvation.

The answer.
I have not hitherto neither carped at your old translator, neither yet at your
translation, neither will I begin here, though I might. Only this I would have
all men to observe diligently, that in this dignity, which God has bestowed
upon men to use their labor, 1. Cor. 3. 5.
and pains in his work, men do use strength not natural but conferred by
grace, that they may be apt, and fit instruments to advance forward Gods work,
so that they have nothing of themselves, in themselves to glory of. And
further, that all that which is chief in this work, 1. Cor. 3. 7
as all increase of goodness, salvation, and life do so proceed from God, as
that therein he uses no man's help, but his own.

1. Cor. 4. 6.
The text.
But these things brethren I have transfigured, into my self and Apollo for
you: that in us you may learn, one not to be puffed up against another, above
that is written.

The note.
Lo when he named himself, and Apollo, and Cephas: he meant other seditious and
factious preachers, whose names he spared.

The answer.
We see rather that those which are seditious and factious, do for their
better winning of credit, shroud them selves under the names of those which be
famous for godliness and learning. And so it is like that they did at Corinth,
and that the Apostle correcting the fault, was content to spare their names,
that by that mild dealing he might the better win them, if it were possible.

1. Cor. 4. 15.
The text.
For if you have ten thousand paedagogues in Christ, yet not many fathers.

The note.
So may Saint Augustine our Apostle say to us English men.

The answer.
The reader is here to understand, that our papists mean Augustine the monk,
and not Augustine the famous doctor, and that this Augustine was no Apostle,
for that he was not sent us immediately from God, but from a mere man. This
Augustine found in this Island better Christians then he made any, whom because
they could not like that gallie mawfrie which he brought from Rome, he caused
to be most cruelly murdered in great numbers. And yet this is to be noted
also, that a great number of our popish corruptions in his time were neither
bred nor borne, as for example the universality of the popes power and
transubstantiation.

1. Cor. 5. 2.
The text.
And you are puffed up, and have not mourned rather, that he might be taken
away from among you, that has done this deed.

The note.
Christian men should be sorrowful to see grievous offenses borne withal, and
ought zealouslie to seek the offenders punishment by excommunication.

The answer.
This note agrees not with the open practice of your church of Rome, wherein
not only Curtisans are maintained for money, but also the sin of Sodom both
freely practiced, and also praised and commended.

1. Cor. 5. 9.
The text.
I wrote to you in an Epistle, not to keep company with fornicators.

The note.
Either this epistle in the words before, or some other.

The answer.
I take it to be some other, for that I see no reason to lead me to think it
to be this.

1. Cor. 5. 11.
The text.
But now I wrote to you, not to keep company, if he that is named a brother,
be a fornicator, or a covetous person, or a seruer of idols, or a railer, or a
drunkard, or an extortioner: with such a one not so much as take meat.

The note.
A notorious wilful corruption in the Bible 1562. translating in the verse
before idolaters, and here worshippers of images, the Apostles word being one
(...), idolater.

The answer.
A marvelous judgment of God is upon you, that contrary to the express
commandment of God, and contrary to the whole course of scriptures, you
maintain that worshipping of images is not idolatry. Your quarrel to the
translation is answered by Doctor Fulke against Martinius. As for your selves
you bow to the wood, whereof part has served to warm men, Esai. 44. 18, 19.
and part to dress their meat: deny it if you can.

1. Cor. 6. 2.
The text.
Or know you not that the saints shall judge of the world?

The note.
The faithful judge and give sentence with God at the latter day, specially
the Apostles and the perfect Christians that have forsaken all for Christ's sake.

The answer.
The promise of judging the world is general to all true christians, and not
restrained to perfect Christians. But that is intolerable, that you plant the
perfection of Christians in them selves, that is, in their own doing, whereas
our perfection is the doing and perfect obedience of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.

1. Cor. 6. 10.
The text.
Do not err, neither fornicators, nor seruers of idols, nor adulterers, nor
the effoeminate, nor the liers with mankind, nor thieves, nor the covetous,
nor drunkards, nor ra^^ers, nor extortioners shall possess the kingdom of God.

The note.
For this the English Bible 1562. falselie translateth worshippers of images.

The answer.
A fool must be always plaieng with his babble, your quarrel is not worth the
answering so often. An idol in Greek is the same that we call image in English:
but you can not abide that an image should be called an image, but you can
abide to commit as gross and foul idolatry, as ever there was any in the
world.

1. Cor. 6. 18.
The text.
Every sin whatsoever a man does is without the body: but he that does
fornicate, sins against his own body.

The note.
Fornication is not only an enemy to the soul, but wastes, weakeneth,
corrupts, and defiles the body, more properly and directly than any other
sins do.

The answer.
Your note is true, and yet some of your side do prefer fornication before
marriage in some persons, and all your priests refuse the remedy, Smith de
votis and cae^batu.
that God himself has ordained against fornication.

1. Cor. 7. 5.
The text.
Defraud not one another, except perhaps by consent for a time, that you may
give your self to prayer: and return again together, least satan tempt you
for your incontinencie.

The note.
If the lay man can not pray, unless he abstain from his wife: the priest
that always must offer sacrifices, and always pray, must therefore always be
free from matrimony. Hierom lib. 1. c. 19. cont. Iouin.

The answer.
Will you admit all Ieroms reasons in that book to be good? I know you will
not. Amongst other this is a very loose one: Remember I pray you your own note
upon the first to the Romans. He is said to pray continually, that every day at
some certain time prays. Therefore there is no such necessity for any man
to abstain continually from marriage, because married men may very well have
time for both the duties.

1. Cor. 7. 8.
The text.
But I say to the unmarried, and to widows: it is good for them if they so
abide even as I also.

The note.
Before he treated of the continency of such as were married, now he gives
lessons for the unmarried also.

The answer.
But you refuse to learn both the one and the other. For neither you will
admit every man to have his own wife, neither yet will you leave the
profession of virginity to be taken or left, as every man feeeleth in himself
strength, for that to be given to him, or not to be given to him of God.

1. Cor. 7. 23.
The text.
You were bought with price, be not made the bond men of men.

The note.
You must not serve men, so that you obey or please them more than God.

The answer.
The pope exacteth that service, his extollers, flatterers, and clawbacks
bestow it upon him: and generally all papists under that color and pretense,
withdraw even their lawful obedience from their sovereigns and lawful
princes.

1. Cor. 7. 28.
The text.
Art thou loose from a wife, seek not a wife. But if thou take a wife thou
have not sinned.

The note.
Virginity counseled as the better, marriage not forbidden, because it is no
sin.

The answer.
Why have you not thrust virginity in amongst your sacraments, since you hold
it absolutely better than matrimony? You speak very nicely of marriage, being
one of your sacrements: Uirginitie counseled, marriage not forbidden. The
reasons, because virginity is the better, but marriage no sin. Is that the
best reason you can give for the not forbidding of marriage, or can you afford
it no better commendation? Is marriage a sacrament, and no where counseled nor
commanded? Sure that were very strange. The admirers of virginity make
marriage no better than sin. For the end of it is death, says Ierom in his
first book against Iouinian. But to leave your fancies of marriage and
virginity, this I say, that either of them is better than other, as time,
place, persons, and other circumstances do serve for the choice of the one or
the other. Marriage is the holy ordinance of the almighty, commanded to all
that have not the gift of continency. Uirginitie is a virtue rare only to be
kept of those, to whom God has given special gifts for that purpose.

1. Cor. 7. 40.
The text.
But more blessed shall she be, if she so remain according to my counsel. And
I think that I also have the spirit of God.

The note.
The state of widowhood more blessed than the state of matrimony.

The answer.
This also is not absolute, but in respect of many encumbrances that commonly
accompany the married.

1. Cor. 8. ^.
The text.
Knowledge puffs up, but charity edifieth.

The note.
Knowledge without charity puffs up in pride, and profits nothing at all:
when it is joined with charity then it edifieth. Aug. lib. 9. ciuit. Dei. cap.
20.

The answer.
Here again saint Augustine might have been spared, for you have given
testimony sufficient of your reading.

1. Cor. 9. 5.
The note.
Have not we power to lead about a woman a sister, as also the rest of the
Apostles, and our Lords brethren, and Cephas?

The note.
He names Cephas (that is Peter) to prove his purpose by the example of the
chief and prince of the Apostles. Saint Ambrose. Saint Chrysostom. Oecum. upon
this place.

The answer.
You play altogether the sophisters, to rack a word or two beyond the meaning
of the writers. I have told you before that it was no piece of their meaning to
give to Peter any sovereignty over the rest of the Apostles, as well because
they give those additions to others as to Peter, as also for that in express
words they make all the Apostles equal in authority, and of Paul and Peter
they know not whether of them to prefer. But what need we fathers, are not
the scriptures in this case plain? did not James, Peter, Galat. 2 9.
and John give to Paul and Barnabas the right hands (not of sovereignty) but
of society, 2. Cor. 11. 5.
and Paul esteemed not him self inferior to the best and chiefest of the
Apostles? And if your desire for Peter were granted, yet for the Bishop of
Rome you were never the nigher your purpose.

1. Cor. 9. 9.
The text.
For it is written in the Law of Moises, Thou shall not muzzel the mouth of the
ox that treads out the corn.

The note.
In that country they did tread out their corn with oxen, as we do thresh it
out.

The answer.
A needless note, for what could any man else imagine of it?

1. Cor. 9. 13.
The text.
Know you not that they which work in the holy place, eat the things that
are of the holy place, and they that serve the altar participate with the
altar?

The note.
The English Bible (1562) here and in the next chapter says thrice for altar,
temple most falselie and hereticallie against holy altars, which about the
time of that translation were dug down in England.

The answer.
An oversight we grant, but false or heretical meaning we deny. For if these
places make nothing for your altars, how could the leaving out of the word
altar be of purpose against your altars. Besides, the translator sufficiently
clears him self of any such purpose, in that in diverse and sundry places,
he translateth altars, as he finds it. For it had been to very small
purpose in a place or two to shun the name of altars, and to retain them in
infinite other places.

1. Cor. 9. 2^.
The text.
To all men I became all things, that I might save all.

The note.
Not by fiction or simulation, but by compassion of the infirmities of all
sorts. August. epist. 9.

The answer.
A very good and necessary example for those which labor in the word, to
bear so far as they lawfully may, or can with the infirmities of many, to
the end to win and gain them to God.

1. Cor. 10. 1^.
The text.
Therefore he that thinks him self to stand, let him take heed least he fall.

The note.
It is profitable to all, or in a manner to all for to keep them in humility,
not to know what they shall be, says Saint Augustine, which makes against the
vain security of the protestants.

The answer.
You allege Saint Augustine at randon without telling us where we might find
this place, which makes me to doubt that it is but some patch of a place,
which being violently pulled from that which goes before, and from that which
follows, may seem to make for that which he meant not. In which conjecture,
whether in this place true or false, yet I do you none injury. First, because
Augustine gives me occasion so to conjecture, whom I suppose in this point not
to be against him self, who always teaches christians not to doubt of that
which God has promised them. Secondly, your selves have often given occasion
of this conjecture, who many times make the fathers seem to speak that,
which they never meant, as both already has been showed, and hereafter shall
be showed in these answers to your marginall notes.

1. Cor. 11. 2.
The text.
And I praise you brethren, that in all things you be mindful of me: and as I
have delivered unto you, you keep my precepts.

The note.
In the Greek traditions (...).

The answer.
Could not your vulgar translator abide traditions, or has the Greek word
some other signification? Against us Martinius makes many and mighty
outcries if we do not always translate it tradition. He cannot abide that we
should learn any more significations of the word. And all the stur is to give
some color to your unwritten verities.

^. Cor. 11. ^5.
The text.
For I received of our Lord that which also I have delivered unto you, that our
Lord Jesus in the night that he was betrayed took bread, etc.

The note.
The Apostles drift in all that he says here is against unworthy receiving
(as S. Augustine also notes ep. 118. cap. 3.) and not to set out the whole
order of ministration, as the heretics do ignorantly imagine.

The answer.
Saint Augustine does not say, that the whole order of the administration of
the Lords supper is not to be gathered hence. For if the whole institution of
Christ, be not a direction to us for that, whence shall we have it? But it is
best for you to stand upon denial of this, because you break the whole
institution of Christ. How did Paul deliver that which he received of the
Lord, if he delivered not the order of the administration of the sacrament? did
not Christ leave unto his church an order for it? Though the Apostles drift
here be agianst vnreuerent and unworthy receiving, yet that could not be
better reformed, then by teaching the reverend and orderly use of it. But
because you have in your larger annotations bestowed great labor about this
point, therefore I refer it over to the answer of them.

1. Cor. 12. 8.
The text.
To one certes by the spirit is given the word of wisdom, and to another the
word of knowledge according to the same spirit: to another faith in the same
spirit, etc.

The note.
All these gifts be those, which the learned call gratias gratis da^as, which
be bestowed often upon evil livers, which have not the other graces of God,
whereby their persons should be grateful, just, and holy in his sight.

The answer.
That these graces which are here recited are freely given many times to the
wicked is manifest, and confessed of all. But that which you would secretly
insinuate, that the other graces whereby men are made grateful, just, and holy
in Gods sight, are not freely given, but to those that procure them by works
preparatorie, or to them that deserve them by inherent justice, is manifestly
and directly opposite to the Scriptures, Romans 3. 24. Ephesians. 2. 8.

1. Cor. 12. 1^.
The text.
For as the body is one, and has many members, and all the members of the
body whereas they be many, yet are one body: so also Christ.

The note.
A marvelous union betwixt Christ and his church, and a great comfort to all
catholics being members thereof, that the church and he the head and the body
make and be called one Christ. Aug. de vnita Eccl.

The answer.
A marvelous good note, wherein only this heed is to be taken, that men be not
deceived by ioining themselves to those that are catholics in name, and not in
deed. Which it is impossible otherwise to avoid, then by holding fast the
society of them, that embrace and keep that form of doctrine, which was
delivered to the church by the apostles, whom all parts confess to be true
catholics.

1. Cor. 12. 28.
The text.
Are all apostles? are all prophets? are all doctors? are all miracles? have
all the grace of doing cures, etc.

The note.
Saint Augustine ep. 137. gives the same reason, why miracles and cures be
done at the memories or bodies of some saints, more then at others, and by the
same saints in one place of their memories, rather then at other places.

The answer.
Augustine was a man, sometimes, as well as others, deceived by illusions. For
why should not the same saints memories be honored with miracles in Africa,
as well as in Italy? For it was not to places, but to persons, that the gift
of doing miracles was granted. How much trulier wrote Augustine that miracles
were not suffered to endure to his time, August. 1. r^tract. cap. 13.
least men should always seek visible confirmations, and least men should
wax cold by the commonnes of those things, by the strangenes whereof they were
first enflamed.

1. Cor. 13. 2.
The text.
And if I should have prophecy, and knew all mysteries, and all knowledge, and
if I should have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not
charity I am nothing.

The note.
This proves that faith is nothing worth to salvation without works, and
that there may be true faith without charity.

The answer.
It is strange that when in the former chapter you have set faith among the
gifts that are given often unto the wicked, now the same faith being spoken of,
you would have it to be taken for the faith we speak of in the cause of
justification, and so consequently that it might be without charity: Whereas
there is as much difference between that faith, and this, as is betwixt the
belief of the omnipotent power of God, and affiance in his goodness. But admit
that that were granted you, which you so much desire, that a true faith were
here meant, how follows your reason? Is every supposition a proof? Saint
Paul says, if an angel from heaven teach an other gospel, etc. does it
follow that an angel from heaven may teach an other Gospel? do you not see
the vanity of your proof?

1. Cor. 13. 10.
The text.
But when that shall come that is perfect, that shall be made void that is in
part.

The note.
By this text Saint Augustine lib. 22. Ciu. cap. 29. proves that the saints
in heaven have more perfect knowledge of our affairs here, then they had
whiles they lived here.

The answer.
Saint Augustine there entreats of the knowledge and sight of God, which the
godly shall have after the resurrection of their bodies. And he speaks in
that place no word of the knowledge, that dead men have touching the affairs
of men living here, whiles this world endures. But touching that matter his
mind is, Despiritu and ^^^ma. cap. 29.
as he expresses it else where, that the saints in heaven know no more what we
do here, then we know what they do there. But you care not how you lie, so you
may turn men from God, to put confidence in creatures.

1. Cor. 13. 13.
The text.
And now there remain faith, hope, and charity, these three. But the greater
of these is charity.

The note.
Charity is of all three the greatest. How then does only faith, being
inferior to it, save, and justify, and not charity?

The answer.
I will not at all touch that charity is not simply the greatest, but in some
certain respects. But I will come to your reason. If faith justified by the
virtue and merit of it self, then your reason were somewhat, for then charity
being the greater virtue, should rather justify. But now when it is but an
instrument, to lay hold upon Christ our righteousness, your reason holds not.
Our hands are inferior to some other parts of man, yet our hands are the only
instruments, whereby we lay hold on, and use such weapons as serve for our
defense: And therefore men are called men of their hands.

1. Cor. 4. 14.
The text.
But if thou bless in the spirit, he that supplieth the place of the vulgar,
how shall he say Amen, upon thy blessing, because he knows not what thou
say?

The note.
By this word are meant all rude unlearned men, but specially the simple, which
were yet unchristened, as the Catechumens, which came into those spiritual
exercises, as also infidels did at their pleasures.

The answer.
By this word are meant all private men, for it is evident that except they
understood the public prayer and thanksgiving, they could not show forth
their assent by saying, Amen.

1. Cor. 15. 3.
The text.
For I delivered unto you first of all, which I also received: That Christ died
for our sins according to the Scriptures.

The note.
This delivery in the Latin, and Greek imports tradition, and so by
tradition did the Apostles plant the church in all truth, before they wrote any
thing.

The answer.
The controversy is not whether tradition, or writing was first: but whether
the apostles did not write as much as is necessary for us to know, and keep:
and whether traditions, which under their name you obtrude, be to be judged by
their writings, or not. As for that tradition he speaks of here, he
specifieth most plainly in writing, and therefore this can not make for your
unwritten verities, to the which you would feign impropriate the name of
traditions.

1. Cor. 15. 10.
The text.
But by the grace of God I am that which I am: and his grace in me has not
been void: but I have labored more abundantly then all they: yet not I but
the grace of God with me.

The note.
In him Gods grace is not void, that works by his freewill according to the
motion, and direction of the same grace.

The answer.
As you have drawn freewill from philosophy, so you plant grace in the room
of that, which the philosophers called right reason, and you give unto it no
more then they did to right reason, that is to move and direct the will. But
Paul on the contrary side so attributes all to grace, that he leaves nothing
to himself. I have labored (says he) yet not I, but the grace of God with me,
that is to say, which is with me.

1. Cor. 15. 14.
The text.
And if Christ be not risen again, then vain is our preaching, vain also is
your faith, and we are found also false witnesses of God, etc.

The note.
So we may say, if the catholic faith in all points be not true, then our
first apostles were false witnesses, then has our country believed in vain,
all this while are all our forefathers dead in their sins, and perished, which
presupposing Christ to be God, were the greatest absurdity in the world.

The answer.
And why did you not say, if the faith which the church of Rome at this day
professes, be not in all points true? for that we know you mean by the
Catholic faith: but you would have your words true, howsoever your meaning
was. But we deny your Romish faith to be the catholic faith. By our first
Apostles also you mean neither Peter nor Paul, nor any of Christ's Apostles,
but Augustine the monk pope Gregory's apostle: but if his doctrine were
Catholic, neither yours nor ours is in all points Catholic. For our
forefathers which you speak of, you mean those which lived of late years:
for those of elder time knew not your faith, they could not tell that the Pope
could not err, they thought him subject to the whole church, they knew nothing
of transubstantiation, of concomitance, and of a number of such toies as you of
late have coined. And therefore let men understand that the Catholic faith is
that, which Paul and Peter and the other Apostles of Christ left unto us,
taught in the scriptures, and that which the first church of Christ believed
and embraced at their hands, and which the church of Rome at this day
persecuteth, and then your note may stand untouched.

1. Cor. 15. 42.
The text.
For star differs from star in glory, so also the resurrection of the
dead.

The note.
The glory of the bodies of saints shall not be all alike, but different in
heaven according to men's merits.

The answer.
The Apostle puts no difference here between the glorified bodies of the
saints: but between the state of our bodies before the resurrection and after
the resurrection: betwixt which two states of the self same bodies, there
shall be as great difference, as betwixt the glory of the sun, and the glory
of any other star:: and therefore you do but according to your accustomed
order, wrest this text to bring men to put confidence in their own merits.

1. Cor. 15. 44.
The text.
It is sown a natural body, it shall rise a spiritual body.

The note.
As to become spiritual does not take away the substance of the body
glorified, no more when Christ's body is said to be in spiritual sort in the
sacrament, does it import the absence of his true body and substance.

The answer.
Hungry dogs eat durtie puddings, this stuff must serve where better can
not be had. Our bodies though spiritual and configured (as you call it) to the
body of his glory, yet are true bodies, and not in many places at once,
whereof it follows that Christ's body being a true glorified body, is not
in many places at once: for that can not stand with the truth of his body.

1. Cor. 15. 5^.
The text.
This I say (brethren) that flesh and blood can not possess the kingdom of
God, neither shall corruption possess incorruption.

The note.
Flesh and blood signify not here the substance of those things, but the
corrupt quality incident to them in this life by the fall of Adam.

The answer.
If you should light on men as froward and contentious as your selves, they
might with as great reason contend with you, for the litterall sense of flesh
and blood, as you do for the litterall sense of, This is my body, which speech
being of a Sacrament, you will by no means admit to be of the same nature, and
to have like interpretation as all other speeches of Sacraments have.

1. Cor. 16. 2.
The text.
In the first of the Sabbath, let every one of you put a part with him self,
laying up what shall well like him: that not when I come collections be made.

The note.
That is Sunday. Hierome q. 4. Hedibiae. So quickelie did the Christians keep
Sunday holy day, and assembled to divine service on the same.

The answer.
For Sunday, that it was appointed by the Apostles to be kept for the Saboath,
and that it was so solemnized in their times it is manifest, you needed not
Saint Hieroms authority for it, saving that you love to use the fathers where
you least need them.

1. Cor. 16* 8.
The text.
But I will tarry at Ephesus till Pentecost.

The note.
The heretics and other new fangled strive amongst themselves, whether
Pentecost signify here the term of fifty days, or else the Jews holy day
so called. But it comes not to their minds, that it is most like to be the
feast of Whit suntide, kept and instituted, even then by the Apostles, as
appears by the fathers. See Augustine epist 119. cap. 15. and 16. Ambrose in
cap. 17. Lucae.

The answer.
In Augustine I find certain mysteries in the number of fifty noted as well
out of the new testament, as out of the old, and that the feast of Pentecost
was in his time kept of Christians: but what was meant by it in this place, or
whether the Apostles did institute that feast to be kept of Christians or not,
I find nothing there. In Ambrose I find, that the beginning of the eighth week
after Easter makes the Pentecost, and that Paul in this place promised to
tarry till that time, and that they kept all the fifty days as Easter, but
whether by the apostles tradition or no, that is left uncertain. So we see not
by your fathers, that the apostles instituted the feast of Whitsuntide. But we
see that you love to trouble your selves and others with trifles.

1. Cor. 16. 2^.
The text.
If any man love not our Lord Jesus Christ, be he Anathema, Maran-atha.

The note.
That is, our Lord is come. Hierom ep. 173. Therefore Anathema to all that love
him not, or believe not. Theophilact. upon this place.

The answer.
In matter not in controversy betwixt us you make unnecessary show of
reading. If you did either in love or in faith wait for the coming of the
Lord, you would not wilfully serve his enemy, and oppose your selves to his
known truth.

2. Corinthians.
2. Cor. 2. 10.
The text.
For, my self, also that which I pardoned if I pardoned any thing for you in
the person of Christ: That we be not circumuented of satan. For we are not
ignorant of his cogitations.

The note.
(...). Though he did great penance, says Theodoret, yet he calls this
pardoning, (...), a grace, because his sin was greater than his penance.

The answer.
It is happy you will confess one man pardoned of grace, which had not by
gretnes of penance deserved it. Theodorets meaning was not to part his
pardoning betwixt penance and grace. And the text pr^^ueth clearly, that how
great testimonies so ever man gives of true repentance, yet remission and
pardon of sins is not merited, but proceeds merely of grace and favor.

2. Cor. 4. 17.
The text.
For that our tribulation, which presently is momentanie and light, works
above measure exceedingly an eternal weight of glory in us, we not
considering the things that are seen, but the things that are not seen.

The note.
The English bible 1577 does falsely translate Prepares.

The answer.
This translation although not so proper in word, yet all one in sense with the
rest, is already justified by master D. Fulke against Martinius. The reason
which he yields for your fault finding is to be noted: for it shows that
you would have that, which is momentanie and light, to deserve that, which is
eternal and of great weight, and so make a small matter to deserve eternal
life and glory. So lightly you think to come by heaven.

^ Cor. 5. 8.
The text.
But we are bold, and have a good will to be pilgrims rather from the body,
and to be present with our Lord.

The note.
This place proves, that the saints departed now since Christ sleep not,
till the day of judgment, and that they be not holden in any several place of
rest from the fruition of God, till the resurrection of their bodies, but that
they be present with God in their souls.

The answer.
You would say that this proves, that the souls of the saints sleep not
with their bodies till the day of judgment. I marvel much why the apostle
speaks nothing here of purgatory, since by your churches doctrine, the
souls of the greater part of Gods saints, after the earthly house of this
habitatio^ is dissolved, go for a time to the pains of purgatory: which is
directly against the apostles doctrine in this place delivered. For he
immediately after our dissolution, appoints us an house to dwell in, not for
a time, but eternally; nor in pugatorie, but in heaven; not severed from the
fruition of God, but in the presence of our Lord: from which he places none
absence, but whiles we are here in the body.

1* Cor. 5. 2^.
The text.
Him that knew no sin, for us he made sin, that we might be made the justice
of God in him.

The note.
That is to say, a sacrifice and an host for sin. See the last annot. of this
chapter.

The answer.
If men should here without all reason stick upon the letter, as you do in,
This is my body, what can you say for this exposition, that might not be
justly returned against you in that? Your annotation you send us unto, is a
childish cavil grounded upon this, that the scripture calls him just that
does justice. But does it call none else so. Luke 18. 14.
The publican departed better justified than the pharisie, I pray you what
justice had he done? God justifies the wicked. Romans 4. 5.
He is just, or blessed to whom God imputes no sin. The just man lives by
faith. Psalm. 33. 1.
So obtained the thief upon the cross to be justified and saved. You see then
that the Scripture speaks of some other kind of justice, besides that which
consists in our own doings. Leave therefore your foolish cauilling.

2. Cor. 5. 10.
The text.
As sorrowful, but always reioicing: as needy but enriching many: as having
nothing, and possessing all things.

The note.
Saint Augustine (in Ps. 113) gathers hereby, that the Apostles did vow
poverty.

The answer.
Wilful poverty because you see no reason to gather it out of this place, you
make Saint Augustine your buckler for it: but I think your note book deceived
you. I take it that there is no such matter in the exposition of that Psalm.
But he says there, that in calling images by the names of those whom God
created, men turn the truth of God into a lie, and that their form, and
shape, their honorable placing, and setting a loft in the church has more
force to draw people to idolatry, then the consideration that they have no
life, nor use of their parts and members has to induce men to the contrary. I
do not remember that I have read any thing in Augustine that favors wilful
poverty. But in his book of the work of moonkes, he is very earnest against
such idle bellies, as thought it unlawful for them to gain any thing by work
or labor, but would live altogether upon the offerings and liberality of
others, and he both tells them that they refuse to obey the Apostle Paul, and
confuteth their foolish reasons.

2. Cor. 6. 14.
The text.
Bear not the yoke with infidels.

The note.
It is not lawful for catholics to marry with heretics, and infidels. See
S. Hier. c^ont. Iouian lib. Cocil. Laod. cap. 10. and 31.

The answer.
It is not lawful for catholics to marry with papists, or other heretics,
or infidels. For this there needs no authority of men, for the word of God is
plain, and it is not called into question.

^. Cor. 7. 10.
The text.
For the sorrow that is according to God, works penance unto salvation that is
stable: but the sorrow of the world works death.

The note.
Contrition, or sorrowful lamenting of our offenses, is the cause of salvation.
Not only faith then saves as the heretics affirm.

The answer.
You deceive your selves, and others whiles of every consequence you make a
cause. It is very true that faith and repentance must be joined companions in
them that shall be saved, and yet neither of both properly the cause of
salvation.

2. Cor. 8. 5.
The text.
And not as we hoped, but their own selves they gave first to the Lord, then
to us by the will of God.

The note.
The principal respect next after God is to be had of our masters in religion,
in all temporal and spiritual duties.

The answer.
If there were not just cause of suspicion of your evil and lewd mind, and
meaning, this note might pass without controlement, as an hyperbolicall
speech, tending to the reverence and credit of Gods ministers. But because your
whole course of dealing bewrateth manifestly, that you seek to prefer your
pope, and your selves to be regarded and respected above princes in temporal
duties, therefore the reader is to be admonished, that that meaning proceeds
out of devilish pride, and has no ground nor warrant out of this place. For
the Apostle here does nothing else, but commend the liberality of the
Macedonians, in contributing to the relief of Gods afflicted saints. Whereby
they gave good testimony, that they had wholly addicted themselves to God, to
be ruled, and advised by the Apostle, and other ministers of Gods word. All
which the Apostle does to that end to stir up them of Achaia to the like
liberality.

2. Cor. 9. 4.
The text.
Least when the Macedonians shall come with me, and find you unready, we (that
may not ye) may be ashamed in this substance.

The note.
That is, in this matter of alms. Chrysostom. Theophilact.

The answer.
This is well noted, you might have spared your fathers.

2. Cor. 9. 9.
The text.
As it is written, he distributed, he gave to the poor, his justice remains
for ever.

The note.
The fruit of alms is the increase of grace in all justice and good works to
life everlasting: God giving these things for reward and recompense of
charitable works, which therefore be called the seed or meritorious causes of
these spiritual fruits.

The answer.
I pray you tell us how you collect this? What necessary consequence out of
this place you can make thereof? Otherwise we must esteem it, as we esteem
of the most part of your other notes, as of collections tied to your texts with
points, that will scant hold the tieng.

2. Cor. 11. 2.
The text.
For I have despoused you to one man, to present you a chaste virgin unto
Christ.

The note.
The Apostles and their successors did despouse the people whom they converted,
to Christ, in all purity and chastity of truth, and wholly undefiled, and void
of error and heresy.

The answer.
The pope and his clergy do despouse the people whom they seduce, to the
purpled whore of Babylon, in all spiritual impuritie and fornication, and
untruth full of error and lies.

2. Cor. 11. 4.
The text.
For if he that comes, preach another Christ, whom we have not preached, or
you receive another spirit, whom you have not received: or another Gospel which
you have not received: you might well suffer it.

The note.
The note of a false teacher to come, that is without lawful calling or
sending to thrust and intrude him self in another man's charge.

The answer.
This note is true, but not well collected out of this text. For I suppose you
do not think, that false teachers may well be suffered. But howsoever you have
gathered it, your note does most lively describe your wandering Jesuits and
seminary priests, which without all lawful calling or sending, do secretly
thrust themselves into other men's charges, preach a new Christ, and a new
Gospel unheard of in the days of Paul.

2. Cor. 11. 13.
The text.
For such Apostles are crafty workers, transfiguring themselves into Apostles
of Christ.

The note.
A proper term for heretics, that shape themselves into the habit of true
teachers, specially by often allegation and commendation of the scriptures.
Read the notable admonition of the ancient writer Vincentius Lirinensis in his
golden book, against the profane novelties of all heresies.

The answer.
It is indeed a proper term, and no heretic ever did bear a more glorious
show than the papist. Uincentius Lirinensis was careful both to avoid all
heresies himself, and also to admonish others to take heed thereof. His
lessons be good, such as we practice, and you refuse. For first he allows the
canonical scriptures as perfect and sufficient to determine al controversies,
which you refuse. Secondly, to avoid the wrangling of heretics about the true
interpretation of them, he adioineth tradition: which he does not take to be
unwritten verities not spoken of in the scriptures (as you do) but for the
sense and interpretation of them, which was held and believed in the first
churches planted by the Apostles, by the Apostles I say, and their coadiutors
direction. Thirdly, he thinks that not only the men of greatest fame and
estimation in the church might err, but also that the whole or greatest part
of the visible church might err (contrary to your assertion) which hold that
the church cannot err, and that in that case he that will not be carried into
error with multitude and company, must repair unto antiquity, which is far
from suspicion of profane novelty, even as we at this day appeal to the
scriptures, and primitive church. Now then if you will be judged by his rules,
it will appear that papists are crafty workers, and so consequently
heretics, and bringers in of profane novelties.

2. Cor. 11. 28.
The text.
My daily instance, the earefulnes of all churches.

The note.
(...), S. Chrysostom and Theophilact interpret it of daily conspiracy against
him. Others of the multitude of cares instant, and urgent upon him.

The answer.
Your latter exposition whereof you keep close the authors, is the better, and
to be preferred because it is Paul's own, who so interprets his own meaning
in the next words following.

2. Cor. 12. 2.
The text.
I know a man in Christ above fourteen years ago, whether in body I know
not, or out of the body I know not, God does know, such a one rapt even into
the third heaven.

The note.
By this we may prove that it is neither impossible, incredible, nor indecent,
that is reported by ancient fathers, of some that have been ravished, or rapt
(whether in body or out of the body God knows) and brought to see the state
of the next life as well of the saved, as of the damned.

The answer.
Because that which has been done may be done, and it is neither impossible
nor incredible, must we therefore believe all fabulous narrations, whereof
great number are forged under the names of fathers, others too readily
received and believed of men, not espieng at that time the subtlety of the
devil in working those illusions? If this foundation fail you, your purgatory
goes to the ground. Paul utters nothing of that he heard and saw there,
because they were secrets unlawful to be uttered. Shall not that condemn the
rash boldness of others, that take upon them to utter and tell all, and more
then all?

2. Cor. 12. 21.
The text.
Least again when I come God humble me amongst you, and I mourn many of them
that sinned before, and have not done penance for the uncleanness, fornication,
and incontinencie that they have committed.

The note.
(...), which Saint Augustine (epist. 108.) is spoken here of doing great
penance for heinous sins, as paenitents did in the Primitive church. So that
it is not only to repent or amend their lives as protestants translate it.

The answer.
You have been often enough answered for our translations in this case. If
amendment of life and true repentance could be without any tokens or
testimonies of hearty grief, and sorrow for sins passed, then your quarrel
might have some probable show in it, but now it has utterly none. Penitents in
the primitive church did but give testimony unto the church of their hearty
and unfeigned repentance, and not (as you would have men imagine) satisfy for
their sins, and deserve at Gods hand remission and pardon thereof. Augustine
never dreamed of any such matter: but he wrote against the Nouatians, who
denied repentance to them that sinned after they were baptized, against whom he
proves by the example of Peter which had denied Christ, and by the authority
of this present text, that men after baptism were not to be excluded from
repentance, and so maintains the custom of the church in admitting
penitents, which had been before for their faults excommunicated: what is this
to that you allege him for against our translation?

2. Cor. 13. 10.
The text.
Therefore these things I write absent, that being present I may not deal
hardly, according to the power which our Lord has given me unto edification,
and not unto destruction.

The note.
Ecclesiastical power to punish offenders by the censures of the church.

The answer.
Which power we reverence and keep offenders in awe withal, though we
contemn and despise the usurped power of the Romish church, and care not for
her thunderbolts.

GALATHIANS.
Galat. 1. 6.
The text.
I marvel that you are so soon transferred from him that called into the
grace of Christ, unto another Gospel, which is not another unless there be
some that trouble you, and will inuert the Gospel of Christ.

The note.
New Gospellers that pervert, corrupt, or alter the one only true and first
delivered Gospel are to be avoided. See Saint Augustine contra Faust. libro
32. cap. 27.

The answer.
The Gospel of God is the power of God to salvation to every believer,
whosoever therefore does preach any power of pope, of man, of freewill, or of
any other creature or thing whatsoever, to salvation, preaches a new
Gospel, and not the Gospel of God, and therefore are to be avoided. The whole
doctrine therefore of the Popes church is to be avoided, for it is nothing else
but a new coined Gospel. Your note book still deceives you, there are not so
many chapters in that book.

Galat. 1. 19.
The text.
But other of the Apostles saw I none, saving James the brother of our Lord.

The note.
Saint James was called our Lords brother, after the Hebrew phrase of the
Jews, by which near kinsemen are called brethren, for they were not brethren
in deed, but rather sisters children.

The answer.
If upon this you should meet with men as froward as your selves are, in
expounding this is my body, they might make you work by not admitting any
interpretation, and therefore you might see how fond a thing it is so to stick
to the letter, that you will not admit the mind of the speaker.

Galat. 2. 11.
The text.
And when Cephas was come to Antioch I resisted him in face, because he was
reprehensible.

The note.
That is, in presence before them all, as Beza him self expounds it, yet the
English Bezites to the more disgracing of saint Peter, translate to his face.
No. Testamen. anno 1580.

The answer.
It is somewhat that once in your lives you are content to acknowledge that you
have learned somewhat of master Beza: but I think he should not have been
spoken of here, but to take occasion by him to utter your choler, and to ease
your stomach a little upon those, whom you call English Bezites, whose intent
(as you surmise) was in their translation, to disgrace S. Peter: As if it had
been greater disgrace to saint Peter, to be told of his fault to his face,
than to be told of it, and reproved for it in the presence of the multitude.
But howsoever it was, we see plainly S. Peter went awry, and brought others
into the like danger. And further we see that his authority was not so great,
but he might be reproved. Yet though the pope go headlong to hell, and lead
thousands of souls with him thither, no man may say, Why do thou this?

Gal. 2. 16.
The text.
But knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the
faith of Jesus Christ, we also believe in Jesus Christ, that we may be
justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law: for the
which cause, by the works of the law no flesh shall be justified.

The note.
By this, and by the discourse of the whole epistle you may perceive, that when
justification is attributed to faith, the works of charity are not excluded,
but the works of Moises law, that is, the ceremonies, sacrifices, and
sacraments thereof principally, and consequently all works done merely by
nature and free will, without the faith, grace, spirit and aid of Christ.

The answer.
Help, help, Paul has set the popes kitchen on fire. Our Rhemists bring
water, but it runs out by the way. For both by this, and the whole course of
this epistle, we see that this new Gospel into the which the Galathians were
translated, was a piece of popery: Namely, that they joined in the cause of
justification and salvation their works with Christ, and the law with the
gospel. But our Rhemists tell us first, that not the works of charity, but the
works of the law are excluded by S. Paul. As who should say, that there were
any works of love, that are not commanded in the law. And therefore if the
works of the law be excluded, the works of love and charity must be excluded
also. But to help this, they add that ceremonies, sacrifices, and sacraments
are meant principally. But against that, Paul makes him accursed, that abides
not in all that is written in the law to do it. If blessedness and justification
be our delivery from that curse, who seeeth not that the whole law, and every
part of it, and every work of it must be excluded? But further they add, that
al works done merely by nature and free will are excluded: wherein the word
merely is to be noted, because it expresses that their meaning is, if there
be a little help of faith or grace, that then works be not excluded. To the
which I say, this was the case of the Galathians, and the very matter against
the which the Apostle bends his whole force, for that they being Christians,
and so believers did not exclude their works, and merely ascribe their
justification to the grace of Christ: for that they parted the matter as the
papists do, betwixt Christ and their works, the whole manner of the Apostles
reasoning in the next chapter, does plainly show. And therefore I will
conclude with the Apostle; Ephesians* 2. 8.
By grace we are saved through faith, and that not of our selves, for it is the
gift of God, not of works, that no man glory.

Galat. 3. ^.
The text.
O senseless Galathians, who has bewitched you not to obey the truth, before
whose eyes, Jesus Christ was proscribed, being crucified among you?

The note.
For any people or person to forsake the faith of their first Apostles and
conversion, at the voice of a few nouellaries, seems to wise men a very
bewitching and senseless brutishnes. Such is the case of our poor country,
Germany, and others.

The answer.
That Rome has forsaken the faith and doctrine taught by their first Apostles
Paul and Peter, as this Epistle does most evidently testify, at the voice of
their most proud prelates: and that other countries have from thence tasted of
the same cup, seems, (not to wise worldlings) but to the spirit of God, and
to those that are thereby led and guided, a very bewitching, and yet withal
the just judgment of God upon those, that had not, or have not any love to the
truth. Thus have you most manifestly your note returned upon your selves. For
Paul and Peter were out of all doubt the Apostles of God, and the doctrine
delivered by them void of all filth, and corruptions.

Galat. 3. 7.
The text.
Know ye therefore that they that are of faith, the same are the children of
Abraham.

The text.
This faith whereby Abraham was justified, and his children, the Gentiles
believing in Christ, implies all Christian virtues of the which the first is
faith, the ground and foundation of all the rest, and therefore here and else
where often named of the Apostle.

The answer.
See your foul shifts, when we say faith justifies, then you urge against us
a dead faith void of all Christian virtues, yea you go farther, for you
affirm that all faith, and so consequently a true lively faith, may be without
charity. Again on the contrary side when the force, and plainnes of the text
drives you to confess justification by faith, then faith implies all
Christian virtues. So when it may serve your turn, things inseparable as true
faith, hope, and charity must be separated: and again for the like advantage,
things distinct must be confounded, and one must imply and comprehend an
other. But for answer we confess that faith is accompanied with all Christian
virtues, but neither they, nor faith do justify by their own virtue, or
merit, as qualities inherent, or resiant in us. But faith is said to justify,
because by it we apprehend, and lay hold upon Christ, and his righteousness,
which is thereby made ours, by Gods imputation. And this office is proper to
faith, and not to any other virtue.

Galat. 4. 3.
The text.
So we also, when we were little ones, were serving under the elements of the
world.

The note.
That is, the rudiments of religion wherein the carnal Jews were trained up,
or the corporal creatures, wherein their manifold sacrifices, sacraments, and
rites did consist.

The answer.
If the corporal creatures used in the multitude of their sacrifices,
sacraments, and rites, were an argument of their servile estate under the law:
then consider the great heap of rites, and ceremonies in your church, and see
whether they do not serve to bring Christians into servitude, and bondage
again, by making them to serve, under the elements of the world again. Naie
the state of the Jews was less servile, and more tolerable, both in respect
of number, and multitude of ceremonies, and in respect of the commander. For
the greater the dignity of the commander is, the more tolerable, and better is
the condition and state of the servant.

Galat. 4. 14.
The text.
And your tentation in my flesh you despised not, neither rejected, but as an
Angel of God, you received me as Christ Jesus.

The note.
So ought all catholic people receive their teachers in religion, with all
duty, love, and reverence.

The answer.
The name of catholic being to true catholics applied, we embrace your note.

Galat. 4. 29.
The text.
But as then he that was borne according to the flesh persecuted him that was
after the spirit, so now also.

The note.
This mutual persecution is a figure also of the church, justly persecuting
heretics: and contrariwise of the heretics (which be the children of the bond
woman) unjustly persecuting the catholic church* Augustine epist. 48.

The answer.
The text is plain, that he that is after the flesh, persecuted him which is
after the spirit, a plain figure of your persecuting church. The casting out
of the bondwoman and her son, done by Abraham, may be drawn by Augustine, or
some other father, to that purpose that you allege it.

Galat. 5. 17.
The text.
For the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh,
for these are adversaries one to another, that not whatsoever things you will
these you do.

The note.
Here men think (says Saint Augustine) the apostle denies that we have free
liberty of will, not understanding that it is said to them, if they will not
hold fast the grace of faith conceived, by which only they can walk in the
spirit, and not accomplish the concupiscences of the flesh, in cap. 5. Gal.

The answer.
The text is plain against both liberty, and ability of will. And Saint
Augustine, as you know, confesses, that when he wrote this, he did not
understand that the words were verified of them, which were under grace, and
not under the law. Because that though such do not consent to the concupiscence
of the flesh, against the which in spirit they long, yet they would not have
any of those corruptions of the flesh, if they might, and they do not
whatsoever they would, because they would want them, and can not. But then they
shall not have them, when they have not corruptible flesh. Do ye not see what
a patron you have of S. Augustine, and are you not ashamed to allege that as
his, which you know he himself has revoked?

Galat. 5. 21.
The text.
Which I foretell you, as I have foretold you, that they which do such things
shall not obtain the kingdom of heaven.

The note.
Saint Augustine shows hereby that not only infidelity is a damnable sin.

The answer.
Wherein we not only agree with Saint Augustine, but also say farther that
willing ignorance, the mother of popish devotion, in the which you were wont
to nussell your followers, is a great, and damnable sin.

Galat. 6. 9.
The text.
And doing good let us not fail. For in due time we shall reap not failing.

The note.
The works of mercy be the seed of life everlasting, and the proper cause
thereof, and not faith only.

The answer.
This is plain blasphemy, to place the proper cause of eternal life, and
salvation not in Christ, but in our selves, and in our own works of mercy,
which you here most plainly do. Your reason is taken out of the metaphor of
seed, and sowing: The vanity of it is in this, that you rack the metaphor
beyond the scope and meaning of the apostle. For the apostle exhorts them to
liberality, especially toward their teachers, and instructers in the faith.
To encourage men thereunto, he tells them that they shall be as sure, or more
sure of the rewards promised of God, then the sower shall be to reap, that
which he sows: and to that end applies the borrowed speech of sowing, and
reaping. To rack those speeches beyond this his meaning, is most plainly to
abuse him, and bewraieth the wickedness of your doctrine, which cannot carry
any probable show, without racking and wresting the scriptures.

Galat. 6. 14.
The text.
But God forbid, that I should glory, saving in the cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ: by whom the world is crucified to me, and I unto the world.

The note.
Christ (says Saint Augustine) chose a kind of death, to hang on the cross,
and to fix or fasten the same cross in the foreheads of the faithful, that
the Christian may say, God forbid that I should glory saving in the cross of
our Lord Jesus Christ, Expos. in Euang. Io. tract. 43.

The answer.
Because your superstitious abusing the sign of the cross can not be
warranted by Paul, therefore Augustine must help, will he nill he. But he
means none other thing, then the common use of the first christians, who to
show how little they were ashamed of Christ crucified, did use to cross
themselves on the forehead. This will prove but a poor proof of your
manifold abuses of the cross.

EPHESIANS.
Ephesians. 1. 4.
The text.
As he chose us in him, before the constitution of the world, that we should be
holy and immaculate in his sight in charity.

The note.
We learn here that by Gods grace men be holy and immaculate not only in the
sight of men, nor by imputation, but truly and before God, contrary to the
doctrine of the Caluinists.

The answer.
What father has affirmed this before you? This is not only contrary to
Caluins doctrine, but also to the doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ, and his
Evangelist Saint John. For our Lord and Savior Christ teaches the children of
God, to pray always for forgiveness of their trespasses. And saint John says,
if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us.
Then I pray you tell us, if trespasses and sins be spots, how are we truly and
in Gods sight immaculate, otherwise then by the not imputing of our sins unto
us, and the imputing unto us of Christ's righteousness? But herein you deceive
your selves and others, that you esteem not this imputed righteousness for true
righteousness, when and whereas it is the only righteousness, in confidence
whereof we may boldly appear without spot in the presence of our God.

Ephesians. 1. 13.
The text.
In whom also, when you had heard the word of truth (the Gospel of your
salvation) in which also believing you were signed with the holy spirit of
promise, etc.

The note.
Some refer this to the grace of baptism, but to many learned it seems
that the Apostle alludeth to the giving of the holy Ghost in the sacrament of
confirmation, by signing the baptized with the sign of the cross and holy
chrisme. For that was the use in the apostles time, as else where we have
proved, annot. Acts. 8.

The answer.
The many learned that you speak of, are but such as have sold themselves, and
bent al their wits to defend the fornications of the whore of Babylon. And so
you endeavor your selves, and do your best to prove that, which you speak of.
But lies and untruths are not so easy to be proved, as you imagine, but only
to such as do believe every word you speak, to be an oracle. Your chrisme,
and your sacrament of confirmation, were unknown to to the apostles: and not
used by them to any such end, or purpose as you have usurped them unto.

Ephesians. 1. 23.
The text.
And he has subdued all things under his feet: and has made him head over
all the church, which is his body, the fulness of him which is filled all in
all.

The note.
Christ is not full, whole, and perfect without the church, no more then the
head without the body.

The answer.
This note is good, true, and comfortable, if it be understood of his
perfection in his mystical body, and not otherwise.

Ephesians. 2. 8.
The text.
For by grace you are saved through faith (and that not of your selves, for it
is the gift of God) not of works, that no man glory.

The note.
It is said not of works as thine, of thy self being unto thee, but as those,
in which God has made, formed, and created thee. August. de gratia, and lib.
arbit. cap. 8. and seq.

The answer.
Because your own credit will not stretch to qualify the plain speeches of
the Apostle, you crave aid at Augustines hand. But he is your sworn enemy:
and therefore means to give you very slender help. For in the same place he
tells us, that our good life is the grace of God freely given us: and that
life eternal is also the grace of God freely given to us. And that God in
Paul, and others his dear children, and saints, crowned his own gifts, and
not their merits: be you not then ashamed to enforce his speeches against his
mind?

^phes. 3. ^7.
The text.
Christ to dwell by faith in your hearts.

The note.
Christ dwells in us by his gifts, and we be just by those his gifts
remaining and resident in us, and not by Christ's proper justice only as
heretics affirm.

The answer.
You wrangle for inherent justice without all reason, Christ (you say)
dwells in us by his gifts, and we are just by those his gifts. The gift that
Christ dwells in us by, is faith, as S. Paul here tells, and you assume
that thereby we are just, therefore we conclude that we are just by faith.
Therefore you must either confess your manifold wrangling heretofore, in
rejecting justification by faith alone, because it is against your imagined
inherent justice, or else you must confess that you do but cavil here, when
you go about to prove inherent justice, because Christ dwells in us by faith.

Ephesians. 3. 17.
The text.
Rooted and founded in charity.

The note.
Not faith only must be in us, but charity which accomplisheth all virtues.

The answer.
Who ever taught that no more virtues must be in Christians, then faith only?
you can not show one. And yet you are not ashamed to make your ignorant
followers believe, that we spoil Christians of all other virtues.

Ephesians. 4. 10.
The text.
And that he ascended, what is it, but bica^se he descended first into the
inferior parts of the earth?

The note.
He means specially of his descending to hell.

The answer.
He means by his descending into the inferi^^ parts of the earth his
incarnation, or abasing of himself, to take upon him our nature in the womb
of the virgin, which by an Hebraisme is called the lower parts of the earth.
And David so terms his mothers womb in the 139. Psalm. verse. 15.

Ephesians. 4. 2^.
The text.
And be renewed in the spirit of your mind: and put on the new man, which
according to God is created in justice, and holiness of the truth.

The note.
The Apostle teaches us not to apprehend Christ's justice by faith only, but
to be renewed in our selves truly, and to put on us the new man formed and
created in justice and holiness of truth. By which freewil also is proved to be
in us to work with God, and to consent unto him in our sanctification.

The answer.
Who does so teach justification by faith only, that he does not also teach
sanctification, as the joined companion thereof? But lieng, and slaundering is
your delight, which I do not say, because you have expressly uttered your
mind, but because you do covertly insinuate so much to your blind followers.
Your proof for freewill is worth three skips of a louse. You may conclude it
out of every exhortation as well as out of this, it will follow all alike.

Ephesians. 5. ^.
The text.
For understanding know you this, that no fornicator or unclean or covetous
person (which is the service of idols) has inheritance in the kingdom of
Christ and of God.

The note.
See the heretical corruption of this in the annot. Col. 3. 5.

The answer.
We have seen your annotation, and find your quarrel stale, as being moved
before by master Martinius, and answered by master Doctor Fulke. And farther we
see that idolaters are beholding to you, for you take as great pains, as men
may do, to uphold them in their idolatry, which in plain English signifies
worshipping of images.

Ephesians. 5. 23.
The text.
Let women be subject to their husbands as to our Lord: because the man is the
head of the woman, as Christ is the head of the church.

The note.
It is much to be noted that in the first English Bibles there is not once the
name of Church in all the Bible, but in steed thereof Congregation, which is
so notorious a corruption, that themselves in their later Bibles correct it for
shame, and yet suffer the other to be read and used still, See the Bible
printed 1562.

The answer.
Surely Martinius was to blame that left you no quarrel unmoved to our
translation: it has been answered that our first translators translated
aptly and truly, when they translated congregation, and that they therein
committed no fault, whereof they or others ought to be ashamed. That the word
Church was not shunned in any sinister respect or meaning, the translating of
the same word church in the creed, the using of the word church in the notes
of those first Bibles, in our Catechismes always, in our latter translations
as you confess, do manifestly show. The cause whi^ the translators did use
the word congregation rather then the word church, was because in those times
ignorance reigning, the word congregation was more plain, and less ambiguous
and doubtful, and therefore less danger in it of misconstruing or mistaking
then in the other: thus is your notorious corruption come to nothing.

Ephesians. 6. 8.
The text.
Knowing that every one, what good soever he shall do, that shall he receive
of the Lord, whether he be bond or free.

The note.
God leaves no good work unrewarded.

The answer.
It is very true, and yet you never the nigher your merit.

Ephesians. 6. 14.
The text.
Stand therefore having your loins girded in truth, and clothed with the
brestplate of justice, etc.

The note.
If man could not be truly just, or h^^e justice in him self, how could he be
clothed with justice?

The answer.
Men after this life are clothed with their habitation in heaven: 2. Cor. 5. 2.
their habitation in heaven is not in them selves. In like manner may they be
clothed with the righteousness of Christ, which though it make them truly
just, yet is in Christ and not in them selves. The whole armor is Gods, and by
him given us to defend our selves withal. I marvel that you find neither
holiwater, nor cross, nor any such devise of popery among all this armor. I
think therefore that it follows manifestly, that those pieces of armor
never came out of Gods storehouse.

Ephesians. 6. 23.
The text.
Peace to the brethren, and charity with faith from God the Father, and our
Lord Jesus Christ.

The note.
Saint Augustine notes in sundry places upon this same text, that faith
without charity serves not to salvation. Lib. 50. hom. 7.

The answer.
As for that faith which is without charity, we (as we have often told you)
esteem it not worth two strawes: otherwise that a true faith only and alone
justifies, (...) 6.
Saint Augustine will tell you, if you will vouchsafe to see it. It is
necessary for a man that not only when he is wicked he should be justified,
that is, of a wicked man made just, when good things are rendered to him for
evil: but also when he is now justified by faith, that grace should walk with
him, and he rest thereupon, least he fall. And again, that Paul should be
called from heaven, (...)
and be converted by so great and effectual a calling, the grace of God alone
was the cause thereof, for his merits were great, but evil.

PHILIPPIANS.
Philip. 1. ^7.
The text.
And in nothing be ye terrified of the adversaries, which to them is cause of
perdition.

The note.
(...) a manifest proof and evidence.

The answer.
We think you can interpret a Greek word right if you list, as you have done
this.

Philip. 2. 16.
The text.
Containing the word of life to my glory in the day of Christ, because I have
not run in vain, nor in vain labored.

The note.
Such as have by their preachings gained any to Christ, shall joy and glory
therein exceedingly at the day of our Lord.

The answer.
And what shall they do that gain from Christ to Antichrist?

Philip* 2. ^7.
The text.
But and if I be immolated upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I
rejoice and congratulate with you all.

The note.
Pastors ought to be so zealous of the salvation of their flock, that with
Saint Paul they should offer themselves to the death for the same.

The answer.
Such example gave the prince of pastors, such strength has God given to a
number of faithful ministers, as our eyes have seen, and infinite multitudes
are able to testify, and the book or monument of martyrs has recorded to all
posterity.

Philip. 2. 21.
The text.
For all seek the things that are their own, and not the things that are
Jesus Christ's.

The note.
Many forsake their teachers when they see them in bonds and prison for their
faith, because most men prefer the world before Christ's glory.

The answer.
This is very true, and yet the text rather speaks of them that should be
careful over the flock, that a number of them shranke away after the world,
and provided rather for them selves then for the flock. And consider you well
upon this speech, whether Peter's being at Rome then, when Paul wrote this were
likely or no, when Paul had there none like minded to him self. And it is a
very simple shift to say that Peter might then be absent from Rome for
persecution or for business, seeing that both the acts of the Apostles, and
the Epistle to the Romans, and every epistle that Paul wrote from Rome,
minister good reasons against Peter's being there, so that if he were bishop so
long as your stories testify of him, he was a notable non Resident: but I had
rather imagine that he came thither, but a little before his death.

Philip. 3. ^.
The text.
See the dogs, see the evil workers, see the concision, for we are the
circumcision which in spirit serve God, etc.

The note.
By allusion of words he calls the carnal Christian Jews, that yet boasted
in the circumcision of the flesh, concision: and himself and the rest that
circumcised their heart and senses spirituallie the true circumcision. Saint
Chrysostom. Theoph.

The answer.
Either you should set down nothing without authorities alleged, or else if
you would spare your pains in any place, you should do it in those whereof
the sense is not in controversy, but confessed on both parts.

Philip. 3. 1^^.
The text.
And may be found in him not having my justice which is of the Law, but that
which is of the faith of Christ, which is of God justice in faith, to know him
and the virtue of his resurrection, and the society of his passions configured
to his death, if by any means I may come to the resurrection, which is from
the dead.

The note.
If Saint Paul ceased not to labor still, as though he were not sure to come
to the mark without continual endeavor, what security may we poor sinners
have of heretics persuasions, and promises of security and salvation by only
faith?

The answer.
We are very sure that they which after they are called to knowledge do not
continually endeavor to walk in those good works, which God has prepared
for men to walk in, shall not come to the mark of life everlasting, which is
set before all chrians. And we know none but papists that teach such security,
to make men trust to that faith which is idle, and does not work by love a
diligent endeavor of obedience to Gods holy laws. And yet this continuance of
our endeavor, is no argument of doubtfulnesse of our salvation, neither yet of
trust in our deserts, but that Christ lives in us, and by his spirit leads
and guides us effectually. And it is not to be passed over, (though you be
not disposed to see it) that the Apostle for all his endeavor, yet flies from
his own righteousness to the righteousness of Christ, which God has made
his by faith: so that it is evident, that the Apostles confidence rested upon
the righteousness of Christ imputed to him.

Philip. 3. 17.
The text.
Be followers of me brethren, and observe them that walk so as you have our
form.

The note.
It is a goodly thing when a pastor may say so to his flock. Neither is it
any derogation to Christ, that the people should imitate their Apostles life
and doctrine, and other holy men. Saint Augustine, Saint Benedict, Saint
Dominicke, Saint Frauncis.

The answer.
It is a very good thing, when the Pastors are examples to their flock in
life and doctrine, but yet the best men are to be followed with exception,
namely, no further then they follow Christ. As for your frierlie fathers whom
you reckon and whom you follow in wilworship, are unmeet to be matched with
Paul and others, partners of Christian obedience to them, among whom they lived.

Philip. 4. 3.
The text.
Yea and I beseech thee my sincere companion, help those women that have
labored with me in the Gospel, with Clement and the rest my coadiutors, whose
names are in the book of life.

The note.
This Clement was afterward fourth Pope of Rome, from Saint Peter, as Saint
Hierome writes according to the common supputation.

The answer.
This is to be marked, that the reckoning and supputation of Popes succeeding
one another, is a matter not agreed on, though it be the maine foundation and
principal pillar, whereupon the Romish church will seem to stay her self.
For as it is a matter very uncertain, whether Peter was ever Bishop of Rome,
so is it also uncertain, Clemens lib. 7. cap. 16.
who was first, second, third, or fourth. If we may believe the constitutions
ascribed to the Apostles, (the testimony whereof you can not refuse, citing
the authority of them in other matters very often) then Peter was never
Bishop there, Ecclesiast h^st. lib. 3. cap. 34.
but Linus was the first ordained by Paul and not by Peter, and Clemens the
second. Eusebius reckons Clemens third, and Euaristus fourth, after both
Peter and Paul. For I do not perceive that he reckoned one of them more for
bishop there then the other. Tomo 3. cap. ^.
Nicephorus makes Peter the first, Linus the second, and Anacletus third, In
catalog^ scriptorum.
and Clemens fourth. Hierome reckoned in the same order, saving that he adds,
that many of the Latins did count Clemens next after Peter. Sabellicus
writes that Peter, Linus, Cletus and Clemens were all Bishops of Rome at once,
Libro. 3. contra haereses. cap. 3. Lib. 2. aduersus Donatistas.
and strikes quite out Anacletus out of the number. Ireneus reckons next
after Linus, Anacletus. And Optatus Mileuitanus sets him, that is Anacletus,
next after Clemens. And thus your famous succession whereof you so greatly
glory, rests upon a rotten uncertain foundation, the progress thereof if
it were examined, is more diverse and uncertain and that many ways, and
therefore no marvel though so uncertain a succession must serve to uphold so
vile a congregation, as the church of Rome is at this day: which because you
know, you refer the matter to the common supputation, which must be that
which you commonly at this day follow.

Philip. 4. 10.
The text.
And I also reioiced in our Lord exceedingly, that once at the length, you have
reflorished to care for me, as you did also care: but you were occupied.

The note.
This reflorishing is the reviving of their old liberality, which for a time
had been slack and dead. S. Chrysostom.

The answer.
This was Paul's thankfulness, as well for the care they presently had of him,
as for their liberality before time bestowed on him.

Philip. 4. 1^
The text.
And you know also (O Philippians) that in the beginning of the Gospel, when I
departed from Macedonia no church communicated unto me, in the account of gift
and receipt but you only, for unto Thessalonica also once and twice you sent
to my use.

The note.
He counts it not mere alms, or a free gift, that people bestows on their
pastors, or preachers, but a certain mutual traffike as it were, and
interchange, the one giving spiritual, the other rendering temporal things
for the same.

The answer.
Your note is true, though the pastors of your church give stones for bread,
for fish scorpions, and in stead of milk strong and rank poison.

COLOSSIANS.
Colos. 1. 6.
The text.
That is come unto you, as also in the whole world it is, and fructifieth and
grows, even as in you, since that day that you heard and knew the grace of
God in truth.

The note.
He shows that the Church and Christ's gospel should daily grow, and be
spread at length through the whole world, which cannot stand with the heretics
opinion of the decay thereof so quickly after Christ's time, nor agree by any
means to their obscure conuenticles. See S. Augustine epist. 80. in fine.

The answer.
It is true that Christ's faith did grow and spread in the whole world: yet you
your selves will confess, that it does not always spread alike. For I know
you will except our times. And we will except the times, wherein the Arrians
flourished, who (as you report) continued longer, and was better defended by
princes and worldly power than we are now. Then it cannot be a question how
quickly some corruptions grew, but whether any great diminution, or lessening
of the number of true Catholics may be. But the ancient testimonies of stories
do also put that out of doubt. This repugnance you speak of we see not.
Neither have our conuenticles (as it pleases you to term them) been at any
time more obscure than the assemblies of Christians in the primitive church, as
you your selves cannot choose but confess. S. Augustine whose authority you
allege, in his latter days saw a greater decay of the Christian faith, by the
cruel invasion of many barbarous nations that did ouerrun both Europe and
Affrike, than he did think, when he wrote that Epistle, possible to have been
in so short a space. And further, if we consider the stories of the times
since, we shall find that, that the bounds of Christendom have been greatly
lessened, and diminished since saint Augustines time: Flat contrary to his
opinion in that Epistle.

Colos. 1. 10.
The text.
That you may walk worthy of God, in all things pleasing.

The note.
See S. Ambrose, and the Gr. doctors. Or thus woorthily pleasing God.

The answer.
What need you have of Ambrose, or any other great doctors for this I cannot
imagine.

Colos. 1. 10.
The text.
Fructifieng in all good works, and increasing in the knowledge of God.

The note.
Many things requisite, and diverse things acceptable to God besides faith.

The answer.
This is your accustomed dealing, to make ignorant men believe that your
adversaries allow of nothing, but faith. When as we confess many things
requisite for Christians, and acceptable to God, besides faith, but nothing
without faith.

Colos. 1. ^^.
The text.
Giving thanks to God, and the father who has made us worthy unto the part
of the lot, of the saints in the light.

The note.
We are not only by acceptance or imputation partakers of Christ's benefits,
but are by his grace made worthy thereof, and deserve our salvation condignly.

The answer.
You prate much of your own woorthines, and prove nothing* The benefits of
justification and salvation we have by imputation only: other benefits, as
newnes of life, sanctification, and whatsoever pertains to that change and
alteration, which God by the gracious working and guiding of his holy spirit,
makes in those which be his, be really and actually in us. We are made
worthy indeed in respect of Christ's righteousness, wherewith we are adorned,
and in respect of our selves, none otherwise than the hungry are said to be
worthy of meat, and the thirsty worthy of drink, not because they deserve
it, but because they earnestly desire it. The deserving therefore of our
salvation condignly (as you have learned of your schoolmen to term it) might
have been kept in your purse, for here is no place to vent it in, our market
serves not for the sale thereof.

Colos. 2. 4.
The text.
But this I say that no man deceive you in loftiness of words.

The note.
Heretics do most commonly deceive the people with eloquence, namely, such as
have it by the gift of nature, as the heretics of all ages had, and lightly
all seditious persons, which draw the vulgar sort to sedition by the allurement
of their tongue. Nothing (says saint Hierom ep. 2^ ad Nepotian) is so easy as
with volubilitie of tongue to deceive the unlearned multitude, which whatsoever
it understands not, does the more admire and wonder at the same. The Apostle
here calls it (...) persuasible speech.

The answer.
Here is long labor about washing of a tile. Who knows not that papists and
such heretics as they are, by fine, retoricall, persuasible speeches do carry
poor ignorant men after them, and to the intent they may (as saint Ierom
says) be the more admired, and woondered at of the people that understand not:
they not only endeavor to keep the people without knowledge, but also hunt
after strange and unwonted words, such as the ears of the people have not
been acquainted withal, and their intelligence reaches not unto, whereof
this your translation is a good evidence. Turn therefore this note against
your selves, and examine well your own consciences, and repent whiles you have
time.

Colos. 2. 18.
The text.
Let no man seduce you, willing in the humility and religion of Angels,
walking in the things which he has not seen, in vain puffed up by the sense
of his flesh.

The note.
That is wilful or self willed in voluntary religion. For that is, (...),
whereof comes the word following (...), Superstition, v. 23. See annotations,
v. 21.

The answer.
If voluntary religion and will worship were quite and clear banished from
amongst all those that call themselves Christians, then where should popery
become? For you your selves cannot for the greatest part of it, show any other
ground, but the will and devise of men.

Colos. 2. 19.
The text.
And not holding the head, whereof the whole body by ioints and bands being
served and compacted, grows to the increase of God.

The note.
(...), That is, taking subministration of spiritual life, and nourishment by
grace from Christ the head.

The answer.
The Greek word signifies our strait conjunction in Christ's mystical body,
as our bodies are joined and knit together by ioints and sinews, and so your
note declares the consequence of that ioining, being drawn from the truth of
the signification of the word.

Colos. 3. 15.
The text.
And let the peace of God exult in your hearts, wherein you are also called in
one body: and be thankful.

The note.
(...), triumph and have the victory.

The answer.
By a metaphor drawn from the games of the Ethnikes, wherein some had prick
and praise for actiuitie and strength.

Colos. 3. 24.
The text.
Knowing that you shall receive of our Lord the retribution of inheritance.

The note.
Retribution or reward for good works, (...), which signifies rendering one
for another.

The answer.
Out of Gods rendering or rewarding, meriting cannot be collected, and in this
place the word of inheritance cleereth all. For if it be our inheritance, we
have it not by our deserving.

Colos. 4. 3.
The text.
Be instant in prayer: watching in it with thansgiuing: praieng withal for us
also, that God may open to us also the door of speech to speak the mystery
of Christ (for the which also I am bound) that I may manifest it, so as I ought
to speak.

The note.
Saint Paul ever much desires the prayers of the faithful, whereby we learn
the great efficacy of them.

The answer.
The prayers of the faithful prevail much with God: (...)
for his ears be ever open to them, and therefore as they are very needful,
so are they exceedingly desired of all Gods saints. But I pray you tell me one
thing, why Paul never willed them to take heed of being over bold, or saucy
with God, but to make some dead saint or other their means to offer their
prayers to God? For in so often repetition of this exhortation, I think he
would not always have forgotten this point, if it had been necessary or
expedient.

Col. ^. 13.
The text.
For I give him testimony, that he has much labor for you, and for them that
be at Laodicea, and that are at Hierapolis.

The note.
He did not only pray, but took other great pains, to procure Gods grace
for the Colossians, perhaps by watchings, fasting, and doing other penance of
body, that God would not suffer them to fall from their received faith, to the
sect of Simon Magus, or the Iudaizing christians.

The answer.
No doubt Epaphras omitted nothing, that became a painful and a careful
minister of the word to use, for the procuring of Gods graces, and the
advancement and setting forward the knowledge of Christ, and his holy Gospel
amongst those congregations, or churches here named. What your meaning is by
penance of body, whether to satisfy for other men's sins, as well as for his
own, I know not. And for such imaginations of yours, Epaphras had naught to do
with them.

1. Thessalonians.
1. These. 1. 9.
The text.
For they themselves report of us, what manner of entering we had to you: and
how you are turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God.

The note.
In this and the like places the heretics maliciously and most falsely
translate, construe, and apply all things meant of the heathen idols, to the
memories and images of Christ and his saints, namely the English Bibles of the
years, 1562. 1577. See the annot. 1. Io. 5. 21.

The answer.
We translate truly, when in steed of idols, we say images. Our construction
and application also is true, because both your having of images in churches,
and also all manner worship you used about them proceeded, and came from
Gentilisme, so that the speeches and reasons, which the apostles and prophets
used against them, are aptly applied against your images, and the follies you
commit about them. Your annotation you refer us to, is like your selves,
matter whereof you might be ashamed, if you had any shame in you. For it has
been often answered, and it is enough for you barely to repeat it again.
Your council of Nice were impudent, and shameless asses, and beasts, giving
that to images, which you your selves dare not defend. Ecclesiast hist. l. b.
7. cap. 14.
Eusebius in the place you cite, though he aloweth of that image, yet shows
that that, and the like grew out of the corrupt customs of the Gentiles, whereof
he says, that is no marvel, that some did stick in new converted Christians.
And you can not show for four hundred years after Christ, the having of
images in the churches for lay men's books. But I refer your annotation to
farther answer wherein it will be better displaied.

1. These. 2. 1.
The text.
For you your selves know brethren our entrance unto you, that it was not in
vain, but having suffered before and been abused with contumuelies, (as you
know) at Philippi we had confidence in our God, to speak unto you the Gospel of
God in much carefulnes.

The note.
Anotable example for catholic preachers, and passing comfortable when in the
midst of persecutions, and reproaches they preach sincerely to please God and
not men.

The answer.
Your note is good. And God grant that you at length may cast away your desire
of contending, and man pleasing, and seek the truth in sincerity, so should
we cease from offending God, and troubling the world, and our controversies,
and contentions should quickly be at an end.

1. These. 2. 18.
The text.
For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of glory, Are not you before our Lord
Jesus in his coming?

The note.
If the Apostle without injury to God, in right good sense called his
schoolers the Thessalonians, his hope, joy, and glory, why blaspheme the
protestants the catholic church and her children for terming our blessed lady
and other saints, their hope for the special confidence they have in their
prayers?

The answer.
The prosperous success, that God gave to his Apostle Paul amongst the
Thessalonians, did much comfort, and encourage the said Apostle in his hope,
and expectation, not only of their salvation, but also of the crown of
righteousness laid up for himself, in which respect as he might well, because
it was grounded upon the promises of God, he calls the Thessalonians his
hope. How can this excuse you, when the ground of your dealing, is void of all
warrant of the word? For what warrant can you show for your confidence in the
prayers of saints? But let us go a little farther with you, what have you left
to God and his Christ, that you have not given our lady, and other saints
(what said I to saints) nay to knaves, and traitors? who taught men to seek to
come to heaven by the blood of Thomas, you can tell well enough. It is not the
catholic church and her children, whom we charge with this, it is the Romish
Babylon, and her vpholders, the sink of sin, and the mother of all
abominations, that seeks to rob, and spoil God of his honor, and glory, and
to give it to creatures. But our God is in heaven, Psalm. 113. 3. Esaic. 42. 8.
he does whatsoever pleases him: he will not give his glory to an other.

1. These. 3. 10.
The text.
Night and day more abundantly praieng that we may see your face, and may
accomplish those things which want of your faith.

The note.
Though letters and epistles in absence give great comfort and confirmation in
faith, yet it is preaching in presence by which the faith of Christ, and true
religion is always both begun and accomplished.

The answer.
Why did you then both take quite away from the people the comfort, which they
might have reaped by the Epistles of Paul being absent, if you would have
suffered them in a tongue which the people understood; and also in the days,
wherein your heresy reigned amongst us, both slenderly and corruptly give the
other? But thanks be to God, who has removed you, and given great increase to
his truth, and religion, by the industry and diligence of true and sincere
preachers, amongst his people of England.

1. These. 4. 9.
The text.
As for the charity of the fraternity, we have no need to write to you, for
your selves have learned of God to love one another.

The note.
All catholic christians make one fraternity.

The answer.
Howsoever they differ in time, or place, whether they be dead, or alive, and
wheresoever they be scattered upon the face of the earth.

1. These. 4. 11*
The text.
But we desire you brethren that you abound more, etc.

The note.
Christian men ought to proceed and profit continually in good works and
justification.

The answer.
If you had said sanctity, or sanctification, your note had been right, but
you are so greedy and egerly bent upon your inherent justice, that you care
not what you confound, for in the text there is no word of justification.

1. These. 4. 15.
The text.
For this we say to you in the word of our Lord, that we which live, which are
remaining in the aduent of our Lord shall not prevent them that have slept.

The note.
He speaks in the person those, which shall be alive when our Savior
returns to judgment.

The answer.
It is very true, and the cause why he so speaks, is to teach all men so to
live, as if they were continually in present expectation, of the coming of our
Lord and Savior Christ to judgment.

1. These. 5. 8.
The text.
But we that are of the day are sober, having on the breastplate of faith and
charity, and an helmet the hop of salvation.

The note.
A Christian man's whole armor is not faith only, but all the three virtues
here named.

The answer.
And who but papists teach otherwise? As for cross, Lib. de ^id. c. 13 Hosias
says that we have no other shield but the sign of the cross.
and holiwater and such like, there is no mention of them, and yet these be the
chief armor and weapons which our papists teach.

1. These. 5. 17.
The text.
^ Pray without intermission.

The note.
To desire eternal life of him that only can give it, is to pray without
intermission: but because that desire is often by worldly cares cooled,
certain hours and times of vocal prayer were appointed, See S. August. e p.
121. ad Probam.

The answer.
You are not long in one mind. One time to pray continually, is to pray
certain times every day: an other time to pray continually is to ask life
everlasting at his hand that can only give it. And so it is what please you to
make of it, but this later enterpretation (as I think) dropped out of your pen
ere you were aware. For if God only can give eternal life, why do you request
it of others? As for appointed times to pray, being a good means to stir up
our coldness and negligence therein, we both use and like of.

2. Thessalonians.
2. These. 1. 5.
The text.
So that we our selves also glory in you in the churches of God, for your
patience, and faith in all your persecutions and tribulations, which you
sustain, for an example of the just judgment of God, that you may be counted
worthy of the kingdom of God, for the which also you suffer.

The note.
Note that by constant and patient suffering of afflictions for Christ men are
worthy (so the Greek signifies) as the adversaries them selves translate
verse 11. of the croune of the kingdom of heaven, and so do merit and
deserve the same. See annot. Luke 20. 35. And the Apostle heeresaieth that it
is Gods justice no less to repaie glory to the afflicted, then to render
punishment to them that afflict, because of their contrary deserts or merits.

The answer.
If you did not rack making worthy in English beyond the meaning of the
spirit of God, then to be made worthy, and of God to be counted worthy were
all one: for they whom God accounts worthy, are worthy indeed. But yet it
follows not, that they which are made worthy, do deserve or merit the
kingdom of God, and the crown of glory by their inherent righteousness, which
is the thing which both you would and should prove. Your reason from the
justice of God follows not: Gods justice indeed requires that glory be
given, or as you say, repaied to the afflicted for his sake, as well as
punishment to their afflicters, not for the cause which you assign, but
chiefly for his word and promise sake, having promised that they which suffer
with Christ, shall also reign with him: and then also because it is just, that
he put a difference between the estates of those, whom he has made so far
to differ: your annotation or rather marginal note is answered before.

2 Thessalonians. 1. 10.
The text.
When he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and to be made marvelous in
all them that have believed, because our testimony concerning you was credited
in that day.

The note.
Christ shall be glorified in his Saints, that is, by the great and
unspeakable honor and exaltation of them he shall be honored, as now he is:
the honor which the Church does to them, not diminishing Christ's glory (as
the adversaries foolishlie pretend) but exceedingly augmenting the same.

The answer.
Because it is a glory to Christ to advance and exalt his saints in glory,
does it follow therefore that it is lawful for your church to give to saints
that, which Christ gives them not, or that it is not sacrilege to rob Christ
of al things due to him, and to give them to men, be they never so holy? We
are not against any lawful advancement of saints, but against such as neither
they can have, nor yet can stand with the glory of our Christ.

2 Thessalonians. 2. 3.
The text.
Let no man seduce you by any means, for unless there come a revolt first,
and the man of sin be reueiled, the son of perdition, which is an
adversary and is extolled above all that is called God, or that is worshipped,
so that he sits in the temple of God, showing him self as though he were
God.

The note.
How then can the Pope by Antichrist, as the heretics fondly blaspheme, who
is far from being exalted above God, that he prays most humbly not only
to Christ, but also to his blessed mother and all his saints.

The answer.
The proud presumptuous prerogatives given to the Pope, and accepted of him,
does very well declare this exalting of him self, which particularly here
to recite were too long. Other men, as the most Reverend father in God Master
Iuel Bishop of Salisburie, and master Fore in our mother tongue, for the
benefit of the poor people of England, have in this matter taken great pains,
to whom also I refer my reader. But if there were no more but that which you
note as an argument and proof of his humility, it is sufficient and enough to
convince him of Antichristian pride: he that takes upon him to be wiser then
God, exalts him self above God: he that will make his prayers to any other
then God takes upon him to be wiser then God, Ergo he that makes his prayers
to any other but God, exalts him self above God. The mayor as I take it is
clear and manifest, and need no proof. The minor is proved thus, the
wisdom of God has taught us to pray to our father in heaven, and not to
any other, what is it then to teach men to pray to others, but to control
that wisdom of God, that it has not taught the wisest way to pray, and thus
in that wherein you thought to show his humility, you set forth his
intolerable pride.

^. Thessalonians. 2. 11.
The text.
Therefore God will send them the operation of error, to believe lieng, etc.

The note.
Deus mittet, says Saint Augustine libro 20. de Ciu. cap. 19. quia Deus
diabolum facere ista permittet. God will send because God will permit the
devil to do these things, whereby we may take a general rule, that Gods action
or working in such things is his permission. See annot. Romans 1. 24.

The answer.
Now Augustine must help you with a general rule, and that expresselie both
against the whole course of scripture, and also against his own mind, if you
mean by permission only permission, for he says, who does not tremble at
these horrible judgments of God, by which he does in the hearts of the wicked
what he will, rendering to every man according to his merits. And again he
says, it is out of doubt that God does work in the minds of men to incline
their wills, either to good according to his mercy, De gratia and libero
arbitrio cap. 21.
or else to evil according to their deserts by his judgment, sometimes open
and sometimes secret, but always just. This I trow is somewhat more then only
permission, therefore you must rack some other for that general rule, for
Augustine will not yield it you: and it grows out of a foolish nicenes, for
men to be afraid to speak as the holy Ghost has spoken before them.

2 Thessalonians. 2. 17.
The text.
And our Lord Jesus Christ him self, and God our Father which has loved us,
and has given eternal consolation, and good hope in grace, exhort your
hearts, and confirm you in every good work and word.

The note.
This word of exhorting implies in it comfort and consolation, 2. Corinthes,
1. verse 4. and 6.

The answer.
Truth does well, but never when it is intermedled with untruths. If this
note were not defiled with the former, and these that follow, but had passed
alone, then we would have joined with you.

2 Thessalonians. 3. 6.
The text.
And we denounce unto you brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
you withdraw your selves from every brother walking inordinately, and not
according to the tradition which they have received of us.

The note.
Here also (as is noted before 1. Thessalonians 2. 15.) the adversaries in
their translations avoid the word tradition being plain in the Greek, least
them selves might seem to be noted as men walking inordinatelie, and not
according to Apostolical tradition, as all Schismatikes, heretics, and rebels
to Gods church do.

The answer.
If corrupt use had not in your times made tradition to be commonly taken of
the people for a doctrine delivered by word of mouth only, and never published
in the holy Scriptures by writing contrary to the sense and meaning of the
Apostle, then had there not been any just cause of avoiding the word. But you
can not justly blame us, though we fly a word corrupted by you, and therefore
dangerous to deceive withal, and set down for it some other word, no less
aptly agreeing to the signification of the Greek word, and better with more
plainness expressing unto the unlearned the mind and meaning of the Apostle
in that place. But because you charge other men with inordinate walking,
contrary to the traditions Apostolical, answer for your selves, Libr. 2. cap.
2.
and yield us reason if you can, why you break those which you call the
Apostles constitutions? Libr. 1. cap. 6.
why do you not commonly and ordinarily choose married men to be Bishops? why
have you kept the common people from reading the scriptures? Libr. 3. cap. 9.
why suffer you women to baptize? Lib. 7. cap. 24.
why fast you not continually on Wednesdaies? Libr. 8. cap. 2.
why do ye exclude the people both from election and approbation of Bishops
and priests? If these be not the ordinances of the Apostles, why do ye abuse
the world with alleging the authority of that book for you? if they be,
with what face can you object to others, wherein you are most manifestly
faulty your selves?

1. TIMOTHY.
1. Tim. 1. 5.
The text.
But the end of the precept is charity from a pure heart, and a good
conscience, a faith not fained.

The note.
Saint Augustine says, he that list to have the hope of heaven, let him look
that he have a good conscience, let him believe and work well. For that he
believes, he has of faith: that he works, he has of charity. praefat. in
Psalm. 31.

The answer.
As you allege Saint Augustine, so I would that you carried his sincere mind
and love to the truth, so should we not only agree in this, but throwing away
all mind and desire of contending, enter into a most earnest search for truth
with all humility.

1. Tim. 1. 19.
The text.
This precept I commend to thee (O Timothy) according to the prophecies going
before on thee, that thou war in them a good warfare, having faith and a good
conscience, which certain repelling have made shipwreck about the faith.

The note.
Evil life and no good conscience is often the cause that men fall to heresy,
from the faith of the Catholic church. Again, this plainly reprooueth the
heretics false doctrine, seeing that no man can fall from the faith that he
once truly had.

The answer.
True and lively faith is one thing, and the outward profession of faith is
another. You love to dally with equivocations, knowing that that hinders the
consecution of an argument. The outward profession and not true faith is meant
here. By such arguments as you make, it is easy to prove that the crow is
white.

1. Tim. 2. 1.
The text.
I desire therefore first of all things, that obsecrations, prayers,
postulations, thankesgiuings be made for all men, for Kings, and all that are in
praeeminence, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all piety and
chastity.

The note.
Even for heathen Kings and Emperors, by whom the church suffers persecution:
much more for all faithful princes, and powers, and people both spiritual and
temporal, for whom as members of Christ's body, and therefore ioining in
prayer and oblation with the ministers of the Church and priests more properly
and particularly offer the holy sacrifices. See Saint August. de origin
animae. lib. 1. cap. 9.

The answer.
The spirit that guides and directs the bishops of Rome now, is full
contrary to the spirit that guided and directed Paul, and the whole primitive
church. For now such princes as punish papists, or favor not popery, must be
murdered, disinherited, excommunicated, deposed, deprived, given to the devil,
and not prayed for. They may not look for the duty, which was given to
persecuting princes then. For our holy father of Rome will not allow it. I see
not for what purpose you allege Augustine, and therefore I pass him over with
silence.

1. Tim. 3. 4.
The text.
Well ruling his own house, having his children subject with all chastity.

The note.
He says having children, not getting children. Saint Ambrose Epist. 82.

The answer.
I hope saint Ambrose does not mean, that he should have children of other
men's begetting, or that it should be lawful for a bishop to be a married man,
and not lawful for him to live according to the laws of matrimony, which God
himself has set down. But I see you are glad to use the fathers, where you
find them a little too much to favor and fancy your single life.

1. Tim. 3. 6.
The text.
Not a neophyte: least puffed up into pride, he fall into judgment of the
devil.

The note.
Neophytus is he that was lately christened, or newly planted in the mystical
body of Christ.

The answer.
Herein I confess the church of England has been negligent and faulty, for
permitting some of your dissembling papists to exercise the ministry of the
word, before sufficient trial by length of time was had of their unfeigned
repentance and conversion.

2. Tim 4. ^.
The text.
For every creature of God is good, and nothing to be rejected that is received
with thanksgiving.

The note.
We see plainly by these words such abstinence only to be disallowed, as
condemns the creatures of God to be naught by nature and creation.

The note.
We see a double estimation of meats here, one taken from the nature and
creation of things, the other from the person of him that uses them: as
appears plainly in these words, which God created for the faithful, and for
them that have known the truth. Your church therefore is here plainly noted:
first, for that it makes it unlawful for some to feed of diverse and sundry
of the creatures of God, As the charter house moonks.
which God had appointed for the use of all the faithful. Secondly, because it
has generally caused men to make a superstitious difference betwixt fish,
fruit, flesh, eggs, and whitemeat, being al alike by nature and creation. For
that which God has made lawful at all times, with you is sometimes unlawful,
holiness and the service of God, or at least a parcel of it, is planted in
superstitious abstinence, and men's consciences tied and entangled in the
things, in which God has left them free. As for your over turning this to be
meant of other ancient heretics, can no more excuse you, than it did excuse the
Manichees, that this was meant of the Tatians, Cataphriges, Eucratites, and
such like, who were long before them.

1. Tim. 4. 8.
The text.
For corporal exercise is profitable to little, but piety is profitable to
all things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that to come.

The note.
Some (says S. Chysostom) expound this of fasting, but they are deceived: for
fasting is a spiritual exercise. See a goodly commentary of these words in S.
August. lib. de mor. Eccl. Cath. c. 33.

The answer.
Corporal or bodily exercise are external actions for religions sake used and
exercised, as watching, long abstinence from meat and drink, the daily
reciting of a certain number of prayers, lieng and lodging on the bare ground,
the wearing of hair cloth next the skin, whippings, and whatsoever other
bodily vexations besides, wherein papists plant merit, and their heremites and
others their religious do without al measure or mean use. These and such like
are the things, which saint Paul says are profitable to little, and yet a
great piece of popery consists in them. The manners of the catholic church
in saint Augustines time, to which you refer us, does as much differ from the
manners of the church of Rome now, as chalk does differ from cheese.

1. Tim. 5. 5.
The text.
But she that is a widow indeed and desolate, let her hope in God, and continue
in obsecrations and prayers night and day.

The note.
Because of this continual prayer, which stands not with conjugal all and
carnal acts of matrimony (as the Apostle signifies, 1. Cor. 7. 5.) therefore
were these widows to live in the state of perpetual continency.

The answer.
All Christian men are commanded to continue in prayers, and to pray without
ceasing: Therefore by your reason it is lawful for no Christian to marry. You
care not how vainly you conclude, nor into what briers you bring poor men that
have tender consciences, so you seem to say somewhat for your single life.

1. Tim. 5. 17.
The text.
The priests that rule wellet them be esteemed worthy of double honor:
especially they that labor in the word and doctrine.

The note.
Double honor, and liuelihood due to good priests.

The answer.
But goodness of priests consists not in saying mass, and sacrificing for the
quick and the dead, but in well ruling their flock, and in diligent and
painful instructing the people, which pertain to their charge in Christian
religion.

1. Tim. 5. 19.
The text.
Against a priest receive not accusation, but under two or three witnesses.

The note.
Here the Apostle will not have every light fellow to be heard against a
priest. So Augustine for the like reverence of priesthood admonishes
Paucarius, that in no wise he admit any testimonies, or accusations of
heretics against a catholic priest. ep. 212.

The answer.
No reason that against ministers of the word, accusations should lightly be
admitted, and your dealing against us, in continual lieng, and false
accusations, does very well justify Augustines counsel to Paucarius. For it
is a very dangerous thing, to admit the accusations of popish heretics
against true Catholics, seeing they are commonly wont with their adversaries
to keep neither faith, nor truth.

1. Tim. 5. 22.
The text.
Impose hands on no man lightly, neither do thou communicate with other men's
sins.

The note.
Bishops must have great care that they give not order to any, that is not
well tried for his faith, learning, and good behavior.

The answer.
Herein we fully agree with you. But this rule has been as well kept by you,
as all good precepts have besides. But it is no matter: for the pope and his
bishops, learned neither of Peter, nor of Paul, 1. King. 12. 31.
but of Jeroboam to make priests for their own tooth.

1. Tim. 6. 3.
The text.
If any teach otherwise, and consent not to the sound words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and to that doctrine which is according to piety, he is proud, knowing
nothing.

The note.
See the annotation before, cap. 1. 34.

The answer.
We agree with you upon this point, that all doctrine which is odd, singular,
new, differing from that which was first planted by the Apostles, and descended
from them, to all nations, and ages following, is assuredly erronius. Let us
therefore setting all other things apart examine the doctrine of your church,
and so much as shall be found to descend from the apostles we will with all our
hearts embrace. But this trial you fly. And if any time you make a show of
coming to it, then by and by your church must give credit to your doctrine,
your church cannot err, your pope cannot err, we must believe your doctrine,
not because you can prove it, to have come from the Apostles, but because your
church, and pope have given sentence for it, but if you durst abide by your
note, we would easily show your doctrine to be erroneous.

1. Tim. 6. 10.
The text.
For the root of all evil is covetousness: which certain desiring have erred
from the faith, and have entangled themselves in many sorrows.

The note.
As in the first chapter the lack of faith and good conscience, so here
covetousness and the desire of these temporal things, and in the end of this
chapter presumption and boasting of knowledge are causes of falling from the
faith: heresy often being the punishment of former sins.

The answer.
It is very true that God punishes sin by sin, and that there be many causes,
for which wicked men are wont to forsake the faith which they do, or did
sometimes profess. The causes in your note assigned, lack of faith, and good
conscience, covetousness, presumption, and boasting, if all the world be sought,
from one end to the other, there cannot any be found, in whom these causes
have so evidently concurred, and wrought as in your most holy fathers of Rome,
wherein I refer my self to the credit of your own stories.

1. Tim. 6. 19.
The text.
Command the rich of this world not to be high minded, nor to trust in the
uncertainty of riches but in the living God, (who gives al things abundantly
to enjoy) to do well to become rich in good works, to give easelie to
communicate, to heap unto themselves a good foundation for the time to come,
that they may apprehend the true life.

The note.
Alms deeds and good works laid for a foundation and ground to attain
everlasting life. So say the doctors upon this place.

The answer.
If you had showed us what doctors had so spoken, we would have showed you
their meaning. But we know that neither they nor the apostles meant by the word
foundation, to put Christ out of his office, or place: but only to oppose
against the uncertainty of riches here, the certainty of promised blessedness
in the time to come. According to the saying of our Lord, and Savior Christ,
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

2. TIMOTHY.
^. Tim. 1. 6.
The text.
For the which cause I admonish thee, that thou resuscitate the grace of God
which is in thee by imposition of my hands.

The note.
Here again it is plain that holy orders give grace, and that even by, and
in the external ceremony of imposing the bishops hands. And it is a manner of
speech specially used in this Apostle and S. Luke, that orders give grace to
the ordered, and that to take orders or authority to minister sacrament or
preach, is to be given or delivered to Gods grace. Acts. 14. 25.

The answer.
Here you say that that is plain, which no wise man can see: namely, that
holy orders give grace, in, and by the external ceremony of imposing of the
bishops hands. For if that were so, what needed there be any choice of men
furnished with gifts and graces for that purpose, since in the very ordering
they should be sufficiently endued with gifts and graces necessary and
needful? And how fell it out that there were so great a number of popish
priests void and destitute of al gifts and graces after their ordering, when
the bishop had conferred and bestowed upon them all that he could? It is
evident by the manifold commendations that the Apostle gives to Timothy, 1.
Tim. 4. 16.
as well for his own study in the scriptures, 2. Tim. 3. 14. 15.
as also for his bringing up under his mother, and grandmother, that he was a
man furnished with gifts before Paul and the elders ordered him. But because the
prayers of the church in that his consecrating to the work of God, were not in
vain, that blessing and increase of aptness and fitness, which God at their
petitions gave him at that time, is called the gift or grace by imposition of
hands. In the like order it is true, that all those which be rightly ordered,
are delivered to the grace of God: because the same God, who of his merciful
goodness before endued them with gifts, made them fit and meet for the work of
his ministry, and moved his church to call them thereunto, afterward by and
in the imploieng of their talents to his glory, and the benefit of his church
and people, increases and augmenteth their gifts.

2. Tim. 1. 13.
The text.
Have thou a form of sound words, which thou have heard of me in faith and in
the love in Christ Jesus.

The note.
Faith and love coupled commonly together in this Apostles writing.

The answer.
Paul so speaks of them, because faith and love be companions inseparable.
But such mates as you are, bend themselves to uncouple these, to the end they
might have some probable show of matter to prate withal, against justification
by only faith.

2. Tim. 1. 16.
The text.
Our Lord give mercy to the house of Onesiphorus, because he has often
refreshed me, and has not been ashamed of my chain.

The note.
What an happy and meritorious thing it is to relieve the afflicted for
religion, and not to be ashamed of their disgrace, yrons or what misery so
ever.

The answer.
Put meritorious into your purse, and understand true religion, and then we
agree to your note.

2. Tim. 2. 10.
The text.
Therefore I sustain all things for the elect, that they also may obtain the
salvation, which is in Christ Jesus with heavenly glory.

The note.
Mark here that the elect (though sure of their salvation) yet are saved by
the means of their preachers and teachers, as also by their own endeavor.

The answer.
Mark here the force and might of truth, which has here wrested this
confession of truth from you, that the elect are sure of their salvation, to
which the whole course of your doctrine is opposite. The ministry of the
word, and men's own endeavors to attain the knowledge of the truth, we
acknowledge to be means appointed of God to save those, which be his.

1. Tim. 2. 16.
The text.
But profane and vain speeches avoid.

The note.
See the annotation before. 1. Timoth. 6. verse 20.

The answer.
We have seen your note, and do see that both your reasons and authorities
there stand very well against your selves. But I refer the answer of it to the
answer of all your annotations.

1. Tim. 2. 25.
The text.
But the servant of our Lord must not wrangle, but be mild toward all men, apt
to teach, patient, with modesty admonishing them that resist the truth: least
sometime God give them repentance to know the truth.

The note.
Conversion from sin and heresy is the gift of God, and of his special
grace, yet here we see good exhortations and prayer, and such other helps of
man be profitable thereunto: which could not be if we had not freewill.

The answer.
That conversion from sin is the gift of God, and that all helps by man, which
God has thereto appointed are needful and necessary it is manifest, but it
is impossible, that the industry of man should do good, Romans 8. 7.
where God creates not a new heart, and renews not a right will. For the will
and wisdom of man is enimitie to God. And so appears the vanity of your
conclusion for free will.

2. Tim. 3. 8.
The text.
But as Iannes and Iambres resisted Moises, so these also resist the truth, men
corrupted in mind, reprobate concerning the faith.

The note.
That those Magicians which resisted Moises were thus called, it is not written
in all the old Testament, therefore it came to the Apostles knowledge by
tradition, as the church now has the names of the three Kings, of the penitent
thief, of the soldier that pierced Christ's side on the cross.

The answer.
Howsoever Paul had the names of those magicians, to us it is not material. We
are sure the spirit of God has now to us made them known by him, and
therefore it follows not that we must believe your fabulous narrations of the
names, number, dignity and such like, of the wise men, wherein you make of
East, West, and of West, East, contrary to the manifest truth, so that the
wiser sort of your selves do not believe those toies, but your Romish church
has delivered it to her children: let them that will willingly be deceived,
be deceived by her.

2 Timothy 3. 14.
The text.
But thou continue in those things which thou have learned, and are committed
to thee, knowing of whom thou have learned.

The note.
In all danger and diversity of false sects, Saint Paul's admonition is ever
to abide in that was first taught and delivered, never to give over our old
faith for a new fancy. This is it which before he calls depositum. 1.
Timothy 6. and 2. Timothy 1.

The answer.
And why did not Paul admonish men to hold fast that, which the Pope and the
church of Rome should prescribe, because that should not, or could not err, or
stray from the first faith? Or why do not you, setting all other things apart,
enter into that trial with us, whether our doctrine or yours were the former?
Your whole doctrine swarueth far from the first faith which the Apostles
planted, and the greatest part thereof is quite destitute of all testimony of
antiquity.

2. Tim. 4. 6.
The text.
For I am even now to be sacrificed, and the time of my resolution is at hand.

The note.
The martyrdom of Saints is so acceptable to God, that it is counted as it
were a sacrifice in his sight, and therefore has many effects both in the
party that suffers it, and in others that are partakers of the merit as of a
sacrifice, which name it has by a Metaphore.

The answer.
The voluntary sufferings of most bitter and cruel death for Gods cause, of
Gods saints are accepted of God as a most sweet sacrifice. The effects in the
party that suffers, because you have not uttered what they be, I can not
imagine your meaning, and therefore know not what to say to it. The effects it
has in others, if you had dealt plainly, you should have said to be the
confirmation and strengthening of other christians by their sufferings. But you
come covertly in with the partaking or partnership of their merits, to make a
way for the maintenance of your holy fathers gainful merchandise, for he has
the bestowing of all the merits of Peter and Paul and other saints, and they
are admitted to be partakers of them, that will pay most for them.

2. Tim. 4. 21.
The text.
Eubulus, and pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and all the brethren salute thee.

The note.
This Linus was coadiutor with and under Saint Peter, and so counted second in
the number of the popes.

The answer.
It is strange to see how boldly our papists can set down that, which by no
means they can be sure of, first therefore good reader thou art to understand,
that by the testimony of all stories Peter and Paul suffered death at Rome
both in one day. If ever Linus therefore were bishop of Rome by the Apostles
life time, he was at this present, when they were so near their end, that they
daily looked to be sacrificed. But it is not likely that he was as then
advanced to that dignity, when neither Paul mentions him as bishop, or as
his or Peter's coadiutor or fellow labourer, and also sets diverse other
Christians before him in his salutation, which had been a very vnmannerlie
part, and a great forgetfulness of duty in the Apostles, if Linus had then
been Bishop there, and so Christ's vicar general. But because you term him
Saint Peter's coadiutor there, I pray you tell me, was Saint Peter there now or
no, I will not use the reason, that Paul not only here but always forgets
him amongst those whom he names in his salutations, whereof grows great
likelihood that he was never there whiles Paul wrote thence. But if he were now
and before there, verse. 15.
Paul makes a very great and pitiful complaint of him, that he amongst the
rest forsook him. But I had rather say he was not yet come to Rome, and that
Paul made Linus the first Bishop there, as your Clemens also affirms, then to
admit so great an absurdity against Peter. The succession of the bishops of
Rome which you so much glory of, and upon the authority whereof your church
rests, is uncertain, vain, obscure, and such as your selves can make no
certain report of.

TITUS.
Tit. 1. 15.
The text.
All things are clean to the clean: but to the polluted, and infidels nothing
is clean, but polluted are both their minds and consciences.

The note.
He speaks not of the church absteining from meats sometimes which is not for
any uncleanness, in the creatures, but for chastening their bodies: but he
means the Jewish superstition, who now being christians, would not cease to
put difference of clean and unclean according to their old law. See Aug.
cont. Faust. lib. 31. cap. 4.

The answer.
I easily believe that he meant not of that which was not, for your churches
superstition in that matter was not yet grown. But you have brought about by
your laws of abstinencie, that your simple followers, in the extremity of
sickness when there cannot be any pretense of chastening their bodies thereby,
are so snarled in conscience, that they dare not touch, or taste, that which is
necessary to preserve life, and to restore health withal. Besides chastening of
your bodies, in your ordinary abstinence in popery, has no probable show.
For your richer sort never fare more delicately, nor fill their bellies more
gluttonouslie, then when they abstain from ordinary meats, and hunt after
extraordinary delicates. So that no man's bodies are chastened by your fasting
days, but their, whom need, or nigerdlines does continually compel to
borrow of their bellies.

Tit. 2. 15.
The text.
These things speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all authority.

The note.
Bishops must be stout and command in Gods cause, and the people must in no
wise disobey or contemn them.

The answer.
So must also every minister of the word, and their flocks do owe unto them
honor, and obedience, and you must remember that your popes cause, is not gods
cause.

Tit. 3. 5.
The text.
But when the benignity and kindness toward man of our savior God appeered,
not by the works of justice which we did, but according to his mercy he has
saved us by the lauer of regeneration and renouation of the holy ghost.

The note.
As before in the Sacrament of holy orders (1. Timoth. 4. and 2. Timoth. 1.)
so here it is plain that baptism gives grace, and that by it as by an
isntrumental cause we be saved.

The answer.
Concerning your Sacraments of orders, of your own institution, and grace by
them given, you have received answer before. That baptism is amongst the
isntrumental causes of our salvation no man denies. And likewise we grant
unto you, that by it grace is given to the worthy receivers, so that you
understand by baptism the whole sacrament, and not the outward act, and work
of the minister only as you commonly do.

Tit. 3. 10.
The text.
A man that is an heretic, after the first and second admonition avoid.
Knowing that he that is such an on, is subverted and sins being condemned by
his own judgment.

The note.
These admonitions and corruptions must be given to such as err, by our
spiritual Governors, and pastors: to whom if they yield not, Christian men
must avoid them.

The answer.
If we were agreed of the church, and governors thereof, then we would not
contend with you about your note. But now so long as you will not suffer the
church to be discerned by the scriptures, nor cleave to that church which
receives the doctrine in them delivered, the admonitions, and correptions of
your governors, are to be contemned, despised, and disobeied.

PHILEMON.
Phile. 1. 5.
The text.
I give thanks to my God always making a memory of thee in my prayers. Hearing
thy charity and faith which thou have in our Lord Jesus, and toward all the
saints.

The note.
Faith and charity commended always together, both necessary to make a
complete Christian man, and to justification and salvation.

The answer.
Faith, and charity always together, but not always commended together, both
necessary to make a complete Christian, faith for justification, and charity
for sanctification: But you the better to blind men, confound that which you
should distinguish.

Phile. 1. 7.
The text.
For I have had great joy and consolation in thy charity, because the bowels
of the saints have rested by thee brother.

The note.
The duties of charity and mercy done to Christ's prisoners are exceeding
acceptable to God, and all good men.

The answer.
This is very true, and yet you the popes prisoners, and not Christ's.

Phile. 1. 1^*
The text.
And do thou receive him as mine own bowels.

The note.
All spiritual men, ought to be exceeding propense and ready to procure men's
pardon and reconciliation to all penitent.

The answer.
It is to be marvelled at, that men showing so little mercy as you are wont,
and so void of all pity, as your tragical doings have showed you to be,
should now become teachers of mercy, and pity to other men.

Phile. 1. 1^*
The text.
I Paul have written with mine own hand: I will repay it: not to say to thee,
that thou owe me thine own self also.

The note.
The great det and duty that we owe to such as be our spiritual parents in
Christ.

The answer.
As to our parents we can make no sufficient recompense, so much less are we
able to requite those, which are Gods good instruments of our regeneration.

HEBREWS.
Hebr. 1. 4.
The text.
Being made so much more excellent than Angels, as he has inherited a more
excellent name above them.

The note.
The excellency of Christ above Angels.

The answer.
And therefore consequently his excellency above Moses, the prophets, and all
creatures whatsoever.

Hebr. 1. 14.
The text.
Are they not al ministering spirits, sent to minister for them which shall
receive the inheritance of salvation?

The note.
The holy angels (says S. Augustine) to the society of whom we aspire in this
our peregrination, as they have eternity to continue, so also facility to
know, and felicity to rest. For they do help us without all difficulty,
because with their spiritual motions, pure and free, they labor and travel
not. De ciuitate lib. 11. cap. 31.

The answer.
I would your doctrine of Angels were always, as this which here you learn of
Augustine, then some of your unprofitable controversies, which now trouble the
world, would soon be cut of, and thrown to the dunghill amongst other filth
and mire of popery. But these, and such other good things, are defiled with
the rest that you couple them with. And more I have not to say to you for this
note.

Hebr. ^* 1.
The text.
Therefore more abundantly ought we to observe those things which we have
heard: least perhaps we run out.

The note.
As that which runs out of a broken vessel, or that runs by is lost.

The answer.
He is said to run out, which does not hold and keep the word which he
hears, of whom we say in English, In at the one ear and out at the other.

Hebr. 2. 9.
The text.
But him that was a little lessened under the Angels: we see Jesus because of
the passion of death crowned with glory and honor, that through the grace of
God he might taste of death for all

The note.
This proves against the Caluinists that Christ by his passion merited his
own glorification, which they would not for shame deny of Christ, but that
they are at a point to deny all meritorious works, yea even Christ's also. And
therefore they translate also this heretically, by transposing the words. In
the bible printed 1579.

The answer.
The force of this proof rests upon the signification of the Greek
preposition (...), which here, as often else where, does signify the final
cause or end, and is to be referred to his lessening, which goes before, and
not to his crowning which comes after. As if he should say, we see him, that
is Jesus, because of his suffering, or that he might suffer, a little lessened
under the Angels, that is, made man. And thus your proof fails, and comes
to naught. Otherwise for Christ's merits we do more highly esteem of them than
you. But the holy Ghost has taught us, that he took our nature upon him, not
for himself but for our good, so that whatsoever he did in our nature, was not
to gain to him self, but to us; not to his, but to our benefit: but
preposterous desire to stablish the merits of men carries you, you wot not
whither. For it makes you to suppose, that the majesty of God which is proper
to himself (for that was the glory wherewith Christ is crowned) may be the
deserved reward of man's works, which is horrible once to think.

Hebr. 2. 16.
The text.
For no where does he take Angels: but the seed of Abraham he does take.

The note.
The dignity of man in that Christ took our nature unto his person in deity,
and not the nature of Angels.

The answer.
Nay rather the great and marvelous goodness of God, that was better to men
than to Angels, and that vouchsafed rather to unite our miserable vile nature
to his Godhead, rather than the eternal excelling nature of Angels.

Hebr. 3. 3.
The text.
For this man is esteemed worthy of more ample glory above Moises, by so
much as more ample glory than the house has he that framed it.

The note.
The excellency of Christ above Moises.

The answer.
Christ far excelled Moises: but you make him far inferior. For from Moises
doctrine no man might swerve to the right hand, Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
or to the left, no man might ad or take away: but to Christ's doctrine, Deuteronomy.
28. 14.
under the name of traditions, you may make as many additions as you list.

Hebr. 3. 14.
The text.
For we be made partakers of Christ: yet so if we keep the beginning of his
substance firm unto the end.

The note.
Faith is the groundworke of our creation in Christ, which if we hold not
fast, all the building is lost.

The answer.
Such a faith as a man in some measure is able to render a reason of out of the
word, and not a blind persuasion to believe as other men believe, neither
knowing what we believe, and why, as the greatest number of your blind
followers do.

Hebr. 4. 1.
The text.
For he said in a certain place of the seventh day, thus, And God rested the
seventh day from all his works.

The note.
If the Apostle had not evidently showed that the Saboaths rest was a figure
of the eternal repose in heaven, who durst to have applied that Scripture of
Gods rest the seventh day to that purpose? Or how can our adversaries now
reprehend the like application manifoldlie used in all holy ancient writers to
that end?

The answer.
What conscience is in you for applieng Scriptures without example, warrant, or
any other necessary collection I know not: but this I know, that in your
handling of the scriptures there appears none. All things that happened to
the fathers in the old Testament, were figures (as the Apostle teaches) of
things happening in the new testament to us. As therefore the diligence of the
fathers was commendable in seeking and searching what was prefigured in the old
law; so the immoderate desire and delight of some, to draw all things in both
testaments into perpetual allegories, and to make figures where none are, and
to wrest their fancies out of what place they list, is justly by your
adversaries found fault withal.

Hebr. 4. 12.
The text.
For the word of God is lively and forcible, and more piersing then any two
edged sword: and reaching unto the division of the soul and the spirit, of the
ioints also and of the marowes, and a discerner of the cogitations and intents
of the heart.

The note.
Whatsoever God threatens by his word concerning the punishment of sin and
incredulity, shall be executed, be the offense never so secret, deep, or hidden
in our hearts, because Gods speech passes easily, and searches thoroughly
every part, power and faculty of man's soul.

The answer.
This note is true, though but in a little part expressing the meaning of the
text, and very hardly agreeable with other parts of your doctrine. For if
secret and hidden sins, which by no means break forth and discover them
selves, by act can not escape the threatened vengeance of God, then what sins
can you can venial?

Hebr. 6. 9.
The text.
But we confidentlie trust of you, (my best beloved) better things and nearer
to salvation: although we speak thus.

The note.
It is evident by these words against the Nouatians and the Caluinists, that
Saint Paul meant not preciselie that they had done, or could do any such
sin, where they should be put out of all hope of salvation, and be sure of
damnation during their life.

The answer.
It is evident by your words, that you flatter your selves with mercy more
then there is cause why, whiles you think that you can not commit any such
sin, as for which you should be sure during your life to be damned. For
herein you do not contend with the Nouatians and Caluinists (as it pleases you
to term them) only, but with Saint John, and with our Lord and Savior Christ.
For what will ye say of those sinners, which S. John forbids us to pray for:
or of that sin, which our Savior Christ has told us shall never be forgiven,
1. John 5. 16.
neither in this world, nor in the world to come? Matthew. 12. 32.
The same sin, the Apostle in this Chapter describes, not because the
Hebrews, to whom he wrote, had committed it, but because it was possible for
some of them to fall into it, therefore he forewarneth them of the great and
wonderful danger of it.

Hebr. 7. 2.
The text.
To whom also Abraham divided tithes of all, first in deed by interpretation
the king of justice, and then also King of Salem, which is to say, King of
peace.

The note.
When the fathers and catholic expositers pick out allegories and mysteries
out of the names of men, the protestants not endued with the Spirit whereby the
Scriptures were given, deride their holy labors in search of the same: but
the Apostle finds high mysteries in the names of persons and places as you
see.

The answer.
That we deride the Fathers or any other Catholic expositors, is one of your
woonted slanders: but we say that measure in all things is a merry mean. For
though in the names of such special persons as were figures of Christ, and in
the names of other persons, places, and things as had their names given for
some special causes and considerations, the mysteries shadowed in the
signification of those names are well, and profitably sought: yet to do, or
endeavor the like, in all names, or in many other names is labor needless,
causeless, and curious.

Hebr. 7. 8.
The text.
And here indeed men that die receive tithes: but there he has witness that
he lives.

The note.
The tithes given to Melchisedech, were not given as to a mere mortal man, as
all of the tribe of Leui and Aarons order were, but as to one representing the
son of God, who now lives and reigns, and holds his priesthood, and the
function thereof for ever.

The answer.
Your note is true, and because he holds his priesthood and the functions
thereof for ever, therefore you offer him great injury, to appoint other
priests to do his office, that is, to offer propitiatory sacrifice for us.

Hebr. 7. ^5.
The text.
Whereby he is able to save us for ever, going by himself to God: always
living to make intercession for us.

The note.
Christ according to his human nature, prays for us, and continually
represents his former passion, and merit to God the father.

The answer.
You would make us believe that Christ was our priest only in respect of our
nature, directly against the word, and against this present place. For the
priests appointed by the law, were men having infirmity, but our priest is
the son for ever perfect, where perfection is opposed to infirmity, and the
son of God is opposed to men: which shows the coupling of both natures,
as well in exercising of his office as in his person. But you of purpose in your
translation have omitted the word men, to obscure and darken the sense of the
text.

Hebr. 8. ^2.
The text.
We have such an high priest, who is set on the right hand of the seat of
majesty in the heavens, a minister of the holies, and of the true tabernacle
which our Lord pight and not man.

The note.
Christ living and reigning in heaven, continues his priestly function still,
and is minister not of Moses Sancta and tabernacle, but of his own body, and
blood, which be the true holies and tabernacle not formed by man, but by Gods
own hand.

The answer.
Paul sets Christ in heaven at the right hand of majesty, you set him in
earth in the sacrament of the altar. Paul teaches that he continues in his
priestly function: you have appointed priests to offer propitiatory sacrifice,
as if his priesthood were ceased. Paul says that if Christ were upon the
earth again, he were no priest: you teach that he is again upon earth,
therefore your doctrine makes him no priest.

Hebr. 8. 7.
The text.
For if that former had been void of fault, there should not certes a place
for a second been sought.

The note.
The promises and effects of the law were temporal, but the promises and
effects of Christ's Sacraments in the church be eternal.

The answer.
This is plain, and flat Manicheisme. If the high priest were a figure of
Christ, if Sancta sanctorum were a figure of heaven, if the sacrifices of the
old law were figures of Christ's sacrifice, then how can the promises, or
effects perteining to them be temporal? The differences that I have learned
between the sacraments of the law, and the Gospel do not consist in
diversity of promises, and effects, but in cleerenes, number, and time.
Cleerenes because that, which then was obscurely shadowed, is now clearly
revealed: number because they had a great multitude of sacramental figures, we
as few in number, and as effectual in signification, as possible may be, in
time because theirs nursed in them the faith of Christ to come, and ours
confirms to us the faith of Christ which is already come, and has
accomplished all things, which are necessary for our redemption.

Hebr. 9. 8.
The text.
The holy Ghost signifieng this, that the way of the holies ^as not yet
manifested, the former tabernacle yet standing.

The note.
The way to heaven was not open before Christ's passion, and therefore the
Patriarks and good men of the old testament were in some other place of rest
until then.

The answer.
You dream of a dry summer. Christ was always the way, but Christ was not
always manifested, or made openly known during the former tabernacle, as now
he is. What makes this for your dream of shutting the fathors out of heaven,
and causing them to go seek another place of rest? Was not Christ the lamb
slain from the beginning of the world? And was not faith in his blood as
auailable to the fathers, as to us?

Hebr. 9. 9.
The text.
Which is a parable of the time present.

The note.
All things done in the old testament and priesthood were figures of Christ's
actions.

The answer.
If all things done in the old Testament, and priesthood have relation to
Christ and that which he performed for us, then how are the promises
temporal, as before you said? Liars had need of good memories, or else with one
breath they deny and overthrow that, which they affirm with another.

Hebr. 9 19.
The text.
For all the commandment of the law being read of Moises to all the people,
he taking the blood of calves and goats with water and skarlet wool, and
ysope, sprinkled the very book also it self, and all the people, saying,
This is the blood of the Testament which God has commanded you.

The note.
Here we may learn that the Scriptures contain not all necessary rites or
truths, when neither the place to the which the Apostle alludeth, nor any
other mentions half these ceremonies, but he had them by tradition.

The answer.
The Scriptures (you say) contain not all necessary rites and truths, why
do you couple rites and truths together? You know that we hold that rites and
ceremonies may be variable according to diversity of times, places, and manners
of people: so the general rules of Scriptures given to frame them by be
observed. But truth is always one and the same, and not to be found but in the
word of truth, and therefore though you could have proved that some of these
rites were had by tradition, yet it would not follow that any necessary
truth were omitted in scriptures. But let us see how doughtilie you prove
that, forsooth half the ceremonies here spoken of, are not mentioned in the
place of Scripture, to the which the Apostle alludeth, nor in any other place,
and therefore it can not be otherwise, but he had them by tradition. As you are
true in this, so I would you might find credit in all things else: Exodus 14. 8.
first in the place by your selves quoted, the reading of the Law, the
sprinkling of the people and the book, with the blood of the sacrifices, with
the words here rehearsed are mentioned. Then rests water, skarlet wool and
hissope, to be showed else where. In Leuiticus we find that water was mingled
with the blood which was to be sprinkled, Leuit. 14. 4.
and that the sprinckle it self was made of cedar wood, of hissope, and of a
skarlet lace. Thus have you one place for the sprinckling, and another for the
sprinkle, and nothing here at all by tradition, which you so contend for.

Hebr. 9. 28.
The text.
And as it is appointed to men to die once, and after this the judgment: so
also Christ was offered once, to exhauste the sins of many.

The note.
By this word which signifies to empty, or draw out even to the bottom, is
declared the plentiful and perfect redemption of sins by Christ.

The answer.
When the holy Ghost by such significant and forcible words has taught us to
ascribe our whole and full remission of sins to Christ, what impudency and
shamelessenes is in you, to join to Christ a number of trumperies of your own,
and as it were in this matter to part stakes with him by chale^ging, if not one
half, yet a very great part by your works satisfactorie and meritorious?

Hebr. 10. 6.
The text.
Holocausts and for sin did not please thee.

The note.
For sin is the proper name of a certain sacrifice called in Hebrew (...) as
holocaust is another kind. See the annotations. 2. Corinths, 5. verse 21.

The answer.
To trouble peoples heads with the diversity of the sacrifices of the Jews,
and their diverse appellations, I judge it not necessary, and therefore I leave
your note as I find it.

Hebr. 10. 16.
The text.
And this is the testament which I will make to them after those days, says
our Lord, giving my laws in their hearts, and in their minds will I
superscribe them, and their sins and iniquities I will remember no more.

The note.
This is partly fulfilled by the grace of the new Testament, but it shall be
perfectly accomplished in heaven.

The answer.
This note I will not impugn, but it comes as a rose among nettles, which a
man can hardly cul out, without stinging of his hands.

Hebr. 10. 20.
The text.
Having therefore brethren confidence in the entering of the holies in the blood
of Christ, which he has dedicated to us a new and living way by the veil,
that is, his flesh, etc.

The note.
To dedicate, is to be the author and beginner of a thing. The protestants
translate, he has prepared, for their heresy that Christ was not the first
man that entered into heaven.

The answer.
We shun not the word dedicate, which you your selves have borrowed of a
protestant, for it is as good and fit as the other. And you charge us
wrongfullie with that which we hold not, for we all affirm that Christ was
the first man that ever carried the whole humane nature and substance of man,
consisting of an humane body, and of a reasonable soul into heaven.

Hebr. 10. 29.
The text.
A man making the Law of Moises frustrate, without any mercy dies under two
or three witnesses: how much more think does he deserve worse punishment,
which has trodden the son of God under foot, and esteemed the blood of the
Testament polluted, wherein he is sanctified, and done contumely to the spirit
of grace?

The note.
Heresy and Apostasy from the Catholic faith punishable by death.

The answer.
This does plainly and manifestly reprove the overmuch clemency used in this
Realm and Church of England, toward froward and obstinate papists, who by
your own conclusion are by Gods laws punishable by death.

Hebr. 10. 35.
The text.
Do not therefore loose your confidence which has a great remuneration.

The note.
Good works make great confidence of salvation, and have great reward.

The answer.
Good works being testimonies of our election, fruits of our faith, witnesses
that we be led and guided by the spirit of God, do nourish and increase our
confidence in God, whom we know to have adopted us in Christ, for his
children. It is true also that God does most liberally reward all good things,
which he works in his children.

Hebr. 11. 1.
The text.
And faith is the substance of things to be hoped for, the argument of things
not appearing.

The note.
By this word substance is meant that faith is the ground of our hope.

The answer.
Or rather that faith is the very substance, and being of things which yet
appear not, nor are not seen, and therefore are hoped for.

Hebr. 11. 5.
The text.
By faith Henoch was translated, that he should not see death, and he was not
found, because God translated him.

The note.
Here it appears that Henoch yet lives and is not dead against the
Caluinists. See the Annot. chap. 11. Apoc.

The answer.
Why do you not couple Saint Paul with the Caluinists, does not he say, Romans
5. 1^.
that death reigned over all from Adam to Moses? Was not Henoch one of these
all, or did he not live within the time there limited? yet it is true that
Enoch and Elias did not die after the common and ordinary manner of other men,
but were translated, and have in extraordinary manner and sort deposed the
corruptible flesh, that with Christ they may enjoy blessed rest, and quietness.

Hebr. 11. ^.
The text.
But without faith it is impossible to please God, for he that comes to God,
must believe that he is, and is a rewarder to them that seek him.

The note.
We must believe that God will reward all our good works, for he is a rewarder
of true justice, not an accepter or imputer of that, that is not.

The answer.
It is true that God of his goodness and bounty will reward every good work,
and it is true that God rewards true justice, that is the good, that they do
that in sincerity and truth seek him, though it deserve none. But that which
you add shows that you care not how directly you oppose your selves to the
truth of Gods word, so that you may bleare the eyes of the simple with
somewhat. Is not the justice of Christ our justice? is it in us reallie, or by
imputation? Heretofore you have seemed to have bent your force to prove some
justice, besides imputative justice, and now you would have imputative justice
quite strooken out of the book, least God should be an imputer of that, which
is not. Our sins were not in Christ, and yet they were imputed to Christ, and
Christ was punished for them: why shall it not then stand as well with Gods
justice, that though Christ's justice be not actually, and really in us, yet it
be both imputed to us, and we crowned and rewarded for it?

Hebr. 11. 19.
The text.
Whereupon he received him also for a parable.

The note.
That is in figure and mystery of Christ dead and alive again.

The answer.
The truth of this note we acknowledge.

Hebr. 11. 22.
The text.
By faith Joseph dieng, made mention of the going forth of the children of
Israel: and gave commandment concerning his bones.

The note.
The translation of relikes, or saints bodies, and the due regard and honor, we
ought to have to the same are proved hereby.

The answer.
Joseph in this commandment touching his bones, showed his assured faith, and
constant belief that God in his good time would keep, and perform his
promise, touching the inheritance of the land of Canaan. The children of
Israel in translating his bones, showed their care of truth, in keeping the
promise, which they made unto him. The honor, yea all the honor, they did to
him or his bones, when they came into the land of promise, Joshua 24. ^^.
and were possessed of it, was to see him, or them honestly laid in the grave.
What makes all this for your superstitions? The saints of God neither gave
you, nor your fathers charge to translate their bones. The cause of your
translating them was not any due regard to them, but profit to your selves, by
making merchandise of their carcasses, and by abusing most shamefully the
simplicity of the ignorant, to offer largely to you under color of honoring
them. And therefore if you should not maintain this note, that butter would
not cleave to your bread.

Hebr. 11. 26.
The text.
Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasure of the
Egyptians. For he looked unto the remuneration.

The note.
The protestants that deny, we may, or ought to do good in respect or for
reward in heaven are hereby confuted.

The answer.
You have confuted your own shadow, and not the protestants, for it is your
slander, and not our assertion that is hereby confuted. For we confess that in
well doing men may respect, and have an eye to such rewards as God has
promised. But this we say withal, that it is not the reward only or
chiefelie, that the saints of God have respect or regard to, for that were
either hipocriticall or servile, but the reverence, that sons owe unto their
father, who the more assured they are of his fatherly favor, the gladder they
are to please him, and the loather to displease.

Hebr. 12. 15.
The text.
Looking diligently least any man be wanting to the grace of God: lest any
roore of bitterness springing up do hinder, and by it many be polluted.

The note.
That we be not good there is no lack on Gods part, who offers his grace to
us, but the defect is in our selves, that are not answerable to Gods calling of
us, and grace toward us.

The answer.
This note is very true, and therefore we ought carefully to call upon God to
reform us, and to renew us, that we be not also amongst them, that stubburnly
refuse the grace of God calling them.

Hebr. 12. 16.
The text.
Least there be any fornicator or profane person as Esau, who for one dish of
meat sold his first birth rightes.

The note.
Such as forsake their salvation and religion to save their lands and goods are
like Esau.

The answer.
This note must have a favorable interpretation, and some cautions and
exceptions, except you will leave no place of repentance to them that have once
preferred goods before religion, but either hipocriticall or too late as Esaus
was.

Hebr. 12. 22.
The text.
But you are come to mount Sion, and the city of the living God heavenly
Jerusalem, and the assemblies of many thousands of Angels, and the Church of
the first borne, which are written in the heavens, and the judge of all God,
and the spirits of the just made perfect, and the mediator of the new
Testament, etc.

The note.
The faithful are made fellows of Angels, and of all the perfect souls
departed since the beginning of the world, and of Christ him self.

The answer.
Because the church is the fellowship of all the saints which have been, are
or shall be, whereof Christ, and not the pope is head and chief, and which
with Christ make one body.

Hebr. 13. 9.
The text.
With various and strange doctrines be not led away.

The note.
New, diverse, changeable, and strange doctrines to be avoided, for such be
heretical, against which the best remedy or preservative, is always to look
back to our first Apostles, and the holy fathers doctrine.

The answer.
I would to God you would once keep promise, to look back in truth to our
first Apostles doctrine, so should our controversies be soon at an end: but
you commonly by your first apostle mean your corrupt monk Augustine. And if
by him you would examine your doctrine, you must cast away a number of your
chief corruptions, which he never knew of.

Hebr. 13. 21.
The text.
And the God of peace which brought out from the dead, the great pastor of the
sheep in the blood of the eternal testament, our Lord Jesus Christ fit you in
all goodness that you may do his will, etc.

The note.
(...) that is, make you perfect and absolute in all goodness.

The answer.
This you learned either of master Beza, or of Erasmus, or of both, give them
thanks for it.

JAMES.
Iam. 1. 14.
The text.
For every one is tempted of his own concupiscence, abstracted and allured.

The note.
The ground of temptation to sin is our concupiscence, and not God.

The answer.
Tentations are either outward or inward. Tentations outward are afflictions,
wherebie God is wont to try and prove men, as gold and silver is tried in
the fire. Tentations inward whereof James speaks in this place, are
inordinate desires provoking and soliciting us to sin, but because men who
receive corruption from Adam, are prone and ready to do as Adam did, that is,
to lay their faults from them selves to God, therefore James earnestly
admonishes them to look into them selves, and there to epsy and see the
root and matter of all corruption.

Iam. 1. 25.
The text.
But he that has looked into the law of perfect liberty, and has remained in
it, not made a forgetful hearer but a doer of the work, this man shall be
blessed in his deed.

The note.
Beatitude or salvation consists in well working.

The answer.
Weldoers or workers are blessed and saved, and yet notwithstanding beatitude
and salvation does not consist in our weldoing, but in the mercy and goodness
of God bestowed upon us in Christ. Therefore it is to be observed that in this
place James makes a comparison between hearers of the word, whereof one sort
are negligent and forgetful, and therefore never the better for the things
they hear. The other sort are diligent, and commit to memory, and put in
practice in life the thing they learned by hearing, these latter so doing and
not the former, show them selves to be blessed and saved. For Christ preached
is their salvation, their works do testify their faith, whereby they have
laid hold on Christ their righteousness, as fruits do witness the goodness of a
tree.

James. ^. 20.
The text.
But will thou know o vain man that faith without works is idle?

The note.
I Will speaks to all heretics that say, Faith only without works does
justify, calling them vain men.

The answer.
You show your delight, you seek to deceive your selves and others by
equivocations. For you know well enough, that faith is not taken here for a
true and a lively faith, which works by love, as Paul and we take it, when we
speak of justifying by faith. Secondly, you know also, that we make no account
of any such faith as is idle, or separated from love. Thirdly, you know that
saint James takes not here justifying, for being made just, but for being
declared and showed to be just: as appears by the example of Abraham which he
brings. For God first made him just, and afterward he was declared and showed
so to be, by that most excellent example of obedience, in offering his son
Isaac. There is therefore no contrariety betwixt us and James, though you go
about to prove that by sound of words, which by sound or just meaning you
cannot effect and bring to pass.

(...). 3. 15.
The text.
But if you have bitter zeal, and there be contentions in your hearts: glory
not, and be not liers against the truth: for this is not wisdom descending
from above, but earthly, sensual, devilish.

The note.
The difference betwixt the humane wisdom specially of heretics, and the
wisdom of the catholic church and her children.

The answer.
If a man compare the fruits of heavenly wisdom, with the fruits of the
wisdom of your church, he shall find them as contrary as white is to black.
All stories testify, that your church has been the author of most of the
wars and contentions in Christendom these three hundred years, and upwards.
Your books in praise of Sodomitri^, your curtesans maintained in the eyes and
bosom of your most holy father, and the beastly life of your priests, testify
the chastity of your church. The mercy of your church the massacres of
France, and the Marian storm in England not yet forgotten, do sufficiently
show. I might go thorough the rest: but peace, chastity, and mercy wanting
amongst you, does sufficiently show your wisdom to be earthly, sensual, and
devilish.

James. 4. 6.
The text.
And gives greater grace: for the which cause it says, God resists the
proud, and gives grace to the humble.

The note.
The boldness of heretics adding here the word scripture to the text thus: And
the scripture gives greater grace.

The answer.
The blindness of you papists, which think it a boldness to set the nominative
case before the verb. I pray you tell us what it is that (as saint James here
says) gives greater grace, if it be not the scripture? But the place is
plain, the words before, and the words following do enforce, that the word
scripture must be supplied: but there is none other cause of your wrangling in
this, but that you would have every thing left as obscure and dark, as might
be possible, to fray poor men from studieng that which they cannot understand.

James. 4. 8.
The text.
Approach to God, and he will approach to you.

The note.
Free will and man's own endeavor necessary in coming to God.

The answer.
Why do you not plainly say, that we must prevent and go before the grace of
God by our will and our endeavor, because James sets our approaching first?
That we know to be your meaning, for that your sophisters commonly contend for.
But to answer you shortly, we are commonly and usually by the spirit of God
exhorted to that, which God must work in us, therefore free will is not
proved by those exhortations.

James. 4. 11.
The text.
Detract not one from another my brethren.

The note.
He forbids detraction, evil speaking and slandering.

The answer.
Uices, wherein you set a great piece of your delight, as in your annotations
most manifestly does appear.

James. 4. 15.
The text.
For that you should say, If our Lord will, and if we shall live, we will do
this or that.

The note.
All promises and purposes of our worldly affairs are to be made under
condition of Gods good liking and pleasure, and it becomes a Christian man to
have usually this form of speech in that case: If God will: If God otherwise
dispose not.

The answer.
If this note had come from Rome, as it does from Rhemes: from Italy, as it
does from France, we should have woondered how they teach others that, which
they have not learned themselves. It may be you know the common Italian
proverb, In despite of God. And this I know, that neither this good counsel
of James was used in time of popery, and when in the time of the Gospel men
began to leave former corruptions, and reformed their speeches according to
this rule, the papists scorned at it, and derided it, as too much holiness.

James. 5. 1.
The text.
Go to now ye rich men, weep, howling in your miseries which shall come to you.

The note.
A fearful description of the miseries that shall befall in the next life to
the unmerciful covetous men.

The answer.
But your religion gives them heart of grace to contemn all threats: for your
father the pope will sell them heaven for money.

^ames. 5. 7.
The text.
Behold the husbandman expects the precious fruit of the earth: patiently
bearing till he receive the timely and the lateward.

The note.
He means either fruit or rain.

The answer.
It is an Hebraisme, and therefore better expounded of rain than of fruit,
because the phrase is usual in the Hebrew, and so usually signifies.

James. 5. 10.
The text.
Confess therefore your sins one to another: and pray one for another that
you may be saved.

The note.
The heretics translate, Acknowledge your sin, etc. So little they can abide
the very word of confession.

The answer.
Here is a knot sought in a rush. To acknowledge, and to confess in English
ears is all one. That we cannot abide the word of confession is one of your
impudent and shameless slanders, from the which the usual and common using of
it in our translations do sufficiently clear us.

James. ^. 20.
The text.
My brethren, if any of you shall err from the truth, and a man convert him,
he must know that he that makes a sinner to be converted from the error of his
way, shall save his soul from death, and covers a multitude of sins.

The note.
He that has the zeal of converting sinners, procures heerby mercy and
remission to himself, which is a singular grace.

The answer.
You dream still of man's procuring mercy and remission to himself by his
own works: but S. James has no such thing, but only this, that the soul of
the converted man is saved, and his sins covered, that is to say, abolished.

1. PETER.
1. Peter. 1. 13.
The text.
For the which cause having the loins of your mind girded, sober, trust
perfectly in that grace which is offered you in the revelation of Jesus Christ.

The note.
Chastity not only of body, but also of mind is required. S. Beda upon this
place.

The answer.
Then all chastity does not consist in single life: for in mind none have
been more impure than your single men.

1. Pet. 1. 17.
The text.
And if you invoke the father, him which without acceptition of persons
judges according to every ones work, in fear conuerseye the time of your
peregrination.

The note.
God will judge men according to every ones works, and not by faith only.

The answer.
Who ever denied that in the judgment of God, that it may appear (as it is
indeed) just: the godly and ungodly shall be discerned a sunder by their works,
and yet you never the nigher to your merits.

1. Pet. 1. 18.
The text.
Knowing this that not with corruptible things, gold and silver you are
redeemed from your vain conversation of your fathers tradition: but with the
precious blood as it were of an immaculate and unspotted lamb Christ.

The note.
He means the erros of gentilitie, or if he wrote to the Jews dispersed he
means the yoke of the law, with the fond and heavy additions of their late
masters called Deuteroses. The heretics to make it sound to the simple against
the traditions of the church, corrupt the text thus: Which you have received by
tradition of the father.

The answer.
Two things we see in your note. First, an exposition what is here meant by
traditions: secondly, a fond quarrel to our translations. First you affirm
boldly without blushing, that here by tradition the errors of gentilitie are
meant. But because that carries not so much as any probable show, therefore
presently you fly from it, saying, if he wrote to the Jews, then he, etc. As
if any man could doubt to whom he wrote, when both he was the Apostle of
circumcision, and also he names them to whom he wrote, strangers of the
dispersion of Pontus, Galat. 2. In the beginning of this chapter.
Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithinia. It is manifest, that the Jews at
that time dwelt in every part of these countries, as strangers dispersed here
and there: which cannot with any show for proof be imagined of any nation
besides. Your yoking of Gods law with those traditions, or additions called
Deuteroses, shows your vile and base estimation of Gods word. But as
whatsoever the Jews had from their fathers added to Gods law, was cause of
vain conversation, so also your additions to the Gospel of Christ called
traditions, are causes of like vanity, and unprofitable travel and labor in
them that use them. Your quarrel to our translations is but mere wrangling,
since your translation has the same in effect: for how could the fathers
deliver, except the sons received? or how were they delivered by Christ from
their vain conversation, if they had not received it first? But wranglers will
never leave cauilling.

1. Pet. 2. 9.
The text.
But you are an elect generation, a kingly priesthood, an holy nation, a
people of purchase: that you may declare his virtues, which from darkness has
called you into his marvelous light.

The note.
The protestants can no more gather of this, that all Christians be priests,
than that al be kings, as is most plain, Apocalypse 1. 6. and 5. 10 Thou have
made us a kingdom (or kings) and priests.

The answer.
We gather both the one and the other, and we know of none other sacrifices now
to be offered to God, but those which every Christian man and woman are bound
to offer, and therefore we need not your sacrificing priests with their paltrie.

1. Pet. 2. 13.
The text.
Be subject therefore to every humane creature for God, whether it be to the
king as excelling, etc.

The note.
So is the Greek: but the protestants in favor of temporal laws made against
the catholic religion, translate it very falsely thus: To all manner ordinance
of man, themselves boldly rejecting ecclesiastical decrees as men's ordinances.

The answer.
The Greek scholiast, whom I hope you will neither accuse of corrupt meaning,
nor deny that he understood the Greek, interprets it as we translate. By
ordinances of man, we understand not (as you slander us) laws of men, but
princes and magistrates elected, appointed, and created by men. The decrees of
your church we reject, as well because that they being but the ordinances of
men, are obtruded in the place and stead of Gods law, as also because we
acknowledge no duty of subjection to the makers and ordeiners of them, being
to us English men mere stangers, to whom we owe no more duty than to any
other forrem potentates.

1. Pet. 2. 17.
The text.
Love the fraternity.

The note.
In this speech is often commended the unity of al Christians amongst
themselves.

The answer.
Which unity you have broken many ways. First, in cutting your selves from
the churches of the east parts of the world. Secondly, in falling from the
ancient faith, which the church of Rome it self first of all in old time
professed. Thirdly, in your obstinate opposing your selves now to those that
retain, keep, and hold fast the ancient holy catholic faith delivered by
Christ and his Apostles to the church.

1. Pet. 3. 1.
The text.
In the like manner let the women be subject to their husbands, that if any
believe not the word, by the conversation of the women, without the word they
may be won, considering your chaste conversation in fear.

The note.
How women should behave themselves toward their husbands.

The answer.
Which counsel and prescription all godly matrones embrace.

1. Pet. 3. 3.
The text.
Whose trimming, let it not be outwardly the plaiting of hair, or laieng on of
gold round about, or putting on vestures, etc.

The note.
Against the proud, curious, and costly attire of women, wherein this ill time
of ours exceeds.

The answer.
Iniquity decreaseth not toward the latter end.

1. Pet. 3. 7.
The text.
Husbands likewise dwelling with them according to knowledge, as unto the
weaker feminine vessel imparting honor, as it were to the coheires also of
grace of life: that your prayers be not hindered.

The note.
How husbands should behave themselves toward their wives.

The answer.
Which good lesson God grant all married men may keep and observe. In which
lesson one thing is to be observed, that married men may so dwell with their
wives, that their praieng be not thereby hindered, contrary to that which in
your notes you have diverse times affirmed.

1. Pet. 4. 6.
The text.
For, for this cause also was it euangelized to the dead, that they may be
judged indeed according to men in the flesh: but may live according to God in
the spirit.

The note.
It has the same difficulty and sense, that the other word have before, 1.
Chap. 3. See the annotation there, v. 19. and S. August. epist. 69. and
Oecumenius upon this place.

The answer.
Time is the daughter of truth, and therefore things that sometimes seemed
obscure, are in time revealed, made open and plain, and so is this. The sense
is plain: The Gospel was preached in former ages to them that are now dead.
Christ by his spirit preached to the rebellious and disobedient people, which
lived in the days of Noe. Your annotation which you refer us unto, is
frivolous, grounded upon a malicious slander, that we deny Christ's descending
into hell, whereas we only deny the popish sense and interpretation of that
article. And concerning Augustine, your note book once again deceived you.
For in the place which you quote, there is nothing touching this matter: but in
his 99. epistle he handles this place, and especially the former in the third
chapter at large concerning Christ's preaching to disobedient persons in the
days of Noe. Where after that by many reasons he had proved that your opinion
whereby you apply this place to Christ's descending into hell, can by no means
stand: he enclineth (though not fully and certainly) that it is not meant at all
of Christ's descending into hell, and rather thinks that Peter means that
those times of Noe, were a figure of our times, and the general disobedience
then, a figure of the small obedience now, and the saving of Noe, and his
family in the arc then, a figure of saving us now by baptism, and so
consequently gives light to that true, and clear interpretation, which we now
follow, and for which we are in part beholding to him, as Gods good i^strument.

1. Pet. 5. 2.
The text.
Feed the flock of God which is amongst you, providing not by constraint, but
willingly according to God neither for filthy lucre sake but voluntarily.

The note.
Desire of lucre, or to exercise holy functions for gain, is a filthy fault
in the clergy, and therefore much to be avoided.

The answer.
And what? is it not a filthy fault also in the pope? You know of whom it was
written, Pope Alexander.
that he sold all holy things, altars, keys, and Christ himself. You know
what outcry has been made against the popes actions, both in this Realm, and
in others, by them, which you will not allow to be protestants. Besides your
whole religion is framed for gain, and to make merchandise of men's souls. So
that from the highest to the lowest none of you can excuse your selves to be
clear from the desire of filthy lucre.

2. PETER.
^. Pet. 1. 16.
The text.
For not having followed unlearned fables, have we made the power and presence
of our Lord Jesus Christ known to you, but made beholders of his greatness.

The note.
By this it is plain that either John, James, or Peter must be the author of
the Epistle, for these three were only present at the transfiguration, Matthew.
17. 1.

The answer.
We do not intend to strive with you for the author of the epistle: but you
might have told us that you borrowed this of master Beza, and that James being
killed by Herod, it must be either John's, or Peter's, and that the phrase being
Peter's peculiar phrase, does show it to be Peter's. But you can borrow of us,
and not give again that, which is due to us.

^. Pet. 1. 18.
The text.
And this voice we heard brought from heaven when we were with him in the holy
mount.

The note.
You see that places are made holy by Christ's presence, and that all places be
not alike holy. See annot. Acts. 7. 33.

The answer.
That all places by nature, and creation are alike good, and of like holiness
this place hinders not, though by some special occasion, or use that a place
for a time is put to, it may be more esteemed, or regarded then an other.

^. Pet. 2. 2.
The text.
And many shall follow their riotousnes, by whom the way of truth shall be
blasphemed.

The note.
Heretics (of whom he prophesies here) do gain scholars by preaching
liberty, and by their own licentious life, which is specially joined to the
heresy of these days.

The answer.
The first, and most special note given to know those heretics by whom Saint
Peter here speaks of, is that they be lieng masters. Which how it is, and
always has been annexed to your religion, and the teachers thereof, may
appear to the indifferent Reader, by the answers to these your notes, and by
your books of beastly fained miracles. Your other note of preaching liberty,
and licentious life, cannot in all the world be so fitly sought, and so surely
found as amongst your selves. For by your doctrine our lady is so good a
gentlewoman, Mill (...) la beat^ Mars*
that so men serve her, be they whoores, be they thieves, be they what they
will be, it is no matter she will entreat and obtain pardon for them. And her
service is neither painful, nor costly, for it consists in saying of a few
Aue Mary's, and now and then praieng to our lady, and sometimes offering of a
taper. As for licentious life who have been able to match your most holy
fathers of Rome?

2. Pet. 2. 3.
The text.
And in avarice shall they with feigned words make merchandise of you. Unto
whom the judgment now long since cease not, and their perdition slumbereth
not.

The note.
All the sweet words of heretics, speaking much of the word of the Lord, the
Gospel, Jesus Christ, etc. are but terms of art to buy and sell poor men's
souls.

The answer.
This accusation of those, whom you are wont to call heretics, is one of your
accustomed slanders. But your merchandise is so manifest, that your own writers
have cried out of it. It was an abbot that acknowledged the church of Rome for
his mother, that willed her to rejoice, Abbas vrspergensis.
because brooks and rivers of money flowed to her, in woonderful plenty, and
no man came to her with empty hand. The old proverb, no penie, no Pater
noster, did witness that the pretended good which you challenged, and vaunted
that you could do to souls, would not come from you without being dearly
bought, and well paid for. As for your pretensed accusation bears no show.
For if we had sought our own profit, we would never have sought the overthrow
of your religion. For if we had held that still, we had been sure of the first
bequest in every man's will.

2. Pet. 2. 10.
The text.
And especially them which walk after the flesh in concupiscence of
uncleanness, and contemn dominion, bold, self pleasers, they fear not to
bring in sects, blaspheming.

The note.
The special properties of heretics.

The answer.
Though your restraint of these properties to heretics, be neither in it self
true, neither agreeable with the truth of the text which speaks more
generally, yet because it can not be but that such teachers be heretics, as
be so grossly wicked, we will examine the case how you can clear your most
holy fathers, and the pillars of your church from being heretics: the
properties here mentioned be in number six. The first, walking after the flesh
in concupiscence of uncleanness: what the testimonies of al stories are,
concerning not the dregs but the highest and holiest amongst you I need not
tell you. Pope John the eight, otherwise called pope Joan, delivered of a
child in solemn procession, whose picture remains in Rome as a monument of
the truth of her being pope, bewraieth sufficiently their uncleanness and
filthiness. Plat^na.
Pope John the thirteenth was slain being taken in the age of adultery. It
were too long to rip up the licentious lives of other popes, I know your selves
are ashamed of them. The second, is contempt of dominion: your popes have not
only usurped the place and seat of their sovereign lords, but have also trodden
upon them, deposed Emperors and kings from their roial estate, made them his
pages to lead his horse and hold his stirrup, and to think it a great courtesy
that they might be admitted to kiss his foot. If this be not contempt of
dominion, then what call you it? For boldness, what dare not they do to me^, that
dare cast their god into the fire? that dare poison the holy host as they
term it. What self pleasers they be in this it appears, that they both
flatter them selves, Pope Hildebrand called Gregory the 9. Pope Victor the
third was poisoned in the chalice.
and go about to persuade others that they can not err? The Emperor Henry of
Lucemburgh was po^soned in the consecrate bread.
How Christendom has been replenished by them with sects, he that
understands and knows the swarms, Leo the tenth.
the number, the diversity of Monks, Friars, Nuns, Eremites, Jesuits, and
such like, can not doubt? And for blasheming which is the sixth, he that has
read of the Popes speech, that he called the Gospel the fable or tale of
Christ, can not doubt but that this note also is verified of your holy father:
now acquit your selves well, and show us some good defense of your popes
against these properties.

2. Pet. 2. 12.
The text.
But these men as unreasonable beasts, naturally tending to the snare, and
into destruction in those things which they know not blaspheming, shall perish
in their corruption.

The note.
So heretics blaspheme the highest mysteries of our faith through ignorance.

The answer.
If a man should go about to reckon up the bold blasphemies of your popish
heretics, against Christ him self and his holy word, Master Cam^pion in the
3. dais conference in the Tower.
the day would sooner fail him then matter. But no marvel, when your great
challenging champions can make them selves good sport and pastime, of the
greatest and most reverend mysteries of our religion.

2. Pet. 2. 18.
The text.
For speaking the proud things of vanity, they allure in the desires of
fleshly riotousnesse, those that escape a little, which converse in error
promising them liberty, whereas them selves are the slaves of corruption.

The note.
Who ever promised more liberty to their followers then Luther and Calvin, and
the like, taking away penance, fasting, continen^ie, or chastity, keeping of
vows, necessity of good works, (because faith does all) obedience to
Ecclesiastical pastors, and Councels, and such like?

The answer.
You are nothing ashamed of lieng. These things which you set down of Calvin
and Luther are stark lies, which you shall never be able to justify. But you
have set open the flood gates to sin, by promising many days of pardon to
the saying of a set number of prayers, and such like.

1. JOHN.
1. John. 2. 16.
The text.
Because all that is in the world is the concupiscence of the flesh, and the
concupiscence of the eyes, and the pride of life, which is not of the Father,
but is of the world.

The note.
How all sin and temptation proceed of these three, see Saint Thomas Sum.
1. 2. quaest. 77. arti. 5.

The answer.
Your labors (I perceive) are bestowed upon them that least need them, that
is, upon the learned, for I do not suppose you to be such fools, as to send
the unlearned multitude to search in the doctors and schoolmen.

(...) 2. 19.
The text.
They went out from us, but they were not of us, for if they had been of us,
they would surely have remained with us.

The note.
They were of us for a time, that is, of, and in the church, otherwise they
could not have gone out: but they were not of the constant sort, or of the
elect and predestinate, for then they had tarried within, or returned before
their death.

The answer.
You dare conclude contrary to the Apostle, he says they were not of us, you
say they were of us, otherwise they could not have gone out, and therefore I
can not marvel that you are so bold with us. The society and company of men
whom we call the church, do nurse as it were in their bosom, many hipocrites
and enemies to Christ, which in time show them selves, who though they go out
from the church, yet in truth were never of the church, for if they had been
of the church truly, then at the least they should not have severed them
selves from the church at their end: for none are truly of the Church, but
those whom God has elected and chosen.

^. John. 1. 24.
The text.
You, that which you have heard from the beginning let it abide in you.

The note.
Keep that firmly and constantly, which you heard even from the beginning, by
the mouth of the Apostles: and not that which you have received by writing.

The answer.
If the apostles taught one thing by mouth, and another thing by writing then
your note has some reason in it. I would feign see some papists collect this
unwritten doctrine, and then show us how we may be assured that they had it from
the apostles. For the things that have been heretofore forged under the
apostles names, the papists themselves do not observe the tenth part of them.
In the mean space they shall give us leave to believe that the apostles whole
doctrine is contained in the Canonical Scriptures.

1. John. 2. 29.
The text.
If you know that he is just, know ye that every one also which does justice
is borne of him.

The note.
We see that that it is an apostolical doctrine that men may do or work
justice, and that so doing they be just by works, proceeding of Gods grace,
and not by faith or imputation only.

The answer.
We see indeed, that it is an apostolical doctrine, that a man may do, or work
justice, and farther that that doing and working is an assured testimony, that
we are regenerate and borne of God. But that by so doing we are made just, or
justified before God: that is your own addition, without warrant of this text
or any other. For though whomsoever God has sanctified, him also he has
justified, yet regeneration and sanctification whereof the apostle speaks
here, are things distinct from justification whereof he speaks not here. And
because justice is a word of general signification, and sometimes spoken of
justification, that is, of that righteousness whereby we are made just, and
sometime (as here) of sanctification, that is, of that righteousness whereby we
are declared to be just, this ambiguitie serves your humor to dally, and
deceive withal.

1. John. 3. 1.
The text.
See what manner of charity the father has given us, that we should be named
and be the sons of God.

The note.
Not by nature as Christ, but by grace and adoption.

The answer.
And can we be both named and be the sons of God, and yet doubt of our
salvation? Were not that to doubt either of the power, or goodness of our
father? Why are you then the doctors of doubtfulnes?

1. John. 3. 2.
The text.
We know that when he shall appear we shall be like to him, because we shall
see him as he is.

The note.
How we shall see God and be like to him in the next life. See S. Aug. ep. 111.
112. de Ciuitate dei. lib. 12. cap. 29.

The answer.
It is well that you afford us so good a schoolmaster, but how shall they do,
that either understand not the latin tongue, or are not able to buy the fathers?
It is manifest that your meaning is not to help the poorer and more ignorant
sort.

1. John. 3. 3.
The text.
And every one that has this hope in him sanctifies himself as he also is
holy.

The note.
This teaches us that man sanctifies himself, by his free will working
together with Gods grace. See Augustine upon this place.

The answer.
You know that your collection will not hold, and therefore you turn Saint
Augustine to us. Wherein still is to be noted that you of purpose fly from
these works, which Augustine wrote against Pelagius, wherein of purpose he
handles the matter of freewill, and scrape and scratch for it here and there,
where he speaks little of it, and that but by the way. The speech that
Augustine uses in this place is this: that God sanctifies, but he
sanctifies not them which are not willing to be sanctified. And therefore
because man adioineth his will to God, he is said to sanctify himself. This
speech of Augustine though it may be racked against his mind, to serve your
assertion of freewill, yet being interpreted according to his undoubted meaning
(as in many places he utters against Pelagius) of those only whose wills God
altered, and to whom God also gives power in some measure to perform their
good desires, is very tolerable, and may well stand.

1. John. 3. 17.
The text.
He that shall have the substance of the world, and shall see his brother have
need, and shall shut his bowels from him, how does the charity of God abide in
him?

The note.
Every man is bound to give alms according to his ability when he sees his
brother in great necessity.

The answer.
And yet not to think his deed meritorious, but only to declare, and show
that the love of God dwells in him.

1. John. 3. 23.
The text.
And this is his commandment, that we believe in the name of his son Jesus
Christ: and love one another as he has given commandment to us.

The note.
Least any man should think by the words next before only faith in Christ to
be commanded, or to please God, he adds to faith the commandment of charity
or love of our neighbor.

The answer.
If there be any that think faith only commanded, or do separate love from
it, tell us (I pray you) who they be, and where they remain, that we also may
know them, hate, abhor, and detest them.

1. Ioh. 4. 12.
The text.
God no man has seen at any time.

The note.
No man in this life, nor with corporal eyes can see the proper essence, or
substance of the deity. See S. Augustine ad Paulin. de videndo Deo. Epist. 112.

The answer.
Still you send us to those schoolmasters, to whom the simple can have no
access, and therefore by whom they cannot be the better.

2. Ioh. v. 8.
The text.
Look to your selves, that you lose not the things which you have wrought, but
that you may receive a full reward.

The note.
Reward for keeping fast the catholic faith.

The answer.
Which is full contrary to the faith of the Romish church at this day.

2. Ioh. v. 9.
The text.
Every one that reuolteth, and persisteth not in the doctrine of Christ: has
not God.

The note.
To go back or revolt from the received truth and doctrine apostolical, is
damnable.

The answer.
But al papists are gone back from the truth in the primitive church received,
therefore except they repent, they are damned.

3. Ioh. v. 5.
The text.
My dearest, thou do faithfully, whatsoever thou workest on the brethren,
and that upon strangers.

The note.
A great grace to be beneficial to strangers, specially to them that be of our
catholic faith, and suffer for the same.

The answer.
Remember then your ungracious government in the days of Queen Mary, when al
those strangers, which before in the days of good king Edward were entertained
and comforted in England, because they had left their countries for the keeping
of a good conscience, and for the testimony of the true, ancient, most holy
catholic faith, were banished this land, and sent to seek a resting place,
where they might find or get it.

3. Ioh. v. 9.
The text.
I had written perhaps to the church, but he that loves to bear primacie
amongst them, Diotrepes does not receive us.

The note.
It seems (says saint Bede) he was an archheretike or proud sectmaster.

The answer.
Uery much resembling my Lord Bishop of Rome in love of primacie, though far
coming behind him in height of pride, and in all other wickedness and mischief.

3. Ioh. v. 10.
The text.
For this cause if I come, I will advertise his works which he does: with
malicious words chatting against us.

The note.
That is, I will rebuke them, and make them known to be wicked. Bid.

The answer.
This exposition we receive, and God has verified it upon your own heads. For
your Diotrepes of Rome his casting out all those that bear favor to them that
love the truth, is now to all the world made manifest to be wicked, and they are
sufficiently advertised both of him and his works.

I^de verse. 4.
The text.
For there are certain men secretly entered in (which were long ago prescribed
unto this judgment) impious, transferring the grace of our God into
riotousnes, and denieng the only dominator, and our Lord Jesus Christ.

The note.
Diverse heretics abuse the liberty of Christ's grace and Gospel, to the
fulfilling of their carnal lusts and concupiscences.

The answer.
It is very true, and yet none so much and so grossly as papists. For if they
would leave their lies and forgerie, and stick to such testimonies as are
without exception, they should easily see it, and be compelled to confess it.

Jude verse. 5.
The text.
But I will admonish you, that once know al things, that Jesus saving the
people out of the land of Egypt, secondly destroyed them which believed not.

The note.
This is our Savior, not Iosue as saint Hierom notes. ep. 17. see Abac. c. 3.
verse 18.

The answer.
That it could not be Joshua that is here meant, both the truth of the story
of the children of Isreal's delivery out of Egypt, and of the punishment of the
incredulous, and also the Greek text, which has not Jesus but the Lord, does
plainly and evidently testify.

Jude verse. 8.
The text.
In like manner these also defile the flesh, and despise dominion, and blaspheme
majesty.

The note.
Such be heretics, that will not be subject to any superior, or that refuse
to obey the laws, either of spiritual or temporal rulers: in which kind
(specially in blaspheming the supreme spiritual magistrate) the Protestants
do pass.

The answer.
It is somewhat, that you do not always pass over those places with silence,
wherein you are so lively described: for of these heretics the pope is the
head, and you his clawbackes are members. For to what superior does the Pope
acknowledge himself subject? and do not all ecclesiastical persons of his
church, challenge exemption from the authority of temporal power? what
majesty is there upon the earth, which he blasphemeth not, when he abaseth the
highest earthly majesty so far under him self, Innocentius de maioritate
and obedientia cap. Solita.
as the moon is inferior to the sun? Iudes description therefore agrees to
none so well as to your selves.

APOCALYPSE.
Apocal. 1. 3.
The text.
Blessed is he that reads and hears the words of this prophecy, and
keeps those things which be written in it, for the time is nigh.

The note.
There be many (specially now a days) that be great readers, hearers, and
talkers of Scriptures: but that is not enough to make them good, or blessed,
except they keep the things prescribed and taught therein: according to our
Saviors saying, (Luke 11.) Blessed are they that hear the word of God and
keep it.

The answer.
It is very true that except men keep the word, all their other endeavors
about the word are little worth: but men can not keep that which they know
not. Reading and hearing (as here appears) is the ordinary means that men
should use to come by knowledge: but you, to the end you might maintain
blindness and ignorance, have kept the people from reading and hearing,
therefore you have made ^ure work, that they should not attain blessedness by
keeping.

Apocal. 1. 9.
The text.
I John your brother and partaker in tribulation, and the kingdom and patience
in Christ Jesus, was in the Island which is called Patmos, for the word of God,
and the testimony of Jesus.

The note.
Banished thither for religion by Nero, or rather by Domitian almost 60. years
after Christ's ascension.

The answer.
By whom he was banished it is not material, as long as we consent that these
things were revealed to him in his banishment.

Apocal. 1. 10.
The text.
I was in the spirit on the dominicall day, and heard behind me a great voice
as it were of a trumpet, saying, that which thou see write in a book, etc.

The note.
I had a vision not with my corporal eyes, but in spirit I beheld the
similitude of the things following.

The answer.
As Peter and Paul, so John in spirit also had revelations, and yet never none
of them saw or knew of saint Patriks purgatory.

Apocal. 1. 12.
The text.
And I turned to see the voice that spoke with me.

The note.
The first general vision of the seven according to Saint Ambrose.

The answer.
You delight your selves with fathers, when and where you need them not. Your
blind followers when and where they see any father cited, suppose that it is
for some matter of controversy, and think that all antiquity make for you:
but in truth where you most need them, there you have none at all.

Apoc. 1. 1^.
The text.
And being turned I saw seven candlestickes of gold, and in the midst of the
seven candlesticks, one like to the Son of man, vested in a priestlie garment
to the foot, and girded about near to the pappes with a girdle of gold.

The note.
It seems not to be Christ him self, but an angel bearing Christ's person,
and using diverse speeches proper to Christ.

The answer.
I see no cause, why it should not be Christ him self.

Apoc. 1. 20.
The text.
And the seven candlestickes are the seven churches.

The note.
Saint Irenaeus alluding to this says, The church every where preaches the
truth, and this is the seuenfolde candlestick bearing the light of Christ.
libro 5. aduersus haere.

The answer.
We are to observe here first, that the signs here bear the names of the
things which they signify: for the seven stars are the angels of the seven
churches, and the seven candlestickes are the seven churches, even none
otherwise then bread is the body of Christ. Secondly, the cause why the
church is compared to a candlestick, is because it carries that light whereof
all godly men are partakers. And because in it as candles or shining lights,
the Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and doctors do shine by the most
wholesome doctrine of Christ.

Apoc. 2. 1.
The text.
And to the Angel of the church of Ephesus write, thus says he, etc.

The note.
That which before he willed him to write to the church, he now wills to be
written to the Angels or bishops of the same only, where we see that it is all
one to the church, and the head or governor thereof.

The answer.
It is evident that John was commanded before to send that which he wrote to the
churches: and it is also plain, that he is commanded to write the same to the
Angels, that is, to the pastors, and governors of the church. But that which
thence you collect, that it is all one to send to the church, and to the heads
and governors thereof, is true but sometimes, and not always. As when some
faithful are saluted by the apostle, and the church that is in their house, it
is manifest that by the church, governors are not meant. And again, because you
set head and governor in the singular number, wherein we suppose that you have
a secret relation to the only sovereign of your church, therefore we are to
admonish the Reader, that when by the church the governors thereof be
understood, there is never any one governor of the whole church meant.

Apoc. 2. 4.
The text.
But I have against thee a few things, because thou have left thy first
charity.

The note.
By this we see is plainly refuted that which some heretics hold, that a man
once in grace or charity can never fall from it.

The answer.
First we do not hold that a man cannot fall, but that he whom God looueth
cannot finally fall, the contrary whereof does not here appear. Secondly,
that by the angel of the church any one particular man is meant, cannot be
proved, but rather a society or succession of men, whereof the later may be
unlike the former. Whereof S. Paul speaks to the ministers of the same
church, that of themselves should arise grievous woolues: and whereof we have
had great experience in the church of Rome, in the later bishops, who are as
unlike the former, as lions are unlike to lambs, or dross unlike to gold.
And therefore this cannot be justly applied to any mutation in one, and the
same particular man.

Apoc. 2. 9.
The text.
I know thy tribulation, and thy poverty, but thou art rich, and thou art
blasphemed of them that say themselves to be Jews and are not, but are the
synagogue of satan.

The note.
This church represents the state of them, that are spoiled of their goods,
emprisoned, and manifoldly afflicted for the catholic faith.

The answer.
And it is to be noted withal who afflicted them, spoiled them, blasphemed
them, that is, spoke and did al manner of evil of them, and to them. For the
afflictors and persecutors here spoken of, are such as say themselves to be
Jews, and are not, that is, such as take upon them wrongfully the name, and
title of Gods church, and people, being in deed and truth the synagogue of
satan. How near this touches you, that violently usurp the name of
catholics, consider with your selves well, for the afflictions you have
brought upon others, are manifest.

Apoc. 2. 10.
The text.
Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life.

The note.
The singular reward of martyrdom.

The answer.
But that reward of martyrdom magnifieth mightily the marvelous munificence
of our good, and gracious God, and not the merit of the martyr.

Apoc. 2. 11.
The text.
He that shall overcome shall not be hurt of the second death.

The note.
The death of the body is the first death, the death of the soul the second.
Which martyrs are surest to escape of all men.

The answer.
That true martyrs are sure to escape the second death is granted, but not
surer then other, that be the sons of the same God, who are assured of his
fatherly favor, both by his promise, and by the testimony, and witness of the
spirit of adoption.

Apoc. 2. 13.
The text.
And in those days Antipas my faithful witness, who was slain amongst you
where satan dwells.

The note.
The special residence of satan is where the faithful are persecuted for
Christ's truth, where not to deny the catholic faith for fear is much here
commended.

The answer.
The special residence therefore of satan, is wheresoever the bishop of Rome
bears swaie, for in all those places, the blood of infinite martyrs have
been shed, to the great praise and commendation of those that have constantly
suffered for the testimony of Gods truth.

Apoc. 2. 19.
The text.
I know thy works, thy faith, and thy charity, and ministry, and thy
patience, and thy last works mo then the former.

The note.
None of these are any thing worth without the other.

The answer.
These things do so mutually follow one an other, that though they may be
distinguished, yet separated they cannot be. Your speech therefore is like
this, the sun is naught worth without light. The fire is naught worth
without heat. For love does necessarily follow faith, and after faith and
love, our ministry and diligent service to God, in the vocation, wherein it
has pleased him to plant us, with patience and all plenty of good works do
necessarily follow, so that one of these cannot be alone as you imagine.

Apoc. 2. 23.
The text.
And all the churches shall know, that I am he that searches the reins, and
hearts, and I will give to every one of you according to his works.

The note.
Who sees not here that good works deserve salvation, as ill works deserve
damnation, and that it is not faith alone, which God rewards, but that faith
which works by charity?

The answer.
He had need of a wonderful sharp sight, that should see here that, which
is not here. You know well enough, for it has been often told you, that it
follows not, that works deserve because God rewards. But still because you
are not able to make better proof, you make your selves sport with this.
Likewise you have been often told, that we set less store by that faith which
is alone, then you do. For if it be without charity, it is improperly called
faith, being common both to wicked men, and devils.

Apoc. 2. 28.
The text.
And he that shall overcome, and keep my works unto the end: I will give him
power over the nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of iron, and as a
vessel of a potter shall they be broken, as I also have received of my father:
and I will give him the morning star.

The note.
This great privilege of saints rises of the power and pre-eminence of Christ,
which his father gave him according to his humanity: and therefore to deny it
to saints, is to deny it to Christ himself.

The answer.
You should have told us what this privilege is, and to whom it is given, dead,
or living saints, so should you not colorably have nuzeled your blind and
ignorant followers in the superstitions that they have learned of you.
Therefore that which you subtly have omitted, we will perform, to the end
your craft may be of all men espied. The rod of iron, or scepter of Christ's
kingdom is his word, whereby he rules and governs all that are his. 2. Cor.
10. ve^. 4. 5. 6.
This word he has committed into the hands of his ministers, to rule and
govern his church thereby: and also to destroy, break down, and overthrow
every high thing that exalts it self against it to withstand it, which shall
be by it broken and shiuered to pieces, as a potters vessel is broken with a
rod of iron. This is the power that is given to them over nations: How then can
you fetch out of this, that which you covet, that is, defense for your robbing
of God and his Christ of his honor, and giving it to dead saints?

Apoc. 3. 4.
The text.
But thou have a few names in Sardis, which have not defiled their garments.

The note.
Such as have not committed deadly sin after baptism.

The answer.
All sin of it self, and according to the nature thereof, whether it be
original or actual, whether it seem small or great is deadly: for the reward
and wages of it is death. Romans 5. 23.
And therefore your distinction of deadly and venial sins, in that sense
that you set it down, is false, frivolous, and foolish.

Apoc. 3. 4.
The text.
And they shall walk with me in whites, because they are worthy.

The note.
Note that there is in man a woorthines of the ioies of heaven by holy life:
and this is a common speech in holy scripture, that man is worthy of God, of
heaven, of salvation.

The answer.
Note that no where in scripture our meriting or deserving the ioies of heaven
is found: and note also that woorthines by our good and holy life, is a popish
tradition, and one of their unwritten verities: for it is Christ in whom we are
made worthy. And thirdly note, that therefore here, as commonly else where,
our Rhemists play but the boyish sophisters, to abuse the poor ignorant
unlearned people, which depend upon them, with ambiguitie of words.

Apoc. 3. 20.
The text.
Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any man shall hear my voice, and
open the gate, I will enter in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.

The note.
God first calls upon man, and knocks at the door of his heart: that is to
say, offers his grace. And it lies in man to give consent by free will
helped also by his grace.

The answer.
That God offers his grace we consent, but that the reformation of man's will
is by you parted betwixt God and man, that we cannot like of by any means. For
that you cannot gather neither of this place, or of any other. For where by
nature our will is altogether corrupt, God, yea even God alone must have the
whole glory of the reformation thereof. And therefore David calls that
reformation, Psalm. 51. 10.
by the name of creation, as if it were by God to be brought forth again anew
of nothing.

Apoc. 4. 1.
The text.
After these things I looked, and behold, a door open in heaven, and the first
voice which I heard, was as it were of a trumpet speaking, saying, Come up
hither, and I will show thee things which must be done quickly after these

The note.
The second vision, in which is represented unto us the glory and majesty of
God in heaven, and the incessant honor and praises of all angels, and saints
assisting him: Which is resembled in the daily honor done to him by all orders
and sorts of holy men in the church militant also.

The answer.
If all orders in heaven give all honor, glory, and power to God alone and his
Christ, how dare you then miserable caitifes part the glory of man's salvation
between God and your selves? Is that think you a resemblance of the incessant
honor and praises of his angels and saints in heaven?

Apoc. 4. 6.
The text.
And in the sight of the seat, as it were a sea of glass like to Crystal,
and in the midst of the seat, and round about the seat four beasts full of
eyes before and behind.

The note.
These four beasts and the like described in the first of Ezechiel, by the
judgment of the holy doctors, signify the four Evangelists, and in them all
true preachers. The man Matthew, the lion Mark, the calfe Luke, the eagle
John. See the causes hereof in the sum of the four Evangelists, page 1. S.
Gregory in Ezechiel.

The answer.
The causes alleged, why by the four beasts four Evangelists should be
signified, are in my judgment very slender and frivolous. But whether they be
signified, or else whether (as other interpreters affirm) they do represent
Gods wisdom, might, diligence, speediness, or facility in bringing all
things to pass, I will not contend neither with Gregory nor you.

Apoc. 5. 1.
The text.
And I saw in the right hand of him that sat upon the throne, a book written
within and without, sealed with seven seals.

The note.
The third vision. Saint Gregory takes it to be the book of holy
scriptures. libr. 4. dialog. 6. 42.

The answer.
Saint Gregory's interpretation does very well please us, and I hope because
you allege it, it can not dislike you: we will therefore add some thing,
which the text it self does manifestly offer unto us to be observed. First, in
that it is written within and without, it manifestly appears that there is
no room left for your additions, called traditions. Secondly, it is fast and
safe sealed, and that with seven seals, by which so diligent and so close
sealing up, it is manifest that it is utterly unlawful to add, to diminish,
to alter any thing, for that to do in a sealed evidence is no better then
mere forgerie.

Apoc. 5. 3.
The text.
And no man was able neither in heaven nor in earth, nor under the earth to
open the book, nor to look on it.

The note.
He speaks not of the damned in hell, of whom there could be no question, but
of the faithful in Abraham's bosom, and in purgatory.

The answer.
Surely you can spy day at a very little hole, that can pick purgatory out
of this place: he speaks of men under the earth, but he can not mean of hell,
and therefore he must needs mean of purgatory. First, graves are under the
earth, and therefore it may be he means neither hell nor purgatory. But I
pray you tell us, how do you know he means not hell, because it was out of al
doubt and past question, that among the damned there could be none found
worthy to open the book. And does not the same reason prove, that he could
mean purgatory, or Limbus patrum? or may it be like to find some worthier
there, then could be found in earth or in heaven? You know well enough that
your fond followers will not seek to examine the truth of any thing you set
down, and therefore you dare deal thus looselie, that every body that will
not wilfully be blind, may see your absurdities. But to leave your follies, I
see that you are amongst those, to whom this book is yet shut and not opened,
and therefore no marvel though you want understanding.

Apoc. 5. 5.
The text.
And one of the seniors said to me, weep not: behold, the Lion of the tribe of
Judah, the root of David, has won to open the book, and to loose the seven
seals thereof.

The note.
So did Jacob (Genesis 49.) call Christ, for his kingly fortitude in subduing
the world unto him.

The answer.
That Christ is called here the Lion of the tribe of Judah, it is apparent,
but whether by allusion to that place of Genesis, which you cite, may be
doubted: but thereof I will not move any contention.

Apoc. 5. 6.
The text.
And I saw, and behold in the midst of the throne, and of the four beasts,
and in the midst of the seniors, a lamb standing as it were slain, having
seven horns, and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God, sent into all
the earth.

The note.
So Christ is called, for that he is the immaculate host, or sacrifice for our
sins.

The answer.
By allusion unto Moises law, because the lamb appointed for sacrifice must
have neither maime nor spot.

Apoc. 5. 9.
The text.
Thou art worthy, o Lord, to take the book, and to open the seals thereof,
because thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God in thy blood, out of
every tribe, and tongue, and people, and nation, and have made us to our God a
kingdom, and priests, and we shall reign upon the earth.

The note.
This makes against the Caluinistes, who are not content to say that we merit
not, but that Christ merited not for him self. Calvin. philip. 2. verse 9.

The answer.
Let us then see how this proves that Christ merited for him self. Thou art
worthy, O Lord, etc. because thou wast slain. Ergo his death and passion was
the cause of his worthiness, and made him worthy. I pray you, you (I say)
that think this so invincible a proof and so necessary a consequence, tell
me whether Christ being the eternal son of the Father, were unworthy this
honor before his incarnation, and consequently before his death and passion? I
suppose you dare not say that he was unworthy before, John 17. 5.
especially, seeing he durst not ask of his Father greater glory then he was
before possessed of with the father. If he were worthy before and so continued,
then could not his merits which came after, be the cause of his worthiness,
and so consequently, he him self in our nature did not merit for him self
this worthiness which he had before. But his honor and glory, to the which he
has advanced our nature, was a consequent of his abasing, and the conjunctions
in those places note rather an order and consequence, then a cause.

Apoc. 5. 13.
The text.
And every creature that is in heaven, and upon the earth, and under the
earth, and that are in the sea, and that are therein: all did I hear saying,
To him that sits in the throne, and to the lamb, benediction, and honor,
glory, and power for ever and ever.

The note.
All the said creatures are bound to give honor not only to God, but also to
Christ, as man and our redeemer, and so they here do.

The answer.
That the same honor, glory and praise, which is given to him that sits in
the throne, is also given to the lamb, and that of all creatures both here and
in other places, manifestly proves that Christ as he was our priest and
redeemer, was both God and man. For otherwise it had not been lawful to give
him the same honor and glory which we give to God.

Apoc. 6. 11.
The text.
And white stools were given to every one of them one: and it was said to
them, that they should rest yet a little time, til their fellow servants be
complete, and their brethren that are to be slain even as they.

The note.
This one stool signifies the glory, and bliss of the souls only, but at
the day of judgment they shall have it doubled by adding the glory of their
body also.

The answer.
We allow of this note, as of our own. But is there nothing to be noted in the
opening of the former four seals, and the horses, and that this vision of the
souls of the martyrs was deferred to the opening of the fifth seal? Is it not
a declaration that persecution for religion, and for the testimony of the
truth should then have his full force and swaie when the fourth monarchy grew
to, or toward an end. But if you would open your eyes to epsy this, you
would not so please your selves, and delight in your persecuting church here
shadowed or prophesied of.

(...)
The text.
And I saw when he had opened the sixth seal, and behold there was made a great
earthquake, and the sun became black as it were sackecloth of hair, and the
whole moon became as blood.

The note.
The tribulation that shall fall in the time of antichrist.

The answer.
As there be that enterpret this, of the tribulation that has or shall fall
upon the earth, for the contempt of the word, so comprehending the calamities
that have befalne since antichrist invaded the papal seat: so there be also
that enterpret this of the end of the world, and Christ's coming to judgment.
To whom I assent rather, for these two causes. One, for that the signs here,
are the same which the Evangelists set down to be signs of the end of the
world. The other because nothing but the sight of so great and excellent
majesty as our Lord and Savior shall come withal to judgment, can daunt, and
in such order terrify the great potentates, and princes of the earth, that
they know not whether to turn them, how to escape, or where to hide themselves.

Apoc. 7. 3.
The text.
Hurt not the earth, and the sea, nor the trees till we sign the servants of
our God in their foreheads.

The note.
It is an allusion to the sign of the cross, which the faithful bear in
their foreheads, to show they be not ashamed of Christ. Saint August* tract.
43. in Io.

The answer.
Christians in the primitive church, when the confession of Christ was joined
with worldly ignominy, did to show how little they were ashamed of Christ
crucified, sign themselves with the sign of the cross. But since* you
papists have brought in so many foul abuses about the cross, that where
papists are, it is very dangerous to have any use of it. Howbeit in this place
what is meant by the sign or seal of God, I think it safest to learn of
Saint Paul, who tells us, 2. Tim 2. 19.
that the foundation of God remains sure, and has this seal, that the Lord
knows who are his. Which knowledge of God causes his to be safe, at the last
day, when he executes vengeance upon the whole world besides.

Apoc. 7. 4.
The text.
And I heard the number of them which were signed, an hundred forty four
thousand were signed of every tribe of the children of Israel.

The note.
Of all the tribes put together so many 144000.

The answer.
To this I can say nothing, but this your note is true, your text is untrue.

Apoc. 7. 5.
The text.
Of the tribe of Judah twelve thousand signed, etc. unto the ninth verse.

The note.
He signifies by these thousands, and the multitude following all the elect of
the Jews to be in certain number, the elect of the Gentiles to be innumerable.

The answer.
Your collection for the number of the elect shall stand for me.

Apoc. 7. 11.
The text.
And after this, I saw a great multitude, which no man could number of all
nations and tribes, and people and toongs.

The note.
The elect of the Gentiles.

The answer.
This note might have been syared, for they are stark blind that cannot see
it without your direction.

Apoc. 7. 9.
The text.
Standing before the throne, and in the sight of the lamb, clothed in white
robes, and palms in their hands.

The note.
Boughs of the palm tree be tokens of triumph and victory.

The answer.
These notes may be put amongst your works of supererogation.

Apoc. 7. 14.
The text.
These are they which are come out of great tribulation, and have washed their
robes, and made them white in the blood of the lamb, etc. to the end of the
chapter.

The note.
The glory of martyrs.

The answer.
Which is more and greater than is possible for man to merit.

Apoc. 8. 3.
The text.
And another Angel came and stood before the altar.

The note.
The priest standing at the altar, praieng and offering for the people in the
time of the high mysteries. Christ himself also being present upon the altar,
is a figure of this thing, and thereunto he alludeth.

The answer.
Now the mass is a figure of this vision, the priest is a figure of the
Angel, and we must imagine Christ either hanging over the altar, or lieng upon
the altar, and to this saint John alludeth here. And all this must needs be
true, our Rhemists who cannot forge, feign, lie, nor err, have set it down,
and we must receive it on their credit. And so their mass came from heaven, as
sure as they are honest men, or as sure as if it were sealed with butter.

Apoc. 8. 4.
The text.
And the smoke of the incenses of the prayers of the saints ascended from the
hand of the Angel before God.

The note.
If this be saint Michaell, or any Angel, and not Christ himself, as some
take it, Angels offer up the prayers of the faithful, as the 24. elders did.
chap. 5. For this word Saints is taken here for holy persons on earth, as
often in the scriptures. Though it be not against the scriptures, that the
inferior saint or Angel in heaven should offer their prayers to God by their
superiors there: but heerby we conclude against the protestants, that it
derogateth not from Christ, that Angels or saints offer up our prayers to God.
As also it is plain of Raphael, Tab. 12. 12.

The answer.
Such premises, such conclusion. You must have that, which you dare not
certainly set down, granted you, or else your conclusion carries not so much
as any show, or likelihood of following. That diverse take this Angel to be
Christ, you your selves confess, and that Christ is many times in scriptures
called an Angel, I am sure you will not deny. That one Angel offers, and
not many, what can it signify, but that we have one mediator not many: and if
we have but one, then why may not Christ be he? That of the 24. elders in the
fifth chapter, is a vision of the saints upon the earth, offering their own
prayers. For John in that chapter does not describe the state of the church as
it shall be in heaven, but as it is here upon the earth: and therefore sets
it down magnifieng and praising the lamb, by whom the book was opened, that
is, Gods will in his word revealed and made known. But you did well to tell us
that saints here are taken for holy persons upon earth: for your blind
scholars do not imagine that there be any saints, but those which are dead and
gone, and which the pope has canonized, and are to be found in his calendar.
If the superior saints offer the prayers of the inferior, then we need to
learn the orders of saints and Angels in heaven, that we go not to them, that
themselves need the help and intercession of others. But who can so tell us,
that we may believe him? You say it is not against the scriptures. If it be
scripture that tells us, that we have an advocate with the father Jesus
Christ, who is the propitiation for our sins, and that we have one mediator,
then multitude of mediators and advocates is against scripture. We dare not
believe your dreams, which are no where warranted in the word. And we marvel
not, that you think it no derogation to Christ, to take away his mediatorship
of intercession, when you make him but half a redeemer, and half a savior.
As for that of Raphaell it may serve to deceive your simple followers withal,
but not to confirm any matter of controversy against your learned
adversaries, who know it not to be canonical scriptures.

Apoc. 9^ 1.
The text.
And the fifth Angel sounded with the trumpet, and I saw a star to have fallen
from heaven upon the earth, and there was given to him the key of the pit of
bottomless depth.

The note.
Most understand all this of heretics. The fall of an archheretike, as Arius,
Luther, and Calvin out of the Church of God: which have the key of hell to open
and bring forth all the old condemned heresies buried before in the depth.

The answer.
And we also understand this of archheretikes. But as you err in your
judgment of heresy, so you set them down for archheretikes who were not, but
principal and worthy ministers of God in his church. Your odious coupling of
Luther and Calvin with Arius, is ridiculous, when neither they had nor held any
of Arius heresies. It is true, and signified by the star, that heretics rise
of those that have been of great account amongst Christians, and therefore have
the more opportunity to deceive with, and become sectmasters, as the bishops
of Rome, who were sometimes most highly and woorthily esteemed, and now are
become apostataes. These, as they rightfully challenge to themselves the keys
of hell, so have they let abroad in a manner al condemned heresies. Ebions
heresy in denieng that faith alone suffices for justification. Montanus
heresy in making laws for fasting days. The Manichees heresy in forbidding
priests to marry, (...) lib. 3. cap. 27. Idem lib. 5. cap. 18.
and so consequently of most heresies one piece or other.

Apoc. 9. 3.
The text.
And from the smoke of the pit there issued forth locusts into the earth: and
power was given to them, as the scorpions of the earth have power. And it was
commanded them that they should not hurt the grass of the earth, nor any green
thing, nor any tree, but only men which have not the sign of God in their
foreheads.

The note.
Innumerable petie heretics following their masters, after the opening and
smoke of the bottomless pit.

The answer.
The innumerable locusts that devour the wealth of the earth, and with their
vain speculatious sting, and poison those which love not the truth, are by the
pope let out of hell, and have sparsed over the christian world in infinite
multitudes, as both his schoolmen, and the sundry and diverse orders of his
religious do testify. For what estimate may be made of the whole number,
Sab^lic^^.
when only one order, namely, the Franciscane friars were able to spare to the
pope thirty thousand able men to bear armor at one time.

Apoc. 9. 11.
The text.
And they had over them a king, the angel of the bottomless depth, whose name
in Hebrew is Abaddon.

The note.
The chief master of heretics.

The answer.
You say that in English his name is destroyer. We see then the devil who was
an homicide, and a destroier from the beginning is this king, and captain over
the archheretike, and his locustes, and that they under him work the great,
and mighty destruction of men which here is prophesied. And this agrees with
the prediction of the apostle Paul, 2. These. 2. 9.
That antichrist should come by the working of satan, with all power and
signs, and lieng woonders. The pope therefore and his clergy have both a
mighty and a cunning king, and captain to conduct them to destroy, and to be
destroyed.

Apoc. 9. 20.
The text.
And the rest of men, which were not slain with these plagues, neither have
done penance from the works of their hands, not to adore devils and idols of
gold, siuer, and brass, and stone, and wood, which neither can see nor hear,
nor walk, and have not done penance from their murders, nor from their
sorceries, nor from their fornication, nor from their thefts.

The note.
Pagans, infidels, and sinful impenitent catholics must be condemned also.

This phrase being the like both in Greek and Latin, signifies such
sorrowful, and penal repentance, as causes a man to forsake his former
sins and to depart from them. (...). See the same phrase cap. 2. 21. 22. and
Acts. 8. 22.

The answer.
Your two notes being both out of one sentence, which could not well be
divided, I have coupled together. And because I am sure that by catholics you
mean none other but papists, therefore you do well to couple them with pagans,
and infidels. For touching salvation and damnation they stand all in one state
and case, that is, in the state of damnation, except they repent. As for your
phrase which you make so much a do about, it has already been diverse tunes
examined and proved, that your imagined satisfactorie penance can not be
gathered out of it. Otherwise we do think that repentance to be but counterfeit,
which wants the testimonies of true repentance, and does not cause men to
forsake their former sins, and to depart from them. But I pray you tell me,
your images of gold, silver, brass, stone, and wood, can they see, hear, or
walk? have you done penance from the works of your hands, or will you wilfully
go to the devil?

Apoc. 10. ^.
The text.
And I saw an other angel, strong, descending from heaven, clothed with a
cloud, and a rainbowe on his head, and his face was as the sun, and his feet
as a pillar of fire.

The note.
Christ the valiant angel is here described.

The answer.
I marvel that you followed not your Liranus to expound this of the bishop of
Rome: but that flattery you are ashamed of, though in other things you exceed
him. But the circumstances make it plain, his dignity, power, strength, his
decking from top to toe, the greatness of his voice, the brightness of his
countenance, his unused steps comprehending land and sea together, can not
well agree to any other.

Apoc. 10. ^.
The text.
And when the seven thunders had spoken their voices, I was about to write:
And I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me: Sign the things which the
seven thunders have spoken: and write them not.

The note.
Many great mysteries and truths are to be preserved in the church, which for
causes known to Gods providence, are not to be written in the book of holy
Scripture.

The answer.
Far fetched, and dear bought is good for ladies, John was forbidden to
write, Ergo they are kept in the church. When you can prove that your church
knows those things, which Saint John was forbidden to write, and those things
which Saint Paul heard, and saw in heaven, and might not utter, then will I
believe all your unwritten verities.

Apoc. 10. ^.
The text.
And the angel which I saw standing upon the sea, and upon the land lifted up
his hand to heaven, and he swear by him that lives for ever and ever, etc.

The note.
This was the manner of taking an oath by the true God. as Deuteronomy. 32.

The answer.
There were diverse and sundry manners of taking oaths by the true God, which I
do not think so necessary here to be noted, as that you have taught men to
forsake God, and to swear by those which are not Gods, Ierem. 5. ^.
and as the thing which is here sworn, that is, that time shall be no more,
which is most necessary for men to consider, that they flatter not them selves
with the eternal continuance of the world.

Apoc. 10. ^.
The text.
And he said to me, Take the book and devour it.

The note.
By earnest study and meditation.

The answer.
You say well, add this (I pray you) that it is not only to be read, studied,
and thought upon, but also in as large measure as we are able to attain to,
understood, and laid up in our hearts.

Apoc. 10. 9.
The text.
And it shall make thy belly to be bitter, but in thy mouth it shall be sweet
as it were honey.

The note.
Sweet in the reading, but in the fulfilling somewhat bitter, because it
commands works of penance, and suffering of tribulations.

The answer.
The promises of the most gracious favor of God, and good life to believers
are sweet and delectable, but that we must pass through many and bitter
tribulations to come to life, to flesh and blood can not be but bitter. As for
your satisfactorie works of penance, which your mind runs on, are not to be
found any where in this book: but your heart is always on your half penie.

Apoc. 11. 2.
The text.
But the court which is without the temple, cast forth and measure not that:
because it is given to the Gentiles, and they shall tread under foot the holy
city two and forty months.

The note.
Three years and an half which is the time of Antichrists reign and
persecution.

The answer.
But that these months are to be measured here by our ordinary months, that
rests to be proved. The only thing that we can learn by this is, that
Antichrists reign shall not endure always, but in comparison of Christ's
reign which shall be eternal, if shall be very short. But how long or how short
so ever the time is, this is certain and plain against the papists, that
during Antichrists reign, the holy city, that is, the church shall be trodden
under foot.

Apoc. 11. 7.
The text.
And when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast which ascended
from the depth, shall make war against them, and shall overcome them, and
kill them.

The note.
The great Antichrist.

The answer.
The bishop of Rome, who though in the eyes of the world seem to prevail, and
to kill the witnesses of Gods truth, yet he can not do it till they have
finished their testimony, that is, the time that God has appointed them for
the execution of their office.

Apoc. 11. 8.
The text.
And their bodies shall lie in the streets of the great city, which is called
spiritually Sodom and Egypt, where the Lord also was crucified.

The note.
He means Jerusalem, named Sodom and Egypt for imitation of them in
wickedness: so that we see his chief reign shall be there, though his tirannie
may extend to all places of the world.

The answer.
How feign you would turn men's eyes from Rome, to look for the great
Antichrist else where. Seeing the names and other attributes are spiritual
descriptions of this city, and that Rome resembles Jerusalem in killing
Christ in his members, is like Sodom in beastly filthiness, and like Egypt
both in ambition and superstition, and in endeavor to hold the people of God in
servitude and thraldom, I see not why we should still think that to be the
great city here spoken of.

Apoc. 11. 10.
The text.
And the inhabitants of the earth shall be glad upon them, and make merry.

The note.
The wicked rejoice when holy men are executed by the tirants of the world,
because their life and doctrine are burdenous unto them.

The answer.
This is very true, and taught by daily experience under the Pope, and such
tirannous princes as bend their might, force, and authority to advance his
dignity.

Apoc. 11. 15.
The text.
And the seventh Angel sounded with a trumpet, and there were made loud voices
in heaven, saying, The kingdom of this world is made our Lords and his
Christ's, and he shall reign for ever and ever, Amen.

The note.
The kingdom of this world usurped before by Satan and Antichrist, shall
afterward be Christ's for ever.

The answer.
This last trumpet summoneth all the dead to rise again, and so to come to
judgment, at which time all enemies shall be destroyed, and God sole seized in
quiet possession for ever and ever of the whole world.

Apoc. 11. 18*
The text.
And the Gentiles were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead
to be judged, and to render reward to thy servants the prophets and saints, and
to them that fear thy name, little and great, etc.

The note.
To repaie the hire or wages (for so both the Greek word and the Latin
signify) due to holy men* proves against the protestants, that they did
truly merit the same in this life.

The answer.
Whatsoever it pleases you to conceive in your imagination, that is by and by
sufficiently proved. The signification of (...), has been often examined,
and yet it could never be showed that it always signifies hire or wages due,
and that for work: for that must be proved before merit can follow. For that
which is not otherwise due but by promise, may prove the liberality of the
giver, but not the merit of the receiver. And thus your proofs prove nothing,
but that brag is a good dog, and does diligently serve your turn.

Apoc. 12. ^
The text.
And a great sign appeered in heaven.

The note.
The dragons incredulous persecuting multitude, and Antichrist the chief head
thereof.

The answer.
You have delivered a brief sum of this chapter in my judgment, both
breefly and truly.

Apoc. 12. 1.
The text.
A woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and on her head
a crown of twelve stars.

The note.
This is properly and principally spoken of the church, and by allusion of our
blessed Lady also.

The answer.
There be some of your side, which least they should be driven to admit
Ecclesiam latentem, (...) de (...) ecclesia. cap. 2.
an hidden church, wrangle hard for the contrary, and so your doctors are not
agreed on the case.

Apoc. 12. 3.
The text.
And there was seen another sign in heaven, and behold a great red dragon
having seven heads and ten horns, and on his head seven diademes.

The note.
The great devil Lucifer.

The answer.
Because my purpose is but to answer you where cause is, and not to write
commentaries, therefore I will not meddle with that which might be noted upon
the description of the devil under the form of a dragon.

Apoc. 12. 4.
The text.
And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and cast them to the
earth.

The note.
The spirits that fall from their first state, into apostasy with him and by
his means.

The answer.
The tail of the dragon be hypocritical false prophets. As dragons and
serpents carry their venim, that they sting and poison withal in their tails:
so the devil seduceth and beguileth by his false lieng prophets. The stars of
heaven cast down to the earth, are the most noble and notable men that seem
far to excel all others, brought to be altogether earthly minded, and to
refuse celestial things.

Apoc. 12. 4.
The text.
And the dragon stood before the woman, which was ready to be delivered: that
when she should be delivered, he might devour her son.

The note.
The devils endeavor against the churches children, and specially our blessed
Ladies only son the head of the rest.

The answer.
It is true that the devil that is so great an enemy to the children of the
church, bears also a special malice to Christ the head of the church, and
would have devoured him, but could not. And because he knows that he cannot
otherwise hurt nor harm Christ, therefore he seeks to swallow and devour us
Christ's brethren, by the seed of the word, and mighty working of Gods spirit
begotten and borne of the church to God.

Apoc. 12. 1^.
The text.
And they overcame him by the blood of the lamb, and by the word of their
testimony, and they loved not their lives even unto death.

The note.
When the Angels or we have the victory, we must know that it is by the blood
of Christ, and so all is referred always to him.

The answer.
You should have said, if you would have spoken truly, and so as much as please
us, is referred to him. For, for to have all referred to him, is all that we
contend and strive for: Faith in his blood is the victory whereby we overcome
the world, and all our enemies. The strength of nature, the ability of free
will, merits of our works, crossing, holy water, indulgences, pardons, masses,
and whatsoever trumperie you strive for beside, do nothing avail to this.

Apoc. 12^ 14.
The text.
And there were given to the woman two wings of a great eagle, that she might
fly into the desert, unto her place, where she is nourished for a time, and
times, and half a time from the face of the serpent.

The note.
This often insinuation that Antichrists reign shall be but three years and
an half, Dan. 7. 25. Apocalipse 11. 2. 3. and in this chapter v. 6. c. 13. 5.
proves that the heretics be exceedingly blinded with malice, that hold the
pope to be Antichrist, who has ruled so many ages.

The answer.
Master Saunders in his demonstrations has as doughtily done for you, as so
dark proofs out of such doubtful places could suffer, and has already
received answer sufficient at the hands of that learned and reverend man Master
Whitakers. You know how doubtfully all expositors expound these descriptions of
the time, and must we needs credit you, that it must be taken according to our
usual supputation? As for the ages, which you suppose your pope has ruled,
you may cut off the one half of them, which I am sure you imagine.

Apoc. 13. 3.
The text.
And all the earth was in admiration after the beast.

The note.
They that now follow the simplest and grossest heretics that ever were,
without seeing miracles, would then much more follow this great seducer,
working miracles.

The answer.
They which learn of them that preach the word truly and sincerely, cannot be
seduced by miracles. Because they know and have learned, that whatsoever
miracles serve not to the confirmation of that doctrine which is taught us in
the word, they are but illusions of the devil, and lieng signs of Antichrist,
which God does send, permit and suffer, to show who they be which constantly
cleave to him and his truth. But on the contrary part, it is no marvel though
your followers be easily seduced and beguiled. First, because they be ignorant,
and know nothing: secondly, because they depend upon men (who as they say
cannot err) and not upon the word of truth, and therefore believe many things,
whereof they have no ground, but either lies or illusions.

Apoc. 13. ^.
The text.
And he opened his mouth unto blasphemies toward God, to blaspheme his name,
and his tabernacle, and those that dwell in heaven.

The note.
No heretics ever liker Antichrist than these in our days, specially in
blasphemies against Gods church, sacraments, saints, ministers, and all sacred
things.

The answer.
Lay away lieng, and speak the woorst you can truly of those whom you call the
heretics of these days, and I am sure you cannot prove your slanderous
speeches by them. But in truth none be so like Antichrist as the pope, and you
his friends. Wherein we will report nothing maliciously by any of contrary
religion unto you devised, but truly testified, reported, and witnessed by
friends and fautors of the Romish power in their stories and writings. One
poisoned his God: another cast his God into the fire: The consessor to Henry
the sixth Emperor. Hildebrand. Leo the tenth.
another would eat his peacocke in despite of God: another counted the
religion of Christ a fable or a tale. It were infinite to set down all their
blasphemies. But if these blasphemed not, then tell me what you call blasphemy?

Apoc. 13. 11*
The text.
And I saw another beast coming up from the earth, and he had two horns like
to a lamb, and he spoke as a dragon.

The note.
Another false prophet inferior to Antichrist shall work woonders also, but
all referred to the honor of his master Antichrist. So does Calvin and other
archheretikes pervert the world to the honor of Antichrist, and so do their
scholars also for the honor of them.

The answer.
How feign you would turn all things from your selves to others. The former
beast coming out of the sea betokens all those kingdoms and potentates that
have opposed themselves to Christ, and with force and violence sought to
suppress the kingdom of Christ. The second beast like a lamb betokens all
orders of the papisticall clergy, who under the name of Christ and his
church, oppugn Christ and his church, and retain some similitudes of the old
church to deceive withal, and are marvelous cunning artificers to coin,
forge, feign, and counterfeit miracles.

Apoc. 14. 1.
The text.
And I looked and behold a lamb stood upon mount Sion, and with him an hundred
forty and four thousand having his name, and the name of his father written
in their foreheads.

The note.
Christ and the same number of the elect which were signed. c. 7.

The answer.
This is set down for our comfort, that we should neither be carried away by
the universality of them that are seduced, neither terrified with the greatness
of the troubles and miseries, wherewith the children of God are afflicted. For
howsoever in the eyes of the world, the pope and his seem to prevail for a
time, yet Christ and his elect stand upon mount Sion, which is a figure of his
true church triumphing.

Apoc. 14. 4.
The text.
These are they which were not defiled with women: for they are virgins. These
follow the lamb whither soever he shall go.

The note.
One state of life more excellent than another, and virgins for their purity
passing the rest, and always accompanieng Christ according to the churches
himne out of this place: Quocunque pergis virgins sequuntur, etc.

The answer.
You are the most gross, and the most careless heretics that ever set pen to
paper. Were all the elect votaries, and professed single life? who can believe
you? Especially seeing the Israelites (to whom this number here spoken of, was
in the seventh chapter properly applied) did desire earnestly, and thought it a
great blessing of God to have fruit of their bodies. It cannot therefore be
otherwise, but that virgins be here called those, which are not defiled with
spiritual fornication: in which sense Paul prepared the Corinthians to
present them a pure virgin unto Christ. ^. Cor. 11. 2.


Apoc. 14. 4.
The text.
These were bought from among men, the first fruits to God and the lamb.

The note.
This the church applies to the holy innocents that died first for Christ.

The answer.
Your church has very obedient children of you: for if she say the crow is
white, you will believe her. For otherwise if you had eyes in your head, you
might see that she applies this scripture at randon, as she does in a manner
all that she deals withal. For the circumstances of this place makes it
very plain, that the whole number before spoken of, are the first fruits to God
and the lamb.

Apoc. 14. ^.
The text.
And an other angel followed, saying, fallen, fallen is that great Babylon,
which of the wine of the wrath of her fornication made all nations to drink.

The note.
The city of the devil, which is the universal society of wicked
misbeleeuers, and ill livers in the world.

The answer.
If evil livers be a parcel of this society, your church of Rome must needs
have her part in it. I marvel what Saint Augustine meant in his days to make
Rome the universal head of this society, De ciuitate dei lib. 15. ca. 5
and that Enochia which Cain built was a figure of Rome, that being the first
city in time, and Rome the first in dignity, the foundations of both being
laid in blood, the founders of both being murderers, murderers I say of their
own natural brethren. And that Babylon must needs be here taken for Rome,
this makes it manifest, that you your selves cannot assign any other city,
that has made all nations to drink of the wine of her fornications spiritual.

Apoc. 14. 10.
The text.
If any man adore the beast, and his image, and receive the character in his
forehead or in his hand, he also shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God,
which is mingled with pure wine in the cup of his wrath, and shall be tormented
with fire and brimstone in the sight of the holy angels and the sight of the
Lamb.

The note.
The great damnation, that shall follow them that forsake Christ and the
church, and worship antichrist or his image.

The answer.
Into which stubborn and obstinate papists do headlong run, and will not be
reclaimed by any means.

Apoc. 14. 12.
The text.
Here is the patience of saints, which keep the commandments of God, and the
faith of Jesus.

The note.
Faith is not enough to salvation, without keeping the commandments.

The answer.
This cavil has been often enough answered. Obedience always follows a
true lively justifying faith, and yet it is not our obedience, that justifies
and saves us.

Apoc. 15. 1.
The text.
And I saw an other sign in heaven great and marvelous, seven angels having
the seven last plagues. Because in them the wrath of God is consummate.

The note.
The tribulations about the day of judgment.

The answer.
The tribulations that God has afflicted the world withal since the first
spreading of the Gospel, and shall afflict it with at any time, betwixt this,
and the day of judgment.

Apoc. 15. 2.
The text.
And I saw as it were a sea of glass mingled with fire, and them that
overcame the beast, and his image, and the number of his name, standing upon
the sea of glass having the harpes of God.

The note.
Baptism.

The answer.
Least the greatness and the multitude of the grievous plagues should overmuch
dismay the godly, the holy Ghost before hand sets down their happy and
blessed estate, wherein they shall eternally joy, and rejoice with God, and
his Christ, that have their eyes fixed upon that, to the end they may the
easilier devour and swallow up the great troubles, and miseries of this life.

Apoc. 15. 3.
The text.
And singing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the lamb,
saying, Great and marvelous are thy works Lord God omnipotent: just and true
are thy ways king of the worlds.

The note.
The song of Moses and Christ is the new Testament and the old.

The answer.
This song is the ioifull thanksgiving that the saints of God use, for his
benefits. It is called the song of Moses, and Christ, because the benefits of
all times of the law, and of the Gospel are therein considered, the delivery
of the children of Israel, and the redemption of all nations under heaven. It
consists of three parts: namely in considering the woonderfulnes, and
gloriousnes of Gods works: the justice and truth of God in his ways: and the
terriblenes and fearefulnes of his judgments.

Apoc. 1^. 6.
The text.
Because they have shed the blood of the saints and prophets, and thou have
given them blood to drink, for they are worthy.

The note.
The great revenge that God will do at the later day upon the persecutors of
his saints.

The answer.
The great revenge that God has done, and showed upon all the persecuting
tyrants of the primitive church. And this withal is to be diligently remembered,
that Gods arm is not shortened, and his hand is stretched out still. And
therefore still blood must be the drink of them that delight in blood, and
they that love darkness, shall have their reward in the kingdom of darkness,
and they that love not the truth, must be given over to believe lies.

Apoc. 16. 9.
The text.
And men boiled with great heat, and blasphemed the name of God having power
over these plagues.

The note.
The desperate and damned persons shall blaspheme God perpetually, which shall
be such only as do not repent in this life.

The answer.
If I did not perceive that these plagues are referred to former times, I would
refer this to you whom I see blinded with hypocrisy, and drunken with the
confidence of your own merits, so that when you intend and purpose to serve
God, you commit idolatry, and because you see not your sins, you can not
abide any admonition or reproouing, and when God strikes and punishes you,
because you understand not the cause, you are never the better, but grudge and
blaspheme, and run headlong to the devil without repentance. But when I
look unto those former times, which are here spoken of, I find the same
roots of evil in them which are in you, although not so deep rooted in them
as in you, that is, the philosophical doctrine of free will and confidence in
them selves and their works, which made them suppose that they pleased God,
when they killed his saints enemies to those opinions: and because they did not
imagine that they did amiss, therefore no marvel though they repented not,
but grudged and blasphemed at the plagues which God powered upon them. For the
same causes must needs in every one have like effects.

Apoc. 16. 11.
The text.
And they blasphemed the God of heaven, because of their pains and wounds,
and did not penance from their works.

The note.
See chapter 9. verse 2. in the margent.

The answer.
The fool will not give his babble for the tower of London, for then he should
miss a great deal of good sport. Your marginall annotation has been viewed
and answered, the substance whereof being frivolous and foolish, you have
repeated I know not how often in these annotations.

Apoc. 16. 13.
The text.
And I saw from the mouth of the dragon, and from the mouth of the beast, and
from the mouth of the false prophet, three unclean spirits in manner of frogs.

The note.
The dragon is the devil, the beast Antichrist or the society whereof he is
the head, the false prophet either Antichrist him self, or the company of
heretics and seducers that follow him.

The answer.
That by the dragon the devil is signified, and by the beast the Pope or the
society whereof he is the head, we easily consent with you, but the false
prophet here we suppose to be Mahomet, that has seduced the whole empires of
the Turks and Persians. And al these by evil, wicked, and seducing spirits
bend them selves, and all their force against the Church and kingdom of Christ.

Apoc. 16. 16.
The text.
And he shall gather them into a place, which in Hebrewe is called Arina-gedon.

The note.
The hill of thieves by Saint Hieroms interpretation.

The answer.
The conjectures of interpreters is very diverse upon this word, but this is
plain, that being in the time of the sixth Angels pouring forth his vial, it
is a matter to be accomplished near about our times, and it is therefore the
diligentlier to be considered and weighed of us with the issue of it. The sum
of it is, that the devil and Antichrist shall by their false prophets,
persuade the Kings of the earth to bend all their whole force against the
church and against the Gospel of God, to extinguish and destroy it. By all
likelihoode the time of accomplishing this is now at hand, for I suppose there
was never before any such conspiracy of princes for that purpose. Judges 4.
the whole chap. and 5. ver. 19.
But God who drew Iabin and Sisera to Magiddo, which because it was placed by
a mountain, is called here Arma-gedon, to give them and all their great army
into the hand of a woman to destruction, has promised to do the like here,
to the great comfort and consolation of his church and people, especially of
those which are now governed by Deborah.

Apoc. 16. 19.
The text.
And the great city was made into three parts: and the cities of the Gentiles
fell.

The note.
The city or commonwealth of the wicked divided into three parts, into
infidels, heretics, and evil Catholics. The city is here called Babylon,
whereof see the next chapter verse 5.

The answer.
The city still I take for Rome, called here Babylon. The division of it I
take to be into Epicurean Atheists, close hipocrites, and cruel superstitious,
and yet openly wicked ignorant people.

Apoc. 17. ^.
The text.
And there came to me one of the seven Angels, which had the seven vials, and
spoke with me, saying: Come, I will show thee the damnation of the great
harlot.

The note.
The small damnation of the whole company of the reprobate, called here the
great whore.

The answer.
The final damnation of the popes of Rome, and their church there so
evidently described by their manners, nature, properties, conversation of life,
apparel, power over the kings of the earth, that neither man, nor place upon
the earth can be found, to which every part of this description can so aptly
agree to as to these. Open therefore your eyes, and epsy her whom the holy
Ghost lays out so openly before you, and fly from her betimes, least you be
partaker of her plagues and damnation.

Apoc. 17. 1.
The text.
Which sits upon many waters.

The note.
These many waters are many peoples, verse 15.

The answer.
Here you have found scripture for your universality. The whore has a large
dominion, and many people under her: even as many, as without all judgment
receive whatsoever it pleases the bishops of Rome to obtrude to them.

Apoc. 17. 8.
The text.
The beast which thou saw was and is not, and shall come up out of the
bottomless depth, and go into destruction.

The note.
It signifies the short reign of Antichrist, who is the chief horn or head
of the beast.

The answer.
I would it had pleased God to make it so short as you imagine it, it had saved
the blood of a great number of saints, and bred quietness in our days: but since
it has pleased God otherwise, God open our eyes, that we may see, know, and
take heed in time.

Apoc. 17. 12.
The text.
And the ten horns which thou saw, are ten kings which have not yet received
kingdom, but shall receive power as kings one hour after the beast.

The note.
Some expound it of ten small kingdoms into which the Roman empire shall be
divided, which all shall serve Antichrist both in his life and a little after.

The answer.
I consent to them that interpret this of our kingdoms in Europe, England,
France, Spain, Scotland, Nauar, Denmark, Sweueland, Beam, Poland, Hungary,
which all have served Rome. But the continuance of their service the beasts
whole life and a little after, is one of your dreams.

Apoc. 17. 1^.
The text.
And the ten horns which thou saw in the beast these shall hate the harlot,
and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and her they
shall burn with fire. For God has given into their hearts to do that which
pleases him: that they give their kingdom to the beast till the words of God
be consummate.

The note.
Not forcing or moving any to follow Antichrist, but by his just judgment,
and for punishment of their sin permitting them to believe and consent to him.

The answer.
Of Gods working in the minds of men, and of your foolish frivolous flieng to
permission, we have spoken diverse times before. I cannot learn of you, to
speak otherwise than the holy Ghost has taught me. but here it is manifest
that those kings shall not serve the whore so long as you dreamed of, but that
though by the just judgment of God, they for a time gave their crowns and
dignities unto Antichrist, yet God has already altered the minds and wills of
some of these, and will when his good pleasure is, alter the rest, that they
shall hate the harlot, and make her desolate and naked, according to the words
of this prophecy.

Apoc. 18. 7.
The text.
As much as she has glorified her self, and has been in delicacies, so much
give her torment and moorning: because she says in her heart: I sit a Queen,
and widow I am not, and moorning I shall not see.

The note.
The measure of pains and damnation according to the wicked pleasures and
unlawful delights of this life, which is a sore sentence for such people as
turn their whole life to lust and riot.

The answer.
Though this be properly spoken and meant of the pains and damnation of the
whore of Babylon, yet it may be well extended to all those, that after her
example excel in pride and ambition, and other impieties. For as they have
followed her in sinning, so no doubt they shall follow her in the punishment of
sin.

Apoc. 18. 9.
The text.
And the kings of the earth that have fornicated with her, and have lived in
delicacies, shall weep and bewail themselves upon her, when they shall see
the smoke of her burning.

The note.
Kings and merchants are most encumbred, endangered, and drowned in the
pleasures of this world, whose whole life and traffike is (if they be not
exceeding virtuous) to find variety of earthly pleasures. Who seeing once the
extreme end of their ioies, and of all that made their heaven here, to be
turned into pains and damnation eternal, then shall howl and weep too late.

The answer.
Kings and merchants, and all other that have had her in reverence, shall be
astonished at the judgments of God upon her, and shall moorne, especially all
manner of shaven merchants, because by her decay they lose their corporal
commodities. For thereby their Romish merchandise, wherein consisted their
whole traffike, becomes dead ware, and hangs on their hands. For that they
have no vent for it.

Apoc. 18. 20.
The text.
Rejoice over her heaven, and ye holy Apostles, and prophets, because God has
judged your judgment of her.

The note.
The angels and all saints shall rejoice and laud God to see the wicked
confounded, and Gods justice executed upon their oppressors, and persecutors:
and this is that which the martyrs prayed for, chapter 6.

The answer.
All celesticall creatures, together with the saints of God are called to
celebrate, and show forth their spiritual joy, and gladness, for the
destruction of the enemies of Gods church, and for the notable revenge that God
has made for the blood of his saints, that has been spilled.

Apoc. 18. 21.
The text.
And one strong angel took up as it were a great millstone, and threw it into
the sea, saying: with this violence shall Babylon that great city be thrown,
and shall now be found no more.

The note.
By this it seems clear, that the apostle means not any one city, but the
universal company of the reprobate, which shall perish in the day of judgment,
the old prophets also naming the whole number of Gods enemies mistically
Babylon, as Ierem. cap. 52.

The answer.
How clear can any thing here make it, that by Babylon one city is not meant?
The whole number of the reprobate shall perish at the day of judgment. What
then? Does that hinder that the head, and principal city of the devils
kingdom, is not meant here, by Babylon? Babylon is taken in the scriptures
mystically for the whole number of Gods enemies, Jeremy. 52. Babylon in that
chapter is not named, and though it be by circumstance desciphered, I see
nothing why there also, it should not be taken for the city it self. But
howsoever it be taken there, it is most manifest, that here it must be taken
for Rome. For what other city is situate on seven hills? what other city has
had kingdom over the kings of the earth? what other city has made the nations
to err in her inchauntments? and in what city else may a man find the blood
of the prophets, and saints that have been slain upon the earth? So that the
reasons that lead us to understand it of Rome are so many, and so plain, that
except a man would shut his eyes against the light, he cannot choose but see
it. Yet this is farther to be gathered, that the head and principal city of
the devils kingdom can not fall without the ruin and fall of the whole
kingdom.

Apoc. 19. ^.
The text.
And again they said Allelu-ia.

The note.
This often repeating of Allelu-ia in times of reioising, the church does
follow in her service.

The answer.
And where all things in the church ought to be done to edifieng, the people
who understand never a word, are never the better, neither for your Latin,
Greek, nor Hebrew. And yet you think it sufficient to tell us that such a
thing, or such a thing in the scriptures, is also in your church service. It
were too great a disgrace for you, to say or sing in plain English, praise ye
the Lord.

Apoc. 19. 7.
The text.
Let us be glad, and rejoice, and give glory to him: because the marriage of
the Lamb is come, and his wife has prepared her self.

The note.
At this day shall the whole church of the elect be finally and perfectly
joined unto Christ in marriage inseparable.

The answer.
In the mean space we had need to take great heed of being seduced by your
persuasions, and so of forsaking Christ, and coupling our selves to another
man, that is, to the pope: which is both the popes, and yours whole endeavors.

Apoc. 19 9.
The text.
And he said to me write, Blessed be they that are called to the supper of the
marriage of the Lamb.

The note.
That is the feast of eternal life, prepared for his spouse the church.

The answer.
And not for you which embrace another head and spouse in his steed, to whom
you have given greater pre-eminence, then to Christ himself.

Apoc. 19. 13.
The text.
And he was clothed with a garment sprinkled with blood: and his name is
called the word of God.

The note.
The second person in Trinity, the Son or the word of God, which was made
flesh. Io. 1.

The answer.
Who shall confound antichrist, and all the power of the earth which takes his
part, even with the sword, that proceeds out of his mouth.

Apoc. 19. 16.
The text.
And he has in his garment, and in his thigh written, king of kings, and lord
of lords.

The note.
Even according to his humanity also.

The answer.
Our Lord and Savior Christ, God and man, after his resurrection is advanced
above all principalities and powers, and every name that is named in heaven and
in earth.

Apoc. 20. 1.
The text.
And I saw an angel descending from heaven, having the key of the bottomless
depth, and a great chain in his hand.

The note.
See in S. Augustine (lib. 20. de ciuit. ca. 7. 8. and seq.) the exposition of
this chapter.

The answer.
Your referring men to the doctors shows that your care is not for ignorant
men to profit them, for they are not the better for this reference, and the
learned needs it not.

Apoc. 20. ^.
The text.
And I saw seats, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given them, and
the souls of the beheaded for the testimony of Jesus, and for the word of
God, and that adored not the beast, nor his image, nor received his character
in their foreheads, or in their hands, and have lived and reigned with Christ a
thousand years.

The note.
Quid in millenario numero nisi ad proferendam nouam sobolem perfecta
vniuersitas praestitae generationis exprimitur, hinc per Iohannem dicitur. Et
regnabunt cum illo mill annis, quia regnum sanctae ecclesiae vniuersitatis
perfectione solidatur. D. Gregorius. libro 9. moral. cap. 1.

The answer.
Your poor countrymen are greatly beholding to you, they are much the better
for your note, they understand it as well, and are edified as much by it as by
your church service. And for my part because you have not vouchsafed to turn
it into English your selves, and because it touches no matter of controversy
betwixt us, I will also take mine ease and leave it as I find it.

Apoc. 20. 7.
The text.
And when the thousand years shall be consummate, Satan shall be loosed out of
his prison, and shall go forth and seduce the nations that are upon the four
corners of the earth, Gog and Magog, and shall gather them into battle, the
number of whom is as the sand of the sea.

The note.
Saint Augustine thinks that these do not signify any certain nations, but
all that shall then be joined with the devil and Antichrist against the
church. lib. 20. de ciuitate cap. 11. See Saint Hierome in Ezechielem lib. 11.

The answer.
We agree with Augustine that all enemies of the church are signified, open, as
Turks and such like, privy, as the Pope, papists and such like, who under the
name and title of Christ persecute the members of Christ, which the text it
self does plainly insinuate, which says that they are the nations, which
are upon the four corners of the earth.

Apoc. 20. 11.
The text.
And I saw a great white throne, and one sitting upon it, from whose sight
earth and heaven fled, and there was no place found for them.

The note.
They shall then be new, not the substance, but the shape changed. 2. Peter. 3.
See Saint Augustine lib. 20. de ciuit. cap. 14.

The answer.
That this is to be expounded of the innovation of heaven and earth, we
consent, but I muse for whom you gathered your notes. The learned without you
know whither to repair for resolution in their doubts. The unlearned can not
consult with Augustine though they would. These references to see the judgment
of Doctors have no profit, but to make a show of your reading.

Apoc. 20. 12.
The text.
And I saw the dead, great and little standing in the sight of the throne, and
books were opened, and another book was opened, which is of life, and the
dead were judged of those things which were written in the books, according to
their works.

The note.
The books of men's consciences, where it shall be plainly read, what every
man's life has been.

The answer.
Our own consciences and thoughts at that day shall either accuse or excuse
us. Look therefore well into your consciences, and take heed that you trust
not too much, and to far to your Pope of Rome, for it is well known that he
is but a mortal man, and not God.

Apoc. 20. 15.
The text.
And he that was not found written in the book of life, was cast into the
poole of fire.

The note.
Such as do no good works, if they have age and time to do them, are not found
in the book of life.

The answer.
Your note is neither gathered out of this place, neither warranted by any
other. He that lives to man's state has age, and he that lives long has time
to do good works, but suppose they have done none, shall we cut from them hope
of mercy before the last gasp, and may not the like grace be showed them, that
was granted to the penitent thief? The time therefore of working must begin
at their conversion and true turning to God, whether it be early or late,
otherwise this place shows nothing, but that only the elect shall be saved.
Others, though in show they have led a painful religious life, Mat. 7. 22. 23.
though they shall be able to say, Lord, have not we done thus and thus in thy
name? yet shall have answer, depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I never
knew you.

Apoc. 21. 2.
The text.
And I John saw the holy city Jerusalem new, descending from heaven,
prepared of God as a bride adorned for her husband.

The note.
The Church triumphant.

The answer.
The joy and comfort of all the saints of God to think of. Now every gift
which we receive in this life, is a pledge and token of that love, wherewith
Christ has embraced his church as his spouse: but then she shall be perfectly
adorned and beautified, and put into actual possession of all the good things,
which are Christ's her husbands.

Apoc. 21. 3.
The text.
And I heard a loud voice from the throne, saying, behold the tabernacle of God
with men, and he will dwell with them.

The note.
This Tabernacle is Christ according to his humanity.

The answer.
Though it be true, that by the incarnation of our Lord and savior Christ, and
his taking upon him our nature, God dwells with us, yet here it is spoken of
Gods receiving us into the participation of the glory of his Christ. For then
when we shall be received into eternal and everlasting felicity, this
society, conjunction, and dwelling of God and man together, shall most clearly
and perfectly appear.

Apoc. 21. 4.
The text.
And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes: and death shall be no
more, nor moorning, nor crieng, neither shall there be sorrow any more, which
first things are gone.

The note.
This happy day shall make an end of all the miseries of this mortality.

The answer.
God is likened to a mother, which wipeth away the tears from the infants eyes
and cheeks, whereby is signified, that not only there shall be an end of the
miseries of this mortality, but also that there shall remain no token, step,
nor print of our former calamities.

Apoc. 21. 7.
The text.
He that shall overcome, shall possess these things, and I will be his God and
he shall be my son.

The note.
He that has the victory in the church militant, shall have his reward in the
triumphant.

The answer.
If hope of pray, and spoil, and liberal intertainment make men to adventure
them selves, and their lives for victory, how much more we, whose lives are a
continual warfare, who are most certain and assured of victory, should
manfully and valiantly fight against all spiritual enemies, since the
liberality of God is so great to victors and conquerors.

Apoc. 21. 8.
The text.
But to the fearful and incredulous, and execrable, and murderers, and
fornicators, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liers, their part shall be in
the poole burning with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.

The note.
All that commit mortal sins, and repent not, shall be damned.

The answer.
The wages of every sin is death. Romans 6. 23.
All impenitent sinners therefore how small soever their sin seem to be,
shall be damned, which is also plainly here insinuated, in that not only
unbelievers, and other gross and foul sinners in the common judgment of men,
are reckoned, but also and that first of all, those which are fearful and
cowards in Gods cause are set, which is a fault that most men little regard,
and make a small account of, and therefore all sins without repentance draw men
to damnation.

Apoc. (...). 11.
The text.
And he took me up in spirit into a mountain great and high, and he showed me
the holy city Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from God having the glory
of God. And the light thereof like to a precious stone, as it were to the
Jasper stone even as Crystal.

The note.
The glory of the triumphant church.

The answer.
Which though it be here excellently, sweetly, and delectably shadowed, yet it
does exceed far the capacity and reach of our dull brains and weak
understanding in this vale of misery. Howbeit the holy Ghost does thus
describe it, to the end that we considering the excellency of this
description, and waieng that that the holy Ghost has but shadowed these things
by the most excellent earthly things that are, we should be wholly rapt and
inflamed with the love of these things, and have our eyes continually upon
them, and long and earnestly desire to have the actual fruition of them.

Apoc. 21. 12.
The text.
And it had a wall great and high, having twelve gates, and in the gates twelve
Angels, and names written thereon, which are the names of the twelve tribes of
the children of Israel.

The note.
The names of the patriarks and apostles honorable and glorious in the
triumphant church.

The answer.
In respect of the promises made to the fathers, and in respect of the doctrine
of truth, and saving health delivered to the whole church by the holy apostles,
and in whatsoever respect beside that you can reckon, neither derogating from
the glory of God, nor dissonant from the truth of his word.

Apoc. 21. 16.
The text.
And the city is situated quadrangle wise, and the length thereof is as great
as also the breadth, and he measured the city with the reed, for twelve
thousand furlongs, and the length and height, and breadth thereof be equal.

The note.
See S. Hierom ep. 17. touching this description of the heavenly Jerusalem,
which is the church triumphant, teaching that these things must be taken
spiritually, not carnally.

The answer.
This admonition is very necessary for your poor blind followers, who know
nothing, and are utterly destitute of all understanding. But alack how is it
possible for them to take these things spiritually, who are altogether carnal,
led by masters and teachers, which are themselves void of the spirit of God?
But out of popery in this light of the Gospel, it is hard to find any so
ignorant, that thinks not that these things ought to be spiritually
understood.

Apoc. 21. 22.
The text.
And temple I saw not therein. For our Lord God omnipotent is the temple
thereof and the lamb.

The note.
All external sacrifices, which now is the necessary duty of the faithful
shall then cease, and therefore shall need no material temple.

The answer.
The sacrifice which your mind runs of, is now no duty of a christian. And
though we have now places to meet in, to hear and learn the word, to pray
and to praise God in, to celebrate the mysteries which he has left to his
church, and to use all spiritual exercises: yet temples we have none, for God
him self is our temple, 1. Cor. 6. 19.
for we dwell in him, and we are his temple, for his spirit dwells in us. As
for your propitiatory sacrifices, you may take pains to return them to Rome,
from whence they came.

Apoc. 21. 27.
The text.
There shall not enter into it any polluted thing, nor that does abomination,
and makes lie, but they are written in the book of life of the lamb.

The note.
None not perfectly cleansed of their sins, can enter into this heavenly
Jerusalem.

The answer.
You know that in this life we know but in part, we love but in part, 1. Cor.
13. 9.
and therefore no work perfectly good can proceed from us. Those therefore
that put confidence in the meritoriousnesse of men's works, can not enter into
this Jerusalem. And I muse that you tremble not, and quake not, when you see
that he that makes a lie can not enter, considering it appears in all your
works, and especially in these notes, that you think it not dishonestie or
shame commonly to lie. And another thing I would have you to consider of, why
this celestial city is called rather by the name of Jerusalem, then of Rome,
seeing that (if your doctrine be true) Rome has greater privileges upon
earth, then ever had Jerusalem, and therefore were meeter to shadow that
celestial city.

Apoc. 22. ^.
The text.
In the midst of the street thereof, and on both sides of the river the tree
of life yielding twelve fruits, rendering his fruit every month, and the
leaves of the tree for the curing of the Gentiles.

The note.
Christ is our tree of life, in the Church by the blessed Sacrament, and in
heaven by his visible presence, and influence of life everlasting, both to our
bodies and souls, of whom Solomon says, The tree of life to all that
apprehend him. Proverb. 3.

The answer.
It is true that Christ is this tree of life, and that he works life and
health by the ministry of his word and sacraments to believers. And that the
knowledge of the benefits which we have by Christ, is the leaves wherebie the
Gentiles receive health, and are cured: and that Christ's bodily presence not
in the Sacrament but in heaven, preserves eternally the bodies and souls of
them that shall be saved.

Apoc. 22. 8.
The text.
And I John which have heard and seen these things, and after I had heard and
seen, I fell down to adore before the feet of the angel which showed me
these things, and he said to me: Stand up, for I am thy fellow servant.

The note.
You see it is all one to adore before the feet of the Angel, and to adore
the Angel, though to adore him be not expressed, as in the 19. chapter. See
the annotation there, verse 10.

The answer.
If your note be true, then how can you adore before images, and not adore
images? For if to adore before an Angel, and to adore an angel be all one,
then how is it not also al one to adore before an image, and to adore an image?
Your annotation shall receive answer amongst the rest.

Apoc. 22. 11.
The text.
And he that is just let him be justified yet, and let the holy be sanctified
yet.

The note.
Man by Gods grace, and doing goodworkes does increase his justice.

The answer.
This is according to your accustomed manner, dallieng, and deluding with words
ambiguous. It is manifest that the Apostle reiterating one and the same thing
in diverse words, does by the latter express the meaning of the former. Our
justice therefore, but not our justification before God, may be increased by
the means you speak of, for it is properly Gods justice, and not ours
whereby we are justified before him. Gods justice I call the obedience of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, which God imputes to those whose sins he
pardons, and which can only abide the rigor of Gods examination, according
to his perfect rule of justice, that is, the law. Man's justice I call the
fruits and effects of the spirit of regeneration, which do more and more daily
abound and increase in the godly, as knowledge and faith does more and more
increase.

The text.
Behold I come quickelie, and my reward is with me to render to every man
according to his works.

Apoc. 22. 12.
The note.
Heaven is the reward, hire, and repaiment for goodworkes in all the
Scriptures, and yet the adversaries will not see it.

The answer.
That our good works deserve or merit heaven, is the thing which we can not
see, nor you show through all the Scriptures. And yet you cease not to make
lame and halting arguments that follow not: for if always upon reward,
deserving necessarily follows, then it must follow that your fellows, which
have been rewarded with the gallows, have also deserved the gallows, which if
you grant, then you overthrow the concertation of your Catholic church, the
chief purpose whereof was to justify traitors.

FINIS.

