THE PATTERN OF AN INVINCIBLE FAITH.

A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross, the first Sunday after Trinity, being the
2d. of June. 1616.

By WILLIAM WORSHIP, Doctor of Divinity.

PSALM 17. 6. I have called upon thee: surely thou will hear me, o GOD.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR FRANCIS BACON, KNIGHT, ONE OF HIS MAJESTY'S MOST
HONORABLE PRIVY COUNCIL
RIGHT Honorable, there is no child of GOD, but either has, or must shortly
wrestle with Death, and Hell. A conflict so terrible, that not only the sweat
will bubble through the brow; but the very blood will trickle down within the
ribs. Job. 6. 4.
Thus Job was a Butt for the Almighty to shoot at: Oh, his spirit was drunk up
with the venim of his Arrows. Psa. 77 9. 10. 6. 3. 38. 2. 3.
How often was David at the brim of despair? what cryings, what roarings were
there, before his conscience could he stilled? Isa. 38. 13. 14.
Hezechias chatters like a Crane, or S^^llow, wh^ the Lord brake his bones in
peec^s like (...) Peter bitterly weeps, Mat 26 75. Luke 18. 13. Rom 7. 24. 1.
Tim. 1. 13.
the Publican thumpes himselfe^ and Paul cannot leave his sighing, to think of
(...) (...) Persecution, and Oppression, the cursed fru^^ his former ignorance.
For Preparation against this Agony, I thought it fit to treat of the rare
History of the Syro-Phoenician, in that solemn and Honorable Assembly,
whereunto I was newly called. Whereon while my thoughts were attending, I was
suddenly cast upon my bed of sickness, and so became more disabled for so
great a task, which yet I endeavored to perform, as the Lord gave utterance.

And being by some entreated to divulge it, I utterly denied, as conscious of
mine own wants; when lo, receiving some inckling of your Honors favor
toward me, I adventured to consecrate this poor Discourse to your name, as
desirous to congratulate with the rest of the Sons of the Prophets, this just
amplification of your deserved honor. And so the boldness of Love, and Duty,
has sent out this mean, and slender Tractate, to one of the most Accurate
Judgments, and Heroical Spirits under Heaven.

With my daily prayers for the continuance, and increase of true blessings to
your Honor, I humbly take leave.

Your Honors ever in all duty and observance, WILLIAM WORSHIP.

THE TEXT.
MATH. 15. 22. etc.

22 And behold, a woman of Canaan, came out of the same Coasts, and cried unto
him, saying, Have mercy on me, o Lord thou Son of David, my daughter is
miserably vexed with a devil.

23 But he answered her not a word. And his Disciples came and besought him,
saying, send her away, for she cries after us.

24 But he answered, and said, I am not sent, but unto the lost sheep of the
house of Israel.

25 Yet she came and worshipped him, saying, Lord help me.

26 But he answered and said; It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and
to cast it to Dogs.

27 And she said, Truth Lord, yet the Dogs eat of the crummes that fall from
their masters table.

28 Then Jesus answered, and said unto her, O woman! great is thy Faith: be it
unto thee even as thou will.


NOw was the time that the day began to dawne, when the beams of Christ's grace
(...) short^^ to be shed upon the Gentiles. The Scribes and Pharisees (the
Divines of Jury) through Envy and Maliciousness, discern not the worth of the
Messiah. They hold hold him but Glass, or else but Crystal, or but white
Saphir at the best; when in truth he is a So Luther calls him, in his Comment
upon the 2 to the Galatians.
Diamond. For as the Diamond is the chief of Gemmes: so Jesus Christ is the
chief of Men. As the color of the Diamond is properly of no color; so the
coming of Christ was without any show. As there is nothing more white then the
light of the Diamond, nothing more black then his shadow; so nothing more
glorious then Christ in his Transfiguration, nothing more sad then He in his
Passion. Yet as a Diamond set on black tent, or pitch, changes not his hue,
as any other stone would do; so Christ on the Cross, in Death, in the Grave,
is still the same without variation. And as the Diamond yields not to the
Hammer, nor to the File, nor to the Fire, nor scarce to Time it self; so
Christ is invincible, lasting, Everlasting. Then Cleopatraes Pearl is worth
two hundred and fifty thousand Crowns, howsoever the Hog trample it under
foot; and Christ is here highly prized by an Aliant, although the Jews make no
reckoning of Him.

The History consists of three parts: a Protasis, an Epitasis, a Catastrophe.

The Protasis, or Ground work, is in the 22 verse, and contain^s, A Note of
Attention, a Description of a Petitioner, a Description of the Party sued to,
and the Sum of the Supplication.

The Epitasis, or Busy part, comprehends the diverse Repulses, or
Discouragements of the said Suppliant; where are also inter-wouen many rare,
and incomparable virtues, to the 28 verse.

The Catastrophe, or Close, contains as well An high Commendation of the
Petitioner, as A cheerful Grant of her Desire, in the last verse.

The Text is long, and full of matter; I will strive to be short, but dare not
too cursorie, lest I huddle up the message of my Heavenly Master.

And Behold. This Behold, in this place, gives every one of us an hub by the
elbow, and calls on us to attend. How attend? Iugu^^^^^.
Saint Austine tells us; with understanding, with willingness, with obedience:
With understanding, that we may come to the kernel of the Word; with
willingness, for God loves a cheerful hearer; with obedience as the end of
both, for without Holiness, no man shall see the Lord. Heb. 12. 14.
He therefore that has ears to hear, let him hear; and let him hear Now,
this very Sermon, this present Sunday, lest the Lord cut him off that he never
hear Preacher more, or at least take away his hearing, which is worse then if
he lost his limbs, or his eyesight. For wanting them, he might be carried
to the Church; where, if he could not get in for the press, yet he might be
let down with cords (before the Preacher) as was the man that was sick of
the Palsy, Mark 2. 4.
and so receive comfort. It were but taking of softly the leads, in some
places the tyles, in some (alas) the thatche; but when the sense of Hearing is
gone, then farewell the sound of the word Preached, the most delicate, and
heavenly Music that ever was.

The Petitioner whom we are to behold, is described by her Sex, by her Country,
by her Faith, and by her Zeal. By her Sex, Behold a woman: not for the blaze
of beauty, which perhaps she wanted; but for the Commemoration, and Imitation
of her virtues.

Luke 1. 48. 2. 36. 3. 8.
The Evangelists mention many excellent women: the blessed Virgin, her cosen
Elizabeth, old Anna, loanna, Susanna, others: which serves as a choake-peare
for those scurrill mates, that are ever sharpening their pens, like quils of
Porcupines against womankind.

In Math. 14.
Ye wanton Dames, that are in your ful-blowne pride, look upon this Woman.
Saint Chrysostom says, that when ye are hoyting, and dancing, the Devil
dances among you; and Cyprian tells you, De Discipl. and hab. virg.
that this Pargetting of faces, is Opus Diaboli, The work of the Devil.
Shortly shall you find, that your outward hue is but momentanie, and when the
flower is gone, your selves may not abide the stalk.

Ioh. 1. 46.
If now we ask what Country woman this Petitioner is, it is answered A
Cananite. Can any good thing come out of Nazareth? out of Canaan? Yes, the best
Man that ever was, came out of that; and one of the best women that ever was,
comes out of this. Lo here the wonderful secrecy of Gods dealing; Ierem. 7.
4. 5.
when Jury fails, Syrophoenicia supplies. The Temple, the Temple, the Temple,
cry the Jews; as if the Arc were not before captiuated; as if the Temple were
not afterward burnt; as if GOD were tied to Places, when the Inhabitants prove
Apostataes.

The Catholics, (whom we term so by way of Charientisme, as Davus is called
a Good fellow, in the Comedy) are ever vpbraiding us with an Innovation of
Religion; when, in trurh, it is nothing but a Renouation. O, say they, where
was your Church, I pray you, for certain hundred years together, before
Luther start up? As if the Church ceased to be at all, because sometimes it
ceases to be Visible. Augustin^.
Is there no Moon, (says Austin) at the change, because it is then
indiscernable? 1. King. 19.
Did not GOD reserve seven thousand to himself, when Eliah complained he was
left alone? Who would have thought there had been Christians among the
Canaanites? Yet you see here is one, and why might there not be more? I will
urge them yet further. Have we none at this day, of our religion think they,
in Italy? Nay, what if there be some of them in Rome? What if in the Popes
Palace? Philip. 4. ^2.
All the Saints salute you, says Paul, most of all, they that are of Caesar's
household. If in the Court of Nero there be Saints, then why not in the Castle
of Saint Angel? unless the Pope be more cruel against Christians then that
Monster, as, I protest, I think he is.

But we are not so hard set, but that we can name Hundreds for a need, that
held with us in the darkest times; as All the Churches of Greece, who renounced
Rome for her abominable Idolatry, in the year of our Lord 1230. Also, the
Waldenses, who were dispersed over all this part of the World. And further,
those that followed John Wickliffe, whose number must neds be great, for that
he was supported by Edward the Third, and diverse of the Nobility. To these be
added the Churches of Bohemia, who with great vehemency resisted the Papacy.
This point has been manfully defended by many of the Lords Champions, who
have tempested aloft furiously with their Ordnance, and sent smouldring
Bullets, to whistle the news of Death in the ears of the Enemy: for me, it
is sufficient, if with this little Birding-peece, charged but with a
thimble-full of Shot, I have taken an eye, or spread a few Pockholes in his
face.

Now for the Faith of this good Woman, it appears by her coming to Christ.
Christ would have been hid, says S. Mark, 7. 24.
but He could not: Cant. 21.
for he is a Rose, even the Rose of Sharon, and wheresoever He remains, He
casts abroad a fragrancie that discouers Him. If the Iron once stir, and
begin to heave, you may be sure the Lodestone is not far of: since this Woman
hies her so to Christ, it is not of Nature, but of Grace, and the cause of her
approach, is the Attractiue virtue of Gods Spirit. This Faith is that, which in
all the body of this Text, is most comfortably diffuf'd, as the Blood in the
Veins, that I shall be still occasioned to commend it. And let no man think
much: for of Faith it may be truly said, which the Philosopher writes of
Universal Justice, Ethic. 5. 1.
that it contains All virtues in it:

(...),

Nor is the Evening, nor the Morning star so admirable as it.

In the mean time thus much: It is the nature of Faith in distress to go to
Christ: not with Saul, 1 Samuel 28. 8. 1. King. 1. 2. John. 6. 68.
to the Witch of Endor, nor with Ahaziah, to the God of Ekron. Master, to whom
shall we go (says Peter?) Thou have the words of eternal life. Bern.
Eamus post Christum (says Bernard) quia veritas est; per Christum, quia via
est; ad Christum, quia vita est: Let us go after Christ, because He is the
Truth; by Christ, because He is the Way; to Christ, because He is the Life.
What good thing can our souls desire, but is to be found in Jesus Christ?
Would we have Salvation? It Is in his very Name. The Gifts of the Spirit? They
are in his Unction. Purity? It Is in his Conception. Indulgence? It Is in his
Nativity. Redemption? It Is in his Passion. Absolution? It Is in his
Condemnation. Freedom from the Curse? It Is in his Cross. Satisfaction? It Is
in his Sacrifice. Purgation? It Is in his Blood. Mortification? It Is in his
Burial. Vivification? It Is in his Resurrection. Heaven? It Is in his Ascension.
Then harsh be the voice that sounds not of Christ; bitter be the sweets that
relish not of Christ; yea dismal be the day, and desolate be the night
wherein our hearts are estranged from CHRIST.

For this Woman's Zeal, it is here: She cried. Impudentis est clamoribus
strepere, says Cyprian: Cypr. de O^rat. D^m.
It Is a token of Impudency, to be clamorous in prayer. True: but Necessity is
the mother of Dispensation. Besides, Amor ordinem nescit, Love knows no order,
says Jerome: Ierom.
and, Excessivus amor rationem non pensat, say the Schoolmen, Excessive Love
regards not the rule of Reason. Psalm. 38. 8.
The Prophet David would sometimes roar in his prayer: James 5. 16.
and Saint James says, that the prayer of a righteous man avails much if it
be Fervent. Exodus 30. Psalm. 141. 2.
For as Incense without Fire, makes no smell, and therefore is commanded to be
sacrificed with fire: so Prayer without Zeal, sends up no pleasant savor to
the Lord.

The Description of the Party sued to, is in this clause, Math. 20. 30. Bern.
O Lord, thou Son of David: which very words are used by the two Blind men
in the 20 of this Gospel. This Title Lord, is (as Bernard calls it) Nomen
Maiestativum, a Name of Majesty, and is given to the Son of GOD by an
Excellency, in the New Testament: because He is our Lord, by the Right of
Inheritance, by the Right of Redemption, and by the Right of Marriage; and
therefore is the Head of the Church, in regard of Order, as being the
Firstborn among his Brethren; In regard of Perfection, both for his sublimitie
and fulness of Grace; and in regard of Virtue, for that a certain influence is
derived from him to all the members of his Church. And He is called Lord, not
Denominatiuely, but Essentially: to the right conceiving whereof, is required a
steadfast belief of his Godhead, against those execrable Heretics, Ebion,
Cerinthu^, Berillus, Samosatenus, Marcianus, Photinus, Arius, Seruet, Francis
David, and the Anti-trinitaria^s of this time.

And here observe, how honorably this woman thinks of Christ. She calls him
Lord, the Jews Beelzebub: Math. 10. 25.
Yet she was an Heathea, they Circumcised: 1. Cor. 1. 28.
She an Outcast, they of Israel: she nuzled up in gross Idolatry, they
trained up in the Law from their childhood; she but of small and slender
knowledge, they learned men, and subtle Disputers. Good Lord, how strong art
thou in weakness, and how thou choosest the things that are not, to bring to
pass the things that are: Aug. Cons.
Etiam sic Domine, etiam sic; Even so o Lord, because it is thy will; whose
dealings are often secret, always just.

Now where she salutes Him, by the name of the Son of David, it is evident
that she takes him to be the promised Messiah. For all Jury rang of this,
John 7. 42.
that The Christ should come of the lineage of David. Which she hearing at an
outside, assisted by the Spirit of God, and weighing all circumstances aright,
concludes that This is He. Which declares her faith to be holy and advised,
well grounded upon the promises of God, and not a fleeting, and vapourous
imagination. This is that which is written in the very beginning of the
Gospel: The Book (that is, the Catalogue, or Register) Math. 1. 1.
of the Generation of JESUS CHRIST the Son of DAVID: As if Saint Matthew, like
John Baptist, should point with his finger to the Messiah, and cry, Behold,
this Man so poor, and so contemptible in show, is lineally descended from the
Kings of Judah, and is the only Redeemer of Israel.

A wonderful Mystery, that GOD should be manifested in the flesh; 1. Tim. 3.
16.
yet is it the staff and pillar of our comfort. Therefore Saint Paul affirms,
Romans 1. 3.
that Christ was made of the seed of David: Not that the Virgin Mary conceived
Him through the pleasure of carnal desire, but through faith, remaining still
in her chastenesse and integrity; even as the Church (in a kind of Imitation)
brings forth children to GOD, and is yet a Virgin, August. Enchirid.
as Austin excellently notes.

Then here is a Towell thrust into the throats of Valentine, Marcion,
Manichaeus, Apollinaris, and other pestilent Heretics, who stand up against
the truth of Christ's Humanity: And more, there is ministered a sweet Repose for
a troubled conscience. For what keeps me from despair, when Satan claps hold
on me, with his bloody sleeue, and his great Butchers knife a-crosse his
mouth, but this, that my Savior is the Son of David, Heb. 2. 17. Gal. 1. 4.
a merciful, and faithful High Priest, who has given himself for my sins.
He has Given, Satan, vnderstand'st thou that? not received, not exacted. He
has given Himself; Himself, Satan, mark'st thou that? not Silver, not Gold,
not Paschall Lambs, not Angels. For my Sins, Satan, mind'st thou that? Not
for my Holiness, not for my Righteousness. For My sins, Satan, hear'st thou
that? as well as for Paul's, or for Peter's. For though they were a thousand
times more Sanctified then I; yet were they never a whit more Justified then I:
And the goodness they had, came not from themselves, but from GOD, who has
put into my heart a great desire, not of Heaven onley (for so had Balaam) Numb.
23. 10.
but of Faith and Repentance, which the Reprobate cannot have. Thus if in our
Agonies, we shall latch the blows of our ghostly Adversary, we may boldly
look for that Crown of Righteousness, 2. Tim. 4. 8.
which the Lord has promised to those that love his appearing.

The Sum of her Petition is set down two ways; Indefinitely and
Determinately. Indefinitely in these words, Have mercy on me: Where she sues
in forma Pauperis, and pleades for Mercy, not Merit, though she was one of the
godliest women in all the world. Yet you know (Beloved) who stand upon the
Merit of Condignity, affirming (and that from their Council of Trent) Council.
Trid. Sect 6. cap. 11. 1. Cor. 9. 16.
that they have Faculty given them perfectly to fulfill the Law. Nay the
Rhemists go further, and will stand to it, that they are able to do more then
the Ten Commandments require. They talk of Puritans, but if these be not pure
pute Sycophants, and the white sons of Novatus, the ROMAN Presbyter, who are?
To whom notwithstanding (to do them a favor) we will chain the Anabaptist,
after whom shall come the Brownist in a string, who is half an Anabaptist as
the Tadpole is half a Frogge.

Well, for us poor Publicanes, we will not trust to our deserts (which will
shelter us no more then an Arbor in Winter) but to GODS tender compassion.
What though my sins be as red as blood, as black as Haire-cloth, as Pitch,
as Hell; Yet are they not Infinite, as is GODS Mercy. Only I must Repent, that
is, confess, and forsake my sins, and turn with my whole heart, not
faynedly, to the Lord. For our Savior charge his Disciples, to Preach
Repentance, and Remission of sins: Luke 24. 47.
So that no Repentance, no Forgiveness of sins. I know the Gospel is a
Book of Mercy: I know that in the Prophets there are many aspersions of
Mercy: I know that Out of the Eater comes Meat, and out of the Strong comes
Sweetness, Judge. 14. 14.
and that in the Ten Commandments (which be the Ministration of Death) 2.
Cor. 3. 7.
there is made express mention of Mercy, I will have mercy upon Thousands;
Yea, the very first words of them are the Covenant of Grace, I am the Lord THY
God: Yet if every Leaf, and every Line, and every Word in the Bible, were
nothing but Mercy, Mercy, it nothing auailes the Presumptuous sinner, that lies
rotting in his iniquities. Our GOD is not an impotent GOD, with one Arm, but
as He is slow to anger, so is He great in Power, Nahum 1. 3.
and will not surely clear the wicked. O but he is Merciful, Gracious, slow
to anger, abundant in goodness, and truth, reserving mercy for thousands,
forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin: Is not here Mercy mentioned,
nine, or ten times together? It is: But read on to the very next words; And
not making the wicked innocent, visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon the
children, and upon childrens children, unto the third and fourth generation. Is
not this the terrible voice of Justice? But stay: in the hundred thirty and six
Psalm, Psalm. 136.
there is nothing but, His mercy endures for ever, His mercy endures for
ever: His mercy endures for ever, is the foot of the Song, and is found six
and twenty times, in six and twenty verses. It is: Yet harko what a rattling
thunderclap is here. 15. 17. 18. 19. 20.
And overthrew Pharaoh, and his Host in the Red Sea; and smete great Kings, and
slew mighty Kings, Sihon King of the Amorites, and Og, the King of Bashan.
Therefore (Beloved) if we will have mercy at the Tribunal Seat of GOD, let
us humble our selves for our manifold and bloody sins. Cyp^
Nec quisquam peccatis retardetur, aut annis, says Cyprian: And let no man
hold off, for that his offenses are heinous, and that he is old, and
mossegrowne in them: only let him beware of Hypocrisy, and Delay, which will
cheat the soul, and bring it to destruction.

That Part of the Petition which is put down Determinatly, is in these words,
My Daughter is miserably vexed with a Devil. Where she instantly beseeches
Christ, even in the bowels of compassion to behold her Child, her little Child,
as Saint Mark has it, Mark. 7. 23.
and to dislodge an unclean, and raging Spirit, who had taken up her body as a
Cabin to rest in. Daughters misery her own, Have mercy on ME, my Daughter.
Acknowledging withal, that GOD in chastening the fruit of her womb, had laid
his scourge upon her also.

Descend, and how the affection of Parents to their Children, is far more
dear then that of Children to their Parents. We read here in this, and in
sundry other places of the Gospel, how carefully Parents made means to
Christ, for the chasing away of Devils, and diseases, from their Children; but
where read ye that the Children did the like for their Parents? In the eighth
of this Gospel, Verse 21.
there is a son intreates our Savior that he may go bury his Father, that he
may throw Moulds on him, and make him sure: but he never once prayed him to
he^le him when he was sick, or raise him when he was dead.

Daughter. If he had only haunted the house, or outwardly wrought upon her
child, the chastisement had been grievous, but to enter into her with his very
substance, is most lamentable to think on. And yet the Lord thus corrects
her in Love, Heb. 12. 6.
in Love (I say) howsoever it seem a Paradox to Reason. O, it is an heavy
judgment of GOD, when a man thriues in sin, and when in the midst of his
rebellions, he spreads himself against the Sun, like an Apricock. When the
anger of GOD waxed hot against the Israelites, he threatens that he will
plague them: How plague them? in not plaguing them: Hos. 4. 14.
I will NOT visit your Daughters when they are Harlots, nor your Spouses when
they are Whores. Certe tunc magis irascitur Deus, cum non irascitur, says
Bernard: Bern.
Certainly, GOD is then most angry, when he seems not angry at all.
Misericordiam hanc nolo; For mine own part (says he) I would none of this
mercy.

all things work together for the best to them that love GOD. Romans 8. 28.
Heaven, Earth, Fire, Water, good Men, bad Men, wild Beasts, tame Beasts,
Calmnesse, Tempests, Peace, War, Freedom, Thraldom, Wealth, Want,
Healthfulnesse, Crazinesse, Life, Death, Angels, Devils. Aug. de Ciu. Dei, lib.
14. cap. 13.
Etiam peccata Domine: Even our sins also, o Lord, says Austen. Audeo dicere
(says the same Father) superbis esse v^ile, cadere in aliquod apertum,
manifestumque peccatum. I dare be bold to speak it, that it is good that
proud men do fall into some gross and open sin, that so Shame may drive them
to remorse. This Doctrine is true; But let no Spider suck poison thence. One
would have thought that this woman, who was not long before converted to Christ,
would have laid the blame on her Religion, and thought hardly of GOD, thus to
single her out for a spectacle of misery, and scarce to shake his rod at her
fellow Gentiles; but see how this correction brings her nearer to GOD, and how
the Devil himself, is a means to further her salvation.

Sin is the most fearful thing in the world. The body of Man was made to be
the Temple of the Holy Ghost, but sin makes it a Stie, and Plauncher for
Satan, who tears it, wallowes it, and torments it piteously, as here, Verse. 20
and in the ninth of Saint Mark. Shall I in one word set out the vileness of
it? It is a Devil. And why not worse? For what makes the Devil a Devil, but
Sin? Take that away, and he is a good creature. Besides, here is a single
Devil in this Child, without a partner: but sin is so congregable, that it
is impatient of solitude.

Our Father Adam eats the forbidden fruit; we would think it but one sin;
but what says Austine? Aug. Enchir.
Superbia est illic, and Sacrilegiu^, and Homicidiu^, and Fornicatio
Spiritualis, and Furtu^, and Auaritia: Pride was at the fact, and Sacrilege,
and Murder, and Spiritual Fornication, and Theft, and Covetousness. This is the
Devil that reigns at this day, in the Children of Disobedience; with which
yet they play, as with a feather, and take pleasure in Pleasure. O Sin; thou
art delightful at the first, but at last thou stingest, like a Be, like a
Waspe, like an Hornet, like a Scorpion. O Pleasure; thou have a Honeysuckle in
thy mouth, but a bitter branch sticking at thy heart; I would name Rue, but
that thou have nothing to do with Herb of Grace. And this of the PROTASIS.

The EPITASIS follows, wherein we are to weigh the sundry Repulses, and
Discouragements to weigh the sundry Repulses, and Discouragements of this good
Woman, together with the constant prosecution of her cause, as they lie in
order.

For the first Repulse, the Evangelist says, that He answered Her not a word.
What? not unfold his lips, to give one word? O wonderful temptation! For what
might she think? Is this He in whom all the Nations of the earth should be
blessed? Genesis 12. 3. Isaiah 55. 1. 65. 24.
Is this He, of whom Proclamation was made; Ho, Every one that thirsts, come
ye to the Waters? Is this He, that will hear his servants while they speak,
and answer before they call? No, no; I see my labor is lost, my hopes
degraded, and my thoughts frustrate. I have looked up to the Sun, and can see
no light: I have hied me to the Fountain, and can find no water: I have
run, and cried after the GOD of All comfort, and He disdaines to speak the
least word to me. Ah, my dear Child, my heart melts like Wax in the midst of
my bowels, to think of thee. Thou art (alas what say I? where am I?) thou art
(poor wretch) possessed of a Dieull, and there was hope; but now what shall I
do, when the Lord of Life shuts his ear to my complaint, and roundly answers
me in not answering me.

Thus she might have debated the case, but she did not. For though Christ was
silent; yet in truth, He gave her a double answer: the one by the general
promises of his word; the other, by the secret whisperings of his Spirit. He
minds her well enough, but He makes as though He heard not, that the
precious graces locked up in the Cabinet of her heart, might be brought forth
to light. Besides, her cries were Musical; so he is loath to have them broke
off. And more: this Delay bred no danger, but where on her affection, and made
the gift more welcome at the receipt; for (usually) what is hardly got, is
greatly set by.

It is even so: the child of GOD prays sometimes on his Knees, sometimes on
his Face, and that with sighs that cannot be expressed; and yet GOD seems not
to regard, but rather to be angry at his prayer. Psalm 80. 4.
O Lord (says the Church in her affliction) how long will thou be angry
against the prayer of thy people. Psalm 22. 2.
O my God (says David) I cry in the day time and thou hear not, and in the
night season I take no rest. Lam. 3. 44.
Thou have covered thy self with a cloud, says the desolate Jerusalem, that
our prayer should not pass through. What then? Esaias 59. ^.
Is the Lords hand shortened that it cannot save? Or his ear heavy, that it
cannot hear? No, But our Iniquities do separate between us and our GOD, and
our sins hide his face from us, that he will not hear.

Sometimes we ask we know not what, with the sons of Zebedee. Math. 10. 22.
Sometimes we ask with doubting, and wavering. James 1. 6.
Sometimes we ask amiss, that we might consume it on our lusts. James 4. 5.
Sometimes we offer a Dogges-necke, Esaias 66. 3.
our souls delighting in our abominations. Sometimes (nay almost always) we
have rouing, and ranging thoughts, and so no marvel if we receive not.
Quomodo te audiri a Deo postulas, cum te ipse non audias, says Cyprian. Cypr.
de Orat. Dom.
How dare thou desire that GOD should hear thee, when thou hear not thy
self? Thou wakest with thine eyes, and sleep with thine Heart: where a
Christian should wake with his Heart, when he sleeps with his Eyes. But let
us step on to the second Discouragement.

Then came to Him his Disciples, and besought him saying, send her away, for
she cries after us. Where the Disciples do not entreat Him to pity her,
but only to dispatch her, one way or other, because she kept such a bawling.
Which dealing of theirs, discouers their Curiosity: for they will needs (for
sooth) teach their Master what to do; as though He leard not as well as they,
and would not have dismissed her, had he thought it convenient. Thus tampers
Peter, in a matter of Life and Death (and that Eternal and Universal) Math.
16. 22.
till our Savior calls him Satan for his pains. But that which I chiefly
fasten upon, from the Disciples indifferency, is the boundless, and
bottomless mercy of GOD, which compared with Man's, is as the Ocean to a Drop.
Which made David in the wonderful strait of Three plagues propounded, to
choose to fall into the hand of the Lord, and not into the hand of Man. These
Disciples were the friends, and followers of Christ, the Light of the world,
the Patriarchs of the New Testament, assigned to high, and heavenly Functions:
Matthew to be an Evangelist, Peter an Apostle, Saint John an Evangelist, an
Apostle, and a Prophet: an Evangelist in his Gospel, an Apostle in his
Epistles, a Prophet in his Revelation. Then who should be good, if they were
evil? who tenderhearted, if they were unmerciful? Yet such small compassion
harbored they in their bosoms, that (so she would leave her clamouring)
whether she sped or no, they cared not greatly.

Which makes me wonder, that the Romanists should be so chub-headed, as to
prove from hence the Invocation of dead Saints. For first, this Woman desires
none of them to speak for her. Secondly, they complain, they make not
intercession. Thirdly, she is never the nearer for their request. Fourthly,
suppose she had fared the better, yet I hope there is great difference, between
praying to the living, and to the dead. Me thinks they should be ashamed, thus
foully to wrest this Example; but who would look for water from a
Pumice-stone, or virtues blush in an Italianated cheek?

Are these the men so renowned for Arts, Tongues, Reading? Are these the
Kil-Cowes of the world, for learning? Are these the best Scholars of their
Seuen-headed Parnassus? Come, come, the Jesuits, (the Popes Roaring Boys) know
well enough we have got the start of them, and therefore they make now no
Syllogismes, but in FERIO. Yet some of our Gentlemen, that have made a step
beyond the Alps, look as big as Bull-beefe, if we offer to compare with
them: and tell us with a shrugge, that They have Scripture, Councels, and the
Fathers on their side. But when we come to the battle, they tell us from
Cardinal Bellarmine, that Scripture is not a Rule, but a Commonitorie: That it
is not sufficient; That it is not necessary. Come to Councels, we are willing
to be judged by the most sacred Council of Jerusalem, and (in all points of
Faith) by the Ancient General Councels of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus,
Chalcedonia. They make show of no great dislike, but at last they bring us to
the Council held at Rome, under John the Three and twentieth, where the Owl
sat President on the Beam: or to the Council of Constance, where they burnt
the Devil in John Husses Mitre: or to their dear dear Council of Trent;
where the Pope (against all conscience) was both Party, and Judge.

Descend we to the Fathers, they bring forth marching in single file, Origin,
Cyprian, Athanasius, Ambrose, Austen, Jerome, Chrysostom, and the rest: and
would make us believe they came Voluntaries, when in truth they pressed them into
the field. Where, when they bid, CHARGE; they give them two blows for our one;
and S. Augustine (that carries the garland from them all) ioynes cheerfully
with us, and (with spear in wrest) makes lanes amongst them. Which they
perceiving, determine the next time to be even with us, and to bring forth old
Doctors indeed, that will stand to them back, and edge; namely, my Neam
Clement, and my Neam Abdy, and my Neam Martial, and my Neam Hyppolite, and my
Neam Amphiloch, and other such Buttoncap't Fathers, as were never yet, in Rerum
Natura. Thus have I (Beloved) upon occasion of this simple proof, (like to
which for all the world, be the rest of their Arguments) given you a sight of
the flourishes of the Catholics, (or rather Catholicons) which if it have
been a Digression, I hope it has been no Transgression.

Come we now to the Third Repulse, expressed in this Answer of our Savior: I
am not sent but to the lost Sheep of the house of Israel. Where He renders a
reason to his Disciples (within the Woman's hearing) why He cannot condescend
to her importunate request, to wit, because it came not within the compass of
his Commission. For his Father had sent him, though not only, yet chiefly to
the Jews, of which number she was none (but a Gentile) and the Partition Wall
was not yet broken down; so he would have her set her heart at rest, and
trouble him no further, since her suite was unreasonable, if not unreasonable.

Oh Lord; this was enough to have split her heart in pieces. What? He in whom
all health was promised, who offered himself to all others, healing all
diseases, Math. 4. 24. 11. 28.
and calling all that were weary to Him, to take exception against her alone,
and to give such a smart, and discourteous answer, as might put her beside all
hope of comfort? But this was done, that GODS glory might be more illustrated,
and the trial of her faith, (being much more precious then gold) 1. Pet. 1. ^.
might be found unto her praise, as the event testified.

Now where Christ affirms, that He is sent to the lost Sheep, it is manifest
that he is a Shepherd, and that Shepherd too, of whom the Lord speaks, when
he says, Ezekiel. 34. 23.
That He will set up a Shepherd over his People, and He shall feed them, even
his servant David, 1. Pet. 5. 4. Heb. 13. 20.
He shall feed them, and He shall be their Shephard. The same is he that is
called The chief Shepherd, and the Great Shepherd of the sheep, to whom all
other are but Vnder-shepheards, subject to his power, and set over their
charges by his special appointment. And as He is the Great, so is He the Good
Shepherd: Ioh. 10 1. 10 14.
for He gives his Life for his sheep. His life? that is much, it is; yet He
gave it. Also he knows his sheep; and that with a double knowledge,
Contemplative, and Operative. Heb. 4. 13.
Contemplative; for all things are naked, and open unto his eyes: (...), as
naked and as open as the sheep that hangs upon the Cambrel, with the skin off,
and the Inwards our, that you may look on both sides at your pleasure; for so
much the word imports. Ezekiel. 34 16.
His knowledge is Operative; for He prouides good pasture for his sheep, lays
them in a good sold, seeks that which was lost, brings again that which was
driven away, binds up the broken, strengthens the weak.

Ye Shepherds of England, learn of this Great Good Shepherd; to tend and
tender your flock. Prou. 27. 23.
Be diligent to know the state of them, as Solomon counsels, and feed them with
knowledge, and understanding. Ier. 3. 15.
Then go before them, by example of good life, according to that of Bernard,
Bern.
Si mundum praedic^s contemnendum, contemn tu prius; If thou beat upon the
contempt of the world to others, see first that thou contemn it thy self. And
pray for grace, that you may venture limme, and life for your flocks. Nisi
Christum valde ames Ber^.
(says Bernard) hoc est plusquam tua, plusquam tuos, plusquam Te, nequaquam
suscipias curam animaru^; unless thou love Christ exceeding deerly, even
better then thy Goods, then thy Kinsfolks, then thy self, I would never wish
thee to take upon thee the Cure of Souls.

Here give me leave to complain a little. There are some that are young, and
cannot yet preach: others are old, and must rest themselves: others are
timorous, and greatly like not standing out for their sheep. Are you young and
cannot preach? Nay therefore you should preach; for your body is strong, your
spirits quick, your Wit fresh, your Memory steadfast, your Nature bold, and
your Voice tuneable. Are you old, and would you take leave of the Pulpit? O what
pity were it, that those grave Fathers, whose Piety, Learning, Sanctimony,
Age, has wonn them so great authority, should exhort the People no more. For
as Grapes are not ripe in the Spring, nor in Summer, but in Autumn, a little
before Winter: So the fruits of Learning come not to perfection, till old Age
(the Virger of Death) step in. And for those that are afraid to hazard
themselves in defense of their Flock, John 10. 13.
let them remember that he is an Hireling, that sees the Woolfe coming, and
flees.

The Wolves of Rome (sent out from their Lycaon) come leering over into the
Land, to leap at the throat of that Princely Sheep, who is worth Ten thousand
of us; Iliad. a and alibi.
who is also (...), our Shepherd: and shall we be such crauens, and so white
about the gyls, as not to resist them? O how true is it of the Jesuits, which
Pius Secundus (sometime Aeneas Syluius) spoke of the Monks of his time: Non
audet Stigius Pluto tentare, quod audet Effraenis Monachus:
The De'ele of Hell dare not attempt the Ill,
That an unbridled Cloyster-creeper will.


Which makes me not endure those Newtrals, who give out, that We, and the
Church of Rome, may be easily reconciled: For the truth is, there is such an
Antipathie between a Protestant, and a Papist, as there is between the two
Bird^ in Plutarch, Plutarch. Mor.
the Siskin, and the Muskin, which will fight earnestly alive, and being dead,
if you mix their blood, it will run apart, and dissociate it self.

The Shepherd is sent to none but Sheep, nay to none but Lost Sheep. The Sheep
is an innocent, and harmless creature, the same among Beasts, that the Dove
is among Birds: So the Child of GOD must be Meek, and Gentle, putting away
all Bitterness, and Anger, and Wrath, and Crying. Ephe. 4. 31.
The Sheep is a profitable creature, and every part of it is good for
something: The Wool for Raiment, the Skin for Parchment, the Flesh for Meat,
the Guts for Music, the Bones for Haftes, and the Horns to blow down the
walls of Jericho: So Christians must be useful to the places where they
live, and profitable to the Church and Commonwealth.

But the Lost Sheep is got into a maze of Misery: Hos. 4. 16.
which GOD signifies to Israel, when he compares her to a Lamb in a large
place. It Is in peril of the Woolfe, in peril of the Lion, in peril of the
Thief, in peril of the Bryer, in peril of the Heat, in peril of the
Storm, in peril of the Grass, and Water it lives by. So that the safety of
the poor Sheep, consists only in the vigilancie of the Shepherd.

This Land of ours (through the goodness of GOD) is talked of far, and near
for the Golden Fleece; for the Merchant knows, it is a Colchis. But that which
makes it thrice more famous, is the goodly Flock of Sheep, that Christ has in
it: the fairest (I persuade me) under heaven; Howsoever the fowle-mouth'd
Separatists calls us Goats, and Swine, and deny us to be Sheep. What though
all of us carry not a fine Staple on our backs, that will open and shut like a
pare of Bellows, are we not therefore Sheep? What though some of us be
Rough-coated, some Water-wool'd, some Totterd, some Tackt, some Lame, some
Flye-gal'd, some Clouted, some Swine-chapt, are we not therefore Sheep? What
if we be strayed away, and lost, are we not therefore Sheep? Yes we are Sheep,
though lost; and it is well that we are Lost, for the Son of Man came to save
that which was Lost. Mal. 18. 11.
Then let every one of us pray with the Prophet David, I am gone astray, like a
sheep that is lost: Psalm. 119. 176.
Oh seek thy servant, for I do not forget thy commandments.

We are now to see how the Syrophoenician brooks this harsh answer; Yet she
came and worshipped Him, saying, Lord help me: Where again appears her
Faith (that eminent virtue) accompanied with fervent Prayer, and with a
creeping Humility.

Her Faith is discovered, in that she continues inuoking the name of Christ,
and will not out, though He had declared new before, that He could not with
warrant from his Calling, help her; for that GODS Mercy, was (for a season)
confined to the Jews. Her speech is this in effect; O Lord, thou have
testified, that whosoever put their trust in Thee, shall not be confounded,
and that whosoever calls upon thy Name, shall be saved: Since I then
(miserable wretch) embrace these promises of thine by Faith, it is impossible
that thou should deny me. For though the Heaven should wheel out of his
place, and the Earth slip off from her foundation, yet Thy Word cannot fail.
Then Lord, remember me, and all my trouble; pity the case of a poor
distressed woman, and let her tears work thee to some compassion: I am
resolved; I will take no nay; I am thy Beggar, and will have my Dole e're I
go: then thrust me not back, o bid me not farewell, for as the Lord lives,
and as thy soul lives, I will not leave thee.

This strong, and inexpugnable Faith, sends Prayer to put the hand in the
treasure of blessings. O Prayer (the most excellent fruit of Faith) how
powerful art thou with GOD? At Five sundry Petitions, Genesis 18.
Abraham brought the Lord from Fifty to Ten; as long as he prayed, he was
answered: And most comfortable it is to consider, that the Lord ceased not from
giving, till Abraham ceased from asking. Again, and again, she calls on
Christ, in whom only she believes, and on whom only she depends for succor.
Thus David, sweetly; Psalm. 73. 23.
Lord whom have I in Heaven but thee; and there is none in earth, that I desire
beside thee?

Yet the Catholics at Loretto, are always crouching to the Virgin Mary: But
what says Bernard? Bern.
Libenter certe gloriosa Virgo tali honor carebit; The glorious Virgin is
willingly content to want such honor. But what talk I of Loretto? I would our
Ladies (some of them) here at home, were not so cunning in their Ladies
Psalter. Psalm. 6. 1. 2.
O Lady rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy displeasure;
have mercy upon me, o Lady, for I am weak, o Lady help me, for my bones are
vexed. Whose heart does not quake, whose hair does not stand upright, to
think that the glorious and fearful Name of JEHOVAH, Deuteronomy. 28. 58. Deuteronomy. 4.
2. 12. 32. Reu. 22. 18.
should be spunged out of the Book of Psalms, and the title of Lady put in,
contrary to the express charge of GOD, and that under the pain of most heavy
curses?

I have often wondered (and that with indignation) that the Popes Creatures
should be so infatuated, as to leave CHRIST JESUS, Ier. 2. 13. 27.
the Fountain of living Waters, and to dig them Pits, even broken Pits, that
can hold no water: Saying to a Tree thou art my Father, and to a Stone thou
have begotten me: the Scripture every where condemning it, as clearly, as if
it were written with the brightest Sunne-beame on a wall of Glass, as
Lactantius speaks. And I could never be quieted in my mind, when I saw them
thus obstinate, till GODS Providence directed me to the hundred and fifteen
Psalm, the eight verse, Psalm. 115.
where I found it thus written: They that make them, are like unto them, and so
are all they that put their trust in them: For ever since, I thus reason with
my self. If I shall come to an image of VVood, or Stone, or Metal, and shall
call, and shout, Ho, Image! are you asleep? What Image, Image! can thou not
hear? Art thou deaf? The Image is never a whit the wiser, though I should
burst my lunges with crying, because though it look like a Man, and have
Ears, yet they are but Ears by Equivocation. And even so, if I shall strive
to convince a Papist, with never such fullness of Voice, and forciblenesse of
Argument, it is to no more purpose, then the blowing of a Trumpet in the ears
of Baal, or making a set speech to a Painted Post.

The next companion of her Faith, is Humilty: for she bows down her body, and
falls at his feet, as if by her gesture she confessed her self to be a miserable
sinner, and had no refuge but in Humility. A virtue, that like the Violet, is
poor in show, grows low by the ground, and hangs the head, as willing to live
unseen: Yet is it ever in the way of preferment, as we find in Joseph, Moses,
Mordecai. An emblem whereof we cannot but remember; For we see that the
little Grasse-hopper (the silliest of creatures) is yet advanced in the
principal City, and in a principal Street of that City, and in a principal
building of that Street, and in a principal place of that Building, as a
golden object of Magnificence to be gazed on.

But at no time is Humility more requisite, then in Prayer; 1. King 8. 54.
therefore Solomon a King, prays upon his knees (for these high Humilities are
very acceptable to GOD.) Beloved; let us detest Pride, as a most pernicious
evil. Aug. De Ciu. Dei.
Ipsum extolli, iam deijci est, Pride's very rise, is her very downfall. But
above all things, let us not be proud in Prayer, with the Pharisee. Luke 18.
11.
When the Sun shines through the Casement on the Wall, Shall the Wall stand
up, and say, It is I that send forth these beams, says Bernard? Bern.
Exodus 28. 36.
Holiness to the Lord, but Man can challenge nothing as his Own, but Sin,
and Frailty. But let us pass on to the last Repulse.

And He answered, and said, It is not good to take the Childrens bread, and to
cast it to Dogs. Here our Savior answers to her Lord help me, but more
roughly, and severely, then ever He did before; for now He begins to chide,
and sneap her, as if she were an unmannerly Puppie. The purport of his speech
is this. Woman, I pray thee hold thy tongue, and show not thy self so violent,
and unreasonable. What grace soever is given me of my Father to be dispensed,
is to be exhibted distinctly to the Jews, lest they be defrauded of their
proper right: for my Father is the Father of Abraham's posterity only. Truth it
is that the very Infidels find him by his Providence to be a Father; but
Adoption, and other spiritual benediction is to be conferred peculiarly on the
Israelites. Now verily it were an unseemly deed, to take the privileges of
children, and to cast them to such as thee, who being without GOD in the world,
art to be kenne'ld up among Dogs. Howbeit, if thou had not dealt so
preposterously, much might have been; if thou had staid till the Children had
dined, happily thou might have light upon some fragments: but to snatch of
the dishes in the midst of dinner, betokens a shameless malapertnesse, and a
presumptuous rudeness.

See here (Beloved) what we Gentiles were before we knew Christ. Let it not
offend your ears, we were no better then Curre-dogges, and so are all at this
day, that live, and die, without Him. Husbandmen, Yeomen, Gentlemen, Noble men,
Learned men, Valiant men, all Dogs without Christ. Now what more ignominious,
and opprobrious then the name of Dog? Am I a Dogges-head, 2. Sam. 3.
says Abner to Ishbosheth, that thou accountest of me so basely?

Within the circuit of this our Church are found certain Dogs that trouble,
and annoy her. The first are those Pricke-ear'd Curres of Rome, that Bark at
the Moon, Nay at Him that made the Moon; to whom if you offer the Gospel,
Math. 7. 6. Prou. 30. 31.
they will turn again, and all to rent you. Yet as if they were those
well-going Greyhounds that Solomon speaks of, they have velvet collars,
richly studded. They would be looked to: for they are the true Scholars of
those false Apostles whom Saint Paul calls Dogs, Phil. 3. 2.
in the third to the Philippians, and the second verse.

Another Dog (who is like to leap short of the Kingdom of Heaven) Reu. 22.
15.
is the outrageous Swearer, who upon every small occasion, leapes at the throat
of GODS most sacred Majesty, and gives him a shake by the bosom. O Judges! o
Magistrates! why do ye tyth Mint, and Annise, and Cummin, Math. 23. 23.
and leave the weightier matters of the law; condemn the Starueling for
stealing sheep, and let the Blasphemer go untouched, who sets up the cock,
and discharges his Pistol in the face of Christ? These things ought ye to
have done, and not have left the other undone. Ah, noble Prince HENRY (whose
very name still makes my heart to bleed afresh) we may thank our
Court-oathes, as one chief cause of thine untimely death. But that God, that
in wrath thinks upon mercy, has from thy ashes raised up another Phoenix.
Deuteronomy. 33. 16.
The good will of Him that dwelt in the Bush, come upon his head, even upon the
top of his head.

Another Dog is he that causelessly railes on men in Authority; and this is
no yelping Beagle, no little Whippit, but a deepe-mouth'd hound, or baying
Mastiue. Thus Shimei bids David, 2. Sam. 16.
Come out, come out, as if he were a Dog, when Shimei indeed was the the
Dog, as the son of Zeruiah calls him.

Another Dog is the licentious liver, who upon some touch, goes softly for a
while; 2. Pet. 2.
but anon, returns unto his vomit. Thus the stinking Drunkard (for so the
Prophet Hosea terms him) Hosea. 4. 18.
inflamed with Wine, neighes, and whinnies after his neighbors wife, (to use
the phrase of the Prophet Jeremy) Ier. 5. ^.
and blesses himself very desperately in his sin. Tush (says he) GOD does
not see me, or cannot punish me, or will not trouble me: by the first, making
him a blind GOD: by the the second, a lame GOD: by the third, an unrighteous
GOD. At last, God visits him with a sharp disease, that wakens up his
conscience, and then, sick, sick: and then, if GOD will repriue him, until a
longer day, oh what a Christian course he vows to take! GOD proves him; he
mends: In body? yes: in manners? no; no more the Pharaoh after then plagues
remoouall.

Another Dog we find in the Prophet Esaias, and this is the Dumb Dog. Isaiah
56. 10.
A Dog and Dumb? Hem Dromo? Dromo! come hither! to the beam with him. What?
(...), a keeper of the house, and not give warning of the Thief? This Dog is
the unconscionable Minister, that opens not his mouth for the safeguard of his
people; who knows not the very first words of the Accidence; for were he but
acquainted with IN SPEECH, it were injustice to charge him with dumbness. A
very unprofitable member. For there are Three things, which if they want
tongues, are good for nothing; a Minister, a Dog, and a Iewes-Trumpe.

It remains now, that we consider how this Woman digests this ungentle
answer of Christ. And she said, Truth Lord; yet the Dogs eat of the crumbes
that fall from their Masters Table. In more words, thus: Lord, I am a Dog, I
willingly confess it; nay more, I confirm it; and with all my heart I
acknowledge the Jews to be thy children, fed at thine own Table, with variety
of Heavenly Dishes. Neither do I envy them. Let me (poor soul) but gather up
the scrappes that fall from their Table at all adventure, I crave no more.

No man in the world could devise a fitter ananswer; for the grace of God was
never damned up so strictly from the Gentiles, but that some drops ouer-flowed
to them, as may be seen in Rahab, Ruth, Naaman, the Ninevites. And here again
the vnfatigablenesse of her Faith presents it self to our view. She follows
and cries, and cries and follows, but what? The Solicited is silent, the
Disciples grumble, she is not of the Fold, she is a Dog. Who is a Dog? A
devout and sanctified Woman. And who calls her Dog? Christ; the Sanctuary of
Souls. It Is nothing to swim in a warm bath; but to endure the Surges, and
tumbling billows of the Sea, that is the man. To believe that GOD is thy GOD,
and loves thee as the Apple of his eye, when he calls thee Dog, and grindes
thee to powder, that is the Faith.

To end this second part: this Woman suckes honey out of gall, and like a good
Logician presses him with this Syllogism:

The Dog is to have the crumbs of his Masters Table: I am the Jews Dog,

Therefore. I am to have the crummes of their table. The Mayor is taken from
the law of Nature, the Minor from thine own words: what say thou, Lord?
answer me: do thou deny, or distinguish? Neither. He did not answer the
Argument; nay, (with reverence be it spoken) he could not answer it: for then
he should have denied mercy to the Penitent, and so contradicted himself,
which had been an Impotencie. This of the EPITASIS.

The Catastrophe is contained in the last words of the Text, Then Jesus
answered and said unto her, O woman! great is thy faith; be it unto thee even
as thou will. Where our Savior first commends this Woman, and that with an
admiration; O woman! never in my life met I with such an Heathen; thou passest
of all that ever I knew; verily I have not found such Faith in Israel. Thou art
able by thy knocking, and importunity to make one rise out of his bed, from
his children at midnight, to lend thee three loaves. Luke 11. 5. Luke 18. 5.
Thou do enough to compel an unrighteous Judge to do thee justice; much
more a righteous one to show thee favor.

O the bountifulness of GOD! when we have done all we can, Luke 17. 10.
we are but unprofitable servants; yet he passes by all our infirmities, and
rewards all our good; rewards? yea, and applaudeth. Thus the thriftie
Servant, that had improou'd his Masters Talents, Math. 25. 23.
has an Euge for his pains: It is well done, good servant, and faithful.
What a singular encouragement is here to well-doing? Ay Caitiues! ah
Slacke-graces! how slothful are we in our Masters business! ah Runnagates,
like Onesimus; Philem.
nay would to GOD we were like Onesimus.

But for what extols he this Woman thus? For her Faith. What Faith? That which
Justified her before GOD. But here is only a suit for a temporal benefit, what
though? That nothing lets, but that by the same Faith that laid hold on
salvation, she believed also the recovery of her daughter; Romans 4. 19.
even as Abraham by a Justifying faith, was persuaded of a Son in his old
age. The whole tenor of the History imports thus much, whether you consider the
Object of her Faith, or the Temper of it, or the Strength, or Effects; among
which the last is most plain for this purpose: for it shows that by this
Faith, she might obtain whatsoever she would; now who doubts, but she would
have the forgiveness of her sins, without the which she were more then most
miserable.

The next way then to be honored of GOD, is to honor GOD; 1. Sam. 2.
and the next way to honor GOD, is Faith, which assures me that Christ has
loved ME, and given Himself for ME; Gal. 2. 20.
and with Himself, all things: and all this He does alone, Romans 8. 32. Heb. 1.
3. Isaiah 63. 3.
treading the Wine Press ALONE, without help of Angels, of Men, of Works: for
Angels are but servants, Men ever typing, and Works not workers, but marks of
our salvation. This Doctrine (as Staupitius well notes) must needs be sound,
and the Religion that maintains it, Pure, and undefiled: for it exalts GODS
glory above the Heavens, and humbles man to the dust of death. Therefore is
Abel commended for his Faith, Enoch for his Faith, Noah for his Faith, Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob for their Faith, Moses (the Law giver) for his Faith; Rahab,
Gedeon, Barac, Sampson, Iephta, David, Samuel for their Faith; Heb. 11.
all for their Faith, and all in one Chapter.

If here it be spitefully objected, that we prate so much of Faith, that we
have pack't Good-Workes out of the Country; be it answered, that this is
nothing but Wood sere, or Cuckow-spit, the froth of rage, with a worm in the
midst of it. For we doubt not to affirm, with Luther, Luther in Gal.
that The fruit, and profit of one only work, which a Christian does in
faith, and through faith, is to be esteemed more precious then Heaven and
Earth. Only we exclude Good works from our Justification, for the
satisfaction of the law, because therein nothing does, nor can concur with
the Merit of Christ. And this is the very Argument of that excellent Epistle to
the Galatians, Gal. 6. 11. 2. 11.
(which S. Paul writ with his own hand) and for which he withstood Peter to
his face. Luth. in Gal.
For as Luther (in an holy zeal, casting out flames of fire) says; What is
Peter? What is Paul? What is an Angel from heaven? What are all other
creatures to the Article of Justification? A point so perspicuous, and
praevalent, that even Bellarmine himself (the Milo that bears the Pope upon
his shoulder) is forced to yield to it. His words are these. De Ius^if. lib. 1.
In regard of the uncertainty of a Man's own righteousness, and for fear of
vainglory, it is the safest way to repose our whole confidence in the ONLY
mercy, and goodness of GOD.

Now where we are charged, that the beating upon the point of Faith, has
banished Goodworkes; we avouch it to be the special way both to breed and
cherish them. In this present Text is a Cluster of Good-workes, far more
pleasant to behold, Numb. 13. 24.
then that of Grapes, which the two Spies brought on their shoulders, on a
bar from the Land of Canaan. Here is finding of Christ, following of Christ,
crying cleare-out after Christ: here is Love, here is Zeal, here is Patience,
here is Prayer, here is Humility, here is Modesty, here is Sincerity, here is
Perseverance, and other sparks of Grace, that lie hidden, under the ashes,
which if you stir, will fly aloft, and crackle about your ears. What is the
cause of all these Good deeds? Faith. For, can the Fruit be good, till the Tree
be good? Can the Tree be good, till the Sap be good? Is not Man a Tree with
the root upward? Is it not Reason that makes a Man, Faith that makes a
Christian? Is not this Paul's method in all his Epistles? Spends he not Eleven
Chapters in that to the Romans, in laying the foundation of Faith, before he
build on it with exhortation to good life, which he performs but in five
chapters? I Will tell thee, proud man, thou that swellest now in the confidence of
thy works; when sorrow comes, and the Law strikes up a fearful Alarm against
thee, thou shall be ready to peake aside, and to spy out some bauke in an
Out-house, whereon to dispatch thy self. Romans 5. 1.
For, being justified by Faith, we have peace with God; the Accent is upon
Faith, upon Christ, without which, without whom alone, we shall never have
peace of conscience: but when it is Morning, we shall wish it were Evening;
Deuteronomy. 28. 67.
and when it is Evening, we shall wish it were Morning; when we are in the
Country, we shall long to be in the City; and when we are in the City, we
shall long to be in the Country: changing the Place, but not changing the
Pain; because the forked arrow of GODS Vengeance sticks fast in our side.

This Orient Pearl, this Woman's Faith, is further magnified by the Greatness.
The Dictator of Philosophers said well, Arist. Eth. 4. 3.
(...), Fairness consists in Greatness. For a little house (though curious
in the Frame) may be counted Pretty, never Sumptuous. Now this Greatness of
Faith, implies Degrees: For some are strong, and Invincible, as this Woman, who
above Hope, believed under Hope: Romans 4. 18.
Others weak, as the Apostles before CHRIST'S Resurrection. Mark. 9. 23.
So then we must imitate the good man in Saint Mark, who cried with tears,
Lord I believe, help my unbelief.

This of the Commendation of the Woman's Faith: now follows the Cheerful
Grant of Her Desire; Be it unto thee, even as thou will. Do but ask and have;
The Devil is gone out of thy Daughter; want thou any thing else?
Competency? Contentment? Heaven? Take it, take Me and all, and all because
thou have wrastled with Me, Genesis 32. 28.
like Jacob, and overcome Me. Beloved Brethren! You that by virtue of this
Faith, may ask what you will, and obtain what you ask, let me this once be
Ye All Representatiuely, and in your stead beg for You and Me, some precious
thing that is worth the craving.

It shall not be Pleasure, for that lasts but an inch of time, and what are we
the better to play, and skip, like fish in the River Jordan, and presently to
fall into the Dead Sea? It shall not be Honor, for that is a thing without us,
not in our own possession. It shall not be money, for (as Cyprian says) it
makes one sigh at a Feast, and at Night when he sinkes into his downe-bed, Cypr.
Vigilat in Pluma, he lies broad waken. These Three wish I not for You, and
Me, for they cannot last, nor secure the conscience, nor satisfy the
unlimited desire of the soul: But One Thing have I desisired of the Lord,
which I will still require, and that is, The fruition of the Comforts that are
in CHRIST.

This was the Happiness St. Paul aspired to, in the third to the Philippians,
the 7 and 8 verses: Philip. 3. 7. 8.
(a Text worthy to be written in Golden, nay, in Heavenly Letters.) I have
counted (says he) All Things loss fpr Christ. Quae (...); which All things?
That I was not an Infidel: but Circumcised; and that not when I was a
Stripling, a Man, an old Man, as were the Proselytes, but the Eighth Day,
according to the prescript of the Law; That I was not of an ordinary Tribe, but
of BENJAMIN, whence sprang the first King, and which claue to IVDAH, when the
Ten Tribes fell away: That I was not lately descended from the Hebrews, but
very anciently from the Loins of Jacob: That I was not of a mean Place, but a
Pharisee, the most famous of Sects, for the opinion of Sanctimony and Learning;
That I was not Cold, or Lukewarm, in my Profession, but Walloping, and
Running over with heat of Zeal, even to the persecution of the Church: That I
was not of a spotted or indifferent Carriage, but of a clear and unsuspected
life: All these, these All, and All things else (except my Knowledge and Faith
in CHRIST) as the Privilege of mine Apostleship, my inward Virtues, and works
of Grace, Have I counted lost for CHRIST. Yea Paul, you Have, but DO you Now?
Is not your mind altered? Yea doubtless (I know what I say) I DO count All
things loss, and more then that, I Have suffered the loss of All things, and
have thrown them Over board, as Wares into the Sea, to lighten my self of
Them. Yea, but do you not now repent, as Mariners are wont in the like case,
when they come to Shore? Not I, not a whit; Farewell they; I am glad I am rid
of Them: For what are they, but (...); but Dross, but Rubbish, but Offall, but
Refuse, but Garbage, but DYNG, in respect of CHRIST.

Then more, and more, do I find and perceive, that All things to CHRIST are but
vain, and irksome: and that without Him, the most Iushious pleasures, and
clyming preferments, are but weeping Joys, and noble Miseries. O how
Honorable is He, Isaiah 9. 6.
For his Name is Wonderful, Counceller, the Mighty GOD, the Everlasting
Father, the Prince of Peace. O how Victorious is He, and with what a grace
does He triumph! Isaiah. 63. 5.
Who is this that comes from Edom, with Red Garments from Bozrah? O how Rich is
He, Genesis 17. 1. 2. Cor. 3.
for He is Shaddai, (...), All-Sufficient, though being Rich He became Poor
for us. O how comfortable is He, Reu. 22. 16. Psalm. 45. 8.
for He is not a Blasingstaree, nor a Night-Starre, but the Morning Star,
and that not clouded, but bright, and resplendent. Cant. 1. 2.
O how sweet is He, and how all his Garments smell of Mirrh, Aloes, and
Cassia; His name is as an Ointment powered out, therefore the Virgins love Him.
Cant. 5. 10.
O how Amiable is He, for He is White, and Ruddie, the chiefest of ten
thousand; His Head is as fine Gold, his Locks are curled, and black as a
Raven. O how loving is He, Cant. 2. 6.
for his left hand is under his Spouses head, and his Right hand does embrace
her. O, he has loved us, (as Bernard notes) Bern.
Sweetly, Wisely, Strongly: Sweetly, for He took upon Him our Nature: Wisely,
for He took not on Him the corruption of our Nature: Strongly, for He gave
up His Life for our sakes.

Cant. 8. 1. 6. 2. 5.
O CHRIST, That thou were as my Brother, that sucked the breasts of my Mother,
that I might find thee, and kiss thee. Set me as a Seal on thine heart, and
as a Sgnet upon thine Arm. Stay me with Flaggons, and comfort me with Apples,
for I am sick of love. Let me borrow the words of Ignatius; Igna^.
Come Fire, come Gibber, come tearing with wild Beasts, come crashing of my
Bones in pieces, come drawing my four Quarters asunder, come grinding my whole
Body to powder; nay, come the torments of the Devil, so I may but Win
CHRIST, Lord, let me see Thee, that I may die; or rather, let me die, that I
may see Thee; yet with humble submission to thy holy Will, lest otherwise I
die, and do not see thee. To this our dear, and blessed Savior, together
with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor, and Glory, Now and Ever.
Amen.

FINIS.

