THE GROUND OF A CHRISTIANS LIFE. Delivered in a Sermon at Harwood in
Lancashire, the first day of December 1618.

By ROBERT WORTHINGTON Minister of Gods word at Acceington.

Heb. 11. 6. Without faith it is impossible to please God. John 6. 68. Lord to
who^ shall we go? Thou have the words of eternal life. LONDON, Printed by R.
Field for Robert Mylbourne, and are to be sold at the great South door of
Paul's. 1620.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
CHristian Reader, the Apostle prophesied that in 2. Tim. 3. 5. 2. Tim. 4. 3.
the last days should come perilous times, when men having a show of
godliness should deny the power thereof: and refusing wholesome dostrine,
through their itching ears, should get themselves an heap of teachers. What
proud Anabaptist, that vaunteth himself upon the stage of vain Imagination,
or secure Papist, that trusts to the broken staff of Egypt, can free
himself from such spiritual maladies? who leaving the key of knowledge, and
fountains of living water, have dug unto themselves broken cisternes. And
no marvel: since Satan cantransforme himself into 2. Cor. 11. 14.
an Angel of light, how can he work in the darkened understanding, and the
heart not truly humbled? He that dare enter combat with the Lord of glory,
wisdom and sovereignty, and offer disputation in the full and only point of
man's redemption; how boldly will this politic and puissant enemy invade Gods
Church, wrestling with us about that staff of faith whereby we stand, and
seek to strip us of that shield which is Ephesians. 6. 16.
able to keep back all his fiery darts? What soldier is there in Christ's
camp, if he do but watch, that shall not be acquainted with his subtle
enterprises? Christ's watchword was not in vain, Watch and pray, lest ye enter
into temptation: Math. 26. 41.
nor his prayer needless for his servant Peter, I have prayed for thee, Luk,
22. 32.
that thy faith fail not. For what greater treachery then to strike at the
root? (witnessed in the Gunpowder treason, hatched by Satan and his
instruments,) or what greater folly, then to build an house without a
foundation? To this purpose is my weak and imperfect labor at this time, the
which I had thought to have shrouded under some Christian refuge, but
considering with my self, I thought so small a work deserved not a patronage
of any worth: and the rather therefore have I sent it to the broad world to
seek for it self, trusting that there is no faithful heart that will deny
so plain and needful a doctrine entertainment. Yet I fear that if it shall
either meet with Atheist, Anabaptist, Papist, or earthly worldling, it is like
(without Gods mercy) to find as little friendship as Christ the author of
faith did among the Gadarens. But howsoever, Math 8. 34.
I have at the earnest desires of some, as also for the defense of my self, if
happily any popish surmiser or other secret opinionist should arise in
opposition (it being preached in a country where are many adversaries of our
faith) presumed to commit that to public view which before I delivered in open
assembly, not aduenturing to change my style, lest I should bewray my self of
folly, in bringing unto light a groundless action: it being like to be
perused by shallower judgments then many of those who were present when it
was at the first diuulged. Wherefore I beseech thee (gentle Reader) that if by
Gods blessing thou shall gain to thy self hereby, either information of thy
judgment, or confirmation in thy^ judgment, or thy will proucked to a more
constant vigilancie over thy ways, remember to return to him that rent of
thankfulness unto whom thou art bound, from whom thou receiuest every good and
perfest gift: praying withal for the unity of Gods Church, the propagation of
the Gospel, that through the means of grace, in season and out of season, thy
faith being strengthened, when this life of faith shall be finished, Christ the
object of thy faith may assign thee the end of thy faith, seating thee in his
celestial Jerusalem with true believers.

Thine in Christ Jesus, Robert Worthington.
Acceington.
The ground of a Christians life, delivered in a Sermon at Harwood the first
day of September. 1618.
ROMANS 14. 23. Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.
THe blessed Apostle in the The cohetence of the Text.
eight verse of the former Chapter, exhorts unto that royal law of Charity,
being that new commandment Love a grace of absolute necessity in Gods church
John 13. 34.
propounded by his Lord and Savior, as a grace absolutely necessary to be in
Gods Church: A new commandment (says he) give I unto you, that ye love one
another: as I have loved you, that you also love one another.

Now invisible graces must have visible testimonies, both for the manifestation
of the graces themselves, as also for our justification before men; therefore
in this chapter the Apostle takes occasion to describe and teach the proper
effect of this Christian grace, it being of that nature as to edify and
support, according to his own testimony, Love (...)* and 1. Cor. 8. 1. 1.
Cor. 14. 26.
his general command is, Let all things be done to edifying.

There were in this church, some strong, Sound Christians are builders up of
Gods church.
others weak; as there shall be ever poor in the world, that the rich may
exercise their pity and compassion, so weak in the Church, that the strong may
exercise their love and affection, to show themselves hereby faithful
disposers and practisers of the manifold g^a^es of God. Christ was the nursing
father of his little flock: never was it known that he Esaias 42. 3.
broke the bruised ^eed, or quenched the smoking flax; so must Christians,
whose Image they bear, and whom they are to follow, daily exercise this grace
of love, since God has given to every one the measure of faith.

Hard was it to bring this people from the traditions of their fathers, or to
wean them from the law ^f ceremonies, Touch Coloss. 2. 21.
not, taste not, handle not.

Therefore the Apostle deals with them as newborn babes, putting a
difference Corruption not easly weaned from custom and ceremony.
between them and the strong. Some had received the full power of Christian
liberty, others had not attained unto it: but were like punies in their A, B,
C, not fully satisfied in this point, that unto the pure all things were pure.
Tit. 1. 15.


Now the drift of the Apostle is to school the strong, and teach the weak,
not ruinating, but nourishing the work of God which was in both; showing the
necessity of faith and love in the Church of God: for, as he corrects the
one for The correcting of sin must be the erecting of grace.
putting a stumbling block before the weak in things indifferent, so he
teaches the other to be fully persuaded in his mind. For he that doubts, is
condemned if he eat, that is, is guilty of impiety before God; which is
expounded in the words following, because he eats not of faith. To conclude
by an Antithesis in my Text, Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. Where there
is not faith, there must A wicked cause brings forth a bad effect.
needs be doubting, and where is doubting, there is sin: a miserable cause
ordinarily produces a lamentable effect, for so much is verified in this
conclusion: Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

In these words are three things remarkable. The division.


1 The generality,
Whatsoever, that is, any actio^ though not indiffere^^; wherein is included
thoghts, words, works.
2 The cause,
Not of faith, that is, not assured in conscience upon sound ground.
3 The effect,
Is sin, that is, impiety a breach of the Law of God.
It is not said, That which is against The opening of the Text.
faith, but that action which is without faith displeases God, whether greater
or lesser matters, either things absolutely necessary; or casually indifferent.
Now There may be a conscience where there is no faith. 1. Cor. 10. 29.
some take faith for the conscience, which cannot be; for the weak may have a
conscience when they have not faith, as witnesses the Apostle himself: And
the conscience, I say not thine, but of that other; meaning the weak. For why
should my liberty be condemned of another man's conscience? Secondly, error is
not faith; but the conscience is oftentimes erroneous: therefore the faith of
hereti^kes is no faith, but rather credulity, yet they have a conscience.

Neither is every opinion and persuasion of the mind and conscience, faith, but
that which is grounded upon the word. So then, faith is a sound persuasion of
Fides dicitur firma animi certitudo quae ex Dei veritate concepta sit, a qu^ si
minimum deflectit non iam fides, sed incerta est credulitas and vagus mentis
error. Calvin. in lib. Instit. cap. 5. The maine doctrine from the full scope
of the Text.
the mind, conceived from Gods truth; and the man that would do an acceptable
work with the Lord, must work it of faith, that is, as I have partly said, an
assurance in conscience grounded upon the word, that it may be done or not be
done. For such things as are required in the Scriptures, are pleasing unto him;
wherefore, where the word of God is not, there is no faith.

The doctrine then to be examined and extracted from hence, is this, That
whatsoever is done without knowledge and persuasion from the tenor of the
Scriptures to be truth to them that do it, that action is a sin. Many have
adventured from their variable opinions and vanishing conceits to draw
peremptory conclusions, and these in themselves have carried a golden gloss,
and appeared as Cristall: but when they have been laid to the touchstone of
Gods sacred truth for further trial, they were found to be but splendida
peccata, beautiful deformities, yea mere fallacies, not any whit available
to pacify the mind, or give full and sound satisfaction to the conscience.

In what high esteem and reputation Humane wisdom and carnal imagination not
a sufficient guide in divine and spiritual affairs.
among the people were the Pharisees phylacteries, and what glistering shows
of an unblameable profession did they make? But when the day star arose, and
he who was brighter then the Sun appeared, their glorious profession is but
like an house without a foundation, yea, as vain as Agrippaes pomp, or Herod's
apparel. Christ with his own mouth gives testimony of their folly, telling
them in plain speeches, that That which Luke 16. 15.
is highly esteemed of among men, is an abomination in the sight of God.

Nay further, what good intentions, as they are called, yet how naked without
their garment of faith, how slipperie for want of a stay, taxed by our Savior,
and reproved in the disciples themselves? Peter, put up thy sword into his
place: As if Matthew. 26. 52.
he should say, Thy intent is good, but thou want a ground, for I must
suffer. How could I be delivered into the hands of the Jews, but that the
Scriptures Verse 54.
must be fulfilled, which say it must be so? I have a ground for my suffering,
but thou have none for thy striking: Peter therefore put up thy sword, for
Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

James and John likewise are very peremptory Luke 9. 54.
for want of entertainment among the Samaritans, but Christ taxes them of a
preposterous zeal, and an unwarrantable assertion. For he came to be a
Savior, and not a destroyer: therefore at this time they want a ground for
their rash purposes and indiscreete desires, though otherwise they make never
so goodly a show in zeal and intention. Number. 15. 32.
Furthermore, the man that gathered sticks upon the Sabbath; and Vzzah that
put 2. Sam. 6. 7. Bare intentions and naked suppositions cannot be the ground
of a sound faith.
forth his hand to stay the Ark of God, the open shaking it cannot be thought
to want good intentions for that they enterprised; yet because they went
against the great command of that high Commander, his direful hand of justice
irreuocably subuerteth them; for Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

The reasons follow First, because without faith no* action is not can be good
or acceptable, as witnesses the Author to the Hebrews, Without faith it is
impossible Heb. 11. 6.
to please God. If God accept any work, it is through Christ^ (...) which
work there is required, not only the doing, but the well doing, unto the
which there is needful, sound ma^er, a right manner, and a good end, the Lord
Jesus himself being not only adiutor, but also a Doctor to his Church. The
material tabernacle must be framed, and fashioned, and Exodus 25. 9.
furnished according to the Lords own direction: there must likewise be
neither addition nor abstraction from those ten words delivered in the Mount,
as it is written in Deuteronomy, Take heed therefore Deuteronomy 5. 32.
that you do as the Lord your God has commanded you, turn not aside neither
to the right hand nor to the left. The Jew and Papist they worship the true
God, but Wil-worships were ever abominable before the Lord.
not according to that manner the Lord requires: therefore their services are
not of faith: and if not of faith, not acceptable. Christ and his Father are
one, so are their laws; therefore whatsoever we ask the Father in his name, he
hears us. Yea (says the Apostle) whatsoever we ask, we receive of him,
because we keep his 1. John 3. 22.
commandments, and do those things which are pleasing in his sight: but
without faith we cannot please God, therefore without faith there can be no
acceptance: for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

2. Pet. 1. 20. verse 21.
holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. Look we at Moses
and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, and we shall find their tongues to
be Esaias 6. 7. Scriptures without error.
touched with coals from Gods Altar, and the spirit of Elijah to be doubled
upon Elisha; yea they were all filled with the holy Ghost, and spoke as the
Spirit gave them Acts 2. 4.
utterance. What words of gross impiety, or rather blasphemy, dare the Papists
utter, concluding these sacred writings, without the authority of the Church
as not authentical? Yea they authorize Canons to be as orthodoxal as the
Scriptures. O palpable blindness, nay, horrible blasphemy! But let us proceed.
As the truth of Scripture appears by the Inditer, so also by the matter it
self there in The pure word of God surpasses all humane learning. That which
man by his wisdom cannot do, God by his word and spirit can do.
contained. How does it discover sinful man's particular thoughts, lusts and
affections, which humane reason was never able to discern, nor any Philosopher
by humane wisdom able to declare? Besides, what articles of faith, although
not against reason, yet above reason? For in natural understanding God is not
all justice and no mercy, but if there were not a Redeemer it should be so:
therefore, although reason can teach, that he must be God that must satisfy the
infinite justice of God for sin, yet that this Redeemer should be God and
man, is above reason. For this cause is his name called Wonderful.
Unspeakable was the Esaias 9. 6.
work of creation, and wonderful the work of redemption: This is the Lords
Psalm. 118 23.
doing though it be marvelous in our eyes: and, Let him that glories glory
in the Iere. 9. 24.
Lord. Besides, nothing but this word is able to minister comfort and relief
in all distresses of body and mind. The sweet promises of the Gospel will
only revive and raise up the weary soul, and give it full contentment and
satisfaction. Athanasius concludes more perfection (...). Athanas. de Synod.
to be in the Scriptures then all the Synods: he therefore that believes God*
must believe the Scriptures, for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

2. Tim. 3. 15.
of them, they being able to make a man wise to salvation, through the faith
which is in Christ Jesus. But, says the Adversary, they are imperfect,
therefore they require a supply from the Apostolical Decre^alls of the Church.
O proud Babel that dare offer strength to him who is strength and sufficiency
it self, and prop his omnipotent power and incomparable work with the reeds
of Egypt! Basil says, that the Scriptures Scriptura common promptuarium
bonorum documentorum. Basil. mag. in psalm. 1. (...). Iren. li. ^. ca. 1. (...).
Theod. dial. ^. cap. 6.
are the rich treasury of the King of glory, full of pearls and precious
stones, wherein the Christian may furnish himself with necessaries, either for
his general or particular calling. Yea, how have the ancient Fathers,
Tertullian, Irenaeus, Theodoret, Augustine, made them their stay, confessing
them to be the immovable ground of faith, the pillar of truth? How have they
commended them by their example and doctrine to all succeeding ages, as
sufficient to make the man of God absolutely perfect unto every good work?
Nay further, how have they expressly published unto posterities, Hieronym in
Mat. 23
Quod de Scripturis authoritate^ non habet, eadem facilitate contemnitur qua
probatur, that is, Whatsoever is not authorized by the holy Scriptures, it may
as easily be rejected as received. Wherefore, although such Babylonish and
Satanicall spirits, in their height of pride dare attempt to weaken that which
the strength of Israel by his own finger has so confirmed and established to
be both perfect and sufficient, Psalm. 19. 7.
yet let all that fear the Lord, conclude with my Text, that Whatsoever is not
of faith, is sin.

Faith only the ground of sound assurance and comfort.
wrought, the which cannot be truly and constantly expected of me, without full
assurance in my soul* and conscience, that I have thoroughly endeavored to obey
God in all things according to his will; being truly humbled at the sight of my
manifold failings and imperfections. For euangelical perfection consists in
these graces, faith, unfeigned humiliation, with an earnest endeavor, God in his
Son accepting the truth of our endeavors as perfect works. The which
evidently appears by the testimony of the Apostle, who although he delighted
in the law of God concerning the inner man, yet was he constrained to cry in
the bitterness of his soul, O wretched man that I am! Were our actions Romans
7. 22. 23 24
perfect, what necessity were there either of humiliation or faith? but
Evangelical righteousness requires both, humiliation to bring us to faith,
and faith for the apprehending of that imputed righteousness which is by
Christ. Hence then is disclosed the natural estate of many, who brag of an
endeavor to serve God, but wanting the clear sight No discerning of
imperfection, no endeavoring after perfection,
of imperfections in their best actions, they come not to the grace of sound
humiliation, and so remain careless, neglecting the means of grace, as
constant hearing, praying, conferring, meditating, whereby more knowledge, and
greater strength is to be obtained; they being ignorant of an universal and
renewed obedience enjoined the people of God. Since therefore his will must be
our will, and his word an absolute rule for the squaring and ordering of our
general affairs, in the courses of true piety, and unmixed holiness: how
frail Hope with* out faith but a vanishing shadow.
and comfortless is that vanishing hope, which is not supported with this
staff of Faith? What comeliness* were it to prefer the daughter before the
mother, but that groundless actions must needs end in fading vanities, and
seeming shows in base hypocrisy? Now the Scriptures tell us, that we are
saved by faith, and unto this grace belongs the promises; for that grace
which brings us Christ, brings us all things: what then can surely Romans 8.
32.
be expected without the life of Faith? David therefore first lays the
ground, and then applies: I shall not be confounded, Psalm. 119. 9.
when I have respect, unto all thy commandments. And Paul gains his
assurance, and triumphs in his expectation from this immovable ground, I
have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, 2. Tim. 4. 7. 8.
I have kept the faith; from henceforth is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness: He therefore that will be fr^e from the guilt of sin, and enjoy
the promises, must constantly, without wavering, practice the works of faith,
for Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

Abraham walked Genes. 17. 1. Genes 5. 24. Genes. 6. 9. Acts 13. 22. Josh. 1. 2.
before God, Henoch with God, Noah by Gods own testimony, was an upright man,
Moses was his servant, David a man after his own heart; how could this be, but
that by faith they obeyed sincerely the word of faith? Hence the Apostle dare
affirm, that As many as Galat. 6. 16.
walk according to this rule, peace shall be upon them and mercy. Therefore,
without all controversy it may be concluded, that there can be no sound life
but the life of faith: for Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

I trust, by this time, easy passage is made for further prosecution of the
point: proceed we therefore briefly to application.

ordinarily upon the word, for the natural man perceives not the things 1.
Cor. 2. 14.
of the Spirit of God, neither can he know them: the Apostle gives two
reasons, the one taken from his own corruptions, They are foolishnes unto him;
the other from the excellency of the things themselves, the which unsanctified
nature cannot be capable of: for as they are spiritual, so they must be
spiritually discerned. The unregenerate man The life of faith not walked by the
gifts of Nature only.
may be enriched with many and singular gifts, as knowledge, approbation of the
best things, yea with inclination toward sincerity. What a glistering
speculatiue image of holiness may the natural man be covered with? how
pregnant in divine and humane histories? He may be stored with variety of the
greatest gifts that Nature can afford him, and express in action Aristotle's
moral virtues, yet never come to be ruled universally by the word, but as a
bondslaue guided and ruled by his enlightened and checking conscience.
Achitophels counsel was 2. Sam. 16. 23.
like as one had asked counsel at the Oracle of God: yet was he without divine
and supernatural illumination and sanctifying graces of the Spirit. So it is
that many can speak of God, but not in that Every service of god discerns
manner as well as matter.
holy manner as of God, with reverence and fear. Others can talk of the word,
Sabbath and Saints, but without humility, delight, affection; that as good
meat may be marred in the making, so good words in speaking: for Gods word
directs, not only for matter but manner. If any man speak (says the
Apostle) 1. Pet. 4. 1^
let him speak as the words of God. And. Paul commends the Thessalonians for
receiving the Gospel, not as it was the word of man, but as it was indeed,
the 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13.
word of God. Hence it is that the regenerate man fears to undertake any
service or worship due unto his God, without an exact preparation: that is, he
summoneth his whole fabric, every faculty of soul and body; insomuch that
he says with Cornelius, We are all here in Acts 10. 33.
the presence of God. He leaves not unexamined his faith and love, committing
a several office to his several faculties; lest his sacrifice should smell
unsavory in the nostrils of the Almighty, no better Esaias 66. 3.
respected then the cutting off of a dogs neck, or the offering up of swines
blood. He forgets not that spiritual actions must be done in a spiritual
manner, lest that woeful prophecy be verified in him, as it was in the
Pharisees* This people come near unto me with Matt. 15. 8.
their lips, but their hearts are far from me. Thus, although the carnal
Ciuilist dare rush into Gods ordinances and holy services, as the horse into
the battle, never respecting like the careless servant, how his masters
work be done, so it be done: yet the tender affected son of Adoption,
sanctified with the graces of Gods Spirit, remembers and registreth that
grounded watchword, Take heed to thy foot, that is, Examine Eccles. 4. 17.
thy thoughts and affections, for, whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

Furthermore, it is required in divinity, although not in humane learning, as
philosophy, that not only our actions Gods word, man's heart, and his actions
must sympathize.
must agree with our minds, but our minds must agree with the truth it self:
for it is not enough that a man walk before God, but that he walk truly and
uprightly with his God. For this cause has our gracious God granted and
vouchsafed his Pillar of a Cloud, and his Pillar of fire for our certain
guiding in the way of happiness. What better and surer conducts can we have
then his Word and Spirit? for what reason cannot do, faith can do. Wherefore in
Christians must be a double truth, truth in affection and matter; the one to
manifest gods truth; the other our own. Graceless men may speak as they
think: their words manifesting the abundance of their hearts; but natural men
can never speak Gods truth truly. What grounds then has imaginary supposition
in the service of God, or that doctrine of Equivocation and mental reservation
hatched in the Romish Synagogue, detested Non etenim falsum i^rare peierare est:
sed quod ex animi tui sententia iuraueris. Cic. de of fic. libr. 3.
of the very heathens? Perjury (says one) is not so much swearing a thing
false, as swearing it falsely, when heart and words agree not. But the
parti-colored Papist may have out of his Rubricke, a tongue for the Prince,
and an heart for the Pope. But let all which set their faces toward Sion,
know, that without knowledge the mind is not Prou. 19. 2.
good; and that truth is required, not only in the doer, but also in the work
it self, far surpassing the choicest gifts of nature, for Whatsoever is not
of faith, is sin.

Again, the secure Naturalist that can show his gilded Arms painted with the
color of civil honesty, and the formal hypocrite that is soa^ed up to an
high pitch of confused holiness: these and The life of faith exceeds
pharisaicall righteousness, and formalitie.
such like have framed a repentance of their own, not grounded upon the
Scriptures. Many take some pains in the outward performance of religious
duties, and can concur with Gods faithful Minister in the strict censures of
hellish sins; yet examine them thoroughly in the ground of regeneration, I
fear, in respect of true and lively experience, they will be found as ignorant
as Nicodemus, yea as vain as Demas: sound mortification will be held
martyrdom with their carnal affections, whence proceeds weariness,
dullness, deadness, yea fearful backesliding, the cursed mother of scandal
to the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ. Nay they live in the bosom of the
Church, yet miserably blind and naked, destitute of those saving graces, true
humility, godly simplicity, joy in the Cross, patience, faith; being in
bondage unto the law and conscience. But the sanctified Christian, who has
well learned Christ, whose heart faith has thoroughly purified: this man Act^
15. 9.
is not unacquainted with the first be ginnings of saving repentance, as
namely, godly sorrow, indignation, with an holy revenge upon his vile
affections. For, what seed is quickened except it die? yea we 1. Cor. 15. 36.
Romans 6. 4.
are buried with Christ in baptism. See then the miserable and ungrounded
estate of the unregenerate, though never so holy in his own judgment and
other men's, yet being ignorant of Christian burial and death of sin, he is
like a house upon a sandy foundation, subject to the violent temptations of
that prying and raging Serpent, ready to be tossed with the waves of his own
corruptions, and drawn aside by worldly enticements. From whence proceed so
many evil surmisings, small care in bearing with, and covering the infirmities
of the weak, yea Christians must examine well their mortification
that woeful sin of spiritual pride, but from unmortified humors, and
unexamined consciences? Many think, if they believe the Trinity with a
general confession of their sins; all that God requiquireth they have
performed; others, if they have had some pangs of sorrow; others, if they be
brought to leave their gross sins, they are not so bad as the worst,
therefore they imagine themselves to be equal with the best.

But the sacred Scriptures teach the ground of true repentance to be far
otherwise, differing from this speculatiue mortification, both in quantity and
continuance. To mortify, in the Scriptures, is to crucify, or apply that
which will make dead? It is one thing to get sin asleep, but it is another
thing to get it dead: for sleep may be procured without pain, but death
comes not ordinarily without sorrow and perplexity. This mortifying therefore
is a destroying of the whole body of sin, an extinguisting of the power and
vigor of it. We Romans 656.
are grafied with Christ (says the Apostle) into the similitude of his death:
which he in the next verse expounds to be a crucifying of the old man, and
destroying of the whole body of sin. Now this crucifying or destroying is
expressed by diverse degrees: first, there is the wounding of sin, when the
sinner is pricked with remorse by the law: So were those Conuerts at Peter's
Sermon said to be pricked in their hearts, Acts 2. 37.
whereupon they cried, What shall we do to be saved? Secondly, a condemning of
sin, when the sinner examineth and judges himself guilty before the Lord:
and thus has it been with the Lords peculiar from time to time, as may appear
in David, Daniel, Job, the Prodigal, and Dan. 9. 7.
the Publican, who humbled themselves as liable to the justice of the Almighty.
Thirdly, the crucifying of sin, when the sinner racketh his own soul by godly
sorrow, driving in the nails of Gods threatenings, restrayning his flesh through
a spiritual revenge: for some of the 2. Cor. 7. 11.
effects of godly sorrow that causes repentance never to be repented of, are
indignation and revenge: Fourthly, the killing of sin, when the sinner
puts off the body of sin, and forsakes his evil ways. The Apostle
forbids lying, and he adds an undeniable reason, Ye have put off the old
man with his works. Coloss. 3. 9.
Yea he enioyneth not a partial, but a thorowout mortification, showing that
he which is not inwardly and thoroughly mortified, was never truly mortified.
Mortify your members (says he) which are on the earth, fornication,
uncleanness, inordinate Where sin is truly mortified, there is no liking of
it in the affections.
affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which is Idolatry. Here
the Apostle would have the conceptions and first inclinations to sin
crucified, because they are the original of all ungodliness. Hence we see, as
also lamentable experience testifies, that many build upon seeming shows and
vain persuasions; for that alteration that true repentance makes, cannot be
found, and all for want of found mortification. For as there must be renouation
in every faculty unto all graces, so there must be mortification of all sins
in every faculty: whereas it is otherwise in Agrippa-like Christians and
carnal Gospellers, who upon the quieting of conscience, and absence of a
powerful Ministry, dare fashion themselves according to the courses and
customs of the times in apparel and communication, not respecting the The
mortified Christian watches against sins of omission. Phil. 2. 12.
urgent necessity of daily watchfulness, with the constant practice of holy
duties. But the crucified Christian, who seeks and endeavors to work out
his salvation with fear and trembling, upon his daily sins executes daily
mortification, concluding the necessity of renewed repentance from the sacred
Scriptures, and his own corruptions, and Whatsoever is not of faith is sin.

Thus fa^re have we waded in the first use, proceed in order to the second.

Popery not able to withstand the Scriptures.
is fallen before the Arc, the fan of the glorious Gospel having already
winn^wed the chafe from the wheat: the mists of darkness being expelled by
the Sunshine of righteousness, and the power of B^bell displayed by the
banners of him which rides upon the white horse, infinite in wisdom, and
invincible in power and majesty: it is not my purpose therefore to be very
large in this use of confutation: although my text would bear me out against
all the proud brags of that Antichristian Synagogue. Well may we know that
Papists, together with the rabble of croking lesuites they are no babes, they
can speak for themselves, or rather Baall^ Though their speeches resemble the
ordinary qualities and conditions of deceiptfull tradesmen, who when their
wares for insufficiency cannot sell themselves, their glozing tongues can get
quick and speedy sale for them: but for all their iugling, glozing, and
dissembling, they shall never clear themselves from Christ's sentence against
the Pharisees: In vain Matthew. 15. 9.
they worship me, teaching for doctrines the precepts of men. This appears by
Papists build upon man, but Christians upon God.
their sandy unsound foundations whereupon they build, as namely, humane
Consistories, lying oracles, Decretals apostaticall, preferring darkness
before light, shadows before substances, Traditions before commandments, yea
the creature before the creator. What can God do and the Pope cannot do? Nay,
the Church is to judge of the truth of the Scriptures. Tremble Babel, for the
pride of the Church has ever been the ruin of the Church. But to insist and
search more narrowly, and to manifest more clearly the rotten groundwork of
this Romish building, the Rhemists themselves comment upon our text, and tell
us that the proper sense is, That every thing that a man does against his
knowledge and conscience, is a sin, but they show the ground neither for
knowledge nor conscience: something must be understood which is not expressed,
or else the consequent must conclude, that a man can neither err in judgment
nor conscience: which well may be gathered from some of their propositions, as
namely this one; Ignorance the mother of devotion. For it is neither against
knowledge nor conscience, when that faith will serve which is fixed upon the
Church, although that Church be grounded upon the devil himself.

Again, other stones there are which Iustificatio est actus indiuiduus ac
simul totus.
belong to this brittle foundation, as namely, that second justification by
works, as if there were a first and a last in the act of justification;
whereas it is (...), a free acceptance of a man's person, yea a justifying of
the ungodly, as the Apostle witnesses: But to Romans 4. 5.
him that works not, but believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his
faith is counted for righteousness. If any regenerate man might have merited
any thing in the matter of justification, it could not have been but David and
Paul, who were so abounding in the work of the Lord, might have gained
something for themselves; but it is far otherwise, as appears by their own
testimonies in facred Scripture. Lord, says Psalm 143. 2. 1. Cor. 4. 4.
Iustificatio exprimitur in Hebraico Hizdik Pro. 17. 15. and in Graeco (...).
David* enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no
flesh living be justified. The Apostle likewise says, I have in all good
conscience served God unto this day, neither know I any thing of my self: yet
am I not thereby justified. Besides, the word, to justify, is opposed in the
Scriptures to condemning, signifying an absoluing or imputative justice, It is
God that justifies, who can condemn, Yea the blessed Apostle Romans 8. 33. 34.
Isai. 50. 8. Act. 13. 39.
Paul is no^ a^^aid to publish in the Synagogue of the Jews at Antioch, that
From all things from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses, by
him, that is, by Christ* every one that believes is justified. Well says
Bernard to this purpose, Bern. in fest. Omnium Sanct. Sermon. 1.
Vaehominum iustitiae quantumvis laudabili, si remota misericordia Dei
iudicetur, that is, Woe to the righteousness of man were it never so laudable,
if God setting aside mercy enter to judge it. For this cause holy Job is not
ashamed to confess, that if he would dispute with God, yet Job. 9. 3.
could he not make answer unto one of a thousand. Thus you see with what
rubbish the foundation of the Romish Church is laid, of which a workman would
be ashamed, yea never adventure so great a building with so slippery a
ground-worker but that the prophecy must be fulfilled in them as well as in
other, namely Christ to be a stone to stumble at, and a rock of offense, even
to them which stumble at Esaias. 8. 14. 1. Pet. 2. 8.
the word, being disobedient, unto the which things they were even ordained.
Were it not so, how could they withstand so plain evidences of the spirit in
sacred Scriptures, as namely justification only by faith without the works of
the Law, figured and recorded by Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his
Apostles? Either it must be of grace, or of debt, but if debt, then were Ephesians.
2. 8.
grace no more grace. In like manner they stand upon Peter's prerogatives above
the other Apostles, which were a thing impossible to human reason, were they
not given up to diabolical delusions; for no other Apostle we read of, that
fell so often and grievously as this man did. They tell us that he walked upon
the water, so did none of the rest. But what supernatural act was this? for
herein by the testimony of the Evangelist he bewraied diffidence and much
weakness, and had not Christ caught him by the hand he had suncke. What unity
Matthew. 14. 30.
therefore or uniformity can there be betwixt the Church of Christ and the
Church of Antichrist, when there is so Rome cannot stand, for it wan^eth a
sound foundation.
great difference in the principles? Furthermore besides all this, other
stories there are, or rather vanishing rubbish, which prop and uphold this
Roman Hierarchy, neither of Christ's or any of his Apostles getting or laying;
as namely that ungrounded doctrine of Transsubstantiation lately hatched and
decreed at the Council of Lateran being 1215 years after Christ, under Pope
Innocentius the third: never taught by those Fathers of great antiquity,
namely, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Augustine. Yea the Evangelists
themselves, Mark and Matthew, are sufficient witnesses of Christ's own words,
who said that he would drink no more of the fruit of the vine, Matthew. 26. 29.
Mark. 14. 25.
which was not blood but wine, as Chrysostom and Cyprian both affirm. These
things being considered, who can justly Call. lib. Insti^. cap. 13.
blame M. Calvin, though he say the mother and organ of popish traditions was
(...), an erroneous zeal and preposterous humor derived from Satan the father
of lies and ungrounded Axioms. And were not poor ignorant and deluded souls
bewitched through the deceits of Satan and vanity of their minds, drawn aside
with those speculatiue shows of Antichristian piety, and withal blinded The
doctri^^ of the Romish Church cannot be maintained by Scripture.
with those false persuasions of admired Cardinals, how could it be but they
should relinquish such impious falsities and counterfeit holiness, grounded
upon nothing but man's invention? I could proceed in showing the insufficiency
and weakness of this declining Babell, the head corner stone which should
uphold the building being cast aside: but their apparent folly I cease to
speak of, it being sufficiently manifested to the Church of God by the
faithful witnesses of the Almighty. Let Jesuits therefore, or rather He that
preaches Christ truly cannot but preach good work^.
Iebusites, maintain their faithless doctrines, as of free will, works of
super^rogation, with such like; yet let Sion fly to the Law and the Testimony;
and if they speak not according to this word, it is, as the Prophet says,
because there is no light in them. And although they falsely Esaias. 8. 20.
charge the Ambassadors of Christ as enemies unto good works, let them set
them no higher then the Scriptures, and they shall set them no higher then we.
For we are his workmanship, created in Ephesians. 2. 10
Christ Jesus unto good works that we should walk in them. Besides, The
weapons of our warfare are notcarnall, but spiritual, mighty through God to
cast down 2. Cor. 10. 4. 5.
holds, casting down the imaginations and every high thing that is exalted
against the knowledge of God, and bringing every thought into captivity unto
the obedience of Christ. But where the Lord has not a mouth to speak, there
his peculiar people may not have an ear to hear; for Whatsoever is not of
faith is sin.

The lives of men ordinarily show what they are.
that made them, and Christ that bought them? How few are the families which
square their lives by the rule of faith? Are not the greatest commandments the
oftenest violated? Are not these days like the sinful days of Noah,
prophesied of by Christ, wherein this principal grace of faith is so meanly
prized. But alas, sins of all sorts, in all sorts of people, in fore and Choro,
both in Church and market. What iniquity can the corrupt heart of Sin did
ever and shall ever abound on the earth.
man imagine, but it may be patronized by a practitioner, and warranted by a
defender? How ridiculous and of base esteem is the life of faith? If any shall
examine their lives, the devil by wicked men will forthwith examine and
censure Satan can abide profession but not practice.
their heavenly courses. To talk and discourse of religion Satan will
sometimes permit, but universal and constant obedience he would never abide.
If thou dare set thy face toward Sion, behold the northern army of cruel
Assirians. No affinity with sin, small friendship with the world. Faith and
the world were ever at variance, For this is the victory which 1. John 1. 4
over comes the world, even our faith. What concord can there be betwixt
Christ and Beliall, light and darkness? Our Savior tells the unbelieving
Jews, That the world cannot hate them, but him it hated: the reason John. 7. 7.
follows, not for injury but for innocence, not for falsehood but for truth:
he testified that the works thereof were evil.

What is the cause that true piety and grounded sincerity is of so small
account, but because the world of the unregenerate ^. John 5. 19.
lies in wickedness, and faith to carnal affections brings little
contentment? How can it be that oppressors, extortioners, usurers, these
idolatrou^ worldlings, together with thousands of delicious prodigals, should
entertain the Gospel: since Zacche^^ must divide his goods, Matthew must bid
farewell to his place of customary receipt; yea the people of God must use this
world as if 1. Cor. 7. 31. The life of faith very difficult to nature.
they used it not? How hard therefore will it be for such as trust in
uncertain riches, to subject themselves to this life of faith? May not Gods
Ministers take up a lamentation, What happy tidings from the word of faith
which we preach? how is the way to everlasting bliss plainly beaten forth,
yet how few delight to walk in it? How sluggish are our common professors,
that cannot watch one hour? and how faithless are those backsliding
hypocrites, as if the unchangeable possessour of heaven and earth were
unfaithful, or unable to recompense and fully reward his faithful people?

Thus we see, that straight is the way, and small is the number that go it.
Ephraim is an unruly heifer that will not be tamed. Ever have Gods Saints been
like the shaking of an olive after the vintage. Wicked men are mad men, they
will not be ordered; they are deaf men, they will not hear, charm the
Charmer never so wisely. If that be sin which is not done of says, how
woeful will it be with the greatest number, who neither know nor believe, being
blind Old natural men are very miserable, for they are full of sins.
and dissolute: having from their nonage to their old age wandered from the
ways of God, being seven fold more the children of hell then they were in
their mothers wombes? If all actions that want faith be sins, how many are the
sins of those who were never enlightened with the knowledge of God? My text
has driven me into such a narrow straight, and so paled me in, that I cannot
get liberty, either to license the novelties of the Athenians, or the
blindness of the Atheist, or the idolatry of the Papist, or the dreams of the
Anabaptist, or the hypocrisy of the Pharisie. I am forced either Gods word
gives no liberty to any sin or sinner.
to raze my text, or rack the conscience of every unregenerate man; but seeing
the gross sins of our sinful times are so apparently arraigned and
condemned in all general teaching, and the light of conscience, I desire to
descend into particulars.

If therefore indifferent things must be of faith, at least in the general, how
much more matters of greater importance? No life of faith without ^^amination.
Where is the examination of thoughts, words, actions? Under what spiritual
and heavenly promise do the works of impenitents consist? What use can there
be of faith, without the life of faith? For his will and promise are
consonants, they are companions, and cannot be disioyned. The uncharitable
railer that spends his time in whispering and backbiting the sheep of Christ,
who desire to glorify He which hates Gods people wants faith.
God in obedience, whereas love edifieth and thinks not evil; but where
there is no love (especially to the children of God) there is no faith: for
faith, if it Galat. 5. 6.
be sound, works by love.

In like manner the proud spirit and secure worldling, that esteems the
powerful preaching of the Gospel a mean and needless labor, promising to
himself repentance without the constant and conscionable use of the means,
setting at light the blessed doctrine of vocation, although in an audible voice
it was hard from heaven, This is my well-beloved Son in whom I am well pleased
hear him. And the Apostle dare confidently affirm Matthew. 17. 5. Romans 10. 17.
41.
both by doctrine and experience. That faith comes by hearing, and no sound
hearing without a preacher: yea he acknowledges the Gospel of Christ to be
Romans 1. 16.
the power of God, to salvation to every believer. And what good was done in
Co^inth or Galatia, he affirms that through Christ by his means it was
wrought; In Christ Jesus, says he to the Church at Corinth, I have begotten
you 1. Cor. 4. 15.
through the Gospel: and expostulateth the matter with the Church at Galatia:
Gal. 3. 2.
Thus received ye the Spirit by* the works of the Law, or by the hearing of
faith preached? Thus then we see these woeful contemners of able and
conscionable Ministers, ground upon no better a foundation then their corrupted
imagination. They It is a note of a wicked man not to love and frequent the
means of grace.
will not be guided by God nor established in Christ, but choose rather to
wander in the wilderness of naked hope, openly descrying and publishing that
condemnation which is in the world, spoken of by our Savior, John 3. 19. 20.
This is the condemnation, that light Ioh. 3. 19. 20.
is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather then light, because
their deeds were e^ill: for every ^an that evil does hates the light,
neither comes to light, lest his deeds should be reproved.

Others, through the blindness of their understanding and perverseness of
their wills and affections, account the He that knows not Gods day and
worship, knows not God.
Lords day, but as the Scholar does the Thursday* only a day of sport and
pastime, examining more their app^rell the^^ the day or their hearts; as also
their natural and base companions more then the assembly of Saints in the
Sanctuary. Whence it comes to pass that they neither prepare to, nor take
any delight in Gods public worship. The reason is, because they ground not on
faith, being both ignorant of the mystery of the day wherein our chiefest
happiness is resembled; as also being led by their own sensualities and
carnal appetites, following rather the direction of their own wills then the
guide of faith. Thus as they are grounded upon themselves, so they remain
ignorant of Christ and secrets of the Gospel, and for want of a sensible He
that thirsts not for knowledge has no care to li^e well.
thirst and appetite unto the word, shall never be able to live the life of
faith, or walk the way to everlasting happiness. But let us come to more
close and unwarrantable courses of men, not grounded on this rock of faith.

A^ first, when we receive the blessings of God not sanctified by the word and
prayer, whereas the Apostle teaches 1. Timoth. 4. 4.
that every creature of God is good, and nothing ought to be refused if it be
received God is to be remembered in all his blessings.
with thanksgiving. Wherein is employed the contrary, that the creatures are
not good unto me without thanksgiving: the reason follows, for they are
sanctified by the word of God and prayer, and not sanctified without it.
Besides the examples in former times, the poor maids of Ramath Zophim told
Saul, that 1. Sam. 9. 13.
the people would eat no meat until the Prophet Samuel had blessed the
sacrifice. 1. Sam. 9. 13. John 6. 11.
Yea Christ himself did never eat meat but he practiced this duty; and the
Apostle would eat no bread, but first gave thanks in the presence of them Acts
27. 35.
all: and commands it as a special duty, In all things give thanks: and
adds 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18.
this reason, for this is the will of God. If these Scriptures and examples
were well weighed, there would not be such brutish receiving of the creatures
as there He that sees God in the lesser blessing will praise him for the
greater.
commonly is. Nay, many that do coldly perform this duty, if God ever
enlighten them to see further the necessity and excellency of this duty, they
will not neglect to bless the Lord for greater mercies; they will (I say) be
more careful to perform and offer up morning and evening Sacrifices.

It would be holden a very inhuman^ and shameful dealing, to forget the
kindnesses of men; how unnatural then is it, and intolerable, to forget so
many Learn to bless God by the light of nature.
renewed mercies of the Lord? He therefore that is without sobriety, prayer and
thanksgiving in the use of Gods creatures, plainly manifests, that he
neither by faith depends on God, nor in faith receives his blessings; but
Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

Secondly, when men confess their sins in general, and cry for pardon for
them; but they cannot credit these two things: First, that all thoughts, words;
Pure actions are strained actions.
and actions must be strained through faith, or else they will be impure.
Secondly, that God forgiueth no more known sins then a man earnestly
endeavors to forsake, they being blotted Sin is forgiven by God when it is
mortified in us.
out of Gods register when they are dead in us: the power and vigor of them
being extinguished, and we in all things as ready to glorify God, as we would
have him to glorify us. But alas, when prayers are not grounded upon a lively
sense of sin, and Gods eternal vengeance due unto them; as also godly sorrow
and faith in the promises: how suddenly do men turn to their old vomit, and
filthy wallowing in the uncleanness of sin? causing sound judgment and
grounded reason to subscribe to perverse Where there is not thesense of sin,
there cannot be the forsaking of sin.
will and carnal affection, preferring Ishmael before Isaac, Esau before
Jacob, Zidkijah before Michaiah, the Pharisees before Christ, custom before
conscience, tradition before the commandment. Thus for want of divine
illumination, as also a correspondencie betwixt their supplication and
conversation, confession and affection, their ungrounded prayers become a vain
lip-labor, impure, and abominable in the ears of God.

Thirdly, when men apparel themselves beyond their estate, and above their
degrees, although God has threatened to visit all such as wear strange
attire, Zeph. 1. 9.
and has granted grounds for our attire, namely the presidence of the wise,
grave, and godly of that degree we live in. Whatsoever things are pure, honest,
and of Phil. 4. 8.
good report (says the Apostle,) if there be any virtue, or any praise, think
on these things which you have both heard and seen in me. But the wantons of
our days turn their eyes from Gods book and people, fixing them upon their
own fancies and backs of Iesabels, imagining that if they be out of the
fashion, they be out of the world. Hence it follows, that servants attire
themselves like their Masters, Carters like Courtiers, Yeomen like Gentlemen,
Scholars like Soldiers. Thus unseemly and vnwarrantably do men and women
apparel themselves, preferring the garments of corruption before the image of
Christ: oftentimes against justice, equity, and common honesty, cutting their
suites in another man's cloth, being daily vagrants from the life of God and
ground of faith. But Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

Fourthly, when men live upon the sweat of other men's brows, crushing the
back of the diligent workman. Such are wandering vagabonds, prying busiebodies,
These and such like, sin against the second Table
^^llish tale-bearers, gamesters, stage players, who sinfully transgress the
law of charity, walking in the ways of Balaam who loved the wages of
unrighteousness, being without God and without Christ.

Fifthly, when with offense, and without edification we use things of an
indifferent nature, whereas the Apostle tells us, that in some cases, and
amongst some persons, it is evil to eat with offense, Romans 14, 2^*
meaning to the we^ke, not wilful. For the law of love and spirit binds
where* the law of commandments binds not: All things are lawful for me, but
all 1. Cor. 10. 2^
things are not expedient; all things are lawful for me, but all things edify
not. Now whatsoever is not expedient nor profitable, may not accidentally be
lawful, In some cases things lawful become unlawful.
although in it self it may be so. It is true, that there is no indifferent
thing unclean of it self, but Unto him (says the blessed Apostle) that
judges any thing to Romans 14. 14.
be unclean, to him it is unclean. It is requisite therefore, that we stand
fast in the liberty wherein Christ has set us free: Galat. 5. 1.
yet withal, we must beware that we give offense neither to Jew nor Gentile,
1. Cor. 10. 32.
nor to the Church of God. And for the better doing of this, we must look to
The edification and building up of the Church must be a thing dear unto us.
the right using of things indifferent: for we easily infringe and abuse our
Christian liberty. There be three principal grounds or maine directions for
the well using and ordering of things of this nature.

First, when we use them lawfully, that is, to Gods glory, not superstition or
profaneness. Therefore the Apostle commands, that Whether we eat or 1.
Cor. 10. 31.
drink, or whatsoever we do, we do all to the glory of God. Thus in eating
and drinking, which are in themselves things indifferent, we are to seek God.
Secondly, when we use them profitably, to edification, the good of man, All
things (says the Apostle) must profit; yea Every Romans 15. 2.
man must please his neighbor, in that which is good, as Christ pleased not
himself, but others. This belongs properly to the weak and ignorant that
Gods glory and man's good, the maine ends of all our actions
may be in the Church, whom I am bound to edify, support, build up, and not by
any means to weaken or grieve, much less destroy, although the thing be never
so lawful in it self. Thirdly, when we use them proportionably, that is, in
sobriety, not failing in the manner, nor exceeding in the measure, but so
using them as they further us in all duties of godliness, being always
vigilant over our affections, lest we be brought into bondage by them. Let us
rather be said to enjoy them, then they us. Thus for the strong Christian.

But the weak conscience may here Duties to be done, and not simply grounded
in the word, must necessarily be examined.
object: How shall I do all things of faith, seeing there are so many laws
which are not simply prescribed in the Word? Answer. Laws that simply and
primarily bind in conscience, are such as bind though there were no humane
laws to urge them; such as preaching, hearing, praying, with others of the
same quality and necessity. Thus the Apostle is said to preach Christ
crucified, although unto 1. Cor. 1. 23.
the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Gentiles Dan. 6. 10.
foolishness. And Daniel is said to pray three times a day, and praise his God
daily, albeit the King and the people rage at him. For this cause may it be
lawful to compel the Papist to come to the sacred ordinances and public
worship of God, albeit it seem to offend them: for good king Josias made a
co^enant with the 2. Chro. 34. 32
Lord and caused all his people to stand to it.

Other laws there are which do not simply and primarily bind in conscience,
but secondarily and in respect: wherefore, although the wholesome laws of the
Magistrate bind not simply and primarily the conscience, but secondarily, yet
Magistrates must be obeyed of conscience in all lawful things.
we must obey their wholesome laws for conscience sake, our consciences being
bound, not by the law of the Magistrate, but by Gods law, which binds to the
obedience of the Magistrates laws in all lawful and honest things: according
to the rule of the Apostle, Romans 13. 5. Romans 13. 5.
Ye must be subject for conscience sake. Neither are we curbed any whit in our
Christian liberty, since unto humane laws which fight not with Gods laws,
the outward man is bound directly, and not the inward but by accident.

The law therefore that forbids the All humane laws must tend toward God
and godliness.
frequenting of Alehouses, for the avoiding of drunkenness, is by good
consequent grounded upon the Scripture: also the law that forbids the
wearing of weapons, for the avoiding of bloodshed, and such like. So likewise
Ecclesiastical laws, helping forward toward the observation of the first and
second Table, although they bind not in particular, yet in the general; as
the place of Gods worship, the time, maintenance for the Ministers, silence in
the Church, with such like.

The Arrian heretics refused the word Some things are lawful and agreeable to
the Scriptures which are not simply expressed in the
(...), and denied Christ to be (...), that is, of the same substance with the
Father, because it was a word no where found in the Scriptures. But Athanasius
answers, that Etsi haec vox in Scripturis non rep^ritur, habere tamen ^am
sententiam quam Scripturae volunt: that is, Although the word it self be not
found in the Scriptures, yet it has that sense which the Scriptures do allow
of.

There are also other civil and Ecclesiastical orders, which do bind neither
generally nor simply, but accidentally, in respect of the contempt of
authority, and scandal that may ensue upon the breaking of order. Now the
weak conscience is in things indifferent most like to stumble, they wanting
express warrant from the Word, and he fears to enterprise any action without
warrant. In which cases, tender consciences Tender consciences must not be
racked
must be tendered rather then racked by authority. For, be the things never so
lawful in themselves, be they never so generally entertained in the judgment
and practice of others, yet they remain utterly unlawful to me, without such
information: for the Apostles command is, Let every man be fully persuaded Romans
14. 5.
in his mind. It stands therefore every Christian upon, to examine narrowly
all his actions, especially his divine and spiritual duties, yea surely to be
grounded in all matters concerning the worship of God.

Iam. 4. 12^
which is able to save and to destroy? Yea, either edicts authorizing and
commanding the laws of the Lawgiver, or constitutions circumstantiall and
indifferent, which may vary according to the variableness of times, places,
and dispositions of Churches.

The Apostles rule being ever observed, 1. Cor. 14. 4^. Ecclesiastical
constitutions must tend to order decency and edification, and remains as
variable.
namely, that they tend to order, decency and edificatio^. Besides, that al
such changeable constitutions be not urged as any part of Gods essential
worship, or as necessary to salvation, or equalized with the law of God;
neither may they by their multitude obscure the glory of Christ in his
ordinances: but such laws as are made unjustly, or command unlawful things,
do bind neither in general nor particular, neither in themselves nor
accidentally, and therefore cannot be of faith. Now the Church of Rome makes
Great difference betwixt the Church of Rome and the Church of England.
laws and ordains constitutions, not only Extrafidem without faith, but
also contrafidem, against faith, and to bind the conscience in pain of mortal
sin, laying grievous burdens upon men's shoulders, heavy to be borne.

And thus far in the third use, proceed we in order to the fourth.

Gods ministers must preach Gods word. 2. Tim. 4. 1. 2.
respect of the necessity thereof, all our actions being to be done of faith;
so also from the direction of the Apostle, who says to Timothy, Preach the
word. Nay we have the example of Christ, who preached Moses and the Prophets
himself. The Scribe demanding the way to life, Christ answers by
interrogation, What Luke ^^. ^6.
is written in the law, how read thou? Again, he entering into a Synagogue
at Nazareth upon the Sabbath (it being his Luke. 4. 17.
ordinary custom by the testimony of the Evangelist) and a book of the
Prophet Esaiah being delivered him, he opens the book, and finds it
written thus, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me,
that I should preach the Gospel to the poor, etc. The which he expounds and
applies, as plainly appears in the verses following: yea he urges it as a
duty upon the people for to hear Moses and the Prophets: They have Moses and
the Prophets, says he, Luke 16. 29.
let them hear them Now what made way for Antichrist, but leaving of the
Scriptures? From whence arises schism, heresy, together with gross
idolatry, The casting aside of the word is the high way to schism, heresy.
and gross Idolatry.
but from ignorance in the Scriptures? For opinion and sense may fail and
err, when faith rightly grounded upon the word cannot. What has caused so
many sects to spring up in the bosom of the Church, as Donatists, Familists,
Brownists, Anabaptists, but want of comparing Scripture with Scripture? When
men want indifferent ^ares and hearts, their affections rather inclining to
courses of security and liberty, and their judgments blinded through pride and
self-love, how soon, I say, are such seduced, drawn away and corrupted?
Therefore as it is a duty to search the Scriptures, they being the ground of
faith, and pillar of truth: so it behooves the Lords ambassadors to come to the
people, with, not Thus say I, but Thus says the Lord. For what wise man will
The word of God vpholdeth a ministers office and authority
credit every hearsay? or what subject will yield respect to such an one as
cou^terfeiteth the kings Ambassador, having neither his Majesty's Arms nor
Seal. I will not deny, but it is a blessed thing to teach Gods truth from a
sanctified spirit: for who is able to direct in that mystical doctrine of
regeneration so well as he that is regenerate himself? or what art is able to
describe and teach like experience? It was an infallible truth, and grounded
certenty, sufficiently persuading the wise men, that in Bethleem Mich. 5. 2.
Matthew 2. 9.
was borne Christ the king of the Jews, when the prophecy of the Prophets, and
the conducting star paralleled both, directing unto one and the same place.
As sure and credible will it be, when Gods sacred Spirit in us shall sympathise
with Gods word and his Spirit make a sweet harmony in his Ministers.
his revealed truth. But if sense preposterously fail without the guide of
faith, then beware of ship wrack, for Whatsoever is not of faith is sin.

We see then, as in a glass, the duty of all Gods ambassadors; for as we may
not preach our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, so may we not deliver a
parcel of the Scriptures, or diuulge them partially. The true treasure and
divine Oracles of the Almighty require faithfulness: for so ought stewards to
be found faithful. Cor. 4. 2.
Gods truth as it is, so it must be taught. The word of truth deserves true
division, The whole word of God must be taught.
as also right application, whereby the whole counsel of God may be revealed to
the Saints. For oftentimes the want of comparing Scripture with Scripture, and
distinguishing of times, produces an Ataxie or confusion in the Churches of
God. To instance in some particulars and lamentable presidents: The cauils and
innouations of that Anabaptisticall Sect, who say that the New Testament is
sufficient to salvation, therefore the Old unnecessary and unprofitable: and
they ground themselves upon these Scriptures, 2. Cor. 3. 6. and 14. Who 2. Cor.
3. 6. 14 16.
has made us able Ministers of the New Testament; not of the letter, but of
the Spirit: for the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life. Moses (say
they) had a covering, Anabaptists very proud and grossly ignorant.
which in Christ is taken away. But the Apostle says not, that Moses is taken
away, but the veil is taken away. For the Apostle speaks of the illumination
and conversion of the Jews to Christ, as appears in the sixteenth verse:
Nevertheless, when their hearts shall be turned to the Lord, the veil shall
be taken away. Indeed the shadows and ceremonies must needs be taken away,
when the substance is come: but Christ was not shadowed or typified in the
moral law, therefore that cannot utterly be taken away* Matt. 5. 17. 18.
for his coming was not to abolish it, but to fulfill it: therefore the Old
Testament is both necessary and profitable. Furthermore, what although the
Apostle teach, that the letter kills, but the There remains good use of the
moral law, both for repentance and life.
spirit gives life, does he thereby any thing else but show the difference
betwixt the Law and the Gospel? namely, that the one is able to do nothing
without the other* For the orga^ of the quickening Spirit cannot be properly
said to be the Law but the Gospel, since the Law has no power to regenerate,
but the Gospel; yet in regeneration and conversation, the Law has it work
and use, and therefore cannot be abolished.

Another ground they have in Matthew. 17. 5. Christ (say they) by the command
Matthew. 17. 5.
of the Father, is only to be heard: but, to hear Moses and the Prophets of
Christ, is to hear Christ. Besides, it is the command of the Son himself,
who was equal with the Father, They have Moses Luke 16. 39.
and the Prophets, let them hear them. Yea he tells the Jews, that If they
had believed John 5. 47.
Moses, they would have believed him, for he wrote of him. Again, was there
any opposition in the Spirit of Christ, which was both in Moses, and the
Prophets, 1. Pet. 1. 10. 11 The doctrine of Moses and the Prophets rightly
applied, very profitable.
and Christ? Of this salvation (says the Apostle) the Prophets have enquired
and searched, which prophesied of the grace that should come unto you.
Searching when or what time, the Spirit which testified before of Christ, which
was in them, should declare the sufferings that should come unto Christ, and
the glory that should follow. Yea the same Apostle affirms, that We have a
2. Pet. 1. 19.
most sure word of the Prophets. What lets then, but we may attend unto the
sound doctrine of Moses and the Prophets? Furthermore, the testimony of the
Apostle Paul is pregnant to this purpose, who avouches, That the whole 2. Tim.
3. 16. Corruption needs correction as well as instruction. Reproves
sometimes very needful.
Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, improve,
correct, and to instruct in righteousness: therefore the whole Scripture is
necessary, the Christian standing in need of it, either for ground of faith,
or rule of obedience, both in his general and particular calling.

Like unto these dreams, is the error of many Libertines, who ground upon
that saying in Jeremiah, After those days, Ierem. 31. 33.
says the Lord, I will put my Laws in the^ inward parts, and write them in
their hearts: as also upon that saying of the Apostle, Ye are our Epistle,
written, not with ink, 2. Cor. 3. 2. 3.
but with the Spirit of the living God. Although it be true, that the knowledge
of the Law may be written naturally in men's hearts, yet he commanded the same
to be written in two tables of stone. For, how does the Lord write this Law in
our hearts? How does he seal up unto us the covenant of our reconciliation and
regeneration by the finger of his The preaching of the word the conduit pipe to
convey grace into our hearts
Spirit, but by the doctrine of the Law and Gospel, preached, heard, written,
read, meditated? Or how could the Apostles call themselves the Preachers of the
New Testament, if the Gospel could not be preached? And in vain should Christ
bid us, Search the Scriptures. John 5. 39.


Furthermore, the Evangelists and Apostles call their doctrine, which was the
New Testament, a Scripture or Writing, as appears by that testimony of Luke,
who thought it meet to write Those Luke 1. 3.
things which he had diligently searched out: Luke 1. 3.
as also, John witnesses, who says, That these things are written that ye may
believe: John 20. 31.
And the Apostle Paul thought it necessary to write, as is plain in his
Epistles. Phil. 3. 1.
Thus we see that the men of God, and The Spirit of God in the hearts of his
people, and his word agree together.
Ministers of the Gospel, wrote by the Spirit the Gospel with ink: the
hearts of true believers sanctified by the Spirit through the preaching of the
Gospel, answering correspondently that word which was both written and
preached; as was evident among those Conuerts at Corinth, in whom was manifest
the power of the Gospel: the preaching of faith being the power of God to
salvation, to Romans 1. 16.
every one that does believe.

We see then by woeful experience, that Satan transforming himself into an It
is the work of Satan to draw men from Gods word, which is the ground of faith.
Angel of light, seeks to ground many a poor soul upon seeming shadows,
drawing them from the rock of refuge, and certenty, namely, Moses and the
Prophets, Evangelists and Apostles of Jesus Christ, who have written and spoken
as the Spirit directed and gave them utterance. Were not therefore the proud
Anabaptist fuller of conceit then judgment, he would never paraphrase the
sacred Scriptures in that manner as he does; as I have already showed, and will
further show in one instance. Christ says, Matthew 5. 34. Swear not at all:
therefore, Matthew. 5. 34.
says he, it is not lawful in any case to swear. Whereas the Lord (upon
necessity) has commended and commanded a lawful oath, warranting the same
both by example and precept, as appears in Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Thou shall fear the
Lord thy Deuteronomy. 6. 13.
God, and serve him, and shall swear by his Name. Yea, the Apostle testifies,
upon necessity an oath to be a very good thing: An oath (says he) for
confirmation Hebr. 6. 16.
is the end of all strife. Thus by conceited exposition would this sect of
people bring Christ to abrogate his Fathers law, and derogate from his Fathers
glory; A proud spirit unfit to expound the Scripture.
whereas our Savior means nothing less: for his purpose is nothing else but
to expound the Law, and deliver it from the gross corruptions and deprauations
He that willingly wresteth the Scripture, neither respects God nor Christ.
of the Scribes and Pharisees. For they taught, that the third commandment was
to be understood of perjury only, or false swearing: therefore our Savior
shows, that in this commandment is forbidden, not only perjury and false
swearing by the Name of God, but also all rash and ordinary swearing in our
common talk, whether by the Name of God, or any of his creatures; because
swearing amiss by them redoundeth to his dishonor. He therefore here
forbids all needelesse and superfluous All needless swearing is much
forbidden in the Scripture.
oaths in our ordinary communication. And as these do err, not knowing nor
understanding the Scriptures, so do many others, as namely, the Carnal
cauiller, that joins himself with the public assemblies, partaking of the
same word and Sacraments with the Saints of God: But this man would have one
line to be sufficient unto salvation; for he finds it written in the
Scriptures, That John 3. 36. Natural men would have all, but they would do
nothing.
he which believes in the Son has everlasting life. But if this man read
forward, he shall see and find, That he which obeys not the Son shall not
see life. Such will like the doctrine of faith, but they cannot well brook the
doctrine of repentance. But, if they attend, or list to hear, they shall hear
Christ to be as rigorous as his Father, both in summoning all men Mark 1. 15.
Luke 13. 5.
to repent, as also in threatening woes against impenitents. The Apostles, as
they preach faith, so they preach sanctification Acts 2. 38.
and amendment of life: for it is the absolute will of God, that we should 1.
Thessal 43 1. Pet. 1. 15.
be holy as the Lord our God is holy. The whole word of the Lord therefore must
be delivered by the Ministers of the Gospel, that the whole courses of men's
lives may be guided by the rule of faith. Christ and his Apostles did not
always Romans 9. 10. 11
preach faith, but according to the dispositions of people and Churches, so was
their doctrine, dividing the word of truth aright. Amongst them of the
circumcision, the Apostle presses the doctrine of faith, but where the Gospel
was established, he unfolds further 2. Cor. 6. 34. Tit. 2. 1. 2. 1. Tim. 6.
17. 18.
the mystery of godliness, teaching other graces and gracious duties
necessary and appertaining to Christian life.

Here we see the wisdom of God, in scattering the Scriptures, not only for
the making his people more diligent in searching them, but also, that they may
The Brownist a wrester of holy Scripture in many things.
remain in his just judgment a stone to stumble at, even to such as are
disobedient and unbelieving. Furthermore, would the Familist and Separatist
take any pains in comparing Scripture with Scripture, they should find but
weak grounds for their indiscreet and ungodly proceedings. For although they
are bold and peremptory in alleging Scripture, yet if they were able to see
their pride and ignorance, they should find but a slippery groundwork to
uphold and maintain their wilful separation. The alleging of Scripture
literally and solely without comparison, will no more help, in some cases,
then bare sufferings without the cause, will help a man to be The devil
cunning in quoting Scripture. Psalm. 91. 11. Matthew. 4. 6.
a Christian. The devil, for his own defense, has alleged Scripture; he can
tell Christ it is written, That the Lord had given his Angels charge over him,
and with their hands they should lift him up, that at any time he dash not his
foot against a stone; therefore what if he cast himself down from the
pinnacle of the Temple? But the Lord Jesus knew, that although this Scripture
was truth, yet it was no warrant for him to subject himself to Christians must
not consent to every quoter of Scripture.
Satan's will, or enterprise such a needless action. And can we persuade our
selves that he labors not to train up as many as he can in such cunning
sophistry? will he leave any arrow in his quiver vnshot before he will be
conquered? When humane learning cannot serve, he Satan a cunning sophister
will not be afraid to urge divine Scripture. Woeful experience witnesses his
working upon the corruptions of corrupt professors, causing their pride,
ignorance and hypocrisy to end in Anabaptisme, Brownisme, and Apostacy. But
let us search some of their mainest grounds. The first place which I purpose
The ground of Separatists.
to show, is in the 1. Corinthians 5. 6. 7. 11. A little leaven does leaven the
1. Cor. 5. 6. 7. 11
whole lump; purge out therefore the old leaven. If any which is called a
brother be a fornicatour, or an idolater, or covetous, or a rayler, or
drunkard, or extortioner, with such an one eat not. But the Apostle says not,
Particulars will not always hold to maintain generals.
Eat not with any that is disobedient, but with a brother. There were many
that denied the resurrection; he commanded not these to be cast forth, neither
does he say, that when he shall come to them, he will cast all such forth as
have not repented of their fornication 2. Cor. 12. 21.
and wantonness, but bewail them. The person therefore that may not be eaten
with, is a brother, a Christian by name, one excommunicated: the end whereof
Our sharp dealing with others must be sugared with love unto them. 2 Thessalonians. 3.
14. 15.
was not to root him out, but to plant him in. For this must be done, that he
might be ashamed; neither was he to be accounted as an enemy, but admonished as
a brother.

The holy Fathers, presently after the primitive times, were troubled
themselves The Church ever troubled with schismatickes.
with such schismatic Donatists, as namely, Parmenian, and Cresconius with
others, who grounded themselves upon this Scripture, with such like. Unto whom
Augustine writes in this manner. Cum quisque fratrum. i. Christianorum intus
in Eccles^^ societate constitutorum in aliquo tali peccalo fueri^ deprehe^sus
vt Anathemate dign us habeatur, fiat hoc vbi periculum schismatis nullum est,
etc. August. cont. August. cont. Parm. lib. 3. cap. 3.


When any of the brethren, that is, of the Christians which have place within
in the unity of the Church, be taken in some such sin, that he may be counted
worthy to be excommunicate, let it be done where there is no danger of a
schism, This man, says he, Corripite non ad eradicandum sed ad corrigendum.
Cast out, that he being stricken through fear, may be healed through shame:
When seeing himself excommunicated of the whole Church, he cannot find a
multitude to be of his fellowship, with whom he may rejoice in his fin, and
insult over the good. We see here by the testimony of the Father, as also by
the prastise of the Apostle, that multitudes, may not be rejected, much less
whole Churches, as these Separatists dream, Lest while we go about to pluck
up Matthew. 13. 24.
the tares, we pluck up the wheat likewise.

Other Scriptures they ground upon, as these out of the Prophets Jeremiah. 23.
28. What has the chafe to do with the Ierem. 25. 28.
wheat? Also upon that in Esaiah 52. 11. Depart, depart, come out from thence,
touch Esaias. 52. 11.
no unclean things, come out from the midst thereof, and separate your
selves you that bear the vessels of the Lord. But when was this separation?
was it not when Babel was incurable and near unto destruction? Otherwise the
Prophets themselves, yea Christ and his Apostles sinned when they were in the
Temple with ungodly multitudes. Has not the chafe been ever The Church was
never without hypocrites.
with the wheat? Is there no chafe at Amsterdam? or has God no people but
there? Has there not been hypocrites in the Church? and who are worse, or how
shall they be winnowed before the separating Angel come with his The chafe
and the wheat must be together ^ntill the last day.
winnowing fan? The cause now of their separation is because we are Babilonish;
the Church of England (say they) is idolatrous and antichristian. Admit we were
so, which is a shameless slander, yet this is no ground for present and sudden
corporal separation. If these who were extraordinarily gifted having withal
the spirit of discerning, separated not, what ground has the Brounist?


The Jews and false teachers were superstitious enough, yet Paul remained
among them, until the Lord called him from thence to go preach unto them of
the uncircumcision. And so did Christ. For what does the Lord require more then
a disioyning in affection and fellowship? Besides, if all humane constitutions
be simply sins, then were all primitive and reformed Churches idolatrous and
unclean, and the Apostles themselves guilty of sin for communicating with
such. Nay further, who may communicate with the Church of England, although he
digress from the same order himself? For we may not sit at 1. Cor. 8. 10.
chap. 10. 21.
the Idols table. Therefore until they prove us Babilonish, and besides all
that, to be incurable, their pretended grounds shall end in meeare conceits,
for Whatsoever is not of faith is sin.

The last sort or sect that I purpose to meddle with, who would feign seek a
staff from Scripture to hold themselves by, is the Papist. One of their
mainest grounds is in the Epstile of James 2. 24. Ye see then, how that of
works a man is justified, Iam. 2. 24.
and not of faith only. Here they ground their second justification; for
Second justification a mere invention.
they would have him that is just, to be more justified, although comparisons
of greater and lesser do not make a several kind, but declare an increase in
the same kind of justification, and not a new kind of justification. Now whereas
the Apostles Paul and James may seem to contradict and oppose themselves, the
one proving so often in his Epistles, that we are justified by faith, without
the works Romans 4. 3. Galat. 3. 6.
of the Law: alleging the example of Abraham for justification by faith, whom
the Apostle James here uses for justification by works. We must therefore
examine and scanne sundry necessary questions for the reconciling of them, as
also for the removing the adversary from off his blind ground in this weighty
point.

The first question to be scanned is, what faith the Apostle James means or
speaks of in this place, the which he makes so insufficient; whether
historical, miraculous, hypocritical, or lively and operative. It is true
that the Apostle Paul speaks of the last, as appears, Gal. 5. 5. 6.
Galathians 5. 5. 6. Circumcision avails nothing nor uncircumcision, but
faith which works by love. But the Apostle James No opposition between the
Apostles. I am. 2. 19. Great difference betwixt a living faith and a dead faith.
speaks of the first, namely, historical, as appears in the 19. verse of
this second chapter; which he calls the faith of devils. So then they both
speak the truth, the one that we are justified by faith only without works,
speaking of a lively faith; the other, that we are not justified by faith
only, speaking of a dead barren, and counterfeit faith.

The second question to be scanned is, what justification the Apostle James
means; for there is a twofold justification, as there are sundry sorts of
faith. First therefore we are justified before God of which justification the
Prophet David speaks, Psa. 32. 1. 2. Blessed is that Romans 43. Psalm. 32. 1. 2.
man unto whom the Lord imputes not his sin. Of which righteousness and
justification the Apostle Paul speaks, who says, That Abraham believed, and
it was Gods promise a sufficient ground for justifying faith.
counted unto him for righteousness. The other justification is before men,
which we have by works, they being as evidences that we are righteous before
God. Of this justification does the Apost James speak: for Abraham's offering
up of his son could not be the cause of his righteousness before God; for
his Romans 4. 18.
faith in the promise was reckoned unto him for righteousness thirty years
before he offered up his son. Therefore before God was his faith not made
perfect through works, but before men. Besides, we read of but few works
that the thief on the cross wrought. Yet Luke 23. 42. 43.
through faith was he justified, and the heavenly paradise promised unto him.

The third question to be scanned is, what works the Apostle James means,
whether works going before or after faith. It is certain that the Apostle
Paul speaks of works going before faith, which he denies to be able to
justify us, as appears, Galath. 5. 2. 3. 4. Behold I Paul say unto you, that
if ye be circumcised, Gal. 5. 23. 4.
Christ shall profit you nothing: for I testify again to every man which is
circumcised that he is bound to keep the whole Law. Ye are abolished from
Christ, whosoever are justified by the Law, ye are fallen from grace. But Saint
James speaks of works which follow faith, as appears in the 18. verse,
James 2. 18. In nature causes of things go before their effects.
where he says thus, Show me thy faith out of thy works, and I will show thee
my faith by my works. Besides, the author to the Hebrews declares that
Abraham's obedience and sacrifice was a work following faith, for he says,
That by faith Hebr. 11. 17.
Abraham offered up his son Isaacke. Works then that follow Justification
cannot be the causes thereof; wherefore the Apostle James must needs speak of
Justification before men, and not before God.

The fourth question to be scanned, is touching the persons with whom they have
to deal; a distinction is very apparent. Romans 103.
The Apostle Paul was to deal with pharisaicall hypocrites, and Jewish
teachers, who held and taught, that unless they observed the law of Moses,
they could not be saved. But the Apostle James was to deal with carnal
libertines and Epicure-like professors, who boasted of a barren faith, and
neglected to bring forth the fruits of righteousness. Many there were that
upon the preaching of faith, gave liberty to the flesh, and thereby became the
servants of corruption, as the Apostle Peter witnesses, 2. Pet. 2. 18. 19
therefore there must needs be necessity of their several doctrine, and no
opposition in it: the one being to deal with such as too much preferred
works: the other being to deal with such as too much neglected them. From
whose examples People of different qualities must have different doctrine
preached unto them.
the Ministers of the Gospel may learn, that one kind of doctrine cannot be
necessary at all times, in all places, and to all persons; therefore must they
take heed to their flocks, wisely and perfectly to guide by the rule of
faith, in the life of life: for Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

Knowledge very necessary to the life of faith. Christians may make some use
of Satan, for he knows much and labors much. Pro. 8. 10. 11.
for where there is blindness in the judgment, there cannot be but sin in the
practice. Therefore search we for knowledge as for hid treasures; let us make
choice of wisdom before gold, and prefer it before pearls. But for our
better proceeding, consider we of some motives and special inducements.

The first is, the necessity of knowledge. Our grand enemy the Devil is
subtle, and well practiced in our manifold corruptions: yea he understands
historically the Scriptures, he rages in these last and worst days: insomuch,
that although he cannot hinder many from profession, yet he keeps many from
saving knowledge, driving men into extremes, conceits, and base absurdities.
Pray we therefore earnestly for a sanctified understanding.

Secondly, knowledge is the ground Men that will believe God must know God. To.
10. 17. 18 19 Acts 8. 30. 37.
of faith; therefore little knowledge, little faith; no knowledge, no faith:
for, How can we believe in him, of whom we have not heard? When Philip had made
known Christ unto the Eunuch, he believed, and was baptized. Although there
may be knowledge where there is not saving faith, yet there can never be saving
faith without knowledge. He therefore that would bring much glory to God, must
labor for much knowledge: both to be acquainted with the will of God, as also
the ways of sin and deceits He that would forsake sin and Satan must learn
to know the^.
of corruption. He that would overcome the enemy, must seek to know what way
the enemy comes, and how he lays his baits and snares. So there can be no
ouercomming of sin and Satan, unless we be acquainted with their stratagems.

Thirdly, a life without knowledge, is a life without faith; and a life without
faith, is a life without God. Christ says, that he knows his sheep, and is
known John 10. 14. John 13. 17.
of them: so then, no knowing of Christ, no sheep of Christ's. If ye know these
things (says he to his Disciples) blessed are ye if ye do them: as if he
should have said otherwise, If ye do not know these Knowledge is part of gods
image resident in his children.
things, ye can never do them. Would we then differ from Pagans and senseless
creatures, and withal, do the will of God? Let us seek for knowledge, for,
Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

Fourthly, good meanings will not serve the turn, the vain trustings of
ignorant persons, are both barbarous and dangerous. He that depends upon his
good meaning, shall be guilty Good meanings without good actions can neither
please God, nor bring peace of conscience.
both of sins of commission and omission. What ground then can such have of
their salvation?

Fifthly, no assurance nor sound comfort without knowledge: for there can be no
applying of the promises without faith; and faith there cannot be without
knowledge. The consciences of the servants of God will oftentimes witness the
same; when they practice things they doubt of, what joy or peace have they? For
when their faith cannot truly apply, their stay and comfort ceasseth, because
nothing sooner bereaueth the child of Grace seeks to do Gods will according
to his will.
God of his comfort, then when he finds that he has not done Gods will
according to his will. Therefore, for the attaining of this excellent grace, I
will lay down some special means.

First, labor for an humbled and dejected Means for the getting of knowledge.
spirit; for, The Lord will teach the humble his ways, Psalm. 25. 9. Secondly,
find out thy wants by an able Ministry, and lay them open before the Lord by
earnest prayer; for, The hungry the Luke 1. 53.
Lord fills with good things, but the rich he sends away empty. Thirdly,
frequent the house of God, and the society of his people; for, such as do his
will, are most like to know his will. Fourthly, be full of heavenly
meditations, labor to serve the Lord in all thy actions. David had got more
wisdom then his teachers by Psalm. 119. 99. 100.
this means. Fifthly, practice that knowledge which the Lord already has
bestowed upon thee: examine how thou have applied every Sabbath days work;
For, no doubt, if thou live under an able Ministry, thou may be searching
thy failings, either in thy general or particular calling, or both. The reason
why He that would know much must practice much.
men know little, is because they practice little. The husbandman tilleth no
more ground then he means to sow; even so men little respect that which they
purpose not to do: it is sin therefore and disobedience that keeps men in
blindness in these Sunshine days of the Gospel.

Sixthly, remember the duty of thanksgiving, Thanks for blessings are always
increased.
both for thy knowledge, and for the means of knowledge; let it appear that
thou prizest it at an high rate by remembering the donor. The gift of a penny
deserves thanks of him that is in need of it, therefore a great gift must
needs deserve and require great thanks.

Seuently impart thy gift to others; lay He that sows shall reap by Gods
blessing more then he sows.
it not up in a napkin. The mother that bids the child give his brother
something of that she gave him, if he do not, she tells him that she will
give him no more: even so is it just with God, that such as have been churlish
and negligent this way, should not only be kept without more, but likewise
deprived of the comfort and benefit of that which they have.

Grounded actions well done shall have a reward
misery, but grounded actions cannot but end in comfort: For he is faithful
that has promised.

The remarkable notes of such faithful Evangelical works are cheerful
sound and constant.
workers are these; first, his service is willing and ready service, for he
loves his God, and believes the promises. Secondly, it is ordinarily sound
both for matter, manner, and end: but if there be a failing, there is sorrow
and repentance, when it is seen; as also a more strict examination of his
actions for time to come. Thirdly, it is constant; the more faith the more
fruit. For as he labors daily for knowledge, so both the continuance and
increase thereof must needs produce a constant and enlarged practice. Thus as
he labors for the weldoing of that which he does, so his care is to do much;
not only for the answering of his gifts and graces received, but also for the
accomplishing of that universal obedience which is required of him; for
Whatsoever is not of faith is sin.

FINIS.

