A Display of duty, dect with sage sayings, pythie sentences, and proper
similies: Pleasant to read, delightful to hear, and profitable to practice,
By L. Wright.

Good nurture leads the way unto virtue, and discreet behavior plaineth the
path to felicity. LONDON Printed by John Wolf. 1589.

To the Right worshipful, most valiant, and famous, Thomas Candish Esquier: L.
Wright wishes all happiness in this life, and in the world to come, to joy
with Christ in felicity for ever.
Having long desired (as duty binds me Right worshipful) to make known my
grateful mind, not only to the Right worshipful your good father of late
memory (who during his natural life was to his Prince a faithful, true, and
loyal subject: to his country, a righteous and favorable justice: to the
Gospel of Christ a godly and zealous professor: to all good men, a gentle and
loving benefactor: and to me a sure and special friend) but also to your
self, whose wonted courtesies, and friendly countenance, even from your
childhood, has moved me (for want of better) to dedicate unto your worship
this little book: as a true token and testimony of the faithful and hearty
good will, I have always borne to you and your house and shall during life:
containing certain necessary rules, touching both Christian duty and civil
courtesy, profitable to many, delightful to some, and offensive to none: but
curious Momus, disdainefull Zoilus, and fleering Sycophant whelps, who with the
blear-eyed Owl, being blinded with malice, blush not to accuse even the bright
sunshine in others, making every straw a stumbling block, euere molehill, a
mountain, and every virtue a vanity: beseeching your worship to except it as
willingly as I offer it faithfully. Thus resting with this persuasion, that the
noble mind is always more courteous, to wink at a fault and take things in
good part, than the baser sort, I humbly take my leave.

To the courteous Reader.
IT is no great wonder though all the world be infected with vice, set upon
vanity, and grown out of order (gentle Reader) seeing Democritus has his
mansion in the market, Democritus did always laugh and Heraclitus weep at the
follies of men.
and his chair at every corner of the street: whose laughter at follyes, does
so greatly encourage, strengthen, and confirm the riotous excess, and
intolerable outrage of witless youths, wilful wildheads, and idle
unthrifts in this our careless age: as the continual tears of sorrowful
Heraclitus, lamenting their misery, can small prevail to reform or amend
them: who much like river trouts, always swimming against the stream, or
Kestrels flying against the wind, despise their duty, reject the rule of
reason, and condemn the wholesome doctrine of their elders, of whom they might
at the first hand have bought counsel good cheap, till afterward being
beaten with the sharp twigs of their own rod, and plagued with the rash
conceits of their own brain, are constrained to buy wit with woe, Ruin is
the end of voluptuous appetite
and haddiwist at an unreasonable price. Experience, in whose schole my self
have bin too long a learner, in sowing the wilful seeds of fantasy, and
reaping the witless fruits of folly, till repentance had taught me, (though
too late) to leave and loath my former liked life: and with patience perforce,
Tim^ past may soone^ be repeated than recalled.
to bear the penance of my tender years misspent. Whereupon as one always more
willing than able to profit my Country, and pleasure my friends: I have taken
o^casion to pen this little book, containing both profitable rules for the
instruction of youth, and sound reason for conformation of age: presuming, that
forasmuch as my chief intent and purpose (what in me lies) is to beat down
vice, and further unto virtue: to help all, and hurt none: that the best sort
in charity will take my simple meaning in good part, as I have always
desired: and as for the evil disposed, who neither have grace to do well
themselves, Prou. 10.32.
nor honesty to speak well of others: I will patiently bear their malice
which I never deserved.

Vale in Christo. L. W.

Want of Government in age, has bred want of duty in youth.
AS youth by law of Nature, Colos. 3.20 Ephe. 6.1, 2.^ 1. Pet. 5.5 Prou. 6.13.
are bound to honor, reverence, and obey their ancients: whose steps, either
in good or evil: they are most apt and ready to imitate: so are elders bound
in duty and conscience, by doctrine, counsel, and example of life, to train
up youth in virtue and honesty. The fattest soil without husbandry, is soon
ouergrowen with weeds: and the aptest wits without government soon corrupt
with vice. An untamed horse (says Solomon) will be hard: and a wilful child
will be wanton. Prou. 13.18.24.
The occasions for youth to yield unto vices are many: their blood does
naturally stir them, Eccle. 30.8.9.
their flesh does provoke them, sensuality does allure them, the world does
blind them, and Satan himself does tempt them. And as it is natural in the
younger sort to commit follies, Deuteronomy. 21.11.12
so is it dutiful in the elder to correct and amend them. Parents by nature,
masters by charge, Eccle. 30.10.11.
neighbors of common courtesy, and all men of humanity. He that spares the
rod (says the wise man) hates his son: Hebr. 12.8. Prou. 23.11.12.
but who so loves him does hold him ever in nurture. Give him no liberty in
his youth, Prou. 13.18.24.
nor excuse not his folly (says Jesus Syrach) bow down his neck while he is
young, Eccle. 3^.11.12
least he wax stubborn and give no more force of thee. What manner of children
shall be borne, lies not in man's power: but to bring them unto goodness by
virtuous education, that lies in man's power: and therefore God does impute the
wickedness of the children, to the negligence of the parents: so that look
how many vices the father has suffered in his child in youth (if with Heli he
break not his neck before) so many sorrows shall afflict him self as a dew
punishment in age. 1. Kings. 4.^^


Such was the laws in times past, that if any dishonest or unseemly thing
chanced to be committed, in the presence of an Elder without reprehension, he
was counted an enemy to the common wealth, and his negligence sore punished.

Cicero, making an oration against Salust, said thus unto his son, though
thy father had never done more evil (quoth he) yet did he greatly injury the
common wealth in leaving such a son as thou art. By Moses law, that stubborn
and disobedient son, that would not harken to the voice of his Parents, was
brought forth and accused before the Elders, Deuteronomy. 21.11.12.
and stoned unto death. By the statutes of Rome called Falsidia: the first
offense in the child was pardoned, the second sore punished, and for the third
he was banished.

Then was youth kept in order, obedience, and duty, and made more account of
their fathers blessing, then their grandfathers inheritance. The blessing of
the father (says Jesus Sirach) vpholdes the house of the son, Eccle. 3.2.5.8.
but his curse brings vengeance, poverty, and destruction. But such is the
misery of our time, that Elders for the most part, are so greatly infected
with all manner of wickedness, Hell may lament and heaven rejoice when old men
cease to be covetous.
especially with such an unreasonable rage of covetousness, multiplying of
riches, and increasing of patrimony, accounting an ounce of dignity more
worth than a pound of honesty: disiring rather to live without virtue, than
dye without money: having more regard to the swimming of their sons, then
the sinking of their souls: and commonly the wisest men the fondest fathers,
Their heads dec^ with gray hairs, and their hearts infect with wickedness.
that when for very age, not only the pleasures of this life, but also life it
self, is ready to shake hands, and bid them adieu. Yea if the graves could
speak, they would call the^ and say, it were high time to depart this life,
and come dwell in them, Where elders are dissolute and (...) gravity, there
youth are sh^melesse and past grace
and yet in the whole race of their former years, have left to their
posterity no example of any goodness, but rather of vice and infamy: whereby
our country is grown rich in treasure, but poor in virtue. It may aptly be
said unto England now, as Marcus Aurelius said once to Rome. Oh Rome (says
he) I weep not to see thy houses decayed, nor thy streets lie vnpaued, nor
thy timber consumed: but I weep to see thee so void of wise fathers, obedient
children, and good virtuous people. It is commonly seen where riches are
honored, Psalm. 5^.6. Luke. 12.2^. Psalm. 52.7.
there virtue is despised: for great riches cloketh vices, and carries light
heads into presumption: and therefore as parents abound in wealth, so children
abound in wickedness: such as be left rich by their fathers, will become often
richlesse by their own will, and such as have liberty in youth to live as
they list, want list in age to live as they should.

Age no doubt is an honorable thing, notwithstanding, Wisd. 4.^. Eccl. 25.6, 7.^
except their wisdom, knowledge, and experience of virtue be conformable to
their ancient years: so as after the flowers of youth, their fruits of good
living may appear to the example of those that follow: they deserve not that
reverent title and estimation due to their calling. Whose wilful negligence in
not doing to youth that in power they might, and in duty they ought, has bred
such contempt to cast off the yoke of obedience, and dishonor them in age. We
daily see the miserable father with great travail, careful studies, and
broken sleeps, Job. 21. Psalm. 73. ^ Iere. 12. ^
to scrape and heap together what possible he can to honor his child: who
having his purse full of money, and his head full of folly: consumes it in
vice, royat, and prodigality, to the fathers infamy: and so by Gods justice,
the prodigal son does scorn the careful sighs of his covetous father:
whereby the proverb is verefied, that riches got with craft, is commonly lost
with shame.

And thus the negligence of age and folly of youth, 1. Kings. ^. 1. Kings. ^.^
21.24.
breeds in the end a double woe to both: the one ending in sorrowful grief,
the other in lamentable misery. Prou. 5.11, 12


A dutiful son following the honest steps of a good virtuous father, the
same God that blessed the one, Young men should study to live, and old men to
di^
will prosper the other: but being inclined unto vice and naughtiness, his
fathers gift is rather a mean to hasten his destruction, Eccle. 5.9.
then help to prolong him.

How much are children bound,
Their parents for to love:
Which unto virtuous ground,
Their pregnant wits do move.
So that in youth they get,
The treasures that shall stay:
When fortunes slitting net,
With waves will wear away.
The right steps unto learning, are thus orderly lincked together: first
aptness by nature, secondly love of learning, thirdly, observing of right
order: and fourthly a constant mind without new fanglenesse.

Aptness, knowledge, and use in time brings perfection in all things. Where
nature is toward, let nurture help forward.
The first is the gift of nature, the second comes by learning and study,
and the third, by diligent practice.

A virtuous age, asks a diligent youth.
WHere Lady virtue is imbrased, she is courtuous, gentle, and easy to be
entreated: a sure professed friend to all such as willingly desire, Where youth
is void of exercise, there age is void of honesty. No fruits in harvest,
without blossoms in spring. Dulcia non meruit qui non gustauit (...).
imitate, and use her: whose property is to favor and follow: not the
stubborn, but the obedient: not the fickle, but the fixed: nor the idle, but
the diligent. Look where she is esteemed, there diligence in youth is always
allowed: no treasure without travail: no gain without pain, nor learning
without labor. And therefore he is likened to a tree, having sweet fruit, but
a sower root: he that will carry a Bull with Milo, must carry him a calfe
also: and he that will have hearts ease, must needs have some arse-swart
withal hearts ease. Our elders did very aptly compare time to a man with a
bauld head, saving a lock of hair before, to signify that if he be once
past, he can not be catched hold upon, or pulled back again: having also a
pair of wings to signify his speed, and swiftness away, and with a sith in
his hand like a mower fetching his stroke, in token that he is never idle, but
always working. A diligent youth brings forth a learned age, a joyful
life, and a happy death: but experience has taught me, and reason bears
witness, that to counterfeit virtue, and seem learned, when planting time is
past, except great pains, it brings small profit: but to be virtuous and
learned in deed, craves labor at the first, and yields fruit with pleasure
at the last.

Of Idleness.
Idleness is called the mother of ignorance, the nurse of vice, the pillow of
Satan, the image of death, and ground of all mischief: it makes heavy
hands, lumpish legs, beastly bellyes, drowsy pates, and witless wills.

The fowls of the air were made to fly, the fishes of the sea to swim, the
beasts of the field to travail, and man to labor. As soon as Adam was
created, to avoid idleness: he was set to dress the garden. Genesis 3.
After his fall it was said unto him: in the sweat of thy face shall thou
eat thy bread. Noah planted a vineyard: Jacob, Moses, and David kept sheep.
Prou. 31. Prou. 28.
The virtuous woman in the Proverbs, eat not her bread with idleness, she
was up early and late, laboring gladly with her hands, she occupied wool and
flax, laid hold upon the distaffe, and put her fingers to the spindle. In the
common wealth of Israel, every degree had his duty and office appointed, and
no idle state allowed. For idleness, the Lord rained down fire and brimstone
upon Sodom and Gomor. Ezech. 1^. ^
In the primitive Church it was sore punished. Amongst the ancient Romans no
man was suffered to walk in the streets without the tool in his hand,
whereby he got his living: and if any man's lands were left vnplowed or
husbanded according to the custom of the country, Aulus Gelius lib. 3. cap. 2.
it was by law confiscat. The Egyptians were severally examined once a year,
how they lived and spent their time: and being found idle, were punished with
death. The Indians so greatly detest idleness at this day, that every family
are straightly examined before dynner: and only those which have deserved it by
labor, suffered to eat: and the rest constrained to fast. Prou. 28. Prou.
10.4.
He that tilleth his land (says Solomon) shall have plenty of bread: but he
that follows idleness shall have poverty. He that will not labor (says
the Apostle) let him not eat. 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.


Every creature under heaven puts man in mind to eschew idleness, and
labor for their living: the Be in gathering her honny, the poor fly in
providing her sustenance in an old hollow reed: the dormouse in hurding up
victuals for himself and his aged parents: the Emmet in toyling all summer to
make merry in winter: Prou. 30. d
the spider in weauing his nets to catch his pray: the Cony, in digging his
house to dwell in: the trees, in yielding their yearly fruits: the waters, in
ebbing and flowing: and the Sun, Moon, and stars, in continual moving.
The horse yeeldes his back to the burden: the ox his strength to labor: and
the sheep his fleese for cloth. But he that spendes his time in idleness,
without travail of body or exercise of mind: is to his enemies a mocking
stock: to his friends a shame: and to the common wealth a burden: and
therefore unworthy to live upon the earth.

Thus practice brings experience,
Experience knowledge gains:
Where idleness both evil conceits,
And loves to take no pains.
Then toil in youth whilst health does last,
And rest in age when strength is past.
Art, fortitude and civility, are the right notes of true gentilitie.
AS a living creature endewed with reason, having aptness by nature to speak,
laugh, and go upright, is called vir, a man, of this word virtus. Vir of virtus.
Even so a courteous, sociable, and well disposed mind, planted in a superior
degree, where wisdom and policy is joined with a valiant courage, makes him
generosus, or nobilis: which comes of nosco, to know: signifying a man in
knowledge, valor, and civility, notable and famous. Socrates being asked what
is gentilitie? Answered, Animi corporisque temperantia. Aristotle thought him a
right Gentleman, who esteemed it most glorious to give: and a stain to his
honor to take. Plato calls him a gentleman who is adorned, not with others,
but his own virtues.

It is required in a Gentleman, Prou. 15.34.35.36.
to be in life and conversation, well governed: disdayning with a valiant mind
to become subject to vice, or infected with villainous manners: to be just and
faithful of promise: Job. 1.11.
patient in suffering wrongs: and apt to pardon injuries without revenge: mild
and reverend in countenance: courteous and gentle in speech: and sober and
civil in behavior.

To his superiors, humble and lowly as a servant: Romans 13.^
to his elders, obedient and loving as a son: to his equals, familier and
tractable as a brother: and to his inferiors, Eccle. 4.5.6.7 Acts. 10.1 ^
charitable and friendly as a father. Remembering that as the wild Heart, is made
tame by watching: the stubborn Ass by beating: and the courragious horse by
feeding. So our countremen of England, being a people, though bound by law, yet
free by nature: are more apt to yield obedience and duty, for love of virtue,
then fear of punishment. And more easily governed by friendly courtesy: then
forceable cruelty.

The honorable title due unto virtue, is of many desired, but of few deserved:
for as that small number endewed with honest nature and civil disposition,
repose their chief pleasure and delight in learning and knowledge: so the
greatest number of all degrees, do set their whole felicity in wealth and
worldly vanity: to whom virtue seems as tedious, as to good men vice is
irksome.

To speak of valor, to the faint hearted: of charity, to the unmerciful: of
courtesy, to the churlish: or of wisdom, to the foolish: is much like, as
the telling of a tale unto one that is heavy a sleep: Eccle. 37. Eccle. 22.
who being awaked, asks what is the matter. Scarlet has no color, to him
that sees it not: the Emerald is of small price, to him yt knows it not: and
arts of little account, to those that have the^ not. Notwithstanding though
pearls cast before swyne, find but swynish entertainment: yet of the
goldsmyth, they are esteemed in their kind, most dear and precious. So in the
judgment of the wise, no riches comparable to a virtuous mind, endewed with
good nature: no treasure to a well ordered life, furnished with good learning:
nor poverty to ignorance, vice, and infamy. He that knows not that he ought
to know (says the Philosopher) is like a beast amongst men: he yt knows no
more then is needful for himself, is counted a man amongst beasts: but he
that knows that is needful to be known, seems rather a God amongst men.
Exodus 4.24. Psalm. 82.6.


It appears that in times past, learning was proper to the ancient race of
Gentlemen only: who changing their trapt Mules, into bard horses: sylken
cotes, into arming corslets: golden hats, into steeled helmets: Uenus lutes,
into Marces trumpes: and dancing in chambers, into marching in the field: did
valiantly win their arms by force of lance, push of pike, and dint of sword:
having both their bodies practiced with marshall might, to conquer in war:
Being waited upon by three dogs, Folly, Fancy, and Flattery.
and their minds furnished with arts and policy, to govern in peace. But
through the careless negligence of their posterity, spending their time, and
consuming their patrimony in idleness, riot, and sensuality: yielding occasion
for their enemies to laugh at their folly: their friends, to lament their
misery: and those that honored their ancesters for their virtues, to abhor
them for their vanity: it is now left for a pray to the meaner sort. Amongst
whom, though some be found in disposition and behavior, Prou* 18.1^. Esaias.
32.8.
more charitable, honest, and virtuous, (than many) by birth of ancient
parentage. Yet the right nature and condition, of a courteous civil Gentleman,
is seeldome found in a hase soil. Whereby it comes to pass, that the natural
impes of civil courtesy: in whose predecessors, the right image of honor and
virtue, did shine: fall daily in subjection, to a sort of churlish Nabals, and
greedy covetous money mongers: whom blind fortune, (by the misery and spoil of
others) has newly advanced, from Cart unto Court: smelling neither of
cheualry, nor almost of humanity: but rather like greedy Kytes, seeking
continually to pray upon simple innocent doves: or Demosthenes hungry flees,
that pykt the poor gaulled Ass to the hard bones. Whose manners are much like
Alexanders horse called Bucephilus, that being vnharnessed, would gently suffer
his keeper to ride him: but feeling himself once furnished, with princely
saddle, golden bosses, and costly trappers: Prou. 15.27. Prou. 18.13.
would proudly praunce, snuff, and snort, in great disdain: suffering no man
come near him, but the king himself.

In whom it plainly appears: that as a leaden sword in a golden sheath: a
hogs snout with a golden ring: a scabd sheep, in a golden fleece: or a
ravenous wolf in a Lions skyn. Such is a crabbed and peevish condition,
furnished with arts, titles, and qualities of a Gentleman. Lib^ral sciences are
most meet for liberal men, and good arts for good natures.
And as for wealth without virtue, it is likened to a sword in a mad man's hand.
Yea the vilest devices, are the readiest means to come by wealth, which ought
not to look honor in the face. And personage or noble lynage, without wealth
or wisdom, Blood without sewet makes but lean^ puddings.
is compared to a tree flourishing with fair green leaves without fruit: or
a stately carved Image, without life: or a painted fire against a wall without
heat: it small prevails the Jews, to boast themselue^s to be Abraham's
children: John. 8.39.
being degenerate from the faith and manners of Abraham. It is better (says
Chrysostom) for the parents to boast of their virtuous son: Chrysostom upon
Matthew.
than the son to vaunt of his noble Parents. and therefor such as covet to
excel in honor, must labor to exceed in virtue: or else the higher their
calling is seated by fortune: the deeper will their fall be, overthrown by
their folly.

Finally, whosoever is a greedy covetous snudge in getting: Prou. 18.17.
a hard pinching nigard in spending: a crafty dissembling fox in dealing:
stern in countinance: churlish in speech, and hoggish in behavior: though he
were as personable in shape, as Absolon: as rich in possessions, as Cressus:
^say. 32.6.7.8
and descended from the blood of great Alexander: he is but a miserable
prowling carle, unworthy the name of a man: much less of a Gentleman.

A caveat to the covetous.
1. Tim. 6.10.
Covetousness is the root of all evil: the ground of all vice: and the
original cause of all mischief. Which in pain of eternal damnation: Exodus
2. c
is straightly forbidden of God himself. There is nothing worse (says Jesus
Syrach) then a covetous man: Eccle. 10.
who for his intolerable greediness is aptly compared to a gryping cormorant:
a devouring caterpiller: Esaias. 56.11.
a ravening wolf: a shameless dog that is never satisfied: and a noisome
hog, that is never profitable till he dye.

Whose ears in respect of any goodness, are as deaf as a door nail: his eyes
as blind as a beetle: his heart as hard as a flint stone: and his pouch as
greedy as hell mouth. And therefore in the common wealth of Israel, they had
a special regard to choose such men for Captains, Exodus 18.19.
Officers, and Governors: Deutr. 17. d
as feared God and hated covetousness. Yea it was not lawful for the Prince
himself, much less for a subject: to gather too much silver and gold. But in
this our miserable age: there is such greedy prowling for pelf: hurding of
money: racking of lands: abusing of law: preuie conueighing of corn, beife,
bakon, butter, cheese, and such other commodities, to feed the greedy
appetites of churlish Naball, uncharitable Dives, and their insatiable
companions: as the common wealth is almost brought to common beggerye. Again,
Esaias. 5.1, 14
such joining of house to house: ground to ground: farm to farm, and living
to living, to maintain their superfluity: as the meaner sort can not have to
aid necessity. Apoc. 22.12.
Yea if the Lord himself should not come quickly, and call them to account.
For bribing, gryping, wringing, plucking off the skin, Michea, 3.2
and grinding the very faces of his poor members: Esaias. 3.15.1^. Esaias. 5.
whose lives are made even a notamy of mysery: and a sea of bitterness: they
would shortly look to dwell upon the earth alone.

These only do prosper, flourish, Psalm. 73.13. Job. 21.
and devour the fat of the land. Their barnes are filled with grain: their
coffers stuffed with coin: their tables furnished with dainty dishes: and their
houses safe, from fear of the rod. They ly upon soft beds of Iuory: grope
their souls in rest: Amos. 6. Luke. 12.1^.20.
and eat their bread alone. Their children go forth in flocks, and lead the
dance: spending their time in riote, and vanity. They sit in the chair of
wilfulness, and speak what they list: whose conceits must stand for reason:
Abacuc. 1, ^
their might for right: and their liking for law. As the ruler will so says
the Judge, yt he may do him the like pleasure again. Michea. 7. ^


Thus have they devoured Jacob: taken away his portion by violence: Psalm. 79.7.
Michea, ^.1.5.6.
and laid waste his dwelling place. They gape upon him with disdainefull
countenance, as it were a ramping and roaring Lion: whose lamentable complaints
are come up unto the ears of ye Lord of hosts: Psalm. 22.13.
yea the very stones in the wall, cries out against it. And therefore* t^ the
conversion or confusion of all such pitilesse worldlings, thus says the Lord:
Esaias. 5. Abacuc. 2.1^.
Woe be unto them that couetously gather together evil gotten goods: Abacuc. ^.
that they may set up their nests on high, to escape from misfortune: they have
devised the very shame, and confusion of their own house.

I saw the Lord stand upon the altar (says the Prophet) and he said: Amos.
9.1.2.
smite ye door cheek, that the posts may shake withal: for their covetousness
shall fall upon their own heads. Go to now you rich worldings and Rams of the
flock, Iame^. 5. a
that live in pleasure and wantonness (says the Apostle) weep and howl for
the myseries that shall come upon you. 4. kings. 5.
Gehefie for covetousness, was plagued with leprosy: 1. kings. 25. Luke.
16.23.24.
Naball stricken to death: and Dives tormented in hell: where without speedy
repentance and restitution, all greedy prowlers shall shortly perish, and come
to a fearful end. Psalm. 73.


The duty of subjects to their Prince.
John. 19.11. Wisdom. 6. a Esaias. 49.25. Hebr. 13.17. 4. kings. 18.4.5.
THe civil Magistrate is a minister armed with laws and sword: appointed of
God, as a nurse to his Church: and a father to the commonwealth. To order,
rule, and govern the people committed to his charge: execute justice: and
keep outward discipline: as well in causes Ecclesiastical, 1. Cor. 14.40.
Prou. 21.1.
as temporal. Whose heart is in the hands of the Lord: to turn it (for the
benefit of the good, and punishment of the evil) which way as pleases him.
Unto whose authority, power, and government: every Christian subject is bound
in duty and conscience: Romans 13. a Prou. 20.2. 1. Pet. 2.17. 1. Tim. 2. a
Luke. 2. a
humbly to submit himself. Reverently to fear him as the roaring of a Lion:
thankfully to honor, and pray for him, as Gods Leuetenant upon earth: willingly
to yield all tributes, taxes, and duties unto him: and obediently to observe
and keep his laws, statutes, ordinances, and proceedings in all things: ( In
matters contrary to faith and salvation, ^ct^. 5.29. Daniel. 3.^.
expressly commanded in the sacred word, only excepted.) Yea though he were as
grievous a persecutor, as Saul king of Israel: as wicked an oppressor, ^ings.
24. Exodus 1. ^ere. 25.
as Pharao king of Egypt: or as cruel a tyrant as Nabugodonozer, king of
Babylon: much more being so merciful, virtuous, and godly a Prince, as good
Elizabeth Queen of England. Iere. 27. b Baruch. 1.6.2.15.
So God by the prophet does straightly command. Our Savior both by his
doctrine and example does plainly teach. And the holy Ghost by the Apostle
does vehemently exhort. Luke. 20.25 Mat. 17.27 Romans 13. a 1. Pet 2.13.1^
Submit your selves unto all the ordinance of man for the Lords sake (says
he) whether it be unto the king: as chief and supreme head, next under God: or
those that be appointed in office to govern under him.

Whosoever therefore resists the authority of the civil Magistrate:
resists not man, Romans 13.2. Exodus 16.7
but the ordinance of God himself, to his own damnation. He that provoke
his, sovereign unto anger (says Solomon) offends against his own soul.
Prou. 20.2.
Preach. 10.18
Yea he that shall but even think evil against the Lords anointed (says he)
the very bird of the air, with the fluttering of her wings, will bewray his
secret thoughts. The rebellious Israelites for resisting against Moses the
civil Magistrate: and Aron the high Priest: Numb. 11. Numb. 21
were some of them plagued with pestilence: some stoong with fiery serpents:
some consumed with fire from heaven: Numb. 16.
and some swallowed up in the bowels of the earth. And rather then the
obstinate, stubborn, and disobedient, should escape unpunished: even Satan
himself, the master, and captain of all traytorous rebels: 2. kings. 17. Mat.
27.5
would move him to be his own hangman: as Achetophell and Judas: the very
hair of his head (for want of other) would yield it self for a haltar to
strangle him: as Absolon and his partakers: 2. kings. 18.11.13.
and the trees of the field, offer their stretched out arms, as fit Iebbets to
confound him: as a member unworthy to live in a common wealth.

And here by the way, a question might arise, touching 3. sorts of people in
this land.

The first, are certain seditious preachers, possessed with proud erroneous
spirits, every one having a Church plot, 2. Tim. 3. a
or common wealth in his head: who under an hipocriticall show of holiness:
turning up the white of the eye: Mat. 6.5.7.
with deep groaning sighs, Luke. ^8.11.
in their long pharisaicall prayers to blind the multitude: presume to walk at
liberty, according to their own lusts, speaking perverse things, to draw
disciples after them: Acts. 20.30.
beating daily in the peoples heads, 2. Pet. 2.1.2
what possible they can, to conceive a loathing and misliking of her Majesty's
government and order of religion established.

The second, are certain of the inferior Magistrates put in trust as the rest
to execute the office of Justice. keep the people in due obedience to her
Majesty's proceedings: The small care in keeping, shows small conscience in
taking an oath.
and punish contemners of her laws. Who notwithstanding, upon a greedy covetous
desire to pray upon the spoil of church-liuings: do preuily under a color of
zeal, both favor, further, encourage, and maintain the faid seditious
Scismatikes: as fit instruments to serve their purpose: to ye great disturbance
of the church and disquiet of the common wealth.

The third, are a sort of fickle headed people: who having their ears itching
for novelties: 2. Tim. 4.3.
are apt and ready upon every light occasion, to cast off the yoke of
obedience: and give heed to those spirits of error: 1. Tim. 4.1.
getting them heaps of teacher^ after their own fantisies, without regard of
duty, either to Prince or laws.

Now the question is this. Whether these three sorts of privy whispering
murmurers, their conditions and manners rightly considered: may justly be taken
in the number of faithful, true, and loyal subjects: or rather more
dangerous enemies to ye state, then open professed Papists.

Certain moral rules, and profitable aduertisements touching civil
behavior, and government of life.
THe rules of civil government, requires a man to frame his manners apt and
meet for all honest company, 1. P^^. 2.17.
and society of men: as discreet amongst the wise: merry with those that be
merry: and mourn with those that mourn: Romans 12.1^.1^.
to yield sound reasons in grave matters: and pleasant conceits in light
trifles. Sobriety without sullomnesse is commendable: and mirth with modesty a
virtue delectable. A merry mind does commonly show a gentle nature: where a
sower grimme countenance, is a manifest sign of a curious teastie churl,
^arnard.
and disdainful hypocrite.

Humility and lowliness of mind, wins the favor of God: and gentle
speech and courteous behavior, the hearts of men.

To be silent of tongue, and se^ret of heart. Silence a^^ secrecy.
Nature has given unto man two ears, and but one tongue (says the
Philosopher) to teach him to hear much, and speak little. Pithagoras being
asked the best way for a rich fool to get estimation: let him wear costly
attire (quoth he) and speak little: for a fool holding his peace, seems to
be wise. Eccle. a 1. ^; Prou. 17.^9. Job. 13.^. Eccle. 27.6. Matthew. 1^.34.
Eccle. 5.14.15
The tree of the field is known by the fruits: and the thoughts of man's heart
by his words. Honor and worship is in a man's wise talking says Jesus Syrach:
but, the tongue of the indiscreet is his own destruction. Life and death are
in the instruments of the tongue (says Solomon) and he that can temper his
words with discretion, Prou. 21.23* Prou. 17.28. Prou. 18.21.
keeps his soul from troubles. Words spoken in due season are compared unto
apples of gold in a silver dish. Prou. 25.1^*


But better he speak not, when wisdom provoke not: Then wiseman he seem
not, when silence he keeps not.

To avoid the company of the wicked. For as bodies infected with contagious
diseases, are loathsome and odious: Prou. 24.1.
so minds corrupt with false doctrine, rude manners, and vicious living: are
most irksome and dangerous. Eccle. 13.1.^^
He that touches pitch (says Jesus Syrach) shall be defiled therewith: and he
that keeps company with the wicked, Nimium samiliaritas contemptum paret.
shall hardly escape without blemish, either in life or credit. And therefore
it was not lawful for the Israelites, to associate themselves with the
Cananites: Exodus 23.33.
least they should be infected with their manners. Abraham was commanded to
depart from Caldea: Lot and his daughters from Sodom: and the congregation of
God, Genesis 12. a Genesis 19.16. Numb. 16.27 2. Cor. 6.14. Eccle. 13.23.
from the tents of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram. What fellowship has light with
darkness: Christ with Baliall: or the faithful with an Infidel. The
Israelites dwelling in Sytim committed whordome with the daughters of Moab:
Numb. 25.1
And the heart of Solomon for all his wisdom, 3. kings. 11.4
by keeping company with heathen Idoloters: was turned away from the Lord.

Let common society be used in equality. Like with like do always best
agree: Eccle. 13.3.4.24.27.
for as the kettle with the pot: the Lamb with the Wolf: and the Ass with
the Lion. Such is the fellowship between the poor and the rich. Requital
amongst equals, is of common courtesy: but recompenee in unequals, enforced of
necessity. Show a child an apple and he will cry for it: but make thy
superiors privy to thy pleasures: and he will have it, or else make thee cry
for it.

Not dainty in diet, nor ryotous in expenses: but moderately to live within his
bounds. Omni nimiu^, vertitur in
To cut his coat according to his cloth: not with the prodigal to spend all:
nor with the covetous to keep all: but with the discreet to use all. He that
has little and spends much, is called a prodigal fool: he that has much
and spends little, a miserable carle: but he that can moderate his expenses
according to ability, is wise. Measure is called a merry mean: liberalite is
a virtue, Bacchus feasts are both lothsom and unwholesome.
consisting to spend: not as a man would, but as he may. A thin spare diet:
is most wholesome for health, and profitable for wealth. I like M. Tussers
alowa^ce.

Two dishes well dressed, and welcome withal,
Both pleases thy friend, and becomes thy hall.
Tusser.
Much spice is a thief, so is candle and fire,
Sweet sawse is as crafty, as ever was Friar.
By the laws of Licurgus. he that inue^te^ any new fashion in attire was
banished.
And as variety and excess in diet, do surfeit the body, and consumes the
wealth: so change of gorgious apparel shows pride without profit: and
commonly covers a thread bare purse. Attire most commendable, is neither
curious nor clownish: sumptuous nor costly: but sober and decent, as best
beseems his estate and calling.

Mistress Fortune, is said to be handmaide to Lady Virtue: who esteeming
more of simplicity with security, then pride without profit: In medio
consistit virtus.
is compared to a poor simple woman in ragged attire: as one despised of the
world: bearing a bridle in the one hand, to restrain vice: and certain
working tools in the other, as one always apt to labor. To avoid penury.
She has also a pair of wings: in toke^ that she flees unto the heavens. She
treads death under foot: to signify that she is immortal. And placed
between two extreme vices: as who should say, she always keeps the golden
mean. It is a true saying, better to live in low degree, then high disdain.
Hebr. 13.5. Prou. 12.28. 1. Tim. 6.6.
A quiet contented mind (says the wiseman) is more worth then great riches.
Every ounce of state asks a pound of gold: and every foot rising in
authority, increases an ell in necessity. The ambitious is hated, and the
base minded ouercrowed: Faelix qui didicit contentus viuere paruo.
but the mean estate resting under the cloak of obedience, within the reach of
his own hap: is always in most safety, and least danger. He that lives in
health, is well fed: he that is preserved from cold, well clothed: and he
that can live out of debt, Faelix qui nihil debet.
is rich and happy: his sleeps are sound: his conscience quiet: and his life
pleasant.

Where wilful race of witless brains,
Flanting in pride, to pass degree:
Bringing rich estate to great decay,
And lewd heads to great misery.
Envy follows Virtue.
What good men want by nature, they seek to supply by art: but the envious
wanting discretion, supplyeth it with malise. Let a man humble himself to the
proud, and he will not hurt him: keep no company with drunkerds, and they will
not infect him: ask nothing of a covetous man, and he will not harm him: but
the more he shall be esteemed of the best sort for honest life: civil
behavior: and virtuous qualities: the more he shall be persecuted with a
number of envious eyes. Only misery void of envy
For ielosie to beauty: adversity to prosperity: and envy unto virtue: are
so linked and joined together: that the one follows the other as the shadow
follows the body. And therefore that famous Philosopher Hermocrates: exhorted
his son to live so: he might be envied for his virtues.

Of the malicious backbiter.
THe Basaliske kills men a far off, by the sight of his eyes: and the
envious backbiter, by ye sting of his tongue. The serpent keeps his poison,
only to the hurt of others: but the spiteful backbiter, both to the hurt of
others, and destruction of his own soul. The Camelion can transform himself
into all colors save white: and the malicious backbiter, into all fashions
save honesty. Disdayning his superior, because he is not equal to him: his
equal because he is equal to him: and his inferiors, least he should be
equal to him. But commonly such evil surmising minds, backbiting mouths,
and slanderous tongues, are to none more noysom and dangerous, then themselves:
to whom it often happens, as it did to the viper, which greedily caught Paul by
the hand, intending to hurt him, fell her self into the fire and perished.
Acts. 28.3 4.5


The property of a faithful and fained friend.
FRiendship is the agreement of minds: the chief of moral virtues: called the
jewel of humanity. A true friend (says the Philosopher) is long sought for,
scarce to be found, and hard to be kept. Well is him that finds a faithful
friend (says Jesus Syrach) the weight of gold is not co^parable to the
goodness of his faith. Eccle. 6.13.
He is always willing and ready to comfort his friend in adversity: to help
him in necessity: to entreat and use him courteously: to bear his
infirmities patiently: and reprove his errors gently. Whose rebukes are much
like pepper, which is hot in the mouth, but wholesome at the heart: and he that
can not bear or take the rebukes of his friend in good part: is aptly compared
to a harp string, which being wrested in tune, does break and snappe a
sunder. Piping and harping makes a sweet sound (says the wise man) but the
tongue of a friend goes beyond them all. Eccle. 40.14
Many there be (says Solomon) that are called good doers: but where should one
find a true faithful man. Gold is tried by the touch stone: Prou. ^0.6.
A good Pilot in rage of tempest: Eccle. 12.8.9 Prou. 17.18. A cold comfort
that is wrapped in no remedy
A valiant Captain in time of war: and a true friend in necessity. A friend
unused is like a medicine vnministred: and a friend without friendship, like a
tree without fruit. As good a foe that hurts not, as a friend that helps not.

A fained dissembling friend, A fained friend.
is much like a serpent bred in Egypt, called a Crokedell. Whom when she
smyleth, poysoneth: and when she weepeth deuoureth. Or the Hiena, having the
voice of a man, speaking like a friend: and the mind of a Wolf, devouring
like a feend. Or the Panther, who with the sweetness of his breath, and
beauty of his coat: allureth such beasts within his compass, as he
intends to uncase: and pray upon their carcass. Or the flattering Sirens,
that sweetly sing the sailors wrack. Or the Foulers pipe, that pleasantly
plays the birds death. Or the Be, who carries honny in her mouth: and a
sting in her tail. Or the box tree: whose leaves are always green, but the
seeds poison. So his countenance is friendly, and his words pleasant: but his
intent dangerous, and his deeds unwholesome. Mel in ore, verba lactis: Eccle.
37.4.^
fell in cord, fraus in factis.

His fetch is to flatter, to catch what he can, Tusser.

His purpose obtained a fig for thee than.
In choosing a friend is chiefly to be observed: that as old wood is best to
burn: old horse to ride, old books to read, Eccle. 9.14
and old wine to drink: so are old friends always most trusty to use. And he
that rejects his kindred, and chooses friends of strangers: is much like him
who changes his leg of flesh, for a stilt of wood.

It is further to be noted, that where the persons are diverse in nature:
differing in manners: variable in conditions: or contrary in religion: their
friendship can not possible long continue.

Again touching the natural inclination of men: he that is light and toyesh
in youth: proves often teastie and waspish in age. A bold malipart boy: a
wilful seditious man. A grimme crabtree countenance: does commonly show a hard
churlish disposition. A smooth glosing tongue: a crafty d^^^embling heart. And a
quick sharp wit: an unconstant and wavering condition. Neither faithful to
friend: nor fearful to foe. Prou. 22.22. In maleuola^ animam, non intrabit
sapientia.
But especially, a proud, furious, or scornful person: is apt to take
displeasure, and think unkindness upon every light occasion: and if such a
heart, where friendship has dwelt, begin once to hate: it is like a spung
which sucketh up as much matter of malice: An injurious friend, is a dangerous
enemy.
as before of favor and affection. And even as the best wine, makes the
sharpest veniger: so the deepest love, turns to the deadliest hate.

In praise of friendship.
Of all the heavenly gifts on earth,
Which mortal men commend:
No treasure well may counteruaile,
A true and faithful friend.
What sweeter solace can befall,
Then such a one to find:
As in whose breast thou may repose,
The secrets of thy mind.
If flattering Fortune chance to frown,
And drive thee to distress:
True faithful friend will help at need,
And make thy sorrows less.
Oh precious Iem, Oh jewel great,
Oh friendship pearl of price:
Thou surely do each thing excel,
That man can well device.
The golden mines are soon decade,
When Fortune turns the wheel:
And force of arms are soon allayed,
If body sickness feel.
And cunning art soon overthrown,
Experience teaches plain:
And all things else their course does change,
When friendship does remain.
But since by proof they have been taught,
A fained friend to know:
I will not trust such glosing tongues,
More then my open ^oe.
Where fairest face does harbor foulest heart,
And sweetest tongue most treason does impart:
Oh false deceat, I Will trust to such no more,
But learn to keep a hatch before the door.
A friendly advertisement touching marriage.
THough wedlock be a thing, so doubtful and dangerous to deal withal: as
to seek roses amongst thorns: honny amongst hornets: or Celes amongst adders.
Notwithstanding might my words crave pardon, (though more willing to wish well,
then able to persuade) I would (according to my simple skill) show my opinion,
touching the commodity, and discommoditie of marriage: and the best mean to
live quiet in wedlock chaunsing upon a shrew.

First considering the state of marriage in general: Genesis 2.
God himself has ordained it as holy: nature has established it as honest.
Reason does counsel it as profitable. And all nations have allowed it, as
necessary. And therefore with the Apostle, Heb. 13.4. ^ccle. ^6.22.23.24.
I commend it, as honorable amongst all men. Happy is that man (says Jesus
Syrach) that has a virtuous wife. Eccle. 26.1.2.3.4.
The number of his years shall be double. A virtuous woman, makes her husband
a joyful man, whether he be rich or poor: Prou. 31.6. Faelix est pulcro,
veniense corpore virtus. Beauty is the ornament of nature, and wealth is gotten
by polisie, but a virtuous woman is the gift of God.
he may always have a merry heart. A woman that is silent of tongue: shamfast
in countinance: sober in behavior: and honest in condition: adorned with
virtuous qualities correspondent: is like a goodly pleasant s^ower, dect with
the colors of al other flowers in the field, which shall be given for a good
portion to such a one as seareth God.

But he that shall prefer the gifts of nature, and fortune: before grace and
virtue. Having more respect, to a clean hand, with a fair smiling
countenance: the^ a clean heart with good conditions: Eccle. 26.3. Eccle. 9.8.9.
shall after find that he fears: and miss that he most desires. Wanting
neither time to repent, nor matter to complain upon.

Prou. 31.26.
Favor (says the wise man) is deceitful, and beauty but a vain thing.
Without virtue, it is compared to a sweet poison in a box of Iuorie: Dulce
venenu^, meritrix decora.
or a fair shoe yt wrings the foot: or the beast called an Armin, whose
skin is desired, and his carcass despised. A short pleasure full of pain
and misery: much like Tantalus apples, which are no sooner touched: Sub melle
la^et venenum. Preach, 7.24.
but turn unto ashes. And in the end (says the Preacher) she is more bitter
than death.

I heard once a learned man show a pretty note concerning marriage: which though
it were a Jewish inuension: yet has it a divine understanding. Ish and Isha in
the Hebrew tongue signifies vir, and vira, the man, and the woman: which being
joined together, makes Chaa, signifiing God, as Jehovah. From which word, take
away these two Hebrewe letters. Chod, and He: that makes it God. And that
remains, is, Ash: which signifies pain and misery. Meaning that in such a
marriage, where virtue is absent, there God is not present: and where God is
not present, there pain and misery is never absent.

A quiet man that matcheth himself to a shrewe: takes upon him, a very hard
adventure: he shall f^nde compackt in a little flesh, a great number of bones,
too hard to digest. Yea such saints are some men matched withal: that if all
their demaundes should be granted: and all that they are agreeued withal,
redressed. Sampsons strength: Jobs patience: and Salomons wisdom, were all
too little. And therefore some do think wedlock to be that same purgatory,
which learned Divines have so long contended about: or a sharp penance to
bring sinful men to heaven.

A merry fellow hearing a Preacher say in his sermon: that whosoever would be
saved, must take up, and bear his cross: ran straight to his wife, and cast
her upon his back.

Diogines being asked what age was most fit for marriage: for young men (quoth
he) it is too soon, and for old men too late.

One Paurimio, son to a Senator in Rome, being desirous to marry: his father
willed him tarry till he were wiser: Nay sir (quoth he) if I once grow wise, I
shall never marry.

Arminius, a great Ruler in Carthage: being importunately persuaded to marry:
no (quoth he) I dare not: for if I chance upon one that is wise, she will be
wilful: if wealthy, then wanton: if poor, then peevish: if beautiful, then
proud: if deformed, then loathsome: and the least of these is able to kill a
thousand men.

Where married couples agree together, Eccle. 25.1.
is a great happiness, and a thing very acceptable in the sight of God. But as
in music are many discords, before there can be framed a true dia^asan: so in
wedlock are many iarres, before there be established a perfect friendship.

In household matters, are many occasions of variance in general: but where
the parties want conformity of manners and conditions: most apt to fall at
contention especial. For as the earth to the air: and the water to the fire,
are in nature and property dissonant and contrary. So where the one is
constant, the other wavering: The one prodigal, the other a nigard: Or the one
young, and the other old: They may well conioyne in law: but never continue in
love. Being prompt and ready upon every light occasion, to resolve into strife
and dissension: Agreeing like harp and harrowe: or rather two cats in a
gutter. And if the husband, will live in quiet, then must he show his wisdom:
either by dissembling the cause, to turn it unto sport: or else go his way
and say nothing: using his shrewde wife gently, as a necessary instrument to
exercise his patience: least she wax worse. For by other means he gets no
faithfulness of her. This was the best remedy that Socrates could find,
against his wife Zantippa. The best help that Job could have against his wife,
Thought to be Dina the daughter of Jacob.
in all his afflictions. And the best counsel that Marcus Uarro could give
unto married men: Vitium vxoris, si corrigi non possis, ferendum esse: let her
say what she will. Better her tongue wagge, then her heart break. It is said
that an Ass, a walnuttree, and a woman: asks much beating before they be
good. But I am verily resolved, that a virtuous woman that is wise, one word of
her husband does suffice. But if she be such a one as neither gentle
admonition: Disdain me not for this is truth, though truth often time turn men
to ruth.
the fear of God: the speech of people: nor the shame of her person can
prevail. All the wise sayings of Solomon, with an hundred stripes to mends,
will not suffice to reform or amend her. A woman is aptly compared to a
drinking glass: which being gently handled, is both pleasant in sigh^, and
nece^sarie in use. But if more roughly used, then the ^endernesse, of that
(...), is soon broken (...) spoiled. (...) as the stringes of a Lu^e, do sound
most sweetly, when they are touched most softly: so are women most tractable,
when they are used most gently.

Yea so long as they are not restrained of their liberty in three things. That
is, to say what they will: do what they will: and have what they will: they
are the most necessary, pleasant, and comfortable creatures living. And apt
enough of their own accord, to submit themselves. But their noble hearts in
no wise, can suffer by force and violence, to be brought in subjection.

It is a common saying, that the tears of a woman do wash away her
displeasure: so that if after her grief, she begin once to weep: she is
then more gentle, and easy to be entreated.

Finally, he that will live quiet in wedlock: must be courteous in speech:
cheerful in countinance: provident for his house: careful to train up his
children in virtue: and patient in bearing the infirmities of his wife. Let all
the keys hang at her girdle: only the purse at his own. He must also be void
of ielosie: which is a vanity to think, Eccle. 9.1.
and more folly to suspect. For either it needs not, or booteth not: and to
be ielious without a cause, is the next way to have a cause.

This is the only way, To make a woman dum:
To sit and smyle and laugh her out, and not a word, but mum.
The Bird that seelly foul,
does warn men to beware:
Who lights not on every bush,
For fear of crafty snare.
The Mouse that shunnes the trappe,
Do show what harms do lie:
Within the sweet betraying bayte,
That often deceaueth the eye.
The fish always the hook,
Though hunger bids him bite:
And houereth still about the worm,
Whereon is hid delight.
If Birds and beasts can see,
Whereas their danger lies:
How should a mischief escape man's head,
That has both wit and eyes.
Certain necessary rules, both pleasant, and profitable for preventing of
sickness, and preserving of health: prescribed by D. Diet, D. Quiet, and D.
Merryman.
Doctor diet.
GAllen the Captain of all Pothicarie Physicians, who lived in health (except
one day sickness) the space of 110. years: being asked what diet he used, to
preserve his health and life so long: In lib. de sanitate ruenda.
answered, I have drunk no wine: touched no woman: eat noching raw or
unripe: kept my body warm: and my breath sweet.

Marcus Aurelius who lived in health till old age: used to bath him once a
year: to vomet once a month: to fast one day in a week: and to walk one
hour in a day.

The counsel of Auicine, is to keep the feet always dry: Wash the hands
often, the feet seeldome, and the head never. Qui medice viuit, misere viuit.
the neck warm: and the body in temperate heat: to avoid poisoned airs of
dead carrian: pissing places, stinking mistes, and dampish vapors, which
infect both man and beast: preferring always the kytching before the
Po^hicaries shop. He that for every qualme will receive nothing without advice
of the Physician: shall be sure to have his carcass full of diseases, and his
powch void of money.

All natural disquietnesse (says Gallen) is appeased by three natural
means: as meat to nourish: music to delight: and exercise to preserve
health. Which rule the nurses of children do naturally observe, in feeding the
infant with her teat: stilling it with her voice: and exercising the body, by
moving her arm.

That golden sentence of Hypocrites duly observed, not only in mean and
measure, vt ne quid nimis, but also in right order as it stands, placed by
the Author, contains a most sovereign preservative against all corporal
deseases whatsoever.

Labor, cibus, potio, somnus, venus, omnia mediocria.

A mean sober diet, is both necessary for health, and profitable for wealth:
whereas variety of dishes, diversity of sauces, and change of drinks:
oppresses nature, which is satisfied with a little: nourishes infected
humors: breeds surfets in the body: and consumption in the purse.

Si vitare velis morbos and vinere sanus, Scola Salerni.

Non bibe, non sitiens, and non comedas satiatus.
Doctor quiet.
THe heart of a good Christian, is love and charity: He that will live as
young must govern himself as old.
his tongue truth and honesty: his attire patience and humility: his armor,
wisdom and knowledge: his diet, measure and temperance: his authority, equity
and justice: 1. These. 4.11. Romans 12.18.19.
and his life quietness of mind, gladness of heart, and health of body and
soul. But where anger and fury possesses, it vexes the mind: fretteth the
heart: In maleuola^ animam, non intrabit sapientia.
dymineth the senses: and distempereth the whole body. So as the wrathful
person can never look truth in the face.

Contend not with an angry man (says Solomon) for he kindles variance, and
stirs up strife. Wisd. 1. Prou. 29.
Make no variance with a rich man (says Jesus Syrach) least he bring a hard
quarrel against thee. Eccle. 8.
Strive not with a mighty man (says he) least thou chance to fall into his
hands.

To contend with a superior is madness: and with an equal a shame. But as the
Lion to fight with the Emmet, or the Egle with the butterfly, is unnatural. So
for man to strive with his Inferior, is most injurious.

God has not given unto man dangerous feet to strike, as the horse: crooked
nails to scratch, as the cat: venomous poison to sting, as the serpent: nor
bloody teeth to bite as the Tiger: but an understanding mind to descerne his
neighbors cause rightly: a pitiful heart to relieve his wants charitably: and
a mild tongue, to entreat and use him courteously.

It is the property of an Ass, to kick when he is spurned: I will quoth will,
revenged be:
not so quoth wit be ruld by me.
Lingua, quo vadis.

a dog, to snatch when he is bitten: and a woman, to chide when she is angry:
but a man of good nature, to dissemble an injury without revenge. To requite
wrong with wrong, is much like as to wipe one dirt away with an other.

The mind of man by nature is courteous and valiant: and more easily won by
gentle persuasion, then violently drawn by strife and contention. Whose heart
by gentle means, being once mollified: his affections qualified, and his mind
pacified: his ears are then more open to hear: his mind to conceive: and his
will to consent unto reason.

And for as much as no vocation or calling is without his cross annexed unto
it: a man that will live quiet, and peaceable in this wretched vale of misery:
must neither be proudly puffed up in prosperity, nor cowardly cast down in
adversity: but well armed with patience: girt with constancy: dec^ with
humility: and furnished with a valiant courage. To take the vanities of this
world as vanities: and all things in good part as they happen: resting always
contented with the will of God, Psalm. 37. ^ Cor. 10.13.
who never fails his children in necessity: nor suffers them to be tempted
above their power.

Of all things bad the best I think,
Is well to hope, though fortune shrink.
Doctor Merriman.
HOnest mirth moderately used, is a pleasant and delectable virtue. As there is
a time to weep, sigh, and mourn: Preach. 3.6. Romans 12.15.16.
so is there a time to laugh, sing, and be merry. When Solomon by his great
wisdom, I^mes. 5.13.
experience, and judgment, had proved all things under the sun, to be
nothing but vanity, misery, and vexation of mind: He concludes that the
best thing for a man in this world, Preach. 3.26. Preach. 8.16.
all the days of his life: is to eat, drink, and be merry in his labor.
Esaias. 65. c Esaias. 35. d
Behold (says the Lord by the Prophet) my servants shall eat, drink, rejoice,
and be merry. He gives bread and wine to strengthen and make glad the heart of
man: oil to make him a cheerful countenance: Psalm. 104.14.
and sweet ointment and incense, to make his heart merry. Prou. 27.9.
Rejoice in the Lord always (says the Apostle) and again I say rejoice.
Philip. 4.4.
S. James exhorts Gods children to sing and be merry. James. 5.13. Prou.
17.23.
A light heart (says the wiseman) makes a cheerful countenance, and a
flourishing age: but sorrow and heaviness dries up the bones and shortneth
the days. Eccle. 30.24. 2. Cor. 7.1^.
Heaviness is called the grave of man's life, and mother of four daughters:
Idleness, poverty, sickness, and misery. It is the property of the
distressed to complain: of the desperate to sigh: of children to weep: and of
weak cowardly crauens to yield and shrink down in trouble, and adversity:
but of the valiant mind, to pluck up a good heart: cast off solome pensive
dumps: put on a cheerful countenance to the world: and bear it out merrely
with a good courage. Knowing that though mischief and misery do come by
pounds, and go away by ounces: yet a pound of sorrow will not pay an ounce of
debt. And as those evil: humors which surfeit the body, are expelled by
medicine: so are such heavy pensive dumps as infect the brain, avoided by
mirth and merry company. No better mean to preserve health therefore, then
morning and evening, to receive an ounce of merry conceits: pounded with the
pestle of patience, in the mortar of quiet content: applying oftentimes a
plaster of hearts-ease to the left side. These will purge the patient from
collar, melancholic, and all grievous pains of the stomach: make him feed
heartely, sleep soundly, and walk chearefully. To a merry heart (says Jesus
Syrach) every thing has a pleasant aste. Eccle. 30.


Of exercises profitable for health and recreation.
Dising comedies bring often tragical ends.
THough all such gaming, as depend upon idleness, chance, and desire of
money: be utterly condemned, as a thing intolerable amongst Christians.
Notwithstanding, such honest exercis^, as being either marshall for service in
the field: physical, for health of the body: or moral, for the recreation of
the mind. Moderately used in time and place convenient: is no less profitable
and necessary (especially for gentlemen and studients) then meat, drink, and
sleep. Minds that are wearied with serious affairs, must sometimes be
refreshed of necessity. For as continual bending does weaken the stiffest
bow: Like triple strings of a lute wrested up till they break.
so long study without recreation, does weaken the finest brain. Yet some
more curious then wise, having (as it were) a pride to be peevish: seem rather
to hate, despise, and detest all mirth, Romans 14.10.
pastime, and human society: as unfit for such as profess Christianity.
Whereas if any exercise be evil, Romans 14.14.
it is not of it self, but through abuse of the wicked: which is no sufficient
condemnation to a thing ordained to be well used. Despise not thy neighbor in
his mirth Eccle. 31. d
Though some have been burned with fire, some drowned with water, and some
surf^cted with meat and drink: yet must we neither cast away the use of fire
and water: nor cease from eating and drinking. So though some dumpish natures,
Why should my liberty be condemned of an other man's conscience.
can brook nothing that is contrary to their own stoicall disposition. Yet no
reason, that therefore the better sort, more pleasant, sociable, and familiar of
condition, should forgo their honest recreation, to feed the humors of such.
To the clean all things are clean, and if any offense be, 1. Cor. 10 29.
Titus. 1.1^.
it is not given, but rather taken without cause. John Baptist and the
Pharisees lived a straight life, and our Savior Christ using his liberty, was
more familiar, like the common people: yet John Baptist and the Pharesies were
not holier then Christ himself.

Wise Solomon makes mention of times as well, Preach. 3.
for pastime and sport, to recreate and make merry: as for serious affairs to
fatigate and make weary. Jacob wrastled with an Angel. Genesis 32. Leu. 23.40.
Deuteronomy. 16.12.


The Israelites in observing the feast of Tabernacles, were commanded to gather
boughs and branches of palms, willowes, and fruitful trees; rejoicing and
making merry before the Lord, the space of 7. days.

When David was returned from the slaughter of the Philistians, the women came
out of all Cities, 1. king. 1^.7. 2. E^d. 12. d
with instruments of Music, playing, singing, and dancing with great joy.

When God sent the Prophet to comfort his people of Jerusalem, amongst others
his mercies, Zach. 8.^.
he promised them this security: that their boys and damsels should sport
and play in the streets.

The taking away of mirth and melody from the people was always a token of
Gods curse. Esaias. 24.7.8. Iere. 7. last. Ezech. 26. c


Take thy pastime at home, and do what thou will (says Jesus Syrach) so as
thou do none evil. Eccle. 32.12. 1. Pet. 2.17.
The Apostle exhorts men to love and delight in brotherly fellowship.

David Chytreus affirms playing and sporting amongst friends, Chytraeus upon
the Epist page 266.
to be very good and necessary, to avoid wicked thoughts and dumpish fantasies.

Master Calvin says, M. Calvin upon Psalm 104.
that God does not only bestow upon men, things sufficient for their
necessary uses: but also proceeds further, in helping forwards, their
pleasures and delights.

Cato calls honest pastime, To be merry, honest, and virtuous. suffiseth to
anger the envious.
a whetstone for the memory.

Gallen prefers tennisse play, Gallen.
as an exercise most profitable for health: because it moves every part of
the body: and has written a whole book in commendation thereof. Shooting in
the long bow is greatly liked of many, being a pastime of great antiquity.
Marcillius Phicinus has written in praise of it. Marcillinus Phicinus.
M. Latimer does greatly commend M. Latimer.
it. And M. Ascam in his Toxophilus, does teach it, as most profitable and
commodious, to preserve health. It incourageth the mind: strengthens the
synewes: clenfeth the poures: clears the senses: makes good disgestion: and
wrastleth against a number of diseases in the body.

Plato incourageth young men to practice the weapon, commending it amongst the
best exercises, and not without good reason: for if it be lawefull for a man to
defend himself from violence, it is both lawful and convenient, not only to
wear a weapon, but also to learn how to use it, if need shall require. He
that desires peace (says Ireneus) let him prepare for war.

For recreation of the mind Chesse play is much commended: as a delectable
pastime, and pleasant study, and a princely exercise: having in it a certain
Majesty, wherein is showed a warlike order, and politic government. It was
first invented by a wiseman called Xerxes, Anno seculi. 3635.
to declare unto a tyrannous Prince, how necessary his subjects were to the
safegarde of his person.

Plato seeming to commend table play, compares it unto the life of man:
Diogenes commends hunting.
that like as an evil chance may be helped by cunning play. So may a crooked
nature be made better by good education.

Reading of books amongst the wise: has always been accounted the
pleasantest mirth: the sweetest music: and soundest counsel. Alfonsus king of
Arragon, being asked what counselors he liked best: answered books: for
(quoth he) they will tell me the truth without flattery. They are neither
obstinate nor greedy of rewards: If I list they speak: and if I list not they
hold their peace.

Marcus Aurelius said he would not give ye little, he had learned by reading in
one day, for all the goods in the world.

The Gods begot her, and ^he 9. Muses did name her.
Of Music.
Music is an Art compounded of Number, Harmony, and Melody, called the
mistress of delights, and the delight of Princes, both ancient and
honorable: highly esteemed, and richly rewarded in all ages: A singular
blessing of God, sent down from heaven, as a pleasant companion to comfort our
sorrows, and abbreuiat our weariness on earth. Dainty meats are delicate to
the taste: Beautiful colors pleasant to the eyes: And sweet perfumes
delightful to the nose. But the harmonial consent of Music, most precious to
the ears. It rauisheth the senses: reuiueth the spirits: sharpeneth the wit:
inflameth the heart: encourages the valiant: terrefieth the dastard: relieueth
the distraughted: expulseth Melancolike dumps: recreateth wearied minds: and
stirs up an aptness unto virtue and godliness. 1. kings. 10.35.
King Saul by Music was delivered from grievous torments: The Prophets by
Music was moved to prophisie: 1. kings. 1^ 10.11.
Orpheus and Amphion by Music were said to move stones, rocks and trees:
Wild beasts by Music have been tamed: birds allured: fishes delighted,
and serpents charmed. The fiercenes of the Wolf, is mitigated by the sound of
the cornet: the Elephant delighted with the Organe: the Be with the noise of
brass: the Crane with the trumpet: and the Dolphin with the harp.

And such human creatures, as can find no pleasure nor delight in the sweet
harmoniall consent of concordes and proportions which speak them so fair:
must needs be monsters in Nature: having their bodies without sense, and their
heads out of proportion.

The Greeks accounted no man learned, without skill in the art of Music: the
sweetness whereof is by Jesus Syrach compared to a Carbuncle stone set in
gold. Eccle. 32.6 As the Lute or Bandora, As pipe and trumpet. As the voice
with broken consort.
Cassiodorus affimeth that the kind of melidie called Dorius, gives wisdom
to the mind. Phrigins increases courage to the heart. Lydius stirs up an
aptness to conceive: and Aeolius pacifieth the affections.

A soft doleful melody full of solome mourning sweetness: not only pearceth
the mind: makes tender the heart: and allureth the outward senses: but also by
the artificial harmony of numbers and proportions, it delights even reason
it self. And therefore Pithagoras had his scholars brought a sleep, and waked
again, with the noise of the Harp.

Church Music.
And the better to moon and stir up man's drowsy affections to devotion and
godliness: that the doctrine of salvation, might more easily pearce the hearts
and minds of the hearers. Barnard.
It has pleased God in all ages (says S. Augustine) to have his precepts of
instruction, August. in his preface upon the Psalms. Eccle. 44.7. 3. kings.
10.14
mingled with the delightfulness of Music: his diuice service adorned with
the sweetness of melody: and his praises comprehended in verses and songs:
after the custom of wise Physicians, who season their bitter medicines with
sweet syropes.

1. Cron. 23.6. 2. Cron. 29. f
The ordinary service appointed to the Jews was solemnly observed, with
singing of Psalms: sounding of trumpets: and playing upon diverse instruments.

2. kings. 6. But if our Michols had seen him at this day, etc. 2. Cronicl. 5.
d
When the Ark of God was carried home to Jerusalem: David himself, did both
sing, and dance before it.

When it was brought into the temple, the Levites in white robes, stood at the
East end of the altar singing, and playing upon Psaltaries, Symbals, Shalmes,
and Harpes. And with them an hundredth and twenty Priests, sounding of
Trumpets: whose pleasant Harmoniall consent, in their praises and thanks
giving, was so gratefully excepted of God, that he filled the house with the
presence of his own glory.

Apoc. 5.8. Apoc. 14. a
John hard the voice of singing, harping, and playing of vials from heaven. The
Apostle exhorts the Ephesians to speak unto themselves in Psalms, Himnes,
and spiritual songs: Ephesians. 5.19.
making melody unto the Lord in their hearts. God is well pleased (says Ierom)
with the morning and evening Himns of the faithful. Ierom upon the 64 Psalm.


And seeing the Prophet David has appointed his Psalms to be song with sundry
notes, Psalm. ^1. Psalm. 14.9.
variety of tunes, and diversity of musical instruments: as Simbals, Psalm.
150.
Organes, Psaltaries, Shambes, Trumpets, Harpes, and Lutes, etc. This word
Sela, placed in y^ Psalms where the matter is most notable. signifies lift
up, or change your voice.
I think it as tolerable to adorn Music in Churches, with art and cunning:
as to beautify paynting with colors: or set forth speech with filed
eloquence. As for often repetitions they do not dim the word as some
suppose: but rather make it more plain to the hearers.

Some do figuratively compare the sound of the voice, to the sound of the
Gospel: the melody of the Orgaine, to the devotion of the heart: and the
playing of the fingers, to the charitable concord of the faithful: where every
one has a pleasure, in doing his duty: which is most acceptable Music unto
Gods divine ears: according to this old verse taken out of the decrees.

Non vox sed votum, non cordula Musica sed vox,
Non clamans sed amans, cantat in aure Dei.
What the heart does believe, and the tongue does confess.
Becomes every member, the same to express.
If sickness do oppress thy corpse,
Prepare sweet Musickes art:
Which pensive dumps, and careful thoughts,
To mirth will soon conuart.
Here follows certain pretty notes, and pleasant conceits, delightful to
many, and hurtful to none.
The natural inclination of an English man.
AN English man by nature, is said to be firm in friendship: constant in
promise: impatient in anger: courragious in fight, without fear of death:
courteous to his inferiors: pitiful to strangers: faithful to his friends:
and fearful to his foes. More ready to revenge an iniurye, then proffer any
without cause: he can not brook a stranger to be his equal, nor to be dared
of any. Always desirous of novelties: never long content with one state, nor
one fashion: greatly delighted in royal, bravery, and excess of diet: taking
more p^easure, to hear himself commended with lies, then reproved with
truths. He is said to have long ears: a short tongue: broad eyes: and light
fingers: quick to hear, slow to speak: ready to spy, and apt to strike. Few
words and gentle speeches wins his heart.

The natural disposition of most women.
Ma^^nan. Job. 2.
MOst women by nature are the sa^de to be light of credit: lusty of stomach:
impatient full of words: apt to lie, Mar^us Varro Mar^us Aurelius. Prou. 21.
Eccle. ^^.26.
flatter, and weep: whose smiles ^re rather of custom then of courtesy: and
their tears more of dissimulation then of grief: all in extremes without
mean, either loving dearly, or hating deadly: desirous rather to rule, then
to be ruled: despising naturally that is offered them: and half at death to be
denied of that they demand. (...).
They are aptly compared to the Musician: who being entreated, will scant sing,
Sol, Fa: but undesired, strain above Ela.

Amongst 1000. men (says Solomon) I have found one, but amongst all women, I
have found none.

The property of a good Servant.
IT is required in a good servant, to have the back of an Ass, to bear all
things patiently: the tongue of a sheep, to keep silence gently: and the
snout of a swyne, to feed on all things heartily: large ears: light feet:
and a trusty right hand: loath to offend: diligent to please: willing to
amend, and sufferance disease.

Of the number of three.
A Burchen broom consists of three things fit for correction, the twigs for
the Scholemaster: the staff for the householder: and the with for the
Magistrate. Three properties required in a good Inkeeper: to be patient, as
Job: provident, as Philemon: and merry, as Hector. And other three in a good
Chirurgian, a Hawks eye: a Lions heart: and a Ladies hand.

Of fear and love.
AS the Lamb is more in dread of the Wolf, then of the (...): and the
Partredge more in fear of the Hawk, then of the Eagle: even so, the common
people, stand more in awe of the inferior Magistrate: whom they love for
fear: then of the superior Prince, whom they fear for love.

Of Law.
THe Law is a spur, to prick forwards unto virtue: a fetter to restrain
vice: a rule to determine right from wrong, and is divided into three parts ius
natural, which nature teaches: lex condita, which the Prince commands: and
mos antiquos, which time has brought in.

Of Physic.
MAn is taught to use and not to despise such ordinary means, Luke. 5.31.
Ec^le. 38. a Exodus 15. d
as God has appointed to heal his sickness. The Lord has created medicine
of the earth (says Jesus Syrach) and he that is wise, will not abhor it. Is
there no Treacle nor Physician, Iere. 8.
at Giliad (says God by the Prophet) why then is not the health of my people
recovered. The Apostle exhorts the Elders of the Church to annoint the bodies
of the sick with oil: Iame^. 5.14.
the Samaritan powered oil and wine into the hurts of the wounded man: Luke.
10.34.
this was a kind of oil in Palestine, much used as a thing very medicinable
for many diseases.

In praise of baldness.
SHedding of hair is the end of nature: insomuch as few men living until full
age, becomes not balde: and the best natures sonest. And like as fruits of
trees come not to perfection till the leaves fall away: no more is man's head
stayde and settled with wisdom, till it wax bare: according to the old
proverb, bush natural, more hair than wit. And as those nuts which in
gathering time, keep still their husks, are known to be naught: so those
heads which in ancient ears keep still their hair, prove s^eldome good. And
therefore amongst Painters and Caruers, it is an ordinary custom to picter
the Image of an evil disposed person with bushie hair: and an honest man with
a bald head: for that the one shows a wanton lightness: and the other an
ancient soberness. An old man with a bushie head, is much like an old shrub
ouergrowen with moss, more brutish then human.

Of the climacterian years.
THe life of man is aptly compared to a long sickness: wherein the 7. and 9.
being creticall days, the patient begins commonly, either to amend, or
grow worse. So from 7. to 7. and from 9. to 9. years, most men do change
their natural complections, and often their conditions: but especially the 63.
years of their age, in which the 2. climats do join, making 9. times 7. or
7. times 9 wherein very few do escape without, either great danger or death.

Of time and place.
I Find written in an old book, of what credit I know not: that as upon the
25. day of the month of March: the sixth day of the week, and sixth hour of
the day, Adam was created: brake the commandment: the woman's seed promised:
and he for disobedience banished out of Paradise. So the same day of the
month, and hour of the day: Caine slew his brother Abell: the promise was
renewed unto Abraham: Isaac was offered up in sacrifice: the massage by the
Angel was showed unto the Uirgine Mary: our Savior Christ was conceived, and
suffered his passion in Galgatha, the same place where Adam was buried: and
that the cross whereupon he dyed for our salvation, was a plant of the same
tree, which bare the fruit of our condemnation. And if all this were true, it
is worth the noting.

To know Easter day for ever.
AS the tenth day of the first month which is March: at the conjunction of the
Sun and Moon, next the Equinoctial: Exodus 12. a
the Pascall Lamb was chosen out of the slocke, Leuit. 23.4.5. Numb. 28.13.14.
and kept till the 14. day, or full Moon: so the tenth day of the first month
being Palm sunday, our Savior Christ entered into Jerusalem: and the 14. day
suffered his passion: so as the next sunday after the 14. day of the Moon, or
full Moon, in the month of March, is always Easter day.

Of Salutations.
OUr elders in times past, were wont to salute young men, with, you are
welcome: those of middle age, with God keep you: and old men, with, God speed
you: signifying that the first were coming, the second remaining, and the
third departing.

Of a Lie.
Iocosum Officiosum Perniciosum Genesis 27. c Exodus 1. d Joshua. 2. Psalm. 5.6.
Wisd. 1.14. Eccle. 20. c Romans 3.8.
A Lie in general is to speak that is false, with a will to deceive: and has
three parts: a sportfull lie, to delight: a politic lie, to profit: and a
pernicious lie, to hurt. The two first are not blameless: but the 3. a sin
most horrible and grievous. Some do think as good a lie that hurtes not, as a
true tale that profits not: but no man may do evil that good may come thereof.

To help memory.
THere is nothing better to nourish a weak memory, and sharpen a dull wit:
then continual use and exercise of reading, writing, and speaking. Practice in
althings touches the quick: and that makes women's tongues run so round, and
lawyers speak so thick.

A poisie for a glass, penned merrily at the request of a Gentlewoman.
VEwing in this glass the singular shape wherewith God has garnished you
above other creatures, to his own Image. It shall be requisite with continual
travel and labor (least so excellent a work be stained by your negligence or
misdemeanour) that you be answerable as ability shall serve, in working his
will: which is not, in crisping and curling: frisking and frounsing: painting
and proining: to better your beauty with strange trim attire, as not content
with his fashion in framing you: but rather as you excel in gifts, seek to
excel in grace: remembering always that as plainness puts on, so painting
puts out, the Image of Christ: which considered, your attire shall not be
sluttish, but sober: not drabbish, but decent: not whoorish, but honest: not
gawish, but godly: as beseems Christianity.

FINIS.

