The Pilgrimage to Paradise. Compiled for the direction, comfort, and
resolution of Gods poor distressed children, in passing through this irksome
wilderness of temptation and trial.

By Leonard Wright.

Acts. 14.22. Through much tribulation must we enter into the kingdom of God.

Matthew. 7.14. Straight is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto
life, and few there be that find it.

Seen and allowed.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf, and are to be sold at his shop against the
broad South door of Paul's. 1591.

To the Right Honorable and my very good Lord, Ihon, Lord Saint-Ihon, Baron of
Bletso: L. Wright wishes increase of honor and temporal prosperity: and
after death, to joy with Christ in eternal felicity.
THE Patriarchs in old time complained (right Honorable) that the days of
their pilgrimage were short and tedious: Genes. 47 Job 14. 2. Tim. 3.1.
but we may truly say, that the days of our crooked aged are most wretched and
dangerous. Apoc. 12.12
When Satan (whose wrath being great because he knows his time but short) is
transformed into an Angel of of light: and his peevish Ministers fashioned like
to the Apostles of Christ, 2. Cor. 11 13 14.
having their heads so fraught with novelties, their hearts so full of
hypocrisy, and their toongs so smooth, eloquent and plausible: as by the
persuadable words of man's wisdom, they are able to deceive (if it were
possible) even the very elect. Mat. 24.24
They fill our ears with vain iangling, striving and contending about
Church-plots and principles of doctrine (ever learning, 2. Tim. 3.7.
and never able to come to the truth) as though Religion consisted only in
speculation, without action, hearing, without doing, or knowledge, without
execution To the great discouraging and amazing of many a simple soul. Who
though in zeal of conscience very careful to please God, and fearful to
offend him: yet by reason of ignorance unable to discern medicine from poison,
or Religion from Superstition. For whose comfort and direction in the way of
truth, godliness and virtue, I have penned this little volume. Which, as a true
testimony of a thankful mind, for those favorable courtesies your Lordship
has vouchsafed to show me, I have presumed to dedicate unto your Honor: in
hope, that in passing under your good name, the people shall the rather be moved
to take the same in good part, and apply it to their profit. Humbly beseeching
you to pardon my boldness, and accept it as willingly, as I offer it
faithfully. And as duty binds me, my daily prayers to the Almighty for your
Honor shall not cease during life.

The Author to the Reader.
IT is a true saying (gentle Reader) man does purpose, but God does dispose.
For I had no sooner determined in discharge of my duty to frame this little
volume: but that upon special occasion offered by some of Satan's brood (who
under an hipocriticall show of Religion, sought to corrupt the pure doctrine of
the Gospel, deface the ministry, and subvert the state of Ecclesiastical
government:) I was moved in zeal of conscience to stay my former pretense.
And rather (as time then required) to apply my endeavors to the preventing of
eminent dangers: as in my late published labor entitled, A Sommons for
sleepers: A Pattern for Pastors: A Display of duty: and The Hunting of
Antichrist: with A friendly admonition to Martin Marprelate, and his Mates,
may plainly appear. Tending chiefly to awake and stir up to repentance and
amendment of life, such wicked and notorious offenders as are most grievous to
the Church, and noisome to the common wealth. And to put all states and degrees
of people in mind of their office and duty to God, their Prince and country.
And now to proceed as one always willing and desirous what in me lies, to
further the glory of God, and profit his children: I have at length finished
this my first pretended work: as a mean to encourage, strengthen and direct
in the right path to eternal felicity, such weary wa^dring Pilgrims: as yet are
weak in faith, doubtful in conscience, or distressed in mind. Craving thus
much at thy hands (courteous Reader) that if it shall please the Lord in
mercy so effectually to bless and fructify these my simple travails, as by
the help and means thereof, thou shall conceive in thy soul that spiritual
comfort and heavenly consolation, which in heart I wish thee: then yield
dutiful thanks to the highest, and charitably pray for me.

vale in Christo. L. Wright.

THE PILGRIMAGE to Paradise.
Chapter 1. He that in Paradise will taist the fruits of Divinity, must first
learn to know himself in the schole of humility.
HVmility is a virtue springing from the fear of God: the mother of
meekness: and sister of devotion: without which no man can attain to the
knowledge and feeling of his own misery in Adam: and felicity in Christ. A
Bird, except her wings be moved downwards, can not fly up to the top of an
hill: nor man, except the affections of his heart be humbled downwards: mount up
to the tower of divine understanding. And therefore that godly father S.
Augustine, Augustine de ciuitate Dei.
compares heaven unto a fair stately Palace, with a little door: whereat no
man can enter, except he stoop very low. As who should say, God rejects the
proud, and gives grace to the humble and lowlye. Psalm. 51.


The true wisdom of a Christian Pilgram, consists espetia^ly, in the
knowledge of his own imperfections. Then are we said to be righteous (says
Ierom) when we acknowledge our selves to be wicked transgressors. Ierom in his
first B. against Pelagius. Augustine.
He has much profited in this life (says S. Augustine) that has learned how
far he is from perfection of righteousness. 1 Timothy 1.15
For the less opinion a man has of himself: the more trust he has in God.
And the more he feels in his conscience, the horror of hell: Those that feel
not the horror of hell, pass little for the joys of heaven. Psalm. ^1.17.
the nearer he is to the joys of Heaven. None so near, as the humble
penitent, whose heart is most deeply wounded with the greeuousnes of sins:
nor none so far from true religion, as he who thinks himself most perfect
and very religious.

The joys of Paradise are prepared, not for proud presumptuous Pharasyes, who
seem in their own Eyes, Luke 18.
most just, pure and perfect: but poor humble Publicans, that justly condemn,
themselves, as most vile, miserable and wretched. The Sun of man came not to
call the righteous: Luke. 5.32.19, 10.15 23.24
but sinners to repentance. To seek up none, but those that do acknowledge
themselves to be lost. To comfort and to raise up none with his Gospel: but
those which be discomforted, and cast down by the law. Nor to anoint and
heal none with his oil of gladness, but such broken and contrit hearts, Esi.
61.
as (for grief of sins) are sick and mourn in syon.

Chapter II. Of the loathsome deformity of nature through Adams fall.
A Natural man consists of three parts The spirit, As Adam in Pa^ed
or immortal soul, endued with reason, will, 1. Th. 5.23. 1 Cor. 2.11.
and divine understanding. The natural affections, or powers of the soul: as
indifferent spurs to provoke, stir up, and prick forward unto virtue, To.
8.5.13.
or vice: and the terrestrial body, To. 7.23. 1. Pet. 2.11. Gala. 5.17.
wherein Satan (by tempting of Adam) has written the law of sin.

All which parts of man (at the first) were in such perfect order and conco^d,
framed together: as nether the immortal spirit did conceive any thing: the
natural powers of the soul desire any thing: nor the terrestrial body,
execute any thing, contrary to the will of God. All creatures under heaven,
being obedient to the body of man: as the subjects to the Prince. The natural
body, obedient to the reasonable soul: as the servant to the master. And the
reasonable soul, with his affections, obedient to God the Creator: as the
child to the father: till that cursed serpent our mortal enemy, found means
to set them at variance, Mat. 26.41.
and discord. Since which time, the nature of man became so fraill and weak:
the occasions unto evil, so many: and the illusion of Satan, 1 Pet. 5.8.
so prompt, and ready: that except, Gods special grace preu^nt him: he is apt
and prone upon every light occasion, to yield unto sin, and wickedness. Being
more easily brought to con^eaue an error, by one little word: then the truth by
a long tale. And sooner seduced to consent unto vice, by one small example:
then converted unto virtue, by many vehement persuasions.

Romans 11.17.24
And as the Jewish Church was likened unto a garden Olive tree: whose branches
in time, growing baren: were cut off, as unprofitable. And the gentles though
by nature wild olives: yet being grafted in the same, were by grace, made
fruitful. So is every natural man very aptly compared unto a wild and bitter
crab-tree. And as Abraham was removed from the forest of Babilonia: Genesis 11.
and replanted in the fruitful garden of Canaan. Exodus 2.
Moses from the wood of Pharaos court: to the fields of Madian hills. And the
Israelites from their hellish bondage in Egypt, through the red sea: Exodus 12.
Psalm. 80.8.
to the flourishing land of promise. So must every child of Adam, 1. Cor. 10.^
Romans 7.5.6 Mat. 15.13. Colo. 2.12. Romans 10.14 Titus 2.15.
be removed from the wild Wood of nature: And (by baptim) replanted in the
fruitful orchard of grace: regrafted with the sweet Garden imps of true
christian doctrine: and (with the pruning knife of ecclesiastical discipline)
have they superfluous branches of sin and wickedness, daily cleansed and cut
away: 1. Cor. 2.14 Ioh. 15.1.^ Math. 3.10.
or they cannot bring forth true spiritual fruits, acceptable unto Gods divine
taste.

Chapter 3. Of the misery of Adams brats, and vanity of the world.
FOrasmuch as (of all other vices) that old rooted infection of pride,
vaineglorie, and presumption, is most universally grafted in man: there is no
thing more necessary or profitable to suppress and subdue his hautie
affections then continual remembrance what he is: from whence he came: and
whether he shall. That in calling to mind, Eccle. 7.
his base metal: his wretched condition: and mortal generation: he may the
rather be moved, more humbly, and lowly, to conceive and esteem of himself.

The misery of mortality.
What is man? telluris inutile pondus: an unprofitable lump of earth: like as
one might say to a piece of yse: thou wast water: thou art water: and to water
thou shall turn again. So man was earth: Genesis 3.
he is earth: and to earth he shall turn again. Thou have fashioned me of
mould and earth (says Job: Job. 10.30.
) and I am become like dust and ashes. Oh homo (says Chrysostom) si
consideras, quid per o^, quid per nares, quid per ceteros meatus egrediatur,
Chrisost.
nunquam vilius sterquilium inuenisti.

What is man? ^is matter is base, slime, and clay: his nature weak, and
feeble: his birth pain, and sorrow: his life vain, and miserable: his state
sliperie, and uncertain: his time short, and tedious: his sins horrible, and
filthy: and his end, grievous and loathsome.

What is man? A mirror of misery: a play of fortune: He is born in tears,
grows up in sighs, lives in pain, and dies in grief.
and a pr^y of death. He is borne weping and wailing, to show his wretchedness:
he lives laughing and toying, to bewraie his folly: and dies sighing, and
sob^ing, to declare his weak infirmity.

What is man? Appulius a Philosopher, and scholar to Plato: describes him in
this wise. Me^ (says he:) are living creatures, dwelling upon the earth:
having souls immortal: brutish servile bodies, subject to death: light
careful minds apt to error: vain in labors: diverse in conditions: long or
they be wise: their time but short: and during life never content.

What is the state of man? Saint Bernard describes it in this manner. There
comes before thine eyes (says he) a man, poor, naked, and miserable:
mourning that he is a man: blushing that he is naked: weeping for that he is a
wretch replenished with misery and feare^ull for that his t^me is but sho^t. A
great part of his life passes away in doing that is evil: a greater part in
doing nothing: and the greatest part, in doing things to small purpose.

And as the life of man is vain, transitory, and miserable: even so is the
world: with all things else, wherein human nature takes pleasure and
delight: as health, wealth, honor, Psalm. 39.6. Preach. 2.
wisdom, strength, beauty, or whatsoever.

What is the world? A veil of misery: A sinck of sin: a mould of mischief:
a den of thieves: a court of Satan: a purgatory of pain: a mother to the
wicked: and a stepdame to the good. Where the proud and vicious are daily
advanced without desert: and the humble and virtuous oppressed without cause:
the weiwarde and seditious befrended, and the quiet and obedient molested: the
ignorant and foolish permitted to speak: and the wise and discreet put to
silence: crafty dissemblers extolled: and simple insiocents despised.

What is the world? A second hell: full of ambitious desires: couetuous
conceates: careful studies: wicked wills: and devilish intents. A cruel
serpent that biteth us with her teeth: scratcheth us with her nails: and
swells us with her poison. Much like the deceitful Laban. Who made poor
Jacob serve seven years for fair Rachell: and in the end, deceived him with
foul Lea. Even so the world promises health, wealth, and long life: and in
the end, deceives us with poverty, sickness, and death.

What is the world? Her mi^th is but sorrow: her pleasure, but pain: her
wisdom but foolishness: and her wealth but misery. Where nothing is to be
looked for, but even a rank of troubles, one following in a^others neck. A
great travel is created for all men, (says Jesus Sirach) and a heavy yoke
upon all men's c^ildren. Eccles. 40.
Some so p^nched with poverty and oppressed with misery: Some tossed and
turntoiled with strife, and contention: some tormented with sickness, sores,
and contagious diseases: that if an old man should set forth the tragidie of
his life, from the day of his birth, As years diminish. so troubles increase.
till his departure to the grave: a man would wonder that the body could
suffer, and the heart could bear, so painful, and dolorus a pilgrimage.

All the godly from the beginning have tasted the troubles of their time. Adam
felt his part of misery: when his children did one kill an other, and saw the
fall of his posterity, 900. years. Abraham felt his part of misery: when at
Gods commandment he wandered into a strange country, and suffered great
troubles. Genesis 12.
Job felt his part of misery: when he saw the spoil and havoc of all his
goods: the destruction of his children: and his own body (from top to toe)
tormented with botches and sores: having nothing remaining but his wicked wise:
who seemed to be left of the devil: not to comfort, but vex and tempt him, to
blaspheme God. Joseph felt his part of misery: Genesis 38.
when he was sold of his brother, and impr^soned without cause. Noah felt his
part of misery: being grieuouslye mocked and persecuted of the wicked. Poor
Lazarus was both sick, ^o^e, hungry and thirsty. Luke 16.
Father Jacob. complained that his days were few and evil. David said he
was a worm, and no man. Solomon was weary of his life: because all that ever
he saw under the Sun: was nothing but vanity, misery, and vexation of
mind. Father Ierom complained, that Satan sought to overthrow him: and that
his weak flesh was ready to consent. Ier. 15.20.
The Prophet Jeremy cursed the day of his birth. Jonas said, it was better for
him to die, then live. Chrysostom called the days of his life, the days of
his sorrow. Naziensen wept that his mother had brought him forth, to see such
miserable days. Such travel has God given unto men under the sun, Preach.
1.
to be exercised therein.

Chapter IIII. Of the breuitye of man's life, and certaintye of Death.
ANd as the days of this our painful pilgrimage, are vain, and miserable:
so are they short and tedious. The one foot no sooner on the ground: but the
other ready to slip into the grave. Man that is borne of woman (says Job)
has but a short time to live, Job. 14.
and is full of misery. He springs as a flower: fades like a shadow: and
never continues in one state. Job. 9.
My days (says he) are more swifte then a runner. We bring our years to an
end (says David) as it were a tale that is told. We are dying continually
all our life long: every year, day, and hour. Our infancy lasts a small
while, and dies. Our youth florisheth a time, and vanishes. Our manhood a
time, and departs. Our age a time, and by and by it is gone. The days Psalm.
90.
of our life (says the Psalmist) are threescore years and ten: and though
men be so strong, that they rub out till four score: yet is their strength
then but labor, and sorrow: so soon passes it away, and we are gone. The
life of man is aptly compared to a vapor: to the trace of a cloud: Wis. ^.
to a ship passing over the waves of the sea, Upon this condition we came
into the world to leave it again.
tossed and beaten with tempest: to a bird that flies in the air: or a shaft
that is shot at a mark, and never staieth till it light upon the ground. Even
so, man, as soon as he is borne, begins immediately, to draw to his end.

The godly Patriarchs who lived in the first age of the world, saw many
years: yet at last the dyed. Death was always the end of their song. Adam
lived 930-years: Seath 912: Enoch, 905: Kenan 910: Mahelaell, 895: Iared, 962:
Mathusala, 969: Lamech, 777: Noah, 950: and they died says the text. ABraham,
the father of the faithful: David, a man according to Gods own heart: John
Baptist, of whom our Savior Christ said, there has not risen a greater
amongst the children of women: yet they dyed. All the Prophets, Apostles, and
godly martires, were greatly in Gods favor: yet they died. Rich and poor,
wisemen and fools: learned and ignorant: godly and ungodly: all must follow
the dau^ce of death. Many are gone before: the rest must follow after: when
God does call nature must obey. Wise Solomon, rich Job, strong Sampson, and
fair Absolon, have trod the path of all flesh. Great Alexander Conquered the
whole world: yet could he find no weapon to conquer death. The stiffest
steel yields to the hammer: the strongest oak to the axe: and the stoutest
heart unto nature. And therefore, king Phillip of Macedonia wallowing in
worldly wealth, and prosperity: commanded his chamberlain, every day at his
up rising: sadly to repeat unto him these words. Remember king Phillip, and
forget not, that thou art a man, subject to mortality. All flesh is grass: and
every man, the flower of the grass: the grass shall be withered, and the
flower shall fall away.

And as death is a thing of all other most certain and sure: so is the time of
death most uncertain and doubtful. Preach. 9.13
The Lord in his word has reuea^ed unto man, many notable lessons, touch^ng
the knowledge of his w^ll: yet not the day of death: because he would have us
live so, as every day mig^t be the day of death. Knowing that as the course of
this life, is the r^ce unto death: so is death the gate to eternal life. And
therefore, as at night, we do willingly put of our garments: in hope the next
morning to put them on again: He that will live, must learn to die.
so ought we willingly to put of these our mortal bodies: assuring our selves
that after we have slept a while in the dust: to receive them again immortal.

O homo Nosce Teipsum
Behold thy self by me, such one was I as thou, and thou in time shall be even
dust as I am now.




1 Cor. 15. John 12.24
The wheat and other seed, though it dye and rot in the ground: yet springs
up more beautiful then before It is written how certain summer birds lie dead
all winter, Pliny.
and revive in the spring. Lactantius.
The Phoenix being burnt unto ashes, yet of the same ashes is bred to live
again. So though our bodies laid shall be, to rot in loathsome grave:
Yet afterward in glorious state, more bewty they shall have:
When death has held them down awhile.
Anon they shall arise,
Eternally in joy to live
With Christ above the skies.


Chapter V. The passage to Paradise is aptly compared to a warfare.
PLato calls a Philosophers life, a meditation of death. But it may truly be
said, that the whole race of a Christian man's life: is nothing else, but a
continual warfare. Beginning and ending in the heart.
For as the Israelites by bodily resistance, did assail, fight against, and
overcome seven Nations, before they could obtain a temporal inheritance, in
the land of Canaan: so must Gods children, by spiritual resistance, Deuteronomy. 7.1.
assail, fight against, and overcome their lewd lusts, wicked, appetits, 1
Pet. 2.11
and fleshly affections, with the hole host of vic^s: enemies most odious to
God, and dangerous to man: James 4.1.
before they can come to enjoy their eternal inheritance in the kingdom of
heaven. The more contrary man is to himself, the more agreeable to the will of
God.




The chief Captain general in this continual conflict, is the mighty Lion
of the tribe of Judah: the prince of peace: the conqueror of death, hell, and
sin: the great Judge of the world, and bishop of our souls: which is Christ
himself.

The grande Captain of our enemies part: is the great red Dragon: the old
crafty serpent: the deceauer of the world: accuser of his brethren: and
governor of darkness: which is Satan himself. Mighty in power: subtle in
policy: and skillful in war. Apt and ready (what in him lies) to hinder the
glory of God, and salvation of man. 1 Pet. 5.8.
Who (like a ramping and roaring lion, seeking continually whom he may devour)
knows how to use both riches and poverty, prosperity and adversity health and
sickness: strength and weakness, bewty and deformity, as instruments and
weapons, to serve his purpose. He tempted Adam, to eat the forb^dde^ fruit:
Aaron, to make the golden Calfe: David, to commit adultry and murder: Judas,
to betray Christ: and Peter, to forswear him.

He is the prince of this world: having all those which are without or against
Christ: either by ignorance, not knowing him: or by heathenish life, not
following him: or by violence resist^ng him: at his b^cke, to take part against
us, with tooth and nail.

The Lieutenants of the field: are fleshly sensuality, against spir^tuall
reason.

The Sargeants of the band: the cursed children of darkness, Ephe. 6 12.
against the faithful ch^ldren of light.

The common soldiers: the law of our members, against the law of our mind: the
effects of the flesh, ag^i^st the fruits of the spirit: oppression and
wrong, against right and justice: subtle craft, and deceit, Gala. 5.
against true simple meaning: pride and presumption, against humility and
lowlines: and all other vice against virtue.

Chapter VI. The armor and weapons of a Christian Soldiour.
NOw forasmuch as our enemies, the children of the world: are more subtle,
crafty, and politic in their generation, then the children of God: Mat.
24.24.
able to deceive (if it were possible) even the very elect. Satan can
transfo^me himself into an Angel of light. Pharaos sorserers could work
marvelous strange wonders: Exodus 7.
turn a rod to a Serpent: water into blood: and make quick Frogs. It is
written that Simon Magus, could by sorserye fly in the air: turn stones into
bread: make quick Serpents of brass: sicles to rea^e corn without hands:
Images of stone to laugh: and dogs to sing.

And being so many in number, as which way soever we turn, be sure to have one
enemy or other to encounter with us. At our right hand, the world, the flesh,
and the devil watches to entice us to our utter destruction. At our left
hand, adversity, poverty and affliction of body is ready to cast us down,
into the dungeon of despair. Behind us, our sins are at hand, to bewray us.
Within us, our own conscience, belaieth to accuse us. Before us, are Gods
judgments read^e to condemn us: and hell mouth open to devour us.

And seeing also that the soldiers of Satan, are so mighty in force, and
strongly armed against us: having on the breast plate of injury: the girdle of
falsehood: the shoes of discord: the sheeld of infidelity: the helmet of
mistrust: the pearcing darts of cruelty: the cannon shot of spiteful
reproaches: the arrows of lying slanders: and the sword of the flesh, which
is the doctrine of man: seeking continually to tempt, pervert, and utterly
confound us.

To resist their tyranny therefore, it stands us in hand to be also well and
strongly armed, with the brestplate of equity: the shield of undoubted faith
in Christ: the helmet of assured hope: Ephe. 6.
the shoes of knowledge, and peace in the holy Ghost: the girdle of truth, well
buckled with patience, and constancy: the cannon shot of deep sighs
proceeding from a true penitent heart: the arrows of bitter tears, brought
forth by remorse of conscience: the pearcing darts of humble fasting: devout
praying, charitable giving, and virtuous living: and the two edged sword of
the eternal word of God: which is lively in operation, Heb. 4.12.
and enters through even to the dividing of the soul, and the spirit: and
the joints, and the marow. Mighty and strong to cast down holds, and
overthrow the imaginations of every thing that exalts it self against the
knowledge of God: 2. Cor. 10.41.5
and bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.

In which spiritual conflic^, are three kinds of soldiers. Some painful
warriors: placed for a time, to be tried in this irksome vale of misery, on
earth. Some triumphat conquerours: for whom is appointed a crown of victory,
in the glorious kingdom of heaven. And some cowardly fugitives: for who^ are
reserved most grievous torments, in the loathsome prison of hell. For as that
professed soldiour, Esaias 24.
which in time of battle does fly the field: and suffer his captain amongst
his enemies, to be buffited, and beaten down: is but a dastardlye coward,
worthy of death: so that professed christian, which in time of persecution, and
trouble, Math. 10.28.32. Romans 10.9.10.
does fly the spiritual combat, and suffer Christ his loving redeemer,
amongst his enemies, to be buffited, and borne down: is but a dastardly
hipocrite, worthy of eternal torments.

Forasmuch therefore, as he is now ready coming in mai^stie, and honor to
muster, Heb. 10.37. Math. 25.3
reward, and crown with glory his conquering soldiers: and punish with
severity, all cowardly fugitives: whose signs and tokens (as messengers) being
already come before: to show that himself is not far behind. It stands
us upon, to keep our battle ray orderly: fight valiantly: watch carefully:
pray heartily: believe faithfully: hope assuredly: endure constantly: and march
on charitably: to stand fast: persevere, and quite our selves like men: the
quarrel is Gods: 1. Cor. 16.13.
the victory ours: the end, the salvation of our souls. Let us keep am^ane
course: as it were betwixt Silla and Caribdes: presumption, and desperation:
traueling our painful pilgrimage in humble obedience, Phil. 2.12.
with fear and trembling: always ready to do our best, and trusting in Christ
to perform the rest.

Chapter VII. He that in Paradise will come to joy with Christ, must travel
with patience under the cross of Christ.
AS the Israelits could not come to the land of promise, Deuteronomy. 29.
but by long painful travel through the wilderness: no more can we come to
the promised land of rest: Act. 14.22.
but by long painful travel through the wilderness of tribulation.

The law of Adams children, is to live in labor: Genesis 3.
and the curse of Eues brats to suffer affliction: yea all mankind do feel
the biting of the serpent.

Our elders in times past, Though these and such other familiar examples may
profitably be used, to help the weak capacity of the simple: yet no man
ought to ground his conscience upon the invention of man, which may err: but
the truth of God which can not deceive.
before they learned their A B.C. (to put them in mind of their calling) began
always their first lesson with Christ's cross. Who in building their churches,
did imitat the fashion of Salomons temple: so as the bodies thereof, might
seem to represent the church militant: and the chancell, the church
triumphant. And in the time of ignorance, was placed right over the door
between the^, a Rood, or cross of wood: to signify, that there is no way left
us to pass from the one to the other: but only under the cross of our loving
Redeemer.

He that will taste of his glory in heaven, must first be partaker of his cup
upon earth. He that after death will rejoice at his presence, 2 Timothy 2.3.
must first in his life time mourn for his absence. He that will embrace him
in his divine robes of honor, must think no skorne of his earthly rags of
contempt. Luke 9.26.
Whosoever is ashamed of his cross in this life, He that will be crowned,
must not grudge to be crossed.
he will be ashamed of him in the life to come. He can not pass from joy to
joy, but either from earthly misery, to heavenly felicity: or else from earthly
felicity, to infernal extremity. There is no other way left for the members,
Luke 14.27.
then to follow their head. Mat. 10.24.25.
The Disciple is not above his master: nor the servant above his Lord. Seeing
the good man of the house has been called Belsabub, Luke 7.34.
glutton, and a companion of the wicked: how can the servants look for better
entertainment?

If the Prophets, Apostles, and godly Martirs of the primitive Church, (who
suffered so patiently the persecutions and troubles of their time) might have
come to the joys of heaven, by living here at ease in sensual pleasure and
security: they were mad men so to despise the world, and afflict their bodies
as they did. Esaias had his carkas cut a sunder with a wooden saw. Hebr. 11.
Amos thrust into the temples with a nail. John Baptist, beheaded. Daniel
condemned to be eaten of Lions. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must
suffer persecution. 2 Timothy 3.12.
The three Israelites, committed to the flam^ng fire. Jeremy and Steeuen
stoned to death. Paul, beh^aded. Thomas (preaching the Gospel in India)
slain with a Dart. And Simon Zelots preaching in Britany, was there crucified,
etc.

But these valiant and victorious conquerours, were w^ll assured, that
prosperity and adversity, riches and poue^ty, life and death, are all Gods
gifts, James 1.3.4
to try, the hearts of men.

That godly and valian^ cha^p on Ignatius, scholar to John, and Bishop of
Antioch, being condemned for the Gospel, to be torn and devoured of wild
^e^sses: Ignatius an. dom. 80.
brast suddenly out in these words. So I may find Christ (says he) I pass
neither for beasts, teeth, fire, Iebet, crashing my bones, renting my body,
nor all the cruel torments, the Devil and his instruments can invent.. Who in
the midst of his grievous panges, did valiantly comfort himself, saying: Iam
incipio esse discipulus Christi. For as a Noble man's servant is known by his
masters cognizance: Let no man count that a grievous misery, which Christ has
left as a badge of his blessing.
so is a faithful Christian by bearing his cross with patience.

It is written how a certain Pagan on a time vsyng great injury and outrage
against a godly christ^an, asked him in great disdain, what fruit or profyt he
received by his Christ. Is not this a singular profit (quoth he) that for all
the bitter tants cruel in^urie, An example of patience.
and grievous outrage against me, yet I do patiently suffer, and willingly
pardon thee without revenge?

Chapter VIII. Of true repentance with her inseparable furniture.
REpentance is an inward sorrow, compunction, and mourning of the heart, Psalm.
51.17. 2 Cor. 7.10
and conscience for sins committed: and contains three parts. Contrition
of heart, confession of mouth, and reformation of life. 1 John. 1.8.9.10.
Like as a man feeling his body grievously Math. 3.8.
infected with sickness does first acknowledge his disease: secondly, seek to
the Physician for remedy: and thirdly, being cured, is careful to temper his
diet, and keep his body from surfeiting again. So is it the manner and duty
of every christian Pilgram, feeling his soul surfeted with sins: first by
earnest repentance to acknowledge his own wickedness: secondly by humble,
faithful, and devout prayer to seek unto Christ for pardon: and thirdly by
restraining and subduing his fleshly appetits and unruly affections, to keep
himself from falling again. And as when the air is one cast with storms,
the Sun darkened with tempest, the clouds torn with thunder, and the ground
bed^wed with rain, straight follows calm and fair wether. So when a
penitent christian, feeling his conscience burdened with sins, does humbly
bewail and confess his faults: the tears (like drops of rain) trickling
down his cheeks, with groaning, sighing and sobbing unto God for mercy: at
last, by earnest, faithful, and devout prayer, being easily entreated and
won: straight follows pardon in Christ comfort of conscience, and
quietness of mind.

Psalm. 40.
In this manner the Prophet David, confessed his sins to be more in number,
then the hairs of his head. 4 Kings. 20
Manasses bowing the knees of his heart unto God, confessed his faults to be
more then the sands of the Sea. Ezechias turned his face to the wall, and
mourned heavily. Mary Magdalyn fell down behind Jesus, Luke 7.^^.
and lamented pitifully. Peter remembering the words of Christ, after he had for
sworn him, Mat. 26.71.
went out and wept bitterly. Which godly conversion (for that it seems
grievous and painful to flesh and blood, so to resist and strive against the
corruption of nature) is of some called penance. For Christ never assigned any
other penance or satisfaction for sins: John. 8.11.
but go thy way and sin no more.

Thus wheresoever true repentance with her inseparable furniture (as humble
confession: faithful prayer, and amendment of life) goes before: their
remission of sins (belonging only to penitent sinners) do always follow
after. And where acknowledging of sins leads not the way: Luke 2^.3.
there the gates of Gods mercy is always shut.

Chapter IX. Of Confession of sins.
THere be four manner of confessions allowed before God.

The first is public: as when for some notorious crime committed) the church
is grievously offended: the gilty offender ought then to come forth in open
assembly, and there (with an unfeigned show of repentance, 2 Cor. 2.3.9
and earnest desire of pardon) to make confession of his fault. Humble thy
self (says saint Ambrose) and entreat thy mother, Ambrose in his 2. B. of
repentance Chap. 10.
the church of GOD to weep for thee, and wash away thine offenses with her
tears.

The second is, when one private person (by word or deed) has done injury,
hurt, or wrong unto an other: the party offender ought then in charitable manner
to come unto him, James 5.16. Math 5.23.24.
confess his fault, desire a brotherly reconcillatio^, and make satisfaction
for the injury committed. Non remittitur peccatum (says S. Augustine) nisi
restituatur ablatum: August.
that is to say, the fault is not pardoned, without restitution (either in
effect, or affect) to the party offended.

The third, when a man is distressed in mind, or troubled in conscience, he
ought then to resort unto his pastor, or else some other learned man, whose
office and duty is by the word of God, 2. Tim. 3.16 17. 2. Cor. 1.4.
to instruct his mind, resolve his conscience, and comfort his weakness

The fourth is a daily opening of our hearts in secret before God. Prou. 24.
The just man (says Solomon) falls seven times, and rises again. Who so
hides his sins (says he) shall not prosper: Prou. 28.
but he that confesses and forsakes them, shall have mercy.

Chrisost. upon the 30. Psalm. homili. 2.
Confess thy sins in this life (says Chrisotome) that thou may have rest
in the life to come: not unto the Priest, Auricular confession was first
compelled by Pope Innocent. an. dom. 1198. Psalm. 32.6. 1 John 1.9.
who is but thy fellow servant, but unto God himself, who is able to heal them.

I said I will confess my sins unto the Lord (says David) and thou
forgauest the wickedness of my fault. If we acknowledge our sins (says the
Apostle) God is merciful and just to forgive us our sins, and cleanse us from
all unrighteousness.

Chapter X. Of faith, hope, and charity.
FAith is a certainty of things, which are not seen: Hebru. 11.1
a sure persuasion and steadfast consent of the heart and conscience: wherewith
man believes that, which his dull capacity ca^ not comprehend: and is divided
into three kinds.

The first is called a dead or fruitless faith, James. 2.19.
referred only to Devils and reprobats: who though they believe the story of
the Bible, and all the articles of the common Creed, except remission of
sins: yet remain still in their damnable state.

The second is to work miracles: Luke 17.6. Mark. 9.23.11, 23.
as with a certain assured persuasion, to believe that a thing shall come to
pass: Acts 3.16.
whereby the Apostles did cast out Devils and heal diseases: Which kind, is
common as wel^ to the reprobate as to the elect. Mat. 7.22.23.
But the true, lively, and justifying faith: Math. 3.17. Acts 10.43.
whereby Gods wrath is pacifyed: our sins pardoned: our minds lightened: our
hearts strengthened: James 1.6. To. 8.14.15. 1 Cor. 6.15.19.
our praye^s heard: our requests granted: and we adopted the children of God,
members of Christ, and Temples of the holy ghost: Hebru. 11.6. Math. 16.17. To.
10 17. Luke 24.45. To. 10.10.1.16.
without which it is not possible to please him: is a syngular gift of God,
whereby his holy spirit (by the preaching of his word and sacraments) does
seal and conform in the hearts and conscience of his elect, a certain assured
trust: Which proseedeth rather from the affections of the heart, then the
understanding of the brain. John 3.16.
that only by and through the conception, birth, merits, death, passion,
resurrection, assention, and intercession of that pure innocent Lamb Christ
Jesus: to have free pardon and remission of sins, both original, and
actual, and reign with him in glory for ever.

Pope is an assured, constant, and vnmoouable expectation: which as an
inseparable companion, To. 15.4.8.24.
does steadfastly look and long for the perfourmance of those things, 1 These.
5.8. Titus 2.13. Heb. 10, 21.
which faith belieueth to be true: and is therefore called the blood of faith,
and anchor of salvation.

Love in general, is a common effect of favor and affection: and charity is
love, reduced in due order, the handmaid of faith, and mistres of all other
virtues.

And as faith believes the word, and hope waits for the promised reward: so
charity seeks to help, comfort, and relieve her neigh: Math. 7.12. 1. Cor.
13.4.7.
hour. To profit and do good unto all: and to hurt or hinder none. To love all
men in Christ, and for Christ's sake: and to hate none but sin, Romans 13.10.
Math. 5.44. Ioh. 13.35.
and for sins sake.

And as the spirit of life, descending from the head, disperseth into every
part of the body: so that if any member shall not be partaker thereof, it
cannot live, but perish terrestrially: even so the spirit of Christ, (being
the head of his Church) so disperseath into every member thereof, quickening,
knitting, and joining them together, by the virtue of concord, love, Mat.
22.12. Ioh. 13.35.
and charity: that if any part, or member shall be separate, or cut from the
same: it cannot live but perish eternally.

Chapter XI. Of prayer and meditation.
AS amongst the Jews in old time, those beasts only, Leu. 11. Prayer must
be grounded upon faith, and faith upon the word of God.
which chew the endde, were counted clean, and meet for the sustenance of
man: so those men only which (by faithful prayer, and meditation) chew the
cudd of their minds: are counted righteous, and meet for the kingdom of
heaven.

Meditation is the keye of conscience, which opens the closet of the heart:
and the eye of the soul, whereby she sees her whole estate, defect, and
danger.

Prayer is an humble lifting up of the mind unto God: the fruits of
repentance, and food of faith: Colo. 4.2.
consisting of two parts: invocation, and thanksgiving. Which Christ himself,
has not only in mercy ordained, as the chiefest part of Divinity: profitably
appointed it, as the surest staff for a christian pilgrim to s^ay upon: Mat.
14.38. 1. Tim. 2.1.
straightly commanded it, as the strongest defense for his poor distressed
children to fly unto: and by his own example confirmed it, Luke 22.40.41.
as the only mean to obtain all things meet for the use and profit of
man: Math. 7.8. Math. 6.9.
but has also prescribed, an ordinary rule, and firm (as it were his common
store house of wealth and virtue) to direct our prayers according to his own
divine wisdom. Wherein is contained all things necessary, both concerning
his own glory: the health of our souls: and preservation of our bodies.
Adding thereunto, a certain assured promise, confirmed with an oath, and
sealed with his own blood: that whosoever do faithfully believe in him: put
their trust in his mercy: and depend wholly upon his providence: Mat. 6.30. Act.
10.43. John 6.47. Mark. 11.34 Ioh. 16.23.
shall have clean remission of sinn^s, and eternal life. And whatsoever they
shall profitably ask in his name: he will assuredly here them, and grant
their requests. Psalm. 50.
Call upon me in the day of trouble (says the Lord:) and I will hear thee,
and thou shall praise me. This is the trust that we have toward him (says the
Evangelist) that if we ask any thing according to his will, 1. Ioh. 5.14.
he hears us. If you abide in me, and my words abide in you (says our
Savior) ask what you will, and it shall be done unto you. Ioh. 15.7.
Whatsoever you shall ask in prayer, if you do believe (says he) you shall
receive it. Mat. 21, 22.
The Lord is nigh unto all that ca^l upon him (says David) Yea unto all such
as call upon him faithfully. I will hear before you call, Psalm. 145.
yea while you are but even thinking to speak, says the Lord. Esaias 65.


As truly as he heard Iobes prayer in the dunghill: Jeremy, in the clay
p^tte: Job. 42. Lam. 3. Daniel 6.3. Jonas 2. Act. 7.
Daniell in the Lions den: the three children, in the flaming fire: Iona^ in
the whales bellye: and Steven under the stones: so truly will he hear the
rest of his obedient children, All times, in all places and for all persons.
James 1.6.7
that call faithfully upon him in distress, and mistrust him not. But he that
doubts (says the Apostle) is like a wave of the sea, tossed with the wind, and
carried with violence. Neither let that man think, that he shall receive any
thing of the Lord.

Some are not heard, Like a harper that plaieth one tune and sings an other.
because they pray with lips only, without the affections of the heart. Some
for ungratefully abusing Gods benefits, as though got by their own policy.

Some in praying for superfluity, are iustlye denied things necessary. You
receive not (says the Apostle) because you ask not. James 4.2.3
And you ask and receive not: because you ask amiss.

The matter in prayer lies not in much saying, but well saying. It is not in
the number of words, Math. 6.6.7
or lowdnesse of voice: but the zealous affection of an humble penitent heart:
Esaias. 57. Psalm. 31.
and the fervent groaning desire of a troubl^d spiri^e: that as most delicate
music, pearceth the heavens, and sounds in Gods sacred ears: as dainty
meat pleases his divine taste: and as sweet incence, delights his heavenly
smell.

When Anna (a figure of the Church) did pray in the Temple: 1. King. 1.
her heart and lips did move: but her voice was not heard: and yet God hard
her. So was Moises said to be vehement in prayer, Exodus 14.
when he spoke not one word.

It is moreover to be observed: that our prayers for spiritual gifts,
pertaining to the soul, ought always to be absolute, without condition: as
well assured of rem^ss^on of sins, and eternal salvation in Christ,
according to his promise. But for temporal things pertaining to the body: to
b^e always joined with this condition: that if it shall please his fatherly
goodness, to grant our petitions. Because we are ignorant, what is most meet,
and profitable for us.

When it pleases the Lord to bestow a benefit of his children: his custom
is, Phil. 2.13.
first to sti^re up their minds: move their hearts: and open their lips,
humbly to pray unto him. Phil. 2.13.
And then (as a loving father) so far as shall further his own glory, and
their salvation: to grant their requests. For whatsoever is contrary, is
vnme^t for him to give: and hurtfu^l for us to receive.

And though our prayers be but weak, faint, For if God should straightly
measure man's imperfections by the straight rule of his word, the most righteous
man upon earth should not be able to stand before him. Mat. 9.24. Math. 7.6.15
29. Wisd. 1.
and full of wandering fantasies: yet in stirring up our selves, what in us
lies: he will no doubt, put to his helping hand: sharpen our duln^s:
strengthen our weakness: pardon our imperfections: and accept our obedience.
But contrariwise: as he is merciful, so is he just. As he is liberal, so is
he wise. He appeared not unto Moises, before he had run out of Egypt, unto
the hills of Madian. Neither will he endewe the hearts of such, with his
heavenly consolation: as are yet possessed with worldly vanities. He will not
cast pearls before swine: not the childrens bread unto dogs; Neither give a
taste of his treasure where there is no will to receive it. He will be found of
those (says the wise man) that tempt him not.

Chapter. XII. Of true abstinence or fasting.
FAsting serves especially to three ends. First, to mortify, and subdue the
lusts of the flesh. Secondlye, to stir up more fervent aptness, Tob. 12.9.
Psalm. 35.13.
to meditation and prayer. And th^rdly, to be a testimony of our inward
humility, and duetifull obedience to the will of God.

We ought to fast (says S. Ambrose) to keep our bodies from surfeiting:
Ambrose.
and our souls from sinning.

The diseases of the mind (says S. Ierom) are to be healed with praying:
Ierom.
and the lusts of of the body, with fasting. For even as a wanton pampered
horse, does strive to cast his rider: so does a wanton pampered body, by
nature, resist against reason, and virtue. And as a fat foul with few feathers,
is unapt to fly in the air: so our prayers (as it were the wings of the
soul) without abstinence of body: Luke 2.37. Mat. 17.21.
are unapt to fly unto heaven.

The body of an obedient Christian, is the meetest temple wherein the holy
Ghost delights to dwell. 1. Cor. 6.19 Psalm. 51.17.
An humble penitent heart, the fittest altar, whereon the Lord takes pleasure,
to receive our offerings: and the mortifying of our flesh, the most acceptable
sacrifice, Romans 6.12. Colo. 3.5.6
to appease the honorable majesty of our God.

Yet always provided, that as he is well contented with the abstinence of the
godly: so much more with the conversion of a sinner. He is greatly moved with
the prayers of the just: but much more, with the restitution of the injurious.
He is greatly delighted with the patience of the sick, James 1.3.4 James 2.15
but much more with the charitable hospitality of those that be whole.

It is good to fast (says S. Augustine) but better to give alms. Augustine
in his 64. sermon of time.
When the lusts of the flesh are mortifyed: our wronged brother satisfied: and
our needy neighbor relieved: then God with our fast is well pleased.

The sick for lack of stomach fast
the poor for want of meat,
The couetuous chuffe to spare his purse Augustine in his 41 sermon, in the
wilderness.

the glutton more to eat.
The apish hipocrite for praise
a good man for his souls health always.
Chapter XIII. A brief sum of Christian religion.
AS the wise men of the East did offer unto Christ their costlye presents of
gold, Math. 2.11.
frankensence, and mirre: 1. These. 3.8 Heb. 13.15 Act. 10.4 Ephe. 4.24. 1. These
4.3 Math. 7.12 6.31.33.
so the most precious thing that we can present unto him, is the gold of
faith, and sure hope: the franckensence of zeal, and true devotion: and the
mirre of virtue, and charitable living. To honor him with due obedience: and
depend wholly upon his providence. Joining always practice with knowledge
deeds, with words: keeping, with hearing: walking with talking: and
expressing, with professing. Romans 2.13.
Knowing that not the hearers of the word, but the doers, shall be justified.
Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven: Mat. 7.21. Ioh. 13.17. Luke 11.28.
but he that does the will of my father, which is in heaven. If you understand
these things (says our Savior) happy are you if you do them. Blessed are they
that hear the word of God, and ^eepe it.

Christian duty consists in knowledge of the truth, faith in Christ, and
obedience to his will.
He that hears the word willingly: understands it rightly: belieueth it
faithfuly: learneth it perfectly applies it profitably: and keeps it
diligently: shall joy with Christ assuredly. And this is religion, or godliness,
the ground of conscience, and true devotion.

The word of God propounds; repentance seeks: prayer finds: faith
apprehends: hope assures: and charity perfourmeth. And where faith never
doubts: nor hope never shrinketh: nor charity never cease: there God never
fails. And this is the golden chain of salvation: the true pilgrimage to
Paradise, and right ladder to heaven. To know and believe the truth, are two
wings to fly unto joy: and to resist vice, and practice virtue, two legs to
walk to felicity.

John heard a voice from heaven saying: blessed are the dead which die in the
Lord: Apoc. 14.13
even so says the spir^t, that they rest from their labors, and their works
follow them. And he that will die in the Lord, must be careful to live in the
Lord.

It is an infallible rule, qualis vita, finis ita: to him that lives
virtuously. God does always give grace to dye faithfully. A joyful death
follows a charitable life: and a happy life insueth such a death. So as he
that lives to dye well, shall surely die to live better: whereas he that will
not frame himself to honor and obey the giver of his life: is unworthy to have
or enjoy his life. And as God in old tune, Leuit. 21.
was not contented to be served with the blind, lame, and maimed of the flock:
so he that carelessly imployeth the bewty and strength of his youth, in vice,
vanity, and service of the Devil: as though old rotten bones, and dregs of age
were good enough to use in the seru^ce of God: he seldom grants either time
to live long, or grace to dye well. Such as live like wolves, do often dye like
swine. Commonly after a dissolute life without fear of death, follows a
desperate death, without hope of life. And it agrees with all equity, right,
and reason, that such as in lewd behavior have passed their time: A wicked
life deserves a shameful death.
should by rygure of justice receive their end.

Chapter XIIII. An exhortation to endure constant in time of trial.
IT is required in a true christian Pilgram, to be well and strongly armed with
patience, and girt with constancy, to abide firm and stable in the time of
temptation and trial: To. 8.36.38 39.
so as nether prosperity, nor adversity, well, nor woe, life nor death, can
once move, quail, or discorage him.

Worldly riches are subject to many mishaps: bodily strength is taken away by
sickness: and by age that daily cree^es on, bewty is soon consumed: but a true
constant mind, comforted by Gods holy spirit: no chance or misfortune can alter
or quall. Elias in the desert, John Baptist in the wilderness, and Peeter in
prison with the rest of the Apostles in time of their pilgrimage, had but
simple clothing, but the loins of their minds were we^l and surely gi^t. Whose
commendations of Christ himself are very great: yet not so much for leaving
their parents, friends, goods, and country to follow him: nether for their
strait kind of living, or valiant courage in preaching: as for that they
continued constant to the end. You are they that have byden with me in my
temptation (says he) and I will give you a kingdom: be faithful to the end,
Luke 22.2^.29.
Apoc. 2.10. Apoc. 21.7.
and I will give you a crown of life. He that overcomes, shall possess all
things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my son, Apoc. 2.7.
and shall eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of Paradise of
God. But he that takes the Plough in hand, and looke^h back, Luke 9.62. Heb.
10.3^
is unmeet for the kingdom of heaven. Not every one that runs: but he that
comes to the end of the gole, 1 Cor. 9.24 25.
has the garlande. Not every one that works in the vine^ard: but he that
continues until night, Math. 20.
has the penny. Not every one that fights: but he that gets the victory,
has the crown of triumph. Not every one that begins well, Mat. 10.22
and does good for a time: but he that indureth to the end shall be saved.

When the Angel had wrestled and night with Genesis ^2.
Jacob: at last because it drue near day, desired to depart: (no quoth Jacob)
I will not let thee go before thou bless me. Jacob by faith prevailed, and was
therefore called Israel (that is to say) one that prevails with God: so all
that will be taken at the last day for true christian Israelites: must by
faithful prayer, patience and constancy, prevail with God.

To become a Citizen of heaven, is an office of great honor: and no small
matter to obtain so high a calling. We may not think to have that at the
first chop, which all the godly before us have obtained in long time: with
great trobles, grievous crosses, and many tears. An Oak springs up by little
and little in great space of years: and cut down again by many small strokes.
The soft drops of water, by often falling, do pierce through the hardest stone.
By continual persuasion, the hardness of man's heart is molifyed: and by
continual prayers our God is easily entreated. Without great labor and long
suit, a worldly benefyte is not obtained at an earthly kings hands: so many we
think our selves most happy and blessed: if (when we have patiently waited in
hope, with cont^nuall praying and intr^ating all the days of our life) we may
yet at length obtain our long desired joys. Luke 10 20.


Happy and blessed is he whom the father of mercy endueth with his interior
grace: so to work, run, and persevere: as in the end he may say with the
Apostle: 2. Tim. 4.7.
I have fought a good fight: and got the victory. I have finished my course:
and won the prise. Christ is to me life: and death to me advantage. To him
with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all honor, glory, and thanks for ever.

Chapter XV. A comfortable consolation to the faithful troop of Christian
Pilgrams.
Pluck up thy heart, and rejoice, Sach. 2.8. Psalm. 6.2.9. Luke 12.32. Ihon.
16.20 33.
little poor despised flock: for the Lord has heard the voice of thy weeping:
whose will and pleasure is to give thee a kingdom.

Great are the troubles of the righteous: Psalm. 33.107.
but the Lord himself is the defender of their cause, and will deliver them
out of all. One hair of their head shall not perish: Math 10.30
for they are dearly bought. Even as a Father pittieth his own son: Psalm.
103.
so is our God merciful unto them that fear him. The natural infirmities of
man, are not hid from his eyes: he knows whereof we are made: he remembers
that we are but dust. Psalm. 116.13.
Right dear in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. He that
touches one of his obedient Children, touches the apple of his own eye.
Zach. 2. Esaias 49.
Will a wife forget the child of her womb, or the son that she has borne:
and though she do forget, yet will not I forget thee, says the Lord. I have
been young, Psalm. 37.
and now am old (says David) yet saw I never the righteous forsaken: nor his
Children beg their bread. Yea, rather then Helias shall die for food: he
will prepare the Ravens to feed him. 3 King. 17.
Rather then Sampson shall decay for drink, Judge. 15.
he will bring water out of an Asses Iawe bone, to refresh him. Rather then
Israel shall starve for hunger: He will send Manna from Heaven, to norish them.
rather then his people shall perish for thirst: Exodus 16.
he will turn the hard Rock into a standing water, Deutr. 8.
to comfort them. Rather then any harm shall come unto his chosen: he will
set his Angels to keep and preserve them: and carry the poor beggar into
Abraham's boosome. Heb. 1.14. Math. 18.10. Psalm. 34. Euk. 16.22. Esaias. 54.
The Mountains shall move, and the hills shall fall down: but my loving
kindness, shall never move, nor fall, says the Lord.

Psalm. 12.5.1.
They that put their trust in him (says the Prophet) shall be even as mount
Sion, which may not be removed, but stands fast for ever.

1 Cor, 11.32 Not barre^ trees, but fruitful are yearly beaden.
And though our loving Father, whose will and pleasure is, not to cocker his
children in this life: but rather to punish their sins, that they should not
be condemned in the world to come) do feed them for a time, Esaias 30.
with the sour bread of heaviness, and bitter water of affliction: to try
them in the fournace of adversity: Prou 17.
as the potters vessel in the oven: or gold in the fire: Apoc. 3.11.
yet the time of refreshing (no doubt) is even at hand. He will come shortly,
and will not tarry: to wipe all tears from their eyes: and turn their sorrow,
Apoc. 7.17. Esaias 61 Math. 16.20
and misery into joy and felicity for ever.

Whom the Lord loves, him he chasteneth: Prou. 3. Tob. 12
and yet delights in him as a father in his son. Because thou wast beloved
of God (says the Angel to Tobias) it was necessary that temptation should
try thee.

Like as the Heards-man, when any of his flock are unruly, and straye from
their fellows: sends forth his dog not of malice to hurt on devour them:
but of love to save and refourme them. Even so our heavenly Shepherd; when his
sheep go astray, and offend him: he sends out his dog of tribulation:
not of e^uye to hurt or distroy them: but of favor to correct and am^nd them.

And as the skillful Physician prescribes not one manner of diet, nor one
kind of medecin, to all his patients: but only that which he knows most
meet for their bodily health, according to the complexion of the man, and
quality of the disease: so where as God our only sailfull Physician, knowing
best what is meet and expedient for the health of all men, both body and soul:
does give unto some prosperity, some adversity, some health, some sickness, some
quietness, Iams. 1 12. Phil. 4.11.
and some troubles: it is our duty to rest contented with his will: knowing
that he never fails his children in necessity: nor suffers them to be
tempted above their power. 1. Cor. 10.13
Though he makes a wound (says Job) he giu^th a plaster, Job. 5.
and though he smite, he makes hole. Genesis 32.
As in wrestling with Jacob with one hand: he did comfort and strengthen him
to overcome with the other. 2. Pet. 2^.
So will he either strengthen the rest of his obedient Children, 1. Cor. 10.13
to endure and overcome their troubles: or else open a way whereby to avoid
them. And often times those things, which are taken for punishments, are
rather profitable medecins. For even as the Nurse, by anointing her breast with
Aloes, does weane her Infant from sucking: so does God by tribulation and
adversity: weane his Children from sensual delights.

Deutr 1.
And as Moses, by striking the hard stony Rock, with his Rod: brought forth
plenty of Water: even so GOD by stryking the stony Heart of Man with affliction:
brings forth tears of contrition. And as in the Gold-smithes Forge, the
gold is fined, while the Coals are burned: so in the Forge of temptation and
trouble: the faithful are tried, and fined: while the wicked are hardened and
consumed.

And as the seed, which is cast upon the land: unless it endure the coldness
of rain, frost, and snow: can bring forth no fruit: no more can man: He that
sows in tears shall reap in joy. Prou. 10. Esaias 51.4.5 52.4.
unless he do patiently bear the cross of tribulation and adversity: bring
forth true fruits of the Gospel. The patient abiding of the righteous (says
Solomon) shall be turned into gladness. The Lord corrects all those whom he
loves: Heb. 12.6. Apoc. 3.19.
and scourges every son that he receives. So as there is no greater
temptation, then never to be tempted: nor sorer whip, then never to be scourged.

Yet such is the natural infirmity of man: that it God begin a little to
chastise: we sorrow and lament, as though there were none other hell. And if we
flourish a little in prosperity: we laugh and sing, as though there were none
other heaven. Having more respect, how the world is inclined: then what the
Lord has commanded. Whereas we should not so much regard what we are here:
as what here after we shall be. Not what we have now: but what we shall have,
in time to come. For all that Christ dyed for, is yet behind. His kingdom is
not of this world. The effect of his death, is not to make us flourish in this
life. The joy of Gods children, and sorrow of his enemies, begins not till
after death.

Hoc momentum, vnde pendet eternitas. This is a place of temptation and trial:
a moment of time, whereof depends eternity of life to come. The figure of
this life: withal the glory pomp, 1. Cor. 7.31. 2. Cor. 5.17. 2. Pet. 3.13.
and vanity thereof: shall vanish and pass away, and all things must be new.
New heaven: new earth: new bodies: new minds: and all things new: such as
neither eye has seen: ear has heard: nor heart has understand before.

Chapter XVI. Of the joyful state of Gods children after the last judgment.
AS the world had a beginning: so shall it have an ending. The heavens (says
the Apostle) shall pass away in manner of a tempest: 2. Pet. 3.
the eliments shall melt with heat: and the earth with all things therein
contained shall burn with fire, and be consumed. But the Lord will crea^e new
heavens, Esaias 51.8.
and a new earth: Esaias 65.17.
and the former (says the prophet) shall not be remembered nor come to mind.

I saw (says the Evangelist) a new heaven. and a new earth: for the first
heavens, Apoc. 21.
and the first earth were passed away, and there was no more sea.



And I saw the holy city new Jerusalem, All things shall be renewed and
restored to the most excellent state of perfection, as in paradise before Adams
fall.
come down from God, out of heaven, prepared as a bride, trimmed for her
husband. And I heard a great voice out of heaven saying: behold the tabernacle
of God is with men: and he will dwell with them: and they shall be his people:
and he himself shall be their God with them: and shall wipe away all tears
from their eyes. And there shall be no more death: neither sorrow: neither
crying: neither shall there be any more pain: for the first things are gone.
And there shall be no night there: Apoc. 22.5.
and they need no candle, neither light of the sun, for the Lord God gives
them light: and they shall reign for evermore. Thy son shall never go down
(says the Prophet) and thy name shall not be taken away: Esaias 60.
for the Lord himself shall be thine everlasting light: and thy sorrowful
days shall be ended. Esaias 30.
The move (says he) shall then be as light as the sun: and the sun light
shall be increased, seven fold: and have as much shine as in seven days
besides.

And as the new heavens, and new earth which I will make, Esaias 66.
shall remain before me (says the Lord) so shall your seed, and your name
continue: and from month to month: and from Saboth to Saboth: shall all
flesh come and worship before me (says the Lord) and they shall go forth,
and look upon the karcases of the men which have transgressed against me: for
their worm shall not die neither shall their fire be quenched: and they shall
be an abhorring unto all flesh.

As the gold is desolued in the fire (says S. Augustine) not to perish,
Augustine de ciuitate dei.
but to make it more fine, and pure: so the first heaven, defiled with the
pride of Angels: and the first earth corrupted with the wickedness of man:
shall vanish, pass away, and be no more seen. Not altered in verity, and
substance: but changed in fashion, form, and shape. 1. Cor. 7.31
So as the nature, quality, and complexion, of corruptible Elemen^s, agreeable
to these our mortal bodies: shall then be transformed, to agree with our
immortal, and purified bodies: 1. These. 4.16
and so remain for ever.

And as we are now clothed, with the Image of Adams corruptible body, 1. Cor.
15.48.49.
subject to death and misery: Phil. 3.21. 1. Cor. 15.52.53.
so shall we then be clothed with the Image of Christ's glorified body,
changed into perfection and sincerity. When Christ shall appear (says the
Apostle) we shall be like unto him, and see him as he is. 1. John 3.2.
And though we shall not then, as now: Ierom. Mat. 22.30. Psalm. 78.25. Job. 19.
be maintained and fed with elimentall food, but as the Angels in heaven: Not
airie spitits but incorruptible bodies. Theodoret in his 2. dialoge. 1. Cor.
15.38.44. Luke 24.39
Yet our bodies of the same human nature, shape, and fashion, of flesh and
bones, with all parts and members of a man, as in this life. Not altered in
substance: but changed in property. Behold my hands and my feet (says our
Savior his Disciples) for it is even I my self: handle me and see: for a
spirit has not flesh and bones as you see me have.

Ioh. 20.19 Anselm. in lib. de simili, Chap. 48.49.
Yet such was his body, as he entered the chamber where they were assembled, the
doors being shut. Anselmus affirms that ye glorifie^ to ies of the just:
shall be so pure, and p^rfect, as may easily pearce or penitrate, Mat. 13.43.
Daniel 12.
any other body, without resistance, or danger: and in beaut^e shall shine, as
the sun.

And as we shall be new men: so shall we have new senses to understand things,
not as they seem: 1. Cor. 13.12.
but as they are in deed: And behold the divine mystery of God, face to
face. The fruition of whose glorious presence (as the original fountain from
whence, all wisdom, gladness, joy, virtue, and true felicity, do proceed)
shall so ravish, content, and satisfy, every member, 1. Ioh. 14. Act. 2.28. 1.
Cor. 2.9.
power, and sense of body, and mind, with fu^l perfection, of pleasure and
delight: as neither eye has seen: ear has heard: tongue can express: nor
heart imagine. In comparison whereof: all the va^ne pleasures of this world,
are but fained shows, or dark shadows.

There was in the temple at Jerusalem, and so in the tabernacle, two vales. The
first in the sanctuary: and the second in sanctum sanctorum. The outward vale
did signifye the covering and concealing of those mysteries, glad tidings, of
the Gospel, or doctrine of grace: pertaining to the church militant. 2. Cor.
3.13.14.18.
Which at the death of christ (to show that the same was then reueiled: the
fiery sword, which kept the gate of Paradise removed: and the way to God the
Father, unto all true believers, laid open) did rent and tear in sunder. Mat.
27.51


The inward vale, did signify the covering and concealing of those divine
mysteries, which after the general judgment shall be revealed: when we shall
see his glorious majesty face to face, as he is. Which vale had four colors,
1. Cor. 13.12
signifying the four Elements: being impediments, and lets, to keep us from
the sight of those heavenly substances, which our immortal and glorified
bodies, shall then behold.

And as our Savior Christ, Phil. 2.
laid aside the part of majesty: took upon him the form of a servant: and
having performed due obedience, and subjection unto his father: is now advanced
to the highest dominion, and crowned with honor and glory, that all knees
shall bow unto him. So after the last day, Romans 14.11
when he has performed the offic^ of a mediator: he shall yield up into the
hands of his Father, 1. Cor. 15.24.25.
both the kingdom, name, and crown of glory: Master Calvin in his
institutions.
and be content with that same glory which he inioyed before the creation of
the world: that God may be all in all.

A Meditation of the Lords prayer.
Our Father which art in heaven: hallowed be thy name.

THy sacred word (oh heavenly father) whereby thou art known, the only Lord
of mercy and judgment: To. 12.1.2. 1. These. 4 3. Romans 10.17 Psalm. 19.111.
be hallowed, and sanctified in us. That by means of hearing thine everlasting
truth: And viewing thy wondrous wor^es, most glorious in their kind: all
states, and degrees of people, may continually be moved (with humble,
thankful, and obedient hearts) to ext^ll, praise, and magnify thy infynite
goodness for ever. That all may turn to thy glory, and our salvation.

Thy kingdom come.

INcrease (most loving Father) thy faithful family upon earth: Gala. 1.4.
Apoc. 22.20 Mat. 24.31. 1. These. 4.17
and make have to deliver us, from this present evil world. Come Lord quickly,
to shorten these our sinful days, and bring our miserable pilgrimage to an
end. That all may turn to thy glory, and our salvation.

Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.

OH merciful God, whose eternal will and pleasure is, to glorify them that
glorify thee in themselves. 2 These. 1.10 1 Cor 6.20. 1 These. 4 3.
We beseech thy fatherly goodness, so to frame our hearts in due obedience, to
thy heavenly will: as our chief study care, and delight, may be wholly applied
to the suppressing of falshod and vice: the aduauncing of truth and virtue:
Luke 14.27.
and bearing with patience the cross of our loving Redeemer after him. That al
may turn to thy glory and our salvation.

Give us this day, our daily bread.

OH most bountiful and gracious Sovereign: at whose mercyes seat, all mankind
must call, and cry for grace: Math. 7.7
at whose almes-basket, both King and Keaser are driven to beg their bread:
at whose bountiful hands, Psalm. 145.
all living creatures (in due season) expect the^r food. We humbly beseech
thee: so to comfort, norish, and relieve our souls with thy true and wholesome
bread of life: John. 6.58.
as the promise of remission of sins, and redemption in Christ, may assuredly
be sealed in our hearts, and conscience. And at thy good will, and pleasure,
give us thy daily blessing of food and raiment: Mat. 6.31.33.
with all things needful for our bodily sustinance in this life. Da mihi Do^.
hodie quod sufficit, and eras plurima petam, Chrisost.
Not desyring with covetous worldlings, to wallow in superfluity: but with
Solomon, a mean contented living, to aid necessity. That all may turn to thy
glory and our salvation

Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.

OH merciful Father, who have promised free pardon and forgiveness of sins,
co^ditionally, that we do humbly acknowledge our faults: Joel. 2. Luke 3.8.
Math. 6.14.15.
amend our lives: and show like pity and compassion, to our brethren that
offend us. We humbly beseech thee, so to relent and mollify, our hard stony
hearts, with the piercyng oil of thy interior grace: as our love and charity
toward them, Luke 17.3.4.
may declare the same promise to be thankfully received of us. That all may
turn to thy glory, and our salvation.

Lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil.

WE pray and beseech thee most gracious Sovereign to bridle and restrain the
furious rage of Satan, our mortal enemy. Who like a ramping and roaring Lion,
1 Pet. 8.5.9.
seeks continually to seduce and lead us into err^r, sin, and utter
destruction. Strengthen our weakness: 1 Cor. 10.30
quicken our dullness: pardon our negl^gence: increase our faith: and keep us
in all truth godliness, and virtue. That we may alw^ies render unto thy
glorious majesty (without beginning, change, or end) all honor, power, and
dominion for ever, Amen.

A most godly and comfortable prayer in time of adversity.
OH eternal and most loving father, thou God of mercy and judgment: to whom
all things in heaven and earth, do bow and obey. At the countinance of whose
glorious majesty, the whole wo^ld does tremble and quake. Who has fashioned
man of slime and earth, covered him in his mothers womb: and redeemed him from
death and hell. Who sees the very secrets of man's heart: understands his
thoughts: and spiest out all his ways. To thee, oh heavenly king, I humbly
bow the knees of my heart: beseeching thy fatherly goodness (in Jesus Christ) to
hear me poor wretched child of Adam: begotten and borne in sin: disquieted
with troubles: wrapped in adversity, and oppressed with misery. Yet by thy secret
purpose pertain to thy kingdom. An unruly sheep of thy fold, by election and
calling: an unprofitable servant of thy household by obedience and duty. And
unworthy son of thy family, by adoption and grace.

I will call mine own ways to remembrance: confess mine iniquities against
my self: and power out my complaint before thee. G^ue ear to my prayer O
Lord: consider my distress: and ponder the voice of my humble desires. Let the
words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be always acceptable in thy
sight: O Lord my strength and my redemer. I have sinned most grievously (Oh
merciful God) against heaven, and before thee. I have sore provoked thine
anger, oh Lord: thy wrath is waxen hot, and thy heavy displeasure is sore
kindled against me. And now in the vexation of my spirit: and the anguish of my
soul (Remembering thy fatherly kindness toward penitent sinners) I appeal to
thy eternal mercy: acknowledge my wickedness: and lament my grievous offenses.
My heart is broken with sorrows: my life waxe^ old with heaviness: and my years
with mourning. How long will thou be angry with thy servant to Lord: how long
shall I seek counsel in my soul: and be so vexed in my spirit? How long shall
I (poor sinful wretch) be tossed in these troublesome floods of mortality:
bewayling the tediousnes of this my yrksome pilgrimage. The infant overcomes
his mother with crying: the child his father with weeping: and the servant his
master with submission. and will thou be no more entreated? Oh Lord, where are
thy tender mercies, and loving kindness, which has bin ever of old? our Fathers
hoped in thee, and were delivered: they put their trust in thee, and were not
confounded. Thou art the father of the fatherless: and the helper of the
friendless. Thou have always heard the humble desire of the poor: thou
preparest their heart to call upon thee: and thine Ears harken thereunto. Thou
deliuerest them from wrong: and right dear is their blood in thy sight. Why
art thou so full of heaviness then, oh my soul: and why art thou so disquieted
within me? Oh put thy trust in God: for I will yet give him thanks, which is
the help of my countinance, and my God. Yea though he kill me: yet will I
trust in him. I will sing unto the Lord, so long as I live: and will praise my
God while I have any being. He has chastened, and corrected me: but not given
me over unto death. And therefore my heart daunceth for joy: my flesh shall rest
in hope: and in my song will I praise him. I will honor him with due obedience:
serve him in fear: and rejoice unto him with reverence. Rebuke me not in thine
anger oh Lord; neither chasten me in thy heavy displeasure. Forsake me not in
mine old age, when my strength fails me: but comfort my heaviness: pity my
misery: and relieve my necessity. Cleanse me from my secret faults: and pardon
the sins of my youth. Grant me a new heart: a new mind: a new spirit: and a
new life. And I will offer unto thee the sacrifice of thanks giving, and
rejoice in thy salvation, oh thou most highest. Thy testimonies shall delight my
soul, in the days of my trouble: thy statutes shall be my songs, in the
house of my pilgrimage: and thy law shall be dearer unto me: then thousands of
gold and silver. To thee oh heavenly Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost:
three distinct persons in Trinity: and one God in power, might, and majesty:
be everlasting glory, perpetual praise: and eternal thanks for evermore, world
without end: Amen,

The Table of the Chapters, contained in this book.
Chapter I. He that in Paradise will taist the fruits of Divinity, must first
learn to know himself in the schole of humility. fol. 1. Chapter II. Of the
loathsome deformity of nature through Adams fall. fol. 3. Chapter III. Of the
misery of Adams brats, and vanity of the world. fol. 5. Chapter IIII. Of the
breuitye of man's life, and certaintye of Death. fol. 10. Chapter V. The passage
of Paradise is aptly compared to a warfare. fol. 14. Chapter VI. The armor and
weapons of a Christian Soldiour. fol. 17. Chapter VII. He that in Paradise will
come to joy with Christ, must travel with patience under the cross of Christ.
fol. 20. Chapter VIII. Of true repentance with her inseparable furniture. fol.
23. Chapter IX. Of Confession of sins. fol. 25. Chapter X. Of faith, hope,
and charity. fol. 27. Chapter XI. Of prayer and meditation. fol. 29. Chapter
XII. Of true abstinence or fasting. fol. 34. Chapter XIII. A brief sum of
Christian religion. fol. 36. Chapter XIIII. An exhortation to endure constant
in time of trial. fol. 38. Chapter XV. A comfortable consolation to the
faithful troop of Christian Pilgrims. fol. 41. Chapter XVI. Of the joyful
state of Gods children, after the last judgment. fol. 46. A meditation of the
Lords prayer. fol. 52. A most godly and comfortable prayer in time of
adversity. fol. 55.


