A Treatise, Showing the possibility, and conueniencie of the real presence
of our Savior in the blessed Sacrament:

The former is declared by similitudes and examples: the latter by the causes
of the same.

MAN HAS EATEN THE BRAEDE OF ANGELS. Ps. 77 INRI

IHS



At Antwerp Imprinted by Ioachim Trognesius. 1596.

Iudic. 14 De comedente exiuit cibus, and de forte egressa est dulcedo.

Meat went out of the eater, and sweetness issued from the strong.

Zach. 9. Quid enim bonum eius est, and quid pulchrum eius, nisi frumentum
electorum and vinum, germinans virgins.

For what of his is good? and what of his is beautiful, but the wheat of his
elected, and wine that springs virgins.

The Praeface to the christian Reader.
FROM the same fire the sulpher match and the white taper draw two sundry
flouers: the one yielding a sweet savor, the other a stinking sent: the one in
color resembling the brightness of heaven, the other in show the darkness of
hell: the one ascending with mild and calm motion, declaring the aeriall and
uniform substance, the other still frying and bubling expresses the
terrestrial nature and violent mixture. From the same Scriptures Catholics
and Heretics draw diverse lights: the Catholic clear, bright, worthy of God,
suitable to man, agreeable with the Text, consenting with Fathers, answerable to
antiquity. The Heretics, dark expositions, forced interpretations, racked
senses, stinking of pride, breathing sensuality, dissenting from the Primitive
Pastors, swaruing from ecclesiastical traditions, repugning to Christ's church
the pillar of truth. This diversity proceeds not from the word of God, which
is most holy, and lies alike open to them both, but from the Interpreters
dispositions. As in the aforesaid example, those various lights of the taper
and match were not caused by the fire, but by their own qualities and temper.
For the Catholic comes with humility, the Heretic with arrogancy: the
Catholic with submission to the leaders of Christ's flock, the heretic with
presumption of his own conceit: the Catholic armed with consent of Fathers,
the heretic with his own singularity: the Catholic trusting in God, and
hoping in his grace, the Heretic relying wholly, either upon the forces of his
feeble wit, or beguiled with the illusions of Lucifer. The which difference,
though in all controversies of religion now called in question, it appears
manifestly (to all those who will examine them to the botome, and wade into the
depth: where they shall find no other grounds of heresy, than Chimericall
interpretations, and selfe-willed expositions of the Scriptures) yet in none so
much as about the blessed Sacrament. The Catholics from these four words,
Hoc est corpus meum, deduce their dreadful, reverent, maiesticall, and deified
sacrifice, the light of Paradise, the food of Angels. The Heretics their
common-table Communion, their profane supper, their schismatic cup, their
tipicall bread, their unblessed breakefast. Yet as the taper receives often
light from the stinking match, so the wisdom of God by his infinite providence
has so permitted these heretical dissentions in his church: that by occasion
of them the verities of the Catholic religion shine now as clear as the Sun
at noonetide in the beuty of brightness. For how many worthy Volumes have bin
penned thereupou most learnedly, which otherwise should never have seen light?
what devotion has this antiperistasis or enuironing repulsion wrought in the
hearts of Catholics? for by infallible records it may be proved, that for a
hundred that were accustomed to communicate weekly in great cities, now there
are well nie ten thousand. Again, since the Eucharist has been so impiously
blasphemed of the adversary, how gloriously, how religiously, how
maiestically has it been consecrated upon the altar, reserved in the
tabernacle, carried in procession, in respect of former ages? what co^course
have we seen of Catholics to the church to worship it? what fervor in
praying to it? what learned Sermons in exalting it? what zeal to defend it?
and not without cause: for so great reverence the majesty of God required, his
love deserved, our homage enforced, so many graces thereby received, exacted,
so that heresy has rubd off the rust of ignorance from many catholics, it
has burned the chafe of imperfections, and purified the corn of devotion, it
has blown off the ashes of remissenes, and revived the coals of seruour and
charity. Finally, it has dispersed the clouds of some irreuerence, and
caused the blessed eucharist shine like a spiritual sun in the Catholic
church. If saint Gregory called the sin of Adam Foelix culpa, a happy offense,
that deserved such a Redeemer, I may say happy heresy that caused such
reformation: nay rather cursed heresy, and blessed providence of God, in
ordaining so inordinate a thing to so ordinate and noble an end. Wherefore
since al catholics, either by devotion, or religious alms, or frequent
communion, or daily reverence, or ardent affects, or learned books endeavor
to oppose themselves against the enemies of this sacrament, I thought good to
cast my two Mites in Gazophylacium, that they with whom I Luke 21.
am lincked in faith might know mine affection by work, and he to whom my
soul is due, may here receive the offspring of my soul. The title perhaps
will seem somewhat stale, but I hope the manner of explicating to be new: or at
least, that which lies scattred abroad in Fathers and Doctors, here they shall
find united in one. And this argument the rather I have handled first, because
I proved in my self and diverse other Catholics, that it did not only revive
greatly our faith, but al^o moved us to conceive a more maiesticall and divine
opinion of the wisdom and providence of God in instituting this sacrament.
For by understanding how agreeable it was with all his attributes, how glorious
for his church, how convenient for man, how profitable to all members of his
elected congregation, I could not but cry out with David and say, quam
magnificata sunt opera tua Domine! Omnia Psalm. 103.
in sapientia fecisti: impleta est terra possessione tua: How glorious are thy
works O Lord! thou have made al things in wisdom: the earth is filled with
thy riches. Secondly, because I have tried by experience, that when faith and
reason, grace and nature, consort together they make a sweet harmony: that is,
when reason applies the mysteries of our faith to the wit by showing them
credible, and worthy to be believed, then faith flourishes exceedingly, and
can hardly be removed: as when an excellent eye meets with the clear light
of the sun, how far, how sharply, and how distinctly will it discern even
very aereall vapors, and almost invisible moates. Of such a man spoke the
Prophet when he described the happy man, who did me ditate in the law of God
night and day, that folium eius non defluet, his leaf shall not fall, because
long meditation upon the mysteries of Psalm. 1.
Faith keeps the soul without withering, and faith without perishing: not
but that a Catholic may leese his faith, but with greater difficulty and more
excess of malice: as it befell not long ago to a person of no small account
in England, whom I had known in time past a Catholic, but then a protestant:
by chance once falling in company with him, I demanded how it fared with him
in religion: if he had forsaken that faith utterly which he sometime approved
so fervently: forsaken quoth he, no faith, I am of opiinion, that he which once
is thoroughly grounded in the Catholic religion, can not possibly but with
extreme malignitie alter his religion: well he may change it in show, well he may
mask it with protestancie, well he may vary his affection, but his judgment,
his conceit, his faith, hardly will he change or never: and therefore by Gods
grace, after I have dispatched some affairs; I will renounce the external
profession, of that religion I know false and detest internally: but before
his affairs were dispatched, death had dispatched him, that others may learn
what it is to dally with GOD in matters of salvation. The third reason that
moved me was, the continual and clamorous voices of ignorant Heretics, who
cease not to cry upon Catholics, and vpbra^^ them with absurdities,
impossibilities, unworthy opinions of God and man, dishonorable to him, and
horrible to us. Therefore, that they may see their own ignorance, I thought no
better way to refute them, then by setting down the theological causes of so
divine a mystery: but yet I know it will befall many that shall read them,
either not to conceive them, or to contemn them, for so David said long since:
Quam magnificata sunt opera tua domine, Ps^lm. 91.
nimis profundae factae sunt cogitationes tuae, vir insipiens no^ cognoscit,
and stultus non intelliget haec: O Lord how glorious are thy works, thy
thoughts are too profound: those an unwise man does not know, nor a fool
understand. For it seems to me that the heretic reading these causes, and a
Catholic reading the same, are like two men entering unto a garden, but the one
at midnight with a torch, the other in the morning: the heretic endued only
with the light of reason, beholds them with torchlight, he can neither
discern the variety of colors, nor grace of figures, not disposition of
knots, nor borders enclosing, but only a glimpse or dark show far
differing from that luster and glory the beauty of the flowers and odoriferous
herbs represent. The Catholic coming in the morning when the sun rises,
veweth and distinguishes the roses, lillies, marigolds, their forms, their
sents, their order, the gratefullaire and paradise of delight. The Catholic
perusing this book, will see what he believed, and note distinctly how every
thing stands, with what faith all Catholics profess, because having had
true faith before, by living in exercise of receiving the Eacharist in the
Catholic Church, by reading books, hearing sermons and spiritual
conferences, all tending to the same effect: he (I say) will conceive no small
delight in contemplating all the garden, and every flower and herb in
particular. And the heretic if he have grace, may say with himself, if this
the papists hold were true, certainly God were glorified wonderfully his love
were ineffable, the partakers of this sacrament were in a blessed state. Truly
of God can do it, me thinks it stands well with his providence, it argues an
abisse of love and charity, it were a thing to be desired of al men: and then
afterward let him consider who first abolished this point of faith out of many
Catholics hearts. Martine Luther an Apostate Munke, (Nunquid cognoscentur in
tenebris mirabilia eius and iustitia eius in terra obliui^nis: Shall perhaps
his wonders be known in darkness? and his justice in the land of oblivion)
for life a Libertine, a practiser with the Devil, by whose suggestion he
confesses he first was induced to abrogate the mass, which for fifteen
years (as himself says) he celebrated: and last of all his bad life, had as
beastly a death. After that he had suffered shipwreck in faith, and proclaimed
wars against the Church of Christ while he lived, but especially after his
death, the sectaries of his heresies were divided into factions, and
principally about the blessed sacrament, who in interpreting four simple and
as plain words as might be spoken. Hoc est corpus meum, to avoid the right
interpretation of the Catholic Church, have invented no more then four score
false expositions. The which dissension while I consider they represent unto me
the blind Philosophers, who wandering in the black night of their misbeleefe,
sought out which was the last end of man, and almost as many diverse ends they
set down, as new Philosophers took the question in hand. And no marvel,
for as the Mathematicians say, from point to point it is impossible to draw
more right lines then one, but crooked and by lines ten thousand: therefore the
Catholics keeping perpetually one uniform and right exposition, it is no
wonder if heretics infinitely multiply their false and erroneous
interpretations. To conclude, I would wis^ to prevail so much with all
Protestants, into whose hands this present Treatise shall happen, as to mcditate
with themselves reason by reason, and confer the majesty and benefit of this
mystery with other supernatural mysteries of our faith, as the incarnation of
Christ, the renewing of our souls internally by baptism and penance, the
favors and presence of the holy Ghost in justification, and I doubt not but
they shall find an admirable conformity and proportion betwixt on^ another,
and then let them remember what a treasure they want that the catholics enjoy:
and how they are plagued into the deepest pit of ingratitude, by not
acknowledging that benefit which (except the incarnation) surpasses all others
that ever God bestowed on man: and finally let them return to the fold of the
Catholic Church, where they shall find the earthly Paradise watered with the
floods of Gods grace, and upon the banks, Apoe. 22.
the tree of life laden with the fruit of this sacrament.

A Copy of a Letter that the Author of this Treatise following, sent to his
friend.
GOod Sir, your manifold comfortes which you rain daily upon me, I hope
shall not fall into a barren scile, that will not render interest in due season.
I send you the epilogue of all those canses, which either out of Scriptures,
fathers, or theological discourse I can afford you: because, without Books,
conference, or other good oportunities, what can be expected? you may well
perceive they are not drawn from sundry sweet flowers, as Bees suck their
honey, but rather like the silk worms web, distilled from the inner bowels
of my soul, in my quiet repose and silent Meditations, I send you them as a
fleece of wool new shorn, without weauing, dying, forming, or fashioning: but
you, or any other, as I I bope will weaue them in a better method, dye them
with a purer style, and enrich them with Fathers and Scriptures. I send you
them as an offspring of my goodwill, at your request begun, continued, and
performed. If there be any thing in them profitable for good Catholics to
meditate, or to serve them for their spiritual exercise, thank God for it,
and the next cause acknowledge your self: for the full disposition of them I
commit to your discretion. As for the other two Treatises you requested of
preparation, and frequent communion (God willing) I intend to do my best, to
satisfy your desire: if you had any book of this subject, I would be content
to peruse it, to see if my practice and speculation confront with his
judgment. In the mean time I beseech you to remember me in your devout
prayers, and request the dew of heaven, that I may yield you those delightful
fruits, I know you desire.

A Table containing the parts and chapters of this Treatise following.
THe first part: that the body of Christ is really in the blessed Sacrament
contained in the first chapter. The second part containing 42. Causes of the
institution of the holy Eucharist. 1 First cause, to communicate himself to
every one in particular. 2 To be an Epitome or an abridgement of all Gods
wonders. 3 To deifie the soul. 4 To unite the faithful after a certain real
manner. 5 To unite the faithful in affections. 6 For the exercise of faith. 7
For the increase of our hope. 8 To inflame our charity. 9 To be an Ornament of
the material Churches. 10 To be the end and consummation of all the other
Sacraments. 11 To arm us against our enemies, and especially against (the
devil. 12 To arm us against the world. 13 To bridle our concupiscences. 14 To
give life to the soul. 15 To dignifie his Pr^ests. 16 To have God under a
sensible object to hear our prayers. 17 To abolish venial sins. 18 To be a
perpetual sacrifice. 19 To be a sacrifice most like his passion. 20 That it
might be a holocaust or burnt offering for the living. 21 To be a satisfactory
sacrifice for the souls in purgatory. 22 To be a sacrifice of thanksgiving for
the Saints in heaven. 23 To show the magnificence and liberty of God. 24 By
diverse means to allure us to love him. 25 To be the immediate object of our
religion. 26 That the manner of our salvation should be correspondent to the
manner of our first preuarication. 27 To be carried about in processions. 28 To
nourish our souls. 29 To effect the resurrection of our bodies. 30 To be a
viaticum or provision for our voyage. 31 To win virgins to God. 32 To render by
gratitude a certain equality to God for all his benefits. 33 To comfort our
souls by spiritual joy and devotion. 34 To illuminate our minds. 35 To be a
commemoration of his passion. 36 To move us to loath that the world loves. 37
To be a confirmation of his Testament. 38 To be a trumpet to blaze the glory of
God. 39 To give us a taste of the joys of heaven. 40 To be a condign
sacrifice for Christ to offer to his ^ather. 41 To discover unto us the
infallible love of God, containing ten Chapters. 1 That the love of God in
this blessed sacrament cannot be comprehended, and of four effects of love,
concerning in it, first union, second, zeal, third, ecstasy, fourth
benenolence. 2 That God instituted this sacrament for love. 3 That in the
sacred Eucharist God effects all these unions which proceed from love. 4
That God showed the second effect of love in the Eucharist, that is, zeal. 5
That God in this sacrament shows a certain ecstasy of love, which is the
third effect. 6 That God in this Eucharist shows his benevolence, the fourth
effect of love. 7 That God shows al diversities of love in this sacrament 8
That God shows a prizing love in the Eucharist. 9 That God shows in the
Eucharist a most intensiue love, containing twelve proprieties, 1. Antiqui^ie,
2. Purity, 3. Vehemency, 4 Fecunditie, 5. Eff^cacie. 6. Constancy, 7. Light,
8. Delight, 9. Majesty, 10. Glory, 11. Liberty, 12. Justice. 10 That God
showed in the Eucharist an extensiue love, and a tender or familiar love. ^^
And last cause, to be the end of all the sacraments of the old Testament,
wherein are explicated the two especial figures of the holy Eucharist, Manna
and the Pascall Lamb.
The end of the table.
A Treatise of the Blessed Sacrament.
That the Body of Christ is really in the Blessed Sacrament. The first part.
AMong Catholics, I know it were superfluous, to endeavor with large
discourses, to prove this Question: Because, relying their judgments upon the
Catholic Church, whose definition in all ages has been most manifest, they
need no other proof or demonstration, Yet, partly to comfort them, partly to
confirm that faith they have embraced, I think ir not amiss, with some few
similitudes, or palpable experiences, to open alitle the veil of this Arc,
and discover some secrets, which either seem impossible, or inexplicable,
imitating herein the ancient Fathers, which explicate the mysteries of the
Trinity, Incarnation, Resurrection, and others, with corporal similitudes,
and examples: yea Christ himself scarce spoke but in Parables, now comparing
grace to Io. 4. and 7. Mat. 13. Mat, 25.
water, now his church to a net, now the faithful to five wise, and five
foolish Virgins; and the reason here of I take to be the blindness of our
wits and dullness of our capacities, who are not able to comprehend any
spiritual mysteries without some corporal resemblances, as most plainly
appears in the Sacrament of the holy Trinity, which cannot be understood in
it self, but in some effects, even as we cannot behold the Sun in his
sphere, but in the water, or through some cloud. Knitting therefore the
judgment of Christ his church, the decrees of Councils, the consent of Fathers,
the reports of Histories, the practice and use of al christianity, I think
that any man, not bewitched with wilfulnes, and but of an indifferent judgment
and capacity, might easily discern the verity of this essential point of
christianity: For supposing here (that no man but senseless can deny) that God
was, and is able to effect this mystery, and (as the learnedest Protestants
have confessed to me) with what words more plainly could he express his mind,
having bread in his hand, than by saying, This is my body that shall be given
for you, This is my Mat. 26. Mark 14. Luke 22. 1 Cor 11.
blood which shall be shed for you? Al Evangelists with S. Paul conspiring in
the same words, in like sense, never mentioning trope or figure. And if ever
Christ had occasion to be plain and apert in his speech, questionless here
where he gave a Law, and enacted a Statute for his church. Who is ignorant
that Laws ought to be perspicuous, because it is necessary that al men should
know them? And therefore we see God gave the Decalogue in so perspicuous a
manner. Here he instituted Exodus 20.
a Sacrament for his Church, but how plain was he in the institution of
Baptism? Here he ordained a principal ceremony Mat. 28.
of religion to be practiced: and who Math. 13.
knows not how clearly he delivered the ceremonial law to the Jews in
Leuiticus? Here he was private with his disciples, to whom it was given to
know mysteries, although to many others in Parables, and therefore it was
convenient, in plain terms to ^eueale this so profound a mystery to them.
Here finally Christ made his last will and testament: al men confess that
wills must be most manifest, lest the executors should not agree about the
sense thereof. Therefore Christ giving a law, instituting a sacrament,
appoynting a religious ceremony, conuersing privately with his disciples, and
making his last will and testament, had sufficient occasion, I think, to
conceive through his infinite wisdom, that here was no place for
metaphorical figures, symbolicall senses, or harsh speeches subject to sundry
interpretations. This reason conuiceth my wit, and so persuades my
understanding, that supposing the thing possible, I marvel any man can deny
it. And therefore since the venty of catholic religion is so true, certainly
all arguments objected against it, consequently are convinced to be false,
whereunto follows, that they may be answered, as in like manner we affirm
all arguments which can be uttered against the holy Trinity to be Paralogismes
and soluble. And for better intelligence, and more fuller conceit, I mean to
propound the chiefest, and rather answer them with natural similitudes, or
other supernatural mysteries, then seriously assoile them according to the
principles of Divinity, where of most readers are not capable.

First, some will demand, how is it possible that such a great body, as that
of Christ's, with all parts and members, should be cowched or conveyed under so
little an host, under a crumme of bread, or a drop of wine? I demand before I
answer, if it were not as great a miracle, for to make a church or mountain
enter into a hole no greater than a barley corn? No man can doubt of it: but
this I will show you done by nature.

Go to the top of Paul's steeple, and there view the country about, the
mountains, hills, plains, valleis, the rivers, the gardens, meddowes,
orchardes, churches, houses, beasts, and men, heaven above, and earth beneath:
now after such a mighty prospect, shut your eyes, and in your mind you shall
see all within, which before you saw without, in the same order, situation,
correspondence, and proportion. Now I will inquire by what monstrous gate passed
in whole mountains, villages, and rivers, and palaces? By the small circle of
the apple of the eye, no greater than a barley corn. But how was God able to
cowch such a quantity, or such a mass, in so little a moate? The reason is,
because the mountain entering into the e^e, puts on a certain spiritual
garment, although the form of the mountain imprinted in our eyes, of it self
be corporal, and extended like other material qualities in the subject. This
same similitude most aptly declares the mystery of Christ's body in the
sacrament, because it receives a certain spiritual garment, that makes it
to be in every part of the host, as the image of the mountain represents
the whole mountain in every man's eye without confusion, or imptoportion. I
demand whether but wholly may refide in one indivisible point.

Is not the highest heaven the vastest body, and the mightiest mass that ever

If God by his omnipotency could 4 Mat. 9.
make a CAmmell pass through a needles eye, who will deny but that he can put,
by the same omnipotency, the body of Christ in a little host? Therefore well
said S. Cyprian, Panis quem Christus discipulis Cipr. ser de co^na Dom.
suis porrigebat, non effigy, sed natura mutatus, verbi omnipotentia factus
est caro; that bread which Christ gave to his Disciples, not changed in form,
but in nature, by the omnipotency of the word was made flesh. We see that
Christ in many miracles suspended natural agents from their most proper and
necessary actions, as fire Dan. 3.
from burning in the furnace of Babylon: 4 Reg. 6.
the iron from descending in the prophets hatchet: S. Peter's body from
drowning Math. 14.
when he walked upon the water: why may he not here suspend the body of
Christ from extending it in place?

Pro. Secondly, how can one body be in so many places at once, in England,
France, Flaunders, Italy? etc.

I answer: how is my soul whole in my head, whole in my hands, and whole in
my feet? If then one soul may be entire in three places, there is no
repugnance why one body may not be in diverse places; for the repugnaunce is
alike in both. If you say, the soul has a certain connection, or continuation
in the body, which Christ's body has not in such distant places, this
avails not: For who can prove, or ever did prove, that it is impossible for
God to cut off my arm, and keep my soul in it, and transfer it into France
or Italy, leaving the same soul in my body here in England?

We hear the Preacher in the Pulpit, whose voice is but one, yet five hundred
receive it, and every one the same sound in his ear.

We see in looking glasses, if there be a hundred little ones about a great
glass, in every one of them our faces entire. Whether is more difficult, to
conceive one body in many places, or many bodies in one place? Surely, I think
no mortal man ever yet could yield a sufficient reason; but we know most
certainly that two bodies were in one place when Christ issued out Luke 2.
Math. 27. and 28. 10. 20. Mat. 16. Luke ^4.
of his mothers womb reserving her virginity, when he rose out of the
sepulcher it being closed with a mighty stone: when he entered to his disciples
the doors being shut, when he assended up to heaven, the incorruptible
spears reserving their places. What is more impossible, that a body should be
in two places, or a body putrified and rotten to be restored to all his
qualities, quantities, and other proprieties? no doubt but this which we all
believe shall be fullfilled in the final resurrection of all flesh.

Thirdly how can can the body and blood of Christ, being so little in
comparison, be resident in so many hoasts and buttes of wine which in all the
world are consecrated and reserved in the tabernacle at one time?

Pro. Tell me how the soul of a child entering in the conception of the infant
into so small and little a body without any addition can extend and dilate it
self through the whole body of a man? tell me how Gods indivisible substance,
without addition, mutation, or alteration, fills the whole world?

So. Do we not prove by daily experience how a little storax or frankensence,
resolved into smoke keeping the same matter and quantity only by rarefaction
to be sufficient to fill a whole church? besides, those that use to work
quicksiluer prove most palpably, how this metal being set upon a fire in a pot
assendeth al in smoke, and fills a most large room, yet after with external
cold being congealed, the self same quicke-siluer falls down again, and
is brought to a very small quantity. Even so the body and blood of Christ,
although for a time they be enlarged yet when the cloud is passed, the
external vailes of bread and wine are consumed, the body is as it was before,
and so shall remain in all eternity.

Fourthly how can those accidents, that whitenes, that quantity, that
moystnes, that dryness, hang in the air without their substance, as a house
sustained without any foundation, the rind without the choare.

Pro. He that understands the mystery of Christ's incarnation effected by the
omnipotent hands of God, cannot call in question this difficulty in the
blessed Sacrament, because it is as natural for a substance to subsist in it
self, as for an accident to be inherent in an other, and yet God seperateth
from the humanity of Christ his person and manner of subsisting; why then may
he not sever fro these accidents their adherence to another? and so much the
more, because Christ's humanity is inserted in his divinity, which hardly can
be conceived without some mutabilitie, which cannot be in God.

If art or nature can make such admirable seperations, as we daily prove,
this point cannot seem so improbable. Did not the Romans try pure wines
from mingled by putting them in an iuye dish, through which the water dropped
and left the wine behind? Does not quicksiluer sever gold incorporated with
other mettells from them all? are not the Potecaries able out of all herbs,
fruits, trees, and flowers, by fire to draw the moisture from the terrestrial
substance? and shall we say that God is not able, to distill the accidents
from their substance, and draw the internal substance, like sweet oil, from
the bark of accidents?

Fifthly, how can there be such chopping and changing of substances of bread and
wine into the body and blood of Christ, and yet no external sign appear, as
we Ioh, 2.
see apeared in the changing of water into wine, and in the rod of Moses
converted Exodus, 4.
into a serpent?

Pliny recounteth not unlike effects of Plin. l. 2. c. 5^.
thunder, that it melted the money in bags sealed with wax, and yet no sign in
the world appeared either in the bags or wax. And Scneca affirms, that
sometimes Se^^. l. 2, c. 31.
it melted the sword, not indamaging the scabbard: and why may not God change
the substance and leave the scabba^d of accidents, since he is the Author of
nature and wadeth deeper into the bowels thereof then any external or
internal agent?

In Christ's incarnation, there was a change of man's nature, the which lacked
his own person and was vphelde by the person of the son of God, and yet
externally those that see his body, viewed not this change by any sensible
effect. In justification also a sinner is wholly renewed within, and made a new
creature, and yet what external show appears of this internal mutation?

Sensible miracles and signs were granted, especially by God, for the
conversion of infidels, and therefore were not effected so often among
Christians after they had received the faith: for as S. Greg. says, Fides non
habet meritum, vbi humana ratio praebet experimentum, Faith has no merit,
where humane reason yields proof: therefore it was expedient that this
mystery should be veiled, that our reason might possess a sensible object
surpassing al reason, and only by faith to be believed.

Sixthly, how is not the body of Christ consumed by so many, who daily since the
first institution, for so many years have eaten him?

Pro. Christ, to occur and answer this reason in the 6. chapt. of Saint
John, first wrought the wonderful miracle by feeding 5000. men, besides women,
and children with five barley loaves, and two fishes, with the advantage of
twelve baskets: I say he wrought this miracle before he began to deliver
them the mystery of this Sacrament, thereby to prepare themselves to answer
this Objection: that if with so little he could feed so many, and make so much
remain more then he received at the beginning, how can he notfeed millions,
with his body, and yet preserve it as entire as it was, when he first gave it?
Christ's body does no otherwise here then our souls do every day in our
bodies, because as bodies continually exhale forth some parts, the which we
restore again by meat and drink: these parts daily thus exhaled, our souls
cease to inform, and yet they never consume nor deminish, even so Christ's body
residing in diverse hoasts, cease to be in them lesing those places without
any other consumtion or alteration.

We see the sun so many years has every day brought new light to the
world, every minut he changes his place without defect or consumption. And why
shall not the Sun of Justice lighten the world in this Sacrament, and yet
change every minute his place without corruption or decay?

Seauenthly how can he abide to pass into such vndece^t places, as men's
stomaks whose breaths many scarce can tolerat? Pro. How does his divinity fill
al places how indecent and unclean soever, receuing no infection by them: but
as the sun beams beating upon a dunghill, neither are infected nor defiled, in
like manner the body of Christ adorned with the beams of immortality and
impassibility, receaueth no impression of any infectious or noisome creature.

So. The stinch of sin much more annoied the smell of his soul, when he
conuersed in earth among sinners than this could molest his body, and yet it
was not indecent he should suffer that, but a sign of extreme love and mercy,
so it is not unseemly his body should be where those defects be, suffering
nothing but only remaining there to work most admirable effects in his
creatures, to their great profit and his exceeding charity, as shall hereafter
be declared.

Eighthly what becomes of the body of Christ, after the forms of bread and
wine are corrupted? assendeth it to heaven? the^ is it continually in voyage.
Does it stay in the stomach? but that is most indecent.

When a man's arm is cut off, what becomes of his soul that informed that
arm? does it perish? then he that lacks an arm, lacks a piece of his
soul. Does it hang in the air? But the air is not organized to receive the
information: finally, it cease to inform the arm, it leeseth that subject
and place, keeping the place in the body where it was before: even so the
body of Christ leeseth the place it had in the stomach, and keeps the place
it had before in heaven.

So. As the Sun in a moment spreads his beams from East to VVeast, even so
Christ, his body from heaven into the sacrament: and as if a clond hinder the
virtue of the Sun, the light cease, the Sun remains where it was: even
so, when the forms of bread and wine perish, Christ's body cease to be
there, but remains in heaven, as he was before.

Ninthly, when the Host is broken, how is not the body of Christ broken also?
why are not separated the legs from the body, etc? why hear we no crackling
of bones? why see we no effusion of blod? Pro. When a looking glass is broken,
do you not see in both the pieces your face as entire as when it was whole?
even so, when the host is broken, in both parts thereof remains the body
of Christ as entire as it was in the whole.

Sol. Albertus Magnus recounteth not unlike Albertus Mag. trac. de Temt. cap.
22.
effects of thunder, that it burns sometimes the shoes, but hurts not the
feet, it sings the hair off the head and face, without any annoyaunce of
those parts. Besides, he that mangleth the body can not mangle the soul,
which keeps her immortality: likewise he that breaks the host,
impeacheth nothing the incorruptible and indivisible manner of Christ's
sacramental presence in the blessed Sacrament.

Tenthly, how can Christ's body be in the Sacrament without confusion, being
whole coarcted into so little a place, for it seems that al his body should
be pressed to nothing?

Pro. This may be most perspiciously resolved by the first similitude we
brought of the whole country, which enters into the eye without confusion, and
our faces which we see, every one in an others eye, with all delineaments most
entire, without any disorder or improportion.

When Christ's body entered, the doors being shut, or issued out of his mothers
womb, was his body pressed to nothing? Io. 20. Luc. ^
No, that were corruption, and not perfection, and indecent for so decent a
body.

I am here to advertise the gentle Reader, that al similituds which Fathers
bring to declare the mysteries of our faith, as the incarnation, trinity,
grace, charity, etc. do ever dissent almost in as many things with the
mystery, as they agree with it. Therefore marvel not if some of those I have
brought iumpt not in all things with the mystery, as they agree with it.
Therefore marvel not if some of those I have brought iumpt not in all things
with the blessed sacrament: for if they should, they were not similitudes, but
the same things.

Besides, consider how many wonderful works we daily prove effected, which
we would have judged impossible before we see them, as in a geographicall
glass, the compass, and such like. Now infer hereupon, that if men by
natural skill can reach but our capacity, how far can God go beyond it?

Lastly, not only heretics, but also infidels exclaim against Catholics,
that it is a thing, not only indecent and horrible to eat man's flesh, and
drink his blood, but also impious and irreligious to eat their God, for what,
say they, is more absurd then for God to abase himself to be eaten, and more
abominable then for his creatures profanely to devour him?

This objection might as well be made against Christ's incarnation, death, and
passion, for it seems as indecent for God to lie in a woman's womb for nine
months, for him that is life it self to die, as to be eaten in this
Sacrament: for what need had he of his creatures that he should toil so much
for them? why could he not have forgiven them all their offenses of his own
accord, seeing the fault was committed against him? But the wisdom of GOD
ouer-reached these carnal and cloudie conceited men, and therefore determined
means surpassing all understandings and devises. Wherefore, as in the mystery
of Christ's incarnation, the Fathers and Doctors endeavor to search out the
reasons which moved the majesty of God so extraordinarily to exmiruite himself
to become man: even so we will here procure to understand some reasons why so
familiarly he did debase himself to be our food.

The second part of this Treatise.
The first cause of the institution of the blessed Sacrament, to communicate
himself to every one in particular.
SVch is the nature of Goodness, that it does not only perfect, enrich, and
adorn the subject wherein it resideth, but also enableth it with an ouerflowing
virtue to communicate it self unto others. Bonum Lib. de Diu. nom. ca 4.
says Dionis. Areop. est sui diffusiuum, Goodness spreads it self abroad:
and for this cause we see the Sun, for that it is good in it self,
communicates his Virtue unto others, dispersing his beams upon the earth: the
air, because it is good conserueth the soul: the sea in regard of native
goodness allodgeth the fishes: the earth endued with the like, lends her lap
to mettalles and herbs: in fine, since all creatures that bountiful hand of
God framed received in their first printing some form Genesis 1.
of goodness. Vidit Deus cunctaque fecerat and erant valde bona, God did see all
that he had made, and they were very good: consequently they received virtue
to communicate their goodness to others. And thus all creatures be good in
themselues^ and profitable to their neighbors. Besides we prove by daily
experience, how they are not content to lend their friends some little parcel
of their perfection, but as much as they have, so much they bestows so that
the sphere of such their communication answers in proportion to the degree
of the natural substance and engrafted perfection, so that earth produces
earth, water brings forth wate^ fire kindles fire, a horse ingendereth a
horse, an eagle breeds an eagle, a man begets a man, whereupon the
Philosophers grounded their Axiom Omne simile generat fibi simile, every like
produces like. If these drops of goodness fallen from God their immensiue ocean
sea, if these beams of perfections issuing from their everlasting Sun, if
these dying leaves of bounty, shaken off that never fading tree of life,
extend the limits of their goodness so far, what bounds can contain his
goodness which is boundless? what measure can be prescribed to him that is
immesurable? where shall his bounty border which is infinite, nothing being
equal to God? Therefore his native goodness enforced him to communicate
himself to mankind, which mystery was effected by incarnation. But because
this favor in substance was only proper to Christ's humanity, though in
operation, virtue and efficacy sufficiently offered for all: therefore the
bounty of God was not extended enough, it lacked a farther communication, that
every man in particular might participate his infinite bounty and perfection,
not in virtue alone, but in substance also. The Sun lends the earth his
beams, yet the substance remains in heaven: but lo in this blessed Sacrament
God has with his beams joined the sun, with his divine virtue linked his
divinity, and not only by effect, but also by person enters into the breasts
of all the faithful, which come to receive him. Here he makes every man
partaker of himself, of his substance, as well divine as humane: And therefore
the sphere of his goodness cannot be farther extended, since every one
receives that which is infinite and God himself.

The second cause to be an Epitome or an abridgement of all Gods wonders.
AFter that God had rowsed from nothing Sap. 11.
the mighty mass of this world, polished it in number, measure, and weight,
the last work those artificial hands finished was man, who as an epitome or
an abridgement comprehended in himself the degrees of all creatures: thereby
giving us to understand, that as often as we look upon man, we should call to
our memories, how many goodly creatures, and how admirably God had created and
provided for his cause: even so after that God in the old Testament, and
Christ in the new, had wrought infinite miracles and wonders, one of the last
which Christ solemnly manifested to the world was this blessed Sacrament, as a
memorial of all his wonders, as an abridgement of al his miracles, that thereby
seeing this Sacrament, we should expend what wonderful miracles he had effected
for us, and what singular graces he had bestowed up on us, the which it seems
David standing a loofe off in his high turret of faith did contemplate, when he
said, Memoriam fecit mirabilium suorum misericors and miserator Dominus, escam
dedit timentibus se, Our merciful and pitiful Lord instituted Psa. 110.
a memory of his wonders, he gave food^ to them that fear him. that all
miracles and singular wonders which God ever wrought, are comprised in this
Sacrament or the like easily, it might be proved; A few I will number, leaving
the rest to the discourse of every sound d^uine. What wonder showed God first
to the world by creation? of nothing to make all: here many learned divines
hold that Christ's body exsisting in heaven is created anew, for they say it is
possible for God to create my soul and body again in France, I being in
England, as for to reproduce in the resurrection those forms, qualities, and
accidents, which perished by death and corruption in the grave, and truly this
manner of speech diverse fathers Cip. de eaera Dom.
use, calling this action, by which Christ's body is placed in the Sacrament,
creation: more over it plainly apeareth, that when the forms of bread and wine
are corrupted, God produces a new substantial matter to sustain and uphold
the new accidents. If you discourse over the miracles of transforming Lots wife
into Genesis 19. Exodus 4. and 7
a Pillar of salt, the rod of Moses into a serpent, the rivers into blood,
water into Ioh. 2.
wine in the marriage, transubstantiation presently represents the same. If
raising up of the dead, if giving sight to the blind, if in satiating a number
with so little, most plainly it shall appear hereafter, that this Sacrament
causes life everlasting, that it opens the eyes of the soul, that it
feeds millions and never consumes. Therefore most true it is, that this
Sacrament is an abridgement of the wonders that God wrought, and it self one
of the greatest wonders of all. And therefore they may well cease now, who
admired so much Archimedes for contriuing a sphere of glaffe, wherein he had
comprised the motions of the heavens, since in this sacrament are united all
the admirable operations, wonders, and miracles, which proceed from the hands
of the sovereign work man of heaven and earth, grace and nature.

The third cause to deifie the soul.
THe Philosophers and Physicians with iointo assent approve this principle to
be of an undoubted verity. Ex quibus constamus ex issdem nutrim^r, with those
things we are nourished of which we are made. For being compounded of flesh,
bones, heart, liver, brains, sinews, we cannot live except we be fed with
flesh, bones, heart, livers, finewes, to nourish our bones, heart, liver, etc.
which position must not be so grossly conceived, that we ought to eat bones, or
livers, to nourish our bones, or hearts, for many eat nothing but roots,
herbs, fruits, bread, fishes, never touching flesh, or bones, and yet are
nourished. But that whatsoever we receive for fustinance, cannot restore the
parts which by continual resolution vanish away, except the meat we take be
first converted into the substance of those parts which are to be repaired.
Therefore that bread we eat does not nourish the heart before it be converted
into the substance of the heart, it feeds not the bones till it be changed
into the substance of bones, it restores not the brains, till it become of
the nature of brains. The Just therefore in scripture being called gods, Ego
dixivos dis estis and filij Psalm. 81. and Io. 10.
excelsi omnes. I said you are gods, and all the sons of the highest: and
participating in their souls a divine nature, Diuinae naturae facti consortes,
Being made pertakers 2. Pet. 1.
of the divine nature (if the Philosophers propositions be proved true) ought
to have a divine food, the which no doubt the wisdom, goodness, and power of
God knew, would and could prouid for them, as we see afforded in this
Sacrament. This seemed Christ to insinuate when he said, Qui manducat meam
carnem, and bibit meum sanguinem, in me manet Io 6.
and ego in co. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, abides in me,
and I in him. By which words are propounded two admirable unions, the one is,
that God is in us, the other, that we are in God, by eating this celestial
food. That God herby dwells in us, it cannot be called in question, because
as meat enters into us, remains in us, and is united with us, even so Christ
enters really, remains really, and is resident so long as the vailes of
bread and wine are not consumed. But O Lord how can we be in thee, since that
no man is in the meat he eats, but rather the meat is in him? how then is it
true, he that eats thee remains in thee? yet infallible truth it is that
those that eat Christ are in Christ. For this difference we find betwixt this
divine food and other corruptible meats, that they have not life in
themselves, nor give life, but receive life of the body, and of insensible and
inanimate creatures become sensible and animate substances, but Christ's body so
feeds the soul that it gives life unto it: Qui Ioh. ^.
manducat me, vinet propter me. He that eats me, the same also shall live by
me. And therefore as God is said to be in the Just by grace and charity, and
they in him, so by this Sacrament Christ is in us, and we in him. Hereupon it
follows, that men are deified in two sorts, by receiving this Sacrament,
first by a real communication with Christ, whom they harbor in their bodies,
and therefore of S. Cyprian are called Baiuli Christi carriers De caena Dom.
or bearers of Christ, and others term the^ Christoferi: secondly they are
deified in soul, by receiving this grace, which is a divine conjunction and
admirable participation of his deity, by which they are made diuinae naturae
consortes partakers of the divine nature.

The fourth cause to unite the faithful after a certain real manner.
CHrist our Savior making his prayer to his Father, among other graces he
Ioh. 17. Hec expositio est Cirill? lib. 11. in Io. ca. 26. and Hillari lib. 9.
de trinit.
demanded, he asked this for all the faithful, that as his Father was in him,
and he in his Father, so the faithful should be one thing. Christ is in his
Father, because he really and essentially participateth the same substance with
the Father, and his Father is in him, for that he possesses the same nature
and substance, with his son. It was impossible that the faithful should in
such sort participate one common essence, because the infinite perfection of
God chalengeth this as a proper dignity, to have a nature communicable to
diverse persons. But since that man's nature was not capable of such fecunditie,
our provident Pastor provided a way to keep his flock together, and to unite
them, not only by affection in mind, but also by a certain real and
substantial nature wherein they should be made all one, and most excelle^tly
resembled unto the blessed Trinity, which was effected by this Sacrament: for
by giving them all the same body and blood, he caused them to be united in one
substance, one nature, and essence, and that more excellent than their own
natural substance was. Wherefore al those that receive their body may be
called one body, as S. Paul doubted not to call them when he said, Vnus
panis, vnum ^. Coria. 10
corpus, multi sumus, omnes qui de vno pane participamus, being many, we are
one bread, one body, all that participate of one bread. And for this cause (as
we say) all the three persons in Trinity are one God, even so all the
faithful by a certain manner are one body: and as the stars in the firmament,
though of themselves very different, yet are united al in one indeficient
fountain of light, so all the faithful fituated in the firmament immovable
of the Catholic Church, are united together and made one in this blessed
Sacrament: but with this difference, that the stars have not the Sun in
them, but ^nely the light, whereas the faithful have the Son of all light
continually springing within them. Iosuah thought GOD Iosu. ^^.
shevved him a singular favor, and woorthily al admire it, that God at the
request of a man should stay the course of the Sun till he had overcome his
enemies: But what would he have said if God had brought the Sun from heaven,
and put it in his hand to have used it at his pleasure? so he has dealt with
us in this Sacrament, by drawing his eternal Son from heaven, to dwell in
earth, to be held in our hands, to be received as food, to join us all that
be in his church, to fight against al visible enemies, as tyrants, and
heretics, and invisible foes, as the Devil and his infernal ghosts.

The fifth cause, to unite the faithful in affection.
AS the body of man contains diverse parts of contrary nature and
disposition, the heart being hot, the brain cold, fleame, moist, melancholy,
dry, spirits of a fiery nature, bones of an earthly, all the four elements
in sundry parts holding predominion, yet the soul keeps them in peace,
conserueth a most sweet harmony, contains every one in his office: even so
this blessed Sacrament joins Christ's servants, Greeks, and Egyptians, Jews
and Gentiles, poor and rich, learned and ignorant, in an admirable bond of
love and unity, if they receive it with that preparation, and use it as they
ought: the Isai. 11.
which union, love, and peace, I say the Prophet foretold was too slow over
the earth, after that little cloud which Elias 3 Reg. 18.
beheld had powered down this blessed Sacrament upon it, Habitabit (says he)
lupus, the woolfe shall dwell with the lamb, the libbard shall rest with the
kidde, the calfe, the lion, and the sheep, shall lodge all together, and a
little child shall lead them: he means, fierce, cruel, and intractable
men, savage nations, and barbarous countries, shall be brought to union, peace,
and love, no doubt but principally by virtue of this sacred communion: this
common soul will cause every one to keep himself in order: this little child
which we fold with our breasts in this sacrament, will guide, pacify, and
comfort them all: for what inflameth men, one to love another principally but
resemblance and similitude? Why do kinsemen so affect one another, but in
regard of resemblance of blood, and similitude of complexions? And therefore
they are called, Consanguinei and Kinsemen. And what similitude can be greater
then this, whereby good christians are made Vere Consanguinei Christi, In very
deed the kinsmen of Christ. Yea rather identified or made one with the
selfsame blood, the selfsame body and soul, which no kindred ever did
participate, because they have the like blood and bodies, but not the same, nor
the same soul. The dignity and worth of those which be partakers of this
sacrament may easily inuit al men to love them. For as we prise and admire all
those whom we acknowledge to be of account, so surely we ought to esteem
those who are bathed with the blood of Christ, who are endued with his grace,
whose bodies are living temples and palaces to allodge this royal maiestio.
If the ground was holy where the Angel only in a bush sp^ke to Moses: If the
mountain was sanctified where the celestial Exodus 3. Exodus 19 Act. 29
spirits gave the law: If the napkins and girdles of Saint Paul wrought
miracles, because they served so great a servant of God, O in what reputation
should we have those blessed men which we know receive so often, and keep so
long the king of Angels, the head of all the Apostles in their bodies.

The sixth cause for the exercise of faith.
IN the sum of all Divinity I find 10. difficulties hardly to be conceived,
and consequently, not easy to be believed.

The first is, how God has free will. 2. how he knows those future effects
which never shall be, but if some circumstances did occur, they would fall
forth. As for example, Vae tibi Bethsaida, Woe Math. 11.
be to thee Bethsaida: for if in Tire etc. 3. how God does predestinate, 4. the
mystery of the Trinity, 5. how Adams sin can be transfused or communicated to
his posterity, 6. the mystery of Christ's incarnation, 7. how that which once
was corrupted, shall afterward be repaired in resurrection, 8. how a spirit
can be dilated in a body, 9. how the corporal fire of hell can torment a
spirit, the 10. is this admirable Sacrament, the which in my judgment for
difficulty surpasses them all. For if you can but resolve me in one or two
questions about each of them, I will make you sufficiently conceive them all.
As plainly I could make it appear discoursing over every one: but because al
men, yea very few are capable I will omit them. For in this Sacrament first you
have heard difficulties about the words, how they can effect that they
signify, 2. how they effect it, 3. in what time they effect it. Secondly you
have inextricable difficulties about the body of Christ, 4. by what action is
it produced. 5. by what manner consists it in an indivisible sort, 6. how does
it reside there without confusion, 7. how does it not penetrate those
accidents, 8. or what union has it with them, 9. what opposition finds it
with the substance of bread, 10. how is it not by so many that feeds upon
it consumed, 11. how can it be disperced in so many places, 12. how can it be
extended to such a mass of bread, and such a quantity of wine, 13. how in
breaking the host Christ's body is not divided, 14. how can there be as much
in one host, as in 10000. 15. how passes the difficulty of
transubstantiation. Thirdly there are difficulties about the substance of
bread, 16. what becomes of the substance of bread, is it annihillated or
resolved into air? 17. when the forms of bread and wine are consumed, how
returns it again? Fourthly, there be not a few most difficult questions about
the accidents, 18. how they remain without their subject, 19. how one host
pe^etrateth not another, 20. how they concur to the production of grace. I
omit many more which might be touched about the sacrifice, effects, and
receauers of this Sacrament. But these only I have propounded, that the
faithful Christians might perceive the singular wisdom of God in providing
them so present, so palpable, so daily an object to exercise their faith. For
questionless there is more merit of faith where the object has greater
difficulty to be understood, because there principally we captive and bridle
our wits to obey God in faith. Wherefore I cannot but commend the devotion of
those faithful christians, who in all temptations of faith, have recourse
unto this Sacrament, and say, good Lord Credo adiuua incredulitatem meam, I
Mark 9.
do believe, help my incredulity: Likewise I take one of the dispositions or
preparations very proportionate to the receiving hereof to be a resolute
faith, to believe the real presence of Christ in this Sacrament, protesting to
live and die in the professing of this undoubted truth, in despite of all
heresy or error.

The seventh cause, for the increase of our hope.
TWo things by the virtue of hope we expect at Gods hands: wherefore both we
are apertly assured to obtain, by the institution of this Sacrament if we be
not faulty on our parts: the former for principal, though last in effect, is
life everlasting: the latter though as it seems not so worthy, yet first in
execution, are the means to atchieue life everlasting. As for them most lively
our hope we see erected by this sacrament. For who is so foolish to think that
God will deny him any thing necessary to salvation, since he has left him his
body, soul, person, blood, and life, for a mean, for a ladder to make him to
ascend into heaven? If saint Paul reasoned Roman. 8.
well, God gave us his son, and how will he not give us all with him, speaking
of his incarnation? so now I will reason, Christ bestowed his body and blood to
bring us to life everlasting, and how can he deny us the less, who has
granted the more? how will he debar us of al treasure in heaven, who has
given us the Lord of al treasure of heaven? Had not the Jews a most steadfast
argument (when they wandered in the vast desert of Egypt) that GOD firmly
pretended to conduct them unto the land of Promise, Exodus 14.
when he sent his Angel with a pillar of fire, as a torch bearer, to guide
them in the obscurity of the night, and with a cloud like a fan to defend
them by day from the scorching beams of the Sun, when he every day rayned
Angels food to sustain Exodus 16.
them? al which were figures of this Sacrament, as hereafter shall appear. And
may not we in like manner say, that Christ has left us an invisible proof,
that he pretends never to fail in means necessary to life everlasting,
having presented a pillar of light, a cloud of rain, a celestial Manna, to
illuminate our understanding, to cool the fiery flame of concupiscence, to
feed our souls to eternal life? And therefore he said, Manducauerunt patres
vestri manna in deserto, and mortui sunt, Your Fathers did eat manna in the
desert, and they died. Qui manducat hunc panem, viuet in aeterno, He that
eats this bread shall live for ever, John the sixth chapter: In like sort we
may be assured of life everlasting: for he that provides such forcible and
excellent means, questionless intends to impart the end, yea he that we
receive is the end himself, Haec est vita aeterna, vt cognoscant te verum,
Deum, and quem misisti Iesum Christum, This is life everlasting, that they know
thee the only true God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ: the seventeenth
chapter of Saint John. And he has auerred most certainly, that those which
worthily eat this food, have even in this life life everlasting in them. Qui
manducat meam carnem, and bibit meum sanguinem habet vitam aeternam, and ego
resuscitabo enm in nouissimo die, He that eats my flesh and drinks my
blood, has life everlasting, and I will raise him up in the last day: John
the 6. chapter: that is, they have the second person in trinity, who is life
everlasting, both the object and the giver.

The eight cause, to inflame our charity.
ARistophanes said that love was of such nature that it affected so to unite
lovers, that they should become one thing: but because this was impossible to
be done, either without the destruction of one, or both, therefore it enforced
them to procure all those unions which were possible, as the same judgments,
opinions, desires, habitations, table, apparel etc. And indeed this opinion
of Aristophanes we may confirm by daily experience: For what else pretend
those who so vehemently embrace one an other, but as it were one to enter into
another, and unite themselves in one, for the vehement affection of love. Why
did Job say, Quis mihi det vt de carnibus eius saturemur, who will Job 31
give me that we may be filled with his flesh, but to declare that the
vehemence of love desired this union? How possess the three persons in
Trinitye such vehement and ardent love, but for the union of one substance in
three persons? That which men thought impossible to God was possible, and that
which nature affected, was by the Author of nature and grace in this mystery
effected: for herby imparting his body unto men without destruction of either,
he caused an vnio^ of both, whereupon ensued that the love of God could not but
be singularly increased toward us, because as fathers love most vehemently
their children, because in them they see a part of their own substance,
disperced in their bodies, though after many chaunges and alterations: So God
vewing his whole substance, without any mutation or change in nature or
quality, his body and blood, his soul and person, really remaining in us and
joined with us, cannot but love us exceedingly, much more then any father his
children. And we for the selfsame cause are moved to love him for the same
union, or rather identification of substance. For who is so base minded, or
cold in affection, that lifting up the eyes of his soul to heaven, admiring
the infinite Majesty of God, where millions of Cherubins and Seraphines stand
in his sight, veiling their eyes with their golden wings, lest they should be
dazelled being not able to behold the infinite brightness of his glory? who I
say after this consideration would not open all the veins of his heart, and
resolve them into love, seeing this sovereign Majesty to descend from heaven
to earth, to dwell with a poor worm, to lodge with a miserable man, one that
many times had offended him, to cover himself under bread to be eaten of him,
and to enter into his body to be eternally united with him? Zacheus thought
Luc. 19.
he showed him a singular favor, to come into his house: the Centurion passed
a Luc. 7.
little further and said his house was not worthy of him. But here what shall
we say? he enters not to receive, but to give, not to cure the body, but to
save the soul, how can that heart not be enflamed with love, which has a
burning flame of fire glowing so near, I mean the heart of our Savior Jesus
Christ? How does not those veins swell with affection which are filled with
the precious blood of their most affectious and zealous GOD? How does not that
soul exult for joy at Christ's presence being so near, when Saint John Luc. 1.
Baptist exulted for joy in his mothers womb, conceauing but our Ladies voice?

The ninth cause, to be an ornament of the material Churches.
IN the old Testament (which was a model of the new) we see that God had a
special care to provide the Arc, the Cherubines propitiatory, with all the
ornaments and furniture of the interior Exodus 25.
Tabernacle, or Sanctum sanctorum, into which none could enter but the high
Priest, and he only once a year. this as the Apostle apertly declares,
signified Hebr. 9.
how Christ was to offer up once a bloody Sacrifice for the redemption of all the world. Yet this was but the Allegory of these ceremonies, which God had
not only instituted to signify what was to come, but also ordained them for
the present use and religion of the Jews, as Circumcision, Ma^na, the Pascal
lamb with all the rest, the reason therefore which moved the divine wisdom of
God to ordain this so maiesticall a place, so reverend and full of ceremonies,
was to strike into the peoples minds, a great conceit of him, a reverence and
respect, a fear and humility in that place.

The like, with out al doubt, stood with his providence, in instituting this
Sacrament, that we should have in our temples the true Ark of his covenant,
whence-fro^ he was to give answer, to imprint in our hearts at the view of
his tabernacle a reverend fear, and a fearful love of his majesty: for if we
were Angels, and needed not corporal senses to pourtraite or represent the
majesty of God unto us, little it would avail us, to have present such rites
and ceremonies, but because our soul in this exile is drowned in the body, and
cannot ascend to God, but by fixing the first and second step in external
senses, and corporal imaginations: therefore our provident Savior
condescending to our infirmities, ordained a sensible presence for his
majesty, thereby to strike into us reverence, fear, and respect, and so in
effect it seems that experience teaches. For when I enter into an heretical
church without light, altar, or image, and especialy without the body of
Christ, me thinks I come into some vast profane hall, or at best, some great
school, for it carries no show, nor casts any smell of religion. Whereas
entering into a church of Catholics, all that I see breaths piety and
religion, the lamps and lights represent the indeficient glory of heaven, and
brightness of Gods elected, the Images give me to understand the multitude of
Saints and Angels, who assist the majesty of God in his eternal temple, whereas
day and night they never cease his praises: the Altar leads me to that
incruent sacrifice, which daily is offered to the living God, for all the
faithful in Christ's church: and in fine, the presence of Christ in the
Tabernacle mo^eth me to reverence, to look into my self, to carry me
circumspectly in that older as such a presence requires. For as well notes
Saint Chrysostom. When Courtiers come before the Kings presence, they are careful
and circumspect what they do, they roll their eyes about their garments, lest
any spotte or blemish in them might offend the Kings eyes, they ponder their
speeches, lest any indecent word should escape from them, they forelooke al
their gestures and actions, lest any of them should appear ungrateful to the
king? And how do faithful Christians when they come before Christ in the
Church? they look into their souls, weigh their words, consider their
thoughts, and in fine, beware that nothing proceed from them, that in any sort
may displease so divine a majesty: for indeed, as the same Author well
aduertiseth, by the presence of Christ in the Sacrament, the church is
converted into heaven. For as we prove the kings Court and Throne is not his
palace, his gardens, his golden galleries, his ^orie beds, his chair of
estate, his pearled canopies, but the person of the King is the essence of the
Court and Throne, all the rest be accessory to him, even so the court and throne
of heaven is not those spheres, those angels, those saints, they be all
ornaments, they be accessory, they wait upon Christ, which is the very essence
and substance of the court and throne of heaven, who now dwelling in the
Church has changed it into heaven: and questio^lesse, where Christ as, there
cannot but be a multitude of Angels attending his Majesty, beholding his
glory, as Chrysostom. witnesses.

The tenth cause, to be the end and consummation of all the other Sacraments
WHen I consider the seven Sacraments of Christ's church, me thinks I conceive
God as an immensiue Circle without bound or limit, whence from issues six
Sacraments, as lines, who end all in the center of Christ's body in this
Sacrament, or else that the other six are great floods of grace which water the
earth of Gods elected, yet all running amain to the ocean sea, which is this
everlasting Challice, or else, that the seven Sacraments, resemble the seven
Planets, whose influences cause such admirable effects in this corporal world,
all yet receive their light from that which stands in the midst, I mean
the Sun; even so all Sacraments draw their virtue and grace from the
contented of the Eucharist. Cipr. sermde caena in ritulo Dionis. li de eccles.
Hiera^c.
Wherefore S. Cip. called it, Consummans Sacramentum, a Sacrament consummating,
and Dionis. Areop. terms it (...) August tract. 1 20. in 10.
Sacramentum Sacramentorum, the Sacrament of Sacraments. For as he says no
Sacrament is present without this, and that for two causes, the former is, in
regard that the Author hereof imparteth grace, virtue, and efficacy, to all
other Sacraments, for out of his side issued all the Sacraments of the church.
Another reason is, because all other Sacraments are peculiarly ordained of God
to this, and as S. Dioni. says, have not their complete perfection without it.
By original sin the gates of Paradise were shut, and we all debarde from
the tree of life, which only immortalized the eaters. By Baptism the gates are
opened, and access is granted to eat the Fruit of the Tree of life, this
Sacrament which grew upon the cross. But actual sins caused death again,
and bolted the gates as fast as before; the which the Sacrament of penance
vnbolteth again. The Sacrament of confirmation peculiarly God ordained for the
saithful, that therein they might receue force and strength to confess the
Soul of this Sacrament Christ Jesus, and all the mysteries of our faith,
denied by infidels, blasphemed by Jews, impugned by Heretics, among the which
none has bin more assailed, nor more earnestly defended then this, and as I
think there is no point of christian religion, upon which more books have
bin written, then on this matter. How order aymeth at the body of Christ, none
can call it in question, since all the seven orders of the Church are wholly
directed unto the right consecrating and administrating of this Sacrament.
Matrimony, by representing the union of Christ and his Church, consequently
unfolds unto us, the conjunction of Christ's fathfull flock with their
heavenly Pastor in this Sacrament, for as man and wife in Matrimony are one
body and one flesh, so by the virtue of the Eucharist, Christ and his faithful
are one body by real union, and one soul by natural affection. And for that
this Sacrament of Christ's body was to be a viation to conduct men, specially
in the last point of their lives, when they enter the harbor of eternal life,
therefore to dispose the soul, to take away all melancholy and discomforts
caused by sickness, and lothsomnes to leave this world, our blessed savior
provided the extreme unction, and then all Sacraments end in the Eucharist.

The eleventh cause, to arm us against our enemies, and especially against the
devil.
THe common enemies of al Christians, well known and daily proved, are the
devil, the flesh, and the world, who openly, and secretly, by force, and
treachery, omit no occasions, wherein they think to prevail. Against them all
three, our vigilant Captain has armed his soldiers with this sacrament. How
he protecteth us against the devil here I will deliver, reserving the other
two to the next discourses. First of all, most certain it is, that the blessed
Eucharist is not only meat to feed our souls, but also armor, force, and
strength to defend us in battle: so says David, Parasti mensam in conspectu
Psalm. 22.
meo aduersus eos qui tribulant me, Thou have prepared a table before me
against those that vex me. And what other table can he mean of but this which
Christ has set before all his faithful? what other table can fortify him
against his enemies but this, wherein is eaten, Fortitudo gentiarum the
fortitude of the Gentiles? the reason why this celestial food armeth our
souls against the assaults of our enemies, may easily be delivered, for little
would it avail a soldier armed without, with helm, currats, pick, or what
furniture soever, if he were destitute of natural force and strength of body
to manage his weapons, if for hunger his vital spirits failed, if he were so
weak he could not strike a blow: therefore meat is necessary to restore his
lost forces, to repair his strength, and consequently, to arm him within
against the troops of his enemies. So internally does the Eucharist fortify
us by spiritual nutrition and vital sustentation against our ghostly foes.
The devil, as GOD signified by that monstrous Leuiathan mentioned in Job
according to Saint Gregory's exposition, like a great whale Gregor. in 40. Io.
did swime in the tempestious Sea of this world, devouring men like fishes,
casting them down into that fiery stomach of his infernal furnaces: at last
he came to Christ, and as he caught for a bait, his Humanity, he was taken
with the hook of his Divinity. In like sort pretending to invade those who
are blessed with this thrice blessed bread, thinking to take them naked,
finds them most strongly armed, and those which he made acounte in hell to
have trodden under feet, by virtue of this blood, shall triumph in Hom. by ad
Pop. Antioch. and hom. 45. in lo.
heaven over his head. For as Saint Chrisostom says, Tanquam leones spirantes
flammas sic discedimus ab illa mensa diabolo terribiles effecti, as lions
breathing flames of fire, so depart we from that table being made terrible
unto the devil. For what flame of fire can more affray then the presence of
Christ, at whose name all the infernal crew do tremble and shake? They fear
no doubt that which carries this sacrament in his breast, should foil their
forces, as David did Goliath that tower of flesh, (their figure 1. Reg. 17.
and slave) with a little stone, the picture of Christ residing in the
Eucharist, they know well enough their darts are shot against a wall of flint,
which reboundeth to their own harm and shame, when they impugn a soul armed
with Christ: yea for fear they dare not approach, but as a servant of Christ
said, S. Kather. de sienn^.
fly from a soul seruent and full of charity as a number of stinking flies,
from a boiling pot upon the fire, because they know they scorch their bodies
by ceazing upon such a preye. Therefore Job. 17^
in all temtations of Satan which vex us vehemently, let us run to this
defense, and say with Job, Pone me iuxta te and cuiusuis manus pugnet contra
me, Put me next to thee, and then let any hand fight against me.

The twelfth cause, to arm us against the world.
BY the world here I understand all the wicked men, who profess themselves
friends of the world and endeavor to induce the servants of God to sin and
wickedness, as Infidels, Heretics, and wicked Christians, against all which
this blessed body does singularly defend and protect us.

Who cannot but call to memory that memorable miracle wrought in the furnace of
Babylon, when the blasphemous Dan. 3.
Nabuchadonozer affecting deity caused Sidrac Misac and Abdenago to be cast
into the vehement flames of fire, because they would not adore his statue? but
what effect had it? what could he prevail? nothing. What was the reason?
because he saw one with them walking like the son of man. They which had
Christ with them (for him the Angel there present represented) in the very
midst of flames walk with alacrity, care not for torments, in the calm of
their dolours they praise and glorify God. For I would demand of any true
servant of christ, what persecution, what what loss of goods, what
imprisonments, what rackes, what gibbets, cutting or mangling can affright him
who has received Christ into his heart in the blessed sacrament? specially
when he considers with mature deliberation, that that all these torments and
many more are nothing in comparison of that the very son of GOD suffered for
his love. Moreover if wicked Christians deride thy fasting, continency, long
prayers, and mortifications, what consideration can better defend thee then the
presence of Christ, who passed over all the alphabet of mortification most
exactly for thy sake?

The cause why this Sacrament so defends good souls against the wicked
assaults of the world, I take to be the great abundance of charity and grace,
whch Christ offers to those that receive his body worthily: for (as after
shall be declared) here our Savior oepneth his hand, and disperseth his
heavenly treasures most copiously. This celestial dew, or rather this
supernatural flame so kindles the hearts of all good souls, that it causes
them to love, prize, and esteem God exceedingly, and consequently to desire
nothing more, than to have occasion to com to that supreme and heroical act
of charity, Ponere animam pro amico suo, to 10. 15.
yield his life for his friend: For thereby they assuredly know they shall be
like unto him whom they do claspe in their breasts: they well understand, that
love more appears by suffering evil for their friend, than in doing good for
him. And for this cause I would council, yea, and I am persuaded, if the
precept, of receiving the Eucharist binds out of Easter (as commonly Divines
hold it does) that specially those, who either are to be examined or
arraigned, or executed for religion, ought to prepare themselves with this
Sacrament if they can do it conveniently: for as Saint Cyprian says, Idonius
esse non potest ad martirium, qui ab Ecclesia non armatur ad praelium and men's
Cip. in cp. 54
deficit quam non recepta Eucharistia erigit and accendit. He is not fit for
Martyrdom, whom the Church has not armed to battle, and there the mind
fails, when the Eucharist received erecteth not and inflameth. For how can
thy be better prepared to spend their blood for Christ, then when they are
armed with the blood of Christ? or when will they answer more courageously in
the defense of Christ's religion, then when they are replenished with the
chiefest fruit of his passion.

The thirtenth cause, to bridle our concupiscence.
THe sting of original sin made such a deep wound in the inferior parts
of our souls, that although they be cured by Baptism, yet the scarres fester
again, except they be continually fomented with some heavenly medecin the
which our careful pastor has provided in this Sacrament: whose virtue better
shall be perceived by the declaration of both the sore and the salve.
Concupisce^ce is an inordinate appetite of the soul, inclining it to follow
the delights of the flesh, proceeding from sin, and be^ding the soul to sin.
This salve is a Sacrament eleuating souls from earth to heaven, from sense to
reason, from carnal delights to eternal pleasures, proceeding from god,
containing god, and leading to god. Whence from follows that as dastards are
terrefied only with the memory of their pote^t adversaries, even so the fury of
concupiscence, is greatly assuaged only by the memory of this sacrament, when
it perceives that Christ must lodge in that house where it resideth. For it
well knows that if the high priests in the old law could not offer their
solemn sacrifices, but prepared with continency, if none durst approache
near the mount Exodus 19.
where God by his Angels gave but two stonye tables containing the law, 1.
Reg. 21. and Mat, 12.
except the abstinency from their lawefull wives had armed them, if David
could not eat the loaves of proposition. but disposed with conjugal
chastity: if 1. Cor. 7.
S. Paul would have married men to abstain for a time, to be more fit for
prayer, how then dare concupiscence debostlie break forth into inordinate
appetites? how dare she desire those delights unjustly, when those are debarred
which might have used them lawfully? Do we not see what care the true friends
of Christ have ever had to handle his body with all purity? If Joseph of
Aramathia take the Matt. 27.
body of Christ to bury, he foldeth it in a most pure sindon or fine white
cloth, if it be laid upon the Altar, none is ignorant how clean the
corporalls are, where upon his precious body rests: and shall we think that
external creatures are so requisite, and internal purity, not much more to
be affected? No no, the soul of him who receives this Sacrament, ought to be
a corporal, without stain of fleshly delights or impuritie: if concupiscences
are so restrained with memory of the purity requisite to this holy Communion,
if the Sun cast such a light before it appear above our horizon, how can
darkness abide after it be risen? in what fetters and boltes shall it be cast,
when Christ enters, when he shows his face? for most certain it is, that
the love and charity of Christ here imprinteth in the soul the supernatural
comforts, he most liberally lends to the devout receivers, extinguish the
flames of concupiscence, as the cloud in the desert hindered the scorching Psalm.
104.
rages which parched the children of Israel, Psalm. 77.
and the fresh water which gushed out of the rock, quenched their thirst.
Likewise after that good souls have harbored this precious balm, what
fragrant smells of devotion, of modesty, of piety, of religion issue out of
those mouths, distill from those hands, spring from those eyes, who have
seen, touched, and tasted their salvation.

The foureteenth cause, to give life to the Soul.
THis cause, motive, or effect, of the institution of the Eucharist, our
Savior welnie ten times inculcateth in S. John which breeds some
difficulty, because all the other Sacraments communicate to the receivers the
same effect: for a sacrament is a visible sign of an invisible grace,
instituted for the fanctificatio^ of the soul, the which cannot be without
grace, which is the life of the soul: for as the body without the soul is
dead, even so the soul without grace lacks life. How then peculiarly does
Christ ascribe the life of the soul to this Sacrament since it is common to
all the rest? Diverse causes I think may be rendered. First, for that in the
other sacraments God distilleth his grace by drops, in this where he
disperseth it with his own hands he powers it forth in abundance: and
therefore they may be said, not to give life in respect of this. Even as we
call flesh only meat, not that fish is not meat, but in respect of flesh
we scarce account it meat. Secondly, because in this Sacrament men
participate, not only the life of grace in the soul, but also the body and
soul fold within them the real and substantial life of Christ, wherewith they
are made one thing, one body, one life, wherefore Christ said, Qui manducat me
viuet propter me, He that eats me, shall also live by Io. ^.
me. And, Sicut misit me viuens pater and ego vnio propter patrem, and qui
manducat me viuet propter me, as the living father has sent me, and I live by
the father: And he that eats me, the same also shall live by me: that is,
as my father sent me by mine incarnation, and I live for the union which my
divinity received from my father, even so those that eat me, shall live for
the union they have with me.

Thirdly, for that we here receive the entire and complete cause of life
everlasting both of body and soul, the which we do not in other Sacraments,
and therefore Christ said, Qui manducat meam Io. 6.
carnem. Et bibit meum sanguinem habet vitam aeternam, and ego resuscitabo eum
in nouissimo die. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood has life
everlasting, and I will raise him up in the last day. Since therefore this
food in general causes life, and for so many particular reasons yields life
to the receauers, we may well call it the fruit of life. And as often as we
eat thereof, we have access to that tree of life planted in paradise by whose
fruit our forefathers had kept their Genesis 3.
bodies immortal. As often as it enters into our mouths we suck the vain
of life, drawing the incorruptible blood out of our Saviors side: for all other
meats, do what you can, they so restore life, that they destroy life, and at
last, by their continual action exhaust all the forces: but this Sacrament
yields eternal life both to the soul and body, and although the body die,
yet by virtue of this food, it is to rise again.

The fifteenth cause, to dignifie his Priests.
Being once in company with certain Protestants, yet civil men for
conversation, one of them being a Minister, asked what was the cause that
Priests were so accounted in times past among the Papists, and ministers so
little prized now among the Protestants. He himself answered first, Truly
(quoth he) I think it proceeded of confession, by which they kept the people
in great awe and reverence. Nay quoth the other, it was the good life of those
Priests which made them esteemed, and the ill life of our ministers which
causes them to be contemned. I then concluded the matter, and told them they
had both touched good strings for we commonly reverence them whom we know are
thoroughly acquainted with our state, and understand our imperfections; besides,
we respect sanctity in whom soever we find it, but especially in them whose
state requires different life from the rest: but to make the harmony more
perfect, I think the chief cause was the dignity of consecrating the body
of Christ, al these three make a good consort in Music, to have power over
his real body by consecration, and over his mystical body by remission of
sins, and to lead a life continually correspondent to them both, cannot but
strike into the peoples hearts a great reverence and respect: Let us omit the
two latter, and only speak of the former.

What greater authority can we imagine could God give to man, than to put in
his hand the use of his infinite power, to work so many miracles, to effect
such a work as surpasses the creating both of heaven and earth, when, where,
and as often as he would? Simeon thought thought it so great a thing, to take
Christ but once in his arms, that he loathed after to live in the world, and
cried, Nunc dimittis seruum Luc. 2.
tuum in pace, Here the Priest every day, not only handles, but also makes
present and eats. The three kings came from foreign countries to adore him:
but the Priest can bring Christ from heaven, and lay him upon the altar. Saint
Marie Magdalen bathed Christ's feet with tears, Luke 7.
but what floods would she have shed once to have eaten his body or drank his
blod? What greater dignity could a man have conceived then to be made
instruments of Gods Omnipotency, that their words should be more effectual
the^ all the deeds in the world? What more imminent glory could they have
imagined, then to offer up daily that sacrifice which our savior offered once
upon the Cross. These things be so great, that whole books would scarce
suffice to Register them all. Read Saint Chrysostom: de sacerdotio, and you
shall see how he extolleth their Authority.

The sixteenth cause, to have God under sensible object to hear our prayers.
ONe of the greatest impediments that the servants of God suffer in prayer, is
a certain diffidence or doubting that they pray in vain, that none hears or
attends what they say, whereupon follows a tediousness and loathsomeness
in prayer, which impeacheth, not only the merit, but also the effect and
impetration, which often requires continuation. True it is that wise and
faithful Christians conceive the presence of God in every place, but because
it is so insensible, because it proceeds from the intellectual faculty, it
causes no great impression in the soul: therefore our provident master
foreseeing this imperfection ordained such a presence as should stand well
with the merit of faith and also greatly Exodus 25. and 37.
further our devotion. As in the old Testament God provided the propitiatory
where he placed two Cherubins folding the Arc with their wings, and he from
thence gave answer unto Moses and the Priests to all that they demanded of
him: that thereby the people might enjoy a perpetual sensible object to
stir more deeply in their minds a more lively conceit of the presence of
God then they could imprint without it. Besides this, corporal presence
helps us greatly in prayer, to recall us when we are distracted, for such is
the imperfection of our meditations, that we cannot prosecute the^, but by
corporal imaginations, the which we prove to be so wavering and inco^stant,
that if we fix not our minds fully upon some corporal and sensible object, our
selves will be wandering in all the coasts of the world. But by this presence of
Christ our imagination keeps at home: as soon as it begins to range, this
Sacrament with a silent voice, but a crying majesty admonishes him of his
duty, that talking with so sovereign a king, he must not but speak to the
purpose, and attend what he answers. Thirdly it causes us to humble our
selves, the which is most necessary for ^eel. 25. Luke 18.
prayer, because oration humiliantis se nubes penetrabit, the prayer of him that
humbles himself will pierce the clouds. And the publicane for this cause
obtained his petition, whereas the Pharisie was rejected: and what can enforce a
man more truly and profoundly to humble himself before God then this food
where the son of god does humble, yea abase himself so low for man? Fourthly
in the Arc, as S. Paul witnesses, Heb. 9.
were the tables of the law, the rod of Aaron wherewith he did so many miracles
in Egypt, and a vessel of Manna that god rained in the desert: For god would
have them to set perpetually before their eyes the memories of his admirable
benefits he had bestowed upon the^? And have we not most lively represented al
these three in the Eucharist? who vieweth but the tabernacle wherein our savior
rests, and reme^breth not the new testament subrogated for the old, Christ
for Moses, the law of grace for the law of fear, the two precepts of charity,
like the two tables foulding the x. commandments? who sees this sacrament
and presently records not what woonders Christ wrought in earth, how he
conducteth the faithful through the red sea of his precious blood, wherein are
drowned all infidels for their incredulity, being made to the one petra
scandali, a Romans 8. 1 Pet. 2.
stumbling stone, and to the other lapis angularis, the corner stone? finally
who beholds here the presence of Christ and imediatly may not easily see the
vessel of ma^na, the food of his chosen people in the desert of his life, the
food of Angels descended from heaven, the food that finally must conduct the^
to the land of promise?

The seventeenth cause to abolish venial sins.
IF we were arrived to the haven of eternal life, and ascribed citizens of
that celestial Jerusalem, whence there is neither Ephesians. 5.
macula ruga nec, spot, nor wrinckle that is, neither sin, nor inclination to
sin, we needed no remedy to wash away our sins, but since our habitation for
a while must be cum habitant. Cedar, in a world subject Psa. 119.
to temptations of Satan, evil examples of the ungodly, allurements of the
flesh, infinite occasions of offenses, since we are seduced by so many
extraordinary passions blinded in judgment, and feebly in affection, prone to
vice, and slow to virtue, Lac. 3.
therefore the very just do utter these voices, In multis offendimus omnes, in
many things ^ 10. 1.
things we offend all, (and) si dixerimus quod peccatum non habemus, nosipsos
seducimus, Prou. 24.
If we shall say that we have no sin, we seduce ourselves: and, septies in
die cadit iustus, the just falls seven times a day. Nevertheless the just
are planted, Psa. 1.
by the river side: if some little imperfection stain them, if some mudde
cleave unto them, these cristal streams will wash it away, this blessed
Sacrament being their daily food, will scour their daily defects. For we
know well that daily meat supplies daily wants, and that which either sun or
labor consumes, that meat repaireth: so in the Sacrament it befalls
wherewith the soul is nourished, that those defects, which either by worldly
malice, or carnal delights were contracted, by this consuming fire are
released. If David could say, asperges me domine Psa. 50.
hisopo and mundabor, lauabis me and super niuem dealbabor. Thou shall purge
^mee O Lord with isope and I shall de cleansed, thou shall wash me and I shall
be made whiter then snow. If the blood of kiddes or calves sprincled with
isope could wash him so from sins (which drew all their virtue from this
Sacrament) so that he should become whiter then snow, how white then shall
become those souls from the spots of sin whose hearts and souls are
sprincled with the blood of Christ. I must confess with Saint Augustine, that
Christ washed his disciples feet before he made them pertakers of his table,
the which did signify the spiritual washing from venial sins, for none
ought to power down this precious liquor but Tract. 56. in 10.
into a challice most pure and neat.

Yet what if after some indifferent diligence made, or for some other present
occasion, one come to this Sacrament with some venial sins, shall not we
think that our bountiful Savior will like the sun consume those little
clouds of ignorance? like an Ocean sea drown those sparks of concupiscence:
like a magnificent king taking possession of his crown and kingdom (I mean
the souls of his servants) forgive those little faults committed, and say as
he said to Zacheus, Luke 14.
Quia salus huic domui facta est, This day salvation is made to this house.
For if we consider but the qualities of venial sins, and the nature of this
Sacrament, we shall find such correspondence of perfection in the one
opposite to the imperfections of the other, that none can deny but that this
food of life, to venial sins is a present death: venial sins are not main
but light offenses of god, but this sacrament yields extreme contentation to
God, wherein his son, who comprehends all his love is contained. Venial
sins dispose to mortal, and consequently, tend to damnifie the soul to death,
but this sacrament is life, brings life, and increases life. Venial sins
cool the feruer of charity, and this Sacrament enflameth charity. Venial
sins cause some blemishes in the soul, and consequently distemper the beauty
thereof, by a little disgracing the exact figure and similitude of the Trinity,
this Sacrament deifieth, adioyneth new colors, and repaireth the portraite
again. For who can better do it then he that came of purpose to refine it?

The eighteenth cause, to be a perpetual Sacrifice.
Priest, Sacrifice, Religion, are so linked together that it is imposible to
find one without the other: for there can be no Priest that has no sacrifice,
nor any Heb. 5.
religion where there is not both Priest and sacrifice. Because, what is
religion but a public profession of a multitude to worship god? and what
public worship can be exhibited to GOD without a real and external
Sacrifice? For the better understanding hereof it is to be noted, that in all
ages, and in all nations, and in all religions, they ever used some sort of
Sacrifices: for if we look into the law of nature we shall find, Abell,
Abraham, Job, offering up sacrifices: if we descend to the law written, there
will appear an admirable number appointed in Leuiticus. If we come to Christ
in his last supper, and upon the Cross we shall find him sacrificing.
Besides, we may observe that all their sacrifices almost consisted in killing
beasts, or in the destruction of some creature, as in burning insence or such
like. Now if we demand, for what reason did they kill bulls, calves, or
lambs, how know they that GOD would be pleased with them? what needded he
bulls, or calves? nunquid manducabo Psa. 49.
carnes ^aurorum aut sanguinem hircorum potabo? shall I eat the flesh of
bulls, or drink the blood of goats? by the resolution of this doubt we shall
better perceive why Christ left this Sacrament as a perpetual sacrifice for
his church. Three reasons then may be yielded: the first, because by
sacrifices men acknowledge GOD the first maker, conseruer, and last end of all
creatures, the which they intend to profess by the external action of
sacrificing, because in killing an ox, and burning of him to ashes, they
deprived themselves of all use of all profit, whereby they signified that all
was due to him of whom they had received all. The second reason was, because
the holy ghost moved them to use such bloody sacrifices to prefigurat the
passion of christ once to be offerred up on the Cross. Thirdly to show by the
death of beasts, and that they deserved death for their sins, that they offered
the one to God in lieu of the other. By these three reasons, we plainly see,
that we in the law of grace have as great need of a real and external
sacrifice, as either the Jews, or those that lived under the law of nature,
For need not we as well as they to acknowledge the dominion and right of GOD
over this world? is not he our Creator, our conseruer, our last end, as well
as theirs? ought not we as well to represent the sacrifice of Christ's passion
passed, as they to prefigurat that which was to come? do not our sins, as well
deserve death as theirs did? and are not we bound as well to crave pardon for
them as they? for these three causes therefore, and many more, our Savior
instituted this sacrifice of the altar: where by the incruent death of Christ
we acknowledge the eternal dominion of God, and render him infinite thanks
for all his gifts, as well of grace, as of nature, and therefore principally it
is called Eucharistia, that is, gratiarum actio, thanksgiving: besides, we
represent most lively his passion according to that precept of Christ, Hoc
facite in ^eam Luke 22.
commemorationem, do this for a commemoration of me. Finally, we cry O Father
of heaven and earth, lo, we deserve death, and 10000 deaths, but here we
present the death of thy son his body quod pro vobis traditur, which is given
for Luke 22.
you, his blood that is shed promultis in remissionem peccatorum, for many unto
remission Mat. 26.
of sins, take and accept his death for ours

The ninteenth cause, to be a sacrifice most like his passion.
Diverse ancient fathers expending those 1 Cor. 11.
words of S. Paul, Quotiescunque enim manducabitis panem hunc and calicem
bibitis, Cip. ep. 3. Chrisost. the ^phi. occum.
mortem domini annuntiabitis donec veniat, As often as you shall eat this
bread, and drink in locu^ Pauli.
the chalice, you shall show the death of our Lord until he come, affirm that
this Sacrifice is the very passion of Christ, that here he suffers, he is
broken, he is changed, he is offered in a real sacrifice after an unbloody
manner, for all the greek texts have it in the present tence, this is my body
which is given for you, this is my blood which is shed for you: and Saint Paul
has expressly, this is my body 1 Cor. 11.
that is broken for you. The manner also how Christ's body is here sacrificed to
god so plainly expresses the passion of Christ that if there were no other
text to prove it, the very correspondence would seem 10. 19.
to show it sufficiently. For how did Christ die upon the cross? by the
division and separation of the soul from his body. Et inclinato capite,
tradidit spiritum, and bowing his head, he gave up the ghost. What was the
cause of this seperatio^? the issuing of abundance of blood out of his body,
and there remaining no life: wherefore both philosophers physicians and divines
say, Anima est in sanguine, the life is in the blood, Deuteronomy, 12.
and experience teaches, that many die by venting too much blod out of their
veins. can show a real separation of the soul of Christ from his body, and a
real separation of his blood from his body here, then we may easily infer,
that in this sacrament there is not only a true, real, and external
sacrifice, but also the very same that was upon the Cross, though in manner as
shall be declared they differ. It is a receued opinion among al learned divines
that the words of consecrating, Hoc est corpus meum This is my body, do effect
that they signify, that as God by saying, Fiat lux, let light be, made light,
so by saying, Hoc est corpus meum, This is my body, is presently put the body
of Christ under the form of bread: moreover, that they effect no more
imediatly than that they signify, therefore by the virtue or efficacy of
consecrating imediatly there is only the body of Christ in the host without
any soul: true it is, that there is no host that has not the soul of Christ,
but that is not by the imediate force and virtue of consecration, but by
sequel, by a following, or as they call it, per concommitantiam, because the
soul is joined with the body in heaven, therefore consequently the body
brings the soul with it, but if the soul were not in the bo die, as it was
upon Goodfriday, then if any of the Apostles had consecrated, the soul of
Christ had not bin in the host, but the dead body as it was in the grave: so
that by consecrating of Christ's body we have a real separation of soul and
body, and only an union of them by sequel and consequence, I call the
separation real, for that where the action is real, that which is effected by
the action, must likewise be real. In like sort the words, Hic est casix
sanguinis mei, This is the challice of my blod, make that they signify, and
therefore hecause they signify only blod, consequently they put by their force
and efficacy only blood in the challice without body or soul, although by
sequel both the body and the soul descend into the chalice, for the blood
being in the veins, it draws the veins, the veins being fixed in the
body, cannot but naturally draw the body with them, the body harboring the
soul, likewise brings it for company. As for example, the woman of Samaria
that drew Io. 4
up water with a cord from the well, she immediately drew the cord, but by
sequel came the paile, because it was tied to the cord, and with the paile,
by sequel the water, and with the water (if there had bin a fish) had followed
a fish: the priest out of Christ's side draws first the blood, immediately
follow the veins, to the veins the body, to the body the soul: for which
sequel this sacrifice is called incruent, and is most decent, perfectly
representing the manner of Christ's death and passion.

The twentieth cause, that it might be a holocaust or burnt offering.
THree sorts of external sacrifices we read in holy scripture, were in use
among Louie. 1. 43.
the Jews, holocausts or burnt offerings, pacifying hoasts, and hoastes for
sins. The first were offered to God in reverence of his majesty, the 2. in
thanksgiving for his benefits received or expected, the 3. for expiation of
their sins. The first was al burnt upon the altar, the last were partly offered
to God, and partly imparted to the priests, the second were divided into 3.
parts, one was offered to God, another bestowed of the priests, and the third
fell to the offerers share. The law therefore of grace being most complete and
excellent of al others as it required a most excellent sacrifice in substance,
so it exacted al sorts of sacrifices included in that one which either tended to
the greater glory of god, or the benefit of his worshippers. Therefore in this
sole and solitary sacrifice he clasped the^ al as most plainly shall appear:
for here are many consumptions in this sacrifice, which evidently convince that
it is a burnt offering. First it is burnt here as Christ's sacrifice and
holocaust was burnt upon the Cross: that is, with the infinite and
extinguishable flames of his charity. For questionless as he there offered
himself and fired his sacrifice with love, to redeem all the world, even so
here his sacrifice burns with the same affection, to save all those in
particular for whom it is offered. Luke 22
Desiderio desideraui hoc pasca manducare, with desire I have desired to eat
this pasche. Secondly the substance of bread and wine by this sacred action of
transubstantiation are not reduced to ashes as when the holocaustes were burnt
upon the altar, but so consumed that they wholly vanishe away, and leave nothing
but their skin and rind behind. Thirdly the priest by receiving it, consumes
it wholly. It is likewise a pacifying host, because, by it we acknowledge the
infinite benefits we have receued, and especially that benefit of our redemption
the which we do not only represent, but also most divinely exercise: by this
also we respect the last benefit of all that is life everlasting, Hic est
pamis pro Io. 6.
mundi vita, This is the bread for the life of the world: finally, it is an
host for sins, not only in regard of the grace it conferreth as a
Sacrament, but also for that it works to the purging of our sins as a
sacrifice, because in the old Testament goats blood, and calves blood did
expiate them Heb. 9.
from their delicts, how much more the blood of Christ? in this our Eucharist
exceeds both the pacifying hoasts, and the sacrifice for sin, that it is
whole offered to God, whole received of Priests, whole participated of the
people: whereas theirs for the imperfection of them could not but be
dismembered. Hereupon I will infer that those people are happy who can daily be
present at the sacrifice of Mass to be made partakers of the admirable effects
of this divine oblatio^. For if the Jews resorted to Jerusalem out of all
nations at Easter to offer up their paschall lamb, to represent their delivery
out of Egypt, if God accepted that shadow of this sacrifice as a grateful
obsequie and loving duty, O with what devotion ought we to resort to Mass?
what assurance may we conceive that God will accept this sacrifice more then
the blood of a thousand lambs or calves?

The one and twentieth cause, to be a satisfactory sacrifice for the souls in
Purgatory.
THis blessed sacrament does not only sanctify the soul as all other
sacraments do, but also, as a sacrifice, it has force to impetrate of God many
graces and favors, to incite us to virtue, and to withdraw us from vice: yea
the blessing hereof is so ample, that it adorneth and profits the Church
millitant, and succoureth also those souls, which suffer in Purgatory: not
unlike the ocean sea, which serves not only for the commerce of men in
foreign countries, to nourish and maintain the fishes which lodge in her
womb, to fructify the earth with rivers and rain: but also it passes through
the low parts, and there concurreth to the generation of mettels, stones, and
other minerals. In like sort, the blessed Sacrament is not content to join the
faithful in unity and concord, to nourish those souls which harbor in the
catholic Church, to engender in them virtues and good works: but also it
extends favors and satisfactions to them that do live in Purgatory, that
inhabit the lower parts of the earth. This effect none can deny but professed
enemies of christ's church: for the protestants themselves generally confess,
that the p^imitiue Fathers, both caught and practiced such oblations for the
dead, howbeit impiously they call this piety of Fathers Pastors and Doctors of
Christ's church superstition and error. But what madness is this, so arrogantly
to condemn a matter not of mere speculation, but of daily practice, exercised
through the whole church, at such time as piety and religion was most fervent,
many of those authors, either the apostles scholars, or scholars unto them,
or at least that could render evident testimony what all the faithful believed
and practiced in those days. Whosoever, I say, condemns this exercise of
error, consequently confesses himself to be a fool, and Saint Agust Lib. 6.
de f^cerdot and hom. 69. ad pop. Ant^o. and in litt, c.
calls it express madness, to infringe any thing observed universally in the
whole church: And specialy without scripture, authority, or reason. Here I omit
scriptures, Fathers, and histories, and suppose the matter as an infallible
truth, that this holy sacrifice profits greatly those souls which be in
Purgatory according to that saying of ^aint Chrisost. Non temere sancitum est
ab apostolis us in tremendis misterijs defunctorum agatur co^memoratio,
sciebant eniminde vtilitatem mnltum illis contingere, lucrum 2. Match. c. 3^ S.
August. proves the fame out of this place, in lib. de cu^a agend^ promortuis.
multum. It is not wihtout cause ordained by the apostles, that in the dreadful
mysterys, the memory for the dead have their place, for they were not ignorant
that they received great profit thereby, great gain. For if the sacrifice that
Judas Machabues caused to be offered in Jerusalem had virtue by the merrits of
Christ's passion to redeem those souls out of purgatory, how much more this
blessed hoaste shall be propitiatory to those which the contented herein redeemed
with his own bound? who can deay but that all the^. Sacraments a^e those
fountains, whence Esaias had promised we should draw living Isai. 12^
ters with joy, Hauristis aquas cum gaudio de fontibus Saluatoris. you shall
with joy draw water out of the fountain of our Savior: if sacraments be
ordained to sanctify the receivers, and participate the graces and effects of
christ's passion for the receivers, questionless this sacrifice which holds
the substance and nature of all other sacrifices, which are instituted as
impretratorie for others, participateth the effects of Christ's passion
profitable for others, and those which by impetration one member of the
catholic church may obtain Zach. 3.
for an other. Since therefore Christ suffered both for the quick and the dead,
this sacrifice must be a conduct to convey the graces and effects of Christ's
passion to those that are dead in body, though living in soul, and so much
more copiously, how much more nearer this sacrifice touches God, how much more
it stands with the dignity thereof, how much more this effect most securely is
granted, and with how much more devotion the person dead was affected to this
sacrifice, or the offerer more fervent at the oblation, or the procurer more
zealous of expiation.

The two and twentieth cause, to be a sacrifice of thanksgiving for the Saints
in heaven.
AS the heart in man's body, and the sun in this visible world spread their
influence and virtue above them, beneth them, and on each side: even so this
blessed sacrifice being the heart of the catholic Church, and the sun of
this spiritual world, communicates virtue to the church millitant about it,
to those that suffer beneath it, and to the triumphant which dwells above it:
and as the heart disperseth not all effects it works to all parts, but uses
an accommodate description according to the qualities and nature of every
part, even so this sacrifice extends sundry effects agreeing to the
diversities of members: to those that suffer, Christ's satisfactions: to those
in earth, diverse helps and succors to avoid sins, temporal commodities,
sundry graces, and virtues; to thofe in heaven, thanks to God for their
happiness, and praises to them for their passed triumphs. This notable
Eucharistiall effect the very practice of the catholic church, continually
represents unto us in the holy Mass, which she offers to God, now for
Apostles, now for Martires, now for Virgins, now for Confessors, the which
practice was in use in saint Ciprians time, who caused Cip. epist 37
the days of martirdomes to be noted, that in the holy sacrifice the Martyrs
might be mentioned. If here therefore we convert our eyes to God, to Christ,
to the Saints of heaven, to the Church in earth, we shall find that this
oblation can not be but most grateful and glorious to them all. For, what can
be more grateful or glorious unto God than to see the blod of Christ mingled
with the blood of martyrs, and both offered up together? what can God esteem
more, than to receive an oblation of virginity, joined with the infinite
purity of this sacrifice? how acceptable will the virtues of Confessors appear
in his sight, burnt as sweet incense with the Manna of Christ's deified
operations and merits? how gloriously will that Garland appear decked with
roses, lillie^ and violets of gold, set with pearls of this precious Manna,
and rubies of this bloody challice: none can be ignorant how glorious the
oblatio^ is to Christ, for since his Saints be members of his body, and by
virtue of this Sacrament so united unto him, that they be Caro de carne eius,
Genes. 2. Matthew. 19. Marc 10. Ephesians. 5.
and, ossa de ossibus eius, flesh of his flesh, and bones of his bones, by
offering up himself: here he shows the triumph of his Cross and Passion, he
represents the admirable virtues of this blessed Sacrament and sacrifice, in
virtue whereof they were norished, defended, and protected, against so many
perils and dangers in the desert of this life, and as by a viaticum conducted
unto the desired land of Promise. The Saints of heaven in like case, can not
but exceedingly rejoice to see their brethren, so grateful to God for their
benefits received, and offer up so worthy an host in recognoscence of
heavenly favors God powered upon them. Questionless they can not forget them
in heaven, who are so mindful of them upon earth, and as their charity is
more fervent, so their care will be more vigilant. The church finaly to whom it
appertains to praise God in his Saints, triumphs in both most admirably,
presenting to God the merits of her spouse, and her children, insulting against
the Devil, flesh, and world, who could not prevail against the^ inuiting the
rest that remain, with glorifying them that are gone, to follow their virtues
and good examples.

The three and twentieth cause, to show the magnificence and liberality of God.
BOuntifulnes benevolence declares and benevolence gifts, but when the gifts
mount to excess, then benevolence is caled magnificence, the which God has
manifested to the world most wonderfully in this Sacrament. What gave he? His
body and blood, and with them his person and divinity: so great a gift as none
can exceed it: for as God surpasses all that is not good, so this Sacrament
all that is not the same thing with it. Who gave it? God himself. If a mean
gift be given of a king, men greatly prize it, because the person of a king
dignifieth the gift, but being so great a gift, and moreover, imparted by God,
herein the greatness increases. How dear was it unto him? as dear as his
own life, for the self same: if he had given a thing superfluous, or not
esteemed, or not necessary, then we would have made less account of it, but
being so near him, and so dear unto him, we cannot but highly commend it.
With what affection gave he it? Freely, not of constraint, yea with a most
fervent love. Cum dilexisset suos, in finem dilexit eos, whereas he 10. 13.
had loved his, unto the end he loved the^, Chrysostom, and Euth. in eum loc.
that is, gifts that come freely are much more esteemed, then those which
proceed of necessity. To whom does he give it? To men, mortal, and miserable
creatures, yea, and to many that then were his enemies: if he had bestowed it
of his Angels or blessed Saints in heaven, it had not been so admirable, but
bestowing it upon fragile men and sinners, it exceeds all admiration. At what
time gave he it? At the hour of his death, when his passion was approaching,
hard before he was to spring water and blood, to imprint his love more in our
memories, and to make us admire the gift the more, that at what time we were
most spiteful against him, he was most careful for us. In what manner? to be
eat: if he had given us his body to have bin adored, as the three kings
adored him, it had been a great favor, and this but in one church at
Jerusalem, Mat. ^.
we would have deemed it a singular grace, and every man would have thought
himself happy that could have gone thither to worship it. If he had bin
something more liberal to have bestowed it upon us, to wear in a jewel about
our necks, with what care ought we to have kept it? what a rare jewel had
this been? what Pearls, or Diamondes comparable? but his magnificent hand
found out a more bountiful way, by giving us to eat. To whom committed he
the consecration? to all Priests, if he had only granted it to the Pope of
Rome, truly it had been an ineffable benefit to all his church: but he knew,
Bonum, quo communius, eo melius, good, the more common, the better it is. When
may they consecrate it? once in their lives? once a year? when, and as many
hoasts, and as often as they will. O admirable goodness! O explicable bounty!
Who must receive it? all men: what once in their lives? once a year? as often
as they can conveniently prepare them selves? What end pretended he in such a
gift? his own profit, or commodity? nothing less: to give us life
everlasting, to enjoy him for ever. He gives himself, the only remedy or means
to enjoy himself. What benevolence can be compared with this, that God would
give God, so dear unto him, with most inflamed love to miserable me^, to
sinners, at that time they intended his death, to be made meat, of all
priests, for all persons, at all times to give us life everlasting? you
Saraphins speak let men be silent.

The twenty fourth cause, by diverse means to allure us to love him.
SVch are the loathing affections of our souls, as the appetities of our
bodies: for we prove by experience, that one sort of meat, though never so
good does distaste us, and cloy our stomachs if it be used long: and in our
souls if that we continually exercise one meditation of the same matter, at
last it disliketh us and becomes tedious. Our blessed Savior knowing well our
infirmities, and il dispositions as in the first creation he provided so many
fruits, fishes, beasts, and birds, that with the variety of tastes we might
recall our appetites again: so in the spiritual pasture of our souls he
prepared sundry subjects to change our distasted affections, as in holy writ
pregnantly appears. For if the creation of this world did not delight our
meditation, then we might pass further and weigh the punishment of sins, in
casting Adam out of Paradise, Genes 3.
in destroying Sodoma in the universal Genes. 19.
diluge: if this please us not, then to admire the providence of GOD in
Abraham, Genesis 7.
Isaak, Jacob, Joseph: if this were loathsome, then he propounded the captivity
Exodus 2.
of Egypt, the captivity of Babylon, the captivity of the Romans: plagues
3. Paral. 36.
inflicted to the Jews, for universal transgression Luke 19.
of his laws: if with this we were wearied, lo the whole life of Christ,
wherein we have such abundance, and variety of food for our spiritual
repaste, as we could desire: yet if this seemed tedious, he has set us down
our four last periods, of death, indgement, heaven, and hell. But finally
knowing that there was no meat, either more pleasant for taste, or profitable
for health, or of more force, and efficacy then himself, he therefore
propounded himself as the object of our meditation, and the subject of our
affection: yet foreseeing that as the very Number. 11.
celestial Manna did loath the children of Israel in the desert, so even God
himself food of all foodes at last would discontent us. therefore to prevent
this inconvenience he accommodated himself in diverse manners, propounding his
deity to us with such variety, that none but indurated hearts could in all
sorts distaste it. First, he presented his divinity unto us Romans 1.
by his creatures, that whilst we read in the book of nature the admirable
wisdom, power and goodness of GOD (all which we may manifestly discover in
every creature) we might love, worship, and adore him. If this meat seemed too
gross for corrupted appetites, he opened the book of faith, there under
veiles, and shadows, tropes and figures, discribing himself, the Trinity,
and other wonderful attributes of his deity, the which he promulgated by
Patriarchs and Prophets in the old testament. But this was something obscure,
therefore he clothed himself with flesh and blood, he came as one of us, for
because children did communicate Heb. 2. Heb. 1.
in flesh and blood he would be pertaker of the same? and being the
expresseword and image of his father, he revealed unto us the secrets of his
fathers breast, thereby to stir up more our drousie and dead affections. Yet
this was not sufficient to satisfy our desires, for pains must show love, and
exceeding pains, exceeding love. Lo he would not fail, he apparelled
himself with a multitude of most cruel and exorbitant pains to give us matter
to ruminate, and besides to move our hearts to love. Yet here he ended not, for
if pains could not strike the stroke, he thought union with us, corporal
meat, and spiritual food, would preua^le, therefore he clothed himself with
the husks of bread and wine: and finally promises to give us himself in
bliss clothed with glory. Wherefore he has earied himself with us as careful
mothers with their sick infants, whose tastes being disguised, if they know
some one meat will do them good they prepare it in diverse manners, that with
variety they may alley the loathsomnes of ordinary diet, so God has disguised
himself in diverse manners to move us to think of him and lodge him. First he
covered him self with all his creatures^, then with the vailes of figures and
shadows, after with the flesh of man by incarnation, then with the rindes of
bread and wine in the Sacrament, next with the pains in his passion, and
finally for ever with glory after his resurrection.

The twenty five cause, to be the immediate object of our Religion.
Our savior Christ as he came to power down the fluds of his divine grace
among the faith^ulll, so he endeavored to cause them work and exercise virtues
correspondent to that grace: for which intent he invented an admirable manner
how to deify al our actions, and transfer our common virtues from their
ordinary course to a most iminent and excellent degree of perfection. Therefore
he being God and man, would have al our actions imediatly to be done to him.
For which cause he said, Qui vos audit, me audit, he that hears Luke 10.
you, hears me. Whereupon did ensue Matthew. 10
that that which before by human prudence was but credulity, now by the precept
of Christ did become divine faith. Likewise, Quod vni ex minimis meis fecistis,
Matthew. ^^.
mihi fecistis. As long as you did it to one of these my least brethren, you
did it to me. Qui vos recipit me recipit, he that receaueth Matthew. 10.
you, receaueth me: So that alms which Luke 10.
by natural virtue is ordained to succor the poor and relieve their misery,
by the institution of our savior becomes divine, 10. 13.
because it is immediately offered to him. For the same reason Saint Paul
instructed Ephesians. 1.
of Christ ex^orted even the very Col. 3. Tit. 2. 1. Pet. 2.
servants to obey their froward masters as Christ himself, thereby exalting
obedience to a higher perfection. In like sort it falls forth in religion:
for we see in the old law this virtue yielded worship to God but mediatly, a
far off, they could Exodus 19. Hab. 9 Leuit. 16. Exodus 30.
not ascend the mountain, it was not lawful to enter into sanctum sanctorum.
Their sacrifices had for their immediate objects, Bulls, Calves, and Lambs: But
the Catholic Religion immediately by means of this Sacrament has access to
God. And as that fervent Magdalen immediately exercised her Religion upon the
person of God, when she powered the precious Mark 14.
ointment upon his head, and those Luke 8.
holy women, who ministered meat and drink unto him, did a work of mercy
Mark 16.
unto God, and all those who adored that sacred humanity, immediately worshipped
his person and divinity: even so all those who either minister light,
vestments, or other furniture of the altar, immediately direct their offering.
So that as in the temple of Solomon there was nothing 3. Reg. 6.
bare, but al gilded with gold, so there is 2. Paral. 3.
nothing offered here concerning the body of Christ, but it is gilded with a
deified religion respecting the person of the son of God. How many faithful
christians at this present wish with all their hearts to have been present that
time that Christ lived upon the earth? how would they have harbored him in
their houses? how prepared his garments? how diligently dressed his wounds?
with what fine sindons wrapped his body? with what sweet spices embalmed his
corse? This desire I cannot but commond, howbeit I take all services,
obsequies, oblations done to this blessed Sacrament, of as great merit and
more then those which had bin employed to Christ's person living in earth: for
the same divinity and humanity in both are alike, and besides here we have a
greater difficulty to believe. For they that lived with him, saw his
humanity with their corporal eyes, and only beleu^ed his divinity: but here
we believe both divinity and humanity, and consequently according to our
belief, refer our devotion, religion, and oblations which therefore are more
meritorious, for merit increases where faith and love are strongest: and
commonly, there they be strongest where they have strong difficulties.

The six and twentieth cause, that the manner of our salvation should be
correspondent to the manner of our first preuarication.

THe principal cause why our Savior took flesh, and came to redeem this
world according to the common decree of divines, was to abolish al sins from
the world, but specially original, because it was most ample (for many be
conceived and borne in it who never actually offend) and indeed, the very root
of al other sins. Therefore our most divine Physician determined to make the
salues of our sores, not unlike the causes of our woes, and by the same order
extinguish al sin, by which it was brought in. We know the causes of Adams sin
were these: the serpent, that is the wicked Angel, the woman, Ada^ himself,
the tree of good and ill, with the fruit thereof, and finally, the desire to be
made like unto God. Which al six our Savior has matched, answered, and most
divinely opposed six like in our justification. An Angel Gabriell to denounce
Christ's incarnation, A Virgin to make her maker, Christ a man by nature and
wisdom in his mothers womb, the tree of good and il, the cross of christ
where all the world might know the immensiue goodness of Christ who died for us,
and the pestilent poison of sin that caused an innocent to die so cruelly,
the fruit is this blessed sacrament that blossomed out of Christ's fide upon the
cross: finally, the desire of deity and immortality, proper effects of this
sacrament, the which entice all good christians to receive it. By this plainly
appears the conformity of our reprobation, with the causes of our perdition.
That even as the scorpion carries a sting to poison and a juice to heal, so a
tree yields a fruit of death, and a tree yields a fruit of life. But were
it not an horrible abuse to convert this bread of life, into bread of death,
and make that a poison, which was ordained to be a remedy against poison. I
am afraid that many had better have swallowed poison then eaten this
sacrament: for poison in fine had but killed the body, and this kills the
soul. All those who come not prepared, who judge not the body of Christ from
other profane meats, these kill their own souls. Many, as S. Ciprian Cip.
de caen Domini.
says, Lambunt quidem petram, sedinde nec mel sugunt, nec oleum, They lick
indeed the rock, but thereof they suck neither honey nor oil. And after he
adds, Quibus expedit suspendatur mola asinaria in collo eorum, and
demergantur in profundum maris, To whom it is expedient that a millstone were
hanged about their necks, and that they were drowned in the depth of the sea.
But who be these? Those Matthew. 18 Mark 9. Matthew. 22.
which come not with a wedding garment, those that have not a firm purpose to
abstain from all deadly sins, those, who have other men's goods, and do not
restore them, those in fine which come not with charity. For this Sacrament by
a natural proposition supposes the receiver to live spiritually. For a dead
body cannot digest meat or nourish it self. And therefore he that is not in
charity, offends hainously, by receiving this sacrament, haling (as S.
Chrysostom. says) the kings son through the mire and durte: Nevertheless, I
do not deny, but in some cases this sacrament gives life, even to the soul
that is dead in sin, if bonafide he come to it with attrition, although he
has committed some mortal sin which he inuincibly remembers not.

The twenty seventh cause, to be carried about in processions.
ALthough this holy and ancient custom of carrying the blessed Sacrament in
procession was not in any place appointed by God nor delivered by tradition
from the Apostles, but instituted by the Church, yet all faithful Christians
ought to conceive, that Christ in the institution hereof, by the depth of his
wisdom did foresee this worthy ceremony, and intended, that in the peace, and
glory of his Church it should be put in execution. No better argument we need
to prove it then the practice thereof: For without all doubt his providence and
the holy ghosts assistance would never have permitted or induced the
Universal Church to appoint it and observe it, except they had intended and
allowed it. And truly no reasonable man (in my judgment) can improve this
sacred and religious honor. For if the Jews, to obtain favors of God, either
to overcome their enemies, or to avoid some plague, or to procure some grace,
or to glorify God, 1. Reg 4. and 14. Iosu. 3. 3. Reg. 6. ^. P^^. 5.
solemnly, publicly, and ceremonioufly, did carry their Arc in procession:
and God in confirmation of this universal devotion, and united religion,
granted, them almost ever that in such cases they desired, with how much more
reason ought the elect people of Christ celebrat this venerable action? First,
thereby declaring In like manner by this solemn procession and triumph of
Christ's people, who concur to profess their joy and internal comfort they
conceive in their hearts to see the empire of his church so far propagated, so
well conserved, and the enemies of God confounded. The second reason may be to
demand publicly some In Flanders.
and sunday to go solemnly in procession with this host: for be they sure,
though heretics while they have a little light of temporal holy ghosts
assistance would never have permitted or induced the Universal Church to
appoint it and observe it, except they had intended and allowed it. And truly
no reasonable man (in my judgment)can improve this sacred and religious honor.
Forif the Jews, to obtain favors of God, either to overcome their enemies,
or to avoid some plague, or to procure some grace, or to glorify God, 1. Reg
4. and 14. Iosu. 3. ^ Reg. 6. 3. P^r. 5.
solemnly, publicly, and ceremoniously, did carry their Arc in procession:
and God in confirmation of this universal devotion, and united religion,
granted, them almost ever that in such cases they desired, with how much more
reason ought the elect people of Christ celebrat In like manner by this solemn
procession and triumph of Christ's people, who concurte to profess their joy
and internal comfort they conceive in their hearts to see the empire of his
church so far propagated, so well conserved, and the enemies of God confounded.
The second reason may be to demand publicly some In Flanders.
and sunday to go solemnly in procession with this host: for be they sure,
though heretics while they have a little light of temporal favor, while some
stronger froces maintain them, yet when as night comes, when human force
fails, Dagon must fall, the Arc and the Idol cannot long 1. Reg. 5.
continue together, though m^col deride David for daunsing, yet shall she die
barren, 2. Reg. 6.
I mean, their heresy shall not spread far.

The twenty eight cause, to nourish our souls.
CAro mea (says Christ) vere est cibus and sanguis meus vere est potus, my
flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drike Io. 6.
indeed: if then his flesh be meat, and his blood drink, and that truly in
very deed, hereupo^ it follows, that al those perfections which agree to
meat and drink, as they nourish the body, al those must appertain to this
food as it nourishes the soul: and those imperfections that meat and drink
ordinarily carry with them, that this Sacrament have not, but surpasses them in
a most eminent dgree. First, meat if it be not had Christians if they live
long without it, inflameth their souls to procure it. For if David said,
Sitiuit anima mea ad te deum Psalm. 41.
fontem viuum, My soul has thirsted after God the living fountain. Well may
we say: Sitiuit anima mea ad te deum viuum, My soul has thirsted after thee
the living God. Meat delights the taste, Omne delectamentum Sap. 16.
suauitatis, All delight of sweetness. Meat restores the forces lost, and
so conserueth life, this sacrament by De coena Domini. 5
this food, increases in spirit: for by receuing the life of charity and
grace, the soul cannot but grow in virtue and perfection, as he that comes
nearer the sun participateth more light and heat. For these resemblances of
meat with the blessed sacrament, we may per? ceaue the reason why our blessed
Savior instituted it under the forms of bread and wine, thereby to teach us
by these external signs, that as bread and wine feed our bodies, so Christ's
f^lesh and blood our souls. But for all these perfections or commodities of
temporal meats, they have adjoined as many imperfections and defects, the
which this blessed food of life wants. For corporal Qui comedit adhuc
esurit, and qui Ecde. 24.
bibit adhuc sitit, he that eats of it is the more hungry and he that
drinks, the more thirsty: and none we see so much desire it, as those who
most frequent it. Corporal meats cannot cause a body that is Qui manducat me,
and ipse viuet propter me. Io. 6.
he that eats me, the same also shall live by me. Corporal meat although it
repair our forces lost, yet the continual Omne in agendo repatitur every
agent in doing suffers again, so that at last even meat it self would
extinguish our outward faculty, if we had no other cause of death. But he, who
eats at this table of life, Non gustabit Io. 6.
mortem in aeternum, non morietur. he shall not taste of death for ever, he shall
not dye. For as the soul can never dye, except it leese the grace of God, and
that it cannot leese of necessity, but of free will, so the grace of God can
never be consumed, but by a perverse wicked will, and therefore in aeternum,
for ever of it self it conserueth the soul in life, because in very deed it
is life. Corporal meats fail in force, for they always cause not the body
to increase in strength or quantity, but after certain years the body does
not only cease to grow, but also it begins to decay, and in fine declineth to
death. But such is the virtue of this holy Eucharist, that every time it is
eaten, it adds a new degree of growth. yea and for most part, when a man
declineth most in body, and comes nearer his death, in spirit and soul he
increases most, because he then has most heat of grace todisgest this sacred
food, for which admirable effects David well say in person of those that
receive this Psalm. 22.
heavenly refection. Dominus regit me, and nihil mihi deerit in loco pascuaeibi
me collocauit, Out Lord does govern me, and I shall want nothing, in the soil
of his pasture he has placed me. For all pastures in respect of this are
barren deserts, all repasts compared with this, leaves soul ever fainting.
These pastures are always green with grace, enameld with flowers of virtues,
watered with the heavenly dew of Gods assistance, and finally, have the
pasture continually attending his sacred flock.

The twenty ninth cause, to effect the resurrection of our bodies.
BY the universal preuarication of Adam 1. Cor. 15.
all his posterity incu^red in particular the death of soul, and corruption of
body: whereunto they only are subject, who discende from him by natural
generation. Because that God had so decreed, that as from him we were to draw
our nature, so by his good demeanor from him, we should receive our grace. But
through his transgression by communicating unto us a part of his substance
poisoned with the sting of original sin, he imparted together the mortal
wounds of body and soul. Our Savior Christ, whose substance was unspotted
with crime or offense, pretending as life to destroy death, communicated unto
us his divine substance, to give the soul the life of grace, and the body
immortality of glory. For who can wonder, if Christ's body touching the bodies
of good souls which receive him with devotion, resuscitate them to life again,
since the touch of Elizeus bones had virtue to restore the 4. Reg. 3.
vital spirit to a dead carcass? If seed sown in the field, although it die
in the ground, retain vigor and virtue of spring so lively again which was
communicated unto it by the root, why shall we not imagine that our bodies
keep a certain virtue, a relation to this sacrament, the only root of
immortality? For if the soul receive grace, the body concurreth, it is an
instrument, and therefore if it be compartner in pain, why not in gain? And
if Christ's soul sanctify our souls, shall not this body glorify our
bodies? Yea both his body and soul will immortallize both our bodies and
souls: and therefore he said, Hic est panis de caelo John 6.
descendens, vt si quis ex ipso manducauerit non moriatur, this is the bread
that descends from heaven, that if any man eat of it, he die not. For
although he die corporally, yet by virtue of this food by the touch, by the
relation to the soul whose instrument it was, Christ will raise it up again.
Without doubt it stands greatly with the providence of God, that Christ's body
should cause their resurrection who receive devoutly this sacrament: because,
as we said above, in this host Christ is sacrificed, and those that
participate it woorthily, in affection suffer and die with him, therefore
reason requires, that as they die with him, so they shall rise with him Si
compatimnr, and conregnabimus, Romans 8.
if we suffer with Christ, we shall be also glorified with Christ. And more
plainly, Reformabit corpus humilitatis nostrae Phil. 3.
configuratum corpori claritatis suae, He will reform the body of our
humillitie, configured to the body of his glory. For if we mortify our bodies,
to make them like his body by crosses and pains. Doubtless he will revive them
with delights and glory, causing them to be his like his body in eternal joy.
For which cause we must for a while entreat our bodies not to groan under the
burden of Christ's commandments, not to repine at fasting, not to murmr at
mortification, not to loathe long prayers, not to grudge to live in prisons
deprived of many false pleasures the world affoordeth, for all these will
passeonce. When death comes, our conscience will rejoice. But when our Savior
after death shall judge us, and see our crosses conformable to his, our pains
for his glory, our tribulation for his confession, Hiems Cantie. 2.
transijt, imber abijt, flores apparebunt in terra nostra, the winter is past,
the shower is gone, flours will appear in our ground: then shall we know that
all earthly joys were mere toys, and every transitory cross an eternal
crown.

The thirtieth cause, to be a viaticum, or provision for our voyage.
THis holy Sacrament for three causes may be called Viaticum. First, because
are to receive it, wander as pilgrims in the deserts of this world, where
spiritual food can hardly be had, and therefore it was prefigured in the
celestial Manna which God rained upon the Jews whilst they wandered in their
peregrination toward the land of promise. Thirdly, insidiari calcaceo seminis
Genesis 3.
mulieris, supplant the heel of the woman's seed) for thereupon depends the
triumph of God, the Church, and the soul, over the devil: the confusion of
hell and the glory of heaven. In this last conflict therefore so dangerous, our
Savior would arm us with his own body and blood, that the infernal fiends
seeing the blood of Christ, should be enforced to let that soul pass in
security, and meddle no more with it, then the distroying Angel with the
children of Israel, when he saw this blood painted over the doors with the
blood of a lamb: yea as so many grisly busaloes they should be terrified and
affrighted even with the very sight of this vermilian color. An excellent
figure of this effect we find registered in the acts of Elias, who being
persecuted by that impious Iesabell 3. R^g. 19.
loathing his life, and desiring death, fled into a deasart, and there
casting himself under a luniper tree desired of God to end his days, and
with that fell a sleep: presently an angel came to him, and awaked him,
willing him to eat, for yet there remained a longway: he rose up, and found
set at his head an imber cake, and a cup of water, he eat and drunk, and
walked for two days by the strength of that food, till he came to the mountain
of God, Oreb, whereas our Lord came unto him. What can more expressly declare the
manner, the virtue, the effect of our viaticum, then this? while the faithful,
Phil. 1.
weary of this world, lie on their death beds, wishing to be dissolved, to live
with Christ in the sweet shade of the catholic church, the Priest presents
unto them the bread of life, willing them to eat, for a long way remains, a
troublesome voyage they have to pass, they receive, and then by the virtue
thereof proceed in their pilgrimage unto the holy mount of heaven, where they
shall see God forever. O happy soul that rests in the desert of this
miserable world, under the shade of such a tree, from whence falls the fruit
of life, I mean the Catholic Church, wherein is planted the cross of Christ,
which bears this fruit of salvation Well said the spouse, sub vmbra illius
quem desideraui sedi, Cant. 2.
and fructus eius dulcis gutturi meo, under the shade of him whom I desired I
have sitten, and his fruit was sweet unto my throat. If it be so sweet in
this life, growing in an vplanding country out of the native soil, how sweet
will it be in heaven, when these vailes shall be broken, when these parings
shall be taken away, when our taste shall be quickened. when we shall eat it
with God himself upon his own table.

The one and thirtieth cause to win virgins to God.
SOme sage Philosophers and wise physicians counsel noble women, not to
commit, the nursing of their children to others of base estate and mean
condition, but that they should give them suck themselves, the reason say they
is most evident, because the rusticke milk engendered in these clownish bodies,
will greatly alter the delicate and noble complexion of the child, for
although we in our stomakes alter and change those meats we receive, and bring
the^ at last to be of our temper and substance, yet in the very alteration
our bodies feel, in tract of time, most notable effects of the^: for hot meats
inflame them, cold meats refresh them, moist meats, dissolve the^, dry meats
unite them. This doctrine being true, as experience pregnantly proves, every
one may see how fit a food for virgins is this blessed sacrament: for if we
consider Christ our savior therein contained according to his divinity, his
father the first virgin of al others (as Nazianzen Nazianz. in Carmine,
calls him) conceived him alone in the womb of his understanding: if we
expend his humanity, it was borne of a virgin without a father, if we wey
Christ himself god and man, we shall find him al his life to have observed most
strictly a virginal purity. This blessed bread entering into our bodies
adorned with so many admirable titles of virginity, how can it but alter our
sensual and base appetires by eleuating them to the complexion, temper and
pure disposition of Christ? shall corporal meats work with more efficacy their
effects in our bodies, than this celestial his prerogatives in our souls? No
no, it is more excellent than so, Dilectus meus candidus Cantic. 5.
and rubicundus electos prae millibus, hic est fios campi, and lilium
conuallium, My love is Cantie. 2.
white and red, chosen before thousands: this is the flower of the field and
lilly of the valley. His garments are lilly white with chastity, and scarlet
red with passions of love, and such effects he imprintes with the seal of his
body in the souls of the faithful. The which effects, considering and
admiting one exclamed, Quid b^^um, Zach. 9.
and quid pulchrum eius nisi frumentum electorum, and vinum germinans
virgins?? what of his is good? and what of his is beautiful, but the wheat
of his elected, and wine that springs virgins? O holy Prophet, do thou
meditate the marvelous works of God, and can thou find nothing more
admirable than this? View the creation of the world, consider thy Fathers in
Egypt, Genesis 1. Exodus 7. and 8, 9, 10 11, 12. Exodus 14.
what marvelous miracles Moses wrought how he passed the red sea so
wonderfully: look upon God himself, and thou shall see an abisse of
goodness, a fountain of wisdom, an indeficient power. How then say thou?
Quid bonum and quid pulchrum, eins nisi frumentum electorum? Questionless,
what of his is good, and what of his beautiful, but the wheat of his elected,
and wine springing virgins. He knew well what he said: for in this Sacrament all the riches, goodness, and beauty of heaven and earth Christ comprehends, in
quo sunt omnes the sauri absconditi? in caelo and terra, in whom Col. 2.
be all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge hidden? in heaven and on earth:
and as for the works of God, if S. Aug. said, the justification of a sinner
was an effect of a more difficul^ie than the creation of heaven and earth
(because God made the^ alone by his infinite power, but here besides the same
power of God, there is required the consent of man) I may well then infer, that
in this sacrament where he justifies sinuers, by giving them the life of grace
and glory, where he springs virgins against so many hard encounters of the
flesh and the devil, he works a greater work than the creation of heaven and
earth and therefore Quid bonum and quid pulchrum eius nisi frumentum electorum
and vinum germinans virgins, What of his is good, and what of his beautiful,
but the Wheat of his elected, and Wine springing virgins: far from Christ's
table that wine of which saint Paul said, Nolite inebriari vino in quo Ephesians. 5.
est luxuria, be not drunken with wine wherein is riofousnes, because this
food causes both abstinence and continence.

The two and thirtieth cause, to render by gratitude a certain equality to God
for all his benefits.
BY the common consent of sacred divines, one of the principal causes which
moved the son of god to take flesh, was to satisfy the justice of his father,
to pay an equal ransom for our sins, for no man can call it in question, that
if God would, he could of his liberality, mercy and bounty, have released all
mankind, have forgiven us our trespasses, but then he had not satisfied his
justice: therefore man being not able to pay it, God found out a way by making
himself man to discharge it. In like sort after the incarnation, and so many
and so rare benefits God bestowed upon us, there remained a perpetual debt and
gratitude for us to answer so many favors of creation, consetuation,
redemption, vocation, justification, election, do the promise of life
everlasting: I say there remained a bond of gratitude to defrayal these graces,
and such being the nature of gratitude, that it ought to render more then it
receives for if it yield less it is not content, if it repay equal, it
affords nothing proper: therefore what remedy was there for man to be grateful
to god for so many and so singular gifts, since he had said, Non accipiam de
Psalm. 49.
domo tua vitulos neque de gredibus tuis hircos, quoniam meus est orbis
terrarum and vniuersi; qui habitant in eo. I will not take calves of thy house,
neither goats of thy flocks, because the world is mine and all that dwell
therein. Our savior Christ did well foresee this imperfection of ours, and
therefore he thought to provide a remedy, and questionless by no better means
then this facrament: for since there is nothing in this world, more worthy, or
more excellent, then god, who^ we had received in Christ's incamation, life,
passion, and in promise for glory, yea, he had bestowed himself upon us in
this sacrament so often as we could eat him. Our fauior therefore with such
profound wisdom contrived this Eucharist, that he ordained it as a gift of God
to us, and as a present of us to him. For as all the lambs and calves offered
in the old testament were more justly and by higher dominion belonging to God
then to men, yet because God had given them to men, and granted them the use,
he accepted them as gifts and offerings unto him. In like sort he has
imparted to his church, this sacred food, to sanctify it, and also, to be a
perpetual sacrifice, a continual offering to God, for all his benefits and
graces bestowed upon her, that she may with the holy prophet say, Quid
retribuam Psalm. 1^^.
domino pro omnibusquae retribuit mihi? calicem salutaris accipiam, What shall
I render to God for all that he has given me? I will take the cup of my
Savior. Therefore I may boldly call of God for more favors, since I have been
so grateful for these. And for the same cause I shall be able to perform
whatsoever I have promised to him. Moreover, as often as in the holy Mass we
offer to God this blessed holocauste, we may say in humility of spirit, and
with thanks to our Savior, we offer up as great a present to God, as ever
God gave, or is to give us, and as we may truly aver, as by our saviors
incarnation and passion we paid an equal ransom for our sins: so by this
oblation we offer up an equal present for all his benefits: and for that we
are not able to answer the love which God gave his gifts withal, we must, by
the virtue of gratitude, acknowledge our insufficie^cie, wish to increase in
charity, and especially desire our Savior in this sacrament according to his
humanity, that as he does pray for us in heaven, so he will supply our wants
in fervent love and gratitude, for so many and so singular favors.

The three and thirtieth cause, to comfort our souls by spiritual joy and
devotion.
THat insoluble probleame which Sampson once propounded, and could not be
answered, except he had revealed it unto his unfaithful wife, (De comedente
exiuit cibus, and deforti egressa est dulcedo) Judge. 14.
meat came out of the eater, and sweetness issued forth from the strong, might
eafily be solued now by any devout catholic: for as they said, Quid fortius
leone? quid dulcius melle? What is stronger then a Apoc. 5.
lion? what is sweeter the^ honey? so we may say, quid fortius Christo leone de
tribu Iudae and quid dulcius Eucharistia quae habet omne delectamentum
suanitatis? what is stronger than Christ the lion of the tribe of Judah? and
what is sweeter the^ the Eucharist, which has all the delights of sweetness?
For as ^ap. 16.
out of Samsons lion dead he drew a honey comb, even so out of Christ's side
hanging upon the cross, islued forth this sacred food sweeter then honye or
the honey comb, the which was figured in manna, Psalm. 118. and 18. Sap. 16.
that had all sorts of sweetness that taste could desire. And no marnaile if
this food be canded with such delights, since the joy of angels, and; the
object of all blessedness is therein contained. I know the Spouse did say of
christ, Fasciculus mirrhae Cantie. 1.
dilectus meus mihi inter vbera mea commorabitur, a nosgay of mirrhe my love to
me shall rest betwixt my breasts. For the bitterness of mirrhe is alayed here
with the sweetness of sugar: and well with trickling tears of penance and
compassion are conjoined excessive joys of love, as Cip. de e^^ Domini.
S. Ciprian well noted and proved by experience, Vide (says he) quomodo his
qui Christi commemorant passione^, intra sacra officia quasi per quosdam
canales de interioribus fontibus egrediantur torrentes, and super omnes
delitias lachrimis nectareis anima delectatur, mark what floudes issue as it
were by pipes from internal fountains for them who remember Christ's passion
in the office (he means the mass as appears after) and how the soul above
al delights is delited with sweetest tears. But I know many will say they have
often done their endeavor, they have prepared themselves according to their
small possibility, and yet they remain as barren as the mountains of Gelbo,
vbi nec ros nec plamia, where fell 2. Reg. 1.
neither dew nor reign. I answer first, that often it seems to have used
diligence, when indeed we can not be excused from negligence. The Pharisie
thought he did well prepare himself to prayer by fasting Luke 2.
twice a week, and yet it was hypocrisy and no preparation: for selfeloue is
so subtle that except the grace of God lighten our eyes well, we can hardly
perceue it. But let us suppose that a soul has endeavored to prepare a
lodging for this King of glory after such a sort as God requires of our
trailtie, and yet to remain in the former arriditie and drienesse. Then I
answer that venial sins, which hinder not the effect of grace, as they
ordinarily cool the fervor of charity, so they hinder the sweetness of
devotion; because that this sensible delight, which proceeds from the
superior part of the soul and affects, the inferior, may easily be stayed
by inordinate love, hope, or delights. For the love of God is so pure, that it
cannot abide any smell of sin and wickedness, and therefore devotion is
sometimes called spirit, and devout men spiritual men: the spirit therefore is
like wind, the which if you close it in any thing as a hallown, give it but
vent with a pinnes point, and you shall see how by little and little it
vanishes away: even so devotion, if you vent the soul with vain thoughts,
sundry worldly desires, heady affections, idle words, it quickly will be
dspersed. Besides, there is a reasonable devotion a tranquillity of mind, a
resolut egood will, which breeds a great contentation, although we want
sensible delectation. But finally, let a soul endeavor to expel venial sins,
let it attend quid loquatur in ea dominus what Pal. 84.
what our Lord will speak in her, let it frequentafter the receipt acts of
faith, hope, and charity, humility, submission, with good attention, and let
it not doubt of devotion.

The four and thirtith cause, to illuminate our minds.
When I behold this sacred body, and this living bread, enter into the breasts
of Gods servants, me thinks I see a king enter into his kingdom, or ascend his
throne where he sits to rule his state. a pastor euter among his flock, to
protect and guide them, a Pilot to ascend his ship, to direct her to the haven
of eternal life, a sun rising upon their spiritual horizon to illustrate
Gods divine mysteries, to reveal many secrets touching their salvation, which
the night of sin had obscured: finally, it seems that there passes into
every ones soul a new eye, whereby they may discern the colors of God from
the colors of the devil, the flesh, and the world. For who will marvel if
from Christ, contained in the breasts of his faithful, issue rays of light,
beams of wisdom, floudes of understanding? is not he as God the light of his
Father, Lumen de lumine light of light? is not he as the second person in
trinity, speculum five macula and splendour lucis aterna, A glass Symb.
council, Nice^i.
without spot and the brightness of eternal light is not he according to his
humanity a temple of light, in quo sunt omnes thesauri Col. 2.
sapientiae and scientiae Dei, in whom are all the treasures of the wisdom and
knowledge of God, is not he our Prophet, our pastor, our doctor, our master,
sent from heaven to give light to the world? did not he call himself lux
mundi, the light of the world? Io. 2.
how then will he withdraw the beams of his light from those souls, who come
devoutly with oil prepared in their lamps to receive light of that indeficient
fountain? especialy he himself having confirmed Matthew. 25
it by saying, Quamdiu sum in mundo, John 9.
lux sum mundi, as long as I am in the world I am the light of the world. Which
effect will be counted more certain if we call to memory that admirable light
which Iona thas received by eating a little honey: for, 1. Reg 14.
what proportion had honey with opening his eyes? or the honey comb with
restoring sight, but that God would depaint in that fact, as in a little Image,
the effect of this Sacrament, that reuiueth the eyes of the soul to see God,
and closes them from the view of the world? But this admirable operation of
the Eucharist, was not only registered in the old Testament, but also expressly
proved in the new, and hear accomplished indeed, that there was foretold in
figure, when Christ the light of the world of set purpose fained himself a
pilgrim, to instruct the two wandering pilgrims in faith, the verity of his
death. Luke 34
passion, and resurrection: afterward intending to draw away the thick
veil which hindered them for knowing whom he was, although in his talk their
hearts So S. Aug. understands this place of the Sacrament lib. 3. de
consensu cuang. c. 11. theoph. in 24. Lu. author. imperf. hom. 69 in Matthew.
did burn, yet they could not discover who he was: at last, by reaching them
this new sight, this new sun, presently their eyes were opened, and
cogneuerunt eum in fractione panis, and they knew him in the breaking of the
bread. And in very deed, the common experience of good Catholics may easily
assure us what light they receive from this life of light. For I have
considered diverse times what should be the cause that-many worldlings prize
so much the pelf and trash of this life, caring nothing for Sacraments,
prayers, spiritual affairs, life everlasting; things so important, so
necessary, so highly to be esteemed, and others leave patrimonies, despise
courts, refuse honors, centemne plesures, abhor riches, and only attend to
fasting, praying, devotion, meditation, mortification, contempt of themselves
and the world: Truly I am of opinion, that one of the principal causes is the
often receiving light from this sacrament in the one, and the lack of the
other: even as the cause of al fecu^ditie is the presence of the same in the
spring, summer, and authume, and the absence of it in winter cause of all
sterillitie, the abundance of heat and light in the one, and the scarcity
of both in the other.

The thirty five cause, to be a commemoration of his Passion.
CAsting mine eyes in one prospect over the whole time from the beginning of
the world unto the latter and, it all appears unto me nothing else but a
solemn triumph of our Savior Christ: the which consists in the preparation,
the triumph, and the memories or monuments thereof: for as the Roman
Emperors after they had achieved any worthy victory against their enemies,
they gave notice thereof to the Senate of Rome, and described to them all the
valiant exploits, how great a conquest they had made, what cities, what
provinces they had subdued, what great good did redound to their commonweal:
the Senate understanding this good success, prepared ways for him to pass,
adorned Gates wherein he was to enter, addressed Chariots to conduct him and
his train, hanged their streets with tapistrie of arras, velvet, gold, and
cloth of tissue. And last of all, erected arches, piramides, pillars, statues,
collosses for monuments and records to their posterity, engrauing in them, the
whole substance and circumstances of the victory. The like (it seems)
befalls in the triumph of Christ, in his Chariot of the Cross: for before
his coming, all the old Testament was nothing else but a preparation, letters
sent by God to those people, by Moses, by prophets, by patriarchs, to dispose
them to believe, expect, and defire the day of this triumph, insomuch, that
some of the^ wished the heavens broken, that he might descend, loathing to
stay any longer, he prepared his way with giving a law and ceremonies, he
decked the streets with sacraments and sacrifices, he adorned the gates, I
mean his temple with infinite variety of furniture, of cherubins, of lions,
of flowers. After Christ came into this life, he marched for three Matthew. 21.
Mark 11 Luke 19.
and thirty years, and at last, came into the City of Jerusalem, where the
people spread their garments, the children carried boughs of palms and olives,
and because the ungrateful Jews would not erect a triumphant Arch, nor engraue
his victories in pilars of marbl, or piramides of porphirie, he erected
himself a monument, a memory of his triumph, his death and passion, the sacred
Eucharist (because he triumphed in dying, and by his passion won the field, so
that the victory, triumph, and death were altogether upon the Cross) a
blessed Arch more durable then marble or brass. Herein he has engraven his
passion as before was declared: here every one may read the sum of his pains,
and therefore rightly he said, Hoc facite in meam Luke 22.
co^memorationem, This do for a co^memoration Psalm. 110.
of me: and David before, memoriam fecit mirabilia suoru^ misericors, and
misereatur dominus, escam dedit timentibus se. Our merciful and compassionable
Lord instituted a memory of his wonders, he gave food to them that fear him,
besides all the services, masses, sacraments, and what appertains to piety or
devotion, after Christ's coming, it has some relation, it serves in part for
a memory, a thanksgiving, or a representatio^ of this glorious triumph of
Christ. And questionless it concerns us much, often to remember the passion
of our savior, since he has instituted so divine a monument, to reduce it into
our memories, and at no better time then when we communicate: for God is a
fountain of liberality, yet he would have us remember his benefits: for as he
that acknowledges them, disposes the giver to bestow more, so he that
acknowledges them not, dries up the fountain toward him. And such is the
goodness of God, that he would institute a memory of his benefits, that we
thereby remembering them, might merit more, and so receive new continually.

The six and thirtieth cause, to move us to loathe ^^at the world loves.
THe holy and devout S. Francis, inflamed with the love of God, was accustomed
to break out into this affectious voice, Deus meus, and omnia, O my God, and
al, the which he had learned of a him, who was a man according to the heart of
God, and many years before had cried: Quid mihi Psa. 72.
est in caelum, and a te quid volui super terram. What is there for me in
heaven, or besides thee, what do I desire in earth? These voices it seemed they
uttered for two causes: first, because he that possesses god enjoys Quaerite
primum regnum dei, and iustitiam Matthew. 6.
eius and caetera adijcientur vobis, And the reason is evident, for if Amicorum
omnia sunt co^munia, amongst friends al things are common, he that is Gods
friend, possessing his heart by friendship, consequently is made partaker of all
treasures, for which cause the good old father said to his elder son, Fili, tu
meoum es, and omnia mea tua sunt. Son, thou art with me, and al mine are Luke
15.
thine. The second cause I take to be, by reason appears how the holy
Eucharist inforceth us after a very palpable manner, to despise and abhor
whatsoever this impious world affects: for who is so senseless, that having
before his face a fountain of most pure and Crystal water, will range abroad
to seek filthy puddles and mirie-fennes to quench his thirst? Has not this
sacrament all thou can desire, insomuch, that the very beauty and pride of
the field cannot be absent. Et pulchritndo agri mecum est, and the beauty of
Psalm. 49.
the field is with me. Wish, see, ask whatsoever the world affords, here
thou shall have it comprised. Desire thou riches? here lie the treasures of
God: wishest thou pleasure? De torrente voluptatis potabit te, Psalm. 35.
he will give thee to drink in the flood of pleasure. Would thou sow the
flower and crop of al goodness? Ostendam tibi omne bonum, I will show thee al
good: crauest thou long life and happy days? Qui manducat Exodus 33 Io. 6.
hunc panem, viuet in aeternum, He that eats of this bread, shall live for
ever. Affectest thou in fine all pleasures in one, all goodness in one, al
wisdom in one? Io here Deus meus and omnia, my God and all. For all creatures
out of God lack many perfections, they are good, but not full. As a cup of
salt water in the sea is perfecter then in a veslel, for there being joined, it
may co^tinualy be preserved, it is incorporated with the whole, and may serve
for many notable effects; separated, it falls to corruption, and serves to
few uses. Al creatures in God live in the prime of their parity, there they
lack imperfection. Therefore (my soul) disdain to view these fading flowers,
these roses with thorns, these bees with stings, these golden aples of Sodoms
love, these Sirens sugered songs, convert thy eyes to this blessed Eucharist,
view in thy Lord a paradise of pleasure, beutie without corruption, profit
without displeasure, joys without deceit, continual delight without satiety:
and then I know thou will break forth and cry, Deus meus and omnia, my God
Psalm. 72.
and al, nam gustato spiritu, deficit omnis caro, for the spirit tasted, al
flesh fails. The^ I know thou can not but direct al thy actions, use all
the creatures of God for no other end then his glory, for this heart will become
like a flame of fire, that burns al it incountreth, and conuerteth the^ into
fire, so thy love will think, speak, and work al for God, and in God, and
consequently, loath what the world loves not for God

The thirty seventh cause, to be a confirmation of his testament.
IT has bin an usual custom with God, to confirm and seal his pacts and
promises with some sensible sign, that by such palpable objects, men might
better conceive and remember them. For if he promise Noe and his posterity,
never after to over flow the universal earth with a deluge, he imprintes his
seal in the clouds, ^ehes. ^.
and for his arms, leaves the rainbow. If he promise Abraham to multiply his
seed as the stars of heaven, and to give him the land of Canaan, he causes him
to divide his sacrifices in two parts, and in confirmation Genes. 15.
of his pacte, he sendes a lamp of fire, which passes through the midest of
the^. If Moses sent from God give the law written in tables of stone, if he
promise to accept them into his peculiar people, he Exodus 24.
confirms his covenant with a bowell of blood, wherewith he sprinkleth all the
people. If GOD used such stately seals to ratify his promises to his people
in the law of Nature, and the law written, questionless he will not omit
them in the law of grace, where the covenant concerns a greater benefit,
wherein are comprehended in a more iminent degree al these favors of God,
promised in times past, the which he sealed so solemnly: and therefore in
confirmation of this new testament, he instituted this blessed Sacrament and
sacrifice, Hic est ealix noni testamenti, this is the challice of the new
testament, affirm the three proclaimers of Christ's law, Matthew, Mark, and
Luke, with the Apostle S. Paul. But what covenant makes Christ with his
people, that he ratifieth with the seal of his own body and blood? Here
Hieremy speaking Hier. 31.
by himself, and by S. Paul, or rather, God by them both, Ecce dies venient
dicit dominus, Hebr. 8.
and consummabo super domum Israel and super domum Judah testamentum nouum,
Behold, the days shall come, says our Lord, and I will consummate upon the
house of Israel and upon the house of Judah a new testament, etc. see the place.
In these words God promises five things to his church, first, that he will
forgive al them, the which he performs by pouring of faith into their souls:
thirdly, that he will write this law, not in stone tables, as Moses Ecce ego
vobiscum sum vsque ad consummationem Matthew. 28.
seculi, behold, I am with ye all days, even to the consummation of the world,
and by sending the holyghost, which docebit illam omne^ veritatem, he shall
Acts 2. 5 John 16.
teach her all truth. Finally, that he will never forsake nor abandon his
Church as he did the Jews Sinagog, the which we have proved by the
continuance of the catholic church, from Christ's time even till these our
days, although persecuted by emperors, impugned by heretics, troubled by so
many evil Catholics, Matthew. 16
yet the gates of hell could nothing preuail against it: the propagation also
of his church was promised by God, and sealed with his sacrament, that this
vine tree planted by Christ's own hands, should delate the branches from sea to
sea, and to the worlds end the extremities thereof, in Psalm. 79.
such sort, that rather land shall fail to propagate this Church, then her
amplification shall finish. Wherefore God shall not be known only in Judea or
Siria, but in all the provinces of the world, since we Psalm. 75.
see deprived of these promises the protestants Churches, eclipsed for fifteen
hundred years, and concluded in corners of the world, in some few Cities of
Germany, in Geneua, and England: it is no marvel if they have broken the
seal of the blessed sacrament, where with by infallible assurance the majesty
of God confirmed them. But the Catholic Church possessing all, holds the
sacred Eucharist as a perpetual confirmation, the which (as (...)
it was said) comprehends both the significations and signs of all the
other promises made and confirmed by God in passed ages. For God promised to
Noe, not to drown the world any more with water, and Christ promises here,
his Church shall never wholly be overflowed with sin: he took for a sign
the Rainbow, the which the sun causes by reflection of beams in watrie
clouds. O what a goodly rainbowe the sun of neuer-fading light effects
here? what glistering beams of glory powers his divinity into that sacred
humanity? what beautiful rays spring from that glorious soul, and adorn
with brightness and most lively colors that immortal body? if it were not
for merit of our faith, we might see through those clouds of bread and Wine,
another sort of Rainbovv, then Nature in her most stately circle ever beheld.
God promised to Abraham, to multiply his seed as the stars of heaven, and
where are they multiplied but in the Catholic Church? he allotted unto him
the land of Canaan, and here the kingdom of heaven, he commanded Abraham
to divide his sacrifice in two parts, and sent a Lamp of fire from heaven to
pass betwixt them, and what could more expressly figure this sacrifice? Are
not here divided by virtue of Consecration, the soul from the body, and the
blood from them both? and does not both the divinity and soul of Christ not
pass, but firmly stand in midst of these parts? God gave the law by Moses,
and promised the people to defend, protect, and accept the^ for his: but here
with a more careful providence, with a more forcible means, with more plenty
of grace, with more abundance of light, with more copy of internal
inspirations and external helps, he declares his vigilant care and fatherly
watchfulnes over his Church, more then the sinagog. Moses sprinkled the people
upon their garments with the blood of dead beasts: but here Christ sprinkled
the hearts of the Apostles with his blood that ever lives. Hereupon we may
inferrre a practical illation, that if as often as we view the rainbow, we
may easily reduce to memory the promise God made, never to drown the world,
so by seeing this glorious rainbow, or rather gracebow, we may call to our
considerations, the mercy and goodness God, in pardoning our sins, and let
us beware to look upon it with polluted and defiled souls, lest it chance to
1. Reg. 6.
us, as it befell to the Bethsamites, who curiously beheld the Arc which did
not appertain unto them, for otherwise he that sees the secrets of our
hearts, will sting us in such secret sort, as both horror and confusion will
undoubtedly ensue, either ^n this life, or in the life to come, or both.

The eight and thirtieth cause, to be a trumpet to blaze the glory of God.
GOd, whose sayings are doings, can speak as well by works as words, and
blaze his name, as amply by silent facts, as shtill tongues. Therefore most
zealous of his own glory (that is, desirous that men should know his majesty,
and in knowing it, render him that dutiful praise, honor, worship, and
homage, as such a sovereignty requires) iustituted this glorious Sacrament.
The which so effectually brings it to pass, that if al tongs and pens were
joined in one, they could not discribe nor speak the thousand part that this
silent trumpet sounds: because we see imprinted in the very heart of nature,
that the crop, the flower, and perfection of every thing ought to be presc^ted
to God. Why did Abell sacrifice unto him the fat of his flock, but because
that even nature had written in the forefront of his Genesis 4.
soul, that God was the woorthiest, and consequently deserved the best? why
didd God himself, in the appointing of his oblations and sacrifices prescribe
always the best to be singled for his service, and that neither lame nor
blind, nor any defectious beast, should appear in his sight, but as he
himself gave us to understand, that if terrence princes disdain to accept
Malac. 1.
base and unworthy presents, how much more he to whom all Monarchies do
yield homage, and lay their Crowns and Scepters under his feet? Why did the
prophet David say Sacrificia medullata offeram tibi, marrowed sacrifices I will
offer to thee? So complete and perfect sacrifices, O Lord, I will offer unto
thee, that the very bones shall not lack their Psalm. 65.
perfection, but be filled with the flower of fatness, their native marrow.
But for what reason a holy Prophet? Because, if we have received all from him,
reason requires we should return the best to him. This universal, ancient,
and natural instinct, the faithful before Christ's time performed with great
diligence and exquisite ceremonies: and indeed it was convenient they should,
for the glorifying of God, for the reverence of his majesty, to acknowledge
him the beginning of all, the end of all, the conseruer, the prouider, the
governor of all: and besides, in him to be an abisse of perfection, goodness,
wisdom, power, and such like att^ibutes. But what proportion had al these to
god? what glory yielded the death of a Bull to such a Highness? When Solomon
offered 2. P^ral. ^.
a thousand to an idol, they were too base, and therefore God rejected them,
he thought them not suitable to such a majesty: and therefore David having no
better, and seeing God refusing beasts and calves, at last thought his own
heart was something more agreeing, and therefore he said, Quoniam sivolnisses
sacrificium dedisse, Psalm. 50.
vtique holocaustis non delectaberis, sacrificium deo spiritus contribulatus,
cor contritum and humiliatur Deus non despicies, If thou would, a sacrifice
I had given thee, but with burnt offerings thou art not delighted, a sacrifice
to God is a contrite spirit. Salomo^ perceuing the infirmities of their
sacrifices, and seeing God distasted with the^, thought in the multitude of
offerings make some little show of the infinite glory he judged due to God,
and therefore ^. Reg^ 8.
he offered two and twenty thousand oxen for one sacrifice, but not in
millibus taurorum, in thousands of bulls was Gods glory sufficiently
declared: what remedy? shall God be frustrated of his glory, seeing all the
world he created for his glory? Malachie the Prophet will straight make
answer, or rather, God by Malachie, Ab ortusolis vsque, ad occasum, magnum
Malac. ^.
est nomen meum, in gentibus and in omni loco sacrificatur, and offertur nomini
meo oblatio munda, quia magnum est nomen meum in gentibus. From the rising of
the sun to the setting, my name is great among Gentiles, and in eueryplace it
is sacificed, and a pure oblatio^ is offered to my name, because my name is
great among Gentiles. Mark how he repeateth twice, Magnum nomen meum in
Gentibus, My name is great among Gentiles, because among the Gentiles, his
majesty was admirable to be esteemed and glorified, therefore he ordained the
blessed Eucharist, that they considering the worthy dignity and infinite
perfection of this sacrifice, might break forth into a wonderful admiration
of the majesty, wisdom, and power of God, to whom so pure, so rare, so
glorious a sacrifice was offered. The which is that glory GOD pretended to win
freely by men in this world: and the devil affecting deity, procured by thest
to steal some part: yet God would not that after this house once appeared
among Christians in the most parts of the world, whereunto this sacrifice was
inducted, that idolatry should greatly prevail. For the light of this sun
dispersed the vermin of the earth, and caused them to retire into their caves.
So that now all nations in the world know that Gods majesty is infinite, to
whom an infinite sacrifice is offered, that he is most worthy in himself, to
whom so worthy an oblation is presented. And what more glory can be desired of
man? is not this Clara notitia cum laud? a blazed notice with praise? that
they acknovvledge and confess God infinite in goodness, and that of mere
bounty he bestovved upon the^ so rich, so precious, so infinite a treasure?
do they not protest, by offering up this maiesticall sacrifice, all those
perfections that either nature teaches, or faith believes, to be rooted in
him as their origin and fountain? and this is to make, Nomen eius magnum in
gentibus, his name great among Gentiles, and is effected by this sacred food
and glorous sacrifice.

The nine and thirtieth cause, to give us a taste of the joys of heaven.
WHen the children of Israel drew near their promised inheritance, a land
flowing with milk and honey, because our provident God did foresee the hard
encounters they should meet withal before that entered into the firm
possession, he thought convenient to give them a taste of the abundance and
fertility of that soil, to the intent, that feeling the fruit, they should
not grudge at the pain: and therefore he moved them to send the scowts to
survey the country, and discover the commodities. They launch forth, pass the
principal parts, avoid sundry dangers, return with such huge clusters of
grapes, (it being vintage) that Numb. 13
they were not able to carry them in their hands, but with poules to bear them
upon their shoulders. Even so our blessed Savior, knowing, that the faithful
children of his church were to be assaulted by many potent, invisible, expert,
and ghostly enimes, as the victory was more important, and the foil more
dangerous, so he thought with a preamble of internail joy, to encourage them
to tolerate a moment of pain: for which effect, he being our scowt, and having
viewed the land of everlasting promise, he brought us the blood of grapes,
this fruit of that soil, to indnce us with the sweetness, greatness, and taste
thereof, to suffer with alacrity, to resist with a courage, to invade with
valor, to expugne with glory, all crosses, encounters, enemies, temtations,
that either adversity could impose, or satan invent, or persecutor inflict,
or our alluring flesh stir up against us. And that is the sacred Eucharist,
the which is not only (as above we have delivered) a portraite of all the
admirable works of God, but also a most lively image representing unto us, the
universal ioys of heaven. For in what consists life everlasting, our future
felicity? In the glory of our souls and bodies? In what manner are our fowls
blessed? by seeing, foulding, loving, rejoicing, in God: and our bodies are
glorified by the redundance, distillation, and influence of our souls: Al
which, most exactly this sacrament affords: because in very deed, he that
sees this sacrament, sees God, as those that saw Christ's sacred humanity, the
veil of his person, were said to see his divinity: and those that view her
majesty, though masked, are said to see the Queen. Besides, in life
everlasting, the blessed comprehend, fould, and (as it were) spiritually, by
their understanding, claspe God in their souls, Sic currite, vt
comprehendatis, 1. Cor. 3.
so run that you may obtain, willed he, that God had admitted to see these
secrets, and the spouse, Tenui eum, nec demittam, Cantic. 3.
I held him and I will not forgo my hold. For really there we shall hold in
eternal possession, that we here expected by hope. And who sees not how all
those that receive this glorious bread, fould it in their breasts, keep it,
and quietly possess God and all his perfections? And who is so stony hearted
that loves not him that lies so near his heart? or who is so indurated, that
this blood does not mollify? or who is so void of affection, that this so
affectious a God, would, and does not move to love? what joy proceeds from
these spiritual imbracings, from this union of spirits, from this matching of
the soul with her center, from this vital refection, from this heavenly
conversation? let him tell that said dulciora sunt vbera tuae super vinum,
Cantic. 2.
thy paps are sweeter then wine, let him tell that felt quam dulcia eloquia Dei
super Psalm. 18. and 118.
mel and fanum, how sweet are the words of God, sweeter then honye or the honye
comb, let him tell that called it pinguis Genes. 49.
panis qui prebet delitijs regibus, fat bread which yields delites to kings.
Finally, how by eating this Sacrament our bodies shall rise and receive
immortality, above was declared: and moreover, in this present food, the body
of Christ which shall be the example of all glorious bodies permanently
remains. No marvel it is therefore if fervent souls live in a perpetual
jubilee of joy and peace, since here in earth they participate a form of the
joys of heaven, if they desire to be with God, whose company is so sweet and
grateful.

The fortieth cause, to be a condign sacrifice for Christ to offer to his
father.
BEfore the institution of this sacrament of invaluable value, the Evangelist
S. John (who sucked his divinity out of that breast, whencefrom issued this
Precious licour) prepares the readers (for other Evangelists) with a most
profound and divine preface, that after understanding such an admirable
mystery, penetrating the depth of his reasons, they might be induced to
believe it, sciens Jesus, Ioh. 13.
etc. Jesus knowing that his father had given him all things into his hands,
and that he came from God, and returned to God, he rose and prepared hmself to
wash his Disciples feet, thereby infinuating with what purity of soul the
faithful ought to participate the dainties of this table. In which compendious
words he yields three reasons, why it concerned the office, functions, and
dignity of our Savior, to institute this regal sacrifice. First because he
being ordained by Psalm. 109.
order of Melchisedech, and consequently having commission to institute a
sacrifice in bread and wine after that former: since Hebr. 7.
therefore God has delivered all things into his hands that appertained to his
fathers glory, his own honor, his Churches salvation, and dignity of them
all: it was most decent, that having received all, his sacrifice should
comprehend all, and be offered to God in recognition of all, the which could
not be any other thing then God, who is all in all. Secondly Alexander, though
proudly, yet truly, vaunted, that Kings ought not so much attend to whom
they give, as who they are that give, how much more did it concern our
Savior Christ, king of kings, to offer a condign present to his father, the
Monarch of the world? wherefore, as all his actions wherewith he merited,
were of infinite value for the dignity of his person, even so this sacrifice
was to be ordained of infinite prize, for the substance of the same: for there
was no gift answerable to either of their dignities, or suitable to their
Majesty's, but a sacrifice containing God, for nothing but God can be infinite
in substance, for which reason we have God the giver, God the receiver, and
God the gift, the which sacred consort cannot but yield a most sweet
harmony. Thirdly, knowing he was to return to Ciprianus De coen^ Domini. and
epist. 53.
and therefore he says not, Hoc est corpus Christi, This is the body of
Christ, but Hoc est corpus meum, This is my body: after the same manner as
Christ spoke them him self. And for which cause Christ's priesthood is called
eternal, because he, unto the worlds end, will never cease to offer it.
Blessed be this savior for ever, who so divinely provided a sacrifice
correspondent to his fathers majesty, his own glory, his churches benefit,
and every Christians profit.

The forty one cause, containing ten Chapters. To discover unto us the
ineffable love of God.
That the love of God in this blessed sacrament cannot be comprehended: and of
four loves concurring in it.
Chap. I.
WHen I enter into the profounde abisse of Gods love, the base of al benefits,
and life of all other loves, it seems I am calmed in the boundlesse^ ocean
sea, where on each side beholding the four quarters of the world, I can
discover nothing but an immensiue and an endless wilderness of water. If I
look upward to heaven, I see those lamps of light covered with a misty fogge.
If I look downward, I find a fragil bark leaking on all sides, that is, if
I convert mine eyes in this sacrifice of love to the institutor, to God, in
whose glory it is offered to the humanity of Christ which is offered to the
devout and fervent souls which participate of this offering, I find no bonds
nor limits, all affections swell so mightily: and like four rivers derived
Genesis 2,
from one fountain in Paradise (I mean the essential love of God the holy
ghost) to finish in the infinite sea of al love God himself. Above my head
what find I but clouds and darkness in him whom this love most concerns,
God almighty? nubes and caligo in circuitu eius, a cloud and Psalm. 96.
darkness round about him, whom Nazianzene well compares to a lightning,
which vanishes from our sight, before we can firmly fix our eyes upon it. If
I consider my self and my perfections, the which my crasie soul leaketh on
every side, I cannot but be afraid to intermedle with such mysteries, since
so devout a Prophet as Isav durst not speak of god Isa. 6.
to the people, because his lips were defiled, nor would attempt so difficult
an interprise till the Seraphin had touched the^ with a burning cole, taken
from the Altar of God, where fire did ever glowe. But shall we speak nothing
then of the love of god, the principal cause of this sacred supper? because we
have so many dainties before us, shall we die for hunger? no, no, I hope the
Angel of God in earth has not once, but a thousand times purified my lips
with this blessed and burning coal of heavenly fire, taken from gods holy
altar, and the very same that comforted the heart of his Prophet: therefore by
his grace I will deliver such discourses as he in this sacrament has
vouchsafed (as I hope) to deliver unto me, remembering alwais, that whatsoever
can be said of mortal men in commendations of such a mystery, is as far
beneath it, as men beneath God, and therefore God commanded in the eating of
the pascal lamb (a most lively Image of this sacrament) that they should
devour, (that is, swallow down Exodus 12.
without chewing) the head, the intralles, and the feet: But to what end good
lord, such immodestie? had not these parts most need of chewing, where there
is most bones, gristles, and sinows? god questionless had a further reach then
that present sacrifice: he aimed at this sacrament, where the head, the
intralles, and the feet of this lamb must perforce be swallowed, for the
head of Christ is his 1. Cor. 11.
divinity, Caput Christ's Deus, The head of Christ is God: the intralles the
secret and inexplicable manner of his supernatural being, under the garments of
bread and wine, as the intralles of beasts lie in secretest place of their
bodies, veiled with the skin and flesh: by the feet scriptures commonly
understand affections, therefore Christ's Godhead, his manner of being, his
inexplicable affection, and love must be swallowed down: we are not able to
comprehend any of them, and therefore all we say is too little.

That God instituted this sacrament for love. Chap. 2.
THe nature of love is so sweet, so precious, so prized, feeding fainting
souls, that in the very maine of crosses and adversities, the love of God
rendereth a most sufficient counteruailing consolation: wherefore, as it is
neither loathsome nor tedious to love God, so neither the long thinking, nor
discoursing can be noisome or fastidious, craving therefore the sacred gale of
the Ghost, I will lanch forth aloof from the shore, and sail into the deep.

It is a most ancient and undoubted truth, that all gifts which God bestowed
upon the world, for the universal or particular good of men, proceeded from
the inexhausted fountain of his love. For which cause the blinded Philosophers
could say that love created this world. For what is love? to wish well to one,
to rejoice in his good, to procure his good, to defend him from evil, to
communicate unto him his treasures, to make him partaker of his secrets. Al
these actions, either be love it self, or such effects and fruits as can not
be separated from love. Therefore if god freely of his own accord, without any
interest for our good, granted us so great a gift, who can doubt but that it
springs from love? Moreover, his intention in giving discovers sufficiently
the ground of his gift: For what cause gave he it? To unite us together with
him. And for what end this union? That he seeing himself sealed in us, might
have a sufficient and worthy object of his love; and we seeing the same
engraven in him for a mutual resemblaunce, might be inflamed to affect him.
For what cause gave he it? To imprint our souls with the life of grace. And
why? that he might love us, and we him, for these be the proper effects and
fruits of grace. For what cause gave he it? To be a means to obtain life
everlasting. And why life everlasting? That there we might with the full power
of our hearts exercise that love and charity quae nunquam 1. Corint. 13.
excidit, which never falls away, that there the sails of love might swell
with the full wind of the holy ghost. Finally, discourse over all those causes
we have alleged. you shall find them every one grounded in love. And
therefore let it be lawful for me to call this Sacrament a mirror, a map, a
flame, a life of love, and interpret Eucharistia bona gratia, good grace, a
singular favor, a superexcellent love. Moreover, whosoever will run over the
effects of love, and thereby discover the origin and fountain of this vain of
life, he shall find them most lively in this little world of al pure love
depaynted. The fruits of love be these, union, zeal, ecstasy bountifulnes.
Four rivers al issuing from one spring: and as this Sacrament, and the
incarnation of Christ, of all the wonderful works of God most manifestly
declare his love, so it were not amiss to declare the effects ofloue in them
both, that the resemblance of both might render the matter more plain: yet to
avoid prolixitie, I will content me with the Eucharist, for by this the other
may be conceived: but first of all let us see what we understand by these
effects.

All perfect love requires a certain Vaion.
union in substance, as was declared in the eight cause: but for that amongst
men this was impossible without the destruction of one or both, therefore they
procured all these unions, which honesty and purity of love affect, and these
are to be of the same judgments and opinions, the same wills, desires, and
affections, the same table and diet, the same place and presence, the like
garments and attire, and finally, to express one another in all things as
near as they can.

Zeal after two manners proceeds Zeal.
from love. First, zealous friends cannot tolerate any injuries offered to
their friends, but procure with greater, or as great diligence to defend them,
their credit, goods, life, or what else appertains unto them as their own.
Secondly, zeal cannot suffer consorts in love, and therefore experience
teaches us, what a grief it is for the husband to have a conceit of a rival.

Ecstasy likewise abstracteth, or haleth Ecstasy.
a lover from himself, and causes him rather to live there where he loves,
then indeed where he lives, for the force of love transporteth excessiuely
his mind, cogitations, and affections, from his own affairs, and enforces
him to attend and procure whatsoever concerns his friend: sometimes also it
leads the soul so far, that it is almost abstracted from the body, as
diverse saints were ravished so with the love of God, that they lived many days
in profound contemplation, feeding upon the food of life, not taking any
corporal sustenance.

Bountifulnes waits upon love, as a most Bountifuln^^
faithful servant, for friends cannot but communicate their goods one with
another, who before by friendship had communicated their hearts, and therefore
they present one another with gifts, as signs of that good will they carry in
their minds, and to remonstrate unto the^, that as they have taken possession
of their hearts, so also they may command them in their goods, for amicorum
omnia sunt communia, among friends al things are common, and he that has given
the greater, will not stick to impart the lesser: these effects I have set
down cursorily, because the exact treatise requires a whole book, only to
show how in this sacrament God shows them al.

That in the sacred Eucharist God effects all those unions which proceed from
love. Ca. 3
AS I said before considering the admirable love that God has declared, by
delivering this sacrament to the world, that I was calmed in the Ocean sea, in
the which similitude if we persist, I think I shall be able in part, to unfold
the union in substance, betwixt Christ and our souls, in the blessed
Eucharist: for as the Ocean sea surcharged with an infinite multitude of
waters, discharges it self in the Mediterranean and red seas, for the benefit
of the inhabitants of Europe, Affrike, and Asia, not dividing it self from
them, but rather, by their means becomes united to those coasts whereon they
border, and the wombs wherein they lie: by which means the treasures of the one
may be transported to the other, and the inhabitants of the vast Ocean may have
free passage into the red and Mediterranean.

Even so the endless goodness of God swelling inwardly with an immensiue
love, discharges himself in these two seas of love, the red by the
incarnation of Christ, and the Mediterranean by the institution of this
sacrament: yet the main Ocean of his divinity remains united to his
humanity, and thereby bordereth upon those souls whom he bathed with his
blood, and is conjoined with the breasts of the^ who receive into them this
Mediterane sea, by which union, the Citizens of heaven may pass freely among
the colonies of the earth: therefore as Christ's divinity was substantially
united to his humanity, even so his divinity and humanity are united in this
blessed sacrament to their bodies and souls who feed at this table: and as
from his divinity proceeded all those graces and favors wherewith that sacred
humanity was spiritually anointed, even so from his humanity linked with his
divinity issue all those sweet virtues and graces for the which this blessed
bread was ordained. And therefore, as betwixt the sacred humatie of Christ and
his divinity, there was a most divine, reciprocate, ardent and continual
love: even so betwixt our souls and Christ, there should rise a mutual flame,
if we fail not, he cannot be defectuous. And as that sacred humanity (like
the needle touched with the adamant looks ever toward the pole star) was
always directed by his divinity: even so ought we in all our actions to
square our intentions according as our Savior teaches us, whom we hold
united in this sacrament: because he was given to us as our master, our
doctor, and teacher.

Much more might be said of this substantial union, but because it has been
partly touched before, partly, because I intend not here to deliver all I think
may be said, but only to touch some few points or superficial heads, leaving
the rest unto the prudent and discreet Readers of godly meditations. As for all
other unions which are rooted in this conjunction of our souls and bodies with
Christ, briefly they may be declared. For by this Union of conceitswith Christ
effected by the Eucharist,
Sacrament we come to participate many of these conceits which here GOD
reueileth, and makes us partakers of, that were most dark and hidden from
nature: because the very mystery it self opens the eyes of our
understanding, to wade deeper into the secrets of nature, than ever philosophy
could have induced us; as that a substance can be wholly spoiled of his
accidents, that the accidents can exist without the substance, that a natural
body can consist entirely without extension or circumscription of place:
finally, all these 20. difficulties, which before were proposed to this purpose
may be inserted. Moreover, here our minds are illustrated, with the divine
beams which issue out of Christ's humanity, as in the 34. cause has been
delivered. And then our judgments are right and true, when they come to be
conformable to the rule of all true knowledge, that is, the infinite wisdom
of God, the which we attain to by knowing God himself: for in him, and by
him, we shall come to perfect knowledge, the which this sacrament affords and
cognouerunt eum in fractione panis, and they knew him in the breaking of bread:
for Luke 24.
which cause the wisdom of God invited all those that would be wise, to come
and drink of her wine she had mingled in this sacrament. Besides, our Savior
here Proverb. 9.
submits himself to the judgment of men, for he makes them the surueyors of
themselves, Probet seipsumhomo, and sic de pane illo 1. Cor. 11.
edat and de calice bibat: qui enim manducat and bibit indigne iudicium sibi
manducat and bibit, non deiudicans corpus dominum, let a man prove himself,
and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of the chalice: for he that eats
and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks judgment to himself, not
discerning the body of our Lord. If they judge worthily, he enters, if
unworthily, contents himself to accept their perverse sentence, as he was
content to tolerate the unjust judgment of Pilate. Therefore the mystery it
self, the effects thereof, the use and practice, shows that God pretended an
union of conceits in this Sacrament. The union of will and affection we see most
Union of affection.
manifestly here effected: god loves him self infinitely for his own native
goodness, and here he gives us the life of grace and charity, to h^lpe, to
animate, to enable us to lone him. God commands us to call in remembrance
his death and passion, and here good souls afflict their souls with internal
grief and compassion. God intended to give us this mystery for a perpetual
sacrifice to be offered unto him: and here the religious christians confirm
their wills with his, and daily offer it.

When I think of the union of friends, Union in company.
who eat at one table, what joy and mirth they conceive in such imperfect
refections and transitory societies, and confer them with this sacred
banquet, it seems no otherwise than to compare a painted dish of meat with
one that is real and substantial, because here all that eat, feed of the
very same, they receive ioys of the soul: but especially to our purpose those
that communicate at this table, eat of the same dish Christ ate on himself,
for he did eat this food we feed upon: and thus he was vere commensalis: And
besides, he is the meat it self, that never was yet seen in the world.

The union of presence and place our Union in presence,
Savior knew well concerned friendship and love: therefore, as one that went
into foreign countries, he thought it not convenient only to leave a ring, a
bare memory, but he included himself in this ring of bread, he made himself
the diamond, and so did depart in external shape and form, but not in
substance. Besides, what nearer union of place can there be then in one
breast, which is the dearest and presentest place that any man can desire: the
which that Lady well declared, who after her husbands death, for extremity of
love, could not permit his heart which had loved her so entirely, to be buried
in any other place, then in her own breast, and for that effect she dried it to
powder, and so intombed it in the dearest, presentest, and cheifest place she
had, that was her own breast, the nearest room adjoining to her heart. What
other union affects love, which here we see not effected? for attire here is
no diversity, since Diverse other v^ions.
one seat serves both, and Christ entering the body of a beggar, is clothed
with rags, and harboring under the heart of a king, is apparelled with scarlet
and purple? What other union can we desire? a society of Soldiers in
wars, lo here Christ and we be made commilitones, both fighting against
our spiritual enemies, as in the eleventh cause was delivered: therefore, if
those wicked accomplices of Cateline, before they attempt their treachery against
Caesar, drunk all of one cup of their own blood, to make them more bold and
linked together, and it prevailed so much, that they all lost their lives
before they failed or fainted to effectuate their conspiracy: how may we not
be accounted cowards and dastards if we fly away, if we faint in battle, if
we leave Christ, and run to serve his enemies, since we have promised
fidelity, and he with his blood has enrolled our names in no better table
then our own hearts? Since we have both drunk the blood of God, what other
union can we think of? Saint Paul said children communicated in Hebr. ^.
flesh, and therefore to be like them he participated the same: but here we may
say, because children did eat flesh, blood, bread, and wine, therefore he
took the forms of them all. By this it appears how this sacrament may be
called communion, since it causes so many vnio^s in substance, in secrets, in
opinions, in affections, in desires, in diet, in place, in attire, in war, in
resemblance of natural inclination.

That God showed the second effect of love in the Encharist, that is, zeal.
Chap. 4.
NAture has printed in the heart of every sensible creature, of most necesfary
instinct for their preservation, that is, not only to love themselves in
procuring good, but also in avoiding those evils which may impeach their health
or conue nient being: ye a she has lent them armor to defend themselves, and
to impugn their adversaries. Amity the cousin german, or rather, brother of
this natural inclination, in like sort affects, not only the good of the
beloved, but also protecteth and defends the^, inuading those, who either
molest or injury his friends: this we see most manifestly in beasts, who for
love of their yongones attempt extreme perils, esteem no dangers, invade
their enemies, fighting til death. The like we may prove in kinsmen, who
esteem al injuries offered their allies to redound to their ignomie, and
therefore by the law of amity they endeavor to protect the^. Yea our savior
Christ touched with this zeal (for so the scripture John. 2
calls this effect of love) seeing the temple of his father ordained for
prayer and sacrifice, by the sacrilegious Jews profaned with theft and
merchandise, moved with indignation against them, regarding neither the gall
of their phrases, the malice of the Scribes, nor the greedy minds of the
Merchants, but presently cast them out of the temple, such was his zeal of his
fathers glory, that he could not tolerate to see him dishonored, where he
ought to have bin worshipped. The like zeal if no greater, boiled in that
sacred breast when he instituted this sacament: for although he eternaly did
foresee, that most sacrile giously this sacred food of Angels should be
blasphemed by infidels, trodden under foot by heretics, mangled and crucified
by Jews, harbored in most ugly and polluted souls, by wicked christians, yet
for the zeal of those good catholics he knew were devoutly and religiously to
receive him, weyed nothing, injuries, blasphemies, dishonors, treading or
tra^pling, cutting, slicing, burning, or baking, so that he might unite his
elected unto him, indue their souls with grace, bring them to the joys of
heaven. O zeal of all zeales, O love of al loves, most worthy of God, to
permit himself to be trod under the fee^ of wicked sinners, to exalt his
faithful to fellows of angels. O holy David, thou thoughtst man was greatly
extolled, because that God had laid under his feet Oues and boues and pecora,
Sheep, and oxen, and beasts of the field: but what would thou have said, if
thou had seen Christ in an hoaste, and for thy love permit an heretic, to
tread him under his feet, but Psalm. ^.
Magnus Dominus, and laudibus nimis, magnitudinis eius non est finis, our Lord
is great, and most worthy of praise, and there is no end of his greatness. O
that we could immitate in part this zeal of Christ, and by gratitude
acknowledge this singular benefit. Ah who would moan imprisonment, for the zeal
of confessing that faith which he appointed? Who would be grieved with
fetters, stinch, gross fare, hard beds, restraint of liberty, loss of life,
to glorify him who is so zealous of our eternal glory? Ah dear christian,
imagine to see the Jews or heretics pricking this sacred, angelical, and
divine host, with pinnes and knives, in contempt of Christ and his religion,
and all for thy cause, for that he instituted this sacrament for thee, to
receive and determine whatsoever should befall, to remain so long as those
forms retain their nature and force: would not such an horible spectacle on
one side make thee tremble, and on the other side, the patience and love of
Christ dissolve thy heart, into a maine of tears? yet too often such cases
have fallen, and many in England God knows, have bin present at such terrible
tragedies, god pardon the actors. Moreover this sacrament was instituted for
many effects, the which all argue the zeal of the institutor, for he did not
only ordain it as a meat or a conduct of grace, to confer many celestial
favors unto us, but also as medicine to remove many evils from us, for does not
this preservative from prison diminish the flames of concupiscence? does not
this fountain of light expel the clouds of ignorance? does not this life of
grace abolish the death of sin? does not the heat of this boiling blood,
revive the remissenes and coldness of our charity? all these evils, and more,
our zealous Savior did well foresee and provide for, in the institution of the
Eucharist. The second sort of zeal (which permits no consorts in amity,
that preiudicate the full scope and ample possession of the heart) as
pregnantly appears in this sacrament as the first, because he that comes
hither unprepared, not so disposed as this Table requires, eats his
judgment. For what reason? 1. Corint. ^
because he divides his love, for in every transgression of Gods
commandment, the sinner prefers the love of the creature before the
Creator, and consequently, violateth that fidelity the spouse ought to the
spouse of her soul, by making the creatures riualls with God, the which injury
GOD will not tolerate, for he intends to be beloved wholly, and entirely, and
will have no love preferred, nor equal to his. The Devil would be content to
have half our love, because, by theft he steals that belongs not unto
him, but God, who is our Father, will have it whole: as those two women which
sued in contention for one ^. Reg. 3.
child before Solomon, the true mother would have all or none, the false
mother was contented with half, Nec mihi, nec tibi, sed diuidatur, Neither to
me, nor to thee, but let it be divided, said she that would have deprived the
true mother of her right. Likewise Pharao was at last well contented that the
children of Israel should depart out of Egypt, but Exodus 10.
he would they should leave behind them their herds of catel and flocks of
sheep: so the devil would iuggle those souls he cannot draw to heresy or
atheism, with bestly delights and sensualities, that thereby he might disme^ber
their hearts, and divide them with God. But what said Moses? we will go al, men,
women and children, cattle, sheep, there shall not remain so much as the
hoof of a beast in Egypt: So ought good souls to say, who prepare themselves
devoutly to receive this bread of life, we will offer our selves wholly to God,
body and soul, wits and wills, all we know and all we can, there shall no part
of us be left unconsecrated unto him. And indeed let us really, and with sound
judgment consider without any particular inordinate affection: if my Savior
give me himself wholly in his person, his soul and body by most entire and
perfect love, alas why should I divide my affection from him? why should I not
sacrifice my self wholly to him, who does sacrifice him self here wholly for
me? since I know certainly my love can never be perfect except it be
consummated in him. Besides, what an extreme injury do I offer him, to prefer
any before, or make equal with him? is not this to play the part of the Jews,
who refused Christ Matthew. 27. Mark. 25
and demanded Barabas? is not this to spoil God of his regal crown and
dignity, and set it upon the head of a miserable creature? For if God, be
God, then he must be loved as God, and above all, and all for him, because so
eminent a majesty, the title of creation, conservation, redemption,
justification, and glorification, exact it of us.

That God in this sacrament shows a certain ecstasy of love, which is the
third effect. Ca. 4
THe learned divines following that notable saying of Saint Dio: Areopagita,
Deus passus est extastim prae amore, God suffered ecstasy (in his passion
especially) for love, conclude that in very deed our savior Christ was after
a certain manner abstracted from himfelfe for love, the which although it
seems something harsh, and hard to be admitted, yet in very deed the
effects were such, that he seemed, for love, to have forgotten himself, his
majesty, and glory, to remember us, for so saint Paul insinnuateth in these
Phil. 2.
words: exinnaniuit semetipsum, formam serui accipiens: he exinnanited
himself, taking the form of a servant. What is this exinnanition but an
ecstasy, an abstractio^ from his glory, majesty, and highness? he made himself
mortal, passible, little, subject to hunger, thirst, heat and cold, labor,
sweat, and wearines: who was immortal, impassible, immensiue, who feeds the
birds of the air, the fishes of the sea, the beasts of the land, the lillyes
of the field, the angels in heaven: he lies in a manger hungry and cold: and
he of whom was principally said, non accedet Psalm. ^.
ad te malum, and flagellum non appropinquabit tabernaculo tuo, No evil shall
come neero thee, nor no scourge approach to thy tabernacle, ravished out of
himself for love was made vir dolorum, a man of griefs Isa. 53.
suffering so many and so horrible pains, that no mortal man can tell whether
he showed more love in suffering for us, or in glorifying of us. But let us now
survey the ecstasy he fell into, by instituting this sacrament, if it was an
ecstasy to euacuat himself in show of deity, by taking the form of a man.
What, does he not suffer a greater ecstasy here, by taking the form of bread?
for there he took the shape of a reasonable creature, but here he bears a
show of an insensible substance. S. Paul speaking of his ecstasy, affirmed that
(...) 2.
Christ lived in him, Viuo ego, non iam ego, viuit vero in me Christus, I live,
now not I: (...) ^.
but Christ lives in me. If Christ lived not himself, but in S. Paul, and
other faithful of his church (of whom he spoke as of himself, Saul, Saul,
cur me persequeris, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?) through the force of
love and affection (Que potius viuit vbi amat, quam vbi animat which more truly
lives where it loves, and not where it lives) how much more truly may hesay
who claspes Christ in his breast in this sacred Eucharist, Viuo ego, iam non
ego, viuit vero in me Christus, I live, now not I, but Christ lives in me?
And let any reasonable man judge if Christ here seem not to put off, and
vnapparell himself of his majesty and glory, permitting himself to be closed
under a husk of bread at the Priests will, staying days and nights attending
in the tabernacle to receive our supplications, permitting infidells and
heretics to abuse, and sacrilegiously to handle him entering into poisoned
souls, beggarly lodgings, and al indecent places that either malice or
infidelity can invent: yea in some sort the ecstasy here surpasses the
ecstasy of Christ in his passion, for although there he suffered, and here is
impassible, yet there he showed himself by words, he answered for himself,
he reprehended and argued them that offered injuries, those blasphemies were
for a small time, and those dishonours not so many: but here he never moves,
the blasphemies are innumerable, they have continued in all ages. And
therefore, when Moses and Elias talked with Christ in his transfiguration. De
excessu Luke 9.
quem passurus erat in Jerusalem, of his decease that he should accomplish in
Jerusalem, that they might well have talked of this Sacrament, as I doubt not
but they did, because, in very truth, both excesses of love are admirable, and
in mine opinion, Habent se sicut excedens and excessum, have relation the one
to the other, as the exceeding and the exceeded.

That God in the Eucharist shows his benevolence, the fourth effect of love.
Cha. 6.
As the hearts of men lie hidden from their eyes in the centres of their
bodies, and the roots of trees under the earth, in such sort, as in
themselves we can not view their natures and qualities, yet nature has taught
us certain ways how to discover them, the heart by motions, color, and
pulse, the root by the stem, branches, leaves, and fruit: even so, love
harboring in the bosom of the heart, cannot be perfectly discerned of
mortal men (who wade into the depth of secrets by senses) in it self, but by
some colors, the pulse, the fruit, some external sign, and of al other,
commonly it is declared by beneuole^ce, bestowing of gifts, conferring of
benefits. So as S. John intending Job. 3.
to make manifest unto us, the exceeding love of God, touched this pulse,
showed this fruit, Sic deus dilexit mundum, vt filium suum vnigenitum daret, So
GOD loved the world that he gave his only begotten son. And Christ himself
declaring the love of Mary Magdalen showed the external benevolence and fruits
Luke 7.
of her affection by anointing him with oil, by bathing his feet with
tears, by drying them with her hair, and thereupon inferred this comfortable
illation, Remittuntur ei peccata multa, quoniam dilexit multu^ Many sins are
forgiven her, because she has loved much: All faithful chrisstians that eat
this fruit of life may easily perceive the root from whence it drew so sweet
a substance to be the abisse of the love of God. Yea I know not by what means
there rests imprinted in our minds a certain sent of love. When we call to
memory this blessed sacrament, it seems to smell of the heavenly Orchards of
paradise which breath no other air then the love of the holy Ghost, for I
think there is none so simple that at the first prospect of his conceit when he
considers this gift presently imagines not, that it proceeds from love, and
most truly might say, sic Deus. so God beloved Ihon ^.
the world that he gave his son, that all those that did eat him, should not
perish but have life everlasting. Yea, while I wade alitle deeper in this
matter, I know not how, but it seems to me, the three persons in trinity
contend which of them should show more excess of love by excess of
benefits: not that there can be any emulation or discention among those
infinite lovers and beloved, but that the effects be so wonderful and exceeding,
that we know not which to prefer. To the father we ascribe power, to the son
wisdom, to the holy ghost goodness, because the father was produced by none,
the son sprung by understanding, the holy ghost issued by love. To the
fathers omnipotency we attribute creation, to the sons wisdom redemption,
to the spirits goodness, justification. Now let al divines set their heads
together, yet they cannot decide which of these benefits ought most to be
prized: nevertheless (in my judgment) I take our redemption to surpass the
others, because in creation God gave us the natural life of our bodies and
souls with this world, and all the furniture thereof for our use and domonion.
In justification he imparteth the supernatural life of grace, with sundry
virtues, gifts, and favors thereupon attending: but in our redemption he gave
us the life of God, which exceeds the others so far as God exceeds man.
And in this sacrament his person, life, soul, and body, and therefore well may
we extol this gift, seeing God so extolled it before us, and say, Quid bonum,
and quid pulcrum eius nisi frumentum zach. 9.
electorum and vnium, germinans virgins. What of his is good? and what of his
is beautiful, but the wheat of his elected, and wine that springs virgins?
for indeed it is either the cheifest or next to the cheifest. Much more might
be entreated here of this effect, by expounding all the circumstances of this
gift, who gives it, what is given, with what effect it is given, to what end,
with what cost, how dear to the giver; but because partly they were handled
before in the three and twentieth cause, of Gods liberality, showed in the
institution thereof, partly because I mean to touch it a little beneath,
partly for that all the causes we have alleged are particular benefits that
God bestows upon us in this precious gift; for these reasons I will omit much
that might be said, concluding only, that as great as God is, so great is his
gift, and as great as is his gift, so great the love from whence it proceeds,
and as great love the gift it self requires of us, if we were able to afford
it, but since we cannot answer one for thousands, let us confess our
defectes, open to him our desires, and require our savior whom we receive, to
supply our wants.

That God shows all diversities of love in this Sacrament. Cha. 7.
Our loving Savior was not contented to unfold unto us the excess of his
love, and the effects thereof in this Sacrament of love, but also he has
vouchsafed to express all the diversities and sorts of love. The which I
find among Divines and moral Philosophers to be in number four. The first
is, a love of account or 1 Amor appretiatiuus. A prizing love.
price, for we are prepared by it to prefer our friend before our goods, our
fame, our own dangers or life. The next may be called love of fervor or
vehemency, 2 Amor intentious, An intensiue love.
as we see yongmen more vehemently love their companions than they do either
father or mother, nevertheless they had rather their friend should die, than
father or mother, if it were left to their election, because they love their
parents after a deeper rate than their companions. the 3 Amor exten^iuus, An
extensiue love.
other they term extensiue, diffused, or a love common to many, as the love of
a king toward his subjects, a bishop toward his flock, a father to a
multitude of children. The last and easiest to be discovered, is a certain
familiar and tender love, 4 Amor familiaris, A familiar love.
as mothers bear to their infants, to whom they show more signs of affection
than to the elder, howbeit they prize the elder much more than their yonglings.
It was most convenient, that God instituting a Sacrament, proceeding from an
abisse of love, and ordained to move men to love, should comprehend in it all
sorts of love: for if that Manna had all forts of tastes to delight the tongue,
surelyreason required that this heavenly food should contain Sap. 16.
all sorts of love to delight the will, the which most plainly shall appear
by the next discourses.

That God shows a prizing love in the Eucharist. Cha. 8.
Certain unlearned Philosophers considering the subordination of all creatures
in this world to man, the heavens, the sun, moon, stars, elements, stones,
mettelles, mineralles, fishes, beasts, fowls, with all that belongs to every
one, in fitting and serving him to some purpose: and besides, thinking their
gods had no other felicity than the rolling of the heavenly spheres and
disposition of this inferior world, concluded that the gods were made for
men: and in very deed, if their principle had bin true, no man could have
denied their ilation. But what would they have inferred if they had seen
christians cate their God? Questionless they might much more evidently have
confirmed their opinion. For when I thoroughly consider with my self that god
could die for man: and befides, would give himself to him for meat, me
thinks if I had no other matter to meditate upon all my life, this would
serve men, by weighing the weakness, miseries, and infirmities of men: and
after, comparing them with the perfections of God: and then to see that God
would make such an account of man, that he would debase himself almost to
nothing for his love. This I say might cause the Seraphins to veil their eyes
for wonder, and mortal men to be ravished with admiration. If a friend do
spend but his goods for his friend, so that of a rich man he become a beggar,
who would not think this love exceeding? Or how few examples can we find of
such amity, although the occasion be offered very often? But how few will
stain their credit, almost with a mere suspicion to favor their friends in
any cause of great importance? But how much less offer, and effectually give
their blood for love of their friend? O blessed Savior thou art the only true
friend, who if all forsake us, will receive us, and not only impart us thy
goods, but thy honor likewise, and blood to eat. If there were a father, who
so affected his son, that he could spare no cost to help him to recover his
health, and for that end bestowed half a score such Cordialles as Plutare. i^
Auton. Plin. libr. 9. c. 25.
Cleopatra the Queen of Egypt eat one after her supper (dissoluing a pearl
she had for a pendent with vinegar which was valewed at 30000. pounds,) there
is no man but he would judge he prized extremely his sons life. Yet what
have pearls to be compared with this Sacrament? if God should convey all the
mass of this world, all the gold and silver, all stones and iewelles, all
creatures living, men and Angels, into a one bit (as no wise man can deny it to
be possible) and would present this to thee, and say, lo, I give thee all this
to love me: would not all men judge that god prized thy love excedingly? for
which he offers so great a prise? and all this he performs in this
sacrament, and by thousands more. For all that is visible or invisible in this
world and ten thousand worlds more, our blessed Christ the second person in
Trinity, which hear God freely bestows upon us in most noble and eminent
manner, comprehends. And what demands he in recompense but Fili prebe mihi
cor tuum, quia amore langueo? Proverb. 23. Cantic. 5.
Son, give me thy heart, for I languishe with love. Finally, muse and
meditate with thy self night and day, and thou shall not be able to imagine
how God could have declared more apertly the account he makes of every one,
then by imparting unto us this sacrament, for all the tresures in heaven and
earth are herein contained. By this plainly appears the disloialty,
ingratitude, and base minds of too too many in England, who in their hearts
know and approve the catholic Religion, and yet for fear of leesing their
worldly pelf, for some inordinate affection to their family, for some desire
to enjoy the pleasurs of the world, they most cowardly and vildely deny their
God, by making profession externaly of a false religion. In what case will they
be when they shall appear before the tribunal seat of Christ, who most justly
may condemn them, and infallibly will condemn them for preferring a little
trash before so precious a treasure, and selling their hearts to the world for
three miserable mites, and denying it to him for infinite millions?

That God shows in the Fucharist a most intensiue love. Chap. 9.
THe vehement love of God in the institution of this sacrament, our savior
well declared, before he came to deliver unto his Apostles authority to spread
this heavenly fire about the world, in saying: Desiderio desideraui hoc pascha
manducare vobiscum, Luke 22.
antequam patier, With a desire I have desired, that is, according to the
Hebrew phrase, most vehemently I have desired, as one should say, after my
desire, yet still I desire, (I can have no end of desiring) to eat this pasche
with you before I suffer. Sweet savior, have not thou for 3. years before
eaten it with them, and why desir est thou now so earnestly to eat it? Ah he
aimed at this pasce, this sacrifice figured by that tipicall lamb, the which
neither he, nor they had eaten before. The like affection Saint John declares
(...) 13.
and confirms, by saying he loved them unto the very end, that is, most
vehemently, as Chrisost. and Euthin. interpret. And without doubt, if he came
like a giant running a race from heaven to earth, Psalm. 18.
for desire to unite his person with our nature in his incarnation, he will
post it to join both person and nature with our souls in the Eucharist, as
the spouse said in the Canticles: Ecce dilectus meus venit Canic. 2.
suliens per montes transiliens colles: Lo, my love comes, discending from
mountains, and running over hills, because the incarnation here takes a most
complete effect, by the real application of Christ's body to ours. But for
that (as Aristotle says, and experience teaches) love delights not so much
in general, as when it is minsed in particular, every condition and quality
being considered, therefore let us wey the favor and vehemency of the love of
God, the conditions, properties and prerogatives, al which S. John in his
revelation had opened in a vision of Christ, Apoc. 1.
which appeared unto him, and after a corporal form depainted, that
afterward of all posterity they might be better perceived: he saw one like
the son of man apparelled with a long robe, girded to the breast with a
girdle of gold, his hair was white like woll or snow, his eyes like a flame of
fire, his feet like brass glowing in the furnace, his voice like the voice of
many waters, he carried in his hand seven stars, and out of his mouth issued a
two edged sword, and his face was shining like the sun in his virtue. Al these
dark mysteries signify the universal love and providence of Christ toward
his church, and therefore this sacrament being one of the most principal signs
of his love toward his church, they ought to be verefied in it more ouidently
then any other: the long robe signifies the Priesthood of Christ, for such a
garment as here is mentioned did properly belong unto highpriestes, for
thissacrament was instituted by Christ as our high Priest, and Pastor of our
souls, to whom it did appertain to provide pasture for his flock. This Robe
was girded to his breast with a girdle of Gold, to signify that whatsoever
he ordined or executed as high Priest was commanded unto him by the eternal
decree of the holy Trinity: For most certain it is, that al ceremonies
sacraments, laws, or statutes our Savior ordained as man, for his Church,
were ordained first in the supreme consistory of those sacred and indiuided
persons: therefore the functions of his priesthood were girded with the precepts
of God and restrained to certain limits and bonds, for which cause he said:
Descendi de caelo, non John 6
vt faciam voluntatem meam, sed eius qui misit me, I descended from heaven, not
to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me. This girdle was of
gould, because whatsoever God commanded, or Christ as man observed, proceeded
from goulden love and charity, and our savior executed them with the purest
love of his heart: and therefore he said, In capite libri Psalm. 39.
scriptum est de me vt facerem voluntatem tuam Deus, meus volui and legem tuam
in medio cordis mei, In the head of the book it is written of me, that I may
do thy will: O my God I will, and thy law in the midst of my heart: which
words S. Paul applies (...) 10
to our savior Christ. Let us now consider with what fervor or vehemency of
love did he institute this sacrament: and because Christ loved us both as God
and man, eternally in heaven by his divinity, and in time, in earth by his
humanity: therefore let us first admire that which is divine, and then that
is deified, twelve conditions or properties of our saviors divine love I find
veiled under these mysteries revealed to Saint John, first Antiquity, second,
Purity, third, Vehemency, fourth, Fecundity, fifth, Effecacie, sixth,
Constancy, seventh, Light, eight, Delight, ninth, Majesty, tenth, Glory,
eleventh, Liberty, twelfth, Justice, all which I mean breefely to run over.

First, Antiquity.
THose snowie rocks and hoarie hairs describe unto us the antiquity of
Christ's love, the which quality, the scripture commended in amity, comparing
old friends to old wine, and late friends to new wine, the which is both
unwholesome for health, and mingled with many indigested dregs, neither must we
imagine, that this venerable bush preiudicateth the vigor of love, or argue
the decay in affection, as it does in nature, for legs of brass declare the
force, and fiery eyes the greenness of youth and fervor. But how ancient is
the love of Christ, wherewith he iustituted this sacrament? began it when he
was incarnated? no, before when he created the world, yet more ancient:
millions of imaginary years conceived in that abisse of unlimited time before
the creation of the world: yet more elder, how old finally? as old as God in
that same point and moment of eternity, when the second person in Trinity
issued from the breast of his eternal father, in that same moment he resolved
himself to take flesh and deliver it to his Church, in this venerable
sacrament: Elegit nos in Ephesians. 1.
ipso ante constitutionem seculi, He chose us in him before the constitution of
the world, in which election, he provided al means, both general and particular
for his elected, to bring them to that glorious end. Moreover by the infinite
comprehension of his divine wisdom, he knew all those in particular, who were
to receive the benefit thereof. And besides, that there was an infinite
multitude whom he might have created if it had pleased him, who would have
profited him more, glorified him more, used this sacrament better then those
that he created would do: he did foresee also how many were to receive it to
their perdition, how many to abuse it to their damnation, how many to
blaspheme it to their eternal ruin: and for all this, his love was so great,
he determined to give himself wholly to all, for the general love he bore to
all, and in particular, to his elected. O what a comfort and consolation this
point well disgested, will minister to all good souls, who devoutly participate
this blessed food, when they consider that God himself had the^ present in
particular before him, in the moment of his eternity, and did see most
distinctly, and provide most infallibly for them, to eat this heavenly
Eucharist, every time that in particular Luke 12
they did communicate: for if a hair fall not from their heads without his
care and providence, much less this angelical food falls from heaven into
their hearts. But what confusion may it be to us, when we make reflection
upon our selnes, to call to mind, how green our love is to God, no
blossoms a^ppeare, it scares as yet is budded. Alas our hatred and iniquity is
grayer headed then our love and amity: for first we began to hate him, then
to love him, to proclaim open wars, then to sue for friendship, and in the
very first instant we came into this world, we stood at defiance with him
that made the world, Ecce in, iniquitatibus conceptus Psalm. ^50.
sum, and in peccatis concepit me matter mea: Lo, in iniquity I am conceived,
and my mother conceived me in sin, said one of Gods canonized Prophets, and
therefore we may well be compared to Vipers, who break their mothers side,
and rent her in pieces before they be hatched. Is this the first fruits of our
life, to repay the benefit of our being with dispight? Ah pereat dies in qua
natus sum, Let the day Io^ 1
perish wherein I was borne, cursed be that day I was conceived, to be an
enemy to my God, O that it were not to be numbered among the days of the
year. But Matthew. 20.
what remedy now? we have all been Gods ancient enemies, let us now begin
to be his friends, and since we come in the last hour, let us recompense
with fervor, that we lost with lingering, and alvvaiescrie in our hearts, Heu
bonitas, antiqua sero te delexi, O old goodness, too late I have loved thee,
and for this ancient love to God the father, which we receive in this
sacrament, in recompense of our long stay and imperfection.

Second, Purity.
THe eyes of Christ as clear as Crystal, and as fiery as a flame, represent
unto us two conditions of his love, the clearenesse, his purity, and the flame
his fervor: this purity of Christ's love declared the spouse in the Canticles,
comparing his eyes to Doves washed with milk. It was not sufficient to
resemble them to milke-white Doves, but besides, to signify more purity, to
Doves washed with milk: Quae lacte sunt lotae, which Cantie. 5^
are washed with milk. That gold we call pure which has no other baser
metal intermingled, that water we think pure that is not stained with
mudde, that Wine we say is pure that is not allayed with water, that love in
like manner we account pure, which is not affected with any proper interest or
commodity, for if we discover one that professes friendship, who wholly or
principally aymeth at his own gain and lucre, rather than our good will and
benefit, we had rather have his rowme than his company, because his love is
impure, and really he seeks more himself than his friend. In this blessed
Eucharist, what interest can God pretend? to forgive us our daily offenses, to
nourish our souls, to be united to him, to instruct us in faith, to confirm
our hope, to increase our charity, to deificate us, to give us a taste of
heaven even in this life: if these be his gains, I must confess that he
intends interest: but if all these be our good, without any Interest of
his, well we may call his love most pure and unspotted. But some will say God
is glorified by this Sacrament, all the world admireth his goodness, praises
his bounty, are thereby moved to love and serve him, But what gains he by all this? was not he as fully glorified before the world was made, in himself,
as after ward? Yes doubtless, or else he had not been compleately perfect,
and consequently, not God. And therefore, when we have done what we can to
him, we are unprofitable, although we be bound to perform all he
commands or exacteth of us. Moreover, all that we do to glorify him, is our
good, and a cause why he will glorify us, therefore if he intend his glory
therein, he violateth no law of amity, for that we should love and honor him
as our chief good.

As pure as Gods love is, yet from our hearts scarce can he distill one drop
of purity: for such is the best love of all, that it carries some sent of
our imperfections: not unlike the water which in a Limbecke we see distilled,
that never ascends pure, but always tainted with the filthy smell of a
corrupted vessel, wherein the herbs are baked: even so our affections ascend
in the sight of God for most part, infected with some inordinate passion, some
drop of sensuality, some smoke of vain complacence, some dross of proper
interest, Ah Domine, imperfectum meum viderunt oculi tui, O Lord, thy eyes have
seen mine imperfections, Psalm a hundred thirty eight: those eyes so pure
vvashed with Milk, more clear then cristall, I know loath to look into this
muddie fenne of my imperfect soul, their seat is upon the margins of flowing
floods of love, thy father and the holy ghost: and above the little cristall
rivers of celestial spirits, who purely love thee, and for thy glory serve
thee. How then will they vouchsafe to look upon such darkness, accustomed to
behold such brightness? how can they but abhor the marches of death, whose
proper objects are the fountain of life?

Third, Vehemency.
IF eyes be seats of passions, windows of affections, quiuers of love darts,
ryuers joined with the fountain of the heart, it is no marvel if Christ,
intending to declare to S. John, the force and favor of his love, appeared
like eyes burning like a flame: because the fire that possessed his heart,
could not be contained, but required some vent. If the eyes of our bodies had
put on the garments of immortality, by which al senses are quikned, and new
abilities added, we might read in the eyes of Christ inhabiting this
Sacrament, as in living books and maps of grace, the vehement love which moved
his divinity to institute this sacred Eucharist: but since we cannot with the
eyes of our souls behold his deity, nor with the eyes of our bodies view his
humanity, let it be lawful for us to argue his love by natural and moral
reason: the which teaches that we must search the causes by effects,
principles by operations, and according to the qualities and degrees of
perfections in these, infer the natures and degrees of perfection in them.
The experience is manifest in luke warm water, in boiling water, and in a
gloing iron, all which participate heat: but because we perceive that one
heateth more vehemently then another, we do conclude, that they all are hot,
yet exceeding one another in degree of heat. Most true it is, that all
supernatural gifts which proceed from God, and are imparted to men, issue from
an infinite power, wisdom, and goodness, because they cannot be effected but by
God: yet this consists rather in the manner of their production, then in
their substance or degree of perfection: as for example, Christ changed water
into John 2.
wine in the marriage, the manner of working this miacle in an instant with a
word, without the help or concourse of any other cause, required infinite
power: yet because the substance of wine, the degree and perfection of wine,
was limited and contained within the bounds of a special creature, therefore
it required no infinity of cause or principle, and therefore we see a vine can
produce wine: But if God could create an angel of infinite virtue, perfection,
or grace, then, not only the manner, but also the substance would exact the
infinite power of God. By this discourse we may plainly conceive, that this gift
which GOD has bestowed upon us, requires, not only infinite power in the
manner of producing it under the rindes of bread and wine, but also in the very
degree and perfection: and consequently, being a gift, proceeds from no
limitred, but infinite love in degree and perfection, because, the effects being
infinite in degree, argues a principle in like proportion, and therefore we may
well conclude, that this gift and Gods love weyed both in a balance have not
one dram of difference. What love can equal this? what greater excess could
God show? Nam infinitum est, vltra quod non est accipere. A thing infinite, is
that that receives nothing beyond it. If all the loves in the world, how
ardent, how fervent, how vehement soever, were compared with this, they would
appear as little sparks, in respect of the vast ocean fire that rouleth under
the moon. But if we add here unto the value of this love, the dignity and
worth, the vehemency thereof would better appear. For as one drop of Christ's
blood in this sacrifice ought more to be prized then millions of worlds, even
so one grain of this love ought to be preferred before all the loves that ever
were, are, or shall be. For which cause our Savior said once, Qui amat patrem
vel Mat^h. 1^. Luke 14.
matrem plus me, non est me dignus, He that loves father or mother more then
me, is not worthy of me, that is, he deserves to leese an infinite good, an
endless love, that prefers a base and limited love before mine: and for
the same cause he is worthy of eternal hatred who so little accounts such
excess of friendship.

Fourth, Fec^nditie.
BY glaunces of eyes and words of mou^th the heart exalts the vapors of
affections; And therefore our Savior with eyes like fire, and voice like the
sound of many waters, discovered to saint John the conditions of his love, by
the flame of his eyes, the vehemency, by the noise of his voice, the
fecunditie: for as the water which falls from heaven rendeteth the earth
fertile and abundant with flowers and fruit, even so this sacrament
embrothereth the soil of our souls with the flowers of virtue, and leads
them with the fruits of good works. Mark says S. Ciprian, what they do, and
consider what Cip^ia^us De coena Domini.
they do speak, who hungring and thirsting after righteousness, are satiated
(he means with the Eucharist) what a holy odor that fulness breaths, good
works, decent manners, chaste effects, quiet senses, that internal sincerity
spreads abroad. But who ever saw water that restores dead trees to life?
the Eucharist restores, and therefore it is called panis vitae, the bread of
life. What water could ever preserve Ioh. 6.
a tree always in vigor, and enable it eternally to bear both flowers and
fruit? the Eucharist inableth Qui manducat hunc panem viuet in aeternum, he
that eats of Ibidem.
this bread shall live for ever. What water ever did change the nature of
trees, and caused a crab tree bring forth figs, or a briar to bear grapes?
The Eucharist causes, by bridling concupiscences, it changes carnal
affection into spiritual, and sensuality into virginite: what heavenly dew
had ever virtue to make one tree produce al sorts of fruits? the Eucharist
makes, for by deifying the soul with grace it is disposed by theological and
moral virtues to effect al good works, which are fruit to be presented to the
table of God almighty. But it is to be considered, that the noise was caused
by a multitude of waters, for the love of God does not only fructify the
soul as water, but also it washes it after a much more excellent manner than
water, and therefore pruneth the trees, and trimmeth them. This water converted
into blood mixed with wine before consecration desired David, when he was
spotted with sins, saying, Asperges me Psalm. 50. Hab. 9.
Domine hisopo, Sprinkle me (O Lord) with hisope dipped in blood. What blou^d?
Not of calves nor bulls, but figured by them, the blood of Christ. And what
will it do? lauabis me, and super niuem dealbabor, thou will wash me, and I
shall be whiter than snow: for water of life so cleanses sins, that it
adioyneth a new beauty: as if there could be a water, which washing a black
More did not only purge the filth from his face, but also added a whiteness
which he never had. Such effects works the Eucharist: for it cleanses, not
only the soul from sin, but also adioyneth a color of gold, a
supernatural brightness, a participation of Gods deity: and beautifieth it so
exceedingly, that it becomes Diuinae ^. Pet. 1.
naturae consors, partaker of the divine nature: Other waters by washing
consume the substance of that they wash, but this water is mingled with wine,
and both converted into blood, and therefore nourishes. fortifieth, and adds
a new vigor to Plut. in Lycurg.
the soul, like that bath of wine Lycurgus ordained to wash young infants
withal immediately after they were borne, to fortify their ioints, corroborate
their sinews, and with the heat to consume superfluous moisture: other waters
by clensing other things defile themselves, but this water remains in cristal
purity, and rather joins a new luster of glorifying god. Many spots there be
in nature which water cannot wash away: but there is no stain of the soul, but
this blood is able to cleanse it fully. Another water concurred to form that
noise which Christ's voice resembled, and that had force to quench the thirst:
for he that drinks this converted water, shall never thirst again, because
Christ has so registered it in S. John, qui bibit ex hac aqua John. 4.
non sitiet in aeternum, he that shall drink of this water, shall not thirst
for ever: for as all medicines require a time for operation, so this Sacrament
after a small time will extinguish al inordinate affections, and fill our souls
ab vbertate domus domini, from Psalm. 33.
the fruitfulnes of our Lords house.

Fifth, Efficacy.
THe stars which he carried in his hands represented the 7. Angels, who were
presidents over the 7 churches, the which he bare in his hand, because he
moved them alto labor, industry, and diligence: for the love of God cannot be
idle: wherefore the holy ghost, who is essentiallye love, descended upon the
Apostles in form of fire, which never can rest, but always is in motion. He
is compared also to wind, the which ceasing to move, cease to be. And to a
fountain, which leeseth the name, when it leaves to run, si amor est,
operatur, si non operatur, amor non est. If it be love, it works, if it work
not, it is not love. And questionless our Savior most divinely shows the
effecacie of his love in this Sacrament: For what means those words, in
finem dilexit eos, to the end he loved them: but that Ihon. ^3.
his love contended to effectuate al things necessary for their salvation even
unto the extreme day of his life? the very present danger and certainty of
his death could not stay the force of his love to omit one jot of that his
father had commanded and perscribed unto him. Who doubts but the patience of
God expecting continually in the Tabernacle that we come to worship him, to
love him, to pray unto him, to move us to devotion, argues the effecacie of
his love, and continual affection to do us good, He stands like the sun
which beats at the windows of our hearts, if we will open them, he is always
ready to enter in: he remains there as a river of Crystal water, running by
our doors, if we will not draw it up, the fault is ours, the river never
staieth his course: yea, our savior lamenteth Isay 5^.
that we will not drink of it, crying Sitientes, venite ad aquas, You that are
thirsty come to the Waters: but more lively in the Canticles, Christ argues
our negligence and shows his diligence, Aperi Cantic. ^.
mihi soror mea, amica mea, columba mea, immaculata mea, quia caput meum plenu^
est rore and cicinni mei guttis noctium. O my sister, my love, my dove, my
unspotted, open the door to me, because my head is sul of dew, and my locks of
the night drops. So it seems to me when I enter into the church, when I see
in the morning the lamps burning before him, that with a most effectual voice
he cries, I have expected here at the door of thy heart all this night to
enter in, lo the testimony, the rain of the night, and the dew of the morning
have passed over my head at last come and receive me in, that I may say Salus
huic domui facta est, salvation is made to this house, and Luke 1^
bless thee as I blessed Obededom for receiving my ark. Moreover, when he enters
into our bodies he vanishes not away as soon as we have swallowed him, but
remains till our stomachs have digested those forms of bread and wine: who
sees not that this long demurre discovers the efficacy of his love? for
what other end staieth he so long behind these vailes of Cantic. 2.
bread and wine looking out of those windows, and beholding out of those
grates, but to induce our souls to look on him, as he looks on them, and to
call us after the forgiveness of our sins, to prune the vine trees of our
souls, to labor for the fruit of virtue, for the kingdom of heaven? I am
hiems transijt, imber abijt, and recessit, flores apparuerunt, tempus
putationis aduenit, (...).
vox turturis audita est in terranostra; now the winter is past, the shower is
gone, flowers have appeared, the time of pruning is, the turtle is heard in our
land. Finally, the efficacy of his love he declares most manifestly, by
conducting all those into the haven of felicity, who worthily participated
this heavenly mystery. For the love is fully consummated when it possesses
the last effect of all intended, the which none can doubt to be the complet
fruition of love.

Sixth, Constancy.
The stabilitie and firmness of those legs of brass open unto us the
stabilitie and constancy of the love of God: for as they sustain the body
most friendly from falling: even so the constancy of love preserves it from
changing: in the first condition of Gods divine love, we declared the
antiquity, and how in the very first moment of his eternity (if eternity can
have a moment) by the force of his love he intended to institute this
sacrament. The which love he kept so firmly without change and alteration,
that although the sins of menwere so many, so horrible, so demeritorious of
his love, that they forced him to drown the world, to burn whole countries,
to send plagues, wars, and famine among men to destroy them, y^^ they all could
not alter his love, to cause him to omit this sacrament. But if he had
foreseen that all men universally afterward were to accept this benefit
with recognoscence, with love with devotion, the consta^cy of his love had not
bin so admirable: but foreknoing that many should receive it to their perpetual
damnation (and no doubt but a great number be now frying in the inextinguible
Fo^naces of hell, who hundreds of times harbored this sacred host in their
breasts (as Martine Luther who confesses himself to have said mass devoutly
for 15. years, with a multitude more of Apostates and sacrilegious heretics)
this greatly confirms his constancy. This abisse and secret of Gods love, as
it is one of the main points touched in predestination and precognitio^ of god,
why he would permit the reprobate to have as free access to sacraments, to
grace, and all other supernatural means, as the elected, howbeit he did
evidently foresee they should be an occasion of great danation, so by resolving
it, many other such like controversies may be decided, therefore I will set down
two or three points which may sufficiently content any wise man, and also
declare the love of God in permitting the reprobate to abuse such heavenly
treasures. First we must believe as an article of our faith, that God is
infinite, wise, good, and omnipotent: by his wisdom he foresees al things which
concern his justice, his charity, mercy, the good of man, and the glory of
his majesty. But if I knew all, and were vicious or malicious, he might effect
many things against right and justice: but being infinite good, no malice or
iniquity can stain the crown of his dignity. Yet albeit he were wise and good,
yet infirm and weak of force, he might know many things convenient, yet for
lack of power, not effect the^, to supply this defect, he has annexed his
omnipotency, so that what he knows and intends he can put in execution.
Omnia quaecunque voluit facit in coelo and in terra. Al whatsoever he willed he
did in Psalm. 134
heaven and in earth. By this discourse we may infer, that when we admire the
wonders of gods works, and find something that seems either against his
justice, wisdom, or goodness, we ought to bridle our judgments with these three
infinities, of wisdom, goodness, and power. Secondly for the merit of faith God
would not discern the just from the unjust, the good from the bad, in his
visible church, for diverse most necessary and important reasons, and therefore
it was expedient that all external and visible means should be common to
both, for otherwise the elected should have bin confirmed in grace, and the
reprobate in malice, that those could do no ill, nor they no good, which was
contrary to the nature of man. Thirdly, if God did foresee, many would abase
this sacrament: he did foresee the cause before the effect, that is, the abuse
proceeded not because he did not foresee it, but because man would most
wickedly abuse it, the which was the cause why he did foresee it: he therefore
Eccle^. 15
laying before man fire and water, good and ill, life and death, who can blame
him if men rather burn then bath themselves? Lastly such is the goodness of
god, that he will open the treasures of his grace, even unto the wicked, that
thereby the elected may extol his bounty, and the reprobate co^etmn their own
ingratitude, for if we account those men most virtuous who do good to
strangers, to wicked men, and those that have small deserts, without doubt the
infinite goodness of God is a sufficient cause to do good to me^ without any
deserts at all, and therefore no marvel if we tolerate the reprobate to feed
upon his table, because his love is so constant toward the just, that he will
rather permit the reprobate to abuse him, then the just to leese him.

Seventh, Light. Eight, Delight.
HIs face as bright as the sun in the greatest force, in the cheifest virtue,
in the prime of light, unfolds many excellent conditions and properties of
Gods bright enflamed and beautiful love, the which instituted the sacred
Eucharist, was not blinded with ignorance, nor veiled with the clouds of
passions, nor led in a prodigal error: for lack of consideration, the which
defects do often inuegle us, because as the sun never makes eclips nor shadow
near it, self: even so this son of justice, Apud quem Iam. 1.
non est transmutatio nec vicissitudinis obumbratio, With who^ is no
transmutation, not shadowing of alteration, cannot be blemished with spot of
ignorance, blot of error, or stain of passion. And therefore we must not marvel
if we can find out so many and so weighty causes which moved him to institute
this sacrament, for Amor est ingeniosissimus, love is most inuentiue where it
loves, and can find forth infinite means to procure, conserve, and increase
love, wherefore our blessed savior, Candor lucis aeternae, Sap. 7.
and speculum sine macula, the whiteness of eternal life, and the looking
glass without spot, was not content that his love should only be beautified
with abundance of light, but also he dispersed his rays upon al those who
condignely receive him into their hearts: for he knows very well that
derstanding is the eye of love, and that in bliss we shall love him best,
because there we shall know him most. By which circumstance of Gods love we
may infer the force and perfection thereof: for he that with infinite wisdom
knew his own majesty, our misery, the admirable excellence of this Sacrament,
the estate of his church, the causes of the institution, the effects of it. the
good uses and abuses thereof; could not but be inflamed with a most ardent fire
of love in granting us such a benefit. For let any man expend in particular,
and he shall try this illatiou to be most manifest. To love and light
follows Deligh^.
delight, and therefore the face of Christ shining like the sun, shows what
delight is adjoined to Gods love. For one of the chiefest causes of delight we
have upon earth, is the light of the sun: and therefore the blinded Tobie to
whom day and night were all one could say, quale Job. 5.
mihi gandium qui lumen coeli non video, what joy have I that see not the light
of heaven? the delight that God conceived by the institution and effects of
this sacrament, which he did foresee so profitable for us, and so glorious to
him, without dout was ineffable. The which he gave us to understand by the good
father, who ran to meet his prodigal son dum adhuc a long esset when he
was yet far off, and Luke 15.
there imbrased and kissed him, and after bringing him home, with what
affection think you caused he that vitulum saginatum the fatted calfe (a most
perfect figure of this sacrament) to be killed, to rejoice and feast with his
son? if his delights be to dwell with the sons of men, Dilitiae Pro^^b. ^^
meae esse cum filijs hominum, my delights are to be with the sons of men,
what extreme delight had he to institute the Eucharist, the very sinew and
joint, the glue and chain, wherewith he did foresee that men and God should
perpetually be linked together in love and unity? If he rejoiced Io. 1^^
to foresee his disciples and the rest of his flock joined in friendship and
amity, what extremity of joy did possess that sacred breast, when he did see
them so united with his body and blood, that they had cor vnum and animam vnam
one heart, and Acts 2. ^^
one mind, and all animated with his divine life? If he that planteth a tree
with his own hands, could foresee what excellent fruit it would yield, what
joy would he receive in planting of it? if the fou^ders of colleges might
foreknowe what rare scholars, preachers, and bishops should ascend from these
foundations, how grateful would it be unto them? with what alacrity would they
proceed in their building: even so our savior reioiced greatly, foreseeing
the admirable good of the Eucharist, how many straying souls by it were to be
reduced? how many proud and ambitious to become humble and mild: how many as
fierce as lions, as gentle as lambs, how many lascivious, chaste, how many
consecrated to gluttony, modest and temperate, how many as brittle as glass,
persevere most constantly in virginity? this object I say so wonderful for
excellency, so gracious for variety, so rare for difficulty, so glorious for
merit, could not but greatly content him, whose contentation is to see the
complete contentment of us.

9, Majesty. 10, Glory. 11, Liberty.
THe brightness of Christ face in the ^^^th. 16. Mark 9. Luke. 9.
mount of Thabor represented unto his three best beloved disciples the glory of
his majesty, or the majesty of his glory, the same it insinuates here because
he would give us thereby to understand, that his love is no common or vulgar
sort of affection, but most marestical and glorious. This word majesty
questionless is more triuiall then understood, for I am of opinion that few
conceive the depth of the signification, because that majesty properly we give
kings, thereby signifying their dignity, which proceeds from their
authority, power, and dominion they possess over there kingdoms. This same
transferred to God. signifies the dignity he possesses, by the right title he
enioys of the full dominion over the world, which proceeds from three
perfections of God, for that he is the first beginning, the last end, and
conseruer of all things. The love of god in instituting this sacrament, was
most maiesticall, because therein he showed his dominion over al dominion, that
is, the complete right he had in disposing of his own person, as a king should
give himself to redeem his kingdom, his love by all reason ought to be deemed
most kingly and maiestical, for in renouncing his right, he shows his full
authority: eue^ so our savior by debasing himself so low, and in a certain sort
renouncing his right, declares most manifestly the majesty of his love. By
ordaining this sacrifice of himself, he manifests, likewise the majesty of
his love in the aforesaid three perfections. For none but he that has full
and complet dominion over God can institute a sacrament or sacrifice wherein
the contained is God, and consequently he shows himself to have power and
authority over all that appertains to God. Besides, instituting it to
conserve our souls, he declares how to him properly belongs our spiritual
conservation: and since this sacrifice tends to God, as the final cause of
all our supernatural good, he reveals unto us that he is our end and that by
possessing his love, we attain our consummate felicity. Therefore it
proceeds from a love maiesticall, contains a maiesticall, and tends to a
maiesticall.

Tenth, Glory.
THe glory of God cannot be separated from his love, for as all his other
attributes, and internal actions, are the self same thing with his deity, so
is his love, and therefore as infinite in perfection as the rest: we call his
love glorious, because it issues (speaking according to the capacities of our
wits) from the light of glory, whereby God is blessed in himself: besides, it
is one essential part of his selicitie to love himself, and therefore we
ought the more to prize this love, that having before it all goodness, all
beauty, all delight, al wisdom, al power, and in fine, al perfections, it
would vouchsafe to extend it self to us, and impart infinity goodness as
though it were not sufficiently satiated at home. It is lastly glorious,
because it appoints a sacrament wherein Gods majesty is exceedingly
glorified, and our souls and bodies are embalmed against corruption, and
preserved for glory in life everlasting.

Eleventh, Liberty.
HIs walking among the seven candlestickes manifested his liberty, that he
was not bound so to one church, but that he might leave it and go to an other,
nor so restrained to any, but that he might leave them al: forcertain it is,
that as he freely and of love without need created this world, so freely, and
of love, he instituted the Eucharist, and as he created the world, not from the
beginning, but after an eternity, to give us to understand, that he who
enjoyed al felicity, a whole eternity, without the world, had no need of it,
but only for our good and his love he produced it in time: in like sort he
instituted not this blessed Sacrament strait after Adams falnot for four
thousand years after, to manifest unto us, that for our profit and his love,
not for any other interest, he instituted it at his departure out of this world.

Twelfth, Justice.
THe two edged sword which issued out of his mouth declares the vindicatiue
justice and revenge of love, because, as his goodness is vehement in loving,
so his justice is exceeding in punishing, for fervent love bordereth always
upon extremes, either extremely hating, or extremely affecting, the
experience we may see in Putifars wife, who as unjustly Genes. 39.
hated Joseph for his chaste denial, as before she vehemently loved him for
her unchaste desite: the which example, although it be of impure love, yet it
declares the nature of love. For as a river that has free passage runs
mildely and calmely, if it be staide from the natural course, it swells and
threatens a ruin of all that hinders the way, even so love, if it can pass
quietly with that it pretends, love surpasses all waters in calmness: but
if the course be stopped, it swells, and either as water, it will wash away
whole cities, or as fire, blow up whole mountains. Our blessed Savior
therefore in this Sacrament of love has balanced his love, and his ire: if
love cannot prevail, revenge shall take effect: for this sword cutting on both
sides threatens a punishment to disloyal lovers: with one side it cutteth
them who refuse his love, by not accepting this Sacrament, and with the other,
those that accept it not well. The first are Infidels, the second Heretics and
ill christians. Pagans reject his love, Heretics impugn his love, ill
Catholics abuse his love. But let them not doubt, since they will not accept
the cup of his honied affection, they shall drink the gall of his bitter
hatred. Moreover, this double edged sword signifies the punishments God
inflicteth in this world upon those, who abuse his love in this sacrament, of
death, madness, and horrible diseases, as infinite examples alleged in Vide
S. Cip^libr. de laps. 1. Cor. 11.
histories most evidently declare, and Saint Paul seems to affirm, who after
he had reprehended the Corinthians for irreuerently receiving the sacred
eucharist, he adeth Ideo inter vos multi infirmi and imbe^illes, and dormiunt
multi, therefore there are among you many weak and feeble, and many sleep: and
in the world to come, for he that eats it not, or unworthily, cannot have the
life of grace, without grace he is dead in sin, the death of sin
transferreth the soul to the eternal death of hell. Besides, this dubble
cutting sword represents the mortal wounds both of body and soul, that it
causes in them who receive it not as they ought to do, for questionless as
those which receive it worthily shall be received both in body and soul
after a more particular manner, then infants who receive it not at all, even so
those that eat it unworthily, shall deferuedly be punished particularly both
in Sap. 11.
body and soul, because proportion of pains must be correspondent to
transgressions, In quo quis peccat in eodem punitur, In that one sins, in
the same he must be punished. Ah what a terrible sight will it be to them to
see him coming in judgment, both accuser and judge, who irreuerently,
irreligiously, and impioussie handled him, by sacrilegious consuming the sacred
Eucharist? What confusion will it be to see that face which in a manner they
did spitte in, by despising his love? what floods of gall will those eyes pour
into their consciences, which came once to glannce streams of sugered peace
into their souls? what an eternal sting will those lips prick in their
hearts with saying, Ite a me maledicti in ignem aternum, Ger Matthew. 29.
ye away from me ye cursed unto fire everlasting, which once were called Famus
distillans labia tua, Thy lips are a distilling honey comb. Ah, love then will
be changed into hatred, and his cheereful looks Cantic. 4.
into a frowning countenance. Therefore let us entertain him with love here,
that with the like he may entertain us there.

That God showed in the Eucharist an extensiue love and a tender or familiar
love. Ca. 10
THe breadth of heaven, and the depth of the abisse who can measure? the 4.
^sdr. 4.
vastness of the sun, or the vehement brightness, whether most excels?
if these be hard to determine, what shall we say of the fervor of Gods love,
whether the extension or intension, the vehemency or the amplenesse, the
height, or the largenes thereof, ought more to be esteemed? first God has
limited his love in this sacrament to no city, as he did his sacrifices to
Jerusalem, to no particular nation, as his old Testament recites, and
ceremonies 3. Reg. ^. ^. Pa^al. 6. and 7.
were contained within the narrow bonds of Iuorie. But from the rifing of the
sun Psalm. 75.
unto the setting: Non est quae abscondat se a calore eius: there is none can
hide himself Psalm. 18.
from his heat: Ab ortu solis vsque ad occasum Ma^^e. 1.
magnum est nomen meum in gentibus: From the rising of the sun unto the
setting my name is great among Gentiles: he restrained it to no definite time,
as all sacrifices of the Jews, like so many errant plannets, were to leese
their light in the appearing of the sun, whose light shall never fail, but
first the world shall leese his form, before this sacrifice shall leese 1.
Cor. 11.
his glory. Moreover the priests be not determined within the straites of any
pedigree, as the sacrifices of Moses within the tribe of Leui, neither the
quantity of bread nor wine our loving savior prescribed for consecration, but
left it freely to the Priests intention to consecrate so much of that which may
be present before him, as shall seem good unto him: neither limited he any
time, but left it to be the receivers devotion: if they could prepare
themselves worthily every day, he is content they should communicate every day,
and so thousands of priests as they daily live by breathing this vital air
to conserve their bodies, so they daily suck the blood from Christ's side to
feed their souls. Consider how many masses are said euuerie day in Italy,
Spain, France, Germany, Flanders, Powland, England, Ireland, Scotland, and the
East and West Indians, where there be now almost as many Catholics as in all
Eupore, and upon sundaies and other feastiuall days how many millions
communicate. Imagine how these veins of Christ's sacred body, like the four
maine rivers that issued out of Paradise, give sufficient refectio^ to all this
innumerable multitude: if we had the eyes of our souls open to view Christ's
precious body and blood glorious and shining, fixed in this sacrament, and
shining in their breasts, we should behold another sort of spangled firmament
in earth, then we do see in heaven in the clearest winter night. Consider
moreover the fragrant smell, the spiritual odor, which continually the
Catholic Church dispersed through, the whole world, exalts from this divine
sacrifice, and sends up to heaven in recognoscence of the infinite benefit of
Christ's passion, and the manifold graces we have received from his majesty. If
God would declare it with a corporal show, the heavens, air, and earth would
be covered with this sacred insence. Blessed be his name for ever, who so far
extended the sphere of his love, that he would have all men, at al times, of
all qualities, in all places, to be licenced to have free access unto him, in
such sort, that the very angels admiring the admirable sweetness of the
Church, presenting her self daily in these sacred oblations, before the
universal court of heaven, and wondering how such grateful smells ascend from
such barre^ deserts, said, Quae est ista, quae ascendit de deserto dilici^s
affluens, C^^tie. 8.
enixa super spo^sum, who is this which ascends from the desert, flowing with
delights, leaning upon her spouse. His His familiar ^out.
tender affection yields little to any of the rest, for as mothers most
tenderly and familiarly deal and converse with their little infants: even so
our blessed savior with us in this sacrament. But he far surpasses all
mothers in the tenderness of his affection, for mothers give their children
cold milk, that is, indigested blood, but Christ imparteth the best blood in
his breast, and besides, all his substance. Of diverse mothers we read, who
came to that fierceness and cruelty, that to relieve their famine they
embrued their hands in their childrens blood, bereauing them of that life that
naturally they had once imparted to them: but we never read of mother that
killed her self to feed her children. O sweet savior thou Psalm. 101.
art the only pellicane, thou launch est thy heart to feed thy flock, thou
did die to nourish thy children with this blood of life. Ah how sweetly
do thou co^uerse with those, who devoutly converse with thee. Thy
conversation has no bitterness, thy friendship no gall: yet few do feel I
know these tender affects of Christ, because Sapientia non habitat in terra
suauiter viuentium, Wisdom dwells not in the land of dainty livers, for it
is an infallible verity that the joys of Christ, and the pleasures of the
world cannot consort together.

The forty two and last cause, to be the end of all the Sacraments of the
old Testament.
AS great and maiesticall subjects are signified with many names, as God,
Christ, the incarnation, bliss, this sacracrament, because we cannot impose
one to signify them completely, therefore we supply this defect with the
multitude, every one signifying a part, eue^ so the providence of God ordained
many simbolicall figures and pictures of sacrifices in the old Testament, to
depaint the blessed Eucharist, because we could not fully conceive the majesty
thereof in one, wherefore he appointed a number. Not unlike to great Princes,
who are not contented in one card to draw their whole kingdoms, but command
for more distinction every province and Country, every city and territory
to be severally described.

Some sacraments God instituted to signify the matter or external forms of
the Eucharist, such were the sacrifice of Melchizedech, in bread and wine, and
the bread of proposition. Some represented the form, life, and soul of this
sacrament, our blessed savior here offered unto his father, and of this sort
were all the lambs, sheep, doves, turtles, and bloody sacrifices, for they
both represented the passion of Christ, and the incruent sacrifice of the Euch
arist, which in substance is all one with the passion. Others did carry on
their shoulders the cognusance of the effects of this sacrament, as the tree of
life in Paradise, the rainbow to we and his posterity, Manna in the desert,
the honey which opened the eyes of Ionathas, the Crystal water which the
stony veins of craggie rocks gushed forth at the request and stroke of Moses.

Others God ordained principally to insinuate unto us the continuance and
perpetuity of this oblation, as the two sacrifices God appointed the Jews
daily to offer, one in the morning, and another in the evening: others he
determined to express sundry circumstances, as the purity and perfection, by
the sacrifice of most pure oil, and finest flower. Others to foretell how
grat^full this sacrifice was unto God by insence, themiamata, and other
odoriforous smelles. All which figures, sacrifices, ceremonies, and ordinances
of God, he that would take the assumpt to declare, and apply every one to
the Eucharist, might easily find sufficient matter to fill a whole volume.
Therefore I mean to omit all the rest, and only betake me to two of the
principal and most celebrated of all antiquity, I mean Manna and the Pascall
Lamb.

Manna, Exodus 16
ALthough we had not the testimony of all antiquity pronouncing that manna was
a figure of the blessed Eucharist, yet the very conformity, proportion, and
admirable simpathie betwixt the^, would sufficiently persuade any reasonable
judgment, that the one was a picture of the other as manfestly shall appear.
First, manna was called food of angels, pane^ angelorum manducauit homo, man
has eaten the bread of angel, because either it Job. 28.
was formed by the ministry of angels, or so worthy a meat, as might serve
for the table of Angels. And who sees not the Eucharist consecrated by the
Priests, the terrestrial angels, sent from God to feed his flock, and that
the angels in heaven feed on no other substance then the sacred body, soul,
person, and divinity of Christ, the meat which is served upon these fragile
platters of bread and wine. Secondly, manna descended from heaven, panem coeli
dedit eis, bread from heaven he Psalm. 77.
gave them. And what said Christ of the Eucharist? ego sum panis qui de coelo
dese^^ai, I am the bread that descended from heaven. Psalm. 77.
Thirdly, Solomon calls manna the substance of God, substantians tuam and
dulcedinens John. ^.
tuam, quam in filios habes, ostendebas: Thou did show thy substance and
thy sweetness, which thou bear toward children: note that manna was really
the substance of God, but by it he declared his treasures, the riches of his
love. In the Eucharist is the very substance of GOD indeed, all his sweetness
and glory, Hoc est corpus meum, This is my body, registered Sap. 16.
by Christ declares no less. Fourthly, manna in color was white, in
similitudine^ Sap. 16.
pruinae, after the liknes of hoar forced, and by beating it in a mortar, it
became after it was baked like a cake of bread and oil. Exodus 1^.
None can be ignorant how this represented Numb. 11
the external form of our sanctified bread in the Eucharist. When the people
saw manna descended from heaven, they wondered at it and said, Man hu Quid
est hoc? what is this? And did not the Jews Exodus 16.
wonder at Christ's promising this sacrament? Quomodo potest hic nobis caruem
suam John 6.
dare ad manducandum? How can this man give us his flesh to eat? Sixthly, manna
was their food for forty years, all the while they wandered in the desert: and
the Eucharist so long as we wander in the desert of this world. Seventhly,
manna was not given them from heaven till the flower of Egypt was spent, and
the sweet effects of this sacrament are not communicated, till we renounce by
baptism the flesh, devil, and world, our Egyptian enemies. Eighthly, they
gathered it up all the week except the Saboth day, wherein they enjoyed that
they had collected upon Friday: and in the saboth of rest we shall live of
that we gathered here on earth: here we sow, there we reap, here we
fight, there we shall be crowned, here we eat Christ with some difficulty, with
faith believing a most profound mystery, there we shall take full possession
without any cross or labor. Ninthly, those that gathered more than that in
quantity which GOD prescribed, they Exodus 1^.
found nothing remaining in their vessels, but worms and putrefaction: who
eat this sacrament vnworthiely, against the prescript of Christ, shall find
no other f^uit left in their souls then remorse of conscience that stinging
worm that never dies, and eternal corruption in hell without ever dieing.
Tenthly, manna had all sweetness of taste. Omne delectaementum and Sap. 16.
saporis suauitatem: All delight and sweetness of taste: The Eucharist
contains Christ, who affords and contains all the joys both in heaven
and earth. Eleuenthly, in manna every one had that taste he desired: in the
Eucharist every passion, Sap. 16.
affection, and sore, finds a perfect remedy, and every desire a complet
sacietie: because by nourishing the soul it yields spiritual force, by
producing grace it ministereth all variety of virtues, by joining our hearts
to Christ the fountain of all comforts, it shakes off all the disgusts and
griefs which our enemies by sins or temtations canimpose upon us,
Twelfthly, the ordinary taste was converted into that taste which every one
desired, Deseruiens vniuscuinsque voluntati, ad (...). 16.
quod quisque volebat conuertebatur, deserving to every ones will, it was
converted to what every one desired. What could more lively express the
mystery of transubstantiation as this admirable conversion and transmutation
of tastes? the like we have in conversion of the rock into water, the
substance of stone by the wonderful work of god, became transformed into the
substance of water, Conuertit petrum Psalm. 113
in stagna aquarum and rupem in fontes aquarum, He converted the stone unto a
lake of waters, and the rock unto fountains. 13. Those who gathered more, and
those who gathered less found in equal portion to eat, Nec qui plus
collegerat habnit Exodus 16.
amplius, nec qui minus paraner at, reperit minus. He that had much, abounded
not, and 2. Cor. 8.
he that had little, wanted not. In the Eucharist, he that receives both forms,
as the Priest, or a greater host, or many hoasts, or in in fine, more or
little, receives no more then they which communicate with the least parcel of
this Sacrament. The fourteenth, when the sun did rise, it consumed away: when
the sun of Justice shall appear, that is, when Christ shall come to us in
his glory, then the manna of his church shall vanish awaynot in substance, but
in form. The fifteenth, Although that God has vouchsafed to feed his children
with the food of angels, with bread sent from heaven with the substance of
God, yet they murmured against it, they lothed it, they rejected it: and what
else do our adversaries John ^
but murmur against this blessed sacrament? did not the Jews say, Durus est
hic sermo, and quis potest capere eum? This saying is hard, and who can hear
it? do not heritikes reject and contemn it? But what said Christ, except you
eat me you shall not live. And therefore all heretics are dead in sin,
because they live not by him.

The Pascall lamb. Exodus 12.
ASmanna did most lively represent the external form and spiritual effects
of this sacrament, so the Pascall lamb expressed the internal substance and
disposition of those who came to feed at this holy table. This sacrifice was
ordained to be a Lamb without spot, that is, lacking all defects and
imperfections, and of a year old, that is, in the prime of goodness. Who sees
not that the host offered is without spot of imperfection, or wrinckle of old
age, either in divinity or humanity, in qualities of body, or operations of
soul. Secondly, this Lamb was to be sacrificed in the City of Jerusalem,
and where can this sacrifice be offered, but in the Catholic church, by
Jerusalem represented? Thirdly, it was to be sacrificed in the evening: at what
time else appointed our savior this sacrament? When did he eat it with his
disciples, but in the evening? All the whole family were to meet at this
feast, to be made partakers thereof: by this we understand the charity that
all Catholics ought to have, when they come to this altar to eat the common
foment of all true charity. Fifthly, it was to be eaten roasted, and so was our
blessed savior upon the cross, and in his sacrament, with the fire of
charity, which he brought from heaven to earth, and what else pretended he but
that it should burn. Sixthly, no common bread, but unleavened was to be eaten
in this sacred feast: Join this bread and the lamb together, and lo the
forms of our unleavened sacrifice, and our lamb of God that takes away the
sins of the world. Besides, this unleavened bread signifies innocence and
sincerity, that none ought to feed here but such as think verily they be in
Gods grace, and clothed with the marriage garment of eternal sanctity.
Seventhly, the sauce for this mystical Matthew. 2^.
lamb was no other but sower, bitter, and wild Lettices, and in this
Sacrament the bitter compassion and candolence of Christ's death, salt and
sorrowful tears for our sins, cause a singular good taste in those who
participate this sacrifice. Eighthly, the head, the feet, and the intrals were
to be swallowed, that is, in this sacrament (as was declared in the 41. cause)
the divinity of Christ fignified by his head, the love of Christ declared by
his feet, the secret manner of his being here we must swallow, no mortal man
can sufficiently comprehend them. Ninthlie, their loins were to be girded, to
signify the purity of mind and chastity of body wherewith this dove bathed in
virgins milk, ought to be eaten. Tenthly they hold stanes in their hands, to
foretell us that we must walk forward in our journey, where we shall suffer
the encounters of diverse enemies, and therefore we ought to receive it as a
defense and a protection against them. Eleuenthly, they were bound to have
shoes on their feet, to teach us that our affections must be restrained, our
inordinate passions bridled, our preposterous concupiscences mortified, if we
will eat the unspotted Lamb, mortified till death to give us eternal life.
Twelfth, their eating of it in haste, declared unto us that his sacrament was
to be eaten as in passage to life everlasting. We were not always to eat it
in this form, bu^ reuelata facie with his face reveled in glory. Thirteen, if
any thing was left, God commanded them to burn it, because he would have it a
full sacrifice: as this Eucharist, where all is cousumed, all is offered up to
God, all received of the Priest. Fourteen, the sprinckling of those posts
with blood, which was a wall of security against the fury of the angel, who
killed the first borne of the Egyptians, who is so ignorant, that sees not to
be the mouths and hearts of Catholics sprinkled with this blood, and thereby
defended from the furious tyranny and cruel invasion of that deformed angel
of hell. Many more moral and spiritual conceits devout souls may distill
from these mystical ceremonies which God by his infinite wisdom appointed to
represent the sacred Eucharist, for what other thing could he pretend? to what
purpose so many rites and ceremonies for eating a Lamb? what imported it him
that they should have shoes on their feet? eat those bitter lettices,
unleavened bread, with their loins girt? nothing could principally move such a
majesty, but the majesty of this sacrament: for howbeit he would have those
people to remember his benefit of deliverance out of Egypt, yet three of these
ceremonies had been sufficient for them.

Deo gratias.
An advise for protestants and puritanes.
IF so it chance that these my simple discourses fall into their hands for
whose tastes they were not prepared, I thought good to give them three or four
aduirtisments, that they remaining without the vineyard of Christ, may thrust
their hands through the hedge, and benefit themselves at least by the leaves of
the Eucharist, since they cannot be pertakers of the fruit.

First that I intended not here to prove by fathers, counsels, and scriptures,
theologically, every cause as in schools they commonly are handled: (the which
if I were to deal with heretics, I could easily perform) but only briefly to
represent unto the peoples eyes for their meditations, some points appliable
to every catholics capacity. Neither do I stuff the margines with
ci^ations, because in very deed I lacked books: but every found divine may well
perceive, that what soever the fathers have written concerning the institution
and effects of the Eucharist, may be reduced into one cause or other. And
consequently a little reading would quickly have filled the margines.

Secondly, let them consider how maiestically, how reverently, how reasonably
Catholics believe, teach, and worship this sacrament. And what difference
there is betwixt our venerable sacrifice, and their profane bread and wine.
Our sacrament subsisting by Gods son incarnate, and their mere tipicall
shadow: our everlasting fountain, springing graces and virtues, for life
euelasting, and their naked supper, unseasoned with grace, deprived of virtue,
spoiled of religion. And in very truth, I cannot see how they can save it, but
that whosoever eats his breakefast saying grace before and after,
communicates as well, and feeds as perfectly on Christ by faith as they do.
Moreover who is so blind that cannot discern how the pascall lamb and manna,
which represented Christ in the holy Eucharist, were much more excellent
sacraments then their communion, because they more lively represented Christ,
the lamb his passion, and manna the fruits thereof, then a gobbet of bread
and a sup of wine: and consequently the blood of the lamb sprinkled upon
their doors, much more expressly stirred Up their faith to feed on Christ then a
breakfast of bread and wine.

Thirdly for this argument and many more I find the protestants both in their
books and conferences most waue^ing, and not able finally to resolve
themselves what to hold, yet I hear that Doctor Andrews has publicly
preached that Christ's body is there really, and many Protestants I know hold
the same opinion. But alas how is it possible for any man to eat the body of
Christ really, and not corporally, after the ma^er of Catholics, defend the
body of Christ to be really in the sacrament? for how can it be reallie
present, being really distants as far as heaven from earth? or how can the body
have a real presence and a corporal absence? it is even as much to say, as a
man may eat really a Capon, and yet none of the substance of a Capon, which is
not intelligible, and they themselves know not what they say, but fall into
manifold absurdities and contradictions: for as many as write of their eating
of Christ by faith, differ from others in declaring, how he is eaten by faith,
and in distinguishing their communion from a good christian breakfast.

Lastly let them consider of what a treasure they are deprived, for it seems
in very deed that God in punishment of their errors would abandon them, and
leave them destitute of one of the greatest benefits he bestowed upon mankind.
Alas by lacking this light, they live in darkness, by wanting this cloud to
repair them from the scorching flames of concupiscence, it is no marvel if
they cannot live chastely, being spoiled of this sinew of charity, it is no
wonder if dissension reign among them, having sent into exile these bowels of
mercy, for necessity christian charity fails: abandoning the only sacrifice
of true religion: conseqne^tly they have expelled al true devotion. And
therefore we now prove by experience in England, that fasting is left, praying
little accounted, mortification rejected, alms brought to nothing, virginity
despised, Christian piety deemed hypocrisy, and in sine, for lack of this
sacrament and true religion brought in fleshly prudence and Atheism.

Finis.
To the Reader.
Pardon (discreet reader) to many errors escaped in the printing because they
hardly could be avoided: the Author being absent, the Printer being ignorant
of our language, the style not vulgar and the Copy not very persect. Yet I
thought good with all these impediments not to deprive thee of so necessary a
medicine, howbeit the glass being something bruised.

Faults escaped in the text.
FOlio 1. page 6 for knitting read omitting. 9 for reach, read ouer-reach:
for geographicall read astronomicall. 10 for exmiruite, read exinanite. 11
for the natural, read their natural. 12 for possible, read as possible. 15
for their body, read this body. 19 for invisible, read invincible. 24 for
present, read persit. 25 for natural, read supernatural: for viation, read
viaticum 26 for to affray read to affray them: for that which, that he which.
30 for rages, read rays. 32 for imminent read eminent. 35 for purge read
sprinckle. 38 to these words, of his body, add, for separate the blood from
his body, and there remains, etc. 40 for extinguishable, read
inextinguishable: for because in the, read because if in the. 43 for
description, read distribution: for manna read Thymiama. 44 for not good,
read not God. 45 for explicable, read inexplicable. 47 for disguished, read
disgusted: for lodge, read love. 48 for iminent, read eminent. 50 for entice,
read inuire: for reprobation, read redemption: for proposition, read
proportion. 52 to these words maintain them, add storm at it. 53 for
disguishing, read disgeasting. 54 for outward, read inward: for the pasture,
read pastor. 55 for of spring, read to spring. 56 for disperse, read
dispense. 57 for two days, read forty days. 64 for same, read sun. 67 for
sow, read see: for paritie, read purity: for love, read lack. 68 for
iminent, read eminent. 73 for house, read host: for the scowts, read their
scowtes. 78 for perfection, read imperfections. 83 for contents, read he
contents. 84 for confirm, read conform: for seat, read suits for attempt,
read attempted. 85 for their phrases, read the pharisees. 86 for to fellows,
read to be fellows. 87 for prison, read poison: for sued, read stood. for
iuggle, read inueagle. 92 for what effect, read what affect. 93 for could
die, read would die: for serve men, read serve me. 95 for savor, read
seruour. 97 for rocks, read locks. 98 for profited him more, read profited
more. 99 for and for, read and offer. 100 for savor, read seruour: for like
eyes, read with eyes. 102 for exalts, read exhaleth: for leads, read
loadeth for chaste effects, read chaste affects. 106 for I knew, read he knew.
107 for we tolerate, read he tolerate. 108 for instituted, read
instituting. 113. for receites, read, rites. 114 for exalts, read exhaleth.
116 for to we, read to no. 118 for inequall, read an equal
Marginall faults.
FOlio 2. Math. 13. place against parables. 33 for eccl. ^5. read 35. 35 for
Luke 14 read 19. 42 for against S. August place, epl. ad Ianuarium: against S.
Chrysostom. place, lib. 6. de sacerd. leave out, zachar. 3. 63 against speculum,
note sap. 7. 64 for hom 67 read 17. 86 against oues and boues, note psa. 8.
against magnus dominus, note psa. 144. 109 for prou. 28. read prou. 8. 116 for
Job 2^, place Psa. 77
Finis.

