A BRIEF DISCOVRSE OF TWO most cruel and bloody murders, committed both in
Worcestershire, and both happening unhappily in the year. 1583.

The first declaring, how one unnaturally murdered his neighbor, and afterward
buried him in his Seller.

The other shows, how a woman unlawfully following the deuillish lusts of the
flesh with her servant, caused him very cruelly to kill her own Husband.

Imprinted at London. by Roger Ward, dwelling near Holburne Conduit at the
sign of the Talbot. 1583.

To the reader.
THat the days of danger and iniquity are as now, not only our own frail
nature may sufficiently certefie us: but also the irksome examples, and
unwonted prodigious spectacles, every day and hour (almost) apparent in our
eyes, may drive from us any doubt to the contrary. For if we enter into
examination with our selves, as well of our negligence of duty to our God, as
also our lack of love to our neighbor: we shall find that we are not,
neither do as the holy Evangelist wishes us, when he says: 1. John. 4.7.
Beloved, let us love one an other, for love comes of God, and every one
that looueth, is borne of God, and knows God: But he that loves not, knows
not God, for God is Love. And I find in Ecclesiasticus these words. Three
things rejoice me, and by them am I beautified before God and men: Eccle. 25.1.
the unity of Brethren, the love of neighbors, and a man and wife that
agree together. How then can we otherwise judge, but that we are in that iron
and crooked age, wherein iniquity should vaunt and show her self: being made
acquainted every day with the lack of that heavenly orname^t, Love, the memory
thereof almost defaced and pulled up by the root, in so grievous and vehement
manner, that it may be hardly said to have any abiding among us at all. And
that I may not wade into abundaunce of matter, without due proof to affirm
any thing alleged: I pray you look into these Tragical accidents
following, which, albeit they carrye terror sufficient, to forwarne the
unnatural children of this world: yet daily do fresh enormities spring up,
able (had nature so agreed) to urge the very bowelles of the earth, to yield
forth fearful acclamations against us. Shall I withold to say, that the
father has not procured the death of his own natural child: and the child
risen in like occasion against his Father? Shall I not say, the Husband has
abrydged the life of his espoused Wife and mate, and she likewise committed the
like unnatural act on her Husband? Has not one Brother murdered the other,
one neighbor killed the other, one friend been false to the other, yea, and
very nature turned against it self? These unlooked for examples are daily
before us, so that we cannot shun the sight and hearing of the^, and yet shall
we pass them over with a slender or light regard? Oh my friends, do we not
see the heavens frown? And why? Because the sins of the earth has fumed up
into the nosethrils of the Almighty, with a savor so yrksome and
insufferable: that he cannot in Justice, but strike stiff-necked Pharao, with
the rod of his fury, yea, and bereave the earth of those beneuolent
blessings, which he has suffered it so quietly to enjoy, and so great abuse
rendered unto him for them. Can we reprove the Father for disinheriting his
Son, when he seeeth his dealings such as deserves nothing? can we blame
that master, who thrusts his servant forth of his doors, when he
beholds his behavior unworthy of house-room? Even so, can we otherwise say,
that our heavenly father does unworthily cast us out of his favor, when in
stead of love, we render him hatred, for duty, negligence, and for all his
good gifts, ungracious thanks? Oh no, let us not enter into such questioning
with our selves, for if we look into our iniquity, and the^ into his mercy,
our daily falling from one sin into an other, and his so long fatherly
forbearance: we will then quickly return from the flesh pots of Egypt, and
from our own filthy and odious vomit, and every one of us say hartelie with
the Psalmist: Psalm. 51.3.
I do know mine own wickedness, and my sin is ever against me. And likewise
confess with Danyel the Prophet: Daniel 9.9.10.
To thee (O Lord God) belongs mercy and forgiveness, for we have gone away
from thee, and have not harkened to thy voice, whereby we might walk in thy
laws which thou have appointed for us. It is high time that we should thus
consider with our selves, if we but look into the present occasions offered
unto us, and mark how busy the devil is to woork ma^s utter overthrow: the
rather by 2. grievous and horrible mischances which has lately happened,
wherein may be seen, how needful it is for us to call for the grace of our
heavenly father, to strengthen us with such assured confidence, that we fall
not likewise into such evil, but may show such hearty repentance of our former
offenses, as the very wicked by our good example, may be drawn to glorify
the eternal GOD.

A most cruel and bloody Murder, committed on New-yeares even last past, being
the last day of December, 1582. in the town of Esam in Worcester shire, by one
Thomas Smith a town dweller, upon his neighbor Robert Greenoll, who when he had
cruelly murdered him, made a grave in his Seller, and there buried him.
IN Esam, a hansome market Town in Worcester shire well known, dwelled two
youngmen, who by their usual trade were Mercers, as in yt country they call
the^ so yt sell all kind of wares: the one of them they called Robert Grenoll,
a bacheler, and of such an honest conversation, as he was not only well
belooued in the Town where he dwelt, but also of those who had every market
day access thither, for their needful necessaries, so yt he was as well
customed as any occupier in ye town. The other was called Thomas Smith, of
indifferent wealth likewise, and son to one of the most substa^tial me^ in ye
town, and joined in marriage with a gentlewoma^ of very good parentage: so yt
he likewise was well thought on of most and least. This Thomas Smith, seeing
Greenoll have so good vtteraunce for his wares, and so well esteemed in each
companierif not upon this cause alone, though chiefly it be accounted so, he
began to envy the prosperous estate of him being his neighbor and friend, and
the Devil so far ruled the course of his envious intent, as nothing would
suffice the desire thereof, but only making away of Greenoll by death, which
though he had no reason for, yet such was the persuasion of the evil spirit
with him. Many platformes were laid, a thousand devises canuazed over by this
lewd man, which way he might woork the death of his friendly neighbor: at last
as the Devil wants no occasions to help man forward to his own destruction,
so he presented Smith with a fit opportunity, whereby he might execute ye sum of
his bloody will. And as the repining at our neighbors prosperity, is not only
monstrous, but a denilish nature. So had this man compassed a monstrous and
most deuilish devise, the very conceit whereof is able to astonish the heart
of a Jew, or Mahomitans recreant, and thus it was as follows.

On New-yeares even last past, this Thomas Smith longinge and desiringe the
end of his unnatural will, bearing the image of a friendly countenance in the
face, but the very perfect shape of Judas tretcherie in his heart, invited his
neighbor Greenoll to his house, where he promised to bestow a quart of wine
and an apple upon him: saying further, they would pass away the Evening
pleasauntly in friendly talk and drinking together. Greenoll being one
desirous of each man's friendship, and much the rather of his being his
neighbor, and one of the same trade himself was: nothing mistrusting the
villainous treason, hyd under so smooth a show of neighberhood, gave him thanks,
promising to come to him at night, and not to fail him. This pleased well the
bloud-thirsting man, so that home he went to determine the Instrument to do
the deed withal, and then down into his Seller he goes, to dispose a place
wherein he might convey the body when he had slain him: there he dug a
grave about six or seven inches deep, thinking there to bury him that he
should never be found. It drew toward night, when as a play was cried about
the Town, whereto both old and young did hastily repair: and this Smith
having a boy that served him in his Shop, fearing least the boy should
perceive any thing, gave him money, and bad him go fee the Play: and bring
him the whole report of the matter. This he did in the presence of Greenol, who
was come according to his promise to keep him company: and the boy having
fetched a quarte of wine and Apples as his master willed him, ran merrily to see
the Play, leaving Greenoll and his master by the fire pleasauntly talking.
They two thus sitting alone, did drink to each other very familiarly, till at
last, Greenol stouping to turn an apple in the fire, a fit time that Smith
espied to accomplish his will: who taking an iron pestell, wherewith he used
to beat his spice in the mortar, and which he had laid by him ready for the
nonce, with this pestel (as Greenoll stouped to turn the Apple) he gave him
two such mighty blows on the head, as he fell down backward to the
ground, yielding forth a very pitiful and lamentable groan. Smith hearing
him to give such a woeful groan (as himself said to me, when I came to him
into the prison) began to enter into some sorrowfulnes for the deed, wishinge
that he might recover again: but when he perceived he had smote him so sore,
that there was no hope of his recovery, he took the pestel again, and gave
him three or four more cruel strokes about the head, which made him to lie
trembling and shaking in such pitiful manner, as would have made a heart of
Adamant to melte in grief: for to behold how life and death made strife
together, life for the sweetenes, to resist death his bitterness, with many a
gasp for breath, with struggling and often folding his arms together: thus
lay this Innocent and martyred coarse. Not suffised with this, the bloody
murderer takes a knife, and therewith cut the throat of Greenol, but as Smith
himself says, he did not cut the weza^d, but pierced the skin somewhat: and
then would have stabbed him to the heart with the knife, but missed and smote him
on the shoulder blade, whereupon he struck again, and then indeed pierced him
to the heart: what a cruel and monstrous hard heart had he, that could
endure this rufull Stratageme? When he had suffised his bloody mind, upon his
friend and loouing neighbor, he drew him down into his Seller, where his
grave was ready prepared for him, and there buried him: which being done, he
smoothed it over so finelye with a Trowell that Playsterers use, so that it
could be hardly discerned, and because he would work the surer, he took
Bayles of Flax which lay in his Seller, and so shaked the shellinges thereof
on ye floor in all places, as no one could say, (but he that knew it) where
the grave was, setting likewise Drifats and Chests over it, so that he judged
it should never be found. Afterward he went and took water, wherewith he
washed and dried his house so clean in every place, yt one drop of blood could
not be espied: behold how subtly he went to work, but God, who in no
case will have bloody murder hid, prevented all his craitie policies.

Smith having thus plaide his tyrannous pageant, and having taken Greenols
keys of his shop from him, went thither and likewise robbed it, bringing a
great deal of the goods from the^re into his own house. But this by the way
is to be considered, that in the Town of Euesam, all the time of Christmas,
and at no other time, there is watch and ward kept, that no misorder or il rule
be committed in the Town, which doubtless is a very good and commendable
order. To one of the watchmen had Smith given this watch-woord, See and see
not: which was only to this end, that he might go by them unseen, when he
carried the goods out of Greenols shop to his own house. On the morrow when it
was known that Greenols shop was robde, question was made through the Town,
who was abroad that night that might be suspected, because of the Play that
was in the Town: upon which demand, the watchman to who^ this message was
sent, declared how Thomas Smith was abroad somewhat late, and sent him this
watchword, See and see not, but was meant thereby he could not gather. Upon
this, Smith was sent for before the chief of the Town, and demanded if he
knew where Grenol was, for that it was reported he had been in his house
ouer-night, and since that time no man could tell any tidinges of him:
moreover his shop was robbed as that night, and that Smith being abroad, and
sending such a by-woord See and see not, to one of the watchmen, yt was a
shrewd presumption against him to be somewhat faulty in the matter. So after
his answer, that he knew not where Greenol was become, and by his late
walkinge and words sent to the watchman, no harm was meante: they said that
they would go to search his house, whereupon Smith answered, that his house
they could not as then see. because his wife was at Kings Norto^, a Town not
far thence, and she had the keys of his house: but (quoth he) if you will
search my Seller you may, and so took the keys from his girdle and threw
the^ unto them. Then went certain that were appointed, to search Smiths
Seller, whence they were coming again without finding such matter as they
looked for: till by chance one of them happened to espy a little piece of
earth, as it were new broken out of the ground, lying under the nethermoste
staire, which he taking up, said it were good to see where any earth was
latelye broken there about, for if they chanced to find the place, some thing
might come to light worth ye beholding. Upon this council they began all to
look earnestlye about the Seller, if they could find the place where that
Earth had been broken up. At last they removed the Chests and Dryfats, where
they felt the ground more soft then all the rest: which caused them (suspecting
somewhat) to fall to digging, where presently they found Greenoll buried, not
past six or seven inches deep, and looking upon him, beheld how cruelly and
unnaturally he had been murdered. These news brought to the Baylifs of ye
town, where Smith was kept till they returned: not without great lamentation
for this bloody deed, of all that knew or heard thereof, he was sent to
Worcester Jail, where he remained till such time as the cruelty of his
vnneighbour like deed might be determined by Justice. When ye Assizes came, ye
apparaunt truth of his offense laid before the Judges, he was condemned to the
death, which he suffered very lately since: but yet by the earnest entreaty of
his Friends, who were of great wealth and credit, the severity of the law
was not altogether ministered, for whereas he should have been hanged in chains,
he had more favor showed him, he was hanged to death, and after ward buried.

Thus my Friends, have you heard the true discourse of this most bloody and
monstrous act, according as in great grief, with like sorrow for the deed,
him self did utter it, both unto me, and diners other being present,
Preachers, and Gentlemen. And truly thus much I must say, for the man truly he
was both a hansome and well featured a Youngman, as one shall lightly so, his
Father as good wealth, and one of the chiefs in the Town of Esam, and he had
been married not past eight weeks by crrbible report, before he did the deed,
to a Gentls woman of very good Parentage, who no donbt remains in great greef
for this unlooked for mischaunce, she being merty abroad with her: Friends,
when her Hasoand at home conunitted this cruel deed: I commit it to the
Judgment of all verfuous Women, what a groefe it was to her, when first she
heard of these unhappy news: But here I may not make a final pause, for that
an other horrible and wicked deed, committed in June last 1582. in the same
Sheire, constrains me to speak somewhat thereof: and for that I beheld the
death of one of ye parties, I am the more willing to pass it over in a brief
discourse.

An other most cruel and bloody Murder, committed in the same shire the same
year as the aforesaid.
AT a place called Cothridge, about four miles distant from Worcester, dwelt an
honest Hubsband-ma^, named Thomas Beast, one very well reputed among his
Neighbors, as well for his house keeping, as also for his Godly and honest
behavior. This before named Thomas Beast, kept a hansome Yongman to his
servant, called Christopher Tomson, to whom (by the wicked instigation and
provocation of ye Devil) the good Wife of ye house used far better affection,
then to her own Husband.

Often times they would carnally acquaint the^ selves together, till lust had
gotten so much power of the Woman: as she began altogether to loathe and
dislike her Husband, and prefer the fleshly dealings of her new companion so
much, as she must needs seek and practice the death of her Husband.

The Neighbors not suspecting, but credibly perceiving, the common and
dishonest behavior of this wicked woman and her lusty Yonker: began so much to
dislike thereof, as if came at last to her Husbands ears, who as well to slake
the rumor of the Prople, as also the pleasure these two unhonestly enioied:
gave his Servant warning to anoyd his house, who packed up his clothes, and
was departing: But that this filthy desirous Woman, so much prevailed in the
matter with her Husband. yt her Companion departed not, but tarried still. At
length, so great grew the hatred of this harlot against her Husband, as she
must needs have Christopher her sweet dallying Friend, to dispatch the life of
him, whereto a great while he would not consent, persuading her still from it; so
much as in him lay. But it grew to such an issue at the last, as she must needs
have her will, and Christopher must not deny her thereof, for she coniured him
by the love that he bare her, and if any way he would witness his affection
unto her, to manifest it in the killing her Husband, for (quoth she) with money
and friends I will warrant thee to save thy life, and then thou and I will live
merrily together. Oh most horrible and wicked Womon, a woman, nay a devil:
stop your ears you chaste and grave matrones, whom Gods fear, duty, true
love to your Husbands, and virtue of your selves has so beautified as nothing
ta^ be more odious unto you, then yt such a graceless strumpet should be
found, so much to dishonor your noble sex. Well, when neither entreaty, nor
all ye fair means Christopher could use, to subvert this deuilish desire:
sollemnely at the eating of a Posset, the night before he did the deed, he
promised her faithfully, to accomplish her will. On ye morrow when his Master
was in his feeld at the plow, he takes a long pike staff on his neck,
wherewith he would go do the deed: but his wicked Mistress missiking the
weapon, saying that it was nothing fit for the purpose, delivered him a Forest
Bil, which she her self had made very sharp for ye same infent, and said: Be
sure to hit him right, and thou shall speed him I warrant thee, so that he shall
never tell who did hurt him. Christopher takes this Bil on his back, and comes
into the feeld to his Master, where he began quarrelingly to say unto him
after this manner. Seeing you are willing I shall serve you no longer, give me
that which is my duty and so fare ye well, with other words of quarrel that
he used about ye sum of the money, but his Master granted him so much as he
demanded, and turning from him, to open his pursse to give him the money,
Christopher struck at him with the Bil in such cruel manner, yt there he
killed him. After the deed was done, he fled, but not far before he was
taken, when presently he exclaimed on his Mistres, how she was cause yt he
committed the deed: whereupon they were both sent to Worcester Jail, where very
often she would solicit her sweet Christopher, with money, hand kerchers,
nosegaies, and such like amorous and loouing tokens, and he besotted in his
naughty affection, would shape all his conditions to please her, the more to
witness his dissolute folly, he made a triumph (as it were) in carrying a lock
of her hair about him, and would sit kissing and delighting in any token she
sent him: beside, one day he desired the Iaylor, that if he were a Man, or one
that regarded the extreme afflictions of those, whom the tira^ny of love
possessed, that he would do so much for him, to rip forth the heart of him, and
cleaving the same in sunder, he should there behold the lively Image of his
sweet mistress, to whom (as the theefest Jewel he had) he destred him to
make a present of that pretions token.

When time came, that Justice should determine of these twain, being worthily
found guilty and condemned: she was adjudged (for an example to all light
and lascivious women) that she should be burned, and Christopher, to be
carried to the place where he did ye deed: there to be first ha^grd dead, and
afterward to be hanged up again in chains. The Assizes being holden at Esam,
she was laid upon an hurdle, and so drawn to the place of Execution, which
was without the lown: and there being bound to ye stake, and the fire made to
burn about her, her wertched carkas was soon dissolved into athes.
Christopher Tomson, he was carried back again to Worcester, where he likewise
(for an example to all lewd livers) was drawn on an hurdle about the Eittie,
and so conuayed to Cothridge, where according to his judgment he hangs in
chains.

FINIS.

