MORAL Observations.

By W.W. Gent.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for Edw: Allde, and are to be sold at his house joining to
Christ-Church. 1616.

TO THE MOST Hopeful light of true Nobility, the right honorable James Lord
Matreuers.
RIGHT honorable, the increase of years in man's life, has the best comparison
to the succeeding perfections of the worlds age: Wherein (if revelations, and
revealed teachings be excepted) we find by observation of History derived
unto us, a waxing, and waining in all Arts and actions: A breeding, an
infancy, a towardlines, a perfection and state, and then a d^clyning, so that
such inspection of the worlds storye, is a fit representation to be considered
for the formatiue trayning of our particulariti^s from the first, and weakest
capacity of instruction, to the last and strongest ability of performance:
which will produce the best, and most enabled endurance of understanding vigor
in the declining years: which though naturally they breed decay in strength,
and power of natural functions, yet with such Custom of use, in the long and
constant exercise of a virtuous mind, cannot want sufficiency of all possible
supportment, that may be expected from the true grounds of a well tempered
understanding. Those things which full years having attained can teach others,
are not fit to be presented unto such years, but serve as fruits already
rypened, to be laid, and kept in store, at seasonable times to be bestowed on
children and younger years. Such be these observations, which I present to
your honor, desiring therein nothing more, then the commending of ready will to
do all honest and serviceable duties to your Lordshippe.

Your Honors humbly to be commanded William Win.

Moral Observations.
Use of Time, books, and reading.
AMong all things precious, nothing is more precious, nor any thing so much
ours, as Time.

2 Every hour is to be embraced in our arms; for he, that has his hand in
today, shall the less care for tomorrow.

3 The first sign of a well composed mind, is to settle with it self, or to
stay at home. Secum morari. Sen:

4 The turning over of diverse volumes together, breeds confusion; it tastes
somewhat of a wandering and unstable disposition. Nusqua^ est, qui vbique est.

5 Who runs thus on Pilgrimage, meets with many Innes, and few friends; he
sees much, and learnes little.

6 Nothing more offenciue to health, then variety of remedies; A Plant often
transplanted, seldom prospers; and a multitude of books, distract the mind.

7 Read choice, and approved Authors; and when you grow weary, leave, and
retire to the same again.

8 Though we cannot read all we have, yet (which is better) let us have all we
read.

9 In much reading, something will offer it self to your observation, use, or
service; Let not that slip indigested, or till meditation have made it your
own.

10 Sometimes, it is not amiss, with Seneca to visit the tents of strangers, yet
not as a fugitive, but as an intelligencer.

11 The use of books is to be lymitted, as the use of meats, according to the
quality of the vser; for in all things, what is too little for one may ouerlaye
another; Theref^re, the best is, not to desire abundance, but enough, this is
always profitable, yet sometimes hurtful. Omne nimiu^, vertitur in vitiu^

Choice of a Friend.
When you esteem any to be your friend, whom you dare not trust as your
self; you may think you are therein deceived, as not discerning betwixt an
acquaintance and a friend, or not well understanding the nature, and power of
friendship.

2 A man full of employment, and acquaintance, can have no greater misery,
then to repute those for his friends, to whom he is no friend himself.

3 Before friendship consider, after friendship trust.

4 I say consider long before you admit any to be your friend, but once being
admitted, entertain him in your bosom, lodge him in your heart, and talk
with him, as with your self.

5 Some there are, who to every one they meet, will utter what they should
only impart to their friends, and tell all they feel itching in their own
ears; others again are so scrupulous, that the honest conscience of their
dearest friend, is not worthy of their secret; and if it were possible, they
would conceal it from themselves. Neither of these, is to be liked; for it is
an equal fault, to trust all, and to trust none. Vtrumque vitiu^ est, et
omnibus credere, and nulli.

6 Consult freely with your friend of all things, but first of your self.

7 True friends will stand fast in adversity; they will love, and frequent
those most that of Fortune are most forsaken. Amicus certus, in re incerta
cernitur.

Wit and Memory.
I Had rather have a good, then an excellent wit, for that will not stoop to
vildnesse, and this is flexible to any thing.

2 Great faults have seldom issued, but from great wits.

3 A great Memory, is a large stoarehouse, full of black smoaky imaginations,
and yrkesome toils.

4 In the remembrance of many things, few yield contentment; many vexation; and
often times, the very delights thereof are troublesome.

5 Of all other, the remembrance of an ill name, is most heavy and sad, even
in the midst of all honor; so tender, delicate, and incurable above
whatsoever else, is Fame.

6 Great molestation, is the inseparable Companion of great memory; for some
matters remembered sting the Conscience: some wound it; other terrify, and
utterly confound it.

7 But why do so many boast of their Memory, and yet forget both the Time,
and themselves.

8 All err in this; that they desire to learn things worthy to be forgotten,
and forget what is fit to be learned.

9 Will you know the best memory? then observe this; remember your sin, that
you may be sorry: remember your Death, that you may forbear: remember Gods
justice, that you may fear: remember his mercy, that you may not despair.
Quid memoriam jactas? vnde haec obliuio diei vnius? vnde tui ipsius?

Virtue.
THe nature of virtue, is to attend, not so much what she has done, as what
she is yet to do; not so much what she enjoys, as what she wants; from
whence it is that she gloryes not in what she has, but is sollicitous about
that she has not.

2. Me thinks, if (it were lawful) I could say, Virtue is covetous, or much
like to Avarice; For she continually thirsts, burns, longs: the more
she seeks, and finds, the poorer she seems, having no mean in her
desires; and worthily: For indeed, the heap of true honor, and merit, can
never be too great.

3. Virtue is no Braggard, no admirer of her self, but an humble follower of
others; And when she aspires and sits highest, then she reckons her self
least.

4. Virtue knows this to be the time of warfare, not of triumph; Therefore
she is ever watching, ever in action. Virtus p^^it et in action, la^^ss^^^
proficis.

Opinion.
WHo thinks he is arrived to the point, or height of perfection, is first
deceived in this; That he believed himself to be, where he is not; next he
forsakes the right way by going wrong; and by anticipating what he has not,
wittingly preuents, what he might have had.

2. There is no such Adversary, or hinderance to the pursuit of virtue, as the
opinion of perfection; For who will labor for that which he thinks fit has
already?

3. If I have any thing in me that is good, I know from whom it comes, and I
am glad; If I want any thing, I know of whom to ask, and of him will I hope
for it.

4. Opinion alters no matter, no laws, no effect.

5. Vain hopers, and lovers, are like wishers and woulders, all
selfe-deceiuers, and never to be trusted.

6. What if my Neighbors magnify my name? May not each of them deceive
another, and all deceive me?

7. The Cittyes, or Towns acclamations, should never make me think the better
of my self; For in my inward soul, there is a more certain, and incorrupt
witness of me; my Conscience; She will tell me true, and I will trust her.

8. Opinion is but a certain name, to an uncertain matter.

9. He that is good in his own opinion; is stark naught in very deed; For
good men are with none so much displeased, as with themselves.

10. But I seem not good to my self alone, but to others also: Yet what if I
be naught and those other Fools?

11. It is ill to deceive others, but worse to deceive your self.

12. Why, but all men speak well of me; Oh joyful news; But shall I be so
unreasonable, as to believe all men? Opiniorem non mutat.

Vulgar Example.
THere is no known way so ready, and headlong to error, as by the example and
steps of the vulgar.

2 To please the vulgar, is to displease God.

3 Who lays up his hopes, or settles his praises in the Common people, is like
him, that sets withered plants, in barren plots.

4 Whatsoever the vulgar thinks, is uncertain: Whatsoever it speaks is false,
Whatsoever it blames, is good,
Whatsoever it allows is naught:
Whatsoever it praises, is infamous,
Whatsoever it does, is foolish.
Qui vulgi latratus far didicit, nullos horrebit Canes.

Liberty.
NOt he that is borne, is free, but he that is buried; for over the first,
Fortune has great power, over the latter none at all.

2 We must not think our selves free because we are without Lord or Master:
for we cannot be ignorant, at what years Hecuba, and Cresus began to serve.

3 Let no man swell with his freedom, and liberty; for not only free men, but
Kings have been brought to thraldom.

4 Unworthy restraynt, is better then unworthy liberty.

5 No restraint so strict, no poison so noisome, as the Cage of our own
Carcass; in which yet we love to live, as fearful, and loath to be rid out.

6 Others write books in prison, and you utter bootlesse sighs, and tears;
others get knowledge, and will you forget patience?

7 Many for the love of God, or hatred of the world, or some other good end,
have chosen to live in Caves, and holes: and if I cannot be of that mind but
that I would feign be free, I must expect, till Man or Death, (who keeps an
other Key) work my delivery.

8 Most Prisons have but one way in, and many ways out: mercy delivers some,
Justice others, Innocence others; some get out by wit, some by money; some by
the honest Keepers negligence, some by favor of the night; (an Earthquake may
happen, to shake down the walls) and others whom nothing else can help, Death
will deliver.

9 Prisons have sent foam forth to their greater glory, others to excellent
Fortunes, many to heaven, and all to their graves: to conclude, they receive
none, whom they render not again. Quibusdem, omnis vita supplicium visa est.

Praise of Native Soil.
LIttle auailes it any man to be borne in a famous soil, unless he harbor
virtue, and hate vice in himself.

2 The chief praise of any Country, is the virtue of the men.

3 Cataline had not been so infamous, but that his Country was so famous.

4 The eminency of a great, and famous City, holds many obscure, and of small
account, whom the obscurity, of a bare-country-Village, would have made
eminent, and of much repute.

5 Your Country will be sure to challenge its own praise, and participate with
yours, for whatsoever you do nobly, or well, is in manner, your countries
praise first, and yours after.

6 Plato thanked, and praisd Nature; first for making him a reasonable
creature, and not a mere Animal; a man, and not a woman; a Grecian, not a
Barbarian; an Athenian, not a Theban; and lastly, for being borne in Socrates
time, of whom he might receive the further benefit of instruction and
learning. Nihil aeque Civitates amplificat, vt Ciuium virtus, ac gloria.

Noble decent, praise, glory.
THe merits of noble and worthy Parents, are marks to degenerate Children,
nothing more detecting the posterities vice, then the Parents virtue.

2 The virtue of one, may, and does often help, and profit another, but if you
raise not glory, and praise for your self, never expect them from an other.

3 The father may love his son, and leave him his land, but never make him
laudable: hence it is, that often times an infinite ecclips of the fathers light,
is suffered in the son.

4 The shining glory of Ancestors, is good in this, that the posterity cannot
live hidden, though it would.

5 Glory is not gotten by noble birth, but by noble life; yea, (which is
admirable) often by Death. Nobilis non nascitur, sed fit.

Imitation.
THe Imitation of great persons, is neither safe, nor necessary for all men:
every feathered Foul cannot soar after the Eagle: some Imitators, will do
cleave contrary; others, another thing; others, the same thing an other way;
and few will Imitate to the full, as their example did lead them.

2 I know not how it falls out, that the virtues of our own line, are less
imitable to our selves, then to others; unless it be, that virtue will not
seem hereditary: I speak faintly, but the thing it self speaks freely; The
excellent son, of an excellent Father is rarely seen.

Raro excellentis viri, filius excellens fuit.

Comportment.
Whatsoever you do, so do it as if your enemies stood by.

2 That comportment is much better, that makes your Enemies admire you, then
inuites your friends to excuse you; and cleerer is that Fame, against which
none can object truly, nor dares falsely, then that, which is once touched, and
then purged. Talis post exitu^ fama est, qualis ante exitum vita.

Dyce-play.
DYce-play: oh insatiable, and huge deuourer; sad, and sudden waster of
Patrymonyes; minds fury, and perturbation; Fames obscurity, spur of sin,
and path of desperation.

2 No prosperous end of Dyce-play, but all naught, all miserable; for both the
looser is afflicted, and the winner entrapped.

3 What if you have played, and won? may you not play again and loose?

4 What you have won, a thousand are watching to get from you, and that you
have lost, none will restore to you.

5 How many strange things have we seen done by very valiant, and worthy men
at play, for a little money, which at other times, and places, the same men,
would not have done, for any earthly treasure? But there, is the kingdom where
all vice reigns; especially Avarice, and Anger.

6 Lusi, vici, gaudio; I have played, I have won, and now I rejoice: Oh impure
play, oh damnable gain: oh vain joy.

7 Let this suffice; that all gladness in our own hurt, is madness; all joy
in the same, mere folly. Omne de suo malo gaudium, stultum est.

Stage Plays and Players.
PLayers move me to laugh; but what do you move them to? How often has the
Player laughed in his sleeue at his best spectator, for laughing at him? how
often musing at the madness of his admyrers, has he seyned that, whereby, he
has falsely pleased them, and truly pleased himself?

2 He that entertaines Players, has whereat to laugh, and as heartily to be
laughed at, yea, and whereby, to be eaten up. Qui te rideant, and rodant.

3 It is a consequent; that who finds taste in what is ill, is ever ignorant in
that is good; nor in truth, can they be acquainted with noble actions, that are
taken with vile, and base pleasures.

4 Who delights to see Plays, delights to see that, which can neither be
honestly shown, nor honestly seen, and hard it is to say, whether the Actor,
or spectator be more infamous; the Stage, or the Stews, the one being drawn
with beggary, the other with vanity.

5 Many, whom Nature had framed gentle, and mild, Plays have made fierce, and
cruel: man's mind prone to vice, should rather be bridled, then urged; for
though it be left to it self, it hardly stays, but being driven, it runs
headlong, after the old Age, They must needs go, whom the Devil drives.

6 Many mischiefs are conuayed by the eats, but many more by the eyes; for at
the eyes, as at two open windows, Death breaks in with violence, to the soul;
The memory takes no impression so powerfully, as by the eyes; or ears often,
and lightly let in, and let out again; but what we see, (unless we see
unwillingly) sticks fast: whether then do you go? or what fury hales you on
to Plays? where you may be pleased for an hour, and displeased for ever;
where you shall see that once, which a thousand times, you will wish, you had
never seen.

7 The Fame, and reputation of women, have been left, and lost at public
spectacles, and Plays; many have returned bold, and wanton from them; many, and
many again doubtful, and wavering: But chaster, and soberer then they went,
none, Acies Histrionum, est sicut Muscaru^, quae vnctu^ comitantur, siccumque
destituant.

Wisdom, Fortune, Folly.
Wisdom, and Fortune, rarely agree well together.

2 Fortune tells you, you are wise because you are wealthy; and makes you bold
to say so: oh but hear, and believe Reason; if it were so indeed, you would
never say so.

3 Things would go well, if there were as many wise men, as professors of
wisdom.

4 The first degree of a fool, is to think himself wise; the next, to say so.

5 Not to wish for that we cannot have, but well to use what we have, is true
wisdom: the first is common, the latter rare. Sapientia, bonorum rector est,
malorum victor.
Facere docet philosophia, non dicere.


Vicinitie, and Enmity.
IT is commonly seen, that where is nearest vicinity of houses, there is
farthest distance of hearts: Nere neighbors, are seeldom free from iarres, and
quarrels.

2 Many, will impute their own faults to their neighbor; so easily they can
see, so exactly discuss, and seuerly censure their Neighbors defects; but
(alas) their own, they judge, examine, and behold with the eyes of favor and
pity.

3. The more Enemies, the more cause to be aware, and better known; for how
many worthies, had slept out their lives in obscurity, had they not been
awaked by Enmity? Bias bids so love our friends, as they may become our foes,
which council, though allowed by many, I like not; for it is the true bane of
friendship. Therefore, in my hatred, I had rather think of love, then in my
love think of hatred; I will not love so, as I may hate; but if I hate, it
shall be so, as I may love again. Nulla Necessitudo est, qua non odijs esse
possit infecta; sola Amicitia sincera, mali huius ignare est: nec magis odiosus
Amicus, quam Amor etiam odiosus.

Piety to Parents.
THe fathers hardness, has often proved the sons happiness; his
tenderness, the others destruction.

2. If you endure a hard father now, remember the hard son, he has suffered
of you before.

3 There is no cause of a hard sons complaint, against his hard father; for
hard mettalls are sooner mollified by their like; and many times, tender-handed
Chirurgians leave the Fouler scarres:

4 Fatherly frowns are lawfully excused by zeal, by Care, by fear, by age.

5 Of our Parents, we must ever make honorable mention, or none at all.

6. I must never judge of my father, but rather be judged by him, as the
secondary Author of my being: and if he be not capable of true praise, I will
reverence him with comely silence.

7. There is no power on earth more just, then that of the father over the
son; nor any service more honest, and due, then that of the son to the
father.

8 If my father be yet living, I will serve, and attend him with duty, and
diligence; for an old Father, is a dying Comfort.

9 My father being old, I had not need to be idle: therefore, I will be busy
in gathering the last fruits of him, as of a falling tree: I will always be as
near him as I can, I will be desirous to see him; as one ready to take his
leave of me, and more desirous to hear him: his last words will I lay up in
the Closet of my heart: They will help to defend me, in the desert of this
world, for when I would have his council, I shall seek him, and not find him
at home.

10 If my father be impotent, and decrepit, I will tender unto him the last
offices of pyety, and service; for if I omit them now, they will vpbraid me
hereafter.

11 The Fathers love is great, the Mothers vehement: both such, and so great as
scarce any Childs can be equal. Nihil tam suum cuique est, qua^ filius Pat^i,
nihil cuique in digntus eripitur.

FINIS.

