An excellent Epitaffe of sir Thomas wyat, with two other compendious dytties,
wherein are touchyd, and set forth the state of man's life.


WYat rests here, that quick could never rest.
Whose heavenly gifts, increased by desdayne
And virtue sanke, the deper in his breast
Such profit he, of envy could obtain
A Head, where wysdom mysteries did frame
Whose hammers beat still in that lively brain
As on a styth, where some work of fame
Was daily wrought, to turn to Brytayns game
A Uysage stern and mylde, where both did groo
Uyce to contempne, in virtues to rejoice
Amyd great storms, whom grace assured so
To live vprighte and smyle at fortunes choice.
A Hand that taught what might be said in rhyme
That refte Chaucer, the glory of his wit
A mark, the whi^he (vnperfited for time)
Some may approach but never none shall hit:
A Tongue, that served in foraine realms his king
Whose curtoise talk, to virtue did inflame.
Each noble heart a worthy guide to bring
Our Englyishe youth, by travail unto fame.
An Eye, whose judgment, no affect could blind
Friends to allure, and foes to reconcyle
Whose pearcynge look, did represent a mind.
with virtue fraught, reposed, void of gyle.
A Heart, where dread yet never so impressed
To hide the thought yt might the troth auaunce
In neither fortune lift nor so represt
To swell in wealth, nor yield unto mischaunce
A valiant Corpse, where force and beautye met
Happy, alas, to happy but for foos.
Lived, and ran ^he race that nature set
Of manhodes shape, where she the mold did loos
But to the heavens that simple soul is fleed.
Which left with such, as covet Christ to know
witness of faith that never shall be dead
Sent for our wealth, but not received so
Thus for our gylt, this jewel have we lost
The earth his bones, the heaven possess his ghost
AMEN.
The myrroure or Glass of Fortune.
When fortune favors, and sets a loft
In hye estate man for to reign
Then all men comes to him sull often
And couey^s with him, for to remain
His company none will disdain,
Thus friends he gets, many a one
But if he fall, I say certain.
Of all his friends then has he none.
When he does rule him they obey
And serve him still, at all assayes
Attentifely, without delay.
Great pains they take both nights and days
With all their power him for to please
Thus friends he gets many a one
But if he fall they turn their ways.
Of all his friends then has he none:
As long as he, is in his wealth
Nothing to him than shall be dear.
In his estate, have he his health
All honor to him than shall appear
Of most and lest, both far and nere
Thus friends he gets many one
But if he fall, than every where,
Of al his friends, than has he none.
Man thus a loft, knows not his friend.
For all men than, to him apply
Showing them selves, to him most kind.
As though they would both live and dye
At his bidding always ready,
Thus friends he gets many a one
But if he fall they him deny
Of all his friends, than has he none.
In his estate they will ensewe
To follow him all that they may
In right or wrong, false or true
His will truly, none will gaynesaye
Though by and by they him bewraye
Such feigned friends, be many one
And if he fall they him denaye
Of all his friends, than has he none.
When fortune on the does laugh or smyle
Geuynge the great possessyon
Belowly and gentle all the while
Thinking on her progression
Some she exalts, some by suppression
Falls under foot, as does many one
So turns the whele, without intercession
Some to good chance, and some to none.
When thou art down, farewell a dew
No more service, thou have at all
When broken is thy retinew
On thy name than no man will call
Disdaynfull words, on the go shall
Foes thou shall have, many a one
Which will rejoice, at thy great fall
Of all thy friends, than have thou none.
Thus under foot when thou art brought
Whom thou do favor most of all
By the truly will set right naught
Scant a good word give the he shall
Unmyndfull how beneficial
Thou wast than to many a one
And when thy dignity does fall
Of all thy friends, than have thou none.
Thus fares the world, both to and fro
When man is in adversity
Who is he than, that will him know
Or help him in extremity
When he is stricke, without pity
With the foul darte, of cruel disdain
None than on him shall have mercy
Lie he in woe, pynynge in pain.
Finis.
A compendious dittie Wherein is touched the state of ma^s life,
NO wight in this world, that wealth can attain
Onelesse he believe, that all is but vain
And look how it comes, so leave it to go
As tides use their times, to ebb and to flo,
This mucke on the molde, that men so desire
Does work them much woe, and moves the^ to ire
With grefe it is got, with care it is kept
With sorrow sone lost, that long has ben'repte
And woe worth that man, that first dolue the moulde
To find out the mine, of silver and gold
For when it lay hyd, and to us unknown
Of strife and debate, the sede was not sown
Than lived man well and held them content
With meat, drink and cloth without any rent
Their houses but poor to shroude them selves in
For castles and towers, were than to begine
No town had his wall, they feared no war
Nor ennemies host to seek them afar
So led they their lives in quiet and rest
Till hourde began hate from East unto west
And gold for to grow a lord of great price
Which changed the world from virtue to vice
And turned all thing so far from his kind
That how it should be, is worn out of mind
For richesse bears now the fame and the brute
And only the cause of all our pursuit.
Which makes among us much mischief to reign
And shall till we seek the right way again
when marriage was made for virtue and love,
Than was no divorce gods knette to remove.
when judges would suffer no brybes in their syghte,
Their judgments was than according to right
when prelates had not possessions nor rent
They preached the truth and truly they went
when men did not flatter for favor nor mede,
Than kings herd the truth, and how the world yede
And men unto honor through virtue did rise
But all this is turned contrariwise
For money makes all, and rules as a god
Which ought not to be, for Christ it forbod
And bad that we should take nothing in hand
But for the lords love, and wealth of the land
And wills us full often, that we should refrain
From wrastynge his will, to make our own gain,
For covetous folk of every astate.
As hardely shall enter within heaven gate
As through a nedles eye a camel to crepe
Why do these mad me^ the^ hourde up and keep,
Ye more then may serve them selves to suffice
As though perfect bliss should that way arise
But if they would suffer to sink in their breast
What trouble of mind what unquiet rest
What myschiefe, what hate this money does bring,
They would not so toil for so vile a thing
For they that have much, are ever in care
Which way to win, and how for to spare
Their slepes be unsound for fear of the thief
The loss of a littell does work them much grefe
In sekyng their lack they want that they have
And subject to that which should be their slave
They never do know, whiles riches does reygne
Attend of effect from him that does seygne
For flatterers seek where fortune does dwell
And when that she lowreth, they bid the^ farewell
The poor does them curse as often as they want
In having so much to make it so scant
Their children somtymes do wysshe them in grave
That they might possess that richesse they have
And that which they wine with travail and strife
Oftentimes (as we se) does cost them their life
To these be the fruits that richesse brings forth
With many other mo, which be no more worth
For money is cause of murder and theft
Of bataile and bloodshed, which would god wer^left
Of rauyne, of wrong, of false witness bearyng
Of treason conspired, and eke of forswearynge.
And for to be short and knyt up the knot
Few mischeues at all that money makethe not.
But though it be ill, when it is abused,
Yet nevertheless it may be well used.
Nor I do not find, that men be denyde
Of sufficient things them selves to provide,
According as god has put them in place,
To have and to hold a time and space:
So it be well won and after well spent:
For it is not theirs, but for that intent,
And if they so do, than it is good skyll,
They have that is mete to use at their will
As priests should not take promocions in hand
To live at their ease like lords of the land
But only to feade gods flock with the truth
To preach and to teach without any sloth
Nor folks should not neade great riches to win
But godly to live and for to flee sin
His will for to work that is their souls health
And tha^ may they think, they live in much wealth
For in this vain world that we be now in
Is nothing but misery, myschefe and sin
Temptation, untruth, contencion, and strife
Than let us not set by so vile a life
But lift up our eyes, and look through our faith
Beholdynge his mercies, that many times says
The just men shall live by their good belefe
And shall have a place where can be no grefe
But gladness and mirth that none can amend
Unspeakable toys, which never shall end
With pleasures that pass all that we have sought
Felicities such as can not be thought
Which place they shall have that his will intendes
With life everlasting, and thus my tale ends.
Vinit post funera uirtus.
Imprvnted at London by John Herforde for Roberte Toye.

