HOROLOGIOGRAPHIA NOCTVRNA.

OR LVNAR HOROLOGIOGRAPHIE.

Set forth and demonstrated (after a twofold manner) in the Horizontall Plane
only.

Upon which (and all other by the same reason) may in a manner, as plainly and
speedily be discerned the t^mes of the Night by the Gnomonicall shadow, caused
by the Moon, as the times of the Day upon any by the Sun: Serving as well in
the day time for the Sun.

By JOHN WYBERD.

Together with an Addition of certain new and brief Rules for the exact and
most speedy mensuration of Circles and Spheres, and also Cylinders, both in
solid and liquid measure, by certain plain Scales only, not heretofore
published, but now set forth for the benefit of all those that have occasion to
make use of such things.

Est natura hominum novitatis avida. Plin.

LONDON Printed by Tho. Cotes. 1639.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE HORIZONTALL LVNAR DYALL.
THe making of this Dyall depends upon the most (...) observation of the
Moons Mediation of the Heaven, or coming to the Meridian, as the little Note
or Table here following does show; and which Master Digges in his general
Prognostication, Mr. Hopton in his Concordancie of Years, and most others have
and do still chiefly observe and follow: Which observation or rule, although
it seems not always to hold very precise, by reason of the various and
sundry motions of the Moon, yet is it not so much amiss, or dissenting from
the truth, but that the time of the night (the Moon shining) may be thereby
sufficiently known, without any sensible error to be regarded, as the before
named Authors (accounted good Mathematicians in their times, and which their
works do still testify) have in those books set down without any stricter
observations: And as I my self also have very often observed, when the Moon
has shined upon an Horizontall or other Sun-Dyall, by the shadow of the Style
or Gnomon, and comparing the same with other sufficient ways, have found them
to accord without any plainly perceptible difference: For having searched out
the true time of the Moons mediating, or culminating of heaven, for any night,
appointed in a place certain (which is not very easily done) the true hour at
any time of that night may be found, the Moon shining upon any true Sun-Dyall
in the same place: Because the defect or excess of the stylar shadow in time,
in respect of the hour of 12. upon the Dyall, being deducted from, or added to
the aforesaid time, gives the true hour or time of that night: which thing
although it be well known to many (as a common rule) yet unknown to most men,
for every man is not acquainted with the Moons said mediation, or has
knowledge artificially to get the times of the same, and none but such as have
some insight into astronomicall affairs, or perhaps knowing the same by some
ordinary means (as many do) yet cannot readily make subduction or addition of
the said defect, or excess (as occasion shall require) unless the same do
chance to fall justly upon some (...) and entire time on the Dyall, at the time
of observation, and therefore it must needs be very convenient to have a
Dyall, that shall even as readily (without any trouble) show the hour of the
night by the Moon, as the hour of the day by the Sun: So that the time of
the Moons coming to the Meridian (whatsoever time it be) is presupposed to
stand in the Meridian line or line of North and South on the Dyall, in the
place of the hour of 12. which time being fore-knowne for any night appointed:
If the houre-lines be so drawn on the Plane (in a due order) that the time of
the Moons coming to the Meridian, shall fall precisely in the said Meridian
line, or line of North and South: I say then that these houre-lines being thus
disposed, shall readily and precisely enough show the hour of the same night,
at any time thereof when it shall be required, if the Moon shines on the
Plane: yet it must not be expected that any Dyall should be made (for
continuance) to show the hour of the night by the Moon always so exactly as
the hour of the day by the Sun, by reason of the various course and motion of
the Moon, in respect of the Sun, as before is said; but exactly enough for
ordinary use: And hereupon is framed this Dyall, which here we have in hand,
according to this little Note or Table, hereto annexed as I said before: In the
first column whereof, are contained the days of the Moons age, reckoned from
the time of her change, or conjunction with the Sun: In the second is
contained the time of her coming to the Meridian or South point, answering to
each day of her age; for although the Moon being full South, shaddoweth
always upon the hour of 12. in the Dyall; yet does she not always come to
the South at the hour of 12. and never, unless in the day of her conjunction
or opposition to the Sun, and then at Midday in the one, and Midnight in
the other, or thereabouts; whereby it appears that for several days of the
Moon, there must be (as it were) several Dyals, so contrived (on one and the
same Plane) that each of them may readily show the times of that night, unto
which it properly belongs: And therefore to proceed to our present purpose:
you shall first prepare a square piece of fitting and well seasoned wood, that
will not warpe or bend, or of brass, or other metal, or of stone, according
as you shall please, which (for the more conveniencie in use) had need to
contain in breadth about 12. inches; the larger it is, the better: Now,
because the Moon, in the day next after her change or conjunction, and
likewise on the day next after her Full, or opposition to the Sun, that is,
she being one day, and sixteen days old, observes the same (or much like)
time in her Age of the Moon. Her coming to the Meridian. Days. H. M. 1 16 12
48 2 17 1 36 3 18 2 24 4 19 3 12 5 20 4 00 6 21 4 48 7 22 5 36 8 23 6 24 9 24 7
12 10 25 8 00 11 26 8 48 12 27 9 30 13 28 10 24 14 29 11 12 15 30 12 00 coming
to the Meridian or Mid-heaven, and likewise being two days and seventeene
days old, and so the rest in their order, (as you may observe in this Table)
but contrary or opposite times of the day; the first happening afternoon,
that is to say, between Noone or Midday and the Midnight following, and the
other in the morning or before Noone, that is, between Midnight and the
Midday following: You shall therefore upon your said Square or Plane, describe
fifteen Concentrique circles, serving for the thirty days of the Moon (or
Synodicall month) of equal and convenient distance one from another, drawing
the outermost circle as large as conveniently you can: So that circle which is
next to the Center, shall most fitly serve for one day, and sixteen days of
the Moons age: the second for two days and seventeene days: the third for
three days and eighteen days: the fourth for four days and nineteen: the
fifth for five days and twenty days, and so all the rest in their order, as
the second figure does show (but for the three first days of the Moon, there
is seldom any use of the three first circles next the Center, because it is
most commonly the fourth day after the change, before she shines in the
Horizon) then upon a large sheet of paper or paist board, draw the common
houre-lines of the Horizontall Plane, (out at length) according to the
elevation of the Pole; and for the more conveniencie in the making of this
Dyall, it is best to divide each houre-space of the equinoctial circle, by
which you drew those houre-lines into five equal parts, and then marking them
out upon the line of contingencie, you shall by those marks there made, draw
out of the center of your houre-lines, obscure radiall lines at length, which
will accordingly divide each hour into five parts, and so each part will
contain twelve minutes of an hour, by which division you may readily and
exactly set off on your Dyall any number of minutes set down in the former
Table, as pertaining to the hour of the Moons coming to the Meridian, as
shall presently be showed: this being done, you shall upon the Center of your
houre-lines so drawn, describe fifteen obscure Circles, equal to those on
your Plane, whereby you Place this Figure next after page ^^
shall set down the hours and their parts upon every Circle of your Plane, in
their due position and distances one from another: All which things, this first
figure does demonstrate, which although it may seem unto many to be needless,
yet I have thought it convenient here to describe the same for the better
satisfying of such as are not thoroughly experienced in these matters, and
therefore do desire plain demonstrative instructions: these things being thus
prepared, you must resort to the former Table, and there find the time of the
Moons coming to the Meridian or South point, for any day of her age: So I
find that the Moon being at the age of one day, or sixteen days, comes to
the aforesaid place at 48. minutes after Midday in the one, and Midnight in
the other: whereupon the Meridian or 12, a clock line in the first figure,
does not then represent the hour of 12. but 48. minutes past the same, and the
houre-line of 11. 48, minutes past 11. likewise the houre-line of 1. 48.
minutes past 1. and so all the rest in their order: which being known, I set
off the hours from the Meridian line after this manner: I take with my
Compasses the distance between the hour of 12. in the Meridian line, and 48.
minutes past the same, in the first circle on my houre-lines formerly drawn,
being the next four parts of the five, which are contained between the
houre-lines of 12. and 1. or 12. and 11. (because, as I said before, each hour
being divided into five parts, each of those parts, will contain twelve
minutes, and therefore four of them 48. minutes, as the first figure shows)
then placing one foot of my Compasses in the Miridian line of the Plane upon
the like circle; with the other I mark down the hour of 12. toward the
right hand: Also I take the distance between the hour of 12. (as before) and
48. minutes past the hour of 11. (being the next four parts of the five,
between the houre-lines of 11. and 10.) and setting one foot of my Compasses
in the Meridian line of the Plane, with the other I mark down the hour of
11. So I take 48. minutes or four parts past the houre-lines of 10. 9. and 8.
from the Meridian or 12. a clock line of my houre-lines, to set down the
hours of 10. 9. and 8. from the Meridian line on the Plane; and so the rest on
that side of the Meridian line: Then to place^ the hour of 1. (and
consequently the rest of the hours, which fall on the other side of the same
line) I take the distance between the hour of 12. (as before) and twelve
minutes past the same, being the first of the five parts between the
houre-line^s of 12. and 1. (because the hour of 1. falls here^ within twelve
minutes of the Miridian) and with that distance I set down the hour of 1. So
I take twelve minutes or one part past the houre-lines, of 1. 2. 3. and 4. to
set off the hours of 2. 3. 4. and 5. from the Meridian line on the Plane, and
so all the other on that side of the same^ line, as many as shall be needful.
Then to place the hours for two days and seventee^ne daye^s of the Moon, I
look into the former Table, and there I find the time of her coming to the
Meridian, to be at 36. minutes past one of the clock, afternoon in the one,
and after Midnight or in the morning in the other: which time must here be
supposed to stand in the Meridian line in the place of the hour of 12. and
therefore the houre-line of 11. must needs signify 36. minutes past 12. and
the houre-line^ of 1. 36. minutes, past 2. and so all other before^ and afte^r
must signify accordingly: wherefore placing one foot of my Compasses in the
Meridian or 12. a clock line (as before) on the second Circle of mine
houre-lines, I extend the other unto 36. minutes past the same, being the three
next parts of the five between the houre-lines of 12. and 11. Then setting one
foot upon the Meridian line on the Plane in the like Circle, with the other I
prick down the hour of 1. toward the right hand. So I take 36. minutes or
3. parts beyond the houre-lines of 11. 10. 9. and 8. etc. to set down the
hours of 12. 11. 10. and 9 etc. from the Meridian line on the plane.^ Then for
the hours on the other side of this line, because that here the hour of 2.
falls within 24. minutes of the South point: I take 24. minutes or two parts
from the Meridian or 12. a clock line of my houre^-lines, and there with I set
down the hour of 2. on my Plane: In like manner I take 24. minutes or two
parts beyond the houre-lines of 1. 2. 3. and 4. etc. to set of the hours of 3.
4. 5. and 6. etc. Then for three^ days and eighteen days of the Moon; I
find by the former Table, that she then comes to the South at 14. minutes
past two of the clock afternoon in the one, and in the morning in the other:
wherefore I take two parts beyond the houre-lines of 12. 11. 10 9. etc. in the
third Circle upon my hourelines, and there with I set off the hours of 2. 1.
12. and 11. etc. from the Meridian line upon the like Circle toward the right
hand: Then for the hours on the other side; because that here the hour of 2.
falls from the Meridian or South point, by 24. minutes of time, on the one
side thereof, therefore the hour of three falls from thence on the other
side by 36. minutes: wherefore I take 36. minutes or three parts beyond the
houre-lines of 12. 1. 2. and 3. etc. and therewith I set off the hours of 3.
4. 5. and 6. etc. Then for the fourth and nineteenth days of the Moon; I
find that she then comes to the Meridian at 12. minutes past 3. of the
clock afternoon in the one, and in the morning in the other: wherefore I
take one part (or 12. minutes) beyond the houre-lines of 12. 11. 10. 9. etc.
upon the fourth Circle of mine houre-lines, and therewith I set down the
hours of 3. 2. 1. 12, etc. on one side of the Meridian line upon the like
circle: Then because the hour of 3. falls here within 12. minutes of the
Meridian on one side thereof, the hour of 4. will fall from thence on the
other side by 48. minutes, and therefore I take four parts beyond the
houre-lines of 12. 1. 2. and 3. etc and therewith I set off the hours of 4. 5.
6. and 7. etc. Lastly, to place the hours for the Moons age of five days,
and twenty days, I look in the aforesaid Table; where I find the time of her
coming to the Meridian, answerable to those days, to be just at four of the
clock afternoon in the one, and in the morning in the other; which hour
being placed in the Meridian line on the fifth circle from the Center; the
hours on both sides thereof, must be set off from thence, after the same
manner, as the hours are on both sides of the hour of 12. when it stands in
the Meridian line, (and therefore they do fall precisely upon the houre-lines
for the Sun) because (the angles being here unequal) the same angles must
still retain the same places, otherwise great errors will ensue: All which
things the second figure plainly shows: and in these five examples, are
contained all the varieties of operations in this Dyall (in which I have been
somewhat the more tedious, to give the better contentment and satisfaction, to
the more unlearned in these things) and therefore more examples would be
altogether needelesse and superfluous, the rest being performed after the same
manner: For the hours being noted down in the five first Circles, (as we
have here showed) the hours may be easily placed in all the other Circles, by
the help of those only without the former operation: For you may observe in
the working (and as the former second figure shows) that the houre-lines or
points of the sixth, and eleventh Circles, are in the same position (in respect
of the Center) with the houre-lines of the first circle, and so the houre-lines
of the seventh and twelfth circles, with those of the second, and those of the
eighth and thirteenth, with those of the third, and those of the ninth and
fourteenth, with those of the fourth, and likewise those of the tenth and
fifteenth circles, with them of the fifth circle: Whereby it is evident, that
five circles only might be sufficient for this purpose, and then each circle
should contain three of the circles in the former figure, which are thus
matched together in respect of their houre-lines, but differing in the numbers
or figures belonging to the same, and hereupon each circle must serve for six
several days of the Moon: for the first circle from the center serves for
the 1, 16. 6, 21. 11, 26. days; (according as they are coupled rogether in the
former figure) the second for the 2, 17. 7, 22. 12, 27. The third for the 3,
18. 8, 23. 13, 28. The fourth for the 4, 19. 9, 24. 14, 29. The fifth and last
for the 5, 20. 10, 25. 15, 30. which way, although it be somewhat more
compendious for the making of the Dyall, yet more confused for the use thereof
to the unskilful, by reason of the manifold denominations of the circles and
their houre-lines: for in the former figure each circle serves only for two
days of the Moon, the one in her increase the other in her decrease,
answering each other, in respect of the hour and minute of the Moons coming
to the Meridian, and therefore (in that respect) there will fall out 15.
circles, and so the houre-lines of every circle, are but of one simple
denomination; but in this latter way, each circle containing three of the
former, serves for six several days of the Moon (as I said before) which
do answer one another, in respect of the number of minutes adhaering to the
hour of the Moons said coming to the Meridian, whereby it happens that the
houre-lines which must serve for those six days, do concur on the Plane,
and therefore may very fitly be contracted into one and the same circle on the
Plane, but then the same houre-lines will bear a threefold denomination, as
may be plainly seen in this third and last figure, which I have thought
fitting here to be set down, for the better conceiving of this latter way,
being indeed a more compendious and complete way than the former, that so,
whosoever shall make trial of what is here delivered, may use that way which
he shall best affect.

The hours in every Circle, are continued on both sides of the Meridian line,
so far as the houre-lines for the Sun do extend, that so the Dyall might
serve generally for all times of the year; and though the hour of 12. falls
twice in some of them, yet may they both be useful at one time of the year or
other; for to place in such hours only as shall happen to be of use, and
neither more nor less, is a thing I conceive not to be certainly done by
reason of the uncertain rising and setting of the Moon, and her uncertain
departure from the rays of the Sun.

Having noted down the hours in every circle (as in the second figure) add
to each circle one or two inward circles, making one or two convenient spaces
for the placing in of little lines or strokes, for the hours and their parts
(according to the usual manner) and the figures belonging to them: but in the
latter way you must add to each circle, three other inward circles, making
three several spaces for the three ranks of figures belonging to every
circle, (as you may see in the third and last figure) because the houre-lines
of every circle (as I said before) be here of a threefold denomination: and it
is necessary for you so to order and contrive the circles on your plane, as
that there may be left a convenient space between every several Dyall or
circle of hours, to distinguish between them, and not to mingle and confound
them one with another.

The parts of every hour necessary to be placed on the Dyall (though we have
put none here, partly to avoid tediousness in the work, and some charge in
cutting the figures, and partly because the are needelesse in this place) may
be those which we have formerly used, or better it were for common use to have
each hour divided into some equal number of parts, as four or eight parts,
as is usually done in most Sun-dyals; for before we divided each hour into
five parts, as being the fittest number for the more easy and exact making of
the Dyall.

The outermost circle of all, belonging to the fifteenth day of the Moon or
day of opposition, serves as well for the Sun, the houre-lines thereof being
rightly disposed for the Sun. For the Moon, on the day of her coujunction
with the Sun, comes to the Meridian much about the time that he does, and
in the day of her opposition to the Sun, she comes to the said place at the
opposite time or thereabout, when the Sun is in the North point of the
Meridian circle, under the ear^h* or our Horizon, that is, at our Midnight or
12. of the clock (as the former Table shows) and then the same Dyall which
serves to show the hour of the day by the Sun, serves likewise to show the
hour of the night by the Moon, though not always so exactly, yet without any
difference to be regarded in common use (as I have oftentimes observed) but at
other times it cannot be so, because the time of the Moons aforesaid mediation
or culmination, is not always the same, but alters on every day, and
therefore that Dyall which should serve to show the hours or times of any
other night by the Moon, must (of necessity) be altered, and the houte-lines
be otherwise ordered and disposed, or else why should not the Moon in any
night when she shines, show the true hours thereof upon any true Sunne-Dyall
by the stilar shadow, as well as the Sun shows the true hours of any day by
the same; which thing, how far it is from being so, I think there is
scarcely no ordinary man that does not know it; the reason thereof being (as I
showed before) because the Moon does not always observe the same times with
the Sun, in her rising, Southing, and setting.

These several Dyals or circles of hours, may not only be delineated upon
the Horizontall Plane, to show the time of the night by the Moon, but also
upon all other planes by the same reason and rule, (and therefore we have here
entitled it, Lunar Horologiographie, that is, The Description of Dyals for the
Moon) and most readily upon the Equinoctial Plane, by reason of the equality
of the horariall angles: And in the direct Meridian and Polar Planes, where the
Solar houre-lines are parallels, there also the Lunar will be parallels; and in
stead of those fifteen concentricall circles formerly used, here must be
fifteen parallel right lines, of which the equinoctial line of the Plane,
may very fitly be one, which may (if you please) serve for the fifteenth day of
the Moon, and so will serve continually for the Sun by the reason aforesaid:
So the seven Parallels falling under the said line, may then fitly serve for
the seven days next enfuing the day of her change and Full, and the seven
Paralells above the said line, for the seven days next before the Full, and
the change next following: or you may begin at the uppermost parallel on the
Plane, and account that for one day and sixteen days of the Moon, and so
going downwards, the lowest parallel will be for fifteen and thirty days,
and so for the Sun, and then the equinoctial line or middle parallel shall
be for eight and 23. days, for you may begin with what parallel you will:
then drawing the common houre-lines of these Planes, and dividing each hour^
into five parts (as before) the hours for the Moon are set off from the
houre-lines of 6. in the one and 12. in the other on both sides thereof upon
their proper parallels, (as far as the houre-lines for the Sun do extend)
with as much facility as in any other Plane whatsoever, the Equinoctial plane
being excepted; so that you be careful to place the right hours in these
planes: Having thus set down the hours (and parts if you please) draw to each
Parallel line another parallel including a convenient space between them,
wherein to draw little lines or strokes for the hours and their parts, and to
place the figures belonging to the houre-lines or strokes: But for that I
showed before, how this might be performed by five circles in the Horizontall
plane, so by the same reason it may here be performed by five parallells only,
for then each parallel serves for six days, and the houre-lines of each
parallel are of a threefold denomination, and then you must draw to each
parallel line, three other parallels, that so there may be three fitting
spaces made for the placing of three rows of figures which belong to the
hourelines of every parallel, as was done by circles in the Horizontall plane;
and in the delineating of any of these Dyalls, it were convenient for you first
to draw the common (or Solar) houre-lines belonging to the plane, obscurely
with the point of your compass or such like thing upon your plane, by which
you may easily discern whether you work rightly or not: But to deliver any
figure here concerning these last mentioned planes I think it to be
needelesse, because if the working upon the former be rightly understood, the
working upon these latter and likewise upon all other Planes may easily be
understood by the same reason: And as for the style belonging to to these last
named Planes, it is necessary that the same be made full as broad as the Plane
of the houre-lines, (or if it were a little broader in the top, it were not
amiss) that so the shadow thereof may always extend as far as the parallel
lines on the Plane; for though a straight round pin will serve in these Planes
for a style for the Sun, yet it will not for the Moon, by reason of the
variety of Dyals on one and the self sam^ Plane, all differing one from
another: But indeed none other is so commodious for common use as the
Horizontall Dyall, which may (most easily) be fitted for use two manner of
ways: For it may be either always fixed abroad, like unto the common
horizontall Sun-Dyall, and so be immovable, or else not fixed, but to be
removed up and down at pleasure, and then having a Magneticall Needle placed
in a Box after the usual manner (whose Meridian line ought to be drawn
therein, according to the deflection or variation of the Needle in the place of
observation) to be affixed to some side thereof, it may be truly placed
thereby, any night when it should be used, being holden or set precisely
horizontall; or (for want of such a Needle) they that have an horizontall
Sunne-Dyall about their house truly placed, may make a shift to use it well
enough, by laying it flat upon that Dyall, and then applying one side the^eof
to the side of the cock or ftile of that Dyall, in such sort that the Meridian
line of the one may be parallel to the Meridian line of the other. But indeed
the most absolute way of all, were to have it made in brass (which may be done
by Mr. Elias Allen dwelling without Temple Ba^re, over against St. Clements
Church, London, who makes all sorts o^ Mathematical Instruments and also
horizontall Sunne-Dyalls in brass) and fixed always upon a poast, or rather
made upon a fair white stone, where the strokes for the hours and their parts
and the figures belonging to them being done in black or other such notable
color, might be more perfectly discerned than in the other: So that then only
knowing the day of the Moon, (which may be known by any Almanacke) you have
no more to do, (the Moon shining on the Plane) but to look out the circle
which is appropriated to that day, and the shadow of the style will presently
give you the hour or time of the night, if your Dyall be rightly made and
placed: And it would be very comely and convenient to have the style to this
Dyall made so, as it should touch the plane in those places only where it is
let into the same, that is, between the center and the circle next unto it,
and again a little about the outermost circle which is furthest from the
center, that so the strokes for the hours and their parts, and the figures
which fall upon or very near the Meridian line, might not be hidden and
defaced by the style.

But because houre-lines may be placed generally upon all planes (as I said
before) to show the hours of the night by the Moon; it would be an excellent
way to have a Lunar Dyall drawn on glass and placed in a window after the
manner of those Sunne-Dyalls which are most accurately made by my loving friend
Mr. Baptist Sutton, dwelling at the upper end of Chauncery Lane, near Holborne
(being the author of the ensuing work or Addition) who likewise will be able
to perform these as accurately as the other, if it shall be required of him:
For there the plane of the Dyall being of a transparent matter, and intercepted
(as a mean object) between the eye and the Moon, the houre-stroakes and
figures, together with the shadow of the style, may be thereupon more
perfectly and speedily discerned, than upon any other kind of Plane whatsoever
(and therefore I thought it not amiss to give notice thereof) but it is well
known that the shadow which is caused by the Moon, cannot be altogether so
perfectly discerned as that which is caused by the Sun, because the light of
the Moon is not so perfect as the light of the Sun, and therefore the time
of the day may be somewhat more readily perceived on the Dyall by the stilar
shadow, than the time of the night; yet it may be very easily discerned
thereby, especially when the Moon shines out very bright.

And now, this our Horizontall Dyall I conceive (and I think, that any man of
understanding will acknowledge) to be far more easy and ready in use, than
that Lunar Dyall which Mr. Fale has long ago described, in his book of Solar
Horologiographie, whose position must be in direct Paralellisme to the
Equinoctial circle of the Sphere, making the same angle (of inclination) with
the Plane of the Horizon, which that does, being the complement of the Latitude
or Polar altitude, and therefore but few men know how to make use thereof in
comparison of them that do not know; and it must needs be troublesome also
to those that do know how to place the same rightly, because they must stand
and apply a Quadrant together with a needle to it every night when they would
use it, unless the same stand always fixed abroad in its due position; and if
it so do, yet the unskilful sort cannot well tell how to make use of it, by
reason (it consisting of two several parts or plates) of the inward moveable
part thereof, turning about within the outmost plate, and upon which the
houre-lines are drawn, whose Index, (or long tooth, as he terms it) being
fastened at the hour of 12. must be turned to the day of the Moon noted on the
outermost or fixed part, and to the hour of the change (as he says)
accounting from 12. of the clock; in which he has not sufficiently expressed
the meaning thereof, for such as are but meanly skilled in these things, to
understand, and so (as I conceive) has not well declared the making and use of
the same. Upon the outermost or fixed part, he draws a circle, which he
divides into 30. parts for the thirty days of the Moon, after this manner:
Now because (says he) the Moon finisheth her course in 29. days, 12. hours,
and 44. minutes, (that is, from the Sun, being in a mean conjunction with
him, till she be with him again by the like conjunction) part or divide the
aforesaid circle into 30. parts, so as 29. of them being equal, the thirtieth
or last must not be so great as one of the other parts by, that is, it must
contain of one of them; by which account (if it were true) the Moon should
finish her said course in 29. days, and 16. hours, (which make of the
natural day) whereas the same is but 29. days, and 12. hours, or of the day
natural, and about of an hour over, and therefore it does not consequently
follow, that the last part should contain of one of the rest, but rather
only: Indeed (for mine own part) I must confess, I never made trial of this
Dyall, and therefore can say the less of it, neither do I know whether the
same were of his own devising or not; But sure I am that this our Horizontall
Dyall is every way as exact as that, and serves to a more general use, it
being of use and delight for all sorts of men, and more especially ^uch as know
not how to find the hour of the night artificially by other ways: for if
they can but know how to get the true age of the Moon (which is easily done by
an Almanacke, as I said before) they may as easily obtain the time of the
night by this Dyall (or the like made upon any other Plane, when the Moon
shines thereupon; and that sufficiently enough) as the time of the day by any
Sunne-dyall when the Sun shines on the same: But if any list to make use of
such a kind of Dyall, as that of Mr. Fales, lately mentioned, they may use
another way to find the time of the night more exactly thereby: For the
houre-lines being drawn upon the moveable or turning plate or wheel (as
before is said) which should now be so large as each hour may be distinctly
divided into such a number of parts, as that you may guess at any one minute
thereupon, (which may conveniently 15. or 20. parts, for then each part will
contain but four or three prime minutes of time) If they can have a Table of
the Moons coming to their Meridian artificially and exactly calculated for
every day in the year, and so for every year severally (which in some years
is to be found in one Almanacke or other, if trust may be given to them) then
to make use of this Dyall in any night of the year when the Moon shines,
they must look out that day in the said Table, and right against it, under its
proper month is set the hour and minute of the Moons coming unto the
Meridian for that day and place: then the Dyall being rightly placed if they
bring that hour and minute noted on the inward or moveable part to the
Meridian line noted on the outtermost or immovable part, and so let the
houre-lines in that position, the shadow of the style shall show the hours of
that night exactly, without having any regard to the days of the Moons age,
noted upon the uppermost part, as in the former, and therefore this must needs
be a surer way than the former, for that depending upon the hour or indeed the
hour and minute of the Moons change (in which the Almanackes do so much
differ) must needs cause an error in the observation of the time: and neither
this way nor the former, can be performed upon any Plane besides the
Equinoctial, by reason of the inequality of angles in all other Planes, whose
houre-lines make angles of intersection.

And now in the conclusion of this work, thus much I say; that if the best
inventions and conceits of men be haunted by some Momaicall Spirit at one time
or other, as it is certain they always have been and still are: Then sure I
am, and I must not otherwise expect but that this of mine (being so mean in
comparison of many that have been so haunted) will be in the same case; yet I
may care the less, because the best of all have been subject to Momus his
censures: But whosoever he be, that shall carpe hereat, or evilly censure it;
if he can find out any other more exact way for this kind of Horologiographie
than that which I have conceited and here delivered (it having not been done
before by any, for ought that I do know or could ever hear) as I doubt he
cannot for the reasons formerly alleged; my request to him is, that he would
be pleased to bestow a little pains in bringing of the same into light, and
then I desire, that for ever after, this may (as deservedly it might) lie
hidden in oblivion and dakenesse: In the mean season I commit these my poor
endeavors to the courteous and favorable acceptance of the friendly Reader
and practitioner, saying to him, (concerning this matter) somewhat in effect as
I said before,

Vive, vale, si quid novistirectius is it is,
Extrahito in lucem; si non, his utere mecum.
AN ADDITION CONCERNING THE MAKING AND USE OF Several plain Scales, for the
exact and most speedy mensuration of Circles, Spheres, and Cylinders, and for
Gauging of Vessels.
1. FIrst, a Scale for the taking of the diameter of any Circle, and thereby to
find the superficial content in foot measure.

2. The second, a Scale for the taking of the Axis or diameter of any Sphere or
Bullet, and thereby to find out the solid content in inch measure: and if I
had the true proportions of metals, I could have fitted a Scale for every
several metal, so that the Axis of any Sphere or Bullet, being taken by his
proper Scale and cubed, the cube should be the weight of the Bullet or Sphere
proposed.

3. The third, a Scale or line for the finding of the solid content of any
Cylinder in foot measure, and that as speedily as of any Paralellepipedon, by
two multiplications only.

4. The fourth a line or scale for the^ giving of the solid content of any
Cylinder in wine gallons.

5. The fifth for the same in Ale Gallons, and these by two multiplications
only.

The length of each Scale severally as follows.
1. First, the length of the Scale for taking of the diameter of a Circle is 1.
1283. foot, that is, one foot and 1283. parts of a foot divided into 10000.
parts: This scale or line, and likewise all the rest, must be first divided
into ten equal parts and each of those parts subdivided into ten equal parts
(after the usual manner) and so the whole line or scale will contain 100.
equal parts; or you may conceive each of those last ten parts to be divided
also into ten other parts, and then the whole line is supposed to contain
1000. equal parts; but indeed 100. parts will be sufficient: Then knowing the
length of every line or scale, you may take that in your Compasses, and turn
it over upon a Ruler, as many times as you shall think to be fitting.

The length of the 2. For the Axis of a Sphere, 1. 2405. inch. 3. For
Cylinders. 1. 0838. foot. 4. For Wine measure. 6. 65. inches. 5. For Ale
measure. 7. 02. inches.

The use of these several Scales briefly in their order.
By the first Scale or line, having taken the diameter of any Circle proposed
(whethe^r in Pavement, Seeling, or the like) if you square that diameter (the
whole line representing but one foot) the same shall be the superficial
content of the circle in foot measure, as nearely as can be found by any other
way whatsoever.

So if the diameter taken, be 4. 25. of the scale, the supernatural content of
the Circle will be 18. 0625. foot. The like may be done for inch measure.

2. By the second scale, having taken the Axis or diameter of any Sphere or
Bullet proposed: if you cube that Axis; the same cube shall be the solid content
of the Sphere or Bullet in inch measure.

So the Axis of a Sphere being 8. 50. of his scale; the solid content will be
found to be 614. 125000. cubicall inches: the like may be made for foot
measure.

3. By the 3. 4. and 5. scales; if the diameters and length be taken by their
proper scales, and the square of the diameter be multiplied in the length, the
product thereof shall be the solid content in foot measure, Wine gallons or
Ale gallons, according to the quality of the scale and measure.

So if the length of a Cylinder be 12. 00. by the third scale, and the diameter
1. 75. the solid content thereof will be found to be 16. 7500. cubique feet:
the like for inch measure.

Rules for Gauging of Vessels.
It is generally holden (and I my self have found by several trialls) that a
wine Gallon contains 231. cubicall inches, or very near thereupon; and that
an Ale Gallon contains 272 cubicall inches in liquour.

The 1. Rule.
This rule is the^ best and certainest of all other, and the way to prove other
rules by, because it is grounded upon good demonstration, but withal it is
somewhat tedious: See Mr. Oughtreds book of the Circles of proportion.

The Rule is thus.

Add the of the Circle at the head, to of the Circle at the bongue in inches;
the sum of this addition being multiplied by the length in inches, gives the
solid content in cubique inches, which being divided by 231 (if wine measure)
or 272. (if Ale measure) the quotient is the content in Gallons.

The readiest way for the finding of the and ^ of the superficial contents of
circles at the head and bongue, is this.

1. As 1. is to 0.5237.

So is the square of the diameter at the bongue^ to of the circle at the bongue.

2. As 1. is to 0.2619.

So is the square of the diameter at the head, to ^ of the circle at the head.

These and added together, make^ the^ mean Circle, whose diameter may (not
unfitly) be called a mean diameter: and thus much for the first.

The 2. Rule.
1. How to find the mean or equated diameter which is thus.

Multiply the difference of the Diameters by 7, and add the product to the
diameter at the head; the sum thereof is the equated diameter.

Example. ^

2. To find the Content of any Vessel in Gallons.

First find the equate^d diamete^r, and square it; Then first by inch measure.

As 294. (if Wine measure) or 346. 5. (if Ale measure) are to the length in
inches: So is the square of the equated diameter, to the content in Gallons.

The reason of these two numbers, is the same with that of a Circle to its
circumscribing square, that is, as 11. to 14. wherefore, if the cubique inches
contained in a Gallon be augmented by 14. and the product divided by 11. the
quotient will yield a number, which shall be the Divisor. Now for the trial of
this rule: Suppose a vessel to be in length. 39. 9. inches, the head, bongue
and equated diameter as before; the square of the equated diameter is 1105. 9.
which multiplied in the length, gives 44125. 41. cubique inches, which divided
by 294. (if Wine measure) gives in the quotient 150. 08. Gallons of Wine: but
by the scale ensuing, the said vessel would contain but 149. So is the
difference about of a Gallon, which being so small, is not to be regarded in
the Art of gauging.

The third way which I have^ found out for the more speedy working herein, is
by a scale or line of equal parts only, having reference to none other line
in the taking of the measures: yet (if you please) you may make use of Master
Gunters line of numbers, or the Table of Logarithmes in the casting up of the
contents: or you may work by natural or decimall Arithmetique, as speedily,
as ever has been showed by any scale heretofore published: neither am I
ignorant of Master Oughtreds Ruler, where he uses two lines; the one of
inches, and the other of unequal parts. But to come to the purpose: This scale
or line, is the fourth in place formerly mentioned, the scale it self being 6.
65. inches, which length being taken with a pair of compasses from a line of
inches (where the inch is divided into an 100. equal parts) may be turned over
6. or 7. times (or more or less, as you shall think to be most convenient)
upon a rod or Ruler, having an hook at one end thereof, according to the
usual manner, and then beginning right under the end of the said hook, run
the divisions toward the other end, and set thereunto the figures, 1. 2. 3. 4.
etc. from the hook toward that end, and set them likewise backwards from
thence toward the hook, as this present figure shows: Or you may allow
somewhat for the thickenesse of both the heads of the Vessel, from the place
right under the hook, if you shall think it fitting. Every such part of the
Ruler must be divided into 100. equal parts; so will it be made fit for this
purpose: You may (if you please) place the line for Ale measure, and also the
line of numbers thereupon, which may there serve for some use as occasion shall
require.

The use of this Gauging Ruler is thus.
First find the equated diameter, as before. Then multiply the square of the
equated diameter by the length of the vessel; the product is the content in
wine Gallons.

Example.

^

Another Example.

^ ^ Equated diameter: Or I might here take 26, because the fraction
approaches nigh unto an unity: for in this kind of mixed numbers, when the
last figure of the fraction toward the left hand exceeds the number of 5.
there (to avoid the fraction) you may add an unity to the whole part thereof,
and so make it an absolute number, and when it wants of 5. (as in the last
fraction) you may (if you please) reject the fraction (which will breed no
sensible error in the work) and retain the whole number only, or you may
cut off all the figures (if there be many) saving the last two or three toward
the left hand, and so make it only a centesimall or millesimall fraction: So
the fraction of the last number aforegoing, may be only. 24, which here
signifies very near of a Gallon.

The question in this last example, is as difficult as most that you shall
meet with of this kind, and therefore if this be rightly understood, all other
questions of the same nature may be easily understood.

Here I might have showed the use of some other scales for this purpose, and
likewise the manner of taking the diameters of vessels at the head and bongne
by this Ruler, but that this is a thing not unknown to such as are exercised
in gauging of Vessels, the same being fully showed in books of gauging already
published and therefore mine intention was not, here to set down the whole Art
of gauging, but briefly to show the making and use of this gauging Ruler,
which was never published before, although I could have set forth the same long
before this time; and therefore if any shall think good to make trial of this
or any of the rest which I have here delivered, let them speak of them
according to what they shall find in them, and not otherwise.

These two several works (friendly Reader) contained in this book and so
presented to thy view, being (each of them) but of a small quantity, and also
as novelties, we have therefore thought it meet and commodious thus to connect
them.

FJNJS.
ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 3. read, but at contrary. p. 5. l. 2. r. positions. l. 28. r.
Meridian. p. 16. l. 29. read this his dyall. p. 17. l. 14. r. conveniently be
15. or 20. l. 28. for let r. set. p. 21. l. 8. for supernatural r.
superficial. l. 21. r. lengths.


