A DANGEROUS PLOT DISCOVERED.

BY A DISCOVRSE, Wherein is proved, That, Mr: RICHARD MOVNTAGVE, in his two
Books; the one, called A new Gagg; the other, A just Appeal: Labors to
bring in the faith of Rome, and Arminius: under the name and pretense of the
doctrine and faith of the Church of England.

A Work very necessary for all them which have received the truth of God in
love, and desire to escape error.

The Reader shall find:

1. A Catalogue of his erroneous points annexed to the Epistle to the Reader.
2. A demonstration of the danger of them. cap. 21. number. 7. etc. page 178. 3. A
list of the heads of all the Chapters contained in this Book.
IEREM. 5. 31. The Prophets prophecy lies, what will you then do in the end
thereof?

The son of the handmaid, shall not* inherit with the son of the free
Woman.

LONDON, Printed for Nicholas Bourne, at the Exchange. 1626.

TO THE HIGH AND HONORABLE COURT Of PARLIAMENT* The humble supplication of the
Author.
WHereas, Mr Richard Mountague, has written two Books, the one, called A new
Gagge; the other, A just Appeal: Which many esteemed as dangerous unto our
Church, and State. I esteemed it my duty, to read them, and to satisfy my
self in the point; whether they were so faulty, as was pretended or not. When
I had read, and well considered of them; I could not but resolve, that they
were in deed dangerous unto our Church. For that he endeavored by them to
change our faith, into the faith of Rome, and Arminius. Which deed I could not
but detest: because that faith of Rome, and Arminius, is false and erroneous:
And upon that detestation, I became an humble suter unto the Lord God, to
preserve our faith in the purity thereof, seeing he is the Author of truth, and
his eyelids preserve pure knowledge. Now, out of the same affection, I
prostrate my self and this Cause, before your reverend, honorable, and grave
Judgments, and high authority: with all submission, and fervent desire;
Craving

That you will 1. take this Cause into your consideration.

2. Preserve the faith of our Church in the purity it has had hitherto.

3. Endeavor to prevent the corrupting of it in time to come.

I do most willingly confess, that I may seem to some, to deserve blame, in
that I do thus presume, to offer my self, into your most honorable presence,
and Tribunal. Yea, I am ready to give that judgment against my self, when I
consider the meannesse of my condition, and the poor talent which I offer unto
you. But none of those things could discourage me in this business: when I
consider, 1. Your most honorable, and fatherly care, over this Church, and
State, of which you are members; receiving with all readiness, and mildness,
the complaints; yea of the meanest suitors. 2. Your service herein, will be
acceptable to God; for, by his Law, The Foxes must be taken, that eat up the
Vines, yea, it is an honor, beyond earthly honor, to do it: for thereby a
name is purchased, excelling humane titles: even the name, to be called Good
servants, and faithful unto the Lord God; and they are also admitted into
their Masters joy. Again, this office is most seemly for your most high and
honorable Court: because, You are (therefore) called together, by his sacred
Majesty, our most gracious King: That things amiss might be redressed: And,
the redress of evils in the Church, and our faith, is of all other, most
comely, and graceful: for, thereby, the Word of God receives freer passage,
and men's salvation is furthered. The doctrine of our Church, does call for your
protection against all intruders, (even of it self) though all men should hold
their peace: Because, it deserves protection, in as much as it was penned, and
composed, by most reverend, learned, and holy Authors, and Fathers of our
Church. It is in it self, most agreeable unto the divine, and sacred
Revelation: yea, wanting nothing, any kind of ways, of a safe, and fit
expression of, and direction unto, our Christian faith: so as we may truly say,
the Church of England is not inferior therein, unto any Church in the
Christian world. Lastly, This cause does indeed, in a special sort belong unto
you, for you are possessed with it (in part) already. This doctrine of our
Church received the authority it has, first, from that most high and
honorable Court, whereof you are. By it also it has bin preserved in that
state, till this present time. Wherefore I rest well assured, That you will not
impute my boldness unto me. Now, I might allege some reasons to move you, to
undertake the work: but I will not do so. For that would be very unseemly
and ill befitting: For what man (well advised) would light a small and dim
candle, to further the light of the Sun in his greatest strength? And this
would be my case, if I should move you by reasons: For you know more then I can
write or speak.

Who would put him forward, that is more ready to do, then any can be to ask?
And this is your case, experience does witness it: In whom we see not the
spirit of Iehu, that was zealous for the Lord of Hosts, but rather of the Lord
of heaven and earth, who is ready to hear before we call upon him; yea, to
call to us, when we are negligent to call upon him. And thus would you do, if
it were fit for your place and authority: so mindful, willing, and ready are
you in Gods service, and the good of your Country. Wherefore I have only this
to say, Go on -- For the Lord is with you. We your Contrymen, true lovers
of our Church and State, are with you, to help you with our prayers unto God,
to render thanks unto God, and our gracious and renowned Sovereign: and to
you, saying, in the words (once) spoken by King David; Blessed be God, and
blessed be You. And to give his sacred Majesty, and You, the honor due unto
you; saying, Many of your Predecessors have done well, but You surmount them
all. Thus I commit You and your Labors, unto the protection and favor of the
Almighty.

LONDON. This first of June. 1626.
To the Reader.
ALthough, I have no delight in making a Preface: for I see not any great need
of it: yet I here present thee with one, because, Custom calls for it. In this
Preface, I will advise thee of some things, even of such (and no more) as shall
help thee, to make the better use of the ensuing Discourse; which, I will do
also with as much brevitie as I can. First know, That, this Treatise was
chiefly intended for my own satisfaction, but is now published for the benefit
of others. The manner of handling the points in it, is scholasticall; and it
might be no other; because the things themselves, and the party opposed,
require it. Besides, this course of writing is profitable for thee; for
thereby, 1. The matters in question, are laid before thee nakedly, and, as it
were, in both ends of the Balance. 2. All impertinent Discourses are
prevented, and all raylings avoided: so as, now thou have nothing to judge of,
but the matter it self. I have directed my Disputation against both of Mr:
Mountague his Books; The Gagge, and the Appeal: because the whole evil,
could not be found out, in any one of them alone. All the sentences, and
several passages, in this Discourse, pretended to be collected, and framed out
of Mr: Mountague his Books, are truly, and plainly, and ingenuously collected,
and framed according as they are in his Books themselves. If any error be
committed in them, it arises from the greatness of their number, or from his
obscure manner of setting down his intent. It may be, some will account the
publishing hereof to be needless: because others have done so much already, as
is fit to be done, in this business. I answer; The publishing hereof, is to
good purpose: For, many witnesses to the truth* gives the greater glory to it,
and procures a freer passage for it, amongst men: Besides, I doubt not, but, by
this Discourse, the Reader shall be put in mind, of some things, which he
would have forgotten, or not observed, in the Books that are published
already. Lastly, None of this kind* have been published already: For herein,
more points are handled, then were touched in them: and, these which are
discussed in this, are framed in another manner, and do tend to an end, which
they did not. I have concealed my name: not because I am, (or have cause to be)
unwilling it should be known: But because, I desire to forestall personal
quarrels; so frequent with Mr: Mountague: And, because, I suppose, the
annexing of my name hereto, is of no great use unto the Reader; for as much, as
he must receive satisfaction, in the points of faith, from the divine
testimony, not from any humane authority whatsoever. One thing (only)
remains: That is, That, I entreat thee, to seek for satisfaction, and an
assured ground, for thy faith, in the present questions: For, it is thy duty
so to do. The Ap^stle Jude does exhort that we contend, for the faith, once
given to the Saints. If thou stand an Idle beholder, not regarding which end
goes forward: what will thou say? How wi^t thou answer it unto God? Will thou
say, This sentence of the Apostle Jude, is not a Commandment? I answer; the
Ap^stles phrase, and manner of speaking, will then refute thee: For, every such
exhortation, is either a Commandment, or presumes a duty already commanded
other-where: as we may see by the like places of Scripture, 1 These. 4. 2. 2
These. 3. 12. Will thou answer, That, it is no Commandment unto thee? ^he^e
words will then reprove thee also; for, they are extended unto all men, without
limitation: And that Epistle is called a general Epist^e. Will thou say, it is
an affirmative Commandment; and* therefore it may not, bind thee at this
time: because such Commandments do not bind to all times? I answer; Thou
can not be free from this Commandment, (even) it the time, unless thou
can find, some part of the div^ne Revelation that shall free thee: For, Thy
self can not free thy self therefrom: seeing thou art to be at Gods
dispose: not at thine own choice. Therefore, If thou will fancy to thy self,
this, or that reason, to exempt thy self from this Commandment, thou art no
other, but, the man that says: A Lion is in the way, I shall be slain in the
streets. Lastly, when will thou then think thy self bound by this law, if
thou be free at this time? Is not the faith of God now at the ^take? Do not
the Foxes out of their holes, seek to eat up the Lord Vine? Does not the Bo^re
out of the Fo^rest labor to root up the Lords Plant? Now, now, therefore is
the time, yea, high time for thee to take thy self bound by this law of God,
or never. Will thou imagine, that thou shall not give an account of thy neglect
of this duty? Surely, then thy thoughts are most vain; for, can thou forget
the Lords voice, that says, Arise, O you dead, and come unto Judgment; and
sha^ we come to Judgment, and not account with the Lord* Besides, can thou
forget that voice, which says: Every man shall give an account, for every idle
word* much more, for every fruitless deed? I say, this thy negligence is a
^ee^* because it is voluntary, thou do choose to be negligent. It ^^
fruitless, because, no good comes of it, unto Gods glory, or thine own
salvation. Wherefore, I will conclude, fould thy hands no longer together, like
the sluggard: give thy eyes no rest, nor thy eyelids no slumber; spare for no
labor; grutch not for cost, till thou be settled, and grounded upon the Rock
of Gods revealed truth: so shall thou stand in the perilous time, and be
ready to go into the Bride-chamber, when the Bridegroom comes. And, this
is all I will say to thee.

For thy furtherance, I have annexed hereunto, 1. A Catalogue of the erroneous
points which are contained in his Book, and the places where they are. 2. A
list of the heads of every Chapter in the Book.


His points of the Popish Faith, are these which follow.

1. THe Church is Judge in Divinity questions, that be in Controversy. 2. We
receive the decisions of the Catholic Church, as the dictates of the holy
Spirit. cap. 2. 3. The Church representative, cannot err in points of faith.
cap. 4. at the beginning, and number. 2. page 12. 4. There ever was, and will be
upon earth, a visible Church, unto which Complaints may be made. cap. 5. at the
beginning, number. 4. p. 26. 5. The Church of Rome, is a true Church of Christ, a
part of the Catholic Church, which we profess to believe in our Creed. cap.
6. at the beginning, and number. 7. p. 37. 6. We grant the general being,
working, and concurring of Free Will with Gods grace: after preventing grace,
man does freely renounce the calling of grace, and freely run. cap. 7. p. 53.
7. Justification consists in remission of sins primarily, and grace infused
secondarily. cap. 9. page 83. cap. 10. number. 17. etc. 8. Both remission of
sins, and grace infused, are the acts of Gods spirit in man cap. 9. p. 83. c.
10. number. 23. etc. 9. A man (yea the Elect) may loose the habit of grace cap.
11. p. 37. 10. Sin is mortal, and venial. 11. The habit of grace is common
to the predestinate, and not predestinate. cap. 12. number. 2. and 3. 12. Every
child duly baptized, is thereby put into the state of grace and salvation. cap.
12. number. 11. p. 55. 13. Mortal sin only disobeyeth Gods law. cap. 12. number.
17. p. 64. and 65. 14. A man habituated by grace, may commit mortal sin. cap.
12. number. 17. p. 63. and 64. 15. There is no difference between the Church of
Rome and ours, in the point of Real presence. cap. 13 p. 81. The only
difference between us, is about Transubstantiation. cap. 14. number. 2. p: 82.
83. 16. The pictures of Christ, the blessed Virgin, and Saints, may be set up
in Churches. Respect is due, and honor given Relatiuely unto them. They may be
used for helps of piety: To represent the prototype: Instruct the unlearned,
renew remembrance. cap. 15. p. 94. and 95. 17. A man may do more then he is
tied unto by any Law of God. cap. 17. p: 107. These works are left to a man's
choice; They procure reward to him that does them, and he that does them not,
is without danger of punishment therefore. cap. 18. number. 2. p. 109. They are to
be found in Virginity, and wilful Poverty. cap. 18. number. 12. p. 120. 18.
Final persevering in obedience, is the isntrumental cause of man's salvation.
cap. 20. number. 27. p. 161. 162.
The points of the false Faith of Arminius do follow.

1. I Conceive of predestination, that it is Gods act of drawing them out which
took hold of mercy. cap. 19. p. 126. 127. cap. 20. number. 3. and 4. and number. 7.
p. 139. 2. Man being prevented by grace, he puts to his hand to procure
augmentation of that grace. Man being drawn, he runs as his assistance, his
own agilitie and disposition is. cap. 7. p. 53. cap. 8. number. 22. and 23.
The heads of every Chapter, are as follow.
Master Mountague has corrupted the faith of our Church cap. 1. The point of
the Judge of Controversies propounded. cap. 2. discussed. cap. 3.
The point of the Churches not erring cap. 4. The point of the Churches
perpetual visibilitie. cap. 5. The Church of Rome, is a true Church cap. 6.
The point of Free Will propounded. cap. 7. debated. cap. 8.
The point of Justification propounded. cap 9. argued cap. 10.
The point of falling from grace propounded. c. 11 argued. cap. 12.
The point of Real presence propounded. cap 13. debated. cap. 14.
The point of Images propounded. cap. 15. discussed. cap. 16.
The point of Works of Supererogation propounded. cap. 17. disputed. cap. 18.
The point of Predestination propounded. cap. 19. debated cap. 20.
The Conclusion of the whole, claiming Master Mountague his promise cap. 21.
CHAP. I. Master Mountague has corrupted, the Faith of the Church of England.
THE whole Disputation following England has published her faith, which will
not be denied, because the Records thereof (chiefly the Book of Articles) are,
or may be in every man's hand.

That he has corrupted it, will easily be granted too, England, and defense
thereof, he has brought in the erroneous faith of the Church of Rome, and
Arminius. And this I will perform; first, by answering his general plea to
excuse himself therfrom in this Chapter, and then by setting down the
particular points wherein, and whereby he has corrupted it, in the rest of the
Chapters following.

First, he pleads not guilty of both accusations, of Arminianisme, and
Popery. Appeal. p. 9. I reply unto him. I will join issue with him herein,
and make it good that he is guilty.

He would argue his innocence on this manner. 1. I disavowed the name and title
of Arminian; for I will not pin my belief unto any man's sleeue. I answer,
if you join in that faith, whereof he was the author, you cannot avoid to
bear his title; no more then others that have sided in the like case. Every
artist bears the name of that art which he professes, but you join in faith
with him, (as afterward shall appear) therefore you must bear his title. 2.
He says, he never read word in Arminius. p. 10. I answer, this will not
thrust off his title. For of them that were called Arrians, many thousands
never read word in Arrius. It is communion in his faith, (not his writings)
that procures that title.

He would prove himself innocent of the Popish I nor am, nor have been, nor
intend to be, a Papist of state or of Religion. p. 111. I answer, his thoughts
may change, and so he may be, what he does not now intend to be; The liking of
some points first, is a good beginning, and a fair way, to like all at last.
We do not inquire what you are, or intend to be, but what you have done.
Therefore this plea is nothing to the purpose.

He would prove he neither is nor means to be a Papist, by two reasons; the
first is, The original grounds of Popery have no warrant from revealed truth.
p. 111. The second is, he has handled them as few besides himself has done,
in so exasperating a style. p. 110. I answer, this proves the thing which is
not in question, therefore deserves not be answered: but to them, I say, you
have left a door open for the first (to escape.) You say, you are not tied to
your own opinion. Gagg. p. 328. If your judgment change, you are as ready for
Popery, and will judge it no less warranted by revealed truth then now you do
the contrary. You tell us of some that draw one way, and look another. You may
be one of them for any thing is done, and are so too (in all likelihood.) For
railing at them does not show you had no favor to them, because the contention
of friends many times is the bitterest, and odious railing, was the fittest
curtain to conceal your friendship to them, where open friendship would
presently have been detested.

If circumstances will argue your guiltiness, I can urge you with some store.
1. Your writing is crabbed and hardly intelligible, full of raylings and
debasing of others, extolling and vaunting of your self, advancing the credit
of Popish Writers, debasing the reputation of many of precious account in all
the Protestants Churches. 2. You often times leave the question between you and
the Papist, to quarrel with Protestants. 3. You grant your Adversary many
points of his faith, and feign a difference where there is none. 4. You drop in
the Popish faith here some, and there some, as if you would, but you are not
willing to be seen. If they were together, every one would perceive them,
being in sunder, a wise man might be overtaken by them. 5. You bring in points
of speculation, that will find less opposition, but being received, will draw
on matters of practice. 6. You profess your self for reconciliation, which
can be understood of none, but with the church of Rome. Appeal. p. 292.

Touching the matter it self, thus he says; I call therein for trial for it,
by God and my Country, the Scriptures, and the Church of England; dare any
join Issue with me upon this, they dare not. p. 9. I answer, I dare and do
accept the Challenge. And that the proceedings may be orderly, I will set the
doctrine of Mr. Mountague in the first place, of the Church of Rome in the
second, and of the Church of England in the third. Then I will show his
disagreement with ours and agreement with theirs. In the last place, I will
show the faith of Rome (wherein he does agree with them) to be erroneous.

CHAP. II. The point of the Judge of Divinity Controversies.
Mr. Mountague. Chapter of Rome. Chapter of Eng: In Divinity questions that be in
Controversy, there must be a Judge to determine whether party contending,
has law and right upon his side, which we say is the Church. gagg. p. 28. It
is the office of the Church to Judge of the true sense and interpretation of
the Scriptures. Cancil. Trent. ses: 4. The church is a witness and keeper of
the Scriptures. arti: 20. We make the Scripture the rule of our belief in
plain causes. And in doubtful points that require determination, we appeal to
the Church for Judgment in that rule. gagg. p. 14. 15. General Cou^cils may
er in things partaining to God. arti: 21. If a question be moved in
controverted matters, the Church must decide and setle that doubt, by applying
and declaring the Scriptures. p. 14. Things ordained by them as necessary to
salvation, The decision of the Catholic Church we receive as the dictate of
the holy spirit. gagg. p. 19. have neither strength, nor authority, unless it
may be declared, that they may be taken out of holy Scripture. arti. 21. Where
the Scripture is hard, (in case there be a doubt) we are to address to the
direction of Gods spirit, and that in the Church. gagg. p. 6.

CHAP. III. The point set down in the former Chapter is discussed.
IN the first place the meaning of the term Judge must be understood, which is
thus explicated;

A Judge is an office, ordained by God, to give sentence in a doubt that is
made, in things revealed by God.

This office has these three properties. 1. The sentence thereof must be
regulated by the Word of God. 2. All parties contending must appeal unto it.
And 3. they must rest satisfied with the Judgment thereof. Of which there is
no question with him in Divinity questions that be in Controversy.

The parts to be debated be three.

1. Whether that proposition the Church is Judge, etc. be true or not. 2.
Whether that proposition consents with the Church of Rome, or not. 3. Whether
that proposition dissenteth from the Church of England, or not.
Touching the first he says. The Word of God, and the ancient practice of the
Catholic Church does avow it. gagg. p. 15.

I answer, Doctor Carleton, Bishop of Chichester, says all contrary in his
book called Directions to know the true Church, p. 54. He writes thus:

Undoubtedly, the written Word does suffice to end all Controversies of faith;
this is the Catholic determination of the Judge of Controversies of faith,
which has been in all succession preserved. And p. 57. Till the Council of
Trent, the Church held the same determination still concerning the Judge of
Controversies in faith.

Now unto whether of you too shall credit be given, surely unto him rather then
unto you. For he is your superior in learning and authority, he is your
Diocesan, whose voice must you hear, but the voice of your Pastor? And you
are in the Affirmative, giving an authority to the Church, which he denies;
you must show us the commission for this authority, for we dare not yield the
Church that office without knowledge of a commission for it. It is your own
rule gagg. p. 17.

A Nunci^ must go to his Commission.

If your proofs be good, your Diocesan must stand by.

1. Your proofs from the word of God, we find p. 17. taken out of Luke 10. 16.
thus to be framed:

Whom we are commanded to hear, Luke 10. 16. They are Judge in Divinity
Controversies.

But the Church. (That is) the Governors of the Church which succeed the
Apostles, are those whom we are commanded to hear, Luke 10. 16. Therefore the
Church is Judge, etc.

I answer, the proposition is false. I show it by many reasons. 1. It does
allege this place of Luke as if that office of a Judge were instituted by this
place, in which respect the proposition is false, because that office is not
instituted in that place. And this I take as granted. 2. At least the
proposition resumes, that that office was already instituted, when those words
Luke 10. 16. were spoken. Which is false also, and I could show it by many
reasons; but this one shall suffice, viz. no place of Scripture does tender
unto us the commission for that office. 3. The word hear, may be understood
for the common hearing of the Word of God Preached and read, as well as for an
appeal thereto, and resting in the sentence of a Judge: yea and better also;
for it is most frequently used in that sense, but little in this. Again, the
Text leads clearly to that sense; but not at all to this.

The assumption speaks of the governors of the Church, severed from other
Ministers which are not governors. In which sense the assumption does need
proof, but he has brought none: but his own affirmation. Besides, the
assumption is false by the authority of the Text it self, which sends us to
all the Apostles successors jointly, by the term you, which distinguishes not
between one successor and another.

His proof from the word of God being dispatched. The ancient practice of the
Catholic Church comes next, but he says nothing of it, therefore I cannot
answer any thing to it.

It may be he looks for proof from us out of former times, to show that

The Church is not Judge in matters of faith.

Which is unorderly: yet notwithstanding to the end that the Judgment of
Antiquity in this point might be fully known. Bishop Carleton in the book
alleged, p. 52. etc. alleges Councels, Fathers, and Popes, all pronouncing
this sentence.

The Scripture is Judge in Controversies of faith.

Wherefore we must hearken to your Pastor, and not to you.

Lastly, if the Church be Judge of Controversies of faith, then God has
assured unto it an infaillibilitie and freedom from error in Judgment, And
assured such a conspicuous being unto the Church, perpetually to the end of the
world, that it may be fit to be appealed unto, and give sentence in every
Controversy of faith, in the time wherein it rises, for without the first it
cannot be a fit Judge for matters of that kind, and without the second, some
Controversies of faith might rest undecided: But the Church has neither of
these two assured unto it by God, as my answers in the two next Chapters will
show: and therefore the Church is not Judge in matters of faith.

To the second thing propounded to be debated in this point, I presume he will
answer that he does not consent with the Church of Rome in this point, and give
this for his reason; to wit, he and they do take the word Church in a
different sense, and give for instance as he does. gagg. p. 19.

He takes the Church to signify a true, not a pretended Church, which they do
not.

And again, Appeal. p. 122. He takes the Church for a general Council with
the Pope as a patriarchcall Bishop, but without the Pope as head; but they do
not so. By Church they understand the Pope alone.

To this I answer; this Discourse evidently declares that he agrees with them
in the nature of the office of Judging, and in the subject that receives it,
abstracted from particulars (namely* that Church) and differs only in the
assigning, in particular which is the Church. Whereby he agrees with them in
the principal thing in question, and that is enough.

But indeed he does agree in this point with the Council of Trent to the full,
which understands by the word Church, a true, not a pretended Church, and the
Pastors of the Church, not the Pope only. For it calls that Church (in the
words immediately going before) the Mother of all believers. Which name cannot
agree unto a pretended Church, nor to the Pope alone.

Neither do the Jesuits expound the word Church, by the word Pope: but only
do apply that sentence of the Council to the Pope by inference and
accommodation, as is apparent by the whole course of their disputations: The
sum whereof may be comprehended in such a Syllogism as this is.

That office of teaching which belongs to the Church. belongs to the Pope, and
his Council.

But this office of teaching, viz. Judging of Divinity Controversies, belongs
to the Church.

Therefore that office belongs to the Pope and his Council.

The proposition (they say) is true, because Teaching is formally in the
Pastors, and (otherwise then by them) the Church cannot teach. It must be a
Council, because the Pastors singly may err. The Pope must be joynd with
them, because it belongs to him, to gather, direct, and confirm Councels.

In the assumption of this reason, he consents with the Church of Rome, and
that is the principal part of this Argument. In the proposition he consents
with them thus far, That this ^^ching belongs to the Pastors of the Church
universally, and to the Pope as one of them, and that in a Council. He only
denies the Popes authority, to call, direct, and confirm Councels, which is
the last, and least part of this Argument.

All which being considered, we may safely conclude, that he agrees in the
point of the Judge in Divinity Controversies, with the Church of Rome.

The third thing to be debated in this question, he resolves, gagg. p. 13. 14.
and 15. That it is the sentence of the Church of England, and does allege the
21. Article for it, saying, the Church has authority in Controversies of
faith. But all this is untrue. I have set down that Article in the former
Chapter, the sight whereof will avow it. Yea the Article is full for the
contrary. For 1. It gives the title of witness of the Scriptures unto the
Church, and the Church cannot be both a witness and a Judge of the Scriptures.
2. It calls the Church the keeper of the Scriptures and no more. Which it must
have done, if it had esteemed it to be the Judge, to apply and interpret the
Scriptures. 3. It restraines the force of the sentence of the Church, To
examination and trial by the Scriptures. But so must not the sentence given by
that Judge, which must be received, as the dictates of the holy Spirit.

The Conclusion is, He dissenteth from the doctrine of the Church of England.

CHAP. IIII.
M * Mountague. The Church representative cannot err in points of faith. gagg.
p. 48. Chapter of England. General Councels may err even in things pertaining
unto God. arti: 21.

IN this point and in the two other which follow, I Rome, because I find not
the Council of Trent to have decreed any thing in them: but notwithstanding
the Church of Rome does teach them by the common consent of their Divines, for
the avowing of the Churches authority in Judging Divinity Controversies, as
shall appear in the particular passages following. This being premised, I
proceed to examine;

1. Whether this proposition ( the Church represensatiue cannot err in points
of faith) be true or not. 2. Whether this proposition agree with the Church of
Rome, or not. 3. Whether this proposition dissent from the Church of England,
or not.
First, the sense of these terms, 1. Church representative, err, 3. points of
faith, must be set down.

1. By Church representative, he understands a Council truly general,
Appeal. p. 121. 2. By error, he means an abberration from a rule. Appeal. p.
6. viz. the Scriptures. gagg. p. 13. 3. By points of faith, is meant every
sentence to be assented to as true, upon the authority of God the reveale^
thereof.
Not erring in points of faith, supposes a sentence to be given, which is the
subject of not erring, in delivering whereof they cannot err.

According unto which sense the proposition may be set down in these words; A
Council truly general, in giving sentence touching a Divinity proposition,
cannot vary from the Scriptures.

That he consents with the Church of Rome in this proposition, himself
confesses. gagg. p. 48. where So say they, so say we. And Bellarmines words
does show it. Which writes thus:

The Church representative cannot err. de. eccle. lib. 3. cap. 14. I am quod
etc. in those things which it propounds to be believed and done. Nostra etc.
He takes erring to be a varying from Gods Word; For he makes that, the first
foundation of our faith, and the Church the propounder and explicator thereof.
de verbi dei interpret. lib. 3. cap. 10. Respondeo ad hoc. etc.

Wherein is Mr Mountague his sentence just.

Notwithstanding he denies, Appeal. p. 121. that he is in this point a Papist
(that is as I conceive) that he agrees with the Church of Rome in this point,
and gives this reason for it;

Points of faith be fundamental, or accessory. gagg. p. 48.


Fundamental are such as the belief whereof, be so absolutely necessary for
the constitution of a true Church, as the reasonable soul is for the
essential being of a man. Appeal. p. 123.

In points accessory, there may be error; but none in points fundamental,
gagg. p. 48. Of points fundamental, only do I speak, and in them only do
I conceive infaliibilitie. Appeal. p. 123.

I answer, this explication serves well to puzzell the Mountague from agreeing
with the Ch: of Rome, for many reasons.

The term fundamental is borrowed. We shall then know the true sense of it,
when we know what a foundation is in proper speech. A foundation is that part,
whereupon the rest of the building is placed. Fundamental points of faith must
be like unto this; they must be such whereupon some other thing is builded,
which is borne up, and sustained by such points of faith.

Things accessory are such as are attendants, not things principal in being or
causalitie: This being considered, I say,

1. First, the distinction it self is naught. No points of says be accessory,
all are fundamental, in as much as the whole divine Revelation, and every
particular proposition thereof, is the foundation of our salvation which is
built thereupon.

And so says the Homily of reading the Scriptures, 1. part, where it calls
the Word of God, the foundation whereupon the wise builder does build. And the
Apostle does say no less, when he says, We are built upon the foundation of
the Apostles, etc. Ephesians. 2. 20. And the thing it self does fay the same, for as
much as there is no sentence, in the divine Revelation, but does conduce to
everlasting happiness.

2. His description of a fundamental point of faith, is of his own devising,
without warrant of the thing it self, or any other Author. He does allege,
Appeal. p. 128. Bishop Morton for his Author thereof: but falsely. The Bishop
(even as he has alleged him) has not one word of a fundamental point of
faith, that has any place in this question.

3. The description (as it lies) is not intelligible, how a foundation can be
as essential to the thing built thereupon, as the soul is to man, passes
humane understanding, seeing man's soul is the primary essence of man; a
foundation is but part of the matter, whereof the building is made. Again,
what he means by belief, needs a second explication, there is nothing in his
discourse that shows it.

4. To what the points of faith be fundamental, he shows not: this therefore
must be understood, because points of faith are fundamental diverse ways, 1.
Some points are fundamental to other some, viz. this point, There is a God, is
fundamental to all other points of faith. The like instance may be given in
many other points, wherein the primary are the foundations to the secondary
points of faith. 2. Points of faith are the foundations to our salvation. 3.
Points of faith are the foundation to the Church, in as much as the Preaching
of the pure Word of God therein, does serve unto the being of a Church, in the
Judgment of the Church of England. Arti: 19.

He yields us another description, Appeal. p. 116. in these words; Points
fundamental be such as are immediate unto faith.

He proves this, as he did the former, (just never a whit.) We must believe it
to be thus, because he says it. We must guess at his meaning, for he does not
tell it us. I think by immediate unto faith, he means such points as are
objected unto faith first and before others, such as these, viz. That there is
a God, is believed before all other points that concern virtue and happiness;
That there is a divine Revelation, is believed before all other that concern
supernatural holiness and happiness; That there is a Mediator, the man Christ,
is believed before all others, that do directly tend to salvation. He being
thus understood, his description is false, for the primary or first obiecting
unto says gives them not any thing like to the foundation of a building. It is
the succeeding Articles of faith (which does suppose the precedent) that make
the preceding to have the likeness of a foundation. This Article, That there
is a God, is a foundation to all others universally, because all of them do
follow and suppose this. 2. Some Articles are fundamental, which are not
objected first unto faith, for that there is a divine Revelation, is not
objected first unto faith, yet it is the foundation unto all other Articles of
divine faith. The like instance may be given of many other Articles, which are
foundations in the like sort: which yet are objected unto faith many degrees
after the first.

He does explicate these fundamentalls, by these properties: viz.

The knowledge and belief of them is absolutely necessary to salvation: no man
can be saved, that does not know and believe them.

That some points have these properties I grant, and namely, those three I have
already spoken of: but that these properties are so peculiar unto
fundamentalls, as that they belong unto them all, and unto none but such (which
is the thing he intends) he has not proved, nor can. Besides, this necessary
order between some points of faith and heaven, does not make them fundamental,
because that necessity arises from the things themselves, in respect that
they are the entrance into the way to heaven.

5. The application of the distinction is false.

He does not conceive the Church to be infallible in fundamentalls. For if he
did, then also he does give the Church authority to Judge in fundamentalls,
because that goes with this. But he does not give the Church that authority,
but denies it unto them. Which I prove by his own testimony.

1. In his Appeal he disputes, p. 126. in this form, and in these words:

Councels are to determine things which be of doubtful issue.

Fundamentalls are no such.

Out of which proposition and assumption, this conclusion issues.

Therefore Councels are not to determine points fundamental.

2. Out of his Gagg and Appeal, I argue thus:

In Divinity questions and controverted matters, the Church is Judge. gagg. p.
14. and 28.

Fundamentalls are not divinity questions, nor controverted matters.

For Fundamentalls be plainly delivered in Scripture. Appeal. p. 125.

Therefore the Church is not Judge in fundamentalls.

Although these things which I have answered, be sufficient (I hope) to take
away the reason, which he pleads to excuse himself, from agreeing with the
Church of Rome, in the point of the Churches infallibility: yet I will add a
reason from his own testimony, and the thing it self, to prove that his
agreement, on this manner:

If he does give to the Church infallibility in points fundamental, all points
of faith be fundamental, then he does agree with the Church of Rome, in the
point of the Churches infallibility. For the Church of Rome does give
infallibility to the Church in all points of faith. But he does give
infallibility to the Church in points fundamental. And all points of faith be
fundamental. 1. To man's salvation. 2. One to another. 3. To the Church (as
shall be proved if need require)

Therefore he does consent with the Church of Rome, in the point of the
Churches infallibility.

And thus much shall suffice touching the second point.

That he does dissent from the Church of England, Appeal. p. 128. The first
whereof must be framed thus:

That possibility of erring, which Arti: 19. ascribes to general Councels,
is in things wherein they have erred. For

It avou cheth, that general Councels have erred.

But in fundamentalls they have never erred, because there is no such extant.

Therefore the Article does not ascribe possibility of erring to general
Councels in fundamentalls.

I answer, this argument proves nothing, but begs the question, in that

1. It takes as granted, some points of faith be fundamental,

2. The assumption is as doubtful as the conclusion. The proposition is also
false, the words of the Article attributes unto the church possibility of
erring, without limitation, either indefinite or assigned It says,

General Councels may err in things appertaining to God.

If this proposition be understood, to speak not of all, but of some things
pertaining to God, then nothing is determined thereby of certainty, but that
may not be granted; for that is a delusion, no decision.

The proof added to the proposition confirms it not, for that proposition is
not a limitation of a Councels erring: but a proof that Councels may err; on
this wise:

Councels have erred.

Therefore Councels may err.

If it be replied, that this reason is not good, except erring in the
consequent be taken, in that sense, wherein it is used in the Antecedent.

I rejoynd, the argument is good, although erring in the antecedent, be taken
for erring in some things, and erring in the consequent be taken for erring in
all things, because the Church that is not free from error in some points of
faith, is not free at all.

The proof added to the assumption stands thus*

That which has not erred hither to, cannot err hereafter, etc.

But this proposition is manifestly false, because freedom from error, and
infallibility in Judgment, is not made by not erring in time past, but by a
special and peculiar providence of God, which they may want at some other
time, who (in the thing) have not erred in time foregoing.

His second reason is in p. 124. after this sort.

If the Article speaks of things pertaining to God, and those are not all
fundamentalls, then it may be understood of things not fundamental.

I answer, this reason has the fault that the former had, it presumes that
points of faith, are some fundamental, some not fundamental, which is denied,
and therefore it begs the question. 2. I will grant the distinction for this
time, and say further, the word (only) must be added to the latter part of this
reason, otherwise it concludes nothing to purpose; that being added, I deny
the consequence, because the Article speaks of all things pertaining to God,
as I have proved in my answer. And I prove further by your own testimony, thus;

If the Article in saying Councels may err in things, etc. do not mean all
but some things, then the doctrine of the Church of England is not plain
direct, without far-fetched obscure interpretations, casie even and perspicuous
of it self, fitted for the use, capacity, and instruction of the simple and
ignorant, who are not capable of obscurities.

But the doctrine of the Church of England is plain, direct, etc as your self
does truly affirm. Appeal. p. 245.

Therefore the Article in saying Councels may err in things, etc. does mean
universally all things pertaining to God.

His third reason is in the same. p. 124 thus;

The Article speaks of debating and discussing,

I speak of deciding and determining.

Therefore I dissent not from the Article.

I answer, the 1. branch of the Antecedent is false. Ordeining is deciding and
determining. The Article speaks of ordaining. Thus it argues Councels may
err.

Therefore things ordained by them, not taken out of Scripture, have no
authority.

Therefore the Article speaks of deciding and determining.

His fourth reason is in p. 125. to this effect.

The Article speaks of things that are in Controversy.

I speak of things plainly delivered in Scripture.

Therefore I dissent not from the Article.

I answer, the words plainly delivered in Scripture, must signify things not
in controversy. That being granted, the second branch in the antecedent is
false. He himself other-where delivers the contrary.

Those things whereof the Church must Judge, are the things where in according
to him, the Church is free from error.

But things in Controversy, are those according to him, whereof the Church
must Judge.

See what he says, gagg. p. 13.

Truth is manifest and confessed. more obscure and involved.


And p. 14.

In controverted matters, if a question be moved, the Church must decide and
settle that doubt.

In plain^ cases no deciding Judge shall need, but such as are ambiguous, must
be determined by the Judge, etc.

Therefore according to him in things in Controversy, the Church is free from
error; and the reason hereof for a full explication of this matter, he lays
down in his Appeal. p. 160. in these words:

There is a rule of faith, we acknowledge it. Things that are straight, and
direct, and according to that rule, confessedly need not application, are not
commonly brought to be, applied to that rule, but things of different or
doubtful standing, these need application, and are applied by the perpetual
practice of the Catholic Church.

And thus have I ended all the reasons, which he brings to excuse himself,
from dissenting from the doctrine of the Church of England in this point, which
are too weak to excuse him, therefore I may safely conclude; He does dissent
from the Church of England, touching the infallibility of the Church.

Now I proceed to examine whether this proposition

A Council truly general, in giving sentence of a divinity question, cannot
vary from the Scriptures.

His proofs for it, we find set down in his Appeal. p. 123. taken from two
places of Scripture; the former on this wise;

They to whom the spirit is promised, to lead them into all truth Ioh. 16. 13.
they cannot in giving sentence of a divinity question, vary from the
Scriptures.

But to a Council truly general, the spirit is promised to lead them into all
truth. Ioh. 16. 13.

Therefore a Council truly general, in giving sentence of a divinitte
question, cannot vary from the Scriptures.

I answer, There is no whole part in this argument; Not in the proposition,
which supposes, that

These words, Ioh. 16. 13. were spoken to some which have an office to Judge,
whether this or that sentence in Divinity, be agreeable to the Scriptures or
not.

But this supposition is of his own making, and has been refuted in the last
Chapter going before, wherein it does appear by my answer to him. That office
was never committed to any. Wherefore this argument does indeed beg; but not
demonstrate the question.

For further refut^tion thereof, I may thus argue If these words were spoken to
some that had that office, then the Apostles had it. For those words were
spoken to the Apostles (I take as granted.) But the Apostles had it not; for
they had the office to reveal the sacred mysteries, with which the office in
question was nothing fit to stand. It cannot be imagined, that the Apostles
would lay aside that power and authority of revealing, and submit themselves
to the office of application and exposition of things already revealed; this
being inferior, as the building, that superior, as the foundation; that being
performed without labor and industry, this not without much of both; that
being an immediate continuation of Christ's ministry, this mediate: none of
which may be admitted without special direction in the Word of God, wherein
there is not a word whereon we may build any such conceit.

Moreover, although this exception were not taken, yet the proposition is
false. These words may be spoken to such as have not that office, this leading
into all truth, and that office of applying and expounding things revealed,
does not necessarily go together. The word, leading, may signify no more, but
an act of doing so much as is required on Gods part, which has not always the
event accordingly, but oftentimes is frustrate by man's default. 2. The words;
all truth, may import no more, but that whole which is required unto the
salvation of every particular man, so necessarily, that without it that cannot
be had. The assumption is no better, the Text alleged has not one word
touching a general Council: If it be replied, that those words were spoken to
the Apostles, and from them to the Pastors of the Church which succeed them,
and because those Pastors cannot consult and give sentence touching a thing in
question, except they meet together, therefore these words were spoken of a
general Council. To this I rejoyne. The Text thus explicated, yields these
questions. 1. Who are the Pastors of the Church. 2. In what respect those
Pastors do succeed the Apostles. 3. Who has the authority, to gather the
Pastors of the Church together. 4. Whether all or some, and what number of
Pastors have authority to determine. 5. Of what value their determination and
sentence is. 6. From whence their determination receives strength; all which
questions are no less doubtful, then the conclusion which the Text is brought
to prove; whereby it does beg the question, but proves it not.

His second proof must be thus framed; They with whom our Savior Christ is
present, according to his promise. M^t. 18. 20. They in giving sentence of a
Divinity question, cannot vary from the Scriptures. But with a Council truly
general, our Savior Christ is present according to his promise. Mat. 18. 20.
Therefore a Council truly general, etc.

I answer, this place of Scripture does yield these questions. 1. What is meant
by Christ's presence. 2. Whether this presence be promised them in respect of
their meeting, or the thing whereabout they meet. 3. Whether that promise
extend also unto a greater number. 4. Whether the promise be made to all that
so meet, Pastors or not Pastors. Every one whereof, is no less difficult to be
determined by the word of God, then the present question, therefore he does beg
the question, and not prove it. Farther answer then this, there needs none unto
this argument, seeing that no proof can be more base and impotent, then that
which depends upon things equally, or more doubtful then the thing to be
proved.

Other proofs then these two, he has not in this point; and these two are
urged by Bellarmine, de Council. cap. 3. 11. lib. 1. and lib. 2. cap. 2. as his
maine strength in this question, and have been answered by Lubbertus and
Whitakers to the full, but they were poor Divines, Mr: Mountague needs not
regard or take knowledge of them.

CHAP. V.
Mr. Mountague. Chapter of Rome. Chapter of Eng: There ever was, and will be ever upon
earth, a visible Church, some-where or other, with visible cognisances, marks,
and signs to be discerned by. viz. Gods Word preached, Sacraments ministered,
Priesthood, and ordination. Appeal. p. 135. Unto which, complaints may be
made. Gagg. p. 49.

I Have nothing to set down in this point under the England, because I do not
find any thing decreed therein by our Church, neither could it well, for as
much as in this point the Negative only is defended against the Church of
Rome; That affirms a visibilitie, which the Church of England denies, which
Negation is employed in the 19. Article, wherein the visibilitie of the Church
assigned by the Church of Rome, is acknowledged in some things, and it is
silent for the rest, which is as much as if it did say in these things, we
confess the Church is always visible, and other visibilitie we do deny.

According to order here must be inquired,

1. Whether that proposition be true or not. 2. Whether that proposition do
consent with the Church of Rome, or not. 3. Whether that proposition do^
dissent from the Church of England, or not.
Before any of these can be disputed, his sentence touching

1. The Church is visible. 2. This visibilitie consists in the inioying of
the Word and Sacraments. Priesthood and ordination. ability to hear
complaints.


That the Church is visible in the enjoying of the Word and Sacraments,
Priesthood and ordination (so far as they are required of necessity unto the
administration of the Word and Sacraments) is not in question, so much is
granted on all sides. The Church of England has decreed it in that 19.
Article, in these words:

The visible Church of Christ, is a Congregation of faithful men, in the which
the pure Word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered,
according to Christ's ordinance, in all those things that of necessity are
requisite to the same.

All the question is about the last branch, viz. Whether the Church do enjoy
all her officers with that freedom, that it may be able and fit to determine
every doubt that arises, touching either faith or manners, as appears number. 2.
6. Which doubt may well be put in this single proposition, set down by
himself. gagg. p. 49.

There ever was, and will be a Church, unto whom complaints may be made.

Now the question is truly put, the next labor must

That it does consent with the Church of Rome, himself confesses, when he
says, gaggp. p. 50. This Controversy (to wit, of the visibilitie of the
Church, taught by the Church of Rome, and denied by others) may cease. If he
did not agree with them, he would have held it on foot, there being so good
reason for it: they maintain it as a ground of an Article of their faith: and
his adversary does challenge the Church of England for denying of it.

And Bellarmines doctrine does show it, de Ecclesia lib. true Church is
visible. cap. 12. The Church is a Congregation subjected unto lawful Pastors,
in the profession of the Christian faith, and the use of Sacraments, cap. 2.
Nostra autem, etc. The Church is therefore visible, because of this subjection,
cap. 12. Septim^, etc. This visible Church cannot fail. cap. 13. Which
sentence has these three branches. 1. The Church is visible. 2. This visible
Church cannot fail. 3. The Church is visible by subjection to Pastors in
matters of faith. In the two first, Mr: Mountague and the Church of Rome agree
expressly: In the third, they agree in the thing, because subjection to Pastors
in matters of faith, supposes, that there be Pastors to whom complaints may be
made, and who are fit, and have freedom and ability, to hear complaints in
matters of faith.

He says, there will ever be a Church, to whom complaints may be made.
Bellarmine says, there will ever be a Church wherein there is ruling and
obeying in matters of faith. cap. 13. Which sentence he presumes in the
beginning of that 13. Chapter, is denied by Calvin, and others, against whom he
does prove it there, and defend it. cap. 16.

That it does dissent from the Church of England, England had judged, that the
Church should be perpetually so open unto the eye of the world, as to enjoy the
liberty to hear Complaints, and determine them, then it would have confessed
it, and taught it, because it has taught visibilitie in all other things that
they do: and it would have set down the whole truth in the point; but this it
has not done, therefore it is most certain, the Church of England does deny
that visibilitie of the Church, which they claim, and he yields unto.

He is very desirous to persuade the world of his agreement England, therefore
he tells us, Appeal. p. 134.

In the 19. Article, Church, and visible, are convertible terms.

Therefore the 19. Article tendreth no invisibilitie.

The sense of this Conclusion is;

The 19. Article does not teach that the Church is invisible.

But that is a private opinion of some, and so he does interpret himself,
Appeal. p. 133.

This Conclusion is nothing to his purpose, if he will England, he must show us
a record for this proposition:

There ever will be a Church, unto whom complaints may be made.

For so says he, number 1. and 4.

Your antecedent is false. Church and visible in that definition, cannot be
convertible terms. For they are not predicated one of another. Secondly, both
of them make the subject part of that definition. The term Church, b^ing the
thing defined, is restrained unto a special notion by the word visible. 3.
Terms convertible, are adequate in their essence, so are not these, Church and
visible; for visibilitie is but an adiunct unto the Church Your Consequence is
also naught, for as your self confess, Appeal. p. 134.

It is a position drawn out from the 19. Article, that there is a Church of
Christ invisible.

And indeed so it is, for to say the Church is visible, is to grant the Church
is also invisible, else how can there be a divided member unto visible. He
labors to show wherein the Church is invisible. p. 135.

But I leave that, because it is nothing to the point in hand, as I have showed.

The proposition in question is set down number. 4. and England, which has
bounded the total and adequate nature of the visible Church within shorter
limits. And indeed, who would be so grossly mistaken, as to think that the
Catholic Church has no being in the world, unless it be in case to meet
jointly together in one court, to make laws, that shall bind the whole Church
in matters of faith and manners?

It stood him upon, to prove that proposition, number. 5. viz. There ever was etc.
to be true; for if it be false, then the Church cannot be Judge in Divinity
Controversies, because the Judge of Divinity Controversies extends unto, and
is present at all times, to determine all controversies in faith and manners,
that shall arise in any time. But this he has not done. He has not so much as
one sentence, piece of a sentence, or word, that may tend to prove this
proposition;

There ever will be a Church, unto whom complaints may be made.

In his Appeal. p. 135. he bestows much labor to

The Church is always visible.

First, by reasons; then by authorities of Doctor Field, Doctor Humfryes,
Doctor Willet, Bishop Morton, Bishop Jewel, Doctor White, with many vaunts,
and much confidence in their authority; concluding that they are ignorant,
malicious, or factious, that think otherwise: But all in vain, for that was
never denied, nor never in question between the Church of Rome, and any others:
If another did thus, he would call it a man of straw of his own making, and
tell him, he shot his boult at it, when he had done; and such like terms. But
I pardon him the fault, I perceive it is his Custom, to prove what all men
grant, and to take for granted, what is denied, he cannot leave it. Therefore I
leave this, and pass to the next.

But I make too much have, I find an argument in Appeal. p. 139. which may not
be passed over in silence. In these words, and in this form he sets it
down.

The Church of Rome has been ever visible.

The Church of Rome is, and ever was a true Church, since it was a Church.

Therefore the true Church has been visible.

He charge that this be remembered, and that his friends do Chew the Cud upon
it. A good advice. A necessary Caution, I will as diligently observe it, as he
lovingly gave it.

I answer, the Church of Rome is taken sometimes for

In this place it is taken in the first sense: otherwise the argument would be
ridiculous. That being so taken, it is manifest.

This Syllogism is false for the form. For

The Conclusion thereof is universal thus; The Church etc.

But it ought to be singular, or indefinite, thus:

Some true Church has been visible.

Perhaps he changed the Conclusion wittingly, because if he had concluded thus,
he saw his Conclusion is nothing to purpose; he ought to have concluded;

The Catholic Church is perpetually visible, as appears number. 12.

And his Readers, poor simple men, had not skill enough to find out that fault
well; let us chew this good stuff a little more. Let it be as he will, take
the conclusion as you find it: yet the conclusion is nothing to the purpose.
For he ought to have concluded, what the Church shall be in all times to come.

The Church shall be visible.

He does conclude, what the Church has been in time past.

The Church has been visible.

particular Church, for he says in the place now alleged, it is a part of the
Catholic Church. And again. Appeal. p. 136. He does call it the Church in
Rome, and does range it with a Church in England, France, Spain, all which do
denote particular Churches.

That he does consent with the Church of Rome, it is the mother and mistress of
all Churches. Council. Trent. sess. 7. de Bab^is. can. 3. and sess. 13. de
extrem. vnct. cap. 3. sess. 22. de sacrif. missae. cap 8.

That it does dissent from the Church of England, Rome, has set it down in
the book of Articles, and the common Liturgy, and has shaken off the faith
of the Church of Rome, by rejecting the Decrees of the Council of Trent, and
other Councels depending upon the Popes authority. All which is also declared
by Bishop Jewel in his Apology, in diverse places; some whereof I will repeat.

1. We have departed from that Church, says he, whose errors were proved and
made manifest to the world, which Church also already had departed from Gods
Word, and yet have we not departed so much from it self as from the errors
thereof. par. 4. cap. 11. divis. 1. 2. We have renounced that Church, wherein
we could neither have the Word of God sincerely taught, nor the Sacraments
rightly administered, and wherein was nothing able to stay a wise man, or one
that has consideration of his own safety. par. 5. cap. 15. divis. 3. 3. We
have forsaken the Church as it is now, and have so gone from it, as Daniell
went out of the Lions den. divis. 4. 4. Let them compare our Churches and
theirs together, and they shall see, that themselves have most shan^^fully gone
from the Apostles, and we most justly have gone from them. cap. 16. divis. 1.
5. We have departed from him, who is without all doubt the forerunner and
standard bearer of Antichrist, and has utterly forsaken the Catholic faith.
part. 6. cap. 22. divis. 2.
Lastly, we have restored our Churches by a Provincial Convocation, and have
clean shaken off the yoke of the Bishop of Rome, who had no manner of thing
like neither to Christ, nor to an Apostle. And these are the reasons and
causes, why we have restored Religion, and forsaken these men. cap. the last.

The testimony of this reverend Bishop must be received, An Apology in defense
of the Church of England, which he does. 2. This work of his has passed for
many years in the public knowledge of our Church, without the least blame. 3.
After this long deliberation, it is reprinted, with special direction from
authority, and to the end it might be had in every several Parish in the
Kingdom, which is executed accordingly.

Whereunto I will add the necessity, which the church England conceived to be
of that separation, which it has expressed by the mouth and pen of the same
Author, as follows:

1. They have no cause to call us again to believe as they believe. If we
should content our selves to return to the Pope and his errors, it should be a
very dangerous matter, both to kindle Gods wrath against us, and to clogg and
condemn our souls for ever. part. 6. cap. 22. divis. 1. 2. We have fallen
from the Bishop of Rome, because the case stood so, that unless we left him,
we could not come to Christ. par. 6. cap. 20. divis. 2. 3. The holy Ghost,
Apocal. 18. commands us to depart from the Church of Rome, for so it is
written; Come away from her, O my people, that ye be not partakers of her
sins, least you be also partakers of her plagues.
Answer to Hardings conclusion.

From whence I thus argue;

The Church of England is departed from the Church of Rome, to avoid damnation.

Therefore the Church of England Judges the Church of Rome to be no true
Church.

And Mr: Mountague does profess himself to be no Child of the Church of
England. Thus he writes. Appeal. p. 112.

I profess my self none of those furious ones in point of difference now
adays, whose profession and rosolution is that the further in any thing from
communion with the Church of Rome, the nearer unto God and truth. That we ought
to have no co^merce, society, or accordance with Papists in things divine,
upon pain of eternal damnation.

Much joy may he have, in that his good temper and communion with the Church of
Rome, I will harken to the warning given by the Church of England, and be
furious with it rather then hazard my salvation in imitation of his good temper.

That this proposition,

The Church of Rome is a true Church.

Is false and untrue, will appear by my answer to his Arguments.

Before I come unto that, I must set down what he means by true Church,
which I find written. Appeal. p. 140. in these words;

It is a true Church in respect of the essence and being of a Church, not a
sound Church every way in their doctrine.

Although this distinction be liable to many just exceptions, yet I pass by
it, and come to the proposition in question, which according to his own
exposition must be conceiud in these terms.

The Church of Rome has the essence and being of a true Church.

His proofs for this we find written in his Appeal* p. 113. the first whereof
is set down in these words;

I am absolutely persuaded the Church of Rome is a true Church, etc.

I answer, his persuasion (though never so absolute) is no compotent rule for
any divinity question, much less for this, which does so nearly concern an
Article of faith, as the Church of Rome would have it. It may be the other two
reasons, which he has for this matter, is the ground for this his absolute
persuasion, therefore I pass from this, and come to the second, in these words;

In essentialls and fundamentalls they agree.

I answer, this is a very riddle, and no proof. What If the Trumpet give an
uncertain sound, none can prepare himself to battle. Let us aim at his
meaning, it will open the whole Cause the better. It may be, by fundamentalls,
he means such Articles of faith, as must be believed explicitly unto
salvation. If this be his meaning, I deny that they agree in fundamentals; for
in such Articles they have no divine faith, because the immediate and formal
reason of that their belief, is the authority of the Pope and his Council,
whose sentence is humane and not divine, for want of a Commission from God for
that office, as has been showed, Chap. 3.

His third proof is comprehended in these words, Appeal. p. 113.

They hold one faith, in one Lord, into whom they are inserted, through one
Baptism.

I answer, this wants not obscurity; he seems to esteem himself safest,
when he is least understood. I suppose he would say thus;

The Church of Rome teaches the same faith which God reveald, and has the
same Sacraments which Christ instituted.

I answer, if he were as able to prove, as he is ready with confidence to
affirm, I would grant him the question upon this only reason.

But the spite is, he has no proof at all, and his own word is not
sufficient, therefore we are where we were, see how handsomely he disputes.

In the last argument, he gave them agreement in fundamental points of faith
(that is to say) in some, not in all points, for all points of faith, be not
fundamental, himself avoucheth, Appeal. p. 124. In this he gives them
agreement in all points of faith; a sudden change; there some, not all; here
all, not some. The matter it self of this argument, shall be further handled
anon, number. 13. etc.

He will supply this want, by the authority of Ianius, Papist, nor Arminian;
his words are these.

The Papal Church, is a Church according to that it has, which belongs unto
the definition of a Church.

I answer, it is very doubtful, whether this sentence be truly alleged or
not, because it neither affirms nor denies any thing of certainty; but let
it pass as it is, it makes nothing for you. He must say,

The Church of Rome, has the essence and being of a true Church.

For so say you. But of this he has not a word. If you say, he supposes

The Church of Rome has something belonging to the definition of a Church.

I rejoynd, he may so suppose, and yet not agree with you; for that supposall
may be a concession in courtesy, and not an affirmation of a truth; which two
things do really differ in your own judgment, Appeal. p. 14. when it was
your own case. Of this judgment I hope you are still, now the case does not
concern your self.

And there is great diff^rence between something pertaining to the definition
of a Church, and the essence whereof you speak; for that must signify part of
the essence, and may signify the general thing, wherein the Church does agree
with other societies; this must be taken for the specificall and adequate being
of the Church.

Lastly, I will willingly grant him, the Church of Rome has something
pertaining to the definition of a Church, and that it is a Church according to
it; and this is all he alleges out of Iunius, yea, I will assign him, what
that something is, viz. It is a company of men on earth, which pertains to
the definition of a Church, by the confession of them and our Church. The 19.
Article says, the Church is a Congregation of men; and so says Bellarmine, de
eccle. lib. 3. cap. 2. And more then so, I will grant him, viz. that the Church
of Rome is so far forth a Church (that is to say) a company of men joined
together in one society, by one common bond; but this will profit him nothing,
as is manifest by the thing it self.

Thus far all the allegations which he makes to the Church of Rome is a true
Church, have been examined, and found too weak, for his absolute persuasion
that it is a true Church to be grounded upon. Wherefore I have good reason to
conclude this point in his own words. Appeal. p. 161.

If you have any special illumination or assurance by divine revelation, or
rather strong persuasion, through affection, much good may it do you, keep it
to your self, press it not upon others.

To which I add. If you will not be advised, but insist upon so vain a
conceit, you do amongst wise men but beat the arre, for as much as there is
the description of the Church in the Scriptures, and the authority of the
Church of England against you, neither does there want proof for the same
thing amongst the Divines of the Church of England. But in stead of many, I
will name only two, that is, your self, and Doctor Carleton, Bishop of
Chichester, no Papists, Arminians, nor Puritans, no shallow heads, that Jcumme
off the surface, no novellers unacquainted with old Learning, none of the
brethren frantic for the holy Cause, but just to an hair, as your self will
desire. Thus you write:

The Pope is interessed in that Apostacy, which is a departing away from
Christ, and his Kingdom, his doctrine, and his Scepter. Appeal. p. 149. and
150.

It may seem probable, that the Turkish state may at least be assumed into
association with the Pope and Papacy, in making up that Antichrist, and
Antichristian Kingdom, or state opposite unto the state and Kingdom of
Christ. Turcisme opposes Christ openly by fiery force, and Popery is opposite
by fraud and guile. Appeal. p. 158.

The Scripture is our absolute rule of faith and manners, we consent and agree,
it is Antichristian to dissent from, to reject that rule, and him an Antichrist
that does so, or proposes any thing, as to be believed against that rule. The
Pope does this, let him then be an Antichrist in St. John's acceptance. There
are many Antichrists. Appeal. p. 160. and 161.

From hence, thus I argue;

1. That Church which is Antichristian, and an Apostata, that has departed
from Christ, his kingdom, doctrine, and Scepter, that is no true Church: But
according to you, the Church of Rome is Antichristian, and an Apostata, etc.

For according to you, the Pope of Rome is an Antichrist, and an Apostata, etc.
And such as the Pope is, such is that Church, for as much as they receive their
faith from the Decree and determination of the Pope. Thus writes Suarez,
defide, etc. tracta. 1. disp. 5. sect. 7. number. 6. and 9.

A general Council, in which the Pope is present, either in his own person,
or by his Legates, and confirmed by the Pope, is an infallible rule of faith.

And this he also there says, is a matter of faith.

Therefore according to you, the Church of Rome is not a true Church*

2. That Church which opposes the Kingdom and state of Christ, is not a true
Church.

But according to you, the Church of Rome opposes the Kingdom and state of
Christ.

For according to you, the Pope, Papacy, Popery, opposes the Kingdom and
state of Christ.

Therefore according to you, the Church of Rome is not a true Church.

How this sore shall be healed, it passes the skill of all such, whose
learning exceeds not the age of Plato. It may be, he has some that is of an
elder stamp; and by it can show, how a church may be a runn away from Christ,
and a household* servant unto Christ. How that church which rejects Christ's
law, kingdom, and Scepter, and in that respect is a rebel, does also at the
same instant, retain, obey, and yield subjection unto Christ, his kingdom,
and Scepter. And this he must do, or else confess, what he built in one place,
he destroys in another. This he cannot do, because Christ, his kingdom, nor
his Scepter, cannot be divided into parts, nor the Church extended thereunto,
as unto parts, neither can the doctrine of Christ, be so objected unto the
faith and obedience of the Church, as that it may reject some part thereof, and
believe other some: but it must obey and believe every part thereof actually,
and intentionally, or non^ at all. There is one God, one faith, one hope, one
Baptism, not deviding, but composing Christ in his members and profession, are
his own words. Appeal. p. 43. Therefore by his own authority, I may safely
conclude against his own proposition now in question;

The Church of Rome is not a true Church.

Bishop Carleton writes thus in his Book, called Directions to know the true
Church*

The Church of Rome which now is, is not the true Church of Christ. p. 78. and
92.

The Church of Rome as now it stands, has no communion with the Catholic
Church. p. 88. and 100.

The present Church of Rome, is no Church of Christ, but an assembly, I say
not of heretics, but of far worse and more dangerous, then any heretics
heretofore have been. p. 65.

Touching the danger that they are in, which have communion with the Church of
Rome, in the Popish doctrine, and the receivers thereof, he writes thus;

These traps are laid with great subtlety, to inthrall their souls, let them,
at least, that are seduced, lift up their eyes, and see the snares that are
provided to catch them, and behold the danger that is before them, if they will
wilfully fall into these snares, then may they blame themselves for their own
destruction. p. 63. and 64.

The damage redoundeth to the destruction of their souls.

This thing the simple people ought more carefully to look to, more exactly to
prevent, then any damage that can grow in their worldly state. p. 43.

The means to be saved, are now taken away by these that are now in the Church
of Rome. p. 84.

Which testimony, as it is free from all exception that might any ways disable
it, so also it caries with it many circumstances of credit, especially, to Mr:
Mountague, for he says, Appeal. p. 69.

Sometimes he was his worthy friend and acquaintance, since is his reverend and
much reverenced Diocesan, his superior in learning and authority. A thing much
urged by himself. Appeal. p. 28.

Unto all men, I find these circumstances, yielding credit unto him.

Our Church and state does take knowledge of him for learning and virtue; for
it employed him for our Church in the Synod of Dort, and that as the
principal of our Divines that were sent thither, are Mr: Mountague his own
words. Appeal. p. 69. Since that, our Church has advanced him unto Diocesan
authority. Lastly, his testimony agrees fully with the testimony of Bishop
Jewel, set down before, whose doctrine is indeed the doctrine of our Church;
the book it self is dedicated unto his Majesty that now is, and thereby has
a Royal Confirmation and Protection.

But which is most of all, this testimony is commended by clear and evident
demonstration, which out of the said book is thus to be framed;

Every particular assembly that holds not unity Christ, but an assembly of
heretics. p. 5.

For the Church is but one, not two, nor many. p. 4.

But the Church of Rome has broken off this unity with the Catholic Church.
p. 5.

Therefore the present Church of Rome, is no church of Christ, but an assembly
of heretics. p. 65.

The assumption of this argument, he proves thus;

The Church is one, 1. by the unity of the body; 2. by the unity of the head;
3. by the unity of the spirit; 4. by the unity of faith. p. 6.

But the church of Rome does not hold the unity by the body. p. 8. nor the
unity of the head. p. 13. nor the unity of the spirit. p. 19. nor the unity
of faith. p. 22.

Therefore the Church of Rome holds not unity with the Catholic Church.

Although all those are necessarily required to prove a Church, to hold unity
with the Catholic Church, as he says, p. 6. and he brings proofs, that the
church of Rome holds not unity in any one of them, in the several places
which I have quoted, yet I will content my self to bring his proof for the
last, because (as he truly also says) where one of them is found, all of them
are found. p. 7. And contrariwise.

His proof for the last, stands thus;

They that hold the unity of faith with the Catholic Church, they have the
same rule of faith with the Catholic Church. p. 34. and 39. For

The faith of the Church is said to be one, because the rule of faith is one,
and the same, from the beginning of the Church to the end. p. ^4.

But the Church of Rome holds not, but has changed that rule of faith. p.
32. and 49. For

Whereas the rule of faith was ever confessed to be in the doctrine of the
Scriptures: now in* the Council of Trent, unwritten traditions were taken into
the rule of faith, and so they teach, that the whole rule is in the Scriptures,
and traditions. p. 33. 49. and 50.

Therefore the Church of Rome, holds not the unity of faith with the
Catholic Church.

I might add the several proofs, which this reverend Author brings, to
prove the several parts of this argument, but I forbear it, because the
principal doubt lies in this, that he says

The Scripture is the rule of faith. And

The Church of Rome has changd that rule.

Which needs no proof, because Mr: Mountague avoucheth the same. Appeal. p.
16. On this wise:

There is a rule of faith, we acknowledge it etc.

The Scripture is an exact and absolute rule of faith and manners.

The Pope does dissent from, and reject that rule; proposes some things as to
be believed against that rule.

Which is no less, then as if he had said expressly,

The Scripture is the rule of faith, and the Church of Rome has changed it,
and made a word of God of their own invention.

Which are the Bishops words in the place alleged.

In that book is set down a second argument for the

They that have changed the Judge of Controversies of faith, have changed that
whereby the Church is known to be a Church.

But the Church of Rome has changed the Judge of Controversies of faith. p.
64. and 73. For,

The written Word of God does suffice to end all controversies of faith, and is
the Catholic determination of the Judge of Controversies in faith. p. 54.

They teach, that men must believe nothing, but that which the Church teaches;
by the Church they mean themselves, who are their teachers. p. 39.

They tell us, that the rule of faith is that which the Church teaches. p. 47.
and 48.

Therefore the Church of Rome has changed that whereby the Church is known to
be a Church.

Unto these two, he brings a third, to this effect.

That Church wherein the foundation of the Church is changed, cease to be a
true Church of Christ.

But in the Church of Rome, the foundation of the church is changed.

For in it the rule of faith is changed, which is the foundation of the Church.
And the Church is built upon this foundation, that is, upon the faith contained
in the Scriptures.

Therefore the Church of Rome cease to be a true church.

Unto this testimony, I may add these three more. viz. Doctor Reynolds in his
Verses upon the third conclusion, handled in the Schools, November. 3. 1579.
Doctor Whitaker, in his disputations of the Church. quest. 6. cap. 1. and Mr:
Perkins, in his Prologue to the Reformed Catholic; all which do avouch our
departure from the Church of Rome, upon pain of damnation.

It may be, Mr: Mountague will except against these three, as incompetent to
testify against him; for of the two first, thus he says;

Doctor Reynolds, all his excellency was in his reading. Appeal. p. 123. And
of Doctor Whitaker, he says, that he was a through man, and an earnest promoter
of novell opinions, against other learned Divines. Appeal. p. 71. And of them
all three, that they were Puritans, delighting in contention.

To which, I answer; These exceptions may truly be sentenced by Bishop Jewel,
in his reply unto Master Hardings answer, the 8. Article, and the 1. division,
set down in these words;

He as a man overmuch obedient unto his affections, breaks up his way with
unsavory and bitter talk; and as a Cock that is well pampered with Garlic
before the fight, he seeks to overmatch his fellow, rather with rankness of
breath, then with might of body.

But these Books will keep that credit, which was Mountague, whose Books
were no sooner seen, but they had an hundred to detest them, for one of our
Church which did like them; but most of all, in as much, as they prove this
their sentence, on this manner, by an Argument used by the Homily aforesaid.
p. 428.

That Church whose faith is erroneous, that must be avoided.

But the Church of Rome is a Church whose faith is erroneous.

Therefore the Church of Rome must be avoided. Which argument does convince so
evidently, that I presume, he will not except against any part thereof; but if
he do, there is sufficient in Mr: Mountague himself, besides other where, to
fortify it against the same. Thus he writes, Appeal. p. 160. and 161.

The Scripture is our exact and absolute rule of faith and manners.

The Pope does dissent from an reject that rule, proposes some things as to be
believed against that rule.

From whence I thus argue;

They that reject the exact and absolute rule of faith and manners, their faith
is erroneous. For

Their faith is an aberration from the Scriptures, the rule of faith. And that
aberration is error in points of faith. Appeal. p. 7.

But the Pope, that is, the Church of Rome, does reject that rule of faith.

Therefore the faith of the Church of Rome is erroneous.

Secondly thus;

They whose faith dissenteth from the rule of faith, their faith is erronius.
For

Error in points of faith, is against the rule of faith. Appeal. p. 7.

But the faith of the Pope (that is, of the Church of Rome) dissenteth from the
rule of faith. For

It proposes things as to be believed against that rule.

Therefore the faith of the Church of Rome is erroneous.

If he reply, that all this is to be understood of some points of faith, not of
all, of some part of the rule, not of the whole.

I rejoynd, his words are without limitation* or distinction; thus,

The Pope does dissent from, and reject the rule of faith.

And give this for proof, namely, in that it

Proposes any thing as against that rule.

Again, faith is one, as himself truly affirms, Appeal* p. 43. and the rule
of faith is one, as faith it self is one. These things are evident, I need not
bring further proof for them. All which being duly considered, I doubt not,
but even Mr: Mountague himself will give sentence; That,

The Church of Rome has not the essence and being of a true Church.

One thing more in this question must be remembered; Appeal. p. 83. This
proposition

We must for ever upon pain of damnation dissent from the Church of Rome in
all things, and have no peace at all with them.

Is a strange Bugbeare.

I answer, the sense hereof must be first had, before the truth can be judged
of. By Bugbeare, is meant a fiction, or pretense, used unto Infants to keep
them in awe, and they are so used by the way of dalliance, because Infants have
not the use of reason, and thereby are incapable of government by means that
are of a higher nature, they that cannot judge of truth, nor taste of
substance, must be led with shows, and fed with fancies.

It may be doubted whether this was his meaning or not, perhaps his words are
extended beyond his intent (may some man say) unto whom I answer, he meant to
say no less then thus, and I find it by himself. In his Preface to the Reader
before his Gagg, a little after the beginning, he brings his adversary
saying; There is no salvation to Protestants, which he does call terrible
shawe-fowle, to skare poor souls that have not the faculty of discerning
cheese from chalk, horrible affrights t^ put young children out of their wits,
that cannot distinguish a visnomie indeed from a visor. Where he gives the same
sense to shawe-fowle, that I give here to Bugbeare, which two words signify
the same thing, according to himself in the place last alleged.

And thus stands the case with the Church of England, and these grave and
learned men, whose words and proofs I have alleged, and all other of our
Church to whom they have written in this sentence of Master Mountague. But
this is an imputation more odious then humane ears can bear with Patience.
What? Is our Church a dallier with her children, and that in a matter in nature
so high? Of consequence so great? Does she sport her self, and befoole her
children with Gods Word and their salvation? Are all her children such silly
Infants, that for want of true reason must be governed by shadows? No marvel
though his Diocesan fares no better, where his Mother speeds so ill. He
complains of false, injurious, dishonest, fiery, frantic, etc. Informers and
Promoters. But under what coullours, in what rank shall this Champion be
marshalled, if you set him in the Vantgard, he will be in the enemies front
before the rest of the battle approach, if you place him in the Rear, you
restrain his valor. He complains, the mother is stricken through the sides
of a brother, but here both mother and all her children stricken through the
heart with one stroke together, she a dallier, all them fools, or Infants,*
What shall I say to it? If this be your obedience to your Mother, reverence to
your Diocesan, and kindness to your friends, then -- Of this point enough, I
proceed to the next.

CHAP. VII

Mr: Mountague. Church of Rome. Chapter of Eng: Free Will is in us subsisting, not
in title only. gagg. p. 108. 1. There is Free Will is as true as Gospel, we
grant it as much as themselves. gagg. p. 114. There is in us both the faculty
and use of Free Will, is certain in faith, and decreed in the Council of
Trent. Suarez. opusc. 1. lib. 1. number. 1. cap. 1. The grace of God does prevent
us, that we may have a good will, and works with us, when we have that good
will. Arti: 10. Freewill is a power whereby we eat, etc. we assent, disagree
wittingly, willingly, without constraint. Appeal. p. 99. Free Will consists
not only in the faculty of working voluntarily, or of choice and willingly,
that is, not against the will, but also it includes a power of doing and of
not doing, which usually is called a dominion over his own actions, or an
indifferency in working, in that respect that the faculty so working, of its
nature is not determined unto one, but can will this or another thing, which is
opposite thereunto, and nill or not will. Suar. op. 1. l. 1. n. 2. c. 1 The
predestinate to life, be called according to Gods purpose, by his spirit, they
through grace obey that calling. Arti: 17. 2. Man in the state of nature
entire, had bestowed on him a faculty, whereby most freely and absolutely, he
was Lord over his own octions, and could do or not do, what he pleased and
would. gagg. p. 107. and 108. If we have any will to rise; it is he that
preuenteth our will, and disposes us thereunto. Homily for Rogation, 3. part.
p. 456. 3. That liberty was much impaired by sin, not extinct or amolished
in corrupt nature, such as now it is. p. 108. 4. Man has Free Will in actions
of piety, and such as belong to his salvation. gagg. p. 109. Man's Free Will is
not lost and extinct after the fall of Adam, nor is a thing consisting in title
only* Council. Trent. sess. 6. can. 5. 5. We grant the general being, working,
and concurring of free will with Gods grace. p. 115. 6. Man has Free Will
after preventing grace, in cooperation to the increase of grace. p. 108. Man is
disposed unto the turning of himself unto his own Justification, by exciting
and adiuvating grace, in assenting and cooperating freely with the same grace.
7. Man does freely renounce the calling of grace, and freely run themselves. p.
112. 8. I think no man will deny; That man's Free Will may resist the holy
Ghost, in preventing and operating grace, not suffering him to work the work
of grace in them, so may he also against adiuvating grace. Ap. p. 89. When God
touches man's heart by the illumination of his holy spirit, man does not
altogether nothing, receiving that inspiration for because he can* also reject
the same. Council. Trent. ses. 6. cap. 5. and can dissent if he will. can. 4.
Man being drawn, he runs, as his assistance, his own agillitie and
disposition is. gagg. p. 110. Man being prevented by grace, he then puts too
his hand to procure augmentation of that grace. gagg. p. 110.

CHAP. VIII. The point of Free Will, set down in the former Chapter, is
debated.
IN this point, as in the former, three things are to

1. Whether the propositions delivered by him be true, or not. 2. Whether those
propositions consent with the Church of Rome, or not. 3. Whether those
propositions dissent from the Church of England, or not.
Of the second and third, we have his sentence in his gagg. p. 107. and Appeal.
p. 83. where he says;

The particulars in this point of Free Will, controverted between the Church
of Rome and ours, are of no great moment.

And in his Appeal. from p. 84. to 95. he indevours to prove; That

The Church of Rome and our Church, do agree in the particulars delivered by
Mr: Mountague, and set down in the precedent Chapter.

To which, I answer, howsoever it be with our Church (for of that hereafter)
from hence it does necessarily follow; that,

He consents with the Church of Rome in those his prepositions, set down in
the last Chapter.

Because he will not deny to consent to those things, which in his judgment
the Church of England consents unto. And that indeed he consents fully with
the Church of Rome, will appear by the sight of the doctrine on both sides,
set down in the Chapter going before. What it says of the nature, use,
remaining, causes, manner of working, effects, adjuncts, objects of free will,
the same says he: he comes not short one word; so that it seems little
better, then a transcription out of the Romish faith, and opinion, taught
amongst them.

That he dissenteth from the Church of England, a little England, therefore he
must show, that the doctrine which he defends, is the doctrine thereof.

But that he cannot do, except he prove the Church of England does consent
with the Church of Rome; and (it seems) that he himself perceived so much,
therefore he labors, Appeal. p. 84. etc. to prove their consent by this
argument:

Whitaker, Chemnitius, Mollerus, Perkins, S^ecanus, Hemingius, Willet, the
Helvetian Confession, the Confession of Saxony, do agree with the Church of
Rome. p. 87.

Therefore there is no difference between our Church, and the Church of Rome.

Which argument is not barely alleged; but accompanied with all due
Circumstances. First (for the credit thereof, that it might not come barely
without authority, he tells us. p. 95.

1. He examined this question between them and us of freewill, with as great
diligence as he could. p. 95. 2. He thought thus before, and so he thinks ^ow.
p. 84. 3. He confirms the antecedent, by laying down certain points of
free will, maintained by some one that side* which he calls the most moderate
amongst them. p. 90. and confessed by those of ours. p. 87. 4. He interprets the
conclusion, and says, he means by that Church and ours, moderate and
temperate men on either side. p. 83.
I answer; If his intent be not to prove the agreement between the Church of
Rome, and the Church of England, but between some professors of Divinity on
either side, then all his labor is in vain: for the question he ought to
prove, is touching the agreement, not of private opinions in the Churches, but
of the Churches themselves, which two differ much, as himself affirms.
Appeal. p. 134. This being public and authorized, that not so: and he
professes in his Epistle before his Appeal, his resolution is to leave
private opinions, as Irchius to shift for themselves, and defend the doctrine
of our Church, publicly and universally resolved on; but according to his
words alleged, that is not his intent, therefore all this argument is one of
his Ireehius, necessary to be disbanded, and sent away to shift for it self,
that our Mother the Church be no more troubled with it, yea, to be sent as a
vagabond to the parish where it last dwelt, not suffered to pass without due
correction; and is his own advice in his said Epistle before his Appeal.

But I will suppose that he speaks of the agreement of the Churches
themselves, and answer accordingly.

The antecedent is false, some of these that he names on the part of the
Church of England be strangers. We are not bound unto them; no Law directs
us; our Church does not compel us to be bound unto them, which is his own
plea, Appeal. p. 70.

Those of our Church whose agreement he alleges, are much injured by him. It
is notoriously false that he says; They are as far from agreeing with the
Church of Rome in the point of free will, as Master Mountague is from -- As I
can and will most evidently declare, if need be, but there is no place for that
now; for it is besides the present question.

The consequence is also false; these men you name of our church, are not the
church of England, no more then one handful is the whole harvest; a few trees
the whole Forest: neither is their doctrine the doctrine of the Church of
England; for her doctrine is proposed in Synods, confirmed by Law, commanded
and established by Act of Parliament, as appears by your own description,
Appeal. p. 111.

If that be so I yield: If that be not so, why do you infer our Churches
agreement from their agreement?

These sores will not be healed with your own protestations,

I examined the question with diligence.

That they agree is my confirmed thoughts.

Therefore they do agree, and that agreement is the agreement of the Church of
England.

Thus have we done with the Vanguard, and the maine battle of this
disputation, the Rere approaches next in this order.

They that do not acknowledge this agreement, 1. Do not read so much as
their own Protestant Writers. 2. In their Pulpits they brawle at the shadow
of their own fancies. 3. Abuse the simple Credulity of the unlearned. 4. Make
themselves ridiculous to the Papists. 5. Harden the Papists in their
superstition. 6. Mistake ignorantly that which they do not understand. 7.
Traduce confidently and virulently. Appeal. p. 88.

I answer, I come to dispute, therefore I will speak hereunto so far as it
concerns the matter in hand. I list not to change words with him, though
(perhaps) I could pay him with interest, therefore to the point.

All those heavy and bitter accusations, are not given absolutely, but with
reference unto, and inference upon the agreement, of the Church of England,
with the Church of Rome, in the point of Free Will, if he has proved that he
thinks, he may affirm these. Whether he has done that or no, I will leave to
the judgment (I will not say) of him that is of the meanest capacity, but of
Mr: Mountague himself, who must give sentence against his own proof, or else
undergo the heavy sentence of all men that shall read my answer. What I might
answer to the rest, I am not far to seek, but because it does tend to
strife, and not to edification, therefore I hold my peace, God is the reprover
of such evil language, and revenger of such wrongs, to whom I leave it, and
proceed to that which remains appertaining to this argument, which I find thus
written:

If you with your new learning (for old you have little or

I answer; What is become of Mr: Mountague his disputing? What is become of his
Logic, or where was his Caution? Why man? Oh, he had to do with poor
Divines, silly men, of no performance. He might say what he would, they must
take it for good, therefore he put this sentence upon them, of purpose to gull
them, and it seems so in very deed, for it does neither affirm, no^ deny,
prove, nor disprove, but because every drop of old learning is honorable, as
age it self is, (...) will make the b^st of it. If an Assumption, and a
Conclusion be added, we shall know his ^rrand, which he may (yea must) do one
of these three ways.

1. But I will not yield, nor thank you for such instructions.

Therefore you cannot teach me more then yet ^ know

Or after this sort:

2. But you cannot teach me more then yet I know. For Your learning is new, old
you have little or none. And mine is old, for the course of my studies was
never addressed to modern Epitomizers, I went to inquire of the days of old,
and hitherto I have not repented me of it. Appeal. p. 11.

Therefore I will not yield etc.

I may dispute also from hence, a third way: Thus

3. But you can teach me more than yet I know.

Therefore I will yield and thank you for such instructions.

If he will dispute the first way, the Syllogism is true: but every boy in the
Schools will laugh at him, for the assumption is folly, and the consequence of
the proposition is madness, no man (well in his wits) would say, I will not
yield, therefore you cannot teach.

If he disputes in the second manner, his Syllogism is false, and concludes
nothing; every poor Sophister knows that. But in this manner he must be
understood, for his proofs do lie directly for the confirmation of this
assumption, and cannot otherwise be applied.

But let it be as he will (for the form) the assumption is a blast of
vainglory, the answer is ready; Let him that puts off his armor boast,
and not he that puts it on. If you had lead Causabon in triumph, I would
have advised you to brag of glory, and stay at home: but because you have not,
I come not so far.

The confirmation of your assumption, is an apple of the same tree: but (the
best is) if you touch it, it falls to powder. But I pray, tell me, how do you
know all their learning is new, have they no books of the old? Have they no
guts in their brains, to make use of such books? no tongues in their heads to
impart their learning to others? Or do you know, they have none by any
special testimony from their own mouths, or your own illumination? Is it true
indeed, is your learning all old? Have you ingrost all the books thereof? Does
wit keep her Commonwealth in your breast? Then happy man are you; but thrice
unhappy the world, from whom the old learning is sequestered, and that into a
corner, yea into a close corner, out of which it cannot get (I am sure yet it
has not gotten.) I might go on, to show the insufficiency (if not folly) of
this Confirmation, of your Assumption; but I proceed to the next.

If you will dispute in the third sort, you make a true Syllogism, but then
behold your staydnes (a man of confirmed resolution I will warrant you.) He
change? no such matter, even now you found him triumphing in the victory: now
you find him Capitulating upon conditions of peace. Even now you found him
insulting over his captivated adversary: now you see him creeping and fawning
unto him over whom he insulted; and do you know what manner of one he is, to
whom he speaks? If you do not, he will tell you, and you must believe him,
for old learning cannot deceive you: this he is, A poor Divine, short sighted,
slenderly traveled. He knows Fenners divinity, if you put him out of that,
he is as blind as a Beetle etc.

But howsoever the game goes, this he says (and tie him to his word, you
shall find him either better or worse then you make of him)

If you will teach me, I will yield and thank you too.

And because you shall see he is not in jest, he repeats Appeal. p. 95. in
these words;

If you can make it appear, that there is any such material difference
between the Church of Rome (in the point of free will) and the Church of
England, then I will turn over a new leaf, even in this Article opposing the
church of Rome as far as any etc.

I answer; it must be here observed, that he confesses his agreement with the
Church of Rome, else unto what can he yield? What leaf can he turn over? How
can he oppose the Church of Rome in this Article of Freewill, more then he does
now? So that he cannot hereafter deny that he agrees with it in this point of
Freewill.

I accept of your offer, I look for your performance, when you have received
the condition which I now tender unto you.

In the first place, I will set down what the Church of Rome means by the
word Grace, so often used in this and the other questions following, which the
Reader must observe; because the knowledge thereof does serve abundantly to the
understanding of the present question of Free Will, set down and disputed in
the 7* and 8. Chapters: so does it also serve no less for the understanding of
the question of Justification in the 9. and 10. Chapters: and of the question
of Falling from grace, in the 11. and 12. Chapters; so as he that does not
understand and observe what they say touching Grace, shall hardly know what is
true or false in these qu^stions.

The sense of that word Grace, we may ^ake from Thomas, who has described it,
1. 2. q. 110. art: 1. C. by 4 properties, viz. 1. It is a certain supernatural
thing. 2. It is the gift of God. 3. It is in man. 4. It draws man above the
condition of his nature, unto the participation of the divine good.

Now that this Grace might be the more distinctly known, he does divide it 1.
2. q. 111. ar: 2. C. Into actual and habitual: he calls it actual, because
it moves man's mind unto good: he calls it habitual, because it remains in
man, by the way of a form, and is the beginning of all supernatural actions.

I say, this is the doctrine of the Church of Rome, because it is received by
all their learned, and rejected by none of them: yea, the Council of Trent
has it, sess. 6. cap. 5. 6. 7. where it speaks of Justification it self,
and the preparations thereunto.

The doctrine of the Church of Rome in the point of the concurring of Gods
grace and man's will in the conversion of a sinner unto God, is comprehended in
these 15. propositions.

1. Grace signifies a help, coming from God, a created being, supernatural
to man, remaining in him, leading him unto eternal life. 2. Grace is either
actual or habitual; this does finish man's sanctity, that begins and
continues it by degree^ unto the finishing of sanctity, and is called a
preparation thereto. 3. Actual grace is preventing, exciting, operating, all
of them expressing the first motion of grace. And subsequent, adiuvating,
cooperating all these, expressing a second motion of grace. 4. The preparation
to sanctity, consists in certain actions, viz. 1. faith. 2. fear. 3. hope.
4. love begun. 5. hatred of sin. 6. contrition. 7. purpose of a new life. 5.
Unto these prepratory actions, grace and man's will does concur. 6. Grace
preventing etc. does work thereunto without man's will, it being only passive,
moved and not a mover. 7. By grace preventing etc. man's will is made able to be
willing unto the doing of those prepratory acts, if it will. 8. Unto the
actual doing of those prepratory acts, there is required an assent, purpose,
censent, resolution, or determination of the will, before it be applied unto
the working of them actually, and in the thing. 9. Grace cooperating etc.
works not without the concurrence of man's will. 10. Grace cooperating etc.
stands ready to join with the will of him that is prevented by grace.
Suarez. opusc. 7. number. 43. and opusc. 1. lib. 1. cap. 17. number. 10. 11. Grace
cooperating etc. does concur with man's will in case it consents, resolves,
and determines, that it will believe, fear, hope, etc. before it be applied
unto actual working of them. In case where it does not so consent, etc. grace
does does not cooperate. 12. The actions of faith, fear, hope, etc. are
produced by the joint concurrence of man's will and grace cooperating. 13. Upon
the producing of faith, fear, hope, etc. the habit of grace is immediately
infused. 14. The infusion of the habit does follow the said actions infallibly
in the event. 15. That infallibility flows from the ordinance of God, and
the disposition that man has thereunto by the doing of the said actions.
It may be, some will require me to prove these propositions Rome. I answer, I
am not to seek for that, I am ready to do it, upon the least call; but here
I forbear it, because it is familiarly known to be theirs, so as the proofs
would be needless and tedious, therefore I proceed in my Course.

The point of Free Will in question, concerns the 8.

If man's will must assent, resolve, determine to believe etc. before it be
applied to actual believing etc. And grace preventing etc. works it not:
then it is doubtful from what root or principium that consent etc. first
arises, and from whence it flows.

But man's will must resolve, etc. the 8. and 11. proposition says it.

And it flows not from grace preventing etc. so says the 7. proposition.

Therefore it is doubtful of what, and from whence that determination of the
will first flows.

This doubt, both the Church of Rome, and Mr: Mountague with it do resolve, by
the doctrine delivered by them both, set down in the precedent Chapter, on
this manner;

The will does assent, consent, and determine etc. of it self, out of that
inbred liberty, which is in the will it self: and this liberty consists 1.
in an indifferency, and indeterminatenes unto doing or not doing, to the doing
of this, or the contrary thereunto. And 2. in a dominion over his own actions,
to do as he pleases.

That their doctrine set down (as is before said) does yield this answer, they
that are acquainted with the writings of the learned in the Popish Church will
witness with me: and ^ do make demonstration thereof on this wise;

If man assenteth freely unto the grace of God exciting, and can reject the
inspiration which he receives, then that assent etc. proceeds out of the will
it self, and the indifferency and dominion over his own actions, to do or
not to do, to do this, or the contrary, as he pleases.

But man assenteth freely to the grace of God that exciteth, and can reject the
inspiration which he receives.

Therefore the assent and determination to believe etc. arises first of, and
flows from the will it self, and that indifferency and dominion that it has
etc. So Suarez disputes. opusc. 1. lib. 1. cap. 17. number. 7. etc. and lib. 3.
cap. 12. number. 11. and 12. see Alvares. disp. 89. number. 1. and 2.

The consequence of the proposition supposes; That

1. Man's will has naturally freedom and liberty. 2. The freedom of man's
will consists in an indifferency and dominion etc. 3. The freedom of man's
will, and the free use of that faculty remains in that man that has grace.
4. Man has free will in such actions as belong to his salvation. 5. Man's
free will remains after preventing grace, etc.
All which propositions, we find set down in the six first propositions of
Master Mountague, in the former Chapter: and some of them expressly in the
three first propositions of the Church of Rome, and the rest in the two last
propositions of the Council of Trent, set down also in the former Chapter.

The assumption contains Mr: Mountague his 7. and 8. propositions, and the
two last propositions of the Council of Trent, set down also in that last
Chapter. By which discourse the doctrine of the Church of Rome in this point,
and the dependence that one part thereof has of another, is laid out clearly,
and to the full, so also is the agreement of Mr: Mountague with them declared
to be, without question. The necessity of the consequence will appear. number.
8. Lastly, etc.

It may be, some will desire to know the reason why Council of Trent, did
satisfy this doubt by decreeing the nature or quality of the assent; and not
the root or fountain from whence that assent did flow and arise.

I answer; this question is not demanded without reason, for the Decree of the
Council does resolve the doubt by consequence, and not immediately, and thereby
goes (as it may seem) a way which is farther about, and more obscure. To
satisfy the demand is easy. 1. The nature of the thing it self required that
course, for the faculties themselves of man's soul, are so far removed from
our knowledge, that in themselves they cannot be judged of: But all the
knowledge we have of them, is by the effects which do flow from them,

Again, the course of the divine Revelation required it, for it is silent and
says nothing of the faculty it self: but says enough (at least as they
suppose) touching the act. And this it seems was the reason of this Decree;
for in the fifth Chapter of that sixth session, it says these words; Turn unto
me, do admonish us of our liberty. Where it does argue, the nature of the
faculty, by the nature and quality of the act of the will.

Lastly, the Council does not indeed and in the thing, take that way which is
more obscure, but rather that which is more clear and more certain. For the
nature and quality of the act does argue, and set out the nature and quality
of the faculty, from whence it flows by necessary inference and absolute
certainty. A necessary effect, cannot flow but from a necessary faculty.
Every man will grant, the necessity that is in the sight of the eye (when all
circumstances do concur) can arise from no other faculty, but such as is
determined and necessitated unto seeing. The eye sees the visible object (and
cannot choose but see it) where all other circumstances do concur, because
the eye it self, or faculty of sight by creation is apted, fitted, and
disposed unto seeing, and has not in its liberty to see or not see, when a
visible thing is objected thereunto, and all other circumstances do concur.
The same may be said of those actions which proceed from their next efficient
cause, contingently and freely. Of which every man will say, I did this with
that freedom and liberty, that at the very moment when I begun to do it, and
always before, it was in my power not to have done it, or to have done the
contrary thereunto. Therefore the faculty from whence this act flows by
creation, is not apted, fitted, or necessitated unto the doing of actions of
this kind, and restrained from actions of all other kinds. But in it self is
indetermined unto actions of any kind, remains indifferent unto doing or not
doing, to the doing of this, or the contrary. Has dominion over actions of
every kind, to do or not do; to the doing of this or the contrary, as it
pleases without the restraint or guidance of any superior, extrinsecall, or
previall worker, leading and limiting the same unto this, rather then unto
that. In so much, as if man's action of consenting etc. had been so free, as
the Council has decreed it to be, then it is most true that it had first
proceeded from a faculty no less free. Thus much shall suffice, to set down
the doctrine of the Church of Rome touching this point.

And that Mr: Mountague makes man's will it self, the If man receives grace,
preventing and cooperating unto the work of his salvation, and no other then
the first root or foundation of that supernatural consent, must needs be the
will it self. For out of preventing grace, it cannot proceed, for that serves
and works no further, but to make man able to consent if he will, and
cooperating grace works nothing, but where man has consented, and is ready
to join in the work with it. But Mr: Mountague says, unto the work of our
salvation, we have received grace, preventing, cooperating, Appeal. p. 94. 104.
And does no where acknowledge any other. Yea, more then so, the next worker
unto preventing grace (according to him) is man himself. gagg. p. 110.

From whence does follow, that in his judgment man's will it self is the first
root or foundation of our supernatural consent.

If he answer, he gives to grace the power of sustaining and upholding.
Appeal. p. 94. I reply, this helps not the matter, for to sustain, is only
to preserve man in his being, and also it belongs to Gods general
providence, he does so to all creatures; but we speak of his special
providence, ordering man unto eternal life. If he say, he joins the
assistance of preventing grace unto man's will. I reply; this is to as little
purpose as the former, for the assistance of that grace, is inspiring,
enlightening, exciting, as himself yields. Appeal p. 94. and no more, as all
men do confess, which belongs to the understanding only, it extends not
to the will. Besides, although it did extend to the will, it can be first no
root to send forth that supernatural consent, unless it does determine the
will unto one object, and make it not only able to will, if it will, but also
to will actually, and in the thing; so taking away the indifferency of the
will, that indeed and in the thing, it becomes a consenter, and has not
liberty to divert the use of his faculty therefrom; but this he will deny,
and does seem to do so. Appeal. p. 94.

I say, this is proper to him, because the Council of Trent adds adiuvating
grace unto these, and says, Man does prepare himself by exciting and
adiuvating grace, which is much less then Mr: Mountague says, and bears a
construction far more favorable, then his does, in the understanding of the
Dominicans (as they that read them do know) see Alvares. de Aux. disp. 95.
number. 3. and disp. 99. 2^. conclusio. In the next place, the doctrine of the
Church of England, Rome, and Mr. Mountague; that the consent and difference may
be apparent. The Church of England does fully consent with the Church of Rome,
in the doctrine thereof, set down in this Chapter, number. 5. So far as it
concerns the concurrence of grace and man's will in our sanctification, and
the marks thereof (called eliciated etc. imperated, in respect that they flow
from the inward sanctifying grace, and are wrought outwardly by the choice and
command of the will.) Or by necessary consequution and supposition. The only
difference lies in the doubt propounded, number. 7. and in the liberty of man's
will, taught by the Church of Rome, as aforesaid, for the resolving of that
doubt.

Now the Church of England, satisfies that doubt, on this wise;

The Predestinate to life, be called by Gods spirit. They through grace obey
that calling. Arti: 17. unto which it does dispose them. Homily, page 456.

Which is all one, as if it had said;

They through grace, and the disposing thereof, do consent, resolve,
determine, etc. to believe, fear, hope, etc.

For thereunto by grace, or Gods spirit, is man called and disposed.

In which is also employed; that,

The eliciated act of Consenting etc. is not free: man cannot at the instant of
eliciating that act, reject grace, and dissent from the Calling thereof.

Which sentence, is inferred on this wise;

Every act so wrought by Gods spirit, as man's will is obedient thereto and
disposed thereby, is not free. For

The operation of grace, or Gods spirit, is determined to one.

But man's consenting, which is obedience to the call of grace, etc. is an Act
so wrought by Gods grace. So says the Article and Homily.

Therefore the act of consenting is not free.

What it does give to man's will; our Church gives to grace: that act which it
makes free; our Church makes necessary.

In this doctrine and inference therefrom, the Church England does directly
oppose the faith of the church of Rome, in such express and manifest sort, as
hereafter there can no doubt be made, whether it does dissent therefrom or no,
or wherein that dissent should lie; so that now nothing remains, but that Mr:
Mountague should oppose the Church of Rome, according to his promise, set down
number. 5. But (me-thinkes) I hear him say, this difference is not material, it
imports not any thing worthy of difference and dissent, but proceeds from
minds transported with faction, therefore I am not yet tied unto that promise.

I answer; he seems indeed to attribute the difference and opposition to the
Church of Rome in this point of free will, to arise from no other ground, but
faction, Appeal p. 84. etc. But altogether untruly, for the Church of England
holds not a faction against the Church of Rome, but has made a separation
for the avoiding of damnation, as has been declared, Chapter 6. number. 6.
Neither was she so ignorant, as to take a shadow in stead of a substance, nor
of such an idle head solemnly to determine and decree matters of no moment, to
be matter of faith. But if any man should be of that ill mind, that in any
thing he could think so of her; yet in this point he could not do so; for
this faith of the Church of Rome is erroneous, therefore for it alone (let the
matter it self be what it will be) must she be opposed to the uttermost;
because such a faith is an addition unto the Word of God, threatened to be
punished by eternal damnation.

The matter it self is also of great moment in it self. Our Church does give
all the honor of our salvation (in the event and in the manner of working)
unto God; theirs does devide it between God and man, and gives only this
honor to God, that he makes man 1. able to begin to tread in the way unto
salvation; and 2. supplies man's defects, and joins with him in the progress
it self: but he leaves unto man and the inbred liberty, that is in the
created faculty of his will, to begin and produce the first act, or to make
void the beginning and possibility already wrought by grace, and to prevent,
reject, and forestall the offer and operation of the second supply and power of
grace, regulating both the first and second work of grace. If man will consent
unto, and obey the first work of grace, then the second does join with him,
and thereupon he goes on indeed in the way to heaven. If man refuses to
consent unto, and obey the first work of grace, then the whole work thereof
cease and comes to nothing, and the work of the second grace never comes
on; begins not at all.

The work of man's salvation cease, he is where he was, as if grace had never
wrought upon him. Now that this is injurious unto God, is so manifest that it
needs not be proved, seeing the greatest share of man's ability, to do those
things that shall lead him to heaven, is given to man himself: the lesser unto
God. That man may be saved, it is of God, who begins and joyneth with man,
unto the doing of that which he could not do of himself. But that this power
is brought unto act, is attributed to man himself, and the only liberty of
his own will. Grace does nothing by any effectual efficiency upon the will,
determining the same to God, or restraining it from the contrary.

To conclude; seeing that I have performed the condition number. 5. If you can
make it appear etc. I do now expect the performance of your promise, which
you made in these words;

I will 1. yield; 2. Thank you for your instructions; 3. Turn over a new
leaf. 4. Oppose the Church of Rome in this Article as far as any.

Every honest man will be as good as his word, and so (I hope) will you.

In the last place, those 10. propositions taught by Mr: Mountague, and set
down in Chapter 7. must be examined, whether they be true or no.

The first of them, begins thus;

Free Will is in us subsisting, not in Title only.

This proposition in the terms wherein it lies is true, for by the faculty
of the will, and the elective and free power thereof, man is really
distinguished from all other creatures. What shall be said to it in his sense,
shall be declared, number. 16.

The second, begins thus;

Free Will is a power etc.

The first branch of this description of free will is true, and cannot be
denied. The second branch that places it in a faculty of doing freely, and in
an absolute dominion over his own actions etc. is utterly denied, by reason he
is not able to prove it. He bestirres himself to prove the first branch of his
description, or the first proposition (according as he will be understood) by
experience, and the authority of Scot. Appeal. p. 99. But of this second
branch, he has not a word, which argues he can bring none for it, seeing this
does need it more then that. Secondly, if man has this freedom and dominion,
then God has less charge, providence, and government over the actions of men,
then over any other created effects; for in them God is the only principal
efficient of the work: they are instruments to work in subordination unto,
and by the force of him. But man is hereby made a principal efficient of his
works; superior, or (at least) equal unto God by giving unto him freedom,
and absolute dominion over himself, to do as he will.

God made man, and gave him his being, he yields him his concourse, whereby
he does sustain him in his being. All this while God is no efficient of man's
actions, except very remotely. Man by his being has a dominion over himself,
and freedom to do as he will, hereby he is an efficient next and principal
unto his own actions, if not the only efficient; for man's actions have
relation to the force of man in the doing of them, but they have no relation
unto God at all. The effect may say, by man's power I had my being, and by Gods
power man had his being. But it may not be granted, that God has no providence
over man's actions, or less providence then over the actions of other
creatures; for the Scripture is plain, and full to the contrary. Thirdly,
there is no necessity why this freedom and dominion should be given to the
will, for as much as the properties given to the will, in the other part of the
description, is enough to make it a free faculty. Which I say not of my self:
I learn it from Suarez. opusc. 1. cap. 1. number. 2. And he says, that many
grave and ancient Divines, yea, Thomas, and some of the Fathers are of that
Judgment. At least Mr: Mountague ought to content himself with that liberty
of the will, and not to strive for this dominion, because the church of Rome
does forbear to call that by the name of freewill, least it should agree in
manner of speaking with the heretics of this time; as Suarez avoucheth in the
place last alleged.

The third proposition, has these words;

That liberty was etc.

I answer; If by liberty you mean the use of the faculty in supernatural
actions, then the proposition is false; for, man by sin lost grace, as you
truly teach, gagg. p. 108. And without grace, man's will is not capable of
doing supernatural actions, which for their essence, first, and specificall
nature, are beyond the ability of the force of the Created faculty, and which
cannot be done without the grace of God, as Suarez teaches. opusc. 1. lib. 3.
cap. 1. number. 1. 2. 3. And proves, cap. 15. number. 20. And in this sense, we must
understand those Divines which teach the loss of free will by Adams sin.
Therefore the Council of Trent (and Mr: Mountague with it) pursue their own
shadow, when they decreed as against an adversary, when indeed they had none.
Which is further confirmed thus; If liberty be taken to signify the faculty
it self, then that third proposition is granted, and that upon the same reason
himself alleges out of the Council of Trent, gagg. p. 108. Adam by sin
lost not his nature.

The fourth, fifth, and sixth propositions, contain thus

Man's free faculty, and the free use thereof, is in him that has grace.

I answer; the free faculty and grace are both together in one man, and so
far this proposition is true. 2. If the use of that free faculty be
committed, unto the dominion and dispose of the will it self: then the
proposition is false. It can never be proved, that the use of the free faculty
of the will is left unto the dispose and dominion of the will it self, but the
dominion and dispose thereof, is reserved unto the Lord God: and he says no
less, when he promised to take away the stony heart, and give a heart of
flesh, and to imprint his laws therein. Let Mr: Mountague show, where God says
to a man prevented by grace, I have made thee able to do holy works if thou will. I commit thy self unto thy self, go forward or backward as thou will;
there I will rest, I will take no further care of thee, nor have no further
command over thee; but this cannot be done, therefore I may conclude, the
proposition thus understood (and so he does understand it) is false.

But if the use of the free faculty, be committed unto the Lord God, to
dispose of as he please, so as man's obedience unto grace that calls, be given
to grace (as the Church of England speaks, Arti: 17.) and the entitie of man's
nature be used by grace only, as an instrument thereunto, then I grant this
proposition is true. The use of the free faculty is in him which has grace.
But in this sense he cannot understand it; for then man's actions cannot be so
free, as he pretends in the seventh and eighth propositions following.

In this sense, free will is merely titular, having a name without the thing,
as we use to speak when a man inioyeth a thing, but has no use of it; and in
this sense, our Divines have said true, who affirm man's freewill is in title
only; so also is it most truly affirmed of them that say, man's will is a
serving, not a free will.

The seventh and eight proposition, contains thus

He that assenteth etc. assenteth freely, and can deny his assent if he will
etc.

The word can, in this proposition, does signify a power of using the free
faculty with indifferency, in the very instant in which a man does work; and
so Suarez does understand it, opusc. 1. lib. 1. cap. 1. number. 8. And so must the
Council of Trent be understood, sess. 6. cap. 5. For all other senses thereof,
are violent and extorted, not agreeing with the phrase used by the Council of
Trent, nor their intent in decreeing.

If Mr: Mountague can prove this, let him take all for me. I will not oppose
the Council of Trent, and himself (a Disciple thereof) in this question of
free will. If he cannot prove it, why does he put himself into Gods seat, by
intruding and urging Articles of faith. I am out of doubt, he cannot prove it;
for Suarez has attempted many things, and heau'd at it with both his
shoulders, but all in vain, it may be, Suarez has no old learning, nor Logic
so good as Ramus taught in Cambridge, no Metaphysics at all, but is ignorant
in this question. He could Preach, Lecture, brawle, and prattle a little in a
Pulpit, but dispute he could not; set him to an argument, and you break his
brains; but be it known unto you, all these things are otherwise with Master
Mountague, therefore what Suarez could not, he can do, and that you shall see
in his gagg. p. 112. Thus he disputes.

In Matthew 23. and 37. there is an opposition of man's wilfulness unto Gods
will, God would, Judah would not.

Therefore freely men renounce the Calling of grace, and freely run.

I answer; the last branch of the conclusion, which speaks of running with
Gods grace, cannot follow upon the Antecedent, because man's will in sinful
acts is an efficient after a different sort, and in another manner, then it is
in supernatural actions. In them it is a principal efficient (that is,
sins of it self) in these it is a subordinate efficient, as your self
teach, Appeal. p. 94. therefore sin does flow from the will one ways, and
supernatural actions another.

The first branch in the conclusion does not follow freedom, liberty, or
dominion in resisting, but barely charge them with the eliciated act of
resisting. If it be replied, that resisting is an act of the will, and every
act of the will has that freedom and dominion. I rejoynd; this reply is
refuted already, number. 14.

Therefore it comes too late to take away my answer.

The Antecedent by the word Call, does understand the Calling of God, and the
inward calling by grace, otherwise there can be no show of goodness in the
consequence. If you would have us believe, that our Savior did speak of that
kind of calling, you ought to have proved it, because it may be understood of
the outward calling by the Ministry of our Savior; but because you have not
proved it, your argument (at the vpshot) is resolved into your own authority,
and so is of no worth.

He says in his gagg. p. 112. that many other places of Scripture do serve
this purpose, but he does not name nor urge any in particular, therefore they
can receive no answer.

He has two other Arguments by collection, and a third from Acts the 7. and
51. the words whereof be these Appeal. page 89. etc.

You resist the holy Ghost.

In this argument he raises his confidence, because the very word resist is
used there. I answer; a poor foundation for confidence. It has the same fault
the former had: it affirms of resisting simply; our question is of freedom
in resisting, so it is nothing to the purpose. You understand it of the work of
grace in the soul, but you prove it not: it may be understood of their
resisting of the outward Preaching of the Gospel, therefore we have your own
authority, and no more; we have no reason to think that God inwardly
enlightened etc. all these persons that are said to resist the holy Ghost.

The next, concludes thus;

In whom there is concupiscence, he may resist and rebel against the law of
the spirit.

But in a man regenerate, there is concupiscence.

Therefore a regenerate man may resist the spirit of God.

I answer; This conclusion is nothing to the purpose; for our question is of
the preparation unto the habit and freedom in resisting; but this conclusion
is of a man habituated, and of resisting simply.

If it be understood of resisting freely, then the proposition is false. For
Concupiscence has nothing to do with freedom of will: this is a perfection
given by Creation; that is a defection procured by sin.

His last Argument, is in these words;

If a man justified, may fall away from grace, then he may resist the grace of
God offered.

But the first is the doctrine of the Church of England.

Therefore a justified man may resist the grace of God offered.

I answer; this conclusion has the very same fault which the former had.
Besides, it says grace is offered to a justified man, how that can be true,
himself must declare; for a justified man has grace already, unto such a man
grace cannot be offered.

The consequence of the proposition is naught, losing of grace, has no
affinity with resisting of grace, that signifies the absence of a thing
inioyed, this the repelling and thrusting back of a thing offered, but not
received. The assumption is also false, as shall be proved. cap. 12.

His ninth proposition, says;

Man being drawn etc.

By man's running, he seems to understand a running by the force of the created
faculty; for the words will bear that sense: and he says further in the same
proposition, man does run as his own agillitie is; he says further, gagg. p.
108. the whole question in the point of free will is concerning the force of
the created faculty. In this sense that ninth proposition is false, and to be
detested.

It seems he perceived thus much: therefore in his Appeal. p. 91. and 94. he
labors to cure that ulcer, by saying

Supernatural actions, are true and real operations of man's soul, but the
soul is elevated and actuated to that height by grace, of which it is, that
man's will is a subordinate agent unto grace.

Which declaration comes very short, therefore I will add a passage in Suarez,
which does express the same thing more fully, in his opusc. 1. lib. 3. cap.
15. number. 20. he writes thus;

Man's will cannot have any connaturall power, which by its nature is a worker
of a supernatural act, either as a total or partial cause, but when the
creature does so work, it works as an instrument of God, and although it
works by his own entitie, yet notwithstanding, not out of a force natural,
but obedientall.

This addition I make by his own authority, for he does profess in his
Appeal. p. 90. that he takes the foresaid explication from Pontificians. I
answer; All this labor might have been spared, because it helps the matter
nothing at all. It makes it more obscure then before. Every man can understand
what you mean, when you say, the will does work by the natural force, but
when you say, the entitie of the will does work by a supernatural force,
elevation, and actuation, he will be to seek of your meaning. Moreover, this
explication does take away the free use of the free faculty, which you contend
for, or leave man's will to work, by the natural force of the created
faculty, which is the thing you would thrust off; and I show it thus: This
elevation and actuation, if by grace, is either a moral or a physical work;
if physical, then the will is determined unto one: the free use of the
faculty is abridged and restrained; for this work of grace is previall in
nature and causalitie, and truly efficient upon the will, before it be applied
unto operation in the second act. If it be moral, then the will does work of
the natural force thereof, because the moral work of grace, is no more but a
persuasion offered to the understanding, and rests there. It has no
influence unto, nor reflection upon the will, which is incapable of Judging of
truth and falsehood: only it cannot will any object, but that which the
understanding says is good, which connection between the understanding and the
will, is natural, no work of grace. To conclude, two propositions may be
inferred from this explication.

1. Man does not produce supernatural acts by the force of his created
faculty. 2. Man has no free will in supernatural acts.
You are at your choice; if you have the first, you have the second, if you
take the second, you grant the thing in question. If you deny the second, you
must deny the first, and thereby you defend a sentence which Molina does
accurse unto hell. de Concor. in q. 14. art: 13. disp. 40. Nostra itaque etc.

The tenth, and last says;

Man being prevented by grace, he puts to his hand to procure augmentation
of grace.

I answer; to procure, may signify the act of an efficient, either moral by
the way of merit, or physical, by the way of real influence into the effect.
In both these senses, this tenth proposition is false: and the Church of Rome
has decreed, sess. 6. cap. 8. the grace of Justification cannot be merited;
much less will any be so void of piety, as to say, man can compel God to
give him grace; but what ever his meaning be, here it must be observed, man's
hand is the next cause of a supernatural act, unto preventing grace, and the
putting thereof forth is attributed unto man himself, which is a large doctrine
of free will, as I have showed in the former part of this Chapter, number. 4. Far
exceeding the limits of the Council of Tren^, sess. 6. cap. 5. 6. Which
joyneth grace and man's will always together in his preparation, and assigns
adiuvating grace between preventing and cooperating, which shows his consent
with Arminius, in those gross points which the Church of Rome durst not
Patronize.

CHAP. IX. The point of Justification.
Mr: Mountague.

Man has a double estate of sin wherein he was borne. produced in life and
action.
acquisite, renewed according to the spirit. gagg. p. 141.
In the first state he is not Just. p. 141. To Justify has a 3. fold extent,
To make Just. To make more Just. To declare or pronounce Just. p. 140

Justification properly is in the first sense. gagg. p. 142. and 144.

A sinner is then Justified, when he is made Just. That is, translated from
state of nature to state of grace; as Colos. 1. 13. Who has delivered us from
the power of darkness, and has translated us, etc. Which is motion, as they
say, betwixt two terms. And

Consists in forgiveness of sins primarily, and grace infused secondarily.
Both the act of Gods spirit in man. p. 142. and 143.

In the state of Grace, a man is Just, when he is changed, which must have
concurrence of ow^ things:

Privation of being to that which was the body of sin. Wherein

A new constitution unto God in another state. Of grace whereto. In which he
that is altered in state, changed in condition, transformed in mind, renewed in
soul regenerate and borne a new to God by grace, is Just in the state of
Justification. p. 141.

To speak properly, God only Justifies, who alone imputes not sin, and
creates a new heart within us.

The soul of man is the subject of this act.

In which, unto which, are necessarily required certain preparations, and
previous dispositions to the purpose; As knowledge of God, etc. fear, hope,
contrition, love, desire of, purpose for a new life, and such like. But these
are all with and from faith. The principal indowment of grace, may worthily be
ascribed unto the root and original of Christian pi^tie, Faith. gagg. p. 143.
144.

The Church of Rome.

The Justification of a sinner, is a translation from that state in which man
was borne a son of the first Adam, into the state of grace. Council. Trent.
sess. 6. cap. 4.

Justification it self, is not only remission of sins, but also the
sanctification and renovation of the inward man, by a voluntary receipt of grace
and gifts, from whence a man is made Just of unjust. cap. 7. There is required
on man's part, that he be prepared and disposed by the motion of his own will,
unto the obtaining the grace of Justification. can. 9.

Man is disposed unto the justice of Justification. By faith, fear, hope, love
begun, some hatred and detestation of sin, a purpose to be baptized; to begin
a new life; and to keep Gods commandments. cap. 6. We are said therefore to
be Justified by faith, because faith is the beginning, foundation, and root of
every Justification. cap. 8.

Cap. 10. It decrees that Justification receiud, is increased.

The Church of England.

That we are Justified by faith only, is a most wholesome doctrine, and very
full of comfort, as more largely is expressed in the Homily of Justification.
Arti: 11.

To be washed from sins in such sort, that there remains not any spot of
sin, is that Justification or righteousness, which S. Paul speaks of, when he
says, No man is justified by the works of the Law. The forgiveness of sins
and trespasses, is that righteousness which is taken, accepted, and allowed of
God for our profit, and full Justification. 1. Sermon of salvation, a little
after the beginning.

There is nothing upon the behalf of man concerning his Justification, but
only a true and lively faith. 1. Sermon of Salvation, a little before the end.

CHAP. X. The Doctrine delivered in the former Chapter is argued.
THere be three things in it inquirable.

1 Whether this proposition, A sinners Justification consists also in grace
infused, be true or not? 2 Whether that same proposition consents with the
Church of Rome or not? 3 Whether it dissenteth from the Church of England or
not?
I have set down Mr. Mountagu his doctrine touching this point, which
contains many propositions, and because it might appear how far he agrees
with the Church of Rome, I bring but one of them to be disputed: because if
this be found false and against the doctrine of the Church of England, then all
the rest will be found false likewise: and I desire to contract the disputation
unto the narrowest scantling.

That that first proposition is false, does manifestly Thomas, Vega, Soto,
Bellarmine, Suarez, Vasques, and others that do maintain the same. To declare
it in this disputation to be false it is needless, because there is nothing
brought to prove it.

That he consents with the Church of Rome in every Rome set down also in the
former Chapter will show it. And that not only in the Justice that does
concur unto Justification, and all other things which depend thereupon, but
also in the nature and being of the remission of sins, as shall be declared
no. 23 etc. Which must be observed, because it is a matter of great importance:
it is little observed, and makes up his agreement with them, and his
disagreement with the Church of England in every part and parcel of this
point, teaching in all things as they do; in nothing as the Courch of England
does. That he does disagree from the Church of England, the very reading of the
doctrine of them both, set down in the last Chapter will declare. Our Church
places our whole Justice, and adequate nature of Justification in remission of
sins, he places it also in grace infused. It makes remission of sins one
thing, he another; as shall be showed hereafter no. 26. etc.

Notwithstanding all which evidence, he labors Appeal, page 168. and 188.
to persuade the world; that,

He consents not with the Church of Rome, nor dissenteth from the Church of
England.

But all his labor is in vain, the contradictory will prove true, as this
discourse will declare.

He pleads for himself two things.

First, by grace infused he meant and intended only concommitanter, that is,
grace concurreth with remission of sins in a justified man, page 168. 169. and
170.

Secondly, in that description he went not punctually to work, but described
Justification at large, for that act of God of remission of sins, and the
necessary and immediate concomitance unto, and consequence upon that. Appeal,
page 172. 178.

He charge such as do not understand that proposition in this sense, with
ignorant or wilful mistaking his meaning, or obstinate refusal of
satisfaction. Appeal, page 168. 172.

I answer; All this is a fair show put upon a foul cause, a mere pretense
without show of truth. I will make it appear, first by my answers to the
arguments he brings to prove he meant thus. And then by proofs from the
things themselves. This was not his intent, but his words must be understood as
they lie without interpretation.

His first argument, p. 168. is to this effect.

I did attribute grace infused to Justification secondarily,

Therefore I intended grace infused is in a justified man.

I answer; This reason is reasonlesse: There is no show in the Consequence, the
word secondarily cannot lead your Reader to think you meant so, neither do
you show how it should.

Again, your own words do prove you meant not that, by the word secondarily:
but that grace infused does constitute Justification in a second notion: For if
Justification be a motion between two terms, the one of sin wherein a man
was; the other of grace whereto a man is brought, and that is the first, this
the second, then grace does constitute Justification in a second notion; but
you teach the first, Gagge, page 143. and 141. therefore you must be understood
to mean the last.

In the next place he tells us; that his purpose was to let the Papist know
that we taught, that a man justified is sanctified also.

I answer; This proves not that he meant to say that grace infused is in a
man that is justified, but supposes that he did mean so, and shows why he
did mean so, therefore it is nothing to the purpose. Besides, it is utterly
false, he had no purpose to say any such thing; for the question then in hand,
was whether faith only does justify: which could not yield him any occasion to
say Grace was in a justified man, they being two things every way distinct and
without the show of affinity. Again, never any Papist living did write or say
that we deny a justified man to be sanctified also, therefore you had no
occasion thus to say.

In the last place, page 171. he has these words,

If a justified man be also sanctified, then might I allow one common word to
contain and express both the parts.

I answer; 1. This supposes he meant as he pretends, and shows the reason
why he comprehended two things distinct in nature under one name; but proves
not that he meant to say as he pretends. 2. He bestows much labor, and
spares for no cost to prove the first part of this reason, but to no purpose;
for that was never denied by any man in the Church of England, nor in any other
Church that joins in faith with it. But the consequence is utterly false, for
these two parts are not essential unto that whole which you call
Justification. Therefore when you make one word to contain the^ both, the
sentence is untrue, disagreeable to art, and a monster in nature. He is
unskillful that puts a childs-shooe upon the foot of Hercules, that adds to
the statue of a man the limbs of a beast, and just so do you in this place,
if you comprehend remission of sins and sanctification under the name of
Justification. And this is his whole plea touching the first part of his
excuse, (and this too much too) for of three things two of them are wholly
besides the matter, and void of truth in themselves, the third disproued by his
own plain testimony.

In the behalf of the second part of his excuse, he

Justification is taken in Scripture strictly for remission of sins, and
largely for that act of God, and the necessary, and immediate concomitance
unto, and consequence upon that, etc, and the like does Calvin, Perkins, Beza.

I answer; This supposes that he did describe Justification largely, when he
said, Justification consists in remission of sins, and grace infused, but
proves it not: therefore it is nothing to the purpose. But let it be supposed,
he can prove it at some other time, and go on with him to examine what he
brings: I say it is utterly false, the Scripture does never take the
Justification of a sinner any other ways but one; you bring no proof that it
does, and your word is not sufficient: when your proofs come, you shall have
answer: for the authority of Calvin, etc. I need not much weigh in this
question, because I know your self accounts it worth nothing. Calvin says no
such thing.

His intent was to confute the Gagger.

I answer; This has no force to prove, that

Therefore I described Justification, as comprehending Sanctification, when I
said it consists in remission of sins, and grace infused.

For so to describe it, is not the way the confute, but to be confuted: first,
because that description is false: secondly, in it you agree with the Gagger in
an Article of his Faith, decreed by the Council of Trent.

Moreover, your antecedent is false: you had no such intent: For the thing to
be refuted, was Faith only does not justify, so says your adversary, which
you might have refuted without relation to the nature of Justification; for he
must prove (at least) that something else besides Faith does concur to
Justification, or confess he said not truly. It was not required on your part
to prove all other things were excluded; therefore there was no need or
occasion of making a description of Justification. But suppose there had been
good reason why you should have made a description of Justification, yet the
making of this description, does argue your intent was not to refute the
Gagger, but to establish and confirm the Gaggers position; for if
Justification be as you have described it, then without all doubt, more things
are required to Justification besides Faith: and Bellarmine does dispute just
after the same manner, de Iusti. lib. 1. cap. 18. Lastly, upon this description
of Justification, you proceed, and say, man is the subject thereof, and that
thereunto there are required certain preparations to the purpose; the first
whereof you say is knowledge of God and his Law, etc. that is indeed assent unto
the Law of God, which is Faith, according to the Council of Trent: for you do
not speak of such a knowledge of the Law, which is without an assent to the
truth thereof. You proceed, and teach that Faith is the root and original of
the rest of the preparations: just as the Council of Trent does, which proves
your intent was to justify, and not to refute your adversaries position.

If notwithstanding all this, you will still affirm no. 4. and plead your own
authority for the proof thereof (as best able to declare what you meant) then
first your meaning is not expressed by your words: secondly, the whole course of
your Doctrine says one thing, and your intent is another: thirdly, your
meaning was without reason to guide it: fourthly, the Doctrine that caryeth
your meaning, does destroy what you meant to build: but you will deny all these
four, therefore you must confess you had no such intent.

After he has thus declared what his intent was in page 174. to show what his
intent is touching the nature and adequate being of Justification, which he
proclaims in these words;

Be it known unto you; that, I believe

Justification is (in strictness of terms: Not regeneration, nor renouation,
nor sanctification. But)

A certain action in God, applied unto us:

Or, A certain respect, or relation,

Whereby we are pardoned and acquitted of our sins,

Esteemed righteous before God; And

Accepted by him in Christ unto life everlasting.

I answer; If this proclamation had been published by an authority sufficient
to compel us to have assented thereunto, then had it been possible, that you
had given satisfaction: but for want of that, you must give us leave to touch,
to handle, to search, before we take. Thus therefore I proceed:

This great ado is about nothing: you tell us now what you do believe when
you writ your second Book. We inquire what belief you did express by your
writing in your first Book. Let this fault be remitted, we will rest satisfied
with this, if there be sufficient cause why, but alack there is no such
matter. And thus I show it:

You did not believe that Justification is as now you pretend, for if you had
so believed, you would have expressed that belief, because your intent was to
refute the Gagger, as you profess. Appeal page 173. Now this belief had been
an easy and ready way to have refuted him, seeing that the question there
disputed was, whether,

A man is Justified by Faith only:

As is evident by the 18. Chapter of your first Bellarmine by implicaiton,
confesses no less, de Iusti. lib. 1. cap. 18. Add quod.

Again, if you had then believed Justification is as you describe it now, then
your thoughts in all likelihood would have now been orderly digested: but here
is nothing but confusednesse, and thus I show it:

1 First, you describe by a negative, which Art forbids.

2 Secondly, you place the Genus in two things, viz. action. respect, or
relation.


If you would express one thing by those distinct terms, then you intend a
thing impossible: for an action is an em^nation from a worker, Respect and
Relation (as it is here used) imports an adiunct unto a subject. If your
meaning be, to express two things distinct in nature, by these distinct
terms, then you^ description is ridiculous: I need not show how.

3 You say it is an action in God, which signifies an action immanent, which
is false; Justification is an ^ction transient, and your self confess it,
when you say, Justification is by Faith, and made in an instant, G^gge page
146. which do import actions wrought upon the creatures in time. You also tell
us, this action i^ applied unto us, which signifies an action transient, which
is contrary to the former; and so you say, and unsay, with one breath.

4 You say, pardon of sins is by a respect or relation in God. Which sentence
is wholly without sense, For respect, or relation, has not any force, by which
an effect should be produced; neither can it be conceived what you mean by
Respect, or Relation, or how pardon of sins, should flow from, or depend
upon, that Respect or Relation. And so much for the Genus.

5 You place the special nature of Justification in three things, viz. First,
Remission of sins: secondly, Esteeming righteous: thirdly, Accepting to
eternal life, as untruly, and unreasonably, as the former: for these three are
really distinct; and, therefore cannot concur jointly together unto the
primary and formal being of Justification. Indeed esteeming righteous is an
act of GODS understanding, and called Intuitiue knowledge, which supposes the
thing already in being. Justification is the act of Gods will, from whence it
receives being. Acceptance to life, signifies an act of God willing eternal
life unto man, (as Vasquez has truly observed:) which belongs to
Predestination, and not to Justification? Lastly, Justification is a motion
from one positive to another. But Esteeming righteous, and Accepting to life,
is not such: therefore not essential to Justification.

He does father this confusednesse upon other men, and expressly names Mr.
Perkins for one, Appeal, page 174. but it will not excuse him: for Mr. Perkins
writ a comment (as himself there alleges) wherein it was meet for him to use
amplifications for cleerenesse, and unmeet to be tied unto the exact use of
Art: because that is obscure: but Mountagu is a Disputer, and therefore must
avoid straggling. Besides, Mr. Mountagu despises Mr. Perkins with no small
degree of scorn, as is manifest by what he writes of him in his Appeal page
270. therefore it is plain, in this description he was not guided by Mr.
Perkins his authority. We may conclude this Description is his own, it has
not Mr. Perkins for shelter.

6 Those superfluities being pared off, your sentence is this;

Justification is remission of sins.

You do not believe, that, Justification is remission of sins; for if you
do, then do you not believe, that there is an increase and augmentation of
Justification by the increase and access of Gods grace: for remission of
sins admits no increase, and augmentation, much less by a new access of
Gods grace, which appertains to Sanctification, and not to Justification. But
you do believe the consequent, and do profess it in your Appeal, page 168.
169.

If it be answered, remission of sins is increased by daily receiving
remission of new sins, and by increase of grace, and good deeds, viz. by
declaring him to be just, that is already made just. In which sort he
writes, Appeal, page 162. 169. 197. I reply, this answer does not take away
the force of my argument; for it is auowed only upon his own word, he does
not prove it to be so, nor show how it can be thus, although there be very
great need of both; for remission of sins does take away the very being of
sin that is past, as the Scripture speaks, saying; Thou art the Lamb of
God that take away the sins of the world; which cannot admit any increase:
because, sin being remitted, there remains nothing, and that which is
nothing, cannot receive any increase: neither can Gods act of remitting,
receive increase, himself does confess it, Appeal, page 195. where he
says, Justification as it is the work of God, is without Magis or Minus. The
remission of new sins, does not increase remission of sins, nor can
possibly; because, the sins already remitted, are wholly taken away: the act
of God remitting them, was extended unto the total abolishing of sin; so is
it with the act of remitting new sins, whereby there is no place for
increase: for, that which is so done already, that no more can be done thereto,
that cannot be increased. The antecedent is the Doctrine of our Church; in the
first Sermon of salvation, a little after the beginning; where it says, we
are washed from sin in such sort, that there remains not any spot of sin.
The same thing we find, page 377. and 382. of that Book following.

Neither can the declaring, that sin is remitted, increase the remission of
sin, which is no more, but as if you should say, the tree is known by the
fruit: as your self teach, Appeal, page 197. but to increase, is as much as
when warm water is made hotter, by continuing on the fire, with an augmentation
and access of that heat; as your self say, Gagge, p. 142. which two things
do much differ. Would Mr Mountagu say his riches were increased, if it were
declared truly and fully what riches he has? I hope he would not. In the like
case he must say, the declaring, that sin is remitted, does not increase
remission. If he will go on to maintain that answer, then I conclude in his
own words, Appeal, page 185. Go and befoole your self for opposing common
sense and reason.

When I had come thus far, I supposed here had Appeal, page 183. that

Such is the changed estate of men justified, that they are also regenerate,
that are justified.

I say neither against, nor for: because it was never a question on foot by
any parties in this world: for answer, I may return him his own words,
Appeal, page 196.

In what place do they speak; God save your honest credit, and name me the
place, quote the very words of the Authors, which are parties to that
disputation.

But this is impossible for him ever to do. If it be answered, he would never
have put himself thus far into the eye of the world, to bark at the
moone-shine in the water: he alleges Becanus, Appeal, page 169. whose
words seem to incline somewhat that ways. I answer, something is the matter
indeed, but he has not expressed it. The reason why I will not determine, nor
inquire after. I will proceed to show what it is, and by that it will appear,
it serves not his turn any thing at all.

The Church of England teaches thus touching original

1 Original sin, deserves damnation.

2 Original sin remains in them that are regenerated.

3 Original sin (although there is no condemnation for them that believe,
yet it) has of it self the nature of sin, Artic. 9.

Again, in the first Homily of Salvation, it says thus:

4 They which sin in act, are washed from their sins in such sort, that
there remains not any spot of sin that shall be imputed to their damnation.

The Council of Trent decrees, sess. 5. can. 5. in these words:

The grace bestowed in Baptism, does take away whatsoever has the true, and
proper nature of sin, and sin is not only rased, and not imputed.

Out of this Doctrine on both sides, they infer against us, as if we said,

After remission of sins and justification, a man remains a sinner truly,
and that he is always foul and unclean.

As we may find in Bellarmine de Bap. lib. 1. cap. 13. and de Iusti. lib. 2.
cap. 9. and cap. 7. Secundo, Tertio, etc. and cap. 11.

Unto which, some of the learned in the Church of England do answer as he
alleges, Appeal, p. 169. etc.

We are far from that opinion; for we teach together with remission of
sins we do receive divine grace, inabling man to forsake sin.

What is to be said to the point it self, will come afterward, when the
nature of remission of sins comes to be showed; no. 31.. But how.

Only thus much suffices to set down the true state of the question between
the Church of Rome, and the Church of England in this point, which he harpeth
so much upon; which does also evidently show, that this point has nothing to
do with faith unto Justification, neither could it have lengthened out his
foggy and mistie pretenses brought to excuse himself from agreeing with the
Church of Rome, and disagreeing from the Church of England in this point.
Wherefore I leave it, and proceed.

So confident is he in this fancied victory, that from

If they meant no otherwise then thus, as I conceive they did not, I see no
reason to dissent from them.

There can be no fitter answer to be given hereunto, then to return you your
own words, Appeal, ^ag. 184.

You cite no words, name no place, send me to no text, page, nor particulars,
by any direction, that I may know where to find, what you intend; a mere
trick of iugling companions. Marry I find some things in the Council of
Trent, which I dare say will not down, nor digest with you, a^ opposing your
conceit, or rather dream, or wilful perverting the meaning of the Council;
the which, because I have a fit time. I will not let it alone till another.

Where you say [ If they meant] your meaning is, to refer us to the decree of
the council of Trent: where

It makes Justification to be the pulling of us out of the power of
darkness, and the translation into the Kingdom of Christ. Sess. 6. cap. 3.

And where it does insinuate the description of the Justification of a sinner,
that it is a translation from that state wherein man was borne, into the state
of grace, cap. 4.

That you refer us hither, or unto no other place in the Council, I take for
granted.

Where you say if they meant no more but thus, your purpose is to send us to
your own words a few lines before: viz.

He that is justified is also regenerate.

Now we have the true sense of the antecedent part; I let pass the consequence
of your proposition, and come to your assumption, which must be set down in
these words.

But the Council of Trent in these places, Sess. 6. c. 3. and 4., etc. means
no more but that, a justified man is also sanctified.

Which assumption is wanting and in stead thereof you bring us the proof of it
in these words:

As I conceive they did not.

Now all parts of the argument are set right, I answer to it:

The assumption is false, yea so odiously false, as that a man would not expect
such a falsehood to fall from the pen of a man that understands chalk from
Cheese, or that had conscience to declare the truth, when he understood it.
This might be made to appear by diverse passages in the Council of Trent: but
I will content my self only with these three.

1 Sanctification is by grace infused.

Justification it self is sanctification.

Therefore Justification it self is by grace infused.

The proposition and assumption are the words of the Council of Trent, cap. 7.
In which, 1. it speaks of the same Justification whereof it had spoken in the
3. and 4. Chapters. 2. By Justification it self, it means the quidditie,
essence and being of Justification: both which are manifest of themselves, they
need no proof. And that sanctification is formally and intrinsically by grace
infused, is likewise as certain.

2 The only formal cause of Justification, is the very being thereof.

Grace infused is the only formal cause of Justification.

Therefore grace infused is the very being of Justification.

The proposition is a principle in nature, and agreed upon for truth, therefore
may not be questioned.

The assumption is the express words of the Council of Trent, in the 7.
Chapter.

3 If grace infused does not concur to the being of Justification, then it is
by remission of sins only, excluding grace infused.

But the being of Justification, is not by remission of sins only, excluding
grace infused.

Therefore the being of Justification, is by grace infused.

The consequence of the proposition is so necessary, that it cannot be
questioned.

The assumption is the words of the counsel, c. 7. ca^. 11.

What credit of truth is wanting in the assumption, he will supply by the
proof thereof; which forsooth is his own conceit: he conceived, they meant
not otherwise than thus, therefore you must conceive so to.

Unto which I might return answer in his own words, Appeal, page 178.

Shall I bring proofs to Anaxagoras for the snow is white? Who would not
suffer himself to be persuaded so: nay, because he was otherwise by
preconceit persuaded, he said, it did not so much as seem white unto him. Your
opinions are your own, you will opine what formerly you have thought, so do
for me, and there an end.

But I cannot so let it pass, because you keep not Rome, in the point of
Justification, that have dissented for many ages, till M. Mountagu his conceit
sprung up in the world.

Therefore, unto his conceit, I oppose the resolved judgments of all the
Schoolmen, that have lived in the Church of Rome, till the Council of Trent,
all agreeing in this one sentence,

Grace infused, is essential unto Justification.

And shall we think, the Council of Trent, would determine against the^?
Surely no: Besides, the Council of Trent has framed the decree out of Thomas,
who was the first that brought the body of Divinity into a complete order:
Peter Lombard, Richard, Altisiodore, Albert, and Alexander, (the Predecessors
of Thomas) not attaining thereunto, yet consented with him, in this thing.

Since the Council of Trent, all on that side without exception, do
understand the Council of Trent to place the primary and proper being of
Justification, in grace infused.

I might amplify this bold and presumptuous act of his (daring to oppose a
multitude of learned men for some hundred years, delivering their judgments
singly, and afterward decreeing the same in a Council jointly; and last of
all, the same decree so interpreted and defended universally) but I leave it,
and conclude in his own words, Appeal, p. 248.

You understand not the state nor depth of the question; but scumme upon the
surface, and gibberish you cannot tell for what.

And thus much is enough (and too much) to have no. 4. Now I come to prove he
did not mean as he pretended there: but he meant to make grace enfused
essential to Justification: In which also I will content my self with some
arguments, and let the rest pass: The first whereof I frame thus,

1 That wherein Justification consists, is essential thereunto; not an
accident to a justified man. But in grace infused (according to him)
Justification consists. Therefore grace infused) according to him) is
essential to Justification. etc. 2 Every term of that motion which is called
Justification, is essential unto Justification. But grace infused (according
to him) is one term in this motion, which is called Justification. Therefore
grace infused (according to him) is essential to Justification. 3 If a man be
just when he is changed from sin to grace, then grace is essential to
Justification. But (according to him) a man is just when he is changed from
sin to grace. Therefore (according to him) grace is essential to
Justification.
If any except against the consequence of the proposition, changed, may be
referred unto the term Just; as a thing that does follow a Just man, and so
does declare that a man is just already, before he is changed.

And indeed I do find this argument for substance in his Appeal, page, 174.
and this exception in his Appeal, page 185. where he says,

I do not make this change the same with Justification in the act; but an
incident, instant, necessary consequent, thereupon.

From which answer he infers against him that understands his words, in
any other sense; that he is

1 No Scholar, or Divine; but one at odds with his own little, or frantic
wits, Appeal, p. 176. 2 An opposer of common sense, reason, well known and
confessed divinity on all hands: therefore a fool. 3 A man that does not
understand himself, nor him, page 185.
Unto his foul, and ugly imputations, inferred upon his answer; I say nothing:
the Prophet David in the 52. Ps. v. 2. 3. 4. 5. will give him his lesson for
that.

To the exception it self, I answer; It is very manifest, that he did make
this change from sin to grace, essential unto the act of justification. The
phrase and manner of his speaking in this point; and the thing it self, does
evidently declare it.

For 1. The like phrase he uses when he says, a sinner is then justified,
when he is made just: which can be understood no otherwise then as if he had
said, he is justified at the instant when he is made Just, and by virtue of his
being made Just. 2. To justify (according to him) is to make Just; and to make
just, is to be translated; and the word translated is the same with the word
changed; therefore (according to him) to be changed is to be just, or justified.
3. If to be changed does set out a man already just, and does not signify his
being just, then his purpose was to prove that some men are just, and not to
describe Iust^fication. But he does describe it (as himself professes)
Appeal, page 173. and indeed so he must, or else he says nothing to the
purpose. 4. If the word changed do signify sanctifying grace, which always
goes with Justification; then he must say a man is not justified, till he be
so changed. For he refers being just, to the time when he is changed: but
he will confess that a man is just, or justified, before he is so changed,
and does declare so much, Appeal page 172. where he makes sanctification a
consequent upon justification, and page 174. he says, Justification is not
sanctification.

My last argument in this point I frame thus:

4 If God only justifies, because he only creates a new heart, then to
create a new heart, is to justify.

But (according to M. Mountagu) God only justifies, because he only creates
a new heart: For,

He says, God only justifies, who alone creates a new heart within us: In
which sentence he brings the latter act of creating, to prove the former of
justifying.

Therefore (according to Mr. Mountagu,) to create a new heart, is to justify,
and consequently, grace infused, is essential to justification.

He brings the substance of this argument, in his Appeal, page 188. and 192.
as an objection made against him, but torn in pieces, that the strength
thereof, and the weakness of his answer thereto, might be concealed.

He answers unto it, three things.

1 God only does justify, page 188. 2 God only does create a new heart within
us, p. 192. 3 Faith justifies instrumentally, p. 193.
He annexeth proof for them all:

And concludes, if this be Popery, I confess I am a Papist, p. 191. And am
content to pass for a Papist, p. 194. and complains against the obiectors,
with his wonted bitterness, page 189. 190. and 191.

I answer, this plea is idle: no living man did ever deny any of his three
propositions; nor did charge the^ to be Popery; (at least,) The argument which
he answers unto, has no such thing (as the Reader may see.) A worthy disputer,
that either knows not, or cares not what he speaks unto. The fire cannot but
burn, nor he forbear his railing, therefore he must not be blamed for it.

I argue against both his Expositions, set down, no. 4, thus:

When he said Justification consists also in grace infused, he meant to say,
grace infused was always in a justified man, and by justification, he
understands the whole state of a man reconciled to God, or neither of them:
For,

He pretends both, and both must be true, or neither true. He that is found
false in one thing, deserves not to be trusted in any other.

But he did not take that sentence in both these senses. I prove it: First, for
he says, Appeal p. 169. I professed at first to take Justification only in
this acceptance, viz. For the declaration of the act of Justification upon man
by the lively fruits of a true faith, and for absolution. Which is but one of
the senses, (at most) and seems to be the first: now if he meant only the
first, or but one of them, his own pen must give the verdict, he meant
neither of them in deed and in truth. Secondly, if he make grace infused,
accidental to a justified man, or in him that is justified, declaring him
that-hee is just, then he did not describe Justification, as compre^ending
Sanctification; for unto this Justification, grace infused is essential and
constitutiue; and therefore if you meant the first, you meant not the second.
Thirdly, if in that sentence he intended to describe Justification, as
comprehending Sanctification also; then he intended not to say, grace infused,
is accidental to Justification, or a justified man: for unto this
justification, and man justified, grace infused is essential, making full and
complete the work of sanctification, so as if he meant the second, he did not
mean the first.

I prove against either of them singly.

If when you said, Justification consists in grace infused; you meant to say
a justified man has grace infused, then both those sentences do express the
same thing.

But that they do not. As the very sight and reading of them will manifest.

In the first sentence, justification considered in it self, and without any
person receiving the same, is said to consist in grace. In the second sentence,
not Justification in it self, nor with the party receiving it; but the party
justified, conceived otherwise then as he is justified, is said to possess or
enjoy grace infused, together with his justification.

Therefore by the first sentence, you did not mean the second.

2 If by this sentence, Justification consists in grace infused, he meant to
describe Justification, as it comprehends the whole state and condition of a
man regenerate and reconciled to God, then he agrees fully with the Church of
Rome, which takes it so. For,

It describes Justification to be A translation from that state, in which man
was borne a Son of the first Adam, into the state of grace, and adoption of
the sons of God, Council of Trent, sess. 6. cap. 4. And more fully it says,
Justification it self, is not only remission of sins, but also
sanctification and renouation of the inward man, by a voluntary receipt of
grace, and gifts, from whence a man is just of unjust, a friend of an enemy,
and heir according to the hope of everlasting life, cap. 7.

But by that sentence, he meant so to describe, etc. (as is before set down,
no. 7, Wherein also he places his confidence, Appeal page 172. to give
satisfaction if any will be taken.

Therefore when he says, Justification consists in grace infused, he
agrees with the Church of Rome.

Now at the last we are come to a final conclusion, Rome.

In the next place we must inquire

Whether he agrees with the Church of Rome, and dissenteth from the Church of
England, in assigning of the nature of remission of sins.

Touching which, thus he says: Both forgiveness of sins, and grace infused,
are the act of Gods spirit in man.

To the same effect the Council of Trent decrees in these words.

Grace bestowed in Baptism, does take away whatsoever has the true and proper
nature of sin, sess. 5.

These sentences of the Council, and Mr. Mountagu, do fully agree. He says,
the spirit, It says, grace; He says, the spirit in man, It says, grace
received; He says, remission of sin, is the act of the spirit; It says,
grace takes away the true and proper nature of sin: all which words are of
the same value and signification.

All the Interpreters of the Council, do extend this decree, unto all sins:
(as well personal as original) and that upon good reason, as I suppose.
Likewise what the Council says of grace bestowed in Baptism, They apply also
to the habit of grace received out of Baptism: because it is the same habit
which is received by Baptism, and without Baptism: which does make their
agreement clear to the full.

Moreover; the most common opinion of the Expositors Bellarmine does, de
Iustific. lib. 2. cap. 16:

Habitual grace, has four formal effects, the first whereof is to purge
sin.

And thereby they make remission of sin a physical work of grace: as when
one pin is driven out by another, or one color is blotted out by another.
Some others, (but they are not many) are of opinion, that grace does remit sin
by the way of merit: but the first opinion is most agreeable to the Council of
Trent, which in that decree cannot be understood of taking away sin by the
way of merit: because habitual grace bestowed upon children, cannot bring
forth works; and no works, no merits: besides, if grace did merit remission
of sins, then a man might have grace for sometime, and yet not have his
sins remitted: For there may fall out sometime after a man has received
grace wherein he has no opportunity unto the doing of a meritorious work.

Unto which opinion, Mr. Mountagu his words do greatly incline: for he says,

Justification by grace, and remission of sins, is the act of Gods spirit.
Which is as much as if he had said, in what sort grace does make just, in that
sort, grace does remit sin; else he could not comprehend them both under one
act: but must have referred them unto two acts. Now, it is agreed upon by all,
and Bellarmine has it, in the place last alleged; That, to make just, is a
formal effect of habitual grace. And accordingly to remit sin, is a formal
effect of habitual grace.

Again, he says;

The soul of man is the subject of Justification.

In these words he speaks of the soul, not simply, as being the object of an
outward work: but as the subject receiving remission of sins into it; and
how man should receive remission of sin (by grace) into his soul, and that
remission not be a formal effect of grace, cannot possibly be showed.

Lastly, if in his opinion, sin does expel grace formally, then he must be
of opinion, that grace does expel (which is to remit) sin formally.

But he has the first: Appeal, p. 173. where he says,

The property of those sins, that are more eminent, notorious, enormious, is
to wast the conscience.

Where, wasting the conscience, must signify the putting away of grace; for
what is there in the conscience that can be wasted by sin, but grace? and the
act of wasting, must be a formal act; because, sin is conceived in such a
case to rest and remain in stead of grace.

Therefore he must be conceived, to be of opinion, that, remission of sin,
is a formal effect of grace.

By this (I hope) it does appear, that he agrees Rome. But to avoid all
scruple, it is requisite that I remove one objection, which may be made after
this manner:

He places remission of sins in the pardon, and not-imputation of sins,
Gagge page 143. and in absolution therefrom, Appeal page 169.

Therefore he makes not remission of sins a formal effect of grace.

I answer; he may say both, and yet agree with them: for, although the
Council of Trent, sess. 6. can. 11. and cap. 7. has but employed (not expressly
decreed) this manner of remitting sins: yet all the Interpreters by one
consent do teach both expressly; except only Gabriel Vasquez, in 1m. 2ae.
disp. 204. per tot: yea, he must hold the latter: though he does hold the
former; for pardon, etc. is required also unto the perfect doing away of sin,
as Thomas teaches, 3. part, q. 22. art. 3. C. And Suarez proves at large, de
great. lib. 7. cap. 13. and 14.

And thus much (I hope) is sufficient, to show his Rome. I come now in the next
place, to show his dissent from the Church of England in this point of
remission of sins.

What the Church of England has decreed in the point, I will set down, and
then apply it. It says,

Good works cannot put away our sins, Artic. 12.

In which sentence, there is a direct contradiction put, unto the Doctrine last
recited out of Church of Rome, and M. Mountagu. The term put away must
signify that putting away which is called remission, and not satisfaction; for
this does make recompense for sin, but does not put away sin; which
imports, the destroying of the being, and remaining of sin it self. By
denying the putting away of sin to good works, the meriting of remission of
sin by grace, and the effects thereof is denied: for otherwise then so, good
works are not fit nor able to put away sin: and himself speaks thus of it,
Gagg. p. 156.

Now forasmuch as good works are the fruits of a lively faith (as the Article
speaks) that is of the habit of grace; the remission of sins that it
denies to good works, it denies to the habit of grace, and therein it
denies that remission of sin is a formal effect, or physical work of
grace; forasmuch as the remission of sin can be no other effect or operation of
the habit of grace but formal, and Physical. The Homily of Alms, page 329.
teaches the same thing expressly, which is a proof sufficient: that M. Mountagu
does dissent from the Church of England, and no dissent in a matter of this
kind, can be greater then a contradiction.

Our Church does teach positiuely, what remission Rome and M. Mountagu do give
unto it. If I make that appear. I doubt not then to say: M. Mountagu
dissenteth from the Church of England. I do it thus,

The true knowledge of the remission of sin consists in the true
understanding of these two things, viz. 1. what is meant by sin, which is
said to be forgiven. Secondly, what act of God it is by which it is forgiven.

Sin, of which a man may be denominated a sinner, may be conceived two ways:
first, for the act of sin past: secondly, for the will of sinning: as Thomas
has truly observed, 3. part. q. 61. art. 4. C.

The will of sinning, is not the object of that act, which the Scripture
calls remitting: because the will of sinning, imports an indisposition unto
good, and an aptness to sin, remaining in the will, from whence the
Scripture does not denominate a man a sinner: but from the act of sin.

The act of sin past, is the object of remission, as is confessed on all
sides. The Council of Trent has decreed it Sess. 6. cap. 5. where it makes
such as are turned from God by sin, the men that are justified. So does all
the expositors of the Council, with one consent, make the act of sin the thing
remitted; and from which a man is justified. Bellarmine has it, de Iusti. lib.
2. cap. 16. with whose testimony I will rest contented, others may say the same
thing; but not more, nor more clearly then he has done.

The Church of England teaches it, in the first Homily of salvation; where it
names (a little after the beginning) sins forgiven, by the name of
trespasses: and again, sins from which man is washed, and which are not
imputed, it calls sin in act or deed.

The act of God, whereby the sins of man are England, by diverse titles,
according to the course, and phrase of Scripture: but of them all, one is the
most fit, and of best signification for this present occasion; viz. The
not-imputing of sin: which it uses in the first Homily of salvation, a
little after the beginning, the words lie thus,

Man is washed from his sins, in such sort, that there remains not any spot
of sin, that shall be imputed to their damnation.

In which sentence, washing away the spots of sin, (which is the act
remitting sins) is resolved into the act of not-imputing; where it says, so
washed as not imputed. He must not deny this Homily to be the Doctrine of the
Church of England: for, he does avouch it to be such in his Appeal, page
190. and 194.

If it be said, the Church of England does assign other acts of remitting
sin, besides this, in vsi^g other titles: I answer; though it do use other
titles; yet not assign any other act but this; for this does extend as largely
as them all, and they do but ^xplicate this: therefore we may conclude, in
the doctrine of the Church of England,

The not-imputation of sin, is the sole and only act, whereby sins are
remitted.

Touching this act, arise^h all the difference between the Church of Rome, and
our Church: with which Church of Rome, M. Mountagu consents; both of them
assigning such an act of God, as does really differ, and put a contrariety unto
this.

The Church of Rome teaches, 1. that sin is remitted that covers a thing
deformed with beauty and good shape.

Our Church makes, 1. the Creator directly and immediately the worker thereof.
2. It places the thing effected not in man; but in the outward estate and
condition of man. 3. The manner of working to be merely efficient, viz. God
(out of his prerogative Royal) discharging our account; Not putting our sins
to our reckoning.

And thus much is sufficient, to prove his total agreement with the Church of
Rome, and disagreement with the Church of England in the nature of
Justification: and therewith I might put an end unto this whole point.

But I will go a little further to the satisfying of England has determined
in this point. 2. How little reason he had to depart from the doctrine of our
Church in this point. 3. The great reason that every man has to strive for
the doctrine of the Church of England in this point, as for the faith once
delivered to the Saints.

Against this doctrine of the Church of England, the Church of Rome (as may
well be conceived) does thus dispute,

If no other act does concur unto the remitting of sin, but the act of
not-imputing of sin, then a man, after remission of sin remains a sinner;
truly, and always foul, and unclean.

But a man, after remission of sin, remains not a sinner; truly, foul,
and unclean.

Therefore besides the act of not-imputing of sin, there is required some
other act, unto the remission of sin, viz. The infusion of grace, whereby the
true, and proper nature of sin, is taken away, rooted out, and abolished.

This argument is framed out of the 4. and 9. arguments of Bellar. de Bap. lib.
1. cap. 13. and also taken out of those places of Bellarmine alleged no. 13.
the antecedent part of the proposition is found de Bap. lib. 1. cap. 13. where
he alleges a passage out of Chemnitius, containing the same doctrine which I
have cited out of the 9 Article, and the Homily, at no. 13. out of which he
infers, that we say, that sin is remitted, because it is not imputed, and
we acknowledge not, that it is taken away.

And in his disputation de Iusti. lib. 2. c. 9. Praeterea, and cap. 11. Illud
autem etc. the same thing is repeated: The consequent part of the proposition,
and the inference thereof from that antecedent, is in de Iusti. lib. 2 cap. 7.
Secundo, etc. Tertio, etc. I have assumed negatiuely the consequent part of the
proposition; because they deny the antecedent part of the proposition: and as
Bellarmine says, in that place de Bap. lib. 1. cap. 13. The Council of Trent
Sess. 5. can. 5 decreed against it. The assumption it self, is their own
doctrine; as will be confessed on all sides. The proof of the consequence
seems to be these two things;

1 The act of not-imputing, does not take away sin. Confessed by our
doctrine, no. 13. that says, original sin is in the justified, and in it
self is sin properly, and the spots of actual sin do likewise remain.

2 By the remaining of sin (that in it self is damnable) a man is foul,
unclean, and a sinner truly.

Now that I have set their disputation in true form, Mountagu will maintain his
doctrine of remission of sins no 23, etc. then he must dispute thus too, and
be a worthy child to his mother, and a famous refuter of the Gagger: If he will
not dispute thus, he must revoke that as false in it self, and a stranger to
the Church of England.

Unto this argument many Divines do answer as he alleges, Appeal p. 169.
In these words,

We are far from this absurd opinion; for we teach, with the action of God,
remitting sin, concurreth another action of divine grace, enabling man to
forsake, and mortify every greater sin, which God has pardoned.

But, how fit this answer is, to give satisfaction to any part of that
argument; I leave unto others to judge: because, 1. Bellarmine does confess no
less then is in that answer, de Iusti. lib. 2. cap. 6. at the beginning. 2. It
seems not fit to be applied to the consequence of the proposition; for that
speaks of doing away of sin already committed: but this answer speaks of
preventing sin not yet committed, neither does it appertain to the
assumption, which does not charge us with the holding of any opinion whatsoever.

Other Divines do answer otherwise; I will name Abbot in defense of M.
Perkins, of inherent Justice, 2. part. p. 421. his answer is long, but I will
contract it into (so short) a room as I may, using his own words.

We say (says he) a man may be formally just in quality. law.


In course of law and judgment, the form of justice is, not to be subject to
crime, or accusation; and he is formally just, against whom, no action, or
accusation is liable by law, in this sort a man becomes just, by pardon and
forgiveness; because pardon being obtained, the law proceeds no further, and
all imputation of the offense in law, is taken away, as if it had never been
committed: and this is the state of our justice in the sight of God, our sins
are forgiven us, and thereby no accusation is liable against us.

Before I apply this to the argument, It must be observed, that, the word
pardon in this testimony, is of the same value, and signification, with the
word notimputing, used in the argument: for, by pardon, he understands such
an act, as whereby the imputation of the offense in law is taken away, and to
take away the imputation of the offense, is not to impute the offense. This
answer lies against the consequence, and the proof thereof: affirming, that
the act of not-imputing sin, does take away sin, and proves that
affirmation, which proof I may dispose thus,

Whereby we are made formally just before God, that takes away all sin.

This proposition is a manifest truth, agreed upon by all parties.

But, not-imputation of sin is that, whereby we are made formally just,
before God: For,

By it, all crime, action, or accusation and offense in law, is taken away, as
if it had never been committed, the law proceeds no further; which is
formal justice in law, and our formal justice before God.

Therefore the not-imputation of sin does take away sin.

I might proceed further to show the insufficiency of the argument; but I
forbear so to do, this that I have said is sufficient to justify, and
explicate the Doctrine of the Church of England touching the nature of
remission of sins, and justification, which is as much as I intended, and
this place requires.

If Mr. Mountagu (notwithstanding all this) will insist and say, his words
alleged, no 23. etc. are forced beyond his intent, and that (in his
judgment) there is no other act in remission of sin, but pardon, or
not-imputation, he must look unto it; for as Bellarmine affirms, de Iusti.
lib. 2. cap. 1. and 6, That opinion is proper to Calvin. If that be true, (as
it is most true,) how can he think it is the Doctrine of the Church of
England? For as himself says, Appeal, page 72.

The Doctrine of the Church of England, is not likely to be upon the party of a
faction, that has so long had a schism on foot against it, to bring in
Geneuanisme into Church and State, etc.

If it be not the Doctrine of the Church of England, what does it in Mr.
Mountagu his Book, that voweth to thrust out all private opinions, as Irchins
to their holes, where they were bred, and Bastards to the Parish where they
were borne, and to the whipping post according to law? and like a valiant and
true Champion, to defend the Doctrine of his Mother, the Church of England.
Therefore I may conclude, let him turn himself which ways he will, he shall
find himself to agree, either with the Church of Rome, or with Calvin; if
with them, then is he a Papist; if with him, then does he take the course to
bring in Popes into every Parish, as himself infers, and which thing
himself curses with a heavy and bitter curse, Appeal, page 44. I hope he
will be rather a Papist, then a Caluinist, cursed to hell with his own mouth,

I should now show that this faith of the Church of Rome is erroneous, but he
has brought nothing to prove it true, therefore I have nothing to answer. The
Council of Trent in the decree already reported, no 23. says, three things,
viz. first, notimputation, does not take away sin; secondly, sin is
abolished, and taken away; thirdly, the habit of grace does take away sin.
Bellarmine bestows great pains to prove the second, which was never denied,
de Bap. lib. 1. cap. 13. for the first he does only say it; for the third he
has not so much as one place of Scripture to pretend for it: only de Iusti.
lib. 2. cap. 16. he offers a proof from the nature of sin that is
remitted, which can prove nothing; because it is as doubtful as the thing in
question; by which it is manifest, the Scripture knows it not: and
consequently it is erroneous. If Mr. Mountagu thinks not thus, let him
produce the word of God for the proof of it, and he shall have answer, till
then it must go for such.

CHAP. XI. The point of falling from Grace
Master Mountagu. The Church of Rome. The Church ^^ England I See no reason why
I may not confidently maintain falling from grace, Appeal, page 37. He that
is Justified, may lose the grace of justification, which he haeth received,
Con. Tren^, sess. 6. can. 23. After that we have received the holy Ghost, we
may depart from grace given: therefore they are to be condemned, which say they
can no more sin as long as they live here, Artic. 16. In the second part of
the Homily of falling from God, we are sent unto a conclusion, not only of
total lapse for a time, but also of final separation, and for ever, which is
also according to the Doctrine expressed in the Articles: for he that says a
man may fall away, and may recover, implies withal, that some men may fall
away, and may not recover. By every mortal sin, a man does lose the grace of
Justification, which he has receued, cap. 15. Which sentence m^st now be
accounted his own: because he brings it as the Doctrine of our Church: and he
professes, Appeal page 48 what that Church believes, I believe; what it
teaches, I teach.

Sometime the El^ct, Called, the Justified, such as Peter was, do fall totally
from Gods grace. Appeal, page 16.

By a wicked life, men do fall away from grace, Appeal p. 36. By all which
places alleged we have his mind in this point to the full: I will set it down
in several propositions, for the more ease of memory and understanding, and
follow his order thus,

1 A man may fall away from grace. 2 A man may fall away from grace totally and
finally. 3 The Elect, and Justified, do sometime fall away totally. 4 By sin
a man does fall from grace.
CHAP. XII. The point set down in the former Chapter is argued.
THat we may proceed in this question, in the same order that we have done in
the former, three things must be propounded.

1 Whether this proposition: A man may fall from grace: be true or not. 2
Whether that proposition consent with the Church of Rome or not. 3 Whether that
proposition dissenteth from the Church of England or not.
I have propounded the first of his propositions to be discussed, and not any
of the rest: because they do but explicate, and set out the meaning of this.
The second, and third, shows who they be that do lose grace, and how far
they do lose grace. The fourth sets out the next cause that procures the
loss of grace. The handling of these three will come in (each one) in his
several place.

By the term fall away, is signified the loss of grace, and is as much as if
it were said, he that has received grace, may lose that grace, and be
destitute thereof. By grace is meant the habit of holiness, or that inward
form, disposition, or quality, out of which the works of piety, in the
outward actions of man's life, do flow, and whereby he is ordered and set into
the way of eternal happiness. The word may, signifies the possibility in the
event of the separation of man and grace, as we use to say, a man may lose his
life.

That he does consent with the Church of Rome, (so Mountagu says: but because
we have not these things expressly in the Council; therefore we must have
recourse unto the Interpreters, for the undoubted mind of the Council:
Bellarmine de Iusti. lib. 3. cap. 14. says:

We have example in three which lost their Justice, and did recover it again:
and of five that did so lose their Justice, as that they became reprobates.

Where we have Mr. Mountagu his sentence fully and plainly. For he says, the
Elect do lose and recover: others do lose and not recover. Other Authors of
theirs do speak so as Bellarmine does; but I need not name them, because it
is common unto them all to speak thus.

Mr Mountagu supposes that the reprobate also do sometimes receive the habit
of holiness, and so says Bellarmine too, de Iusti. lib. 3. cap. 14 where he
has the same thing for his title, and concludes it in the Chapter,

Habemus igitur, etc. in these words:

The Justice of Justification is not proper to the elect, but sometime common
with the reprobate.

Lastly, M. Mountagu says simply, Sin procures this loss, where he must be
understood, of those sins which (he tells us, Appeal p. 173.) do wast the
conscience: and not of those which he calls sins of ordinary incursion;
that is, to speak in plain English, as himself there says, of mortal; but
not of venial sins: and so says the Council too.

Upon which I may conclude, M. Mountagu agrees with the Council of Trent in
this point to a word: and (upon the reckoning) we find that this his agreement
in these four former propositions does yield us his consent with them in two
more, viz.

1 Sin is mortal and venial. 2 Grace habitual is common to the elect and
reprobate.
Touching the opinion of Arminius in this point, Appeal p. 16.

I have been assured, that, Arminius did hold, not only Intercision for a
time; but also abscision, and abiection too for ever. That a man called, and
justified through the grace of God, might fall away again from grace totally,
and finally, and become a cast away, as Judas was, for ever.

He must be understood to speak this of the predestinate, otherwise he
puts no diffence between Arminius and his own professed opinion; whether
he consents therewith, or dissenteth therefrom, he says nothing expressly.
That he does dissent from Arminius it is not probable; for he had sufficient
reason to have protested his dissent, if he could have done it with truth. It
is very probable he does consent: because being charged with it he holds his
peace. The old proverb is, the silence of the accused is a confession of
guiltiness. Which seldom times proves untrue, what he is of certainty is
known to God, and himself; he stands or falls to his own master: it is
meet I meddle no further but with his positions and proofs: wherefore I leave
this and proceed.

We have no reason to suppose, that, the Church of England was ever of opinion,
that the habit of grace can be lost: for if it were, then must it also believe,
that, 1 Some reprobate is also sanctified. 2 Some sins are mortal, other some
venial. 3. The habit of Justice, and the works thereof be perfect Justice, and
adequate unto the divine Law* 4. Purgatory, Pardons, Masses, Trentals, Dirges,
etc. be profitable unto some that be dead; but we know by perpetual
experience, that our Church abhors, and the professors of her faith
publicly, and privately, protest their detestation, of all these Articles of
the popish faith, therefore we have a cloud of witnesses, that, do all
testify, that, the Church of England makes the losing of the habit of grace
no part of her faith. Moreover, in the 22. Article it does expressly disclaim
the Romish doctrine concerning Purgatory and pardons. Lastly, This point of
falling from grace has been commonly, and universally rejected: as well by
Ministers, as private men, and no man questioned (in the least sort) for doing
wrong thereby to the faith of our Church: which is a most evident proof, that
they taught and believed as our Church ever believed. If it be answered, some
in our Church have taught falling from grace; I reply, It is true, some have so
done, but they have been but a few, and cried down too, by the most, and
thrust off with no small sign of dislike from authority. I have his own
testimony, three times yielded, Gag. p. 158. and p. 171. Appeal page 26.
affirming, that, our Church has left this question undecided: which against
him is a proof without question, that, his falling from grace is not the
doctrine of the Church of England. And yet behold: He would persuade, that,
his falling from grace is the public doctrine of the Church of England;
del^uered, not in ordinary tracts, and lectures, but publicly, positiuely, and
declatorily; and for proof hereof, he says, he will bring us record thereof,
Appeal, page 28. 36. which he promises shall be by the plain and express
words of our Articles, etc. Appeal, p. 37. Appeal, p. 29. Thus he begins
to perform his promise;

In the 16. Article we read: After we have received

That the full force of this argument may appear, and my answer may be
directly, and fitly, applied thereunto, it is needful that I put it into due
form, and thus it will stand.

Whatsoever is comprehended in the 16 Article is the public doctrine of our
Church.

But that a man may depart from grace is comprehended in the 16. Article.

Therefore that a man may depart from grace is the public doctrine of the
Church of England.

I answer; if he will stand to his proposition he may well be enrolled for a
child obedient, and a Champion most valiant, unto his mother the Church of
England. Bellarmine and all the Doctors of the Church of Rome, are but
faint-hearted cowards in comparison of him.

The greatest part of the acts in Councels do not appertain unto faith: The
disputations that go before, the reasons that be added, nor the explications
that are brought, do not appertain to faith, but, only the naked decrees,
and of them, not all, but only such as are propounded as matter of faith.

So says Bellarmine de Council. auct. lib. 2. cap. 12. Quartum est, etc. and no
Papist ever durst give more then thus; yet Mr. Mountagu dares give to the
Church of England more then this. Every sentence in the Articles (with him) is
matter of faith: and so he does equal them unto the scriptures, to whom it
belongs that every sentence be a matter of faith, as Bellarmine truly
auerreth in the place last alleged.

If he will disclaim that proposition, his argument falls of it self.

To answer more specially, that Article comprehends two conclusions, viz.

1 The baptized may sin. 2 The baptized sinner may receive forgiveness.
These two have their several proofs, to wit:

1 He may depart from grace. Therefore, sin. 2 He may repent. Therefore have
forgiveness,
Every one of the conclusions in that Article is the doctrine of the Church of
England. Your proposition so understood is true; but your assumption is false.
Departing from grace is not any conclusion in the Article.

But suppose that every sentence in the Article is the doctrine of the Church
of England: yet this Article will not profit you: for,

A man may depart from grace by neglecting to obey it. by losing it.


In the first sense (I grant) the Article does teach departing from grace, but
in this sense the Article has nothing in favor of you, much less has it
your falling from grace, in express words: for yours is of losing the habit of
grace.

If it be replied the word depart may not be taken in that sense. I reioyne, it
may be so taken in this place: because he that has the habit of grace does
always first neglect the motion and calling of actual grace, before he
commits sin, and this I take as granted; Therefore you must prove that the
Article does understand it otherwise then so, else it can have no stroke in
your business.

Let it be admitted (in courtesy) that, the Article speaks of the loss of
grace: yet it will come far short of your purpose: for it cannot speak of
the loss of the habit of grace. I prove it, from the Article it self, and
your own doctrine, thus;

The habit of grace is lost by sin. So say you.

Grace in the Article is not lost by sin. But contrary.

Grace is lost, therefore sin committed. So says the Article.

Therefore grace in the Article is not the habit of grace.

By this it is most evident, and past doubt, that, there is nothing in the
Article that avouches the loss of the habit of grace. But pardon him this
mistake, I will give my word for him, he never studied the Article to find the
true sense of it. Do you think his study so mean, as that he would
condescend so low, as to English Articles? I assure you no. I tell you, and he
tells it me, Appeal, page 11. He never studied Bastingius Chatichisme,
Fenners divinity, Bucanus, Trelcatius, Polanus, and such like. His learning is
all old: The Apostles Canons, Polycarpus, Denis, Linus, Cletus, Clemens,
Annacletus, Amphilochius, and others of their time, are his puefellowes, and
hourly companions. And he has good reason for it too; The nearer the fountain
the clearer the stream; the further off the fouler, page 12.

His second argument begins, Appeal, p. 32.

Whatsoever is taught in the Homilies, is the authorized, and subscribed
doctrine of the Church of England, For

The Book of Homilies was first composed and published in King Edwards time,
approved, and justified, in Parliament in Queen Elizabeth's days, and
authorized again of late to be read in Churches.

But that a man may fall away from grace, is taught in the Homilies.

Therefore falling from grace is the doctrine of the Church of England.

I answer; a man would verily think he would have us believe his proposition
to be a certain, and undeniable, truth: he bestows so much sweat in the proof
of it: but (good man) he meant nothing less; or else at the turning over of a
new leaf, he becomes a new man; for he professes himself of another mind in
the 260 page following, in these words:

I willingly admit the Homilies, as containing certain godly and wholesome
exhortations: but not as the public dogmaticall resolutions, confirmed of the
Church of England. They have not dogmaticall positions, or doctrine to be
propugned, and subscribed in all and every point. They may seem to speak
somewhat too hardly, and stretch some saying beyond the use, and practice of
the Church of England. The ancientest Fathers sometimes do hyperbolize in
their popular Sermons, which in dogmaticall decisions they would not do, nor
auow the doctrine by them so delivered. Now after this enforcing sort may our
Homily speak, and be so interpreted, which are all popular Sermons, fitted
unto the capacity of common people.

Well, there is good reason why we should take his second thoughts, for the
better, and so leave him tra^pling his own proposition into the dirt, by which
means, his assumption does not deserve answer.

But it may be, he will put new life into his proposition, by a special
privilege that this homilily has above the rest, namely that it is for
explication of the doctrine contained in the Article.

I answer; he seems so to pretend, Appeal, pa. 32. but it is false, we find
not any direction from the Article to the Homily, nor any reflection in the
homily upon the Article: neither can the one explicate the other: but are
really distinct conclusions, and proofs.

The Article says,

He departs from grace, therefore he sins.

The Homily says,

He falls from God by a wicked life, therefore is deprived of grace.

He that can make new Articles, can create new expositors.

Although this be sufficient to satisfy the argument: p. 32.

The title of the Homily is of falling away from God, which very title is
sufficient warrant for the Doctrine in this point.

I answer; this title has nothing to do with the loss of grace: falling from
God signifies turning away from Gods law, and so the Homily it self (a little
after the beginning) does expound the title, and says,

They that may not abide the Word of God, but following the stubbornness of
his own heart, they go, and turn away from God.

If by falling from God, should be meant losing of grace, then the Homily
must be conceived thus to reason;

If you lose your grace, then God will take his grace from you.

For in that sort the Homily does reason from falling from God, as the reading
thereof will show: but it were most absurd to think that the Homily would so
reason.

His second reason for the same purpose, is taken out of the Homily it self,
and stands in this form;

They that are deprived of grace and heavenly life, which they had in Christ,
and become as without God in the world, given into the power of the Devil, as
was Saul and Judas, they lose grace totally, and finally. But according to the
Homily, the truly justified are thus deprived. For:

It is said, they were in Christ, they continued sometime in Christ.

Therefore, according to the Homily, the truly justified may lose their grace
totally and finally.

By this argument, he thinks the cause is his at common law: ye must now
yield, or turn heretic against the Doctrine of the Church of England; but he
is much mistaken. The homily does affirm thus much by the way of rhetorical
enforcement, to persuade men to take heed they turn not away from Gods Law. It
being so understood, I grant the whole reason, but it profits him not. He
promised, no 5. the positive, and declaratory Doctrine of the Church of
England; but rhetorical enforcements are not such.

It may be, some will say, there is a truth in this enforcement. I answer; what
truth soever there is in it, this is certain, the faith of the Church of
England is not contained in it. No man (well advised) will send us to seek for
the faith of our Church unto an argument, urging the practice of a duty, in a
popular Sermon. But what that truth is, we may best learn from the Author of
this Homily himself, whose meaning we find to be comprehended in these two
things.

By such threatenings of Gods taking away of grace.

First, the great danger of sin: Secondly, the necessity of repentance is
declared.

Both which are set down in the first Sermon of Repentance, a little from the
beginning, in these two sentences;

1 We do daily by our disobedience, fall away from God, thereby purchasing
unto our selves (if he should deal with us according to his Justice) eternal
damnation. 2 Whereas the Prophet had before set forth the vengeance of God: it
is as if he should say, although you do by your sin deserve to be utterly
destroyed, and now you are in a manner on the very edge of the sword: yet if
you will speedily return unto him, he will most mercifully receive you into
favor again.
By which it is evident, the opinion of the Author of the Homily was not, that,
man that had grace, should by sinning be brought to that condition indeed and
in the thing, that, his habit of grace should be taken from him, but, that the
urging of such severity did fitly serve to restrain man from sinning: and to
reduce him unto repentance. Which being so, all the confidence which he put in
this argument, does vanish, and come to nothing; and himself may be ashamed,
that puts so great confidence therein, p. 32. 33. and 34. I might also
return him the like amplifications unto the several parts of my answer, as
might fit to the several amplifications of his argument, but I let such things
pass.

His third argument, I find, Appeal, page 33. etc.

3 He that says a man may fall away, and may recover, implies withal, that
some men may fall away, and may not recover.

But the Article says the first.

Therefore it implies the second.

I answer; this argument requires little to be said to it: because it
presumes, that, the Article speaks of losing the habit of grace; which he
has not proved, nor can; yea, I have showed the Article may be understood
otherwise, and cannot be understood so, no 7.

Lastly, the assumption is false; that 16. Article does not say,

A man may recover the grace he has lost. But,

The express words of the Article are,

By the grace of God, we that fall into sin may amend our lives.

Which two sentences do (most really) differ. This man is very willing to
abuse the understanding, that dares thus boldly falsify words upon record,
against the sight of the eye.

His fourth argument is set down, Appeal, page 36.

4 In the public service of our Church, you shall find also as much as
falling from grace comes too.

I answer; he promised positive, and declaratory Doctrine, and express words,
affirming his falling from grace, and now he paies us with consequences; a
fault you reproved very often, and many a fair title you gave your adversary
the Gagger for it. Turn back again, and take a view how many of them belong
to your self: Was there ever any man so senseless, as to send us to seek the
faith of our Church in consequences? Or does he think to find any so void of
reason, as to believe him? Surely no, for that were a work endless. If the
faith of our Church be in this consequence, why not in second upon the first,
and a third upon the second, etc? And this is enough to satisfy the whole: but
lest he should have an ill conceit of himself, if I should cut him off thus
shortly: therefore I will set down what that is, which he tells us, is as
much as falling from grace comes too, and this it is;

Every Child duly Baptized, is put into the state of grace and salvation, by
that lauer of regeneration.

Which must be acknowledged, and may not be denied to be the Doctrine of the
Church of England: being taught, first, in the form of private Baptism:
secondly, in the Catechism: thirdly, in the rubricke before the Catechism.

I answer; first, this is Bellarmines second reason for this point, de Iusti.
lib. 3. cap. 14. secondly, these are not records of the faith of our Church: no
public act of our Church has made them such. Besides, the Books themselves
be incompetent for that use; the one being a form of administration of
Prayers, and Sacraments: the other, short precepts for the instruction of
Infants. He was near driven, when he catched at this shadow. Moreover, he
affirms (most falsely) where he says; this sentence,

Every one duly Baptized, is by Baptism put into the state of grace and
salvation, is taught in the places quoted.

The words of the places themselves will show it: neither is there any such
thing meant, or intended in them. It may be, he will reject this answer;
because I make it. I reply in his own words, Appeal, p. 277.

If you will not admit the answer, I can name you one who will say and approne
as much; whom you dare not deny to be of credit, or style, as you doc some
others: Appeal, page 294. A poor man that doubtless was out of his element,
and meddled beyond his latchet.

I mean Bishop Jewel, whose words are these;

In the Sacrament of Baptism (by the sensible sign of water) the invisible
grace of God is given unto us, Artic. 5. diuis. 8. folio 250.

Little ones being Baptized, and so the members of Christ, Artic. 8. diuis. 16.
folio 291.

Thus far Bishop Jewel is for Mr. Mountagu, but let him interpret himself,
and make up his judgment full, touching the use of the Sacrament, and then we
shall find him directly against him, and for that end he says thus;

We confess, that Christ by the Sacrament of regeneration, has made us flesh
of his flesh, and bone of his bones, that we are the members, and he is the
head. This merueilous conjunction and incorporation, is first begun and wrought
by faith, afterward the same incorporation is assured unto us, and increased in
our Baptism: wherein must be considered, that the holy mysteries do not
begin, but rather continue, and confirm this incorporation, Artic. 1. diuis.
13. folio 27.

It may be here demanded; how this judgment of Bishop Jewel does prove
against Mr. Mountagu. I answer, thus, If in his judgment, the Doctrine of the
Church of England does diue to the Sacrament of Baptism no more but the
renewing, and confirmation of our incorporation into Christ, and grace by
Christ; then in his judgment the places alleged out of the form of private
baptism, and the Catechism, do not mean to say

Every Child baptized is (thereby) put into the state of grace and salvation.

For he was not ignorant of the doctrine of the Church of England, set down in
those places, or in any other, neither would he deliver the doctrine of the
Church of England otherwise then he did conceive it to be.

But that he did so conceive of it, his words do show, and he adds, that,
our incorporation is begun first, and afterward assured, and increased in our
Baptism, which does not begin it: which is so plain, full, and direct a
contradiction unto Mr. Mountagu; as the mind can devise, or words express.

If (yet) this testimony will not serve, let the Church of England (in the 25.
and 27. Articles) tell us, what effects it does give unto the Sacraments: where
it assigns

To the Sacraments in general, that they are:

1 Tokens of Christian profession. 2. Signs of Gods good will. 3. He does by
them quicken and confirm our faith.

Of Baptism in special our Church says,

1 It is a sign of regeneration. 2 An instrument whereby we are grafted into
the Church. 3 By it, the promises of forgiveness of sin, and adoption are
sealed. 4. Faith is confirmed, and grace increased.

These, and no more but these, are the effects of the Sacrament of Baptism
assigned by our Church, it has not a word of putting the baptized into the
state of grace and salvation by Baptism. If it be answered: the Liturgy, and
Catechism is a supply to make full the doctrine of the Articles. I reply; so
to say, is wholly without authority, and fondly without show of reason. The
Articles were made upon great deliberation, and of purpose to settle an unity
in matter of Religion; therefore it would not omit principal points, and set
down others, that are subordinate, and not called into question.

If the professors of the faith of our Church (publicly, and privately, in
writing, and by word of mouth) have taught and believed of the Sacraments, no
otherwise then is laid down in the Articles: and is maintained by Bishop
Jewel; and all of them do deny that the habit of grace is bestowed in
baptism, and do deny it as the erroneous faith of Rome, then may we well say
that the Church never meant to set down any other faith but that: for all the
children were not ignorant in their mothers faith, nor the mother so careless
of her faith, as to suffer it to be corrupted, and her intent to be changed.

Forasmuch as, she could not be ignorant, what was done, nor wanted power to
redress things done amiss.

If it be said some have taught as M. Mountagu does: I answer; it has been in
a corner then; He that did so Crept in at the window: neither shepherd, nor
sheep knew it. If Mr. Mountagu will be one of them he may be for me. I envy
not his happiness, nor will follow his course.

To conclude this argument; M. Mountagu in this point agrees with the Church
of Rome, in another point of their erroneous faith.

The Council of Trent has decreed thus;

The grace of Justification is bestowed by the Sacraments, and that unto all,
etc. sess. 7. can. 4. 7. and 8.

The Sacrament of baptism is the instrument all cause of Justification,
without which no man is justified, sess. 6. cap. 7.

And this faith of the Church of Rome is explicated and defended by Bellarmine:
as in other places, so in these. 1 Of the Sacraments in general, lib. 2. cap.
3. 2 Of Baptism in special. lib. 1. cap. 11. Quarto propos^tio, etc. and cap.
12. Very effectus, etc.

Mr. Mountagu says,

Every child baptized is put thereby into the state of grace and salvation.
Just as they do.

And thus much for this argument, and all the rest which he pretends to take
from the authentical records of the doctrine of the Church of England. He
brings others from the testimonies of singular a lame dog over the style, and
to uphold a cause ready to fall: I will propound and examine them.

The first whereof is set down, Appeal, page 28. in this form;

They were the learned in the Church of England that drew, composed, agreed,
ratified, justified, and subscribed the Articles, and penned the Homilies.

But all these have and do assent, to falling from grace.

Therefore the learned in the Church of England assent therein.

I answer; this Sylogisme is false, the middle term is predicated in the
proposition, and subjected in the assumption: it ought to be thus framed:

They that composed etc. Did assent etc.

They that composed etc. Were the learned, etc.

Therefore some that were the learned etc. Did assent.

I answer; the assumption is a vaunt of his bragging vein, and more then the
parties themselves would assume, or he can prove: he knows not who composed
them, etc. they were dead long before he was borne, and there is no record of
their names.

The proposition is false: neither the Articles nor Homily do teach falling
from grace; as my answers thereunto do plentifully witness.

His second argument of this kind is in Appeal, page

1 It was the Tenet of Doctor Ouerall, That, a Justified man might fall away
from grace, and thereby incur Gods wrath, and was in state of damnation,
until he did recover again, and was renewed after his fall. 2 Which opinion
was resolved of, and auowed for true, Catholic, ancient, and Oxthodoxe by the
Royal, reverend, honorable, and learned Synod, at the Conference at Hampton
Court. 3 The book of the proceedings is extant, which will auerre all that I
say for truth against you, here, See the
I answer; I think he would infer from hence, (I am sure he should infer.)

Therefore some of the learned in the Church of England do maintain falling
from grace.

The antecedent has three branches, the third is a proof of the two first.

The first branch is false, I have read the book which reports Doctor
Overalls opinion, in page 41. and 42, in these words:

The called, and justified according to the purpose of Gods election, might,
and did sometime fall into grievous sins, and thereby into the present state
of wrath: yet

They did never fall either totally,

From all the graces of God, to be utterly destitute of all the parts and seed
thereof,

Nor finally,

From Justification: But were renewed.

You report him to say, they fell into the state of damnation, which imports
a falling totally.

The book reports him, denying falling totally, or finally:

The second branch is also false: the book has not a word that reports any
confirmation of the opinion of Doctor Ouerall. His hap was hard, that amongst
so many words, he could not light upon one true one, and his face very
audatious that durst affirm a falsehood for truth, against the light of the
nooneday. He talks of conscience, and honesty, and Cheuerell, and I know not
what: He must tell us under which of those heads this allegation shall be
ranged: for he has best skill in such language; the allegation it self
stands under the censure of the reader, and the allegator at the bar of the
Almighty; therefore I leave this and pass to the next.

Hitherto I have spoken to the matter urged in the

Some of the learned, etc.

Unto which I have these two things to say, first, he gets nothing though it
were granted him. He ought to prove

The Church of England teaches his falling from grace.

Which will not follow upon his conclusion; because those learned he speaks
of, may be a faction prevailing in the Church of England.

Secondly, his intent is to say, all the learned in the Church of England do
maintain falling from grace: for he says, Ap. p. 28. Many in the Church of
England, reputed learned, are of opinion Grace cannot be lost: which is as
much as if he said, they have the name of learning, but have none indeed, all
the learned say as I say. Which sentence is a most vain, idle, and insulting
brag.

If all were unlearned that deny falling from grace, then (I hope) Mr Mountagu
is learned, that affirms the loss of grace, and that dares sentence them all
for want of learning, that deny falling from grace: but how learned he is, let
this whole disputation show, wherein you shall find great plenty of notorious
faults against learning, as false Sylogismes, loose consequences, notorious
false premises, impertinent conclusions, false allegations, propositions
contrary in their parts, headless divisions, manifest contradictions; a
nosegay of some of them I do here present you. Thus he writes.

The Church of England leaves the question [touching falling from grace] at
liberty unto us, Gagge, page 158.

The question touching [falling from grace] is undecided in the Church of
England, Gagge, p. 171.

The consented, resolved, and subscribed Articles of the Church of England, nor
yet the Book of common Prayer, and other divine offices, do not put any tie
upon me to resolve in this question [touching falling from grace] Appeal, page
26.

Contrary whereunto he writes as follows.

That man may fall from grace is the Doctrine of the Church of England,
Appeal, page 31.

That a man may fall from grace, is the Doctrine of the Church of England,
delivered publicly, positiuely, and declaratorily, in authentical records,
Appeal, page 36.

The Church of England it self has directly and in express words taught,
that, a justified man may fall away from God, and become not the child of God,
Appeal, page 59.

The Church of England holds, and teaches punctually, that, a man may fall
from grace, Appeal, page 73.

It is the Doctrine of the Church of England, that a man justified, may fall
away from grace, Ap. p. 89.

And when he had belabored himself almost out of breath, to prove, that,
falling from grace is the Doctrine of the Church of England, the Ancients and
the Scriptures, he concludes in these words;

I do not say more then I am urged to do, by the plain and express words of
our Articles, and Doctrine publicly professed, and established in our Church,
Appeal, page 37.

Other fair flowers that argue him one of the learned in the Church of
England, might be collected hither: but I content my self with these, because
the Reader may find them in their own places.

His last argument in this matter is set down, Appeal, page 36. in these
words;

Your prime leaders have understood the Tenet of the Church of England to be as
I have reported it, and accordingly they have complained against it.

I answer; it is very likely he would conclude from hence,

Therefore you must so understand it also.

I let pass his bitterness, for that hurts none that think not of it. The
Doctrine of the Church of England is understood according to the primary sense
and meaning thereof, and sometimes also in a forced interpretation: some have
complained of, and objected against this latter: and so far I grant this
whole reason: and good reason they had too for so doing. It becomes the
Pastors and people of the Church of England to discover, and detect the
corruptors of their faith. But against the first, never any excepted, neither
is there any reason why: Take the words of our Church as they lie, force them
not to serve a turn, and they are familiar to understanding, and of a manifest
truth. And thus have I dispatched all his arguments whereby he thinks to prove
falling from grace, to be the Doctrine of the Church of England.

In the next place comes his proofs to be examined,

Of which he has no small store in his Gagge, from page 159. to page 165.
wherein he has followed Bellarmine, de Iusti. lib. 3. cap. 14. step by step:
omitting nothing that is of any force, nor adding any thing that can supply any
defect in Bellarmine. He borrows of him (so much as) his confidence in the
plenty, and perspecuity of divine testimony: Bellarmine says, Quod attinet,
etc.

The testimonies of Scripture are so many, and so clear, that, it is to be
admired how it could come into the mind of a man to say, Grace could not be
lost.

Mr. Mountagu says.

The Scripture speaks plain, that, a man may fall from grace. Gagge, page
161.

Falling from grace is fully cleared, and resolved in Scripture, Gagge, page
165.

The Scripture is express for falling from grace, Appeal, page 36.

I will give answer to all the allegations produced: let them be Bellarmines,
or Mr. Mountagues, or whosoever else: Truth may be defended against any opposer.

The whole multitude of their allegations, may be reduced unto two Sylogismes:
the former (whereof) stands thus;

If every righteous man may, and some do, leave his righteousness, and commit
iniquity, then he that has grace, may lose that grace. For,

The most righteous man living, continually does, or may, mortally transgress.
Where mortal sin is committed, God is disobeyed. Where God is disobeyed, he
will not abide. Where he will not abide, grace cannot consist. Where grace
cannot consist, it must needs be lost. Gagge, page 161.

But every righteous man may, and some do, leave his righteousness, and
commit iniquity.

Therefore he that has grace, may lose that grace.

I answer; the words righteous, and righteousness, in this argument, must be
taken for the act, not the habit: and he does so understand it, I take as
granted.

This being so, the assumption is true, and needs no proof: yet
notwithstanding, he alleges many places of Scripture, as Ezech. cap. 18.
24. 26. cap. 33. 12. 13. 18. Matthew. cap. 12. 24. Luke cap. 8. 13. John cap. 15.
2. Matthew. cap. 24. 12. Romans cap. 11. 20. 21. 1 Timothy cap. 6. 20. cap. 1. 18. 19.
cap. 4. Gal. cap. 5. 4. 2 Pet. 2. 20. 21. 22. Heb. cap. 6. 4. and he
concludes, that infinite are the testimonies of Scripture to the purpose that
these speak unto.

All which may be applied unto the assumption of this reason, and cannot be
applied to any other sentence: neither do they affirm any more but this: viz.
every righteous man may, and some do, omit holy actions, and commit sin in
the actual disobedience to Gods law.

Then, he adds diverse examples of righteous men, that neglected their
obedience to Gods law, and committed actual sin. Which must be referred unto
the proof of the latter part of the assumption, and can belong to no other: by
which it is manifest, that all this goodly show, and bumbasted brag, of
infinite places of Scripture, all teaching falling from grace: at the last,
comes to no more but what every man will grant, and being granted, will
profit him nothing, he is not thereby one hair the nearer to this conclusion;

A man may lose the habit of grace. For,

The consequence of the proposition is naught, and the proof thereof false, in
many branches thereof, auowed only upon his own word, without the least show
or pretense of proof. Surely this man meant not sincerely, when he undertook
to prove, that, which no man did ever deny, but takes as granted, and leaves
unproven that which all men do deny, that join not in faith with the Church
of Rome. That it may appear I say true: I will give you an account of some
faults in the consequence of the proposition, and proof thereof.

The consequence of the proposition depends upon this sentence;

The habit of grace departs from him that actually disobeyeth Gods law.

If this sentence be true, his consequence is good: if it be false, the
consequence is naught: the latter part does not follow upon the former; but
this sentence, the habit of grace, etc. is most false, as will appear.

To make it seem true, in the proof of his consequence,

The first branch of his proof says,

Every righteous man may, or does sin mortally.

In which sentence he takes two things as granted.

1 Some sins are mortal; some venial, and not mortal. 2 A man habituated
by sanctity, may commit mortal sin.
I answer, if by mortal, he meant no more, but sin tending, and conducing
unto damnation, it would not be denied him, that sin is mortal: but thus he
understands it not: for then he could not distinguish sin into mortal and
venial: for all sin in this sense is mortal. If by venial, he understood
no more, but sin not deserving damnation by Gods notimputing it, I will grant,
that sin is venial: but he must not understand it thus: for so, all the
sins of the justified are venial or (to speak in the words of the Church of
England, first Homily of salvation, a little after the beginning:)

Their sins are washed in such sort, that there remains not any spot of
sin that shall be imputed to their damnation.

It remains therefore, that he takes mortal and venial in the same sense
that the Church of Rome does. Which being true, that distinction is denied: and
so he begs the question, and proves it not. It is also denied, that, a man
habitually sanctified, can commit any such sin as the Church of Rome calls
mortal; and yet he proves this as he did the former, even by his own word. If
you will not believe him, you must go look proof other where, but you must
not look it in Bellarmine, for if he had brought any, Mr. Mountagu would have
given it you in English.

His next branch is this;

Where mortal sin is committed, God is disobeyed.

I answer; in this sentence, he attributes disobedience unto mortal sin
adequately, denying venial sin to be any disobedience unto Gods law: for if
he did not so, he must say, that the habit of grace is lost by the committing
of such sins as he calls venial: for he says, (as we shall see anon) where
God is disobeyed, grace cannot consist, but must needs be lost. But he will not
say grace is lost by venial sin; therefore he conceiueth only mortal sin
disobeyeth Gods law. Just as Bellarmine does: who teaches,

Venial sin is sin, by analogy, or certain proportion, and imperfectly,
after a certain sort; but not perfectly, and simply: neither is it perfectly
voluntary, nor perfectly against the Law: but besides the Law. De amiss. gra.
lib. 1. cap. 11. Quintum, etc.

If you ask me, how Mr Mountagu proves this? I answer, with no worse proof
then he has done the former branches: and that is his own very word, which
you need not stick at, for he is one of the learned in the Church of England.

His third branch is in these words:

Where God is disobeyed he will not abide.

I answer, in what sense soever the word disobeyed be taken, this sentence is
false, and must go for such, till he has proved it; which yet he has not
done, nor attempted to do, let him show us in the divine Revelation one of
these two things:

1 God has decreed to take away his grace upon the committing of this or that
sin. 2 This actual sin, is of that nature, that of it self, it does
expel grace.
If he prove one of these, the question is at an end, the Divine Oracle must
have credit. If you bring not that, you hunt a flea, and pursue a shadow. It is
in vain for you to tell us a Just man may sin, till you prove, that grace
must give place to sin, by the ordinance and decree of God, or the nature of
the things themselves.

There be some other things in this proof to be examined: but I pass them
over, because they depend upon these branches which I have answered unto, and
do stand or fall with them. To conclude this argument, I say, It is worthy to
be observed that the maintainers of falling from grace are raised unto a great
pitch of confidence in the truth of that position: but at the vpshot, their
proofs are for the thing denied by none, and they take for granted the things
denied by all; which kind of disputing, in it self is most unsound; for it is
no more, but as if they should say, it is so, because we say it is so, and it
is most dangerous to the Reader that is not very wary: for it is most
deceitful, bearing a show of truth through the allegation of many places of
Scripture, which indeed do nothing concern the thing in question.

It may be, some will urge these places of Scripture

If he that is habitually sanctified, always may, and sometimes does commit
such sins, as for which (in in the event) he is cast into hell, then a man
may lose, and some do lose the habit of sanctity.

But he that is habitually sanctified, always may, and sometime does, commit
such sins, as for which, in the event, he is cast into hell.

Therefore, etc.

I answer: In this reason, I grant the first part, or consequence of the
proposition: because no man has the habit of sanctity in the moment when he
goes to hell; for that leads to another end, and is always to be crowned with
glory.

But the assumption, or second part, which has two branches, is wholly false:
no one place of Scripture does affirm, or infer either of these two
sentences.

The habitually sanctified may commit such sins as for which (in the event)
he shall go to hell.

Some habitually sanctified have committed such sins, as for which he is now in
hell.

If any require me to show, that, the places alleged do not prove thus much.
I answer, That is not my office: for, 1. the question is not (at this present)
purposely disputed. 2, It is their place to dispute, and mine to answer: let
them apply the Scriptures to the purpose in an orderly form, and I will make
my answer good. It is enough for me to give them an Issue. They must prove the
Issue, or leave the cause behind them.

I will put some of their allegations into form, and

He that may leave his actual righteousness, and commit such actual sin,
as for which he is threatened by God, in the event, to be cast into hell, he
may commit such sins, as for which, in the event, he shall be cast into hell.

But the man habitually sanctified may leave his actual righteousness, and
commit such sin, as for which he is threatened by God, in the event, to be
cast into hell.

So says Ezech. cap. 18. 24. 26. If the righteous turn from his
righteousness, and commit iniquity, he shall dye therein.

Therefore the man habitually sanctified, may commit such sin, as for which,
in the event, he shall go to hell.

I answer: although the proposition seems not to be evidently true: because,
God may so threaten sin, to show unto man what the desert of sin is, and not
what in the event shall become of such a sinner: yet I will not at this present
insist thereupon: but come to the assumption, which is not true: neither does
the place alleged make it appear to be so: for these three words, viz.
Righteous, Righteousness, Iniquity, may import the act, and none of them can
signify the habit: as the text it self does evidently show, which does
interpret the word Righteous, by the word Righteousness, and Righteousness it
calls an Act, saying, all his righteousness that he has done, etc.

If it be replied, actual righteousness, does suppose the habitual, as the
fountain, from whence it proceeds, and without which actual righteousness
cannot be. I answer: Actual righteousness may proceed from actual grace,
because actual grace does make man's will a sufficient root or beginning, and
an able-next-cause of supernatural actions, as Suarez teaches, Opusc. 1. lib.
3. cap. 4. no 1. and the Council of Trent has decreed, Sess. 6. cap. 6. where
it says, a man does believe, fear, hope, trust, love, detest sin, desire a
new life, etc. (all which are supernatural actions, or actual righteousness)
by grace exciting and adjuvating, which is actual, not habitual grace.

If Mr Mountagu will deny this, the Scripture it self will avow it, which
speaks of some that fall away: which argues they did righteously before
time, but now commit sin. Of them that fall away it says also, they had
tasted of the good word of God, and of the powers of the life to come; which
two things signify actual grace. They cannot signify habitual grace,
because the beginning of, and preparation unto our sanctity, may well be
resembled unto, and set out by tasting: which is the beginning and preparation,
unto that feeding which is for satisfying of hunger, and nourishment of the
body. But the habit of grace, which is the highest degree and measure of our
sanctity, cannot be set out by the metaphor of tasting. For the habit is no
less then meat received into, and remaining in the body of man, sustaining his
being, and giving him power to do the actions of life, cheerfully and readily.

If it be demanded further: what holy actions do proceed from the habit of
sanctity? I answer, They are such as are done, 1. out of the love of God, and
his Law: 2. out of an intention of, and a delight in obedience to God. 3. They
be such holy actions wherein a man does continue, either always without
intermission, or return from actual sinning by repentance. And the reason
hereof is good: for (in the confession of all men) the habit does dispose a
manvnto doing with willingness, readiness, and delight: and the habit of
sanctity does determine the soul of man unto doing the works of
righteousness, as may be proved against such as deny it, with Suarez Opusc. 1.
lib. 3. cap. 4. no 1. So as although a man do the works of righteousness never
so fair in outward appearance, never so many, for number, and continuance:
yet, they proceed not from any habit or settled inward quality of holiness, if
they be done for private ends, and be wholly discontinued at last.

And thus I have (as I hope) plainly, and truly opened, and resolved, the whole
difficulty in this argument: and thereby showed it insufficient to uphold their
falling from grace. Which being well observed, will give satisfaction unto all
other places of Scripture, which are alleged in this question.

In favor of the second branch of their assumption no 19. They dispute thus,
Gagg p. 164.

Judas had the habit of grace.

Judas committed sin for which he is in hell.

Therefore some that had the habit of grace committed sin for which he is in
hell.

I answer: He has proofs for his proposition, and assumption. This I grant
as a thing evident. That I deny as a thing manifestly false. His proof for his
proposition is in these words.

Judas was numbered with the twelve Apostles, had all the prerogatives which
they enjoyed, God gave him to Christ, as well as Peter, or John.

I answer; this proof is childish, the reading of it refuteth him: all these
things alleged were outward privileges, no inward habit of grace. If he
conceive them otherwise, he must prove it: his word will not make articles of
faith: a goodly disputation, that in conclusion (always) rests upon the
disputers word: you must believe that, or rest where you began.

Other toys of this kind you may have enough, in the place where I had this, but
it is loath some to name them.

One more I will propound and examine, that there

Peter had the habit of grace.

Peter committed such a sin as for which he was in the present state of
damnation.

Therefore some that have the habit of grace did commit such sin as for which
he was in the present state of damnation.

I answer: The whole doubt of this argument, lies in the words state of
damnation. The sense of that being truly known, the argument will be found
good or bad. A man is then in the state of damnation,

1 When he wants that inward quality that must order, or set him in the way
unto holiness in this life, and happiness in the life to come.

And secondly, when he stands actually bound over (by God as he is a Judge)
unto hell fire, for the sin committed.

If it be his intent to say, that Peter was thus in the state of damnation, his
assumption is false, and a miserable begging of the question, by affirming upon
his bare authority, a principal thing in question. But if by state of
damnation, he meant; the desert of sin only, then I grant the whole: but the
conclusion is nothing to purpose; we speak not of the desert of sin in it
self, but of damnation it self actually in the event. To conclude my answer
to all the arguments of this kind: Now we see he beats the bush, and makes
offer to take the game: but he wants all means for the purpose, the foul
must come into his fist, or he must go without her.

His other argument for the maine question I find written, Gagge, page 161.
which is to this effect,

If Adam and Lucifer did lose their original state, then man may lose his
habit of grace: for the one was in the state of innocence in Paradise: the
other in heaven in glory: to whom man in grace (at most) is but equal, not
superior.

But Adam and Lucifer did lose their original state.

Therefore man may lose his habit of grace.

I answer; this argument is as shallow and shuttle, as any of the former; the
weakness of the consequence is seen by a piece of an eye: All men will
grant, the providence of GOD in this or that act, is not regulated by the
former act of his providence. What if he did so to Adam and Lucifer, could he
not do otherwise with other men? what is there in the nature of the things
themselves, or of GOD, that should tie him to do in this as he did in that?
surely nothing. His actions toward the creatures were all free, and he at
liberty to do, or not do, this ways, or that ways, as he pleased; until
he had decreed what, and how he would do. He does all things according to the
counsel of his own will; that is, according as Suarez does truly interpret
it, opusc. 4. disp. 1. sect. 1. no 9. God works all things according to that
counsel which is accepted by the good pleasure of his will: this is sure, God
did so by them, and we believe it, because he has said it; that he does so by
other men, we believe not, because God has not said it. We know some men are
in the possession of the habit of grace; if you will have us believe this
possession to be casual, show us where God has said, he will take it away,
else we dare not believe you: for it is plain, none can take it away but God:
and he will not take it away, unless he has revealed so much unto us, which
he has not done: and so much for all his arguments taken from Scripture.

He urges Fathers, with no less confidence of plenty, commanding all men to
receive their testimony, Appeal, page 36. and 37. He brings some by name,
Gagge, page 165. etc. But this is a very bubble, and comes from that foysting
fountain, that the rest of his brags have done. Bellarmine has no such
confidence in the Fathers: he names but two, and out of each of them, one
sentence, and so sits him down; which Bellarmine would never have done, if
he could have found more. If Mr. Mountagu will say, Bellarmine is a poor
Ignaro, and has no old learning, himself has read more Fathers then
Bellarmine ever heard of, which is his own language in another case; all the
world would laugh at him: but not believe him. The conclusion is, Bellarmine
neither brags nor brings, therefore Mr. Mountagu does both in vain.

I will finish my answer to his Fathers by his own direction, Gagge, page 165.

There needs no proof by Fathers, where holy Scripture is silent: Fathers may
be pretended by false play, but none (indeed and in truth according to their
words and meaning) can be produced. Let him try when he will, in a Logical
form, and he shall find it. Thus have I concluded my answers to all his
arguments brought to prove his falling from grace, taken from the Scriptures,
and Fathers.

His last argument for the same purpose, I find, Appeal, page 17. which he
begins thus,

If you deny falling from grace, you are a Papist.

I answer; this sentence begins an argument, which is continued by diverse
other parts which follow. It is called a delemma, in plain English, a Net, a
Snare, a Toil, to catch the old one; the battle is before and behind, turn
you which ways you will, it will catch you. But soft and fair, old Birds will
not be caught with chafe, if the stuff of your Net be unsound, your game will
escape.

This sentence does neither affirm nor deny, put it into a lawful form; and
it speaks thus;

He that denies falling from grace, is a Papist.

This sentence is false: for falling from grace is an Article of the Popish
faith, as himself confesses, Gagge, page 158. and I have proved by the
Council of Trent: cap. 11. The denial of the Popish faith cannot argue a man
to be a Papist, in the judgment of any man living. He is a strange Papist,
that treads the faith of Papists under his feet; but more strange that a man
should be a Papist for denying the Popish faith. Well, but he will prove it by
the words which follow, viz.

For I demand, did Peter fall, or did he not fall, when he denied Christ?

I answer; every interrogation has the force of an affirmation; now this is
referred as a proof unto the precedent sentence, by the word for: which does
immediately follow the same; thus then he does dispute;

Peter did either fall, or not fall.

Therefore he that denies falling from grace, is a Papist.

I know you laugh at this naughty consequence: but you must not do so. Homer
may take a ^^p* well, let that pass, Peter did fall or not fall; what of that?
we stand now between two, you must tell us which we shall choose, for that
end, these words follow;

If abnegation, and abiuration, and execration will enforce a fall, he did.

I answer; this leaves the matter no less doubtful, then it was: this gives
us leave to say,

But it did not enforce a fall.

Therefore Peter did not fall.

Or thus.

But it did enforce a fall.

Therefore he did fall.

When you have said all, you have said nothing. It may be the next will
dispatch the matter. You say,

If he fall, he needs must fall totally, or finally: for show me a third?

I answer; this is fair, but far off; whither this tends, none but your
self knows, if your self do know, you shall be crowned for a choice one.
You divide a total fall from a final: and that is absurd. Every final is a
total, and some total is also final, your self being Judge. There may be a
fall, neither total nor final; as when Gods concurse or actual grace is
withheld: but the habit remains. And this is possible, seeing there is
actual grace, and habitual, as Suares does prove plenteously, de great.
pro^egom, 3. cap. 6. and 3 part, lib. 1. no 4. etc. yea, actual and habitual
grace also, do differ in their use. This, serving to make man's will fit to
eliciate supernatural actions after a connaturall and perfect manner, by an
inrrinsicall and connaturall faculty (as Suarez teaches, opusc. 1. lib. 3.
cap. 4. no. 1.) That, tending to dispose unto this, (as the Council of Trent,
sess. 6. cap. 5. and 6. decrees, and Suarez consents in the place alleged)
and to move the habit unto working being obtained, as Aluarez proves, de
Auxilijs disp. 88. and the thing it self by perpetual experience does show;
see Alua. disp. 24. no 37. and Bellar. de great. lib. 1. cap. 4. Quatuor dona:
have patience, it may be, it will come anon, in the mean time he proceeds
thus;

Now then in such denial, St. Peter, did he fall, or did he not fall?

I answer; the word Then, imports an inference, so that this sentence is
inferred upon another; but what that other is, we shall not find in any part
of this argument: for they are all either disjunctive, or connext propositions.
Before we had heads without a tail, now we have a tail without a head: this
demand came once before, it seems it will abide a second seething: well, let
that be, what will become of it, we shall see anon: and that is well (no
doubt) for the second seething has made it wholesome food; thus you go on;

You must answer he did not fall.

I answer; and so must you too; or be a rebel against your Mother the Church
of England, which in the first Sermon of Repentance, a little before the end:
where (after it had reckoned up Peter's denial of his Master, and dissimulation
at Antioch) it concludes:

After this grievous offense, he was not utterly excluded, and shut out from
the grace of God.

With whom I also say: Peter did not lose the habit of grace by the denial of
Christ: but what of all this; he will now tell you, in these words;

So that you join with the Gagger, and subscribe to Bellarmine, who maintain,
that Peter's faith did not fail: avoid it if you can.

I answer; and so must your mother the Church of England join with the Gagger
too; avoid (you) it if you can: for I say no more then what I have learned of
her, and so must you also (avoid it if you can,) for you profess to believe
what it believes, and teach what it teaches, in whose faith and confession
you hope to live, and dye* Appeal, p. 48. You have spun a fair thread, you
have hunted all this while, and covered your nets close, to catch your mother,
and your self in the pitfall.

I will do you that favor, as to let you and the Church of England loose, I
will stand by it my self, and will profess,

Peter lost not his faith when he denied Christ.

But you must give me leave to express my self, which I do thus;

The act of faith is either eliciate, or imperate.


The first is the act of the soul only, remaining in it self not known to
man, which we call believing. The second is wrought by the body also, and
comes to the knowledge of men, as when a man does profess by his tongue, to
give credit, and trust unto Christ. Peter lost not his faith in the first kind;
but in the second. I doubt not but Peter did in the inward motion of his heart,
believe that he was indeed the Christ; and trusted unto, and relied upon him,
as such: even in that very moment when in words he denied that he knew him.
Peter's denial being but a dissimulation to thrust by the present distress he
feared. If Bellarmine and the Gagger say thus, I subscribe to them, and that
upon good reason: for Peter had long believed on Christ, and had now no cause
to change that belief, therefore we may not say he did change it; unless the
divine revelation had said it, which has not a word of any such thing, but
look better on your books, and you shall find Bellarmine says; Peter lost
his charity, but not his faith, because he was Pastor over the whole Church,
and was to teach it the true faith, de Pont. Rom lib. 4. cap. 3. which sentence
is much more then I say: by which it appears that Bellarmines doctrine is not
the perseverance I maintain: nor my sentence so good Popery, as M. Mountagu
has delivered, contrary to his unjust challenge, Appeal page 18.

It may be he will deny my distinction of the act of faith; to establish his
own employed, Gagg. page 163. which is on this wise.

Faith is either in the end, or the act.


But this distinction I fear not; because end and act are not parts of faith;
neither as specialls, to the general, nor as constitutiue parts, making a
constituted whole: besides, what he says, of the end of faith, is a riddle
which (I doubt) himself understands not: Thus far have I answered to the
consequent, or position as it lies; I will now put the disputation into

Thus then it lies;

If you say Peter lost not his habit of grace, then you subscribe to Bellarmine
and the Gagger: who say, that, Peter lost not his faith.

But you will not subscribe to Bellarmine, etc. where he says, Peter lost not
his faith: for that is Popery.

Therefore you must not deny, that Peter lost his habit of grace.

I answer; This whole argument is a mere caption, and no proof: it supposes,
that, the loss of the habit of grace, is denied to Peter only; which is
false: and the conclusion nothing to the purpose. And so he must be understood,
for the Papists deny the loss of faith unto Peter only.

But I will take it as it lies, and answer to it. The weakness of his cause
will the better appear by my answer, which is this;

I grant the assumption, I promise you, I am, and will be as far off from
joining in that article of the Popish faith, as M. Mountagu, and further too.
For he comes very near it in giving the Church the office to determine all
controversies in faith.

Yet you get nothing by it; for the consequence of your proposition is naught,
I may say the first and not the second, in the sense wherein they take it; for
they say he lost not his faith, neither in the habit, nor act, by a special
providence, and peculiar dispensation: upon the reason, and for the end, as is
aforesaid, no 25. but, I say, he lost it not, neither in habit, nor act, by
that providence and dispensation, which is common to him with all other men
that have received the habit of grace; who must needs keep their faith so long
as they keep the habit of grace; because the habit of grace consists in
faith, hope and charity. Unto this sentence of mine that faith of the Church
of Rome is contrary. They say, all men lose their faith, when they lose the
habit of grace, (only Peter is excepted, by a peculiar privilege as I have
showed, no 25.

Thus are we come to an end of M. Mountagu his snare, and we find the snare is
broken, and the game is escaped, and with it, his whole disputation in this
point of falling from grace is ended. He tells us of some that have
whirlegiggs in their heads, Appeal, page 81. Which is true of himself, if it
be true of any, but he may be pardoned that fault, his heart was so full of
anger, and his pen of railing, that he had no leisure to attend upon Art and
Divinity.

CHAP. XIII. The point of real presence.
M. Mountagu. The Church of Rome. The Church of England. There is, there need
be, no difference, between the Church of Rome and our Church, in the point of
Real presence, Gag. 253. Appeal 289. Our Lord Jesus Christ, true God, and
man, is contained truly, really and substantially in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist. conc. Trent. sess 13. c. 1 That is, whole Christ, body, and blood,
together with the soul and divinity, and not in a figure or virtue only. can.
1. The Supper of our Lord is a Sacrament of our redemption by Christ's death,
insomuch that to such as rightly with faith receive the same, the bread which
we break, is a partaking of the body of Christ, and the cup is a partaking of
the blood of Christ.

CHAP. XIV. The point of Real presence is debated.
THe order observed hitherto, must be observed

1 Whether his doctrine of real presence be true or not. 2 Whether he
consents, in the real presence, with the Church of Rome, or not. 3 Whether
he dissenteth, in the point of Real presence, with the Church of England, or
not.
His consent with the Church of Rome is plentifully

There is no difference between the Church of Rome, and ours, in the point of
Real presence. Gagg. p. 253.

The Protestant in the Sacrament, is as real and substantial as any Papist.
Gagg. p. 251.

If the Priests and Jesuits, were not common Barretters of Christendom for
private ends, this controversy on foot, touching the real presence, might
cease. Gagg. p. 251.

They that in the point of real presence, do make a difference between us,
and the Papists, were bred up by the devil in a faction, and by him brought up
in a faction, and by him sent abroad to do him service, in maintaining a
faction. Gagg. p. 253. and Appeal p. 291.

The only difference, between the Church of Rome, and ours, is about the
manner. Appeal p. 289. viz. How it is made the flesh of Christ. Gagg. p. 256.
255. Namely, whether by transubstantiation or not. 252. 254. The Council of
Lateran decreed Transubstantiation, which we condemn. Gagg. p. 252.

And in this, viz. how it is made the flesh of Christ, he places the whole
difference between the Church of Rome, and ours, blaming them for this, p. 252.
and for nothing else; and reproving their proofs* because they prove not that
the sacrament is the flesh of Christ by transubstantiation. Gagg. p. 252. and
254. Out of which, we may conclude: Mr Mountagu believes, as the Council of
Trent has decreed, touching the real presence: and the doctrine of it is his
doctrine; so as, what the Council says of reserving, carrying about, and
worshipping of the Sacrament, must be accounted the faith of Mr Mountagu;
because the first does necessarily infer the second. If Christ be really
present, then the sacrament, must be so reserved, carried, worshipped. And so
much for the second branch.

If this be true, then Mr Mountagu does not dissent The point of real presence
is not Popery in the divinity of the Church of England* That is, the Church of
England, agrees with the Church of Rome, in the point of real presence: as he
does explicate himself a few lines after. If that be so, then I grant he does
not dissent from the Church of England.

But all the doubt will be, how he will prove, that the Church of England does
join in faith, with the Church of Rome in the point of real presence. His
proof (such as it is) I find set down, Appeal p. 289. etc. and may be
concluded in this form;

Whatsoever is taught by the Bishops; Bilson, Andrews, Morton: by Protestants;
Fortunatus, Calvin, Beza* Sadael, is the doctrine of the Church of England.

But the faith of the Church of Rome, touching the real presence, is taught by
these, etc.

Therefore, the faith of the Church of Rome, in the point of real presence, is
the doctrine of the Church of England.

This form of disputing may not be excepted against, because all his
allegations in the place quoted, will be to no purpose, if he does not thus
dispute; for the allegations do serve to prove this assumption, or can be of
no use at this time.

To the proposition I answer two things. First, The doctrine of the Church of
England is contained in books, authorized publicly for that end, and
subscribed unto as such. But these men's writings are not such: For no statute,
law, or ordinance, have ratified them: and commanded subscription unto them as
such. Therefore your proposition is false. Secondly, your own words are these,
Appeal. p. 58. and 59.

Whereas you would make the world believe that Ecclesia Anglicana Calvinistat,
as if he were the father and founder of our faith, as if our belief were to
be pinned unto his sleeue, and absolutely to be taught after his institutions:
show me good warrant for it, and I yield.

This is impossible, therefore your proposition is false, even by your own
sentence: his own pen gives Judgment against his proposition as false: that
being false, this reason cannot be good, although his assumption were never so
true.

The assumption is utterly false; and I do admire, that shame did not
withold him, from alleging Calvin and Beza as consenters unto the Romish
faith in the point of real presence; seeing that Bellarmine in his first Book
and first Chapter of the Sacrament of the Eucharist does make Calvin, and Beza
principal opposers thereunto: and in the second Chapter he does apply the
Council of Trent in special sort against Calvin, and forgets him not, in
no one passage of his disputations in this point.

The words of the Bishops, (even as he has alleged them) are not so much as
like unto the Romish faith, as he that reads them will presently judge. I
do not attempt to apply them to his assumption. Two of them are yet living,
who will (I doubt not) by lively voice, disclaim the decree of the Council of
Trent, and their consent thereto, touching the real presence, and so fully
refute his assumption as false.

He infers further from hence, on this wise;

If this be the Doctrine that the Church of England teaches and professes,
(as it is indeed) I leave you to those that must look unto you.

I answer; this inference presumes too far, and comes too late, I may rather
infer contrariwise.

If the Romish faith of real presence be not the Doctrine of the Church of
England, (as indeed it is not) my answer has showed it in part, (and I will
show it to the full hereafter,) then I leave you as a corrupter of our faith,
to be punished as such, according to law in that case provided.

I find in his Gagge, page 250. he writes thus,

Our Catechism in the Communion Book says expressly, the body and blood of
Christ is taken and eaten in the Lords Supper.

And a few lines after he concludes in these words,

The Protestant is as real and substantial, as any Papist.

He seems to infer the latter sentence upon the former: the meaning whereof
is this: Protestants acknowledge the real and substantial presence of Christ
in the Sacrament, no less then Papists.

What his intent was, is best known to himself. It was needful for me to
propound it, and let it be known by my answer thereto, that no real presence
is intended by our Church in the words alleged: which answer I will take from
Bishop Jewel, who has already made it for me, in his reply unto Hardings
answer, Artic. 5. p. 238. whose words be these;

Christ's body and blood, indeed, and verily, is given unto us, that we verily
eat it, that we verily drink it.

In these words there is as much contained, as Mr. Mountagu alleges out of
the Catechism. But mark now what he denies, and answers further for the
explication thereof.

Yet we say not, that Christ's body is let down from heaven, or made really, or
fleshly present in the Sacrament: we lift up our hearts to heaven, and there
feed upon the Lamb of God: thus spiritually and with the mouth of our faith,
we eat the body of Christ, and drink his blood, even as verily as his body
was verily broken, and his blood verily shed upon the Cross.

This answer of Bishop Jewel is full to the purpose, and of no less
authority, then the Catechism alleged: which being taken in this sense, we
may safely conclude, that our Church is no friend to the real presence in
those words of the Catechism.

A third thing also is in his Appeal, page 291. thus

Both we, and the Papists confess, This is my Body; and that is enough; and
contend merely about the manner how it is my Body, (that is) how the Sacrament
is made the flesh of Christ, Gagge, page 256. The council of Lateran decreed
transubstantiation, and we deny the same, Gagge, page 252.

Which sentence, by the course of the place where it is, must be applied to the
present purpose, in this form;

They that agree in this sentence, This is my Body, there is no cause why they
should be distracted in the point of real presence.

But we and the Papists agree in this sentence: This is my Body, and contend
merely about the manner how it is made the flesh of Christ, etc.

Therefore we and the Papists have no cause to be distracted about the point
of real presence.

That it was his purpose thus to dispute, the place it self where that
sentence stands, will show: where he brings the thing here concluded in
the first place, and then the words alleged, as a proof thereof: and referred
thereunto, by this word, seeing, etc.

I will take my answer unto this, from the same Author and place, page 236.
from whence I had my former, viz. the reverend Bishop, whose words be these;

Indeed the question between us this day, is not of the letters or syllables
of Christ's words: (for they are known and confessed of either party:) But
only of the sense and ^eaning of his words, which is the v^ry pith, and
substance of the Scriptures: and he commits fraud against the laws, that
(s^^ing the words of the law,) overthrows the m^^ning: If it be true, that
the only sense of Christ's words is, that his Body is really and flesh^^^ the
Sacrament, it is great wonder, that (...) of the ancient Doctors of the Church
could eu^r see it.

This answer is full to every point of Mr. Mountagu his argument.

First, he says, they agree in words, touching this sentence, This is my Body:
and so far he grants the assumption.

Secondly, the question is, of the sense of those words: and thereby denies the
assumption, and proposition too: as if he should say, although they agree in
words: yet differing in the sense, there is sufficient cause of distraction,
and dissent between them. For the sense is the pith of the Scriptures; and he
that overthrows the meaning, corrupts the Law. 3 He says they understand
Christ's words of a real and fleshly presence of Christ's body. Which the Bishop
denies, whereby it is evident that he puts the difference between the
Church of Rome and ours in this; viz. that They affirm a real presence, We
deny it. And this does directly oppose the latter part of Mr. Mountagu his
reason, that places the difference between them, and us, merely in the manner
how the Sacrament is made the flesh of Christ, which they say is by
transubstantiation. The Bishop says, we dissent about the real presence. M.
Mountagu says no: for (says he) our dissent is merely about
transubstantiation.

By which it appears, M. Mountagu his arguments (in the behalf of the Church
of Rome) were answered long before he was borne.

It may be he will reply to this answer of the Bishop, that it is not
sufficient, and give the reason for it, which he alleges in the like case in
his Appeal page 291. viz.

The Devil bred him up in a faction, and sent him abroad, to do him service
in maintaining a faction.

And thus he must reply, or blot out of both his books that bitter sentence,
which was written against all such, as make any difference between the Romish
Church, and ours, in the point of real presence. I reioyne to it in the
Bishops words, p. 237.

If he be of God, he knows well, he should not thus bestow his tongue and
hand.

Moreover, if he has the understanding of a man, he knows it is evidence of
truth, not bitterness of railing that carries credit in a divinity question:
let him first take away the Bishops proofs, and show wherein he is a liar, or
an ignorant man, and then there may be some excuse for this railing: till then,
it will be held a ruled case, his will was good, but his cause naught. He must
rail because he had nothing else to say. And with this I conclude all the
pretenses that he has for his agreement in the point of real presence with
the Church of England.

I will now deliver some reasons to prove, that the England does oppose the
church of Rome in the point of real presence, as follows.

1 Many of our nation have given their bodies to the fire for denying it. 2 It
has been proclaimed against, by our Ministers, without any blame from
authority, or known opposition from any of ours. 3 Our Church has determined
what is to be held, touching the nature, and effects of this Sacrament, and
has not a word of the real presence. Our Church has determined, that the
Sacrament is to be eaten, taken, and given, only after a spiritual manner, and
by faith: and denies worship to it. Arti. 28. That the wicked receive the
sign, but are not partakers of Christ. Arti. 29. That it ought to be
administered to all men in both kinds, Arti. 30. which it would not have done if
it had granted the Popish real presence. Lastly, Bishop Jewel in the name and
defense of the Church of England, denies it; and maintains that that Article
of the Popish faith is erroneous, first in his Apology beginning at Chapter 12
the 2 Part and so forward, and again in his Reply to Harding, Arti. 5. And
this I hope is sufficient to prove, that the Church of England rejects the
popish real presence.

It remains in the third place, that we examine by the Devil, as he does in
the words which I have alleged. That he proved it not in his Gagge it is no
marvel: for there he goes hand in hand, with his Adversary. That he did it
not in his Appeal, was, because, he could not: for there he had good cause
to show all his strength: Only I find in his Gagge page 250. these words:

He gave substance, and really subsisting essence, who said, This is my body,
this is my blood.

These words are little other then a riddle: yet I will make the best of them.
My answer thereunto will explicate the matter, and take away that which might
seem to fortify the popish real presence: thus it may be framed,

If Christ gave substance, and an essence really subsisting, when he did
administer the sacrament to his Disciples, and said, This is my body, etc. then
the body of Christ is really and substantially present in the Sacrament.

But Christ gave substance, and an essence really subsisting, etc.

Therefore the body of Christ is really present.

I answer; The word substance etc. in this place may be taken for the substance
of Bread and wine: or for the substance of Christ's body: That Christ gave the
substance of bread and wine I grant, and so the assumption is true, and he
must grant it likewise, or else say with the Council of Trent, Sess. 13. can.
2. That, it does not remain: but is changed, etc. which I presume he will not
do: But the word substance being thus understood, he must thus argue, He gave
the substance of bread, therefore the substance of his body was present. These
two do hang together like harp and Harrow, so the consequence of the
proposition is naught.

If by the word substance he meant Christ's body, then the substance of his
body is affirmed to be given, but not explicated how he gave it, nor proved
yet that he gave it. This is his old vain, you must go seek his meaning for
the sense, and take his word for the truth, or else his is no man of this world.

I will bestow some pains to find out both: To give may be after an humane
sort (that is) when I deliver a thing in my possession, into the possession of
another: I had it then, another has it now: he is seized, I am dispossessed
of it. If Christ gave the substance of his body thus, then the* substance of
his body was present. But Christ did not give the substance of his body on this
manner. If he will say Christ gave the substance of his body in this sort, he
must prove it by the word of God; for it is impossible unto natural
understanding, that Christ should deliver the substance of his own body, out
of his own possession into the possession of his Disciples.

Furthermore, Giving may be after an heavenly and spiritual manner, that is to
say, unto faith. If he say Christ gave the substance of his body in this sense;
Then he says true, and thus he must say, or disclaim the faith of the Church
of England: for so says our Church, in the 28 Article. But then Christ might
so give, and yet not be really and substantially present in the Sacrament. For
we lift up our hearts to heaven, and there feed upon the Lamb of God. Thus
spiritually, with the mouth of our faith, we eat the body of Christ, and
drink his blood, etc. as I have alleged out of Bishop Jewel in his reply to
Harding, p. 238. see Defen. Apolog. p. 234. and 264. for this answer.

I hope no man will require me to prove, that, Jewel has laid in the defense
of his Apology, part 2. cap. 12. diuis. 1. p. 220. namely,

Christ nor his Apostles never taught, nor the Primitive Church never believed
that real presence.

Thus have I ended this argument, and the whole point of real presence, and (I
hope) have made it appear, that it is, neither the doctrine of the Church of
England, nor a true doctrine.

CHAP. XV. The point of Images.
Master Mountagu. The Church of Rome. The Church of England. Images and Idols
may be two things, unto Christians they are not unlawful in all manner of
religious employment. The Images of Christ, of the Virgin Marie, and other
Saints, may be had, and kept in Churches, honor and worship is due, and must
be yielded unto them. Taken out of the Homilies against peril of Idolatry,
printed 1576. the second Tome. The pictures of Christ, the blessed Virgin, and
Saints, may be set up in Churches. Not that any divinity, or power is believed
to be in them: for which they are worshipped, or that any thing is desired of
them, or that, a trust is placed in them. The words Idol, and Image, be words
of diverse tongues, and sounds: yet used in the Scriptures indifferently for one
thing always. p. 27. to bring Images into the Churches, is a foul abuse, and
great enormitie. page 27. Be forbidden and unlawful, p. 84. Not things
indifferent, nor tolerable, page 96 and 97. There is a respect due unto, and
honor given, relatiuely unto the picture of saints, and Christ: they may be
used for helps of piety, in rememoration, and more effectual representing of
the prototype. Gagg p. 318. For the instruction of the unlearned, renewing the
remembrance of the history, and stirring up of devotion. Gagg p. 300. But,
because, the honor that is exhibited unto them, is referred to the prototype
which they represent: so as, by the Images which we kiss, and before whom we
uncover the head, and kneel down, we adore Christ, and worship Saints, whose
images they bear. Bishops ought diligently to teach, so as, 1 The people be
trained up in the articles of faith, by the histories of our redemption
expressed in pictures, or other similitudes. 2 Be put in mind by Images, of the
benefits and gifts which are bestowed upon the^ by Christ. 3 To give thanks to
God for the Saints, by whom mirales are wrought, and good examples set before
them, and to follow their life and manners. For instance, in remembering more
feelingly, and so being impassioned more effectually with the death of our
Savior, when we see that story represented unto us by a skillful hand.
Appeal. p. 254. Council. Trent. Sess. 25. de inuoca. etc.

CHAP. XVI. The point set down in the former Chapter is discussed.
HEre we enquire of three things.

1 Whether his doctrine of Images, be true or not. 2 Whether he consents
therein, with the Church of Rome or not. 3 Whether he dissenteth therein from
the Church of England or not.
His consent with the Church of Rome, is sufficiently testified by their words
and his. He says, Images may be had in Churches: and, Honor is due; and to be
given unto them. So says the Council. He says, Honor is due, and given
relatiuely. The Council says, The honor exhibited to Images is referred to
the prototype: which is the same with his. He says, They may be used for the
instruction of the ignorant, recalling the memory of the history, and stirring
up of devotion. The Council says: The articles of faith may be learned by
them, men put in mind of the benefits by Christ, and stirred up to give
thanks, for the miracles, and to imitate the virtuous actions wrought by the
Saints. Which differs nothing from him.

He concludes the point of Images thus;

Let practice and doctrine go together, we agree. So that the question is not;
what may be given them. Gagg. p. 319.

These words (as they lie) be void of sense: they contain neither affirmation
nor negation: they bring nothing that is affirmed of, or denied unto: (to speak
formally) they have neither subject, predicate, nor vinculum.

If this word your be added unto the words practice, and doctrine, and the word
then be put before the words we agree, then that sentence may be understood:
but he will not abide him that shall do so, for he rages against him that
shall do so, Appeal. p. 256. etc. Whether those words be added or no, his
agreement with the Church of Rome, does sufficiently show it self in them:
for, 1. these words are spoken unto the Church of Rome, with whom he has this
present disputation: for in the former part of this discourse he says unto
them, Whatsoever you say, etc. In your practice, etc. So that it is all one, as
if he had said, Let your practice and doctrine go together, etc. 2. By
doctrine he means all the doctrine of their Church; for he speaks of
doctrine without limitation, and thereby extends his agreement with them in
their whole doctrine touching Images: which is further confirmed by saying, the
question between him and them is not what may be given them. Which is as much
as if he said, I consent unto their whole doctrine. 3. By the doctrine of their
Church, he must understand the decree of the Council of Trent: for their
Church has no other doctrine but that: the rest is opinions of singular men:
so that his sentence now set down, is as if he had said,

I agree with the Council of Trent in the point of Images.

Now the Council of Trent has decreed in the place alleged; that,

The honor to be given to Images, is kissing of them, uncovering the head,
and bowing down before them.

Which must be understood to be Mr Mountagu his sentence also.

Notwithstanding all this plain evidence, yet I presume he will deny his
agreement with the Church of Rome: because,

The ignorant amongst them give them honor due unto God, and the learned
amongst them (as Thomas by name, and others with him) persuade, that as much
honor is to be given to a wooden Crucifix, as to Christ himself in heaven.

For thus he writes, and in this he puts the difference between himself
and them, Gagge, page 299. and 319.

I answer; this is not sufficient to excuse him from agreeing with the Church
of Rome: for the one instance alleged is matter of fact: and has not to do
in this business, which concerns only the faith of their Church; the other
which is the sentence of Thomas, is matter of opinion, which the Council has
not decreed: and Bellarmine says, de Imag. lib. 2. cap. 20. there be three
opinions in their Church touching this thing: whereof this of Thomas is but
one; so that we may conclude, he differs from them in one opinion held by
some amongst them: and this is all he says; and therefore for all this he
consents with them in matter of faith, which is the thing we seek for.

I answer further; It does not appear, that he does yields honor unto
Images, Gagge, page 318. but, does not show us what is the nature thereof,
whereby we might be able to discern the difference of that honor which he
gives, from that which they give.

If it be replied, the Council gives little honor to Images, and that which
Thomas gives is the main and chief thing to be blamed. I answer; that honor
which the Council gives, is falsely given, and is a matter of faith, which we
may not receive: for every false faith is an addition to the divine revelation.

If you ask, whether he agrees with the Church England, or not: He will
answer, he does agree with it, and does affirm so much in effect, Gagge, page
318. 319. but it is a mere pretense without show of truth: he can allege no
one passage in the Doctrine of the Church of England, which appoints that any
Images of Christ and the Saints should be set up in Churches, or that any kind
of honor should be done unto them, being set up there: or, which assigns
unto them any use in religion: much less, that they should be helps of piety,
etc. The case being such, it was a face without a face, that said, we and
Protestants do them all, Gagge, page 318.

The very truth is, he does contradict the Doctrine England, in some of these
positions directly, and in other some by necessary consequence, and I prove it
thus;

The Doctrine concluded and urged in the Homilies, is the Doctrine of the
Church of England. For,

The Book it self, and the use thereof, is established by public authority,
and the subscription of all Ministers, Artic. 35.

But he does contradict the Doctrine concluded and urged in the Homilies.

Therefore he does contradict, etc.

The assumption or second part, will be apparent to him, that reads the
words on both sides, set down in the former Chapter. It says, Idol and Image
is the same thing: and alleges the use of Scripture for it. He says, Image
and Idol may be two things, that is, are not one; It says, Images may not be
brought into Churches, and that being there, they be unlawful, and
intolerable: He says, they may be brought into Churches, they are not
unlawful, and are sometimes profitable: all which are direct contradictions:
affirming, what it denies, and denying what it affirms. Lastly, if Images
may not be brought into Churches, then may they not be employed in religion,
for helps of piety, the instruction of the ignorant, and the stirring up of
devotion, etc. for these are more then that, because Images in Churches may be
for ornament, or for no use. The Homily does deny the placing of Images in
Churches, therefore it must also deny them to be helps unto piety, etc. now he
teaches contradictory to this, in making Images helps unto piety: therefore
he does contradict that which follows upon the words of the Homily, by
necessary consequence. Let us see how he will avoid this objection, and for
that end, thus he says, Appeal, page 260.

I admit the Homilies to contain godly exhortations: but not as the public
dogmaticall resolutions of our Church, or Doctrine to be propugned and
subscribed in all and every point.

I answer; in the 12. Chapter, no 8. he extold the Doctrine of the Homily, as
an authentical record of the Doctrine of the Church of England. In this place
he denies them to contain the dogmaticall resolutions of our Church, (so
constant is he, and so settled in his judgment.) Let us take what he will
admit; which we find to be three things: first, they are exhortations;
secondly, godly; thirdly, To be propugned and subscribed in some things. I
require no more: Exhortations they are, (that is) matters of manners, all of
them are not matters of faith, and therefore they do not all contain
resolutions of faith: but some of them be matters of manners. He grants them
to be godly, therefore true, for falsehood cannot tend to godliness. They are
subscribed, in some things, therefore in this that I have alleged; because it
is not a rhetorical enforcement, nor a Tropicall kind of speech, but the
conclusion enforced; which is set down in words that have no other sense but
as they lie, without interpretation. This is enough to prove my proposition,
and thus I dispute from it.

Every exhortation propounded, enforced, esteemed godly, commanded to be
subscribed unto by our Church, is the Doctrine of our Church.

But the Doctrine of the Homily alleged, cap. 15, is an exhortation
propounded, enforced, etc. by our Church.

Therefore the Doctrine of the Homily alleged, cap. 15. is the Doctrine of
the Church of England.

Thus he confirms the objection which he is desirous to thrust off: The
sight of truth may be hindered, but the being of truth cannot be defeated: he
that attempteth to conceal it, in the event makes it more apparent.

Now we come to see what truth there is in his Doctrine Bellarmine, de Relig.
Sanct. lib. 2. cap. 7. 8. 9. 10. and 11. 12. As well as he fetched positions
from the Council of Trent. To answer Bellarmine, is but labor lost: for I
know not how far he will join with him in his proofs, and it would be too
tedious; for he brings much more then will sort with this occasion, and present
business. Let Mr Mountagu urge what he likes best, and he shall have answer:
till then, I rest satisfied with the Homily, that disputes thus against
Images in Churches;

1 If the worshipping of Images do always befall Images set up in Churches,
then it is unlawful to set up Images in Churches.

But the first is true, perpetual experience does show it: and the affinity
that is between man's corruption, and the worshipping of Images does procure
it, page 128.

Therefore the last is true also.

2 That thing which is used in order unto supernatural actions, and is not
warrantd in the divine revelation for that end, is unlawful.

But Images in Churches are so used, and are not warranted etc. page 88.

Therefore Images in Churches be unlawful.

Let not M. Mountagu say these are rhetorical enforcements, and no Doctrine of
the Church of England; I will save him that labor. I do allege those
arguments for the truth that is in them; not for the authority that does
commend them. Let him show wherein they be untrue, or confess they are true,
and it suffices.

But he is not able to show this, and therefore we may safely conclude; this
man was strangely transported, when he wrote on this manner, and in these words;

If the Church of Rome had given no more to Images but an historical use, our
Church would not have departed from them about that point (as I suppose) for so
our doctrine is, Appeal, p. 251. Our strictest writers do not condemn it, p.
253. Furious ones in our Church would proceed, but they are singular
illuminates, let them gang alone.

I answer; what the doctine of our Church is, in this point of Images, I have
declared in the foregoing Chapter. If you can bring any record, for any other
passage in the doctrine of the Church of England, that puts upon Images this
historical use, namely of suggesting unto, moving, or affecting the mind, even
in pious, and religious affections, which you father upon it, p. 253. you may
do well to bring it forth, that, the world may see it. But because you cannot,
I must entreat you to take the words of Bishop Jewel unto Harding in the
defense of his Apology, p. 350 without offense; which are as follows,

Leave, leave this hypocrisy, dissemble no more, it is not manly: your credit
fails overmuch, your word is no sufficient warrant.

If you will fall into your wonted fury, it is the Bishop that must bear it;
They are his words not mine and uttered upon the like occasion that you offer
here. I could add a farther refutation, and pull off this false imputation
from the shoulders of the Church of England, by the testimony of Bishop Jewel;
but I defer it unto the next passage, where the reader shall find it.

He wanted proofs for his doctrine of Images: but

There is no Popery in the historical use of Images,

Appeal, page 252.

I answer; There is Popery in it: for it is the faith of the Church of Rome, as
I have showed in the chapter going before: and it is contrary to the word of
God, as I will show anon; both which are sufficient to make it Popery, even in
your own judgment: for thus you write,

Popery is contrary to the word of God, Appeal. p. 310.

But he does deny that this use of Images is contrary the word of God: for
thus he writes,

1 The historical use of Images, is true doctrine in it self, Appeal, p. 251.

2 That Images may be made, for ornament, memory, history, no law of God
forbids, Appeal, p. 265.

I answer; Bishop Jewel is a witness so competent, to show us what is true,
or not true; what is forbidden or not forbidden in this case, that I shall need
to produce none but him. Thus he writes in his answer to Harding the 14
Article, p. 378. etc.

1 The first end of Images is, the attaining of knowledge, although perhaps
somewhat may be learned by them; yet is not this the ordinary way appointed by
God to attain knowledge. Saint Paul says, faith comes by hearing, not by
gazing. This seems to be no handsome way for to teach the people, for where
greatest store of such Schoolemasters be, there the people are most ignorant,
superstious, and subject to Idolatry.

2 I grant Images do oftentimes vehemently move the mind, but every thing that
may move the mind, is not meet for the Church of God. Gods house is a house of
prayer, not of gazing. Whoeuer adoreth, or makes his prayer beholding an
Image, is so moved in his mind, that he thinks the Image hears him, and
hops it will perform his prayer. Alleged out of S. Augustine, p. 318.

3 Touching remembrance it is like the first, and therefore is already
answered. Thus far the reverend Bishop.

If old learning can satisfy this illumination, the Bishop must gang alone. If
it cannot, old learning shall have a writ of dotage. The Bishop shall have the
Church of England that furious one, and all her children to bear him company.

The Homily concludes p. 132. That Images ought to be abolished: so does the
Bishop p. 383. But Master Mountagu will none of that, Appeal, p. 255. The
reason which our Church and the Bishop does allege is this, viz. because they
are the cause of much evil, M. Mountagu says no; they are sometimes
profitable, Gagg. p. 318. But I will follow the Church of England, and the
Bishop: let him gang alone for me.

By these arguments of our Church, propounded, Rome and M. Mountagu; that,

Honor is not due to Images.

If he does not rest content with this proof, it stands him upon to show us
the divine law, which inioyneth man, to give honor to Images: forasmuch as,
without such a law, the honoring of them, is an humane invention, and a
service done unto God, which he rejects as odious and abominable: and
consequently the faith decreed by the Church of Rome, and received by M.
Mountagu, touching the having, employing, and honoring of Images, is erroneous.

CHAP. XVII. Of works of supererogation.
M. Mountagu. The Church of England. A man may do, with the assistance of Gods
grace, things as counseled only, and not commanded. Voluntari^ works, besides
over, and above God^ commandments, 1, are works of sup^rerogation. 2. Can^^t
be taught, without pride, arrogance, and impiety. A man, in some one point,
may do more then is exacted. A man may do more then he needed to have done
out of strict command, Gagg. p. 104. A man may do more then he is tied unto by
any law of God, Gagg, page 105.

CHAP. XVIII. The former point of works of supererogation, is disputed.
ACcording to our former course, three questions are to be handled.

1 Whether there be any such works or no. 2 Whether in affirming of them, he
consent with the Church of Rome, or not. 3 Whether he dissent from the Church
of England therein or no.
In this Chapter, I have brought no Doctrine, under the name of the Church of
Rome, because hitherto I have followed the Council of Trent, which has
decreed nothing in this point. Therefore the faith of that Church in this
point, is to be taken out of the Doctrine commonly received amongst them
touching it, and because there is no Author amongst them fitter to report what
that is, then Bellarmine: I will set down what he says of it, it is this;

Holy men may do such things for Gods sake, which they are not bound to do;
and these are works of supererogation, de Indul. lib. 1. cap. 4. Respondeo
non, etc. de Monachis lib. 2. cap. 7. 9. 13.

The G^gger has the same thing reported by Mr. Mountagu in his Gagge, page
104. in the margin, in these words,

Man by assistance of Gods grace, may do some things counseled: and these we
call work of supererogation.

That he does consent unto this Doctrine of the Rome, he professes plainly,
and fully. Thus he writes: I willingly subscribe unto the point of councels
Evangelical, Gagge, page 103. and further he says, of the definition of
works of supererogation, which I have reported out of him, no 1. given by his
adversary the Gagger. If these were your works of supererogation and no
otherwise, I would not contend with you, page 104.

He does agree with them likewise in explicating and setting down the nature
of a Council evangelical, (as he calls it.) Bellarmine says thus of it:

It is a good work showed; not commanded: it differs from a Precept in this,
a Precept binds of its own force, a Council is committed to man's free
choice; when a precept is observed, it has the reward; being not observed, it
has punishment: but if a Council be not observed, it has no punishment; if
it be observed, it has the greater reward, de Monachis, lib. 2. cap. 7.

Just on this manner writes he; Imperious laws, require exact obedience upon
pain of punishment, Appeal, page 219. A Council is a mandat, not properly*
but with condition, left unto a man's choice to do it, or not to do it, page
221. lastly, he says, the obedience to Councels, procures reward to him that
obeys them, Gagge, page 105. and he that keeps them not, is without danger
of punishment therefore, Gagge, page 103.

A man would think by this, that he would not stick to confess that he
agrees with the Church of Rome in the point of works of supererogation: but
indeed he does deny it: for thus he writes,

You call works of supererogation, such as be laid up in store for
employments, the treasure and stock of the Church, to satisfy for other men's
offenses, not the things done as counseled, only: these are only titular,
those are indeed works of supererogation which you mean, but these I deny,
Gagge, page 103. etc.

I answer; this excuse is headless, what hand ruled his pen when he wrote
thus, passes my skill to judge: he does hear the Church of Rome with one
consent to affirm, voluntary works are works of supererogation: and the
Church of England says the same expressly, and in so many words: and yet
(forsooth) he will needs bear them both down, they give voluntary works the
name only of works of supererogation; but they meant it not. But I pray who
told him so? he names no Author for it, nor can name, (I am sure.) Well, he
had it by special illumination, and therefore he might know their meaning
without them, and you must believe him, for such knowledge is certain, and
cannot deceive you. Be it so: he does disagree in the name: but that will not
infer his disagreement in the thing. He has confessed his subscription to
Evangelical Councels, (that is) to voluntary works, as I have showed in the
former Chapter, and that is all which is sought after: now we find his
agreement with them in the thing: let him give what name he will unto voluntary
works.

But he says,

It is an error in Divinity, not to put a difference betwixt such works as a
man may do, or not do without guilt of sin, or breach of law; and the
Papists works of supererogation. If any man not knowing, or not considering
the state of the question, has otherwise Written, or Preached, or Taught, it
was his ignorance, or fancy, or misunderstanding, or misapplying; Appeal,
page 215.

I answer; in stead of proofs, we have evil language: I will scumme off the
froth, and examine what he says in good sober sadness. This is the sum of
his sentence.

He that says voluntary works (in the judgment of the Church of Rome) be
works of supererogation, is ignorant or fantastical.

Unto which proposition I may add this assumption and conclusion.

But the Church of England says, the Church of Rome calls voluntary works,
works of supererogation, Artic. 14. So does the Church of Rome, as I have
showed out of Bellarmine, no 1.

Therefore the Church of England, and the Church of Rome are ignorant and
fantastical.

2 O Mr Mountagu, who do you make your self to be? do you know the faith of
Rome better then your Mother? nay, better then your self? you subscribed that
Article, and thereby professed those words of her to be true; is the other end
of your tongue turned outward, that you now unsay what you said then? did you
then know, and now are ignorant? But suppose you might make thus bold with your
Mother and your self; do you think to beg all the learned in the Church of
Rome for fools, that understand not their own faith? but you would be
thought far from this: therefore your proposition is false in the same
thoughts.

3 The proposition does suppose, that,

Works laid up in store, to satisfy for other men's offenses, called the
treasure of the Church, are the Papists works of supererogation.

And so he speaks expressly, Gagge, page 103. 105. 106. (...) this is a mere
presumption without truth; avouched barely upon his own word without tendering
any proof. You must prove what you say, or else you bring words of the wind.

Against you I prove thus;

1 That which is laid up in store to satisfy for others, is not works, but
the value and price of works, viz. satisfaction, Bellarm. de Indul. lib. 1.
cap. 2. 1 Propos. 4 Propos. cap. 3. 1 Propos.

Therefore that which is laid up in store to satisfy for others, cannot be
their works of supererogation.

But let us suppose that the voluntary works themselves be so laid up, yet can
they not therefore be their works of supererogation, and thus I show it:

If voluntary works, laid up in the treasury of the Church, be therefore their
works of supererogation, then works done according to Moses Law, are also their
works of supererogation; for the satisfaction arising from them is also laid up
in the treasury of the Church, to satisfy for other, as Bellarmine teaches de
Indulg. lib. 1. c. 4. Respondeo, non est.

But that works done according to the Moral Law are not their works of
supererogation, I take as granted.

Of his agreement, or disagreement, with the church England in the point of
voluntary works, you need not make a question; for (if you will believe him)
The Church of England

Has no doctrine against Evangelical counsels, Gag. page 103. For now
voluntary works and evangelical counsels are the same, as we have heard out
of Bellarmine de Monachis. lib. 1. cap. 7. Quantum ad etc. and as himself does
expound it, out of Philastrius, and Nazianzen, Gag. p. 10. But this imputation
is an untruth so ^oule, that it deserves no other answer, but his own words:

Blush for shame, Gagg. p. 250.

For the Church of England says expressly,

Voluntary works, besides, over and above Gods commandments, cannot be
taught. Arti. 14. And further it says,

Man cannot, for Gods sake, do more then of bounden duty is required, which is
as much as if it had said, There be no voluntary works at all.

But it may be, he will say, ye do him wrong, he so far as he knows; I
answer, Those are his words indeed: but mark the sense, those words seem to
be rather a confirmation then a limitation of his denial: for is it credible
that he could not read this Article? Or that he did not know, 1. That the
Church of England had made this Article. 2. Or that the Church meant to deny
those works indeed which it does deny in words? Or that this Article is the
doctrine of the Church of England? Surely none of these may be conceived.
Therefore we may conclude (as a thing very probable) that his intent was to
avouch that denial, upon his own knowledge.

Now the Judgment of our Church, and of Master Mountagu, in the point of
voluntary works, is fully known; and that they are contradictory; it may be
concluded, he dissenteth from the Church of England in the point of voluntary
works. But before I pass from it, one thing is worthy observation. viz.

Mr. Mountagu has subscribed contradictories. He subscribed the Article that
says, there is no voluntary works, and he subscribed that there is voluntary
works, Gagg. p. 103. etc.

Can any man tell what this man would do to be Chief muftie? I doubt himself
cannot. But pardon him: his ends were contrary; He must subscribe the Article,
or miss advancement. He must subscribe the other, or be no reconciler. He
meant to attain both; He has gotten the first, and he professes himself for
the second, Appeal page 292. He has put hard for it in both his books:
therefore it was reason he should subscribe on both sides. In the first, he
subscribed to what protestants are, in the second to what they ought to be.

I should now come to dispute the question, whether,

A man may do voluntary works.

Wherein I might first prove the negative: but it seems better; to resolve
with M. Mountagu, Appeal, page 218 That it would be lost labor to seeeke, or
go about to beetle it into his brains, because he says, Appeal page 218.
All antiquity is of opinion, there are Evangelical counsels. And he resolves
Appeal, page 224. to join in opinion with them. And he gives this reason for
it, Appeal, p. 240. I am tied not to preach or publish otherwise (according to
the Cannons prescribed unto Ministers in such cases, Anno 1571.) Knowing it to
be the resolved doctrine of antiquity as I do. I am not excusable if I
transgress the Cannons.

But notwithstanding; because he may change his mind, therefore I will proceed
and prove,

There be no voluntary works.

My first argument shall be the words of the Article already alleged no 6.
etc. Whose authority only ought to be sufficient to Mr. Mountagu; because he
has subscribed those words of the Article as true, and has vowed to forsake
all others, and follow his mother the Church of England, Appeal, page 183. And
the rather, because those words do so plainly and fully deny voluntary works.

My second argument shall be the same which I

Whosoever teaches voluntary works, they be proud, arrogant, and impious. For
says the Article,

Voluntary works cannot be taught, without pride, arrogance, and impiety.

But no man may be proud, arrogant, and impious.

Therefore voluntary works may not be taught.

It may be objected, that the first part of this reason is extended too far;
because it reaches unto antiquity. And also it does pass too hard a sentence
upon such as teach voluntary works.

I answer, both parts of this objection be false: and the respect we owe, unto
the first composers, and confirmers of that Article, does bind us to think so:
for they were able to drop Fathers with M. Mountagu, and govern their
passions, better then he can govern his.

Besides, the thing it self does say no less. Never any Father taught the
popish voluntary works. If M. Mountagu will say the contrary. He must show
those fathers, that teach of voluntary works, as Bellarmine does, de Monachis.
lib. 2. cap. 7. and 8. which he is never able to do. Against the second part
of the objection, the Article disputes thus,

They that teach, that, men render unto God, so much as they are bound, and
more also, they are arrogant and impious: For,

They take upon them more then is true, against the word of God, which says,
when you have done all that are commanded to you, say, we be unprofitable
servants, Luke 17. 10.

But they that teach voluntary works, teach that men do render unto God, so
much as they are bound, and more also.

And so does Bellarmine expressly teach, de Monachis lib. 2. cap. 6, Secundo
Comparando, and cap. 12. at the very end thereof, and in many other places.

Therefore they that teach voluntary works, are arrogant and impious.

If Mr. Mountagu can satisfy the premises of this argument, he may avoid the
conclusion: but I despair of that: for he must join with Bellarmine in the
assumption, because he that keeps not the law, cannot do voluntary works,
which is more then a man is bound too: seeing those proceed from a common,
enjoined, and limited perfection of love: As we learn from Bellarmine, de
Monachis lib. 2. cap. 6. Tertio Comparando: and Mr Mountagu himself teaches
no less, when he says, obedience to Councels proceeds from grace, therefore
of love. He says, they are left to a man's choice, therefore his love is
voluntary, and unlimited. He says also, these works are worthy of more praise:
therefore they proceed out of a higher degree and perfection of love, Gagge,
page 103. And that the doer of these works, does keep the law, the thing it
self does testify: for he that is able to do works of greater perfection,
must needs be able to do works of less: seeing the less is comprehended in
the greater: besides, he that comes short of keeping the Law, how can he
go beyond the Law, in loving God, by doing works left unto his choice? If any
man will say, he may do these voluntary works, and yet come short of doing
the works of the Law, as Mr. Mountagu does, Gagge, page 104. he must show me
the man that did so, and the actions wherein they did so, and prove it
sufficiently, else I must believe our Church, Artic. 14. and the things
themselves that say the contrary.

He cannot avoid the proposition: for Bellarmine de Monachis lib. 2. cap. 13.
Respondeo Petrum, etc. as he that reads it may see: and I will show.
Bellarmine answers to this argument, thus,

The Lord does not say, Luke 17. and 10. you are unprofitable. But wills them
to say, we are unprofitable servants. For,

It is his will that we should be humble, and not boast of our merits.

Himself says afterward, Thou good servant and faithful. But he calls him
only, unprofitable, that disobeyeth the Law, and is cast into utter
darkness, Mat. 25. 26. and 30. verses.

I reply; this answer, (as it lies) is nothing to the purpose, it does not
gainesay any part of the argument: yet I will bring the particulars, and see
how they may be applied to the purpose, He says,

Our Lord bid them say they were unprofitable: himself did not say so.

I grant this; neither does the argument say otherwise. It may be he would
infer from hence;

Therefore they say, they are unprofitable servants; but are not.

If this conclusion were true, the answer would be sufficient, and the
argument of no force: but this part of his answer cannot infer this
conclusion: for then, our Lord should teach him to lie, which Bellarmine dares
not affirm: yea from thence it may be truly inferred, that they were indeed
unprofitable servants: but Christ is the teacher of truth, and in bidding them
say they were unprofitable, it is as much as if he had said himself, they
were indeed unprofitable: for he would not put any sentence into man's mouth,
which himself would not affirm: these things I take as granted, and offer no
proof for them. He says;

2 It is his will we should be humble, and not boasters.

I grant this also, neither does the argument say the contrary. It may be he
brings this to prove, That,

The foresaid confession was not according to truth.

But it does not prove it: for humility and false speaking do not go
together. It does rather infer the contrary; he would have us humble,
therefore he would have us speak the truth; for both of them are virtues
proceeding from the spirit of truth; and there is no greater sign of humility,
then when men confess their failings truly: He says further;

3 They that so confess, are called good servants and faithful.

Let this be granted also, and it will agree well with every part of the
argument. I suppose his intent is to say,

Therefore they that did thus confess, were indeed profitable servants.

But this does not follow from that; for our Savior might call them good,
though they failed in some things, wherein they were unprofitable servants; and
yet speak according to truth: for his servants are accepted of him, to all
purposes of love, no less effectually, then if they were absolutely good and
unprofitable in nothing. Again, he blotteth out their failings, (whereby they
are unprofitable) out of his Book, whereof it is, that they are not imputed
unto them, and they stand before God, as if they had never failed: Lastly, such
do enjoy the habit of grace, and bring forth the fruits thereof: by which they
are truly good, and from whence they may truly have the name of good, and
faithful servants.

He says fourthly,

They only that disobey the Law, and are cast into utter darkness, are
called unprofitable servants.

This sentence, has not to do with the argument any more then the former; and
it is false in it self. Others also that do not so disobey the law, as that
they are therefore cast into hell, may be called unprofitable servants, which
I prove by this argument,

The Saints are truly called unprofitable servants, because every breaker of
the Law, may truly be called an unprofitable servant.

But the Saints do so break the Law, that they are not therefore cast into
condemnation.

Therefore some that do so break the Law, that they are not therefore cast
into condemnation, are called unprofitable servants.

That the Saints do break the Law, is clear, by 1 Ioh. 1. 8. 10. and that
therefore they are not cast into condemnation, it is as certain by Romans 8. 1.
But these two, i. e. the sanctified and unsanctified, are called unprofitable
servants in a different sense. They that go to hell, have that name totally,
universally, and finally; they never have the name of good servants: for they
are totally and finally unprofitable servants, as the place now alleged, Mat.
25. 26. and 30. verses shows, which says, that the unprofitable servant
gained nothing by his talent; and that by his own choice and resolution. The
other that go not to hell, has both: they are unprofitable for a time: they
are profitable finally, or for ever. They are called unprofitable in some
respect, viz. In respect of their faylings, and as they are in themselves; but
they are called good and faithful, totally, finally, and universally, by
means of their grace, of the not-imputing of their faylings, and of Gods
favor, wherein they are made good, by the receiving of all supernatural good
things.

By this, (I hope) it does appear, the argument which our Church uses against
voluntary works, is strong and sufficient against the pretenses of Bellarmine.

I come now to defend this Doctrine of the Church England, by answering such
arguments as I find brought by Mr. Mountagu, against it. Bellarmine de
Monachis, lib. 2. cap. 8. at the end says; Evangelical Councels be chiefly of
continency, obedience, and poverty. Mr. Mountagu in his Gagge, page 103. does
instance them in virginity and wilful poverty; Bellarmine alleges Mat. 29.
and 21. 1 Cor. 7. 25. and 28. to prove that these be Evangelical Councels, de
Monachis lib. 2. cap. 9. arg. 5. and 7. Mr. Mountagu reports the same places,
Gagge, page 105. and grants, that they speak of Evangelical Councels; by
which he disputes in this sort;

Wilful poverty, Mar. 19. and 21. single life, 1 Cor. 7. 25. and 28. may be
done.

Wilful poverty, Mat. 19. and 21. single life, 1 Cor. 7. 25. and 28. be
voluntary works.

Therefore some voluntary works may be done.

I answer; the first part of this argument is false; the places alle^dged do
not show, or commend wilful poverty, and virginity unto all men. Those places
belong only to particular persons and times. In Matthew. our Savior speaks
unto the young man, that would know what he should do to come to heaven: The
Apostle in his Epistle to the Corinths, directs his answer to such as
doubted, what to do in case of marriage; and we do not find in the word of
God, that these answers are extended any further, and many things in the places
themselves do restrain them only to those persons and times.

The second part of the Argument is also false. A voluntary work; first, is
good; secondly, more then the Law requires; thirdly, grateful or acceptable to
God; fourthly, a means leading to eternal life; fifthly, left unto a man's
choice, not strictly commanded to be done or not done; as we learn by
Bellarmine in the place alleged, and Mr. Mountagu, Gagge, page 104. 105. and
106. But this selling, Mat. 19. and abstaining, 1 Cor. 7. have not these
properties. Therefore they are not voluntary works. That they are not means
leading unto heaven, will easily be granted, by every man, that has any
experience in the word of God, or the work of grace: for there is no promise
of heaven made to a man, upon condition of hispouerty, or virginity, rather
then to him that is rich and married. If any man thinks otherwise, let him show
that promise in some other place of Scripture; I say in some other place of
Scripture, because it is usual with the holy Ghost, to repeat, illustrate, and
urge the means of salvation, and the connection of heaven thereunto, in more
places then one. If that cannot be found (as without doubt it cannot) then it
must be showed, that, these places alleged do contain it expressly, and
without doubtfulnesse: for the holy Ghost would not content himself to show us
a means of salvation, by obscure and doubtful terms.

Bellarmine affirms, that wilful poverty, and virginity be means of
everlasting life, and Mr Mountagu ioynes with him in it. Gagg. p. 105. and 106.
Bellarmine proves the first is to be a means of life, because our Savior
says to the young man, thou shall have treasure in heaven. And M. Mountagu
confirms it with the same words. Gagg. p. 105. I answer unto them both, our
Savior made not this promise, unto his selling; but to his coming unto, and
following of Christ. I prove it, because, this promise is annexed immediately
unto his coming, and his coming imports a denial of himself, and taking
up his cross: which is, an obedience due unto God necessarily, as Bellarmine
confesses in that 9. chapter alleged, Septimum etc. respondeo haec, etc. and
also because that denial, etc. is assigned as a means of salvation, and urged
as a necessary duty in many places of Scripture. But the Scripture has not any
such word of wilful poverty. Again, when the Disciples in the chapter
alleged; verse 27. pleaded that they had forsaken all, and followed him, and
demanded what they should have, he promised them everlasting life; and
assigns only their following of him, as the means thereof, but has not a
word of their leaving of all, ver. 28. Bellarmine brings proof in that 9.
chapter, alleged, I am vero, etc. that virginity is a means of salvation:
and that both the places of Scripture alleged in the argument, do speak
unto all the faithful. At contra, etc. But I pass them over with silence,
because M. Mountagu has not a word of them, and the proofs themselves are so
slight and childish, that to set them in form, and to answer them, would be
loss of my labor, and a burden to the reader. Thus I conclude my answer to
the argument: because M. Mountagu has brought nothing in confirmation thereof
more, then I have satisfied.

Bellarmine has other arguments to prove voluntary works; but they are not
worthy answer: because M. Mountagu does omit them, and these two places of
Scripture, are the chief and principal.

And with this I might end this whole point, but, that, he is importunate,
Appeal, p. 22 1. with one argument, whereby he is sure to make you confess,
that, a man may do voluntary works, these are his words,

If you will needs deny Evangelical councels, you will be foundworse by far
then Papists.

I answer; Show us wherein we should be worse then Papists, and then you say
some thing that may perhaps bring us to your bow. If that will serve turn, he
will not stick with you. Herein, he says you are worse, in that,

You are convicted in your consciences willingly to break those words of our
Savior; Go sell all that thou have and give it to the poor, which you are
persuaded is a precept.

I answer; I let pass by* quarrels, and come to the matter. By precept you
mean a precept to us, else you cannot charge us to break it, that do not so
sell. That being observed, you charge us falsely. Show us the man that has
said, that those words of our Savior are a commandment unto us. Bellarmine de
Monachis. lib. 2. cap. 9. will show you two men, that denies it, viz. Calvin
and Martyr, he brings them both saying, these words were spoken only to the
young man. And he that reads his Confirmation of his 5 argument shall find it
so. If you will prove the doing of voluntary works by our own conf^ssion, you
must bring us things true, and not falsehood against the light of the Sun.

Yet so joyous, confident, and iocund is he in this argument, as if all were
his own, as if he had spoken nothing but what was as true as Gospel;
therefore he proceeds on this wise:

If you do not sell all that you have and give it to the poor, you must give
me leave to think you dissemble.

If you demand of him wherein that dissimulation should lie, he is not to seek
for answer; thus he does show it you;

You would persuade men of a case of necessity, that your selves may feed fat
upon their folly.

I answer, when I read this passage, I could not but stand amazed, and my heart
within me became cold, to see the liberty that an angry mind, and an evil
tongue will take; but staying my self a while, at last I remembered him that
said, I will lay my hand upon my mouth, and him that was a lamb dumb before
the shearer, that opened not his mouth. That endured such speaking against of
sinners. This gave me satisfaction for the injury of this evil sentence:
touching the Author whereof, I say no more but this, Lord forgive him for he
knows not what he does, and so I might put an end to this whole point:

But, stay: he must talk a few cold words with you,

He that said a man may do more than he is commanded, was no Papist, they that
say it is Popery, are men of poor capacity, not apprehending what is popery,
what is not; they misdeeme, mistake, misname popery, Appeal, p. 217. and 218.

I answer; this suteth well with the last passage: both of them together do
witness (without exception) that Mr Mountagu is a careful obseruer of
Councels, for these sentences be unmeasurable railings: and I am sure they were
never commanded, and I presume never co^ncelled by God. He must show us then,
who gave him a law for them, or whose Counsels they are. By Popery he must
mean the erroneous faith of Rome. That being so* his bitterness is joined
with falsehood, (a sweet Garden that yields such flowers.) That it is* he
faith of Rome is already agreed on. That it is erroneous, has been hitherto
inquired of in this question. It was your duty to have showed us your voluntary
works in the Scripture: but you have not* therefore we must resolve, you
cannot; If they be not there, you must confess, they be erroneous. Therefore
the understanding and capacity of them that deny them, was rich enough to
find out your Popery: and give the right name to it. I could give him that
urges Popish voluntary works, such titles as he does justly deserve, and which
might equal those which he (unjustly) gives, to such as refuse them: but I
leave them as fittest for his eloquence: and such Reuilers to the dispose of
him, that has pronounced a woe unto such as are strong to do evil.

CHAP. XIX. Of Predestination.
Master Mountagu. The Church of England. I conceive of Gods act, or decree, of
Predestination after this sort Appeal, p. 61. to 65. 1 God decreed to create
man. 2 He created man good. 3 Man fell from that good. 4 By that fall he was
plunged into Perdition. 5 God saw him and had compassion of him. 6 He stretched
out deliverance to the^ in a Mediator. 7 Drew them out which took hold of
Mercy; this I must profess. Predestination to life, is the everlasting purpose
of God, whereby, (before the foundations of the world were laid) he has
constantly decreed, by his Council secret to us, to deliver from curse, and
damnation, those whom he has chosen, in CHRIST, out of mankind, and to bring
them by Christ, to everlasting salvation, as vessels made to honor.

CHAP. XX. The point of Predestination is debated.
THis Chapter examineth two questions only.

1 Whether his doctrine of Predestination be true or not? 2 Whether he
consents in it, with the Church of England, etc.
We omit to enquire, whether he consents with the Church of Rome or not:
because the Counsel of Trent has decreed nothing (that I can find) touching
the nature of Predestination; and the most common opinion of their Schools
dissenteth not from the Church of England: Some do dissent, as Occham, and
others with him in former times. And in latter times Gabriel Vasquez, and some
others with him; but the difference, is rather in Position, and manner of
speaking; then really, and in the thing.

The disputation in this Chapter is restrained unto Appeal, page 61.

Take it as I conceive it, and so shall profess it, until I am informed and
ascertained, that the Church of England teaches all otherwise then I conceive
of it.

This shows you lose but labor, when you attempt to draw him from his
opinion by any arguments taken from Scripture, or man's writings; bring him the
Church of England, and it suffices; if you bring not that, he is still where
he was. The doctrine of the Church of England is not concealed from him, nor is
the sense obscure; he needs not dig de^pe to find it, there is none worse
then he that will not understand.

Before I can show what the Church of England

He drew them out which took hold of mercy.

This branch does appertain to Pred^stination, for it concerns man's ordering
unto his last end, and perfection. The other six, belong not thereto; for they
speak of man's being, and the causes thereof, and things pertaining thereto.
They have not a word of ordering man, to any end. If this seventh branch be
framed according to Art, it will stand thus;

Predestination to life, is an act or decree of Gods will, whereby he purposed
to draw them out of the state of perdition, which took hold of mercy.

In this frame, we have the thing defined, and that Artic. 17. and the
Scriptures are more frequent in that; and no marvel why, because the
Scriptures were written for the direction, and consolation of them that shall
go to heaven, I have framed it altogether by his own direction: the question
of Predestination is put so by himself, as I will now show.

Appeal, page 38. he calls it an act or decree of God, which must needs be
an act of his will: and so he terms it, Appeal, page 61. This act is
immanent, not transient; for he says in the same place, he conceiues it,
setting by, all execution of purpose: and again he says in the same place, he
that is actually Saved, is so saved, according to the purpose of his decree. So
saved, are So ordained by God, Gagge, page 177. He says further, Gods will is
the cause of things, either positiuely by disposing them, or by permission,
etc, Gagge, page 177. He does take this act of Gods will, to be a positive,
not a permissiue disposing: for he says, whatsoever was done in time, was So
disposed of, and ordered before all time, Gagge, page 178.

The word Them, imports, that man is the subject of Predestination; a certain
number of men, not generally all; and so he speaks, Appeal, page 51.

The words out of, etc. imply, that the predestinate to life, (in our
apprehension, or (as they say) in signo rationis,) were in the state of
perdition, before they were predestinate: and so the steps which in his
opinion, are observed by God, toward the Predestinate, and related in the
former Chapter, do expressly show; which also he has, Appeal, page 52. fully
and plainly.

These words which took hold of mercy, do signify, that in Gods
foreknowledge, the Predestinate do finally believe and repent, etc. before
they are predestined, or before the will of Predestination is termined unto
them: and that this faith and repentance, etc. is the obiectiue reason, moving,
and regulating the divine will of Predestination, unto the party predestined;
so as if you ask the reason why God did predestinate some, it is answered,
because he would. If you demand further why he did predestinate this singular
man; it is answered, because he took hold of Gods mercy in the means of
salvation offered, by believing and repenting; and this I take from himself:
where he says, He that is actually saved, is So saved, according to the
purpose of Gods decree consequent, not antecedent, Gagge, p. 177. And again, he
says; men are not saved without relation to their repentance, Appeal, page
74. which thing is most fully declared, Appeal, page 58. where he blames this
sentence: Gods decree to glorify Peter, was without any consideration had of,
or regard unto his faith, obedience, repentance: which sentence for substance
he sets down, and rejects, Gagge, page 179. And Appeal, page 74. he
says, without final perseuering, they are none of Gods elect.

Where he says, he drew them out, etc. he places the whole term or end of
predestination in giving eternal life. This thing he implies also, Appeal,
page 78. where he says, It is your own, God appointed to give grace and
glory; as if he should say, this sentence is proper to you; I disclaim it. If
man has grace before he be predestinate, then grace is not the term or end of
Predestination: he affirms the first, so must he do the last.

Thus we have his sentence of Predestination, and the sense thereof: now we
must compare the Doctrine of the Church of England with it; that, thereby we
may see, whether our Church has opposed the contrary thereto or not, which he
affirms it does, Gagge, page 179.

I will set down again the Doctrine of the England in an orderly form, for
the better understanding thereof: It is this,

1 Predestination is Gods decree, Eternal. Constant. By his Council secret to
us.
2 To Bring to salvation by Christ. Deliver from damnation.
3 Some elected out of mankind in Christ. 4 Before the foundations of the world
were laid. 5 As vessels made to honor.
And thus stands the Doctrine of the 17. Article, each part being placed
according to art: the sense whereof I will now also declare.

PREDESTINATION, is the thing defined,

IS, has the place of a band, to tie the following part of the sentence, unto
that which went before.

GODS DECREE; These words signify that thing which Predestination has in
common with oher actions of Gods will, called the general nature: it does
express also, the principal efficient; namely, GOD, and an act of his will.

ETERNAL; This does set out, what kind of act Predestination is, (to wit)
such an act as is essential unto God: yea, it is of his essence, for nothing
is eternal, but the being of God. This act of his will does remain in God,
and is usually called an immanent act, for it passes not out of God, working a
real change in the creature, which is the property of a transient act.

We conceive that this act of Predestination, is an eliciated act of Gods will;
and an eliciated act is that which flows from a power, that is the beginning
thereof; as believing is an act which proceeds from the faculty which the
soul has to believe. But Predestination is an eliciated act (in our
apprehension only:) by reason we are not able to apprehend the being of God as
it is. Whereas the essence of God is a pure act, altogether without mixture of
the first and second act, considered apart, and separated in the thing. Lastly,
the relation that this act has, unto the creature, is rational, not real:
God is a being of himself, without respect unto any created effect.

CONSTANT, This imports the certain event and infallible performance of the
thing decreed by Predestination; so as he to whom God has appointed grace and
glory, shall not fail of either of them, but enjoy them both without missing:
And that this is the true intent of our Church, it is very plain: because it
does not call the decree it self, or God in decreeing, Constant. For that it
has already declared in the word Eternal, which signifies a duration without
beginning or ending; which does so fully and plainly express, the constancy
of God in decreeing, that the word Constant cannot add any thing thereunto.

BY HIS COUNCIL. By these words, our Church shows; 1. that Gods
understanding is joined with his will, in this act of Predestination; for
counsel is an act proper to the understanding: 2. This act of the
understanding (to speak according to humane capacity) is to judge the act of
Predestination to be good, and to persuade thereunto, by the allegation of
reason: for so we conceive the understanding to direct the will; and, this is
the nature, or condition of Council; he that counsels does thus.

SECRET TO US, By secret is meant unrevealed; the judgment then of our Church,
set down in this sentence, may be expressed in these words.

The reason, that moved God to predestinate this, or that person, is unknown
to us.

TO BRING TO SALVATION; These words, do set forth the special, and proper
nature, and formal being of Predestination: by which it is distinguished from
all other actions of God; and they import the term or end of Predestination,
or the thing appointed to be given by this decree of God; which consists in
happiness or glory after this life; signified by the word salvation: and grace
in this life, by the words, bring unto, by Christ. For God does not bring man
to salvation, but by means, and that means can be nothing but grace: for can it
be conceived, how our coming to salvation can be attributed to God as his
work, but by reason that he does give grace?

Lastly, it cannot be conceived, how God should bring to salvation by Christ,
but, by giving of grace: seeing none come to salvation by Christ, but such, as
are members of Christ; and none are members of Christ, but by the means of
grace.

And that it was the meaning of our Church, to make final grace one thing
appointed by Predestination to be given unto man; it is apparent by that
doctrine of the Article which follows; where it makes Predestination to be
the cause, or reason wherefore God bestows grace, and glory upon man in the
event, for thus it says,

Wherefore they which be endued with this excellent benefit, viz. of
Predestination, be called, according to Gods purpose, by his Spirit, they
through grace, obey the calling, and at length by Gods mercy, they attain to
salvation.

BY CHRIST; Hereby our Church, does set forth the means (appointed by
Predestination,) whereby in course of time man shall enjoy the thing appointed by
Predestination, and that is Jesus Christ, under whose name, all other
subordinate means are fitly comprehended: and that our Church meant so, need
not be doubted; because it adds other means of grace, and salvation,
(besides Christ,) in the doctrine of the Article following.

TO DELIVER FROM DAMNATIOM. By this the nature of Predestination formerly
delivered, is set out or made more plain unto us; for this being contrary unto
that, does make it the more manifest unto our understandings; and the Scripture
takes the same course also, as in many other places, so in these: He that
believes is passed from death unto life: There is no condemnation to him that
is in Christ: Romans 8. 1. By damnation is not meant the state of damnation
actually: for that sense cannot stand with the doctrine of our Church which
follows; but by damnation is understood the possibility of being in the
state of damnation, prevented by the decree of Predestination; for that sense
does agree very well with the doctrine of the Article: which says, This decree
is constant; as is declared before.

SOME ELECTED OVT OF MANKIND. The subject, or parties predestined, are here
said to be man, but not all men universally; it restrains the same unto some
of mankind, by saying that they are elected ones: and elected out of mankind.
2. The subject that receives Predestination, is described by two things. The
one by the name, and under the title of man merely, without any addition;
whereby is signified that man conceived in himself only, as an intellectual
creature without grace or works of grace, is objected unto, and set before the
divine will of Predestination, and in that notion only he receives the same.
Our Church does not say, that God waited till man had grace, and then, and upon
the intuition thereof, he was moved to, and did predestinate him. That this may
be the sense of our Church is clear: because it is a course agreeable and
decent unto the divine providence, and man himself: and that this must be
meant by our Church, is certain also, for no other sense can be made thereof
agreeable to these words, and those words that went before, which say, the
reason moving God to predestinate, is secret to us: And grace is bestowed by
predestination. The other thing describing it, is the word elect, which
signifies an act of Gods will, whereby our Church does give us to understand,
that the reason why this or that man is predestinate, arises from Gods will
and pleasure, of which it is, that the predestinate are singled out, and
severed from the rest of mankind.

IN CHRIST. Our Church refers these words unto the word elect, thus;

Those whom he elected in Christ.

In this sentence, the word elect, does signify, 1. an act of Gods will. 2 An
act going before predestination. 3 A collection of a certain number of men,
(from others) to be predestined, unto this, or that measure of grace, and
glory; for so it speaks in the 17. arti. saying,

Those whom he chose, he decreed to bring to salvation.

The words in Christ tell us, that Gods eye was extended to the chosen ones in
or through Christ. Now this act of election, may be done upon man in the
intuition of Christ, either as the end intended and aimed at in the act of
election; or as the meritorious cause thereof. In the first sense we may not
take our Church, seeing it says, the reason that moved God to predestinate is
secret to us: we must therefore understand our Church to speak in the first
sense; for that is most agreeable to the course of Scripture, to the dignity of
Christ, and to the operation of grace in man. What heart is it that will not
rather make it self subordinate unto Christ, then Christ subordinate unto him:
And that our Church meant thus, we have yet better reason to think, viz.
because this whole description of predestination is taken out of the first
chapter to the Ephesians, where the Apostle having said in the fourth verse, He
has chosen us in him; He concludes in the 12 verse, That we should be to the
praise of his glory: which shows that Christ's glory was the end intended and
aimed at, in the act of election.

BEFORE THE FOUNDATIONS OF THE WORLD WERE LAID. (That is,) before the Creation.
The world is created, either in the real being thereof, or in the decree to
create. Our Church speaks not of real creating; for, then it should say the
decree of Predestination is before actual Creation. This it could not mean,
or that is as much as if it had said, the decree of Predestination is eternal:
for before that creation, there is no duration but eternity: But our Church
meant not by these words to say, Gods decree was eternal: for it had said so,
in express words a little before, and this phrase of speech does not make that
more plain: but, does rather more obscure it. Our Church then speaks of Gods
decree to create, and so it sets forth the moment wherein (in our
apprehension) man is predestinate by God, and is, as if it had said,

Gods decree of Predestination (in our apprehension) goes before his decree of
creation.

And the rather all men should understand our Church thus: because this order
is agreeable to the nature of the things themselves: Predestination being more
worthy of love then Creation: That being supernatural, perpetual, and man's
last perfection; This being natural, temporary, and at most but a way unto
that: therefore it is more orderly, to conceive the decree of Creation, to be
subordinate unto the decree of Predestination, then Predestination unto
Creation.

If any think that man cannot be predestinate, before he be actually made: I
answer; in Gods will of execution it is true, man cannot enjoy the being of the
thing appointed by Predestination before he has actual being himself: now,
the will of execution is not now in question, but the will of intention only:
man may be predestined in the will of intention, before he has an actual
being; for God may so decree, when man is but in possibility to be: as Suarez
well observes:

AS VESSELS MADE TO HONOR; In this last branch our Church assigns the end of
Predestination, and the manner how it flows from the same. The end is
signified by these words, made unto honor; by honor is signified, both the
glory and honor given unto God, by declaring his attributes; as providence, and
love unto the reasonable creature; as also the honor which the creature
receives from God, in beholding him face to face, wherein the true and proper
nature of blessedness consists. That being the supreme, this the next end
of Predestination: And that our Church does mean thus, there is no cause of
doubt, because it agrees well with the present words, and the thing it self.
It opens the manner how the one flows from the other, by saying, as vessels
made to honor; wherein the Predestinate are likened unto vessels, that receive
honor unto themselves, and are instruments in honorable offices unto God. In
saying, as vessels, our Church shows, that this end issues from the act of
Predestination, immediately, and of the thing it self. There is nothing in
man, added unto the divine will of Predestination, to make it fit and apt for
these effects: for such is the condition of a vessel, it cannot say to the
Potter, thou had sufficient reason out of my self, why thou should make
me a vessel unto honor, neither can it challenge the Potter for injury unto
it, if he does make it a vessel not unto honor. Lastly, our Church says, the
Predestinate are made unto honor, (to wit) by Predestination: whereby
efficiency of every kind is attributed unto Gods will: no part of this honor
is yielded unto the Predestinate himself: for then it must have divided the
act of making to honor, between God and the Predestinate: but this it does
not, but gives that act, only to Gods will of Predestination.

And thus have I gone over the Doctrine of the Church of England, whereby it
does appear, that our Church opposes Mr. Mountagu his Predestination so
fully, as nothing more can be required.

Mr. Mountagu says,

1 Glory only is decreed by Predestination. 2 Man was in perdition, before he
was Predestinate. 3 Man had final grace before he was predestinate. 4 Man's
final grace moved God to predestinate him.
Our Church says,

1 Final grace and glory is appointed to man by Predestination. 2 Man was
Predestinate, before his actual being was decreed. 3 Predestination is of Gods
will, the reason thereof is not from man, nor known to us.
Notwithstanding this proof, he will make you purpose Appeal, page 59. thus
to be concluded;

That which is opposed by many of the learned, and most conformable in the
Church of England; that is opposed by the Church of England. But this sentence,
Predestination is without relation to faith, etc. is opposed, etc.

Therefore this sentence, etc. is opposed by the Church of England.

I answer; I will speak to the point in question, and let the rest pass.

The proposition, or first sentence of this reason, is false, by his own rule,
Appeal, page 48. and 49. where he says;

The presumptions of servants, are not the Lords directions, every one that
Prateth, Reads, Lectureth, Preaches, or Professes, must not look to have
his discourses taken as the dictates, or Doctrines of our Church: yes (says
Mr. Mountagu, page 59.) If they be of the learned and most conformable in our
Church; nay (says Mr. Mountagu, page 49. Our Mother has sufficiently made
known her mind in Books that are public, promulgated, authorized, and
subscribed, these are those passages, at which the lisping Ephramites are to be
tried.

Some that be learned in our Church, does oppose that sentence, and so far I
grant the assumption: but their number exceeds not. If Mr. Mountagu conceiueth
otherwise, he is one of the Duke of Burgundies spies, that takes a field of
Thistles, for an army of Pikes, page 320 and so the assumption is false, that
speaks of many. Those some do oppose indeed: but privately and in a corner.
Let him show, where ever that sentence was opposed in Print, or in public
place, without control: therefore their opposing is not our Churches opposing.

His next reason is thus, Appeal, page 59. and 73.

If our Church it self does teach, that a man may fall away from God, and
become not the child of God, then it opposes that Doctrine of Predestination.
But our Church does so teach, directly, and in express words.

I answer; He makes this matter like a Pedlers Horse, that is acquainted with
every door, a Knight of the Post, to depose in every cause: In this cause his
witness is false, his Pedlers ware will not sell. Our Church does not so
teach. Mr. Mountagu (the Gagger being witness) says expressly,

Our Church has left it undecided, and at liberty, p. 158. and 171. and I have
proved our Church does not teach it, Chap. 11. 12.

It is bold importunity, to urge that for true, which himself denies to be
true, but better that then nothing. It may perhaps be believed by some, where
silence is a sentence of guiltiness.

He tells us further, page 59.

Our Church has gone on in these high points, in great wisdom, not
concluding upon Gods secrets.

I answer; I grant thus much: Let him go on in the words of our Church, and
stick to them, and it suffices: but what he would infer from hence, I know
not, I am sure he may infer, thus,

Therefore himself in dissenting from our Church, has not done wisely.

His third argument I find, Appeal, page 72. which

That which was styled against the Articles of Lambeth, a desperate Doctrine,
at the Conference at Hampton Court, before his Majesty without reproof, or
taxation of any, is not the Doctrine of the Church of England.

But this Doctrine of Predestination, was so styled, viz. by Doctor Bancroft,
etc. without reproof of any.

I answer; the proposition is as probably false, as true, such a fault might be
let pass for diverse reasons of state, and observance. The assumption is a
manifest untruth. The Book that reports that Conference will show it: for it
reports that speech of Bishop Baneroft, page 29. in these words,

Many in these days, neglecting holiness of life, presuming too much of
persisting of grace; laying all their religion upon Predestination. If I shall
be saved, I shall be saved; which he termed a desperate Doctrine.

Here is not a word of Mr. Mountagues tale.

According to him, the Doctor says thus, this sentence,

Predestination is without relation to man's faith.

Is a desperate Doctrine.

According to the Book, the Doctor says, this sentence,

The Predestinate may neglect holiness of life, because if he shall be saved,
he shall be saved,

Is a desperate Doctrine.

These two sentences, are not so like, as the Hares head, and the Goose
giblets, the one reproues the nature assigned to Predestination, and tells
them, that Predestination is not such as they say it is. The other reproves
men that abuse the Doctrine of Predestination: but medleth not with the nature
thereof, what difference then there is between the nature of Predestination,
and man's abuse of Predestination, in the course of his life: such difference
there is, between Mr Mountagu and the Book; he speaks of the first, that of
the second.

But now let us suppose the Doctor had said these

Predestination, without relation to faith, is a desperate Doctrine.

Then the second branch of his Assumption is likewise false, because it says,
that speech was not reproved: but I find otherwise in the Book, which
reports, page 43. a speech of his Majesty, that makes Predestination, to be
without relation to faith, his words be these;

Predestination depends not upon any qualities, actions, or work of man: but
upon Gods decree and purpose.

Which sentence is contradictory unto that sentence which Mr. Mountagu says,
was condemned as a desperate Doctrine, by the Doctor: and therefore it is a
suffi^ient reproof of his speech.

His fourth reason I find, Appeal, page 72. etc. it

If Predestination without relation to faith be the Doctrine of the Church of
England, then should it make a party with Calvin. But it would not make a
party with Calvin; for that were the next way to bring in his discipline.

Therefore Predestination without relation to faith, is not the Doctrine of the
Church of England.

I answer; this pelting stuff is not worth the viewing; all the world knows
that the Church of England does agree with Calvin, in very many things, and it
must do so, or else it must agree with the Church of Rome, in all the points
which Calvin rejects, which are all the decrees of the Council of Trent, a
very few excepted. If I should say all the Articles, and the Homilies agree
with Calvin, for the maine matters of faith, I should say no more then what
might be proved. Other exceptions might be taken to this argument, but I pass
by them: Thus have I put an end to this poor stuff, loathsome to the
answerer, and disgraceful to the disputer; Ducklings, not Eagles, catch Flies.

Hitherto we have hunted a shadow, and labored

The positive Doctrine of the Church of England, is no other, but this,
[touching Predestination.]

1 Sin came into the world, by the Devil, not God. 2 Death came by sin: 3
God prepared a Mediator, Christ. 4 Willed life to every believer. 5 His good
pleasure was, all men to be saved, Gagge. page 180.
I answer; he would conclude from hence, thus:

Therefore, our Church does not teach Predestination to be without relation to
faith.

For the place requires this conclusion, as he that reads these places may
see, viz. page, 178. that God, etc. page 180. the positive etc. page 179. the
Church, etc. p. 181. I nor teach etc. Now, we have his reason, I will examine
the truth of it. I answer, in his own words, Appeal, page 57. (used in
another case.)

The Church of England does not teach thus, touching Predestination, and why
may I not say so, except you show the contrary, or bring me forth a Creed, a
Cannon, a conclusion in being for it, in the Church of England?

But let it be as you will, If this be all that our a decree, or dispositiue
act of God; will, as we have learned by your self No 4. Now, these words show
us from whence sin came, and whither it will, what be the means to escape
it, and it speaks of Gods velleitie, or willingness unto man's freedom
therefrom; but of any positive act, ordering man to the supreme end, Mr.
Mountagu brings not a word, as the doctrine of our Church. Besides this, I have
the witness of one M. Mountagu that brings more positive doctrine from the
Church of England then this, viz. out of the 17. Article, in his Appeal, p.
51. and these are his words, In the 17. Article the Church speaks of Election
only.

1 That there is a Predestination by God unto life. 2 That it was an act of his
from everlasting. 3 That he founded it, and resolved for it, i^ the man, and
Mediator Christ, both for the purpose and performance. 4 That it is, and was,
of some special ones, alone elect, called forth, and reserved in Christ, and
not generally extended unto all mankind. 5 This purpose of his, is like unto
himself, unchangeable, done according to the Council of his will.
Which must needs be more, then the former five propositions, no 14. for
there is never a one of these (except the third) so much as mentioned in those
former: seeing this Master Mountagu alleges authority, and the former M.
Mountagu brings none; this testimony must be received, the former rejected:
whereby this reason is as poor, miserable, and lame as the former. Therefore I
will leave it in the Spittle-house with them, and proceed.

From this passage alleged out of the 17. Article,

1 What our Church resolves touching this, is resolved in the 17. Article, the
very words of that Article, being expressed in terms as far as concerned
that decree, Appeal p. 58. 2 This is all that I can find touching that
purpose, and decree of God, Appeal, p. 52. 3 In all which passage containing
Gods decree, is not one word, touching your absolute decree of God, to glorify
man, without any regard unto his faith, etc. Appeal, p. 58.
I answer; I will not strive about the first, and third branches.

The whole question is about the second, wherein he presumes that,

His five propositions related no 15. do contain the whole doctrine of the
17. Article, touching the decree of Predestination.

If it were true, I would grant him, that, our Church does not teach, That
Predestination is without relation to final grace: but he presumes an
untruth. The 17 Article has not all his five propositions: It presumes the
first, because it does show what Predestination is: but affirms it not: it
has not the third, nor fifth any ways. It has more by much then you report,
all which is made evident no 5. and 6. so that I shall not need to spend time
to show it.

Touching the second branch it self, I answer, it is Gag. p. 180. you report
no 14. the doctrine of the Church of England, touching this point in fi^e
propositions, four of them (at least) being wholly different, and altogether
unlike these, and yet you say, The positive doctrine of the Church of England
is no other but them. So as what you said there, and what you say here
overthrows each other. If it be them, it is not these; If it be these, it is
not them.

If our 17 Article (in your sight) has no more but these, then you see our
Church, does define Predestination only by the general nature, efficient
cause, and subject matter, for your fi^e propositions, no 15. contain them
only; but you dare not say, you did see our Church so defining Predestination:
for, then you profess to see a fault in our doctrine, not to be excused;
seeing, that, the nature of every thing, is set out by the special and formal
being, and end thereof: not by the efficient, and material cause, without
them: But you may not so profess: for you say;

Our Church has gone on, in this point of Predestination, warily and in great
wisdom, and prudence, Appeal, page 59.

Besides, it is most injurious, and an imputation most false: Our Church has
defined Predestination, in that 17 article, by all the causes whereby it
existeth, as I have showed no 5. 6. which course is most agreeable to art, if
we may believe, Thomas 2 did. 27. q. 1. ar. 2. ad 9.

And it also has explicated each cause, to make the difinition familiar, and
easy unto understanding: therefore we must conclude, you did see more in the
17 Article, then you will acknowledge.

If you could not see more in the 17 Article then you profess, to see, then
you can scumme upon the surface: but not diue into the depth: then have you no
cause to despise the capacity of other men, as poor, nor to vaunt of your
own, as able to work wonders: seeing there is more in the Article then you
can see; as has been showed you.

Thus far of your reasons to excuse your self, of disagreeing and dissenting
from the doctrine of the Church of England, in the point of Predestination, and
for my answers thereunto: by which (I hope) all doubts are so removed, that we
may conclude,

The Church of England teaches all otherwise, in the point of Predestination,
then you do.

Now, we should examine, whether he, or our Mountagu seems to decline all
search after that.

For, he thus writes,

You cannot relish any thing, but Gods secrets, you are never at quiet with the
secrets of Gods Kingdom, you can never let his Predestination alone: that
comfortable doctrine of election, and reprobation is your continual Theme. It
is good to be wise unto sobriety, Appeal, p. 59.

The sum of which words must needs be these;

Predestination is neither comfortable, nor revealed.

Therefore not to be disputed, nor our common talk. For that is wisdom unto
sobriety.

I answer; The Church of England says, article the 17. Predestination is full
of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable comfort. And lest it should be doubted,
whether this be true, or no, our Church adds a reason to confirm it, in
these words; Because it does establish their faith of salvation; and fervently
kindle their love toward God.

Whether of them shall we believe? Our Church, or M. Mountagu? S^rely our
Church is worthy of more credit: For she passed her sentence with deliberation;
and impartially. He with ill affection. It confirms the position with an
experimented truth. He with his bare word. Such a dutiful child is worthy his
mothers blessing, that gives her the lie upon his own authority.
Predestination is revealed to M. Mountagu, else he would not speak of it, so
wise is he unto sobriety: but it is not revealed unto us, for we never came
so near unto the spring head, as he has done* and indeed we need not
pretend revelation, to oppose unto him; we only say, show us divine revelation
for your Predestination; and we believe it: till then, we reject it as your
own fantasy. It is your boldness to meddle with Gods secrets, or to devise a
predestination opposite to his revelation.

He proceeds with these words.

I profess, I do love to meddle, in nothing less, then in this their
desperate doctrine of Predestination, Appeal, p. 60.

I answer; he must conclude from hence, that,

Predestination must not be disputed.

Or else it is mere Gaggling. If he do thus dispute then have we a worthy
disputation: for we have nothing to guide us but his own president.

We must grant the consequent: because the authority of the antecedent does
enforce it, and good reason too: for who would not love and hate, what he
loves and hates? He says our predestination is desperate. I commend him for
it. By the last words he spoke, he gave his mother the lie expressly: She said,
is was comfortable. He denies it, with a scoff. Now he says it is desperate,
wherein he checks her also, for our Predestination is delivered, in her words,
and conceived, according to her sense, and true meaning: as may appear no 5.
and 6.

He scoffs at them that say, the doctrine of Predestination is comfortable:
belike then to him it is not so. But whether of these be in better case? whose
judgment may we follow, our Churches, or his?

To appeal to himself is a thing not equal: Popular positions do often
err: private spirits are of weak assurance, Appeal, p. 8. Well then, whither
shall we go to be resolved in this point? Unto the public Doctrine of the
Church of England, contained in the Book of Articles, etc. he does appeal,
for the ending of all doubts with hang in the Church of England, page 9.
Agreed; no better match, no fitter Judge. Let the 17. Article speak. It says,
unto such as feel the works of their flesh mortified, and their minds drawn
to heavenly things, the Doctrine of Predestination is Comfortable. But unto
persons that be curious, carnal, without the spirit of Christ, Predestination
is most dangerous: for by it, the Devil does thrust them either into
desperation, or unclean living. By which sentence I hope the matter is at an
end, and the inference is plain and necessary.

Unto the holy, Predestination is comfortable.

If Predestination be a desperate Doctrine unto thee, then art thou carnal,
and without grace.

Mr. Mountagu is able to apply specially, what our Church has decreed
universally: therefore I leave that to himself, and all other whom it may
concern; contenting my self with a bare relation of our Churches judgment.

He writes further, thus;

Our Church in the point of Predestination, has not determined specially,
Appeal, page 59. of when, how, wherefore, or whom, Gagge, page 179.

I answer; this sentence tends to the same purpose, (or nothing) that the
former did, viz. to dissuade from all search after the nature of
Predestination. If a man did not care what he said, he might sort well with Mr.
Mountagu: there is no untruth so apparent, but some man dares adventure to
avouch it: there is hardly a falsehood to be found more apparent, then this
sentence of his, and thus I show it.

Our Church has determined whom, when, wherefore, how,
viz. some out of mankind. before the Creation. of his will. by his secret
Council.


As the Reader may see in the 17. Article, and I have showed, no. 5. and 6. If
our Church has not determined thus (and all hers ought to follow her example)
then Master Mountagu is much to blame; For,

He has determined whom, when, wherefore, how.
viz. some of mankind. being in perdition. final grace. 1 willing them
salvation. 2 providing a Mediator. 3 taking them out which laid hold of him.



As the reader may find plainly laid down in the former part of this Chap.
no 3. 4. 14. 15. His choice was ill, that brings falsehood for truth, against
himself, and such is his condition in this place.

Now for as much as he cannot discourage you

I must confess my dissent thorough and sincere, in no one point, more then in
this their Doctrine of Predestination, Appeal, page 60.

I answer; the Dice are now cast, Caesar must be all or nothing: the combat is
offered to all comers; the Gantlet is cast down, take it up who dares. But
let him know, he must prove his own Predestination, or leave the field. The
first weapon he appears withal, is made of this fashion:

God is not the Author of sin, or death, Appeal, page 64.

This weapon is strengthened with some authorities of Scriptures and Fathers:
from that place to page 69.

But this weapon serves not for this battle. The question is, whether, first,
God found the Predestinate in perdition: secondly, whether Predestination be
with relation unto final grace: thirdly, whether Predestination does not
appoint to give grace, for so you teach, and these we deny. But whether God be
the Author of sin and death, is not thought upon at this time. Those three
you must prove, or say nothing: for them you have offered no proof. It is a
safe war, where there is no enemy: and a cowardly attempter, that refuses the
field where the enemy abides.

It may be, he will say, the refutation of this sentence, does refute the
latter branch of Caluins opinion of Predestination, propounded, page 50. and
rejected, page 60. because this sentence follows thereupon, p. 54. I answer;
this helps not the matter, for the question now on foot,* is whether Gods
decree to save Peter, be absolute, and does proceed from Gods will only, page
53. which is denied by your self, the Church of England, (as you pretend) the
Lutherans, and Arminians. Against Calvin, and the Synod of Dort, p. 38. 53.
and 56. There is not a word of that second branch, (which concerns
reprobation) objected against you, but it is foysted in by your self only,
and that upon good reason too; for you knew full well, that no man would defend
this: but every man could defend that, against you. It was good policy to
undertake to prove a confessed truth: for so you went with the stream, and to
be silent in the proving of a manifest falsehood, for then you had been found
guilty. You tell us your resolution this way, in these words;

I never held it wisdom, to tire my self with haling and tugging up against
the stream, when with ease enough I might, and with better discretion should,
sail with the flood, Appeal, p. 12.

Now, although the case had been as you pretend, yet you had been abundantly
faulty; for disputing against one branch, when there was two in the question:
and for opposing a consequent, letting pass the antecedent and consequence:
which is (indeed) to deny the conclusion, when you durst not meddle with the
premises.

He keeps the field still, and presents himself

The Church of Geneua dissenteth from the private opinions of Calvin and Beza,
Appeal, p. 71.

I answer; by private opinion of Calvin, he must mean this of Predestination,
and from it he must conclude;

Therefore his Doctrine of Predestination is not true.

Otherwise he misses the present business. That being supposed, he comes on
the back, where he ought to come unto the face of his enemy: he ought to
prove, that, his Doctrine is true, not disprove ours; but be it as he will, if
you ask him how he does know that the Church of Geneua does so dissent, he
does answer; Deodate did tell him so. If you doubt of his testimony, he tells
you, he is a Minister, and a Professor in that Church, and sent to the Synod,
from his Country: well, let him go for a witness without exception; the
chiefest doubt is how it may appear, Deodate did say so: He puts that out
of doubt also by auouching, he told him so, even Mr. Mountagu, being the man,
that Deodate was withal at Eaton; which proof cannot be avoided: for he
should never have had the company of Deodate in Eaton, unless he had been
such a man, whose word is as true as steel: yet nevertheless his word is of
small authority, for I have found it deceitful, no 11. 12. therefore I dare
not trust it; but let us yield him, that Deodate did tell him so: and that
therefore our Predestination is not true. Then he must be conceived thus to
dispute;

Your Doctrine of Predestination is not true, therefore mine is true.

A substantial dispute, and well worthy a rich Divine, and old learning; mine
is, because yours is not; he tells us of some that have whirligigs in their
heads, Appeal, page 81. I am sure he is one of them in this argument.

He ends not with this, but goes on still with these

This sentence: God did decree to glorify Peter, without any consideration had
of his faith, etc. is a private fancy of some particular men; Appeal, page 58.
never heard of, till of late, page 31.

From hence he must infer;

Therefore this sentence, God did decree to glorify Peter, etc. is not true.

I answer; The Inference is naught, truth in Divinity stands in a conformity
unto the divine revelation, not unto the sooner, or later apprehension, and
report of men. If you mean, it is not revealed, then your terms of Private
fancy, and yesterdayes hearsay are but toys for Children.

How dare you say our doctrine of Predestination is a private fancy, and a
Novel opinion, seeing King James of famous memory for learning and knowledge,
has expressly auowed it, in these words;

Predestination depends not upon any qualities or work of man: but upon Gods
decree and purpose.

As I have showed no 12. This testimony does give us sufficient odds above
you; for Our sentence has royal confirmation, and yours has none: herewith
also, I would content my self, were it not, that he urges, with great
vehemence; That,

This sentence above said, is the doctrine of Nouellizing Appeal, p. 60.

For the removing hereof, and to give full satisfaction in the point; I will
add somewhat more thereunto, and show, that the doctrine of Predestination
which we defend, is neither new, nor the invention of Nouellizing Puritanes.
And because I will avoid all his suspicion and imputation of faction and
dissension, I will allege the words and judgment of other men, not any of
mine own.

Bellarmine says, de great. lib. 2. cap. 9. after this sort: No reason can be
assigned on our part, of Gods Predestination: not only merits properly so
called, but also the good use of freewill, or grace, or both together foreseen
of God: yea also merit of congruity, and condition without which, he that is
predestined should not be predestined.

For explication he says further,

I add, On our part, because on Gods part, Cause may be assigned, viz. In
general, the declaration of his mercy, and Justice; In particular, God does
not want his reason, why he would predestinate unto life, this man, rather
then that, although the same be hidden unto us. Thus far Bellarmine.

This sentence he undertakes to prove, in the tenth chapter following, 1. by
Scriptures. 2. by the testimony of the Church. 3. by reason founded upon
Scriptures, and Fathers, which he begins thus. Some out of mankind are
chosen unto the Kingdom of Heaven. 1. Effectually, so as they come thereunto
infallibly. 2. Freely, and before all foresight of works. This proof he makes
good by the Scriptures in that chapter, By the testimony of the Church in the
11. Chapter, namely, by the allegation of many particular testimonies; and then
in general he says,

All the Fathers esteemed of by the Church, even all of them without exception,
did manifestly teach this sentence, after the heresy of Pelagius was begun.
And also, it was approved by the public sentence of the Church.

Lastly, he concludes in these words;

This sentence ought to be esteemed, not the opinion of some of the learned;
but the faith of the Chatholike Church.

He proves also the same doctrine of predestination by seven reasons, in the
twelfth chapter, every one of them being no other; but the application, and
accommodation of Scripture, unto the point: and does defend this sentence,
against opposition in the 13. 14. and 15 chapters following.

These testimonies of Bellarmine must be allowed of by M. Mountagu for many
reasons. 1. Because he is a Jesuit; and Jesuits have the preeminence for the
present in the Church of Rome; as himself informs Appeal, page 203. and
Bellarmine was a man of better spirit then some of that society, as himself
avouches, Appeal, page 239. whom he does there also profess to be ingenious,
and bids him, well to fare. He does commend him, and prefer him too,
before others, saying:

Bellarmine is a man of as strong a brain, and piercing apprehension, as any
new vpstart master in Israel of the pack, Appeal, p. 77.

But, it may be he will say, Bellarmine is factious in this point.

I answer, I will therefore fortify Bellarmines testimony; but not with the
testimony of any other Jesuits, though I might allege Suarez, who is not
only so full in this point as Bellarmine is, but also does exceed him in the
explication and urging thereof: and that most frequently, but I will forbear
that, and only add the Dominicans; and because I will avoid needless
allegations I will content my self with Aluarez, who in his book de Auxiliis
disp. 37. no 6. and 9. etc. Disp. 120 no 4. says,

There can be no cause, reason, or condition on man's part assigned of
Predestination: but it is to be referred unto the mere, and undeserved will of
God.

Which, he says further, is according to the Judgment of Augustine: approved
of by many Popes, and taken out of most evident testimonies of holy Scripture.

The testimony of these two, must needs be of great force unto every man that
does duly consider them, because, 1. They are our adversaries, whose testimony
is of more weight then if they were friends. 2. They are such adversaries, as
purposely do refuse to speak as we do. If then they concur with us in
words, and the thing it self, then it is manifest, the truth compels them: for
there is nothing else to induce them; they want not euasions (if any were to
be found) for they are men of learning, they have parts of nature, they are
industrious themselves, and are abundantly assisted by others; neither are they
ignorant that this their doctrine of predestination is the opinion of Calvin. To
conclude, this is a sentence not peculiar to themselves, that is, to the
society of the Jesuits, and the family of the Dominicans whereof they are, but
it is a doctrine universally received, by their learned; as may appear by
Aluarez in the 37. disputation alleged, and Suaerez opusc. 1. lib. 3. cap.
16. no 7. and that which goes before: only some of them do differ in the
manner of handling it, namely, whether, both grace and glory, or grace only,
be thus freely predestined. Lastly, it may be truly esteemed the faith of
the Council of Trent also: because that Council knew it to be the judgment
of Calvin, whose sentence they meant to reprove in all things they could: yet
they decreed not a word against it: and it is apparent, they did not forget it,
because they spent so many years in that Council, which is a plain argument,
they thoroughly considered all the differences betwixt them and Calvin. Besides,
in the sixth Session and twelfth Chapter, it decrees against such as resolve
with themselves, that they are certainly in the number of the Predestinate;
judging this to be the opinion of Calvin, which is a plain proof, that they
forgot not Caluins opinion in the rest of his Doctrine touching Predestination.

I hope, this proof is sufficient to clear this point from nouelty, faction,
etc. terms which it pleases Mr. Mountagu to give it: for what can be more?
Writers (ancient and latter) Churches (of Rome and ours) agree in it, confirm
and urge it. If this be nouelty, faction, puritanisme, desperate, detestable,
and horrible, to the ears of pious men, Mr. Mountagu is happy, and his
Dutchmen with him, that have chosen the contrary sentence: but no reasonable
man will believe it, therefore I proceed.

His next flourish is in this sort,

The Lutherans detest and abhor it, Gagge, p. 179.

Strange (though too true) imputations are raised against it. Odious things are
inferred from it, Appeal, page 54. pressed to purpose, and you cannot avoid
(to my poor understanding) their conclusions, Appeal, page 52.

This discourse may serve to disgrace; but not to disprove: for he assigns
no imputations, nor consequents, nor consequences, nor antecedents in
particular. but speaks only, of such, and only auowes them upon his own
affirmation, and understanding, which are of little worth, for his word is
found false, no 11. 12. and himself says, his understanding is poor.

Let him bring those particular imputations, those consequents, which (he
says) are so odious, and consequences which (he says) are so necessary, and
antecedents, from which they flow; let him show what is imputed, and unto what,
and the world shall see, he speaks never a true word.

He tells us of Rouing, Rolling, Rambling, I Mountagu his eloquence, and I
might put them all, as titles to the disputations (foregoing) in this point;
and yet should I come far short of the excellency and worthiness of his
Disputation, therefore I hope the Reader will judge as he find s, and supply
what I want.

He will speak but once more, and that shall drive

Without final perseuering in obedience, they are none of Gods elect, these
being the appointed isntrumental causes of all their salvation, Appeal, page
74.

This reason must be thus framed,

If final perseuering in obedience, be the appointed isntrumental cause of
man's salvation, then final perseuering in obedience, etc. is the thing,
without which no man is of Gods elect.

But final perseuering, etc. is the appointed instrument all cause of man's
salvation.

I answer; by isntrumental cause of salvation, Mr. Mountagu must mean (at
least) the meritorious cause of heaven, which being so, his sentence in plain
English is thus much;

Final obedience is the meritorious cause of salvation.

In which sentence he agrees with the Church of Rome; for the Council of Trent
has decreed, that

Eternal life is propounded as wages unto such as do well to the end. Ses. 6.
cap. 16.

Good works do merit eternal life.

This Doctrine of the Council is urged and defended by Bellarmine in his
Book, de lusti. lib. 5. as the Reader may see to the full.

Hereupon we may conclude against Mr. Mountagu, in his own words, written in
another case. Which follow;

The Ape discouers himself by cracking of nuts, Appeal, p. 308.

So does this man, who, what, and what side he is of, A Tridentine in faction,
and engrayned in affection that way: howsoever pretending conformity by
subscription, ibid.

But it may be, Mr. Mountagu will say, he did not know that the Church of Rome
taught thus much: I answer; his own words will then refute him, for thus he
writes;

If a man continue constant in the course of good works, he is sure of heaven
causally, in Bellarmines judgment, as procured by them, Appeal, page 210.

To the parts of the Argument, I answer, first,

The assumption is denied by our Church, which says,

By our deeds we cannot merit heaven, nor bring us to the favor of God, nor
win heaven; Homily of Almes-deedes, second part, page 326. 327. and 329.

Upon this reason: because, then,

A man is a Merchant with God, and so defaceth, and obscureth the price of
Christ's blood.

Now, our Church has overthrown his assumption: there is no need that I
speak further thereunto: but yet, that the efficacy of truth taught by our
Church, may fully appear; you shall hear himself deny this his own
assumption: for thus he writes;

Bellarmine says, Heaven is of works causally, wherein I differ from him,
Appeal, page 210.

There is a reward for the righteous, not for works, or of works, Appeal,
page 208.

Some man perhaps will say, he does then contradict himself.

I answer; that salueth not the wound he gives unto his assumption, the voice
of truth in his own mouth against himself, is of more worth then many
witnesses. This part of his reason being naught, the rest has no force to
infer the conclusion; yet I proceed to the rest.

The foresaid argument (at the best) (and amongst Bellarmine, de great. lib. 2.
cap. 13. Quintum etc. by Suarez, opusc. 1. lib. 3. cap. 19. no 22. etc. by
Aluarez de Auxilijs disp. 37. no 3. Tertio Deus, etc. no 21. Ad tertium, etc.

To the consequence of the proposition, I answer, that it is most feeble and
false.

A man may have everlasting life in the event, by reason of his final
perseuering: and yet not be decreed thereunto, by reason of his final
perseverance foreseen.

I show it out of the said Authors, thus:

In Predestination, there is Gods will of Intention. Execution.


This distinction I find in Bellarmine, de gratia, lib. 2. cap. 14. Respondeo
illud. In Suarez, opusc. 1. lib. 3. cap. 18. no 4. De deo part 2. lib. 1. cap.
14. no 7. And in Aluarez, de Auxilijs disput. 37. no 19.

If any doubt of the truth of this distinction, the Authors alleged do bring
proof enough for it; and chiefly Suarez in the places alleged, and in his
opusc. 1. lib. 3. cap. 19. no 4. etc. to whom I refer the Reader.

Supposing then that the distinction is without question, I answer; Gods action
of execution, wrought in time, does indeed represent Gods eternal will of
execution: for the will of execution, is no more, but a disposition of
execution, or the execution it self preconceiued in the mind of God, as the
Authors alleged do truly speak.

In this sense Mr. Mountagu says truly,

So saved, are So ordained by God. Whatsoever comes to pass, comes So to
pass, because God has said, So, and no otherwise it shall come to pass,
Gagge, page 177.

The one is original of the other, and the one is evidence of the other,
Appeal, page. 61.

But this is not to our purpose, for we speak not of Predestination, as it
contains Gods will of execution; but of intention.

The acts of God done in time, do not represent Gods eternal will of
intension; which is no more, but a decree appointing, that the thing shall be.
The will of intention medleth not with the manner how the means shall produce
the effect, and how the effect shall flow from the means, it assigns not
which is the means, which the end, as the said authors have abundantly proved.

It is the first act of Gods will, touching man's salvation, and is not
regulated by any former. God was wholly free to will it, or not to will it, to
will it unto this man, or unto another, there being nothing in the creature to
restrain this liberty, and determine the divine will unto one: so that you
must show us divine revelation, that affirms the final perseverance of
Peter, was the reason to move God, to appoint him unto glory. It is not an
infere^ce made from an act of temporal execution, that can be a sufficient
ground to inioine us to believe it: but such revelation there is none,
therefore we may conclude, there was no such reason, leading God to
predestinate this or that man unto glory. Here, I may enquire of M. Mountagu
whether he has read this answer, and others like unto it or not: (one of the^
is certainly true.) If he has not read it, where is his transcendent reading
he so much does vant of? where is that divine that so often calls others
ignorant, poor, and scummers upon the surface; and such like terms Now these
poor divines, these simple ignaroes, must giberish to him, he knows not what.
If he has read them, where was his conscience, when he urged an argument so
often answered, and so much opposed? and (which is more) when he tendered it
barely as a thing granted, without (so much as) one word out of the divine
revelation to confirm it, or to take away those answers which are made to it?
What will he plead? Is Suarez, Aluarez, and Bellarmine some of his poor
Divines, mere Gaglers, Blunderers, Ramblers, etc. not worth the answering, not
worth the regarding, the naming? If his will be, to show himself ridiculous,
he may thus answer: and (to say the very truth) his deeds do thus answer,
though we have not his words for it. I might go on with this inquiry; but I
content my self with this, leaving it to the judgment of the understanding
reader.

Thus have I applied the answers of these authors unto the argument, which does
abundantly, show the weakness thereof: and I might content my self with that:
but I will add somewhat more which the argument it self does lead unto.

This argument set down no 27. speaks of Predestination, Rome, and ours. If
he say, he takes Predestination to be a decree to give grace also, then this
argument must be framed thus;

Final perseuering in obedience is the instumentall cause, that Peter received
grace in the event.

Therefore without final perseuering in obedience, God did not appoint by
Predestination to give Peter grace.

The antecedent or first part is denied by all which live in the Church of
Rome: yea, even by them, that would have Predestination to glory to be upon
the foresight of works; and they must so deny, because the Council of Trent
has decreed, sess. 6.

Preventing grace is given by God, man having no merits, cap. 5. We are
justified freely, because none of those things which precede Justification
(whether faith, or works) do merit justifying grace it self, cap. 8.

The same thing touching the free giving of the first Grace, we learn from
our own Church, which takes it from S. Augustine, and tendreth it unto us, in
the Sermon of Fasting, p. 172. In these words.

No man does good works, to receive grace by his good works.

Good works do not bring forth grace.

Grace belongs to God, who does call us, and then has he good works,
whosoever receives grace.

Which sentence is so full and plain, and of such authority, that I shall not
need to say any more, to show the insufficiency of the Argument: therefore
here, I will end my answer thereunto, which also must put an end to our
Disputation, touching this point of Predestination, because he does not offer
any further occasion.

By that which is past, it does appear, that he dissenteth England, in this
point of Predestination; and that he has nothing (of any worth) to say for
himself, or against our Church.

Now we should discover, with whom he does consent in the point: for with
some he does consent; else it is a private fancy, peculiar to himself. With
the Church of Rome he does not consent. I take that as certain: therefore he
must consent with the Lutherans, and Arminians. I name them both, because both
have shares in the business. The Lutherans do urge this doctrine of
Predestination, but not very strictly; nor as a matter undoubtedly revealed:
nor do they press it in all the particulars brought by M. Mountagu: and
therefore it must be ascribed to Arminius (by us) because he is the man,
whose voice was nearest unto us; he urged it with more particulars, and upon
greater necessity, then the Lutherans do: he chose rather to see the Country
that bred him, brought him up, and advanced him, come to utter ruin, rather
then he would hold his peace, or retract this sentence of Predestination. I
forbear to confirm this by the particular passages written by Arminius,
Vorstius, and other of that side; because it would be tedious, and without all
benefit. What has passed, is sufficient to show, he teaches falsehood, and
untruth. Therefore here I will end the whole Disputation.

There be also other points of Faith, in his two Books, which oppose the
doctrine of the Church of England, and which deserve a reproof: but because
these are propounded and handled by him in the first place, and their
opposition is most dangerous, therefore have I contented my self with the
refutation of these only, reserving the rest till some other opportunity.

CHAP. XXI. The Conclusion of the whole Disputation, claiming M. Mountagues
promise.
ALthough it has been his fashion to spend many lines, with much bitterness,
and ill language; very ill beseeming a man of gravity, and a Minister: yet in
the issue he promises fair, (if you will believe him) writing in these words;

Let him, or any other, go honestly, sincerely, soberly, Scholler-like to
work: Let him come home to the points controuerted, without Rolling, Rambling,
Rauing, join issue, instantly with the question where it lies: I am for him:
no man more ready, more willing, more submisse, more desirous to go calmly to
work, for Gods glory, the Churches tranquillity, the good and benefit of my
self and others.

Thus far he, in his Epistle to the Read^r, set before his Answer to the
Gagger, near to the end thereof.

I answer, I have accomplished your desire; you inuit to the discussion of the
things you have written. I hope you will accept it in good part: I have
observed the course of disputation you have appointed. And, because, I would
not trust mine own Art (altogether,) therefore have I followed B. Jewel, in
his answer to Master Harding.

To show your self a plain man, you profess further, in your answer to the
Gaggers Preface, toward the end.

1 Our faith is to be regulated by the Scriptures. 2 Bring me in any one
point, or all points, to this rule. Tie me to it, try me there. I fall down
and adore it. I would not, I will not, swerue from it. 3 The present doubts
hang in the Church of England: I do appeal to the public doctrine thereof,
let that which is against them, on Gods name, be branded with error: and as
error be ignominiously spunged out. Let the author be censured (as he well
deserves) by authority. If I be so taken with the fact, or evidence be clear
against me, or I be convicted by sufficient witness, to have erred thus, I
will recall, and recant, whatsoever is so exorbitant: and further, will deal
so with my own writing, as they did with their curious books, Acts 19. and
19. Appeal p. and 9.
I answer; I have performed the condition, in the judgment (I hope) of every
Reader, able to judge of a disputation. I look for the performance of this
your promise: if you fail, the fault must rest upon your self; and so I leave
you to your own choice.

But you think to escape that; and yet be without blame: by obiecting against
the persons, and plea of them that stand against you.

Of their persons, you say, They are
Puritanes, Self-conceited, Presumptuous, Maligners at States, Irregular,
Loving paritie, Factious, Turbulent. (page ^ 3. Over precise professors. p. 4.
Malicious. p. 5. Hornets ill affected, Purer Brethren, Great Rabines in Israel,
whose pens, and pulpits be infallible in judgment. page 6. Popular-spirits,
Singular illuminates, Simple ignoran^ees, Classical dictators, Groners for
Parochial Popes. p. 7. Partiaries, p. 14. Peremptory, resolved, conclusiue,
false slanderers, p. 15. Calumniators, indirect dealers, p. 22. Men of
cheuerellised consciences, Calumniators, neither honest nor plain, having
presbyterian tricks of Legerdemaine, p. 23. Traducers, Saint-seeming,
bible-bearing, Hypocritical Puritans, glosers, time-seruers, Colluders with
the State, page 43. Closers (in show) with our Church, but teachers of things
contrary to what they have subscribed, crafty pretenders to bring in Popes to
every parish, and Anarchies in the State, separatists from others, singular, a
part, afaction, a division, brethren of Amsterdam, p. 44. A faction of
nouellizing Puritanes, men intractable, insociable, incompliable with those
that will not maintain dissentions. p. 60. Men that have whirlegiggs in their
brains, And be far at variance with their own wits, p. 81. Clamorous
Promoters, That read not ordinary protestant writers, that braule at the shadow
of their own fancies: fight with shaw-fowles of their own setting up. Talk
confidently, Traduce virulently, mistake ignorantly, page 88. Men of new
learning, that have little, or none old, factious, furious, p. 90. Of the
preciser cut, zealous Disciples, p. 95. Such whose wits be not their own, p.
96. Such as profess themselves senseless, p. 99. Ignorant of others, wedded
to their own conceits, p. 101. Fervent ones, violently precise, p. 108. Of
uncharitable, unchristian, fiery, Puritanicall zeal, Malice, Indiscretion,
Such as run a madding, of transported spirits, p. 110. Schismatics conforming
for preferment, p. 111. Men that hold with the Hare and run with the hound, of
moving, violent, Quicksiluer, Gunpowder spirits, That run into extremes,*
Furious ones, p. 112. Promoters, without Christian charity, common wit, sense,
understanding, honesty; Such whose passions are malignant and possessed with
deep malice. Shameless slanderes, p. 129. Ignorant, malicious, factious,
poor divines, p. 138. Frantic, good fellows that are and ever will be I
know what, p. 139. Halfers in opinions for private ends, rotten at the core,
professing conformity, but are opposites, p. 142. Men partially addicted,
maliciously bent to calumniate, Honest informers, detractors, p. 145.
Puritanicall opposites, p. 146. Men that have set themselves to calumniate,
Ignorant of the point they undertake against. That cannot or will not
understand, p. 168. Fools opposing common reason, confessed divinity, p. 185
Great Masters in Israel, Liars against their own knowledge, p. 191. Ignorant,
peevish, profane, p. 207. Misdeeming informers, wanting sincere and honest
dealing, p. 209. Malicious, peevish, Puritanicall, p. 213. Men of poor
capacity, without apprehension, p. 218. Dissemblers, p. 222. Such as
understand not the depth of the question, scum upon the surface, gibberish they
cannot tell for what, page 248. Pigmies of this time, p. 273. Younglings, p.
274. Of uncircumcised lips, p. 275. Of your shorter cut, singular in their
own conceits, Such as ramble, and are ready to grind the teeth, p. 279.
Furious Puritans, p. 281. Ignorant, insolent, arrogant, presumptuous. 283. Good
brethren, seeming holy, and precise, Tormentors of words, malicious detractors,
285. Bred, and sent abroad by the devil, to maintain a faction, p. 291.
Neither discreet, nor moderate, nor, understanding Divines, 293. Foore men,
that meddled beyond their lachet. And were out of their element, p. 295.
Ignaroes, intolerable, insolent, malicious traducers, Of Puritanicall,
quicksiluer spirits, p. 304. Such as love faction, and division, p. 305.
Counterfeiting hypocrites, p. 308. Of a brazen forehead, p. 319. Zealous ones,
charitable informers, frantic fellows, frighted with Pannicke fears, of
uncharitable conceits, p. 320. Of Predominant frensies, Ignorant stupiditie, p.
321.
Against their plea, you say It is
Private opinions of the Informers. Classical resolutions of the Brethren, p.
6. Dismembered passages, p. 15. Of pure malice, indiscreet zeal, Lost-wits, p.
17. Mistakings for advantage, p. 20. Shreds cut out from several parts, laid
together and patched up for advantage, p. 22. Things broken and dismembered,
which do not cohere nor ensue, nor follow instantly upon each other, laid
together out of charitable pure intent, p. 24. Passages dismembered, misshapen,
and abused, p. 26. Scholasticall points, mere speculations, of themselves not
apt to breed danger. That have been pursued without all danger but of
tongue-tryall, p. 42. Private imaginations of opiniatiue men, ignorant of
others, wedded to their own conceits, p. 101. Idle dreams, fancies, and
furies, p. 114. The fruits of angry and idle brains, p. 115. Confusednesse, p.
116. Sottish malice and ignorance, p. 128. Misshapen calumnies, false
suggestions, p. 129. The grunting of swine, p. 288.
I answer; first, in the very words of that learned, holy, and reverend Bishop
Jewel. If I should quit him with courtesy of speech, I should be like unto
him, but I thought it good to use such temperance of words, not as may best
answer your eloquence, but as may be most comely for the cause. Thus he writes
in his Preface before his Defense against Harding, no 1.

Although I should grant these imputations, whereof I shall speak, no 2. yet
should you gain nothing. And I show it in Bishop Jewels words also.

I beseech you, if you have leisure, hearken a little, and hear your self
talk, behold your own words, so many, so vain, so bitter, so fiery, so
furious, altogether in one place. These be the figures and flowers of your
speech: yet must we think that you can neither stamp nor rage, howbeit I
trust, no wise man will judge our cause the w^rse, for that your tongue can so
readily serve to speak ill, Defenc. part 2. cap. 1. diuis. 1. p. 83.

By such discourses, he is able to prove whatsoever thing shall come to hand:
when Scriptures fail, then discourse of wit must come in place: and when wit
and discourse will not serve, then good plain round railing must serve the
turn, then he flingeth now at his Informers, now at his Promoters, now at the
Puritans.

Thus he iumpeth, and courseth this way and that way, as a man rouing without a
mark; thus he shows a mountain of words without substance; and a house
full of smoke without fire; when all is done, we may say of him, as the poor
man said that shore his Sow. Here is great cry, and little wool.

But truth is plain, and homely, and has no need of these hablements, but who
so will take upon him to maintain untruth, must be forced to lead his Reader
from the purpose, to feed him with words, for want of matter, and briefly, to
do even as here you do. In the Preface to the Reader, near to the end.

To the particular imputations, I answer likewise in Jewels words. So terrible
are you in your dealing, be not afraid good Reader of all this smoke; for thou
shall see it suddenly blown all to vanity, from whence it came. Thus he
writes in his Preface before his Defense, no 6.

Touching some of the particulars I have my answer You say we read neither the
old writers, nor the new; but are utterly ignorant and void of all learning; it
were a very ambitious and childish vanity to make vaunts of learning. For
as much as you seem desirous of the ^ame of great reading; ye shall have the
praise and glory of it (Mr. Mountagu) without contention: we will rather say
with St. Paul, we know nothing but only Jesus Christ crucified upon his
cross: yet notwithstanding we are neither so ignorant, but that we are able
and have leisure to read as well the old Doctors, and the Fathers of the
Church: as also your light, uncivil pamflets, and blotted papers, which (God
wot) in all respects are very new, and we are much ashamed of your papers, and
novelties, to see them with untruth, and other discourteous speech, so fully
fraughted.

I answer further, you say we have no learning, capacity or understanding: but
these are your own words, you have brought nothing that has showed it, or,
that is fit to try, whether you say true or not: you have brought some
arguments; but they are so silly, that a child may answer them: you please your
self with some Latin, Greek, Poets, History, Fathers, Counsels: but they
serve to no purpose, for they neither prove, nor disprove any thing in
question. If you will bring arguments that savor of understanding, or dispute
from Latin, or, Greek words, Poets, History, Fathers, Councels, in a Logical
form of true Sylogisme, then shall you readily find, where reading, learning,
capacity rests: Till then, you may use them, and brag of them, but he that
has his eyes in his head, will say there is no cause.

You say, we are Puritans, which you esteem a reproachful pure in his own
conceit, and is not washed from his filthiness; according to the sentence of
the holy Ghost. Proverb. 30. and 12. Now this seems to agree to your self,
for, you say, you have received the earnest of your salvation, App. p. 48.
Therefore you are pure in your own conceit. Now you are not washed from your
filthiness, except your unmeasurable railings formerly related, be no
filthiness. If you will say they be not filthiness, then must you resolve us,
what Solomon meant, when he said, There is a generation whose teeth are as
swords, and their iaw teeth as knives, Prou. 30. and 14. And David, when he
said, Their throat is an open Sepulcher, etc. Did Solomon and David commend or
discommend those of whom they spoke? You tell us, that Puritans do refuse, some
of the doctrine, or discipline of the Church of England, or both, Appeal, p.
118. and this does fitly agree to your self, for in all the points now
disputed, you reject the faith of the Church of England, and bring us the
Popish faith in stead of it, as has been evidently declared.

You tell us the things objected against you are collected out of diverse
places, and laid together for advantage: In both parts you intend to blame the
pleadings against you; but the first part is against your self, for, Art and
plain dealing, required you to set your opinions together. An objection is
well made, when it is truly made, though it be gathered out of many severed
places. You mean they are laid together unjustly: but the several places out
of which they are brought will say, that is false: diverse sentences brought
into one place, do make each other the cleerer unto understanding, to that end
are they now laid together, and for no other, as the reader may find. To
scatter them into diverse places with the intermission of other things, was a
good means to conceal the snake, till a fitter time was offered: he that
gives poison, must conceal it. To gather them together, was the labor,
diligence, and faithfulness of him that did it. He that discouers a hidden
evil, is more worthy then he that suggesteth that which is overt, and lies
aloft. You would fain Tridentize it, and so go on, hanging hoof, against hoof:
(that I may use your own words) Appeal, p. 270. As the fearful Hare, does
double, and redouble, her course, and intricate her passage, to conceal her
self, even so do you: he therefore that would find you out, must take you
where you are to be had, seeing you are not where, and how you ought to be.

You tell us of the points in question,

(...) are not ^^gerous. Of themselves. In the event unto us. Because They are
scholasticall speculations merely. The author is No fomenter of Faction.
Schism.
A Patri^t. Reconciler. Appeal, p. 42. 43.




They that think not so Make clamors of they know not What. Wherefore.
Are Frantic fellows. Frighted with Pannicke fears.
Have without cause fired the Beacons. disturbed the Country.
Esteem a field of Thistles, to be a battle of Pikes.

Appeal, page 320.

I answer; It is no marvel, though you set your whole strength, to remove the
suspicion of danger, from the points you have delivered; yea it would be much
marvel, to see you do otherwise* for he that lays a snare, must conceal
it, least his purpose be frustrated; but your labor is spent in vain, a weak
sight may see them full of danger.

That they are dangerous to our eternal estate, and of themselves, fitted to
bring sad events, is manifest; for all of them are articles of erroneous faith.
Now an erroneous faith is an addition unto the divine revelation, threatened by
God, to be punished eternally, Revel. 22. and 18. verse, Some of them be
articles of the erroneous faith of Rome, and that they be dangerous unto our
salvation, we have the testimony of Bishop Jewel, who says expressly, That,
they are dangerous to kindle Gods wrath, and condemn our souls for ever,
Apol. part. 6. c. 22. diuid. 1. And c. 20. diuid. 2. he says, unless we leave
them, we cannot come to Christ: With whom agrees our reverend Bishop Carleton
in his directions to know the true Church, p. 63. and 64. For of the Romish
faith he says, That it is traps and snares, dangerous, and tending to man's
destruction. Your self do no less, when you say, Popery is original of
superstition, enemy unto piety, Appeal, p. 321.

The particular points, whereof we have disputed, do say no less.

For, if we must take our faith in all matters

If a man believe, that a sinner is justified (from the powers, and faculties
of man, are disposed, and fitted, unto obedience as amply and largely as the
Law appoints, and prescribes obedience, and consequently is in danger of
damnation: for such a man rests in his own Justice, to keep him from hell,
and to order him to heaven; and thereby trusts unto a sliding foot, and a
broken tooth, for as much as God has laid out the way unto them in another line.

He that believes that the continuance of grace in his Saints; so largely
expressed in the Scriptures: Nor unto the divine providence which governs the
world with infinite wisdom.

He that believes Images are profitable to the stirring

He that believes, that Christ is really, and substantially Jewel in his
Reply, the 8. Article, p. 283.) cannot be attempted without great danger: for
it is Idolatry: seeing Christ is not there really and substantially: and all
Idolaters shall have their portion in the second death, Revel. 21. verse 8.

He that believes, he assenteth unto God that that he so consents out of
the liberty and dominion, that his will has to do, or not to do, to consent,
or dissent, and not yield that consent in obedience unto any preuiall work,
and true efficiency of grace, disposing him thereunto: and consequently, that
himself does first and originally make the difference between himself and
another, that dissenteth from that grace of God that calls: and that he has
of himself, something which he has not received, whereof he may boast,
contrary to the word of God, that says,

Who has made thee to differ from another? And what have thou that thou
did not receive? Now if thou did receive it, why do thou glory, as if
thou had not received it? 1 Cor. 4. and 7. verse.

By the like deduction, the danger of your Doctrine

I might show the like danger, to arise from the rest of the points delivered
by you, and urge the danger of these other ways: but I think this sufficient,
to make it apparent, that they are dangerous unto a man's soul.

Touching the danger which (of themselves) they Appeal, page 42. I say for my
self.

I am loath to touch here, or to meddle beyond my slipper, the State is not the
subject of my profession: I pray for the prosperity of Prince, and Policy: but
let their courses alone to whom they concern.

Yet notwithstanding, I hope I may with license, and good leave, allege what
is manifest to all men, and delivered by your self. Thus you write;

Popery is for tyranny, Appeal, p. 321.

And so say I, with the general consent of all those that know Popery, and are
not subject thereunto. By tyranny, you mean, tyranny over Kingdoms: for you
oppose it (in the place alleged) unto Anarchie, now (I hope) every man will
say, Tyranny is a notorious evil to any State or Kingdom. If you had not said
thus, the thing it self would have said it for you: for Tyranny is, where one
man does rule the whole, by an unbridled and unlimited will and pleasure. Now
this the Pope claims over all Kingdoms, whose will is accounted a law, to
whom no man may say, This is not well done: nor call his actions into question.

If you say you have not taught this, therefore your Popery is not for tyranny.
I answer; this must follow upon the Popery which you have taught: for you give
to Councel^ an authority to determine matters of faith, and require all men to
receive their sentence as the dictates of the holy Ghost. You allow the Church
of Rome a share in such Councels, by granting that it has the essence of a
true Church; you also allow the Pope himself a place in those Councels. Upon
which it will follow; that the Pope must call, direct, and confirm all such
Councels: and consequently, that the Pope has such authority over temporal
States and Kingdoms, as is aforesaid; for that authority of the Pope over
Councels, has bred, and confirmed this authority of his, over temporal
States, and Kingdoms; as he that reads Bellarmine, de Romans Ponti. lib. 5.
cap. 1. Tertia sententia, etc. and cap. 6. to the end of that Book, will find.

If we receive these points of Popery hitherto discussed, Rome; by which
means our own State is much disabled to maintain it self against foreign
opposers; and a foreign State inioyeth a great addition to defend it self,
and to offend; yea, to subject ours unto the will of the Pope, and State of
Rome; which things, (I doubt not) will be confessed on all hands, to be no
small danger to our State: and this shall suffice for this time, to show the
dangers that do perpetually attend upon this faith of Rome, which you persuade
us to receive.

You tell us, you are a Patriot, equal to the best: you

I embrace the total doctrine and discipline of the Church of England; and
will maintain it, to be ancient, Catholic, Orthodoxe, and Apostolical,
Appeal, page 111.

I trust to make good, against any and all whosoever, that the Church of
England is so conformable unto purest antiquity, in the best times: that none
can be named in all points, more conformable, Appeal, page 48.

You must give me leave to answer hereunto in your own words: which I find,
you have written concerning some, viz.

You do conform only for preferment, hold with the Hare, and run with the
Hound, Appeal, page 111. and 112. you are rotten at the core, page 142. your
goodly glozings, and time-seruing colludings with the State, are but like
Watermen, looking one way, rowing another, page 43. and 44.

Your self (at least) cannot be offended with me, for applying those words of
yours, unto your self: for it is but Justice to fill you, in the same cup you
have filled unto others.

Neither may it be ill taken of any other: for you may be of that number,
notwithstanding this protestation: because (that I may use your own words) you
must remember All your words are not Gospel, Appeal, page 272. Therefore
until I may perceive that you manifest what you protest, by real practice,
you must give me leave to think you dissemble in the point; and would persuade
men, that you are not to be distrasted, that your self may feed fat upon
their folly, Appeal, page 222. I find you also writing thus of some:

Your holy cause (you see) will not succeed by opposition; therefore you come
up, and seem to close with the Church of England in her Doctrine and
discipline: but indeed, you infuse secretly, and instill cunningly, a foreign
Doctrine, pretended craftily to be our Churches* so that a^ length, you may
wind in foreign discipline, and the rest of foreign Doctrine, Appeal,
page 43. and 44.

If you conceive thus of others, it is like enough you saw it first in your
self: for there is none so suspicious of another, as he that is guilty. You
know our English Proverb, The Mother would never have sought her Daughter in
the Oven, but that her self had been there first: you can apply, what I
exemplify, to speak in your own language, Appeal, page 320. yea it is more
then likely that this was your intent: For you wave the Doctrine of the Church
of England: Teach contrary to that which you have subscribed: as you challenge
others, Appeal, page 44. which you would never have done, but for some
special end, and no other end can be assigned but this; and unto this end it
serves fitly.

If I should reason thus,

The learnedest, the most conformable, the renowned, rewarded, etc. yea the
faith it self, of the Church of England, is for Popery. Therefore Popery is
the true faith.

Then every man will be ready to embrace the faith of Rome, and good reason
too, seeing this testimony wants nothing to give it authority; the party
himself, a friend, (nay more) a Brother that has been borne, bred, and
brought up in the confession of the Church of England, that has learned,
loved, admired, and proposed to himself to follow indeclinable, the Doctrine
and discipline of the Church of England, Appeal, page 111. No new vp-start
Master in Israel. But one that adhereth and consents unto, the Apostles, and
their true successors, immediate and mediate, Appeal, page 45. and 46. The
Doctrine of the Church of England, is proposed in Synods, confirmed by law,
commanded, and established by act of Parliament, Appeal, page 111.

As the quality of your person, and pretense, so your for you are known unto,
and approved by his sacred Majesty, King James; as you do solemnly inform us
in the Preface to your Appeal, and in the Book it self. page 43. You are
beholding unto, and favored by, men of principal rank, in the government of
our Church and commonwealth: as we learn from your Epistle, set before your
Treatise of the Invocation of Saints, near to the end thereof. You are indeed
rewarded with preferments, many for number, great for value. Who would deny his
consent unto Popery, when it is brought by a messenger thus accomplished? You
are a Minister and a Preacher, therefore when you bring in Popery, you go
compendiously to work; for you are like enough to gain, and draw your
Parishioners with you, at least to make them more feasible then other ways
they would be: as yourselfe writes in the third page of your Preface to the
Reader, set before your Gagge. You are a Preacher unto many congregations,
therefore you must needs draw the more people after you; and they draw others;
for we see by experience, things new and strange, stay not always with them
that receive them first. Moreover, by Preaching Popery, they may be
accommodated according unto the disposition of several men; he that is
inclinable thereunto, may be followed seriously, plied at all times. He that
is auerse may be observed, and dealt withal as opportunity is offered.

Lastly, preaching is of greatest efficacy, for it comes under the name of
Gods ordinance, it is more fit to enter into, and prevail upon, the thoughts
of man, than any other course: like as the small rain res^eth upon, enters
into, and softeneth the earth, more then the great and hasty showers. By
preaching popery may be let in softly, without noise, slowly without violence,
like as liquid bodies are distilled by a soft fire, and being once entered,
takes faster hold like unto a screw, that is not heard when it enters, nor
can be pulled out when it has taken hold.

This course, to bring in popery was now requisite: Ianizaries to convey it
into every Kingdom, Province, division, family, household, singular person, if
it were possible? What wars and treachery have they omitted, the Histories of
Wicklife, Hus, Ziska, Henry the second, King John, and Queen Elizabeth,
(besides many others) will show. More of any of these are not needful, nor can
be expected; yet what have they gotten, have they won a party unto their faith,
or one man to believe as they do? Surely this they have gained, enen a garment
dyed red in the blood of the Saints, and a name, but not of the sons of
Abraham, who never had the glory of heresy, and poison of false doctrine,
cruelty, treachery, murder, usurpation. Now, now therefore, is the time when you
must change your copy, turn over a new leaf; bethink your self of a new
course; turn your threatenings into flatterings; your loud sound into still
voices; your long disputations, into distilled dropping, your enmity into
pretended friendship, your conjoined armies into severed corner creepers; your
armor into Gowns; your swords into sithes, your bills into mattocks: Finally,
let no voice of war be heard in your streets: Sound, and resound; lift up
like a trumpet the voice of Peace, tune your instruments, to make that harmony
to be more delightful, then the sweet Singer of Israel; and then perhaps you
may gain him unto your side, whom God has given over to believe lies: but for
the rest, they will, and always shall, have just cause to say, as we now do,
The snare is broken we are escaped, thanks be unto God.

I might give satisfaction to every one of his particular railings, for there
is sufficient for it: but I will not burden the reader so much. This that I
have said, is sufficient: because these things being thus, none of his other
bitter invectiues can be true. Though they were true, yet do they make either
wholly against him, or nothing at all for him.

I conclude this whole discourse, in the words wherein Bishop Jewel concluded
his, to Master Harding, page 652.

Deceive not the simple, they are bought with price, they are the people of
God, for whom Christ has shed his blood. Your shifts be miserable, you trouble
your self, as a Bird in the lyme. The more ye stir, the saster ye cleave;
the longer ye strive, the weaker ye are: ye cannot bridle the flowing Seas, ye
cannot blind the Sun beams. Kick not still against the spur: Give unto
the glory of God: (will ye will ye) the truth will conquer. God give us both
humble hearts, and the people eyes to see, that all flesh may be obedient to
his will, Amen.

FINIS.

