THE NEW AGE OF OLD NAMES.

By Ios. Wib. Master of Arts of Trinity College in Cambridge.

(...).

LONDON Printed for William Barret, and Henry Fetherstone. 1609.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, HIS Most worthy friend, Sir JOHN WENTVVORTH Knight,
Health and Happiness now and for ever.
Parue, nec inuideo, sine me Liber ibis in Aulam,
FOr as Tanais goes under Meotis, and Alphaeus under the Sea, yet neither is
the one bitter, nor the other salt: So ^ doubt not but that those vulgar
imputations, which the m^lecon^ents cast upon the Court, shall never attaint
nor arrest your heroycke spirit, which as it has vouchsafed to shine upon me
with gracious aspect (for commonly true Nobility and Humility, are like
Hippocrates twins:) So has it in forced me to eleuate my self above the Orb
of my actiuitie, and with the Eagle to lay my Eggs in the lap of love: These I
most humbly commend to your powerful love. I could wish some Castor or Pollux
were within the shell, and if it please you, with the influence of your Sphere,
to generate some Celestial heat in them, I hope the young ones, if they prove
singing Birds, will learn to sing the Song of gratitude to your munificence,
if they be Birds of pray, I will charge them to follow your game. If they be
fowls, Dedicate to Ruc the god of Hungary, I will desire no more, but that
they may please your palate: most humbly I desire your Worship, not to break
them, for they are not the eggs of a Cocatrice: try the success, my desire
is, that they may prove Cocks of the game. Domitian set up a prize for
Poetry, which he kept every fifth year, and had his cruelty been as little,
as his wit was great, he would have been as much commended for this, as he
was condemned for other actions: but I trust I shall find you tobelike his
Brother Titus, in whosegreatnesse nothing was unpleasant, but the shortness:
Now therefore as Perseus defended himself under the buckler of Palace, and
Teucer under that of Ajax: so I leave mine orphant Muse to the ingenu ti^ of
your Honorable nature, and the Patronage of your deserved greatness.

Your Worships always at command Jos. Wybarne.

To the Reader.
REader, if I may persuade, read the book before the Epistle; for this latter
is the quotient, the former is the Division: if thou will censure it before
thou have read it, it may be some other Harpie will light upon thy books, if
thou write any, and if thou write none, I will answer thee with the Poet of
Bilbilis,

Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua,

Which one thus simply turned: Either commend me, or come mend me: and
peradventure I shall request thee as Agesilaus did the Ambassador, not to tell
how I played with my child, till thou have one of thine own, if thou look
for news, you may do well to go to the Colonie at Virginia: if for deep
matter, stay till my head be of silver, for golden heads commonly bring forth
but leaden works: if for strange and uncouth strains of wit, know that I care
not for Apricocks, hoe est, ingenia praecocia: I have seen many of their
books shrink in the werting: if thou require more accurate testimonies, the
matter is moral and Positive, not demonstratiue or controuersiall: for I
suppose, that the bramble of controversy has been a means to choke most of
our sciences, which stand more on explication of experience, then in winding
and windy arguments, if I have omitted something in a matter so variable,
remember that I talk of Errors Den, celebrated by the pen of our second
Chaucer. Lastly, consider I have put an old song to a new tune, if thou like
it not, harken to the Harmony of the Planets, which if thou can not hear,
think thou were borne at the fall of Nilus: and thus wishing thee either to
open thy ears with courtesy, or shut them with silence: I leave unto thee
this my Grammar, wherein I have handled Nomen and Pronomen, other parts of
speech I am not at leisure now to decline.

ESt Latio in medio late lacus, vndique opaco
Vmbraru^ strepitu, atque vndanti sulphur inhorr^ns,
Errorum statio est: at Graio murmr Auernus:
Hic mill anguipedum vultus, noua nomina rerum
Apparent* c^ntumque immanis hiatibus Hydra:
Hinc somno torpens, gelidoque papauere Morpheus,
Ter gemina hinc Hecate, tria virginis ora Dianae,
Et trino Anguicomus collatrans ianitor ore,
Virtutesque Artesque and versicoloribus armis,
Publicolaeque doli, ac Stoici dumeta veratri,
Religio intorti squamis sinuata Colubri,
Et quaecunque latent informi monstra Barathro,
Pallados augurio demum haec Camerina mouetur,
Id sorts memorant Liciae, ac iubet author Apollo,
Tantae molis erit suetos gracilescere nimbos,
Discite iustitiam moniti, ac non temnere technas.
THE NEW AGE OF OLD NAMES.
CHAP. I. That nothing is known but Names.
SECTION. I.
THough the bodyworke not without the spirit, yet the spirit is either
compelled, or inclined, or rather declined to evil actions, by the passions of
the body; wherefore they that handle Astrology, Physiognomie, and Physic:
proceed sometime certainly, and always probably; because of the mutual
sympathy and vndevorceable dependence of the soul and body: the like
proportions are to be found in speech, wherein the vowels resemble the soul,
the consonants the body: the greatest vigor of speech is seen in names,
concerning which we will declare: first, that all knowledge comes by deduction
of them: secondly, that all error arises from seduction by them.

SECTION. II.
NOw then it is certain, that as it is in the fable of the Fox, which licked
only the outside of the glass, but could not come to the pottage, so we know
names, but not things: This was signified of old by them that told, how Jupiter
wasfed with bones ^ucian dialog. of Jupiter and Prometheus.
and fat, Prometheus reserving unto himself the solid flesh: by the flesh is
meant sound knowledge, by the fat the fleeting show of superficiarie terms of
Art, by the bones is deciphered, the inextricable and perplexed labor in the
curiosities of euerstriuing contradictions, So Ixion embracing a cloud for
Juno* and Narcissus loving his own shadow for a water Nymph, and Paris
maintaining the Trojan war in E^ripid. in He^^na. ^^eophron in Cassandra.
the defense of Helenaes Idol, for Helena her self was conveyed by Juno to
Proteus King of Egypt: All these declare that we are fed with the shales, not
with the kernels of learning, and as the common byword goes, whilst the
blind and the lame man Herodotus in the l^fe of Homer.
have for their portions the shells of the Oyster, the Lawyers fees is the flesh
of the fish. To conclude this truth by no fabulous truths, consider that true
M^tamor. 5. lib. Claudian de raptu Proserpinae
fable of Proserpina, wherein it is avouched, that she for eating seven
grains of a Pomegranat in the Elisian garden, was made the Queen of Hell, to
the opening of this Muthologie, the Turkish Priests in their Alcaron do give
us light: for they say, that the forbidden fruit was a Pomegranat, and that
every grain therein was of the quantity of an egg. The Frenchmen at this day
call a Peache, un peche, which they derive a peccando, as the Latins malum for
an Apple has great affinity, with malum for evil, now she that tasted this
Apple, was before her fall Plutarch. de I side and Osiride
termed Isha, the Egyptians ignorantly called her Isis, which name Plutarch
expounds, to signify knowledge, and this was the knowledge of good and
evil, of good by deprivation, of evil by deprauation, and late repenting
experience, the highest note whereof is to know, That we know nothing but Names.

SECTION. III.
THis assertion we shall now bring to the hammer, the Anuell, and the
touchstone: namely to firm reason, the first agument is this; every thing is
either a substance or an accident, the substance is a Wood, See Zabar^ll upon
the first of the demonstrations. cap. 4.
peirsable by no star, for all demonstration is of accidents, seeing that the
mayor terminus, is a proper effect the minor is the subject, the middle
extreme is the cause efficient or final: likewise all definitions are of
accidents, for as much as they are inquired only by demonstration, which
indeed is to be turned into a definition, as we see in the nature of the
Silke-worme, the Egg becomes a Worm, and the Worm in time a Fly, so a
demonstration by altering of terms is made a definition: O^e example will
explain all. Where the Earth is interposed, there is a deprivation of light,
or an Eclips, but between the Moon and Sun, the Earth is interposed, in the
Moon therefore there is an Eclips. From this real demonstration by an
vnfabling Metamorphosis: we collect this definition, an Eclips is the
deprivation of light in the Moon, made by the interposition of the Earth
between her and the Sun, by this it appears, that accidents only can be
demonstrated and defined: Now every accident is either quantity, quality,
action, passion, or relation which last is nothing but a term or name imposed
by Art, and is extracted from the foundation of the four former accidents, as
great and little, from quantity, better and worse, from quality, Father and
Son, from action and passion, now it shall appear that we know nothing but
relations, and consequently nothing but naked names. This is first evident in
all quantities which by Aristotle are reputed five, Magnitude, Time, Place,
Number, Speech, as the quantity of Sillables is therein considered, Magnitude
is length, breadth, thickness, now to leave the Mathematicians to there
nightly speculations, I request all active wits to tell me, what do ^hey
understand in length, but a certain name of difference from breadth and
thickness, and what is Magnitude but an accident of the matter, how can be
distinguished from the form by an essential difference, considering
difference of difference cannot be assigned, except we will run out into
infinite Laborinthes. And as for Time is it ought, but a name respective of
that which is past and to come? So that certainly about this flower or rather
about the smell thereof, many have distilled out the flower of their best Time:
Concerning Place, it has so many bones, that we have need of Cranes to pluck
them out of the throats of Philosophers, Scaliger after Exercitio. 6.
many Maeanders and excursions says, Locus est vacuitas Corporis subituri,
Place is an emptiness capable of a body that shall enter or succeed. I pray
you what is this but Maedeaes empty Casket setting Cryusa with her house on
fire. Now for Number, it is most spent in C^phers, places, names. Lastly for
Speech, what sinews can we expect from it, is it Odyss. 11.
not like the Ghost in Homer: (...)

For now no longer si^^wes hold,
The flesh and bones been waxen old.
Thus much of Quantity: Now Quality consists all in Degrees, which are
nothing but respects, respects are nothing but relations relations nothing but
Names, as for Action and Passion, they are so merely Relative, that Aristotle
says, they differ no more then the way from Thebes to Athens, and Phys. 3.
lib. cap. 3.
from Athens to Thebes. Thence we conclude, that as the Thunder many times
destroys the sword, leaving the scabberd untouched, so the substance and
realitie of all knowledge is sucked out, like the eggs of the Crocadile by the
Icnumon, and nothing left for our inheritance but shells, sheathes and Names.

SECTION. IIII.
THe second argument or plea may be thus framed, to prove that we have nothing
but the Camels skin stuffed with Hay, as Semiramis did against the King of
India, either we know the being, (which nice wits have called the essence)
or the manner of being, which Scholemen abounding with leisure, rather then
learning, have called existence, the being is unknown like the head of Nilus
in the mount Atlas, for who dares aver, that he knows the matter and form of
an accident, except he would be confined to the Isle of Antisera, to have his
brain purged with Helibore: as for the existence or mnaner of subsisting, is
it not a notionall and relative term? cramming a man with learning, as
promises do with hope, and what be terms, but names? So that to conclude, as
in the City of Butus, they that Herodotus in Euterpe.
consulted with the Oracle of Latona, after they had slept before her Image,
did by the first word of the next that met them, gather a prediction: so when
Masculine promises of real knowledge are made, we are turned off at last with
Feminine performance, in reuersion of words, so that the distinction of the two
Sects of Schoolmen, real, and nominall, is now confounded.

SECTION. V.
THe third reason does thus ratify the matter: Exercitat^. 307. Sect. 21.
All knowledge is by species and shows, called intelligible, which are proved
by Scaliger to be mere accidents, but if we sift it further, we shall find
them to be nothing but Names or Notions, presented to the understanding: for
colors, sounds, smells, tastes, and qualities of touching, offering themselves
to the common sense, are carried into the inner closset of the fancy, in
whose myrror they are represented to the simple understanding, which first
conceiving them as single terms, makes of them seven Spiders-webs: first
compounding and dividing, secondly reasoning and discoursing, thirdly resting
or agreeing, fourthly deliberating and consulting, fifthly choosing, sixthly
reflecting by the faculty of conscience, lastly desiring and moving. So that
to gather the total sum, these species, which we call intelligible, are but
terms gathered into sundry forms, as of the same watrie vapor are made many
meteors, a Cloud, a Rainbow, the Rods, the Crown, parelins; also rain,
hail and snow: so of the same names variably framed, issue not new things, but
new appearances, by this it is clear that the Quotum of all our knowledge
consists in a small number of broken names, which we may call reliquias
Danaum, atque immitis Achilli: the relics of man's fall, wherein the wings of
the soul were so clipped, that were they not repaired by Dedalus, who has his
name from (...) to know, she should always have flagged upon the fennes of
base mortality.

SECTION. VI.
THe last reason of this quaternion of Soldiers, may thus be demonstrated, all
knowledge is by some argument, for the Latin arguere to argue, is deduced from
the Greek (...), white or clear, whence is drawn (...) argentum, Silver, it
is now not material, whose method we insist upon, whether of Ramus the bough,
or Aristotle the root, by either clew we may get out of the laborinth, let us
therefore assume for example sake, any sort of Argument, as causa, causatum,
vulgarly called effectum Subiectum, accidens, lately entitled adiunctum, and
we shall find that all their knowledge is by relation of terms. For as all men
acknowledge there be four causes, Efficient, Matter, Form, End, so the most
learned have formed four causata or products of causes, Effectum, Materiatum,
Formatum, Destinatum, which do mutually answer to the causes, like the cords
of Music, and what are these but Names and new notions? The same may be
observed in the proportionable differences of Subiectum and Accidens. For as at
Philbets in Egypt, of Camels dung and a soft fire, they make Chickens to be
hatched from Eggs, which are there set: so man's mind being well tempered, from
one relative term frames another, far surmounting both the skill and
felicity of them, which extract the spirit of Roses, Wine, yea and all
Chimicall impostures. Shall we think the like is not to be seen in Arguments
of less moment? what be reasons drawn from disagreeing, comparison, from
Name, division, definition, testimony; but a heap of Aenigmaticall terms,
ouergrowne with distinctions, as Archymedes Tomb was with Tuscul. Ques. 5. lib.
Thorns, when Cicero came to visit it. Wherefore if all knowledge be of
Accidents, and those are relative, if we only know the manner of being, not the
being of things in nature, if all shows intelligible, and Arguments, be but
Accidents in relation, that is mere Names, it remains that we only feed
upon the Thistles of Names, howsoever we seem to carry upon our backs most
precious Merchandise.

CHAP. II. Knots sought in a Bul-rush.
SECTION. I.
WE have hitherto lent one ear to the defendant, Water with Romans, as with
us the ^ower Glass. Su^tonius in Claudio.
the accuser is now to be heard, we are to allow him sufficient water to
plead by, First then he reasons against us thus: We know God as we are
taught, and therefore all knowledge is not of Names. But stay presumptuous man,
cast down thy eyes from thy train to thy feet, speak not De numine sine
lumine, talk not of God without God, can thou know him but by his works,
thou may indeed believe above reason, but will thou empty his Ocean into
thy Oyster, can thou divine how the begetter should not be before him that is
begotten, can thou dream how generation and proceeding differ, does not the
Spirit work like the Wind, whose sound thou hear, Ioh. 3. 8.
but knows not whence it comes, or whether it goes! In a word, if thou
beleeuest with reverence thou shall one day know him face to face, but now thou
know him only in a Riddle, and well is it for thee, if thou know his
Name.

SECTION. II.
But now like Hanibal or Mithridates once over come, this adversary
recollecteth his forces, and thus pleads the second time. Know you not that
the Skepticke doctrine of Pyrrho, A^ston, and Hirillus, has been lone ago
hist out of the Schools or rather banished and confined among the Barbarians,
will you cause us to doubt of all things, then shall we doubt, whether you
doubt or no, it is possible you may carry bread in the one hand, and a stone in
the other, and that you may speak as false as an Almanacke maker, though you
mean as true, as a man upon his death bed. Staffords Law must answer you, if
you be possessed with this frenzy, but oh my friend have me not to Bedlam, it
may be I have sold my Land, which you mean to beg. I answer in a word, I am
no Skepticke, nor I hope you no Gnosticke, I doubt not whether I know, but know
resoluedly, that I do not know any thing but Names whereupon to resolve. They
that came Aristotle Mund. Cap. 1.
to Athens the first year were wise men* The second year Philosophers, that
is lovers of Wisdom: The third year Rhetoritians, that is mere bable^s, The
meaning is, First, they deemed themselves to be wi^e, casting up Mountains to
heaven, like the Sons of Aeolus. After feeling themselves to be puffed with a
timpany of Pride, they desired that to be Metamor. 11.
in themselves which they admired in others: Lastly seeing the more they
strayed, the less they could go back, they found a Harvest of wild corn was
left them, it may be of those Reeds which M^d^s Barber filled full of words,
neither is this spoken of modest hypocrisy or glory in holding Paradoxes. For
when I say that we know Names, I ascribe such a measure of knowledge to man's
shallow vessel, as it is hardly capable of, for are not Names drawn from the
causes, effects, subjects, and accidents, which like the four Rivers of the
Moon, Rhenus, Danubius, Nylus, and Ganges, are stored with endless plenty of
wholesome waters? Some have not doubted to say, that Names are taken by
Antiphrasis from the contrary, as Parca quod min^m^ parcat, Lucus quod non
luceat, but this counterfeit Antiphrasis is now uncased, does not the Parca
spare, when two produce the life, and only one cutteth it off: May not lucus
be drawn a luce, seeing it is a Grove shining with the torches of heathen
Idols, neither shall we fear barrenness, because we have no Bastards, or
lack of Names, because we want Antiphrasis: To conclude then, though we know
nothing but Names, yet by them as the Vines do by their Palmites, we lay hold
on the Elm, that is, we do see the back parts of things.

SECTION. III.
I Had thought by this time that Cerberus would have coucht, but with his third
head he barks again thus, All Arts, but especially Sciences, pre^end the
knowledge of things, therefore to serve us like younger brethren with Legacies
of mere names, and to bereave us of the Gauell-kind Land, is to show that you
are a selfe-louer without a Corriuall: But stay my friend, let it be first
manifest that my Father left Land, and then we will rather agree at home, then
suffer the Butlets box to win all. Agrippa in his Book Devanitate
Scientiarum and Viues, whose fame ever lives in his Book De causis corruptarum
Artium, will soon purge thee of this swelling error: but experience in every
Art, and the sequel of this Treatise, shall in part aswage thy hunger, except
thou have Canina^ appetentiam, such a hunger as Erisicthon Metamorp. 12.
had, which was maintained by his daughters Metamorphosing, that is by her
whoredom, as learned men expound it: But now enough of this Problem, for they
that are wise know it already, and fools will not understand it, though you
bray them like Anaxarchus in an Iron mortar.

CHAP. III. The error by names in Policy.
SECTION. I.
Having sufficiently to the unlearned, and superficially to the judicious
declared, that our knowledge is only of Names, it remains that we manifest
errors which come by Names, for so this new Age of Old Names will be detected.
For as the Spear of Achilles did both wound and heal T^liphus, and as the
water of Dodona does both extinguish and lighten Torches* so Names both teach
and seduce: many spices are said to be cold in touching, and hot in working;
that is in applying, as when they are beaten, eaten or disgested: so Names if
they be but nakedly touched, prick and sting like nettles, but if they be more
roughly examined, they bring no damage nor deceit; and first this is plain in
matter of policy: the iron government of the Romans may be a president for
all: First when A^neas had overcome Turnus, to appease the mind of the
Hetrurians and Latins whom he conquered, he was content that the name of
Trojans should be abrogated, and rested satisfied with those names which he
found in Italy: as if now the Kings Majesty coming out of Scotland into
England; should to the further uniting of both the Realms, call them by the
ancient name of Britanie, and style himself King of Great Britain, as
Alphred and some ancient Princes have done: next Romulus, when the Sabines
were united to him, was content that the name of Tatienses should remain, and
that Tatius should enjoy the name of a King, though it appeared not long after,
that as small Brooks falling into a great river loose their name, so this
weak star concurring with the Sol that would be so^us, soon suffered both a
total and final Eclips, for to say no more, the murder of Tatius by Romulus
his crafty conniuence, was not revenged: the like is observed in Tullus
Hostilius, the third king of Rome, who suffered that the Albanes should loose
their name, though they were his Countrymen, yet withal he infranc^ised them
in the liberties of Rome: But to leave Kings. When the Romans had vomited out
the viperous brood of Tarquinius, they found out a new Name, for instead of
one King, they had two Consuls, and withal enacted a Law, that as the name of
Tyrant in old time, so now the name of King among them, should be for ever held
most odious and ominous, and withal they banished Collatinus Tarquinius only
for the name sake, though indeed he was one of the first that conspired against
the tyrant, neither was this law transitory, for Julius Caesar five hundred
years after, could by no means obtain the name of King, though he were not
second to any man, either in authority or policy: and yet Augustus Caesar
rather by the length of time, then strength of wit; did in this kind minister
sundry experiments as is at large to be seen in Appian and Dion: to name all,
were more then tedious, and yet to leave all, would leave this Remonstrance too
naked.

SECTION. II.
AVgustus therefore finding that the name of king was odious, and the term of
Dictator misliked or suspected, forged a new name of Emperor, and so put away
the title, but not the power of a Si Catulos Canibus, etc.
kingdom; not unlike (if we may compare whelps with dogs) to her that
having denied a young man twice, finding him not to renew his suite, told him by
letter, two Negatiues make an Affirmative, and so with her loving Logic she
entertained him again into grace, but leave we one of the worst among women,
and to return to one of the best among men.

Augustus gave the richest and weakest kingdoms of the world to the Senate,
reserving the poorest and the most warlike to himself, by which devise he
kept the Senate in a perpetual honorable bondage. Also he made a double
Exchequer, the first he called his own, the other the Commonwealths, not
unlike that crafty Churl, which having two chests, the one empty, which he
called all the world, the other full, which he termed his friend, being
requested to lend, would answer he had no coin in all the world, but he
would go to his friend, who would not lend but for interest. For indeed
Augustus used both these Exchequers as his own Concubines: likewise he
appointed triumphall ornaments for victorious Senators, still reserving the
triumph it self, for himself, and his successors; and so played with the
Romans, as vermin do with poultry, sucking the best blood, and leaving the
refuse for all comers: but what should I speak of all his public actions and
mysteries of state, one private policy shall be an hostage for all; he desired
to have a bondman give testimony against his master, it was answered, that it
was against law, whereupon he caused him to be sold to another, and so made
him his accuser, is not this to call stumbling starting, and iadish dullness,
nothing but forget fullness: true it is that Tacitus records this of Tiberius,
with whose cruel and wily nature, this seems to be very consonant, but
Dion says, he had his plot-forme from Augustus, it is not improbable, seeing
he had his president from him in most matters of regiment.

SECTION. III.
THat we may something draw on this web of story, the succeeding Roman
Emperous, have thoroughly declared what Names can do in policy. Infinite
examples are found in Tiberius, which to recite, were to write again the
eleven first books of Tacitus his Annals, not unlike Crysippus, who for a
Laertius in vita Crysippi.
citation, writ down a whole Tragedy of Euripides: or many modern bunglers,
which are rather exscriptores, then scriptores: and as it was merrily said, bad
springs of water, but good leaden spouts: but to Gilbert in Magnete.
return to Tiberius, it is no marvel, though Suetonius report, that Domitian
only would read the Acts and Records of Tiberius, for by that little which
Tacitus has left, the rest being consumed, as it seems by Goths and Vandals,
or by some timorous Tyrant, it does appear that by the changing of Names, and
show of liberty, he brought the Romans under the lowest degree of basest
seruilitie: he would not be called Lord, but played the Usurper and the
Tyrant: he would have the Empire divided into three parts, and when he was
demanded which part he would have, he answered indeed, that it did not befit
his modesty to choose, but though it were replied, this question was asked to
show the indiuisibilitie of the kingdom, yet he pursued the Author of this
question, namely Gallus to the death. In a word, he never spoke as he
thought, and yet hated them most that seemed but the least to suspect or
mistrust him, and I am afraid if all Tacitus were extant, the mysteries of
state would be too much exposed to vulgat eyes, of all which, this is one
maine Maxim, that the name be as little changed as may be, though the thing
be altered: the like things are observed by Herodiane in the lives of Seuerus,
and Maximinus: as also by the Church writers in the lives of Constantine,
Iustiniane, and others; but I will not mount too hie, least with Phaeton I fall
into Rhodanus.

SECTION. IIII.
TO aleage other stories, would either be too difficult, or at least too
laborious, to aleage our own Chronicles, would seem too perilous: but some will
say, do you condemn all policy in Names, or Names in policy? To this I
frame this direct, but (yet I fear me in regard of some) an obscure answer,
policy and morality as they are sundry arts, so they aim at several ends,
for policy shows what can be done, morality what should be done; the
Moralist says, men should be good and not mutinous, the Politician answers,
that men commonly neither are nor will be good, except they be constrained or
deceived: no constraint being violent can be perpetual, but deceit being more
secret, is more secure and durable: when we give Alloes to children, we give
it in the pappe of an Apple, that being received, they may eat; and eating may
live. So common people many times to their own good must be illuded, it is not
requisite in a family, that the servant should know in all points his masters
will; and therefore so long as no evil is commanded, the secrets of state
howsoever they seem to deceive the manyheaded multitude, yet are most lawful,
convenient, necessary. Wherefore we discommend not Tiberius and Domitian;
because they used cunning, and many times collusion; but because they abused
it, in misapplying the same to murder and lust. Briefly let no captious
Cauiller with sharper nails then wit, claw at this position: Ethics and
policy are not contrary, but yet diverse.

SECTION. V.
THis bitter pill we will once again lenifie with an other Iulip or a Pozeme,
that it may be the more gently entertained: as in all policy, so principally in
that which is Military, error in Names is most subtle, yet most profitable:
The three Decij in Liuie commanded, if they were killed in the battle, it
should be given out, that they did voluntary run into the midst of the
enemies, upon a vow for the safety of the Commonwealth, so that their death
was not prejudicial to the army, as otherwise it would have been. Haniball
having overcome the Romans, put on their armor, and so his soldiers being
taken for Romans, won a City under their subjection: Julius Caesar when his
Soldiers mutined, only used this word Quirites, that is Gentlemen of Rome, by
which they understood, that he would cassheare them from their military
service, at which word they were so astonished, that immediately they desisted
from sedition, and with much ado in appearance obtained pardon: we will
conclude with later examples, Scanderbegge King of Albania, when he felt the
pangs of death to approach, commanded the army should martch, and withal that
it should be proclaimed, that himself was advancing forward; which
Proclamation did so amate the Turks his enemies, that presently they brake
their ranks, without breaking a Lance. Tamberlane the Emperor of Tartary
would not cut his hair after the manner of his own Country, but ware it long,
saying, that he came (by the mothers side) from Sampson, whose strength was
supposed to consist in his hair, by which fable he obtained this honor, that
he was thought invincible. To conclude, error by names in warlike, and in all
other policies, has been held to be of least peril and most efficacy.

SECTION. VI.
But some will grinne against that which has bin said, that error of Names
has been the Scholemistris of learned flatteries, which are the cankers of
Ty^ants, and many times the apoplexies of estates, as Tacitus and Suetonius do
show in Nero; Dion, and Herodian declare in Commodus; but as I take it,
Tacitus in the beginning of the life of Julius Agricola, as also in the end
thereof, has thoroughly discust this doubt, demonstrating against Thraseus,
Priscus, and Rusticus, that to flatter a Tyrant for a man's own safety, not
with any dishonestie, is a thing of no less praise then security: for tell me
why should a man loose the service of his head for the freedom of his tongue:
which as it is otherwise unseasonable, not unlike to him that preached to them
that robbed him, so many times it kindles the rage, sharpeneth the suspicions,
and justifies the pretenses of tyrants, whereas a modest silence would reserve
a man to better times.

CHAP. IIII, All fallacies come by Names.
SECTION. I.
Having a while waded in the wide Ocean of Policy, which depends upon
experimental Reason, it rests that we treat of Reason artificial, commonly
entitled Logic, which though she be full of Thorns, yet if we put over
our hedging Mittens, may be tractable: we avouch then that all fallacians,
which are errors in Logic, do issue from Names, which like the Rainebow:
Mill trahunt varios aduerso sole Aeneid. 9.
colores, and receive as many forms as materia prima, or as Quartilla did
lovers, and this may be thus made perspicuous. The thirteen fallacians, as
they are commonly reckoned, may be all reduced to Ignorantia Elenchi, which is
when the subject of the Question is taken away, or the state changed, this is
plain by instance:

Carmina Paulus emit, recitat sua Carmina Paulus, Mar^iall.

Nam quod emit, possit dicere quisque suum.
Paulus byes Verses, says they are his, no lie,
For what more right our own, then that we buy.
In this fallacy of Equivocation, by the word suum and sua, the state of the
question is inuerted, for the Verses were his by the right of a possessour, not
of a maker. Likewise in that Oracle, Domine mancas hosts enim penetrabunt
terram tuam, and subijcientur domui K^kerman in his third Book of Logic.
tuae, which indeed should have been written thus, Domi ne maneas, hosts
enim penetrabunt terram tuam, and subijcient Vr domui tuae, Now Vr in Chalde
signifies fire. In this Oracle, I say, wherein are the fallacies of Amphibole,
Composition, Division, Accent, Figure of speech: The state of the Question is
altered, as appears by the contrariety of interpretations the same is most
ocularly manifest in the other six fallacies, for that which we call
Polyzetesis, or many Interrogations, is nothing but an Equivocation turned into
a Question, and so is of the same nature. Also in this Example, Qui te animal
dicit verum praedicat, at qui te asinum idem and te animal dicit, ergo. The
Elenchs of accidents secundum quid, are lurking, and yet with all the Question
is changed, for the reason is drawn from a particular to an universal, which
is most preposterous and retrograde, so where the Question is begged, the
stream of the disputation turns his channel: Lastly, in fallacies of a Non
consequente and a non causa, there is nothing but a change of the Question,
which is in effect but a Name inuerted, not unlike the legerdemaine of Iuglers,
or the glittering gloss of Alcumists gold, which though it satisfy the eye,
it will hardly endure the stamp, the touchstone, or the hammer.

SECTION. II.
FVrthermore seeing darkness is known by light, and deafness by hearing,
fallacies being the diseases of the Soul, are known by their sovereign
medicines. Now as the Sun drives away the Wind and the Clouds, so a
distinction only does extinguish the Ignis fatuus, and dispell the mistie
mysteries of cheating falacies. There are indeed three ways to dissolve an
Argument, denial, retorting, and distinction, but Denial is too hostile,
savoring more of obstinacy then of Art, retorsion is more witty then
profitable, in a word, Denial is like searing and launcing, Retorsion like
medicines drawing or purging, Distinction is like to ripening remedies, or to
purges which we call benedicta, because they cleanse and feed. Now I would be
judged by a crewe of Critikes, neither do I pass though the soul of Lipsius
were coniurde from his Purgatory, the verdict I crave is upon this point,
whether a distinction be any other thing, then the enumeration of sundry
significations of the same word, with an apt application to the thing in
question. By this it is clear, that a falacie is like the Sea-prophet Proteus,
to whom if any came to consult, he would turn himself both into water and
fire, both into a senseless Tree and a savage Tiger, and in fine into every
form of forms: But if the consulter did but bind him, not fearing or
regarding his shapes, then would he yield a direct answer to his demand, so
if you bi^de a fallacy with the chains of a distinction, you shall cause her
to appear in her own likeness, like Duessa disroab'd by Prince Arthur. In
brief, it is largely confirmed by Aristotle, in the fourth Book of his
Metaphysickes, which is commonly called the Book of Distinctions, that all
error proceeds from indistinction of Names, not much unlike the
halucination, or error of the sight in the Art Opticke.

SECTION. III.
NEither are fallacies only impaled within the Marloe.
Schools, but as far as Boreas claps his brazen wings, and wheresoever men
or wits be found, there is either the fuel or the fire of deceit: no not in
war where Thalius harp cannot be heard for the neighing of horses, no not in
religion which is a cloak so large, that it may cover the whole world; as
Tamberlane was wont to say: no not in a man's most retired meditations (where
one would be most loath to put a trick upon himself) will any place be found
so narrow, where deceit will not hatch, if her eggs in time be not broken. For
as at the dawning of the day, in each part of the air, darkness is mingled
with light; so in every part of the soul, error cleaues fast to truth. In the
Theorick understanding, knowledge, ignorance: In the Practicke, faith and
infidelity, prudence and folly: In the Conscience, scruples and resolution:
lastly in the Affections, towardness and waywardness: and according to the
vulgar opinion, vice and virtue wage war without truce: and rage like the Sea
of Oseria, which ebbes and flows four and twenty times each day: hence we
conclude that fallacies are vbiquitaries, and busy as newes-mongers, and that
as each part of the body has some disease sent from the Witch Acrasia, which
is intemperance: so there is no part or function of man's life, which may not
be ouergrowen by the brambles of some fallacy.

CHAP. V. New Names of Fortitude.
SECTION. I.
SEeing then this leprosy of error does creep upon alwals, let us examine it
first in virtues, wherein we will follow the known tract, being a thing not so
hard as impertinent to mint new divisions of virtues: the chief virtue then is
Fortitude, a mediocritie in despising dangers, and we may extend it to be
constancy, which makes every virtue a habit: but now all you Muses,
Heliconides, Aonides, Peonides, Sycilides, Lebethrides, and if there be any
other kinds come to my aid, for as the Poet says, Grande loquuturi nebulas
Persius. Satyr. 6.
Helicone legunto, aid me I pray you, and show me into what shapes of Names
this Fortitude has been transelementated. First therefore single fight by
many green heads has been so well esteemed, that whosoever does refuse it,
is proclaimed a dastard: we know indeed that David by heroycall instinct, did
try a single combat with Goliath, but this is not exemplarie: Again the
Romans tolerated the combat of the three Horatii with the Curiatii, but it
proved afterward prejudicial to them, neither was it done but in the
infancy and barbarism of their state. Lastly a Battle for trial of truth,
was allowed by the positive Laws of sundry Countries, but now they are
repealed, as being made in the times of uncivil ignorance: for what can be
more perilous in War, then by the death of one enemy to hope for a complete
victory, and by the fall of some one friend to betray the rest, as yet
untouched, unto wilful slavery: Were it not a strange thing to judge of
sounds by taste, no less uncouth is it to decerne right by a combat: May not
the vniuster person be more strong, more skillful, or at least more subtle?
but if they answer, but yet not more fortunate, let them know they tempt
Providence, and therefore provoke her, no marvel then though the Turks at
this day do point single Combatants to be burnt in the side with hot coals
of fire, these shall rise against us in judgment, when it shall be told us
that this single combat is no Fortitude, but an impatient distrust in the
divine administration, as if it could not present us with just occasions of
trying our valor.

SECTION. II.
THere reigns another humor not unlike the former, namely reuenges desire
much practiced in Suites of Law, which serve instead of Civil wars, for
whilst Bellona wastes the Country, there is a perpetual vacation in law, but
when Peace returns, the Term begins, so that men always must be waging
war or Law, but of this hereafter: mean time the Spirit of revenge in
general, has borrowed the visard of Fortitude, and yet it is found in all
misshapen, wrinckled, hollow-eyed: In a word, anger flaming witches, for upon
hope of revenge, only those bloody covenants are commonly drawn with Satan:
the ground of this error is, that men forget that, whereof no man can be
ignorant, (...) Of (...), to work forcibly, (...) a step. (...) to
distribute.
(...) the revenging eye, the Heathens had many Names for their Goddess of
revenge, as Erynnis, Icnaea, Nemesis, Ramnasia, Astraea, Ceres, for all these
are but one, though some respects of difference have been found in the names,
she was termed Erinnis, of her violent actions against evil men: Likewise
Icnaea because she hunted them as it were by footesteps: She was entitled
Nemesis for distributing due punishment, Ramnusia was a particular name given
by the Ramnenses, which were the followers of Romulus, to appease the Ghosts of
Remus, which were called at the first, remures, but afterward lemures. Astraea
Ovid. de Trist.
is not only the name of Justice, but of revenge, for Justice many times with
Iron hand, though with leaden feet, does revenge long smoothered crimes:
Metamor. 5.
Lastly Ceres is brought in plaguing the earth with Cockle, Darnell,
barrenness for the loss of Proserpina. Of (...) punishment and (...) Murder.
a priuatiuum and (...) a bed. (...) envy.
What should we say of Tysiphone, revenging murder, Alecto, unchastity,
Megaera strife and envy, by all which it appears, that the Heathens will
condemn us before the true Minos, for our reuengfull desires, masked with the
Name of Fortitude, which is notwithstanding taken a Ferendo not a feriendo, nam
patiendo, male non faciendo, fortes sumus.

SECTION. III.
THe next Cheater under the name of Fortitude, is that desperate resolution,
which is found in Sailors, a thing grounded upon custom and Atheism, and
indeed built upon the sand, for not only in storms, they are found
ridiculously fearful, but especially in Sea Fights, the most desperate
Seamen discover their cowardice. This was observed in the Roman gladiatores,
and with us in our executioners and Bearewards, that though otherwise they be
bloody, and obstinate, yet if they fall into a danger without the compass of
their own element, they are found to be most meticulous, for indeed he that
despises not all dangers equally, despises none resoluedly.

SECTION. IIII.
Man's mind is like a distempered Lock, which will neither open nor shut, or
like a man that by halting in jest, is become lame in earnest: strange it is,
that Male-contentment should be now counted the strain of resolution and badge
of Fortitude, neither is this a new error: For why were Brutus and Cassius, and
after them Cato Vticensis, so much renowned for their fortitude? Was it not
because they were great malcontents. But now not the oppression of our
liberty and ruin of our Country, has brought forth this melancholic
streams, Idleness and want of employment, joined with pride and Epicurisme,
have drawn us into this back ward passion, but more of this in Magnanimity.

SECTION. V.
THere remains yet an other order of men, which have borrowed the Gregorian
or false hair of fortitude, Namely, such as think it valor to resist Laws
and Officers, a virtue unknown in other Countries, where all such resistance
is plagued with severity of corporal pain, and infamous in dignity, but
such is our popular indulgence, that we wink at it in all, commend it in some:
And no marvel, for we find the vulgar voice so condemning Serieants, and
other Officers, as if the functions

(...) New Names of Temperance.
SECTION. I.
TEmperance is a kind of Fortitude, in bearing the violent assaults of lust and
other appetites: So Fortitude is a kind of Temperance, moderating and tempering
the turbulent affections, and therefore by Aristotle, justly Temperance is
marshald Ethi^^. 3. 11. (...) de art (...).
in the second rank, and by some is made the common Mediocritie of all
virtues. But infinite are the distempers of glosing and seeming Temperance, to
omit Heretics and Turks, the modern vale of chastity is drawn over sundry
Realms, Adultery seems to be much condemned, and yet Stews are ^ compelled
to lie in iron beds) as the jealous locks wherewith chastity is rather
tempted then taught, a grievous error in Names to hold, that harlots are free
for their lust, and wives must never be exempted from the contagion of
suspicion.

SECTION. II.
AN other kind of Temperance is in drink and meat, wherein there is a
Babilonish confusion of Names: in Italy, and Spain, we are condemned for
great gluttons, the Germans for great drinkers, and some have not doubted to
answer, that it is their national sin, which is untrue: for before the
Teutones and Tygurines came over the Alps, what time they besieged the
Capitol of Rome, it is manifest, there were no grapes in Germany; this being
the only true occasion of that war; a certain Barbarian returning from Rome
into Germany, where he was borne, brought with him certain grapes, at the
sight and test whereof, the Germans desired to invade Italy; and therefore
drunkenness was not always the national sin of Germany. Besides the great
Temperance of the old Britons and Saxons, and of sundry Normane Kings, as
Rufus, Stephen, Henry the first, surnamed Beauclarke: does sufficiently show,
that our surfeting does not only proceed from the climate, nor only from the
Petigree, we being derived from Saxons, which be Germans; and Normanes, which
came out of France, but descended from Denmark: except we should likewise
imagine suspicion is the national sin of Italy, and pride of Spain, whereas
we know that under the ancient Romans, Italy was famous for plain dealing,
and before the Goths ouerranne Spain, it was as void of pride as now it is of
drunkenness.

To determine this matter, these things make a sin, as it were national.
First the Petigree, secondly the Climare, thirdly the Neighbour-bordering of
some nation, fourthly Impunity, fifthly some corruption in Religion, lastly
overmuch Peace: for example, it cannot be denied, but that great luxury has
ouer^aken our land, for we came of the Germans and French, the one a hungry,
the other a dainty Nation; and so we learn to exceed both in quantity and
quality of diet. Again, our Climate is cold in respect of Italy or Spain, so
that the Italian coming into our Country, eats more liberally then at home,
the external cold kindling the heat of the stomach: likewise our neighbors
are the Low Dutch, much boasting with Darius, that they can bear wine. As for
impunitie of luxury it is very strange, seeing it is not only not punished,
but even defended and rewarded: of corruption in Religion we shall treat
hereafter. Lastly, for long peace, it cannot be denied, but as the hot sands in
Africa bring forth continually new Serpents: so this daily and nightly
produces new excessive pleasures. The sum is, Temperance if it be measured
by the stomach of any one Country, it shall be meted with a Lesbian and
mutable rule. So that if we style all English gluttons, and Germans drunkards,
the speech will savor of popularity more then of charity.

SECTION. III.
THere follows yet a more dangerous error, more affecting or rather
infecting our manners, drunkenness of late days has found among us patrimonia,
and matrimonia, and every where patrocinia, and is maintained with some
shadows of truth, the brethren of Joseph are said to be drunk, whereas
indeed the meaning is, they drank liberally of the best, they Gene. 43. 34.
Compare Hagg 1. 16. John 2. 10.
drunk the cup of necessity, strength, delight, and it may be of sleep: but
who touched the cup of folly, of lust, of fury: with no less infelicitie do
they traduce rather then produce Solomon, he bids thee Prou. 31. 6.
d^inke that thou may be glad for a season, not void of reason with
untimely madness: we have heard say, that the Danes think, what enters in,
Matthew. 15. 20.
defiles not, but what they vomit. If this be true, I am sure they vomit
great blasphemies, for in that place is mention of such things only, which
issue from the heart and soul, not from the stomach: other have found
drunkenness to be a remedy for a quartan, and have purchased withal an
habit of drinking. So that of sick men, they are become sound beasts: other
defenses as of company, of gentry, of inforcement, and the like are confuted by
the bare repeating. To conclude, it is shame that the combinations of drinking
are not dissolved by seuerer execution of good laws.

CHAP. VII. New Names of Liberality and Magnificence.
SECTION. I.
LIberalitv and Magnificence, differs as a Pike and a Pikerell, the former
being conversant about ordinary benevolence; the latter about sumptuous works,
but as I take it, this distinction is not so much found in the thing, as in the
flattery of writers; the first Gangren of this virtue, is the false name of
hospitality, whereby by men fill the full only, maintaining either
Instruments of recreation, otherwise lawful: as Horse, Hawk, Hound; or of
mere pomp, as multitude of servants without office, or of importunacy, as
valiant Vagrants, or of mutual flattery, as men that can re-inuite them:
mean while, the laboring* the impotent, the sick, the imprisoned, the
necessarily wandering; the learned and ministerial poor are neglected. The
Names of Lord and Lady, as is proved out of the Saxon records, were given in
ancient Verstegands Antiquities.
time, for true hospitality: for Lord was written Laford, now Lafh is that
which we call loaf, but signifies bread in general: not the form only. He
therefore was a La-forde, or a Lord, that afforded bread: this term Lady was
written Laphdian, that is a woman, dividing or distributing Bread allowed by
her Lord and husband: The name remains, the thing is abolisht, for either
housekeeping is neglected, or the rich only feasted. Thus did not the
Patriarchs, nor the Grecians, and Romans, so famous for Hospitality, other
Nations greatly contemn us, though with a greater pride bending on the other
side to covetous solitariness.

SECTION. II.
AN other poison of pretended liberality, is the Frenzy of building, a thing
well Painted by many, but yet in the end it proves a rotten post. The
Bricklayers of Babel, and the Kings of Egypt that made the Pyramides by the
labor of the Israelites, do partly show us, what bad success these glorious
Titles did purchase: the manifold terrors of Caine, the builder of the first
City; the curse of him that built Jericho, the madness of Nabuchadonoser, who
built Babel for his own glory, do testify Lycanthropia, a disease wherein
men think themselves to be beasts.
sometimes the ruin, often the infelicitie, always the vanity of the dooers.
To conclude this, let builders remember that to be most true, that Ovid spoke
in an other sense.

Esse quoque in fatis reminiscitur affore tempus;
Quo mare, quo tellus, correptaque regia Caeli Metamor. 1.

Ardeat, and mundi moles operosa laboret.
It was but a fable of Phaeton, but we expect now that it shall be both truly
and shortly perform'de, at what time these buildings will make a fair show in
the public fire, as Nero said of Rome, when it was a burning. As for the Alms
which they pretend in building, they are like the white of an Egg without
salt, for the labourer is worthy of his wages, neither can Alms and stipend
concur in the same Salarie or gift.

SECTION. III.
THe third Imposture is, our English Apish vanity, whereby we tire our selves
in changes of strange costly and gaudie tire, not to cover nakedness, not for
ornament and distinction of orders, not for defense alone, but to show our
leuitie in imitation, our facility in aluring, beside our needless expense
and lunasicke inconstancy. So that although sundry Diseases are sent from
other Nations to us: Yet we are always the cause of the Chincough Cachinnus.
in other Countries, whilst they wonder at us, which as a King- Fisher being
dead, change with the wind, that is with each fashion, not unlike Horses sick
of the fashions; Indeed other Countries retain their old habit, out of pride
contemning the in frugalitie of new inventions, but we are changed with sordid
mutabilitie, ascribing the fault commonly to Women or Tailors, who serve like
Munkeyes or Dogs among Ladies, upon the sent of evil sauors: Whereas the
truth is, the husbands pride like the luster of the Sun, is seen in his wife
representing the Rainbow. When Solon came before Cresus, being demanded,
whether he had seen a more pompous show, answered he had seen Phesants and
Peacockes in their native habit, as for his apparel it was borrowed. O Solon,
had thou known how raiment came up, thou should have seen that thou
spakest not by guess: It was said, Is not the body more worth then raiment? as
if the body without raiment might be safe, for not only in the Golden age
before Adams fall, was there no need of such borrowed vesture, but even in
this Iron season, wherein Gold is of most estimation. The savage Indians,
rather upon ignorance of vice, then affection to virtue, keep all parts bare,
save those which nature biddes should be concealde, their simplicity, being a
ragged remnant of our ruined innocence: And if the temperament of our Climate
would endure the same, we doubt not but the bodies of sober minds would admit
the like naked sincerity.

SECTION. IIII.
THe fourth colored name of Magnificence, is Dion in Claudio.
painting, a notable president whereof was Poppaea, which had the Milk of five
hundredth she Asses to wash her face with, the oldest pattern we read of, was
Iesabel, though some would fetch it farther from Job 42.
Jobs daughter, which was named Cheren-happucke, by interpretation the horn of
stibium or complexion, but I think if some nose-wise Critic were here Nice
No^ de.
he would think that she was so called for her natural beauty, exceeding all
Painting, but it is not safe of an Etimologie to make an History, except we
like his Dream, that said Brutus was an adulterer, because O Brutus for
Obrutus.
of self-will, he thus read Ouids verse, O Brutus insanis esset adulter aquis,
whereas it is certain that Brutus revenged the Rape of Lucrese, and the
Adultery of Tarquinius, but such lips such lettisse, Painted stories and
Painted faces may well agree, the latter being made to offend by enchantments,
the former to defend them, certain it is that as Gunnes have taken away
manhood, so Painting has disgra'st beauty.

CHAP. VIII. Of Magnanimitis and Modesty.
SECTION. I.
THe next golden pair of virtues commonly reputed, are Magnanimity and
Modesty, differing in quantity as the former virtues, the first being seen
about great Honors, the second about smaller, these distinctions we will not
now refute, least we should seem Parents colere, that is to plough up our
Fathers graves, as it was said by Augustus. The first Cantherist that eats up
the roots of this tree, is self-love, which men (who skillful to suck Milk
out of a Flint) have thus assayed to draw out of the fountain of verity, it
is written, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: And therefore
self-love is enjoined, for the rule is better then the thing ruled, but
self-love is the rule. The thing ruled is the love of the neighbor,
self-love therefore is better and more inioyn'd. We answer, that Love of our
selves, is a rule natural not moral, like as when we say, be Morally
dilligent, as the Pismire is naturally, Also love thy neighbor Morally, as
Christ has loved thee supernaturally: For tell me, thou that iudgest without
prejudice, when it is said, Love thy neighbor as thy self, is this thy
meaning, as thou do, or as thou ought to love thy self? The first being
in nature, the latter in duty, if thou aver the latter as some have done,
then tell me how ought I to love my self? Is not now the rule as uncertain
as the thing ruled, and has ever any man (...) in (...).
offended in this duty, has ever any hated his own flesh, is not this
virtue found in brute beasts as well as men? Nay, can we think the Prince of
darkness loves not himself. To conclude, where it is said, I hate them as
if they were mine enemies, the meaning is, I hate them as, if I were a natural
man, I should hate my natural foes, so when it is said, Love thy neighbor as
thy self, this is the meaning; That which by nature thou do to thy self, by
duty perform to thy brother.

SECTION. II.
BY this it is plain, that the Name of Magnanimity being defined to be a
virtue, whereby a man being worthy of great honor, thinks himself worthy of
the same, does something smell of the Brimstone of heathenish pride, for of
what honor should a man dream himself to be worthy, seeing the highest top
of all knowledge, is to acknowledge that we have none, and the fairest
buildings of virtue, should be laid upon the foundation of humility. It Is said
that Neptune did help to build the Walls of Troy, because in the foundation
of building, we should dig till we come where there is water. Humility then
the foundation of Virtue, must be laid upon the water of contrition, issuing
from the clear fountain, wherein we see the faces of our own misery: and
therefore some have not doubted to say, that Aristotle in the great praises of
magnanimity, did sow pillowes under Alexanders elbowes: other deny the book
of Ethics to be his, because Nichomacus (as they say) was but six year old
when he died, as if Quintilian did not dedicate his institutions to his son
at the same years, other say, that these Ethicall discourses were popular, not
accurate, but why do these silly Hares thus insult upon a dead Lion? I
believe that he which groped so well in the dark, had he seen our light, he
would have looked upon the glistering sun, as well as any of our Eagles.

SECTION. III.
ANother Moth that frets the Name of Magnanimity, is an act, which some ascribe
to Fortitude; namely killing of a man's self, but for as much as honor has
been most pretended to be sought by it, it may seem to be a strain of
Magnanimity, rather then of Fortitude: now although it has been practiced, by
men otherwise famous, yea by women of the noblest spirits, yet we shall find
first that the five examples in Scripture: Abimelech, Saul, and his
armor-bearer, Achitophell, and Judas, are branded either with pride, or with
despair: next it is clear, that Codrus, Cursius, Minutius, and others have
done it upon barbarous superstition. For Satan knowing that Christ's blood
should be the propitiation for the sins of the world, of which the Sacrifices
in the law were types, persuaded the wandering Heathen, that the Divinity was
only appeased by humane blood, hence we have the oblations to Molech among
the Ammonites, and to Saturn among the Look Tobie Matthew his Sermon preached
before the Queen, 1580.
Carthaginians, Thrasians and Samnites, and to Haesus among the Gauls: as for
the three Decij, I take it, it was no vow but a policy. Cato Vticensis indeed
is much praised, but I suppose (all things considered) it was but a male
contented pride, that drove him to this exigent: as for the women, Dido,
Sisigambis Portia, Cleopatra, and others, they are the less to be accused,
because of the great infirmity of their sex, and impotencie of their passion,
and this is much more evident in Martyrs and Virgins, who pretending to save
their faith and virginity, cast not their wares out of the ship, but
themselves out of the world. Their good intent is not to be concealed, their
frailty is to be pitied: in brief it is not lawful to break prison, or to
leave the watch before the appointed hour, and though many glorious yuie
bushes be hanged over this act, yet indeed it is a wine running out of the
vessel of pusillanimitie, neither did any ever kill himself, that dreaded not
a danger greater in show, which thereby he endeavored to escape.

SECTION. IIII.
NEither has only Magnanimity been thus transfigured, but Modesty has
borrowed many feathers, one greatest and most deformed she took from the lasie
Owl, under this pretense (...) been qui Timo^.
latuit, been vixit, quia latere est viuere, and viuere ^st latere: this nation
of men leans upon this principle, a man is borne for himself, and therefore
it is but ambition to strive to help others, but as the root is bitter, so is
the fruit, as the principle is erroneous, so is the conclusion; God the Father
gave his whole being to his Son, these both in unspeakable manner breathed
forth the holy Ghost; these three persons made the world: and rule it with
continually-working assistance: the Angels are for our sake sent out daily upon
certain mysteries and Ministeries: Eve was made to help man, and he to rule
both her and all other visible creatures, the heavens by their influence
Scalig. exercita. 300. Sect. 59. 13
guide the Elements, which feed the plants, the food of beasts, and they of
us: is any part of the body made for it self, does not the liver minister
spirits to the heart, the heart to the brain, the brain to the whole
microcosme: wherefore he that lives to himself, quenches the spirit in
himself, and burieth his talent, but I spare to speak of this any further in
this bold and ambitious age, yet many we know there be, that have thus erred
on the right hand.

CHAP. IX* New Names of Clemency.
SECTION. I.
THe seventh virtue called Clemency, opposed to Cruelty and Indulgence, is
assaulted by many errors of Names: The first is this, some think, we ought to
forgive all injuries, not only in respect of malice, but even in regard of
punishment in censure: these consider not that prudence is the form and square
of all virtues and so of charity: true it is she suffers all things: namely,
which prudence advises may be suffered. Notwithstanding, first it is as true,
that to yield impunity to evil doers, is in a sort as dangerous as to punish
the just. Secondly it is mere folly to ascribe integrity to an evil man, or
to write him in the bead-roule of my friends, that is a close and dangerous
enemy: for example to trust a man of an other Religion, or contrary faction,
upon what protestation or bond soever, is nearer to phrenzie, then to charity:
credulity is after a sort as bad as suspicion, for he that believes the best
of every man, holds the truth of no man, for ordinarily it appears that men
credulous, because they believe the good speaking against the bad, and the bad
against the good, are found in event, if not in effect most suspicious: for as
an anarchy and tyranny differ little, so is it like perilous to believe all or
none. True it is, if a man repent, our censure must be altered, but our censure
must lean upon probable Arguments of a mindepenitent.

SECTION. II.
AN other supposed enemy of clemency, is going to War and to Law: Against
War, many phanaticall humors have been found to rail; but besides the
ancient testimonies and examples, of Abraham, Moses, Iosuah, David, and others:
The Apo^a. 17. 15.
New Testament describes the War of the ten Kings as most lawful: Besides
it is manifest, if subjects being witches and murderers, may be put to death,
why may not foreign Princes upon open injury be repelled, or reclaim'de by
War: Yea say they, but under the Messiah they shall turn their Swords to
Sithes, and Spears to Mattockes, and shall learn to fight no more. The meaning
is, they shall surcease all Civil and intestine War, they shall have no
tumult in conscience, and in the general judgment all warlike and domestical
strife shall be abolisht.

SECTION. III.
THe use of going to Law, may no less be defended, so that the cause be both
true and great, so that by no arbitrament, the strife can be determined, so
that rigor be not showed in the advantage. True it is, that suites before
Heathen Judges were scandalous, specially when the matters might have been
comprimised by private Vmpires. But Christian Judges, and causes otherwise
irreconcilable, remove this stumbling block: Always being remembered that
fraud, violence, and avarice, creep not into them that should be patterns and
patrons of Justice.

SECTION. IIII.
A New Chymaera does appear of clemency, under the Title of the prerogative
Royal, when wilful murderers, Witches, Sodomites, and obstinate Traitors are
pardoned, wherein although Princes in the most part do err, by ignorance of
the fact, not of right: Yet Trapezuntian flatterers make their Apologies, as if
it were lawful for them to dispense with any sin, not remembering that Kings
being Gods vicegerents, may not slack the bridle of his severity, whom they
represent. Domitian Suetonius in Domitian.
said truly, he that punishes not Informers, cherishes them: So he that
cutteth not off Murderers, is accessarie for all his Prerogative, neither do
we shorten the power thereof, but direct the limits. God is said, not to be
able to do that he will not, so we may say, Princes can not do that they
should not.

SECTION. V.
THe like deceit, but far more general and pernicious, is Indulgence,
whether of Captains to their Soldiers, or of Parents to their Children. The
former being the ruin of Armies, the latter of Families, which as they are the
Seminaries of the Commonwealth, so they spread their defects beyond all
possible means of redress: First, for commands of War; it has been found,
that the imperious cruelty of Lucullus was dangerous to him, as Appian shows
in the Civil Wars, and yet the remissness of Scipio did bring no less
damage for a time, till being better informed, he reformed his error. Scipio
the younger, for his prudent severity before Numantia, wherein he had more
ado with Ze^ophon in the expedition of the Graetians.
his Soldiers then his enemies, was in a manner preferred before all but
Caesar. Clearchus said, a Soldier should fear his Captain more then his foe.
As for the indulgence of Parents, although men otherwise most famous as Jacob,
Ely, David, have been noted for it, yet their infamy and punishment, and with
all the praise of Abraham, Judah, Moses, in Scripture, and in other stories of
Brutus, Manlius, Augustus, do show both the rareness of the virtue, and of
the virtuous in this behalf. For men being tainted with a natural self-love,
can hardly by reflection, see their own faults in their Children, being
portions extracted from their seed, and most times from their follies, so that
next to the taming of a man's self-love, vain pity to Children is hardest to
be subdued.

CHAP. X. Of the New Names of Veracitie.
SECTION. I.
VEracitie a virtue in telling verity, is Eclipsed by the shadows of sundry
Names. First, Equivocation desires to be cosen German to it, saying that it
reserues a lawful condition, as when the magistrate demands a thing to the
hurt of the party demanded: for (say they) it is against civil law, and
civility, that a man should accuse himself: wherein these men consider not
they abolish ius ex officio, a thing by them more practiced then Being Papists.
by us. Again, when Christ was adjured to tell whether he were the Christ; he
gave a testimony without all mental reservation. Now whereas they talk of
mixed propositions, partly mental, and partly vocal, as they disturb all
societies with their new inventions: so they make their speech a Centaure,
half a man half a horse, or like one of the broodes of Nilus, half earth,
half frog; a thing both shapelesse, and shaped in one mixture.

SECTION. II.
A Second bastard of Veracitiy, is an officious lie, a thing excused, defended,
and praised by many: but if this Lie be sifted it will be found, that it comes
Ab officio, verbo, non nomine, That is from hurting, not from helping, for
though it bewrays not thy friend, yet it betrayeth the truth, which should
be dearer then all friends, in desence of it many examples have been
alleged. Abraham lied to save his life, in calling his wife his sister, but I
wonder what foreheads these men have, seeing Abraham himself avouched that
she was his sister by the fathers side, besides this term sister in that
language, imports every kinswoman: Yea, but say they, the Midwiues lied, in
saying the Ebrew women were lively, and yet God built them Houses, we answer.
First, the word lively may signify Midwiues: Again the Ebrew (...) tongue.
women being premonished of the danger, might by the aid of neighbors
without those solemn Midwiues be delivered, as the Vigine Marie was in
Bethelem, and harlots with us, and all in America: Now where it is said, God
built them Houses, (...), (...) not (...).
it is meant of the Israelites, not of the Midwiues, the Ebrew word being of
the Masculine gender. Lastly, though it were meant of the Midwiues, the
blessing was not granted for their Lie, but for their fear of God, as for the
examples of Jacob, Rahab, and others, they are no more presidents to us, then
David's adultery, Salomons idolatry, Peter's Apostacy.

SECTION. III.
Chap. II.
THe last enemy of Veracitie, under the title of a preposterous name, is a
perseverance in the truth without auoydance of persecution: true it is, we may
not fly upon distrust, or against conscience, calling, or charity, otherwise
we may as well fly from pursuing enemies, as from the four great plagues,
wild beasts, pestilence, famine, war. Shall we not say, that he suffers,
who leaves his Country, his kindred, his goods, rather then he will howl
with Woolues: what if some Martyrs have been in this error, we live by laws,
not by examples; to conclude, he that flies may fight again as Demosthenes
said, and as Leonidas Soldiers, may reserve himself to better times.

CHAP. XI. New Names of Comitie and Vrbanitie.
SECTION. I.
Affability or Comitie is a courteous behavior to all men, Vrbanitie is a
pleasant facility in harmless jests, the first error of Name, which
ouershadoweth Comity is that, which indeed should be termed ambitious
flattery: This first is found in men that seek for Sovereignty, witnesses be
Iugurtha, Julius Caesar, Seuerus the Emperor, In Scripture we have Absolon,
Adoniah, Ismael, their ends were confusion, as intrusion was their means: now
if the fountain be Not be in Genesis, but in J^rem^^.
poisoned, what shall we think of the river, it is not lawful to say, that
Pharaohs Butler forgot Joseph two years, it is not expedient to say, that they
can flatter, that see the face of Ahazzuerus, they are so modest, receive so
little benefit by collusion, and have so small occasion to use it, that a man
would little think, that Crows should build their neast so near the palace:
true it is that Solon said to Aesope, men may not come to Craesus if they will
not flatter, but sure I am when Craesus was tied to the stake to be burned, he
was in another mind, certainly Aesope whither of purpose I know not, said, the
Lion could not be healed without the Apes liver, that is, Princes Herodotus in
C^^o.
cannot be safe without the death of flatterers.

SECTION. II.
VRbanity a most pleasant virtue, is pestered with the affinity of common
ieasting, which usually has one of these four vices: first, profaneness
against God, whose name when Pilate heard, he trembled: secondly, biting
scurrility, whereby men rather loose their guest then their jest. Vespasian
being once troubled at his table with such a Bufphoon, willed him to jest no
more at his friends, but at himself: which as Suetonius reports was presently
Suctonius in V^spasian.
done in most obscene manner; the third vice then is obcenity: these three are
in the quality; the last excess is in quantity, namely, incessant babbling: he
that would make a great fire continually, must rake together much mean fuel,
and he that will always be shaking the spleen of others, must have much
curiosity, more words, and most lies, his face must be as hard as the shell of
a Tortis, his tongue as sharp as the quilles of a Porcupine, his heart as
unclean as the stable of A^geus, before Hercules brought in the river Alphaeus
to cleanse it, and therefore this sordide generation should be banished into
Africa, as Titus did Promoters.

SECTION. III.
THe abuse of sundry Theaters here seems to present it self, which were they
reduced to their first institution, might heal as much as they now hurt: Among
the Romans no woman's part was played by a man: this was the mischief, the women
were Curtisans; neither indeed can it fit matronlike modesty to be Actresse on
a Stage; but by this we conceive, the heathens saw light though through a
narrow grate, and if we mark the ancient Tragedies of AEsculus, Sophocles,
Seneca, we shall find the reproof of AEsculus, wherewith he reproved
Euripides, for bringing a woman in love upon the stage, and for effeminating
the mind of the Athenians to have been most just, and yet such is man's
frailety, he that bringes in this reproouer, does every where (...)
abound with obscaenity; I grant it is not so comicall as Satyricall, but lust
is such a sin as it can hardly be reprehended without sin, and he that
will rebuke it, must be first wicked by experience, or by imitation: no marvel
then though all Histrionicall persons were infamous by the Roman law, though
they changed no apparel of their sex, though they played but once, and that
without hier; though their part had neither dicacitie nor filthiness: For
profane speeches were in those days capital, the Cynicks judgment also is
to be observed, whose opinion being demanded of Players, answered, the better,
the worse, that is the better Players, the worse men; and certainly, the
Actors are many times (...) in the ^^fe of (...)
more culpaple then the Spectators, specially if their Action be continual and
mercenarie; notwithstanding, if we mark how young men spend the latter end of
the day in gaming, drinking, whoring, it were better to tolerate Plays with
Augustus, Vespasian, Titus, Nerua, Traian, and other good Emperors, then with
Domitian to cut down the vines, least tillage be neglected, remembering the
verses set down by Suetonius against him:

Rode Caper vitem, tamen hin^ ^um stabis ad Aras,
In tua quod spargi Cornua possit erit.
Well gray-beard, croppe the Vine, yet when thou standst forlorn
At the alter shall be wine to sprinckle on thy horn.
For it is a Principle in Policy, that the deteining of the multitude by
public spectacles, is a great obstacle to many base and clandestine Actions,
and therefore a Player being condemned by Augustus for a quarrel at the
Theater, answered, if these things be winked at, the people shall have less
leisure to inquire into your great actions. It is said of See T^on in his life.
the Mantinians in Polibius, that the leaving of their Country Music, was the
cause why they degenerated into Barbarism and cruelty: so I fear if all
public sports were restrained, our Country would soon turn to sottishness
or mutineys.

SECTION. IIII.
AN other occasion of mirth, but hinderance of Vrbanity, is a certain sport in
cruelty, exercised upon men or beasts: first for men, we know that among the
Romans whilst Paganism endured, sword fight was publicly tolerated, whereby
sometimes in one day ten thousand were killed; this heathenish or brutish play
was abolisht by decrees of Christian Emperors, not much unlike this, is the
delight which we commonly take in innocents, which were kept in ancient time
by great men, partly for spectacles of horror and humility; partly for charity:
and therefore we have an old ceremonious speech in our Country, he cannot but
thrive, that keeps a fool, it may be also there was a respect had to their
ability and willingness to labor, but that men should make sport upon their
folly, which are no more obnoxious to it, then our selves: is an argument of
senseless and unnatural cruelty, neither may we commend the immoderate
delights in bayting of beasts and Cock-fights, seeing all these contentions
came by man's fall, so that if by accident we behold them, we are thence to draw
occasion of repentance rather then of delight, neither yet may we for all that
hence infer the condemnation of hunting and hawking, the former being allowed
by Isack in his eldest son, and both of them being but instruments of taking
those creatures, to which we have right: and therefore the accidental sport
being seasonably taken by men of ability cannot be disallowed.

CHAP. XII. New Names of Justice.
SECTION. I.
Justice a virtue of giving every man his own, either Arithmetically by
distribution, or Geometrically by commutation and compensation, has received
many See Justin in the beginning of his first Book.
variable Names: first by tyrannical power of doing all things at the will of
a Monarch, without positive laws in the Country, was a long time held for
Justice; this afterward proved very prejudicial, not only because tyrants
made stawking horses of their wills: for it is perilous when men can do what
they will, and will not what they should: but also because there did succeed
many Princes either naturally, or by education very defective, as Kilparicke.
Charles the simple and others, by whose arbitrament, if things had been
moderated and not by Laws, the Commonwealth must have suffered shipwreck.
Laws therefore were invented, and with great industry perfected, that the
actions both of Tyrants might be repealed and of fools moderated, Example
(...) and (...) in the (...)
of which we find in Caligula, Commodus, and Pseudantoninus. The same is to be
seen at this day in the Government of the Turks, Preter-Iane, the Barbar^an,
and the Russian, in whose absolute Government Laws are silent, equity being
destroyed by the rigor of Justice, and this is supposed to be the cause, why
more excellent men have been found in free States, as Rome, Athens, Sparta,
then in absolute Kingdoms, because in them the great Pike deuours the Eeles.

SECTION. II.
But although Laws have been most needful, yet three great defects have
been found in them, First the swarming of Suitors, for as many Physicians in a
City, argue much intemperance, so many Pleaders, much wealth, more hatred,
most contention. Poison in physic is an extreme remedy, because one
deleterious poison is hardly tempred but by one of equal strength: law and war
are desperate Tacitus in his (...) w^iting of (...) P^^sius.
medicines, and therefore as Informers were much complained on in Rome in the
days of Vespasian, not because they were simply to be taken away, but rather
to be diminished i^ regard of their number and power, and corrected in respect
of their fraudulent malice, learned fraud, and dangerous learning, so the
ouerflow of suites and pleaders, and the rancknesse of injuries in this kind is
rather to be lamented then helped, for though the latter be better, the former
is possible: now we ought to frame our wishes according to possibility of
things, which were it well observed, it would be a cordial to many,
Epictetus in his Enchry^^d^on.
whose melancholy, not the land of Helibore, no not Virginia now can purge.

SECTION. III.
A Second impotencie is in the execution of laws, when they that might be most
operative Judges, are too much employed otherwise in war or pleasure, the
Roman Emperors therefore especially the best, did often personally assist the
judgment seat, yea Claudius himself, though otherwise ouerruled by women and
servants, yet was much commended for a judgment he pronounced: a certain
widow hating her own only son, defrauded him of his inheritance, saying
he was a foundling A child found and brought (...) by her hu^b^^d.
not her son, the young man replied, that he was her son, and claimed the
land: Claudius hereupon commanded the widow to marry this young man: but she
whether through horror of incest, or hatred of his person, confessed that he
was her son, and so the land was adjudged to him, and therefore The
resurrection of fools.
it may be that those books (...), and Senecaes Cotakuntosis were made upon
flattery against him, not upon truth: Luther in his book de sublimiore
potentia, shows how a wise Prince is better then all laws, by a notable
example, which was this, one took a Noble man prisoner, whose wife came to
entreat for her husbands life, he answered, if she would consent to his folly,
he should be delivered, she craved first license to confer with her husband
about it, which was granted; her husband also gave her license to do it, the
next day her husbands head being chopped off, was sent unto her, whereupon she
complained unto the Duke of Burgundy, who sending for him, compelled him first
to marry her, and then beheaded him, intituling her into his lands and goods:
this Act he prefers before a hundredth sentences of wrested law: in brief,
those states are most happy, where the supreme Magistrate does moderate laws,
otherwise unchangeable, as those of the Medes and Persians.

SECTION. IIII.
THe third unhappiness of laws, is when they are not made altogether in the
first foundation, therefore the common wealths of Israel, Crete, Cybaris,
Sparta, Carthage, whose laws were uniformly made at once by Moses from God,
by Minos, Charondas, Lycurgus, and Phaleas, are preferred before those
kingdoms, whose laws have been framed successively upon new occasions, for we
see no Roman laws made in the time of a free estate, but upon seditious
compulsion, which howsoever by accident, did enlarge their power, because their
mutinies were ended by law, not by sword: yet if we mark the sequel, we
shall find, that first it was not durable but in war, being else molested
with Read the Florentiae history.
civil broiles: secondly, when it had ascended to the height, it could not be
preserved without a Monarchy: thirdly, when the Empire was established, it was
See Dion in Augustus.
like never long to endure, as both the event declares, and by narration of
the causes, might easily be convinced. To conclude, happy be the countries,
whose laws are framed with the caution made by Carondas, who did ordain, if
any man would change Dio lorus Si^ulus in his ^ibliotheca.
a law made, he should come wearing a rope about his neck, with which he
should be executed, if his new invention were not found better then the old
constitution: were this performed, interpretation and execution of old laws
would serve without innovation.

SECTION. V.
Diverse things are pretended to be enemies to justice, as first the remitting
of the rigor of our ancient laws, whereby wilful murderers were hanged
alive in chains; but howsoever this seem to equalize common fellons to them,
for as much as according to the present state, their executions differ not in
sense but in shame, yet if we consider all circumstances, we shall find, first
that this death by famine cuts off the ordinary means of repentance, because
it exceeds the patience of man's nature, and drives him to unexpected
despair, and obstinacy: again, it shall appear, that this ancient cruelty
would now too much harden our hearts, more then sufficiently frozen over with
the insensible yse of incharitablenesse.

SECTION VI.
AN other supposed enemy of justice, is the practice of Usury, which indeed if
it be exercised to the poor, or to rich without respect of damage in suing,
may be intolerable; but in case of interest when time of payment is neglected,
in the state of Orphants, in mutual hazard, or in hazard public, simply to
dissalow it, is to cut of all traffic and society, for this sin is rather
in the conscience then in the act, therefore no penalty is imposed upon it by
Gods law; true it is, our laws tolerate ten in the hundredth, but the intent,
not the rigor thereof is to be weighed, for the clearing of justice: the
imperial laws which appointed six, eight or twelve in the hundredth, do show
there is great difference in the moderation of these matters, which Prudence
only directs as the loadstone does the variation of the Pole.

CHAP. XIII. New Names of Constancy Abstinence, and Shamefastness.
SECTION. I.
Having run over the perfect virtues, it follows next, we should entreat
of those which are counted dimidiate and imperfect, the first is constancy, an
appendent to fortitude, which is a perseverance in doing good with resistance
of affection, so that except we will be Stoickes, who banish affections
specially obstinate, Fortitude is a virtue which should be; Constancy which is
for whilst we live in this clay, this generation of affections is Lasciuis
hederis ambitiosior, and sticks like a horse-leach, drawing blood till it
burst, but even this imperfect virtue, is perfectly ouershadowed, first with
obstinacy, which seruilefieth a man to his will so that he becomes like
Moecenas, a thousand times married to the same wife, always iarring, yet
always faint to be reconciled; the ground of this frenzy is, that men will,
before they deliberate; first executing the Prisoner, then enquiring of his
demerite as men say they do at Halifax, or as some have done in religion first
broching a new doctrine, then setting Clerks a work to maintain it by
exquisite argument: this obstinacy feeds heresy, as the vapor of the
adjoining Sea does the flame in Mount Aetna, which breaks out every third
Thucidides, lib. ^^.
year, the only medicine of this fancy, is Argumentum a fustibus, flat
violence upon injury, whereof he shall find best experience, that deals
with Mariners, or vntutored Barbarians.

SECTION. II.
ANother soyling of constancy, is an immode^ate kind of self-love, such as
Pamphilus pretends in Arcadia, who though he loved many by a successiue
mutabilitie, yet proved that he was constant, by this reason: The thing which I
loved was my fancy affecting her, when that fleeted to an other, still I
pursued the same fancy, and therefore cannot be accused of inconstancy, which
is as much as if he had made himself the Center, and had drawn all lines of
the Circle, from the circumference of his actions to that one undivided point.
By this rule some Politicians, all pennie-fathers have been so guided, that as
Lions and other beasts are led by the sent in the night to their pray, so these
by their own self-love are drawn to each desire and action, so that where
they find not bonum coniunctum as they term it, they relinquish it as
unsociable.

SECTION. III.
THe second imperfect virtue is abstinence, or continence, which is a
temperance with the combat of affections, this combat in case of lust Divines
call burning, according to the saying, it is better to Marry then to burn.
Now burning is not only an assent after abstraction and inescation, commonly
called the first motion and delight, but rather a continual soliciting of the
mind, together with an auocation, from the ordinary functions of a man's
vocation. Here is then the vulgar error, to suppose each tickling of the mind
to be burning, and so to imply a necessity of Matrimony, whereas indeed if
a man abstain both from lawless acts, and be withal so laborious in his
calling, that he can (though with some difficulty) repel these fiery
assaults, he may be truly termed continent.

Si valiant homines, ars tua Phoebe iacet.
If men be aye in temper just, Phoebus thy Art shall lie in dust.
If there be no contention or resistance, how shall a man promise to himself,
that after Hymen's rites, he shall not yield to his own adulterous suggestions.

SECTION. IIII.
THe third inchoate virtue is Shamefastness, in ancient times much praised in
young men, derided then in old men, now in both, save that some have found a
new Name for their Palenesse, at the recital of their unrepented villainies,
which they have clothed with the maiden-like robes of blushing. Whereas indeed
blushing is but a fear of rebuke for an error, upon misprision or mistaking,
not a dead wanness for a fault, which a man never in tends to leave till it
forsake him, this is nothing but the stripes or streaked colors of conscience,
Quae caeco verbere torquet, Like the rods which are made in the clouds, but
blushing and fasting are banished together, the one being accused of ignorance,
the other of rigorousnes: The first was confined to Terra Florida, or some such
Country, where ignorance of vice seems to do more good, then the knowledge
of virtue, the latter was shipped over into the I Will of superstition.

CHAP. XIIII. The Frenzies of Friendship.
SECTION. I.
FRiendship not a virtue, but the reflection of virtues in two, as being a
mutual love not lurking, does change her Name as often as the Sea. which here
is called Aegeum, there Ionium, elsewhere Adriaticke, Atlantic, Persic, and the
like. The first Name, is Love, which like the fish Polypus, assumes the color
of a Rock, to which it sticks; so does this, of friendship, here is only the
difference, the fish deludeth other fishes only, this it self principally;
but tell me, what is love? A Mule is a beast begott of a horse and a she
Ass: so love is an humor begot between wit and idleness, and to omit other
imputations, it has borrowed the names of two famous Arts, insomuch that the
Arts themselves are almost lost, if some small shards of them had not been
dug out of the monuments of antiquity, the first is Music, the Theorie
whereof is almost abrogated by Arithmeticall and Geometrical proportions, so
celebrated in Pythagoras and his followers, and now laid in Democritus pit,
where he buried truth: the practice also of Music is deformed by amorous
Lyricks, whose Sonets are nothing but bellows of contemplative lust, of whom
may be said what Iuuenall says of women:

Haec faciunt, quibus accendi iam frigidus aeuo
Laomedontiades, and Nestoris hernia posset. Satyr. 6. Set down by Sir Thomas
Eliot in his government. li. 1. cap. 20. 21.

To pretermit other innouations, the Art of Dancing with the mysteries thereof,
which was an Appendant of Music, is now made the mother of toys, and whereas
in ancient times it served Mars, Minerua, Ceres, and Pan, War, Learning,
Husbandry and Shepherds, now forsooth Dame Venus has made an impropriation of
it.

SECTION. II.
THe second Art, which this Circe with her wand has enchanted, is Poetry, by
her Siren songs drawn down from the top of Parnassus, almost to the vale
of Taenarus. The Duke of Vrbins Painter, being commanded to draw the shape of
Paul and Peter, drew the face somewhat red. other points of his workemanshippe
were commended. but when a doubt was moved of this, he answered that indeed
they were somewhat pale with preaching, but were they now alive, a vermilion
blush would dye their faces, to see the lazy fattnesse of their imagined
successors: so I think, if a man would paint Homer, Hesiod, Aratus, Nicander,
Oppian, Horace. M^dta Drrcaeum leuat (...)
Heroicke Poets: or the Tragedians, AEsculus, Sophocles, Lycophron, or that
famous Theban Swan, Pindirus the Prince of the Lyrickes, or the Latin Poets,
Virgil, Claudian, Lucan, Statius, I suppose they should all be painted
blushing, to see Euripides, Theocritus, Catullus, Ovid, Martial, and others,
serving Venus in Mineruas raiment: if we consider those heavenly Poets, Moses,
Job, Deborah, David, Esaias, Habacuk, or those of a lower rank, but yet divine,
Nonnus, Apollinarius, Serranus, we shall see that the most excellent subjects
were selected for Poetry, that the wisest Princes, holiest Prophets, most
learned Priests, thought them selves honored by this Art: but now pardon me
you Manes Homerici, and Virgiliani, she is now become Trulla, I had almost
said the Trull of lewd loves, fancies and passions: redeem her from this
shame, if any sinew of Spencer be left in you, and let it be a capital fault
in Virginis choro, I mean Pallas, Veneris torum vel nominasse.

SECTION. III.
Grievous it is, that the wolf should devour the Lamb, but when the Lamb
eats the Lamb, what Southsayer would not be amassed? Friendship to be injured
by vice, is evil, but no wonder; but it is a wondrous evil that a virtue,
namely Concord, should do her wrong, yet so it is, some men think they should
have concord with all men, friendship with none: by concord they understand
peaceable conversation, upon respects of mutual gain, pleasure, honor; by
friendshipp, they fancy a thing in abstract or rather in the clouds, a perfect
similitude of manners, studies, age, degree, with cohabitation, a thing
scarsely to be expected in heaven, where although love have Temperamentum ad
pondus (as they say in Physic) yet as a star exceeds a star in one of
the six magnitudes, so soul surmounteth soul in glory: all the cupps are
full of Nectar, yet one surpasses another in capable quantity: wherefore upon
this pretense, that friendshipp cannot be more then Celestial, to abandon the
golden linckes of friendshipp, and to use only the base coin of common
concord, is a greater sign of suspicion then of virtue, we do like the
fellowshipp of Saints, not only by the light of faith, but partly led thereto
by reason: Antigona could say, that she ought to please those, with whom she
Sophocles in Antigona.
hoped to remain for ever, meaning thereby the Citizens of Heaven: So if
Socrates in Plato, and Sybilla in Virgil, do tell us that heaven, or Elysium
is prepared for good men, we ought to be acquainted in this sea, that when
we arrive at the hoped Haven, we may enjoy the joy of indissoluble
friendship: and although concord make a good Citizen, yet he that wants
friendshipp, is but a bad man, for a good Citizen and a good man are not all
one.

SECTION. IIII.
COmbinations of thieues, of them that follow the Lupercals, of Rebels, of
Heretics, have Obscene sacrifices of Pan.
also challenged the name of friendshipp, as if she were a Camelion, admitting
all colors but red and white; the former being a symbol of modesty, the
latter of integrity: Certain it is, that union not of minds, but of causes,
makes friendship, else this virtue might be found in Plutoes guard, and among
the Nymphs that watch about Acharon, Styx, Lethe, Cocytus, Peryphlegeton, the
five loathsome Lakes of hateful hell: yet so it is, these seeming societies,
or rather conspiracies, using order in disorder, I mean in the feasts of Bona
Dea, that is of good fellowship, have made a Monopoly of all neighborhood, as
if the better sort did live like Apri singulares and Solivagi, solitary
wandering Boares, whereas these good Wolves pray together, though it may be,
they never prayed but in a storm, in which. if Bias had been with them, he
would have desired their silence, lest that God hearing their prayers, so
contrary to their deeds, should as contrary to their wills drown them in the
seas, as they with their wills had drowned themselves in the dead sea of
pleasure. But here is the error, they cannot be merry See the Legend of
Phaedria in the 2. book of the Fayerie Queen.
except they laugh a Sardonian laughter, qui plus Alloes quam Mellis habet,
which turns at last to wormwood, or rather to the worm that never dies, and
the burning wood, whose consumption shall never receive consummation: but the
truth is, this violent amity cannot be perpetual; when Apes sees Nuts, and
Serpents Bettany, they leave their dancing and hissing concord, and fight a
Cadmion fight to win a bloody victory, where the Conqueror weeps, and he
that is conquered is undone.

SECTION. V.
THe plurality of friends, is not the least Viper eating out the heart of
friendship, and yet as Polygamie will needs be Marriage, howsoever in latter
times it is accounted adultery: so he that has many friends, thinks he has
much friendship. Well, Adrian said truly, by the multitude of Physicians D^^^
in h^s li^^.
the Emperor is dead, so I suppose, friendship being H^rod^tus in C^^ *Th^s is
Gi^on in the 2. o^ G^ne.
distracted like the river * Gingdes, by Cyrus into three hundredth sixty five
Brooks, to loose both her Name and nature. An old man in the Fable at his
death, demanded his Son what friends he had, the young man answered very many:
Well said he, I have lived so long, and yet have found but half a friend, you
therefore for your instruction do thus: Kill a Calfe and put it in a sack,
go to your friends and tell them it is a child, whom you have murdered,
requesting them to bury and conceal it, the young man obeying, found that his
friends sho^ke him off, as a Spaniell coming to land, shakes the water off his
hair, then at his Fathers advise he went to his half friend, who presently
assented to it, mean while one of this yong-mans friends accused him, and had
sent him to Charon before his Father, had not the matter been discovered, we
need not Print the meaning of this tale. It Is plain, that as he that had his
hair half Gray half Black, being Married to a young and an old wife, the
young pulling off the Gray, the old the Black, he became Balde before he was
crafty, so he that diuides his friendship, as the harlot would have had the
child before Solomon, may Marry with friendship by the Popes old Law, for he
is above seven degrees from it. We have read only of David that had two
friend, Jonathan and Husha, but the latter was not his friend, till many years
after the death of the former: Some think Augustus Caesar had two friends,
Maecenas and Agrippa, but the former was so garrulous, the latter so impatient,
that he had much ado to shun the one, and bear with the other. And whereas
some make Poll^o, to be the third, Dion refutes that error, showing that
Poll^o was so cruel, that when A^g^stus came to suppe with him, he commanded
one of his servants for breaking a Crystal glass, to be cast to his Lamprees,
that they might devour him alive, but Augustus calling for all the Christals
in the house, brake them, and saved the servant, and afterward he demolished
Pollioes house, though he gave it him on his death bed. By this declaring that
Princes may have many wel-willers, but few friends, for the friends of great
men dwell either at the City Trapezus, so called of (...), a Table, or at
Placentia, so named a placendo, but few either at Verona, or Constantia, few
are either so true or constant, that they will not hold their friends as men
do Wolves by the ears, not able to retain, and fearing to let go. Most
clear it is, that the noble paires of friends, Orestes and Pylades, Nisus and
Eurialus, Damon and Pytheas, Scipio and Lelius, Cicero and Atticus, Iesippus
and Fuluius, and in the Arcadia, Musidorus and Pyrocles, are no less extold by
Aristoes two Swannes, History and Poesy, then Dichotomies are by Ramists, or
the quadrature of the Circle, and the Philosophers stone by them that never
knew them. To seal up all, we will have Catoes posie in his Ring: Esto
inimicus nullius, vnius amicus.

CHAP. XV. Vain Titles of heroycall Virtue.
SECTION. I.
Virtue according to the Stoickes, was divided into Cathecon and Catorthoma,
that is, Cicero. O^^ic. 1.
into Virtue mean and possible, or Virtue transcendent and heroycall, such as
the Scriptures ascribe to Sampson, the Poets their Apes to Hercules, and our
writers to Prince Arthur. This virtue has been three ways assaulted, First,
by calumniation, for actions done by divine instinct, have ever found some
Zoylus, Momus, Mastix, or See Spencer. lib. 6.
tongue of blattant beast, so called of (...), to hurt. Hence comes (...),
damage, from which it may be, our word Blab does fetch his Pedigree. The
deeds of Sampson are scoft at by many, not knowing with what spirit he did
them, as for them that carpe at the acts of Hercules, we pity their brains,
because they understand not the Poets divine intent, which was to describe a
man endued indeed with eminent Virtues, yet not exempt from human passions,
and therefore they feign him drunk, and mad, and that which is worse then
both, so drunk and mad with the love of Omphale, that he served her in a
woman's habit. Not unlike things do Homer and Statius ascribe to Achilles,
neither is Homers Ulysses free from all tincture of folly: Yea Virgil the
Prince of Helicon, decyphering in his Aeneas, the valor of Achilles in the
Iliads, and the wisdom of Ulysses in the Odysses, is not blamed for writing
that verse,

Speluncam Dido dux and Troianus eandem AEneiad. 4.

Deueniunt. --
Who knows not what followed, and how sharply he was rebuked from Jupiter by
Mercury. But some Ass that never tasted of the Modals will say, why do you
bring your patterns from brain sick Poets? to whom we shape this answer,
not only these which lie not, because they say they lie; but even those which
cannot err, have set down men of heroycall virtues, yet darkened like the
Moon with some blot; therefore as well the sins as the virtues of Moses,
Sampson, David are registered with the point of a Diamond in the glass of true
history, seeing none can truly challenge that to himself, which the Hasell
tree said in Ovid,

Nux ego iuncta viae, quae sum sine crimine vitae,
A populo saxis pretereunte petor.
I silly Nut-tree bordering on the way,
Which in my life did never err or stray,
With staves and stones in manner rude
Am pelted by the multitude.
Or thus,
I faultlesse Nut-tree joined to the way,
With stones and staves am pelted every day.
SECTION. II.
THe next impeachment of Heroycall virtue is Apish imitation, to which may be
applied that of Horace,

Pindarum quisque studet aemulari,
Iuli ceratis open Dedalea
Nititur pennis, vitreo daturus
-- Nomina Ponto. Horace Ode. 2

Iulus, who strives Pindar to emulate,
With waxen wings which Dedal's art did make;
He flies in vain, to give by hapless fate,
Names to the Icarian, glassie, bluish lake.
We read of Salmoneus imitating Jupiters thunder, and so punished by it.

Vidi and crudeles dantem Salmonea poenas. Aeneid. 6.
By which is insinuated that actions divine or supernatural, are not with
emulation to be followed, but to be adored with admiration; for this in other
things is most ridiculous, in religion most perilous, of which hereafter.
Antonius that would in all points be Alexander, Alexander himself that would
be son of Jupiter Hammon, Commodus for imitating Hercules, and Nero Phoebus,
both in ^inging and driving Chariots, are read of with as much laughter being
dead, as being alive, they were feared with hatred: M^crinus in Herodian is
much condemned for his vain persisting in the steps of good Pertinax,
wearing like the Cuman Ass the Lions skin, till the stranger that had seen
a Lion, knew him by his ears and braying. Caligula would needs imitate Julius
Caesar in conquering Britain, and conducting his Army to the sea side,
commanded his Soldiers to gather shelles, which he called the spoils of the
Ocean, and binding a few Germans that never fought against him, led them in
triumph to Rome; with many other things, which Dion, Suetonius, and Tacitus
also, if that part of him were extant, have reported, not because they should
move the spleen, but that we may see how Princes have been flattered in
things so absurd, in so much that Vespasian had like to have been put to
death, because he seemed in some sort to be weary of Neroes singing; and
Corbuto was killed before hand, because it was thought he would dislike it when
he came: and this certainly has been the means to increase the insolency of
many Tyrants, that once takinga conceit, that they were like some famous
Prince; their humor being found and followed by some worse then Crows,
feeding upon the faults of the living, not upon the carkases of the dead, have
withal cruelty endeavored to make good their first fancy. Bassianus the
Emperor thought himself so like Alexander, that when a Lawyer in a Plea with
one of that name, did cry out, O wicked Alexander! O the manners of Alexander!
what shall be done to Alexander? at length in great choler answered, if you
do not quickly cease reyling of Alexander, you shall feel great Alexanders
power. If I should tell at large the like things of Commodus, I should write
out the(...) propounded by Menenius Agrippa, how the Nobility was reputed, he
told the people which revolted from the Nobility, that the stomach was once
forsaken by the members of the body, complaining, that it was idle, and they
endured all the labor for it; In conclusion, the stomach fainting, they
likewise quailed, and too late agnised their own error. This parable so moved
the multitude, that they never after upon any mutiny labored wholly to
abolish, but to qualify and moderate the Nobility: and howsoever in the civil
wars of Scylla, and Marius, Cinna and Sertorius, Pompey, Crassus and Caesar,
Anthony, Lepidus and Augustus, the Nobility was much impaired, yet Augustus
according to his public providence, repaired and honored the Senate,
augmenting their Revenues, purging their infamies, and at least in appearance,
confirming their authorities: And this as it was not neglected by Tyberius, so
was it mainely respected by Vespasian, Nerua, Traian, Aurelius, Pertinax, and
other Emperors, no less worthy of a Maeonian Trumpet then Achilles. The
Venetians, Florentines, and they of Genoa have most curiously observed the
same; but Venice is most famous for it, as appears by that excellent Epigram:

Not Mark but Mercury does keep her warm,
And Sea-God Neptune hugges her in his arm:
Fertile, though vnfertill of all good things,
Her Prince a Monarch, and her children Kings.
For the Nobility is interessed in the Commonwealth, neither do I think, that
any State, either ancient or modern, can be preferred to it for polliticke
and discreet Government: It were laborious to recite, and tedious to hear,
how, as when Bees are decayed, they are revived by the death of an Ox; so
Nobility has been often repaired in France, England, and elsewhere. When
the two Roses in England, the red and the white, had almost been made red with the blood of thirteen set battles, yet care was had by that second
Solomon, I mean that renowned Henry the seventh, that out of the ashes of the
old Nobility, a new Phoenix might be raised.

SECTION. IIII.
THE second error concerning Nobility is, that birth alone is Magnanimity or
Heroycall virtue: this has sufficiently been refeld by Agrippa, De vanitate
Scientiar. Saty. 15. Saty. 2.
by Iuuenall, by Persius, but especially by Maximilians fool, for when he
desired to bring his Petegree to Noah's Arc, he told him, that whereas now he
reverenced him like a God, if he came once to the Arc, he should be his
fellow; for he was sure, that he also descended from thence. Furthermore
concerning this successiue Nobility, these things are observed: First, that
children so borne, seldom enlarge their fathers government, but resting
contented with their atchieuements, settle upon their lees: Secondly, these
men coming with ease to authority, being trained up in a flattered education,
do easily degenerate to all lawless license; examples of Nero and Commodus
are evident: Nay, Herodian shows, that this consideration greatly Herodian l.
1.
molested Marcus Aurelius upon his deathbed; and therefore both the same
Marcus, and Pertinax; yea and Augustus himself twice indeed: likewise
Tyberius and Seuerus always in show, a tempted to reduce the Commonwealth to
the Government, by election, not by succession. But although it be true, that
sometimes ignorant or evil Princes succeed, yet the condition of Kingdoms
and Nobility is not alike; for although the King be insufficient, yet his
peaceable succession preuents intestine mutinies, specially if the Councellers
be wise; and foreign invasions do not approach: but when the children of
Nobles are weak or wicked; it will be hard to find a domestical remedy:
Thirdly, we find a Commonwealth not to be durable, where linkes of order are
not equal in proportion of dependence, for in nature we see, that the Elements
are joined by Symbolization, the air to the fire by warmenesse, the water to
the air by moisture, the Parcite Philosopho manes Ciceroniani and Syd mani.
earth to the water by coldness; but where Nobles are without regard of
virtue, there is no descending by stayres, but either a Pesant or a Gentleman,
a Dolphin or a Dog-fish, an accident or a substance: Lastly, mere Nobility is
commonly the ruin of the family; for he that is noble without virtue, proves
ignoble by extraordinary vices of his own, or devises of others: wherefore it
is expedient that the Temples of virtue and honor be built together as it was
in Rome, and that every man take great birth, to be an obligation of virtue
made unto him: It was ominous in Xerxes Army, when a Mare Iustine.
brought forth a Hare, for it was a sign that his great Army should be
surprised with prodigious cowardice: no less monstrous is it to see Thyrsites
come of Achilles, to see Samias Ninias the son of great Ninus, drunken
Cambises of sober Cyrus, and Marcus to whom Cicero dedicated his Offices, to
live as much baselyer then his father, as his father did more honorable then
his Ancestors: Who mournes not to hear the two sons of Tamberlaine more
inferior to the meanest, then he was superior to the best: it is a grief to
a Prince, when necessity inforceth him to fill his Councell-Table and places of
trust, with men of mean descent, whilst the Nobility claim their fathers
titles and titles of honor, and yet are neither sent to war, nor rule in
Judgment; as being either unable or unwilling: but in our land there be no
Wolves, and I hope neither Owls nor Asses: we detest the Bull of Pius Quintus,
that laid this imputation upon us, whether upon error or wilfully we know not,
but certainly we have had, and have many buds of true Nobility, which have
brought forth the fruits of Magnanimity and heroycall virtue.

CHAP. XVI. New Names of Arts.
SECTION. I.
THe moral Virtues being handled, it remains to treat of the intellectual,
which commonly are reckoned five, Wisdom, Understanding, Science, Prudence,
Art. But I know not by what infelicitie, Art and Science, have under their
names comprehended the rest, as the Roman Legions in the days of the
Emperors, were grown into disordered numbers, so that one contained the
quantity of many, before ordained in the time of good Military discipline.
Arts are of sundry kinds, some isntrumental, Grammar, Rhetoric, Logic, but
these three are special, the general be History and Poesy, the others be
principal, and they are either Contemplative or Practicke. The former is
divided into Metaphysickes, Physickes, and Mathematickes, under the last
whereof, are comprehended Arithmeticke, Music, Geometry, Astronomy: The
latter be parted into active and factiue, Active be Ethicke, Oeconomicke,
Politic under which is the Civil Law and Art of war. The Factiue, are all
mechanicke Arts, as Medicine, Husbandry, Cookerie, Building, Armorie,
Clothing, Shipping: Now to tell the false names of these, would require a
tenth Muse or an other Scaliger. In whom Salust said, was Dubartus.
the Babylon of learning: First Grammar has got a new name of Critickes, who
have found out the blessed Art of changing words, when they understand them
not, to whom may agree the censure given of Erasmus by Lipsius, Magnus Erasmus
fuit, See Sauils Notes upon a place of Polibius, in the end of his Notes of
Tacitus History.
mayor fuisset, si minor esse voluisset, And I think the Author of this
censure, if he dissembled not in his Notes upon Tacitus, as he did in his
Book De Constantia, was not a little sorry of his time torn in these toys.
For that which the famous Geographer of Camden in his Britanie.
England said of Norfolke-men, that they strive about tittles in Law when
Titles fail: May as truly agree to these Crickets, I should say Critickes,
who fill their Books with Variae lectiones, and tell you a long story where
they borrowed this Manuscript, where they saw that Monument, how this
conjecture may be good, those commaes may be turned into colons, and colons
into periods, but I am weary with speaking of them.

SECTION. II.
Rhetoric now banished out of Turkey, as it was out of Sparta, has always
claimed the name of Patronage, whereupon some imagine our Lawyers to have been
successors of the ancient Orators. True it is, that many Pleaes are found in
Tacitus against Senators that gained by pleading, but there also they are
refuted. Neither can I but agree to that saying of Littleton, that good
pleading is a thing most honorable, railing and delays have been the stains
of this profession, some have been accused for falsification, some for
Ambo-dexters: But we may not blame the use of the calling, for the abuse of the
men. The Devil was an Angel, Balaam a Prophet, and Judas an Apostle. Though
some Lawyers have been thought to have been liars, yet Fitz-harbert, Ployden,
Bracton and Stamford, cannot Juris prudentes vocantur iure prudentes.
without great malice and parcialitie, receive these imputations, and
certainly in the Apology of Rhetorician Lawyers, it may be said: First, that
if they should not use much volubilitie of tongue, the multitude would not
admire, and so not reverence them. Secondly, where the sound of War is not,
there of necessity must be either mutinies, or Law. Thirdly, if Law were not
costly and tedious, and like the upper Mil-stone, as Usury is compared to the
nether, the vulgar sort which are as malicious as Witches, would use Laws
frequently, as footeball play, or dancing about a May Pole, and therefore this
may be as good an instruction to them, as that which a merry man said,
hearing there were many things to be decreed in Parliament against Alehouses:
I warrant you quoth he, it was at the motion of some Lawyer, for a dozzen of
Ale would end more Suites at one sitting, then would be spun over in three
Terms. Fourthly, the multiplicitie of Cases, does of necessity imply many
querkes, and therefore the Rabbis have found many quiddities in Moses law upon
the like occasion: Nay, suppose the Alcheron it self, were it not ruled by
barbarous severity, would admit endless scruples. Lastly, if the Law were not
full of ambiguities, wit, experience, eloquence, should have no place: only
it were to be wished, that the Orphane, the Widow, and the needy, should not
by delays and dimurrurs be deluded. I should speak of Logic and Poetry,
but upon other occasions I have before treated of them, only this I will add,
I do heartily wish that some great Mecaenas would maintain perpetual
professors of those two Arts, as also of Rhetoric, and Mathematickes in the
Academies, for then we should not be scorned in foraine Universities.

SECTION. III.
HIstory the witness of time, and the memory of truth, has also received much
obscurity, first, by the neglect of Chronology, which among the Grecians is
observed only by Diodorus Siculus, for Thucidides writes but of a small time,
so does Xenophon that supplied him. Polybius is almost all lost: again, many
fables have been inserted, as appears not only in Herodotus, but even in
Plutarch and in Liuie; yea our Ecclesiastical story has been found full of
lying Legends, besides this the, desire of Faction greatly Eclipsed the light
of story, of which our modern Chronicles are sufficient testimonies, also the
study of inserting too many orations, things indeed reproved by Diodorus,
Iustine, Herodian, have hindered Authors from inquiring into more matter, and
so have starued the studious Reader, the ignorance of Geographie has been no
less impeachment to the glory of History: there be also accidental miseries
much to be deplored, as first the cruelty of unlearned Tyrants, which have
sacrificed to Vulean so many labors of Minerua, as also that Readers and
professors of this Art, have not been dreampt of in our Universities, much
less maintained and honored: for he that will be a good Historian, must let
all other ploughes stand still whilst he lives.

SECTION. IIII.
THe science Metaphysicall is like a man, that has a Spanish gesture, an
Italian eye, a Dutch swallow, an Indian breath, a Negroes Venerie, and a French
suite, for it has borrowed some plumes from Logic, some from Divinity, some
from Physic, the lands are not out of final recovery, therefore may be sued
for: in a word, this science is non ens, a vacuity without a body, a name
without nature.

SECTION. V.
Natural Philosophy, were indeed a thing, and not a name only, if men spent
not their time, al in the Generals of Aristotle, never descending to the
particulars in Gesner, and to the practice in Galen, for certain it is that
Physickes without Physic are clouds without water, and Physic it self
without knowledge of birds, beasts, fishes, and creeping things is lame and
barren: here also the want of Readers in perpetuity, were to be renewed, if
either liberal men were learned, or unlearned men would believe the skillful;
but alas, there is a frost of charity, and the ice of Avarice has so covered
over the water of Liberality, that the fishes in the river Helicon, are in as
bad a taking, as those in the great frost, when the verse of Virgil was
verified.

-- Caeduntque securibus humida vina. SECTION. VI.
THe Mathematical Arts, were it not for Melancholy and want of maintenance,
would not be naked names, but things of ease and use: of Music I spoke
before, Arithmeticke is no more inquired into, then that it may be a band to
covetousness: Geometry with the Optickes, and Astronomy are too laborious and
costly for our idle and needy age, so that mad men and Mathematitians,
Alminackemakers and liars are almost confounded.

SECTION. VII.
EThickes and Politickes have been handled before, the Art Oeconomicke is
partly swallowed up in Divinity, partly covered under the wings of Avarice,
but with the pretense of frugality: the true practice thereof in Education of
children is little known, less regarded, for the rich will not, the poor
cannot bring up their Children, as they should, so that our present laziness
and ignorance, are truer then Prognostications of our barbarism, Atheism, and
ruin.

SECTION. VIII.
Arts Mechanicke or Factiue, are slubbered over with many neglects or
curiosities, tillage by the covetousness of a few is made a trade of beggerie,
Cookery by the daintiness of some, is become a Stews of Luxury; the Art of
Physic otherwise most honorable, profitable, pleasurable, by the unlearned,
idle, hasty, cruel, covetous dispositions of many, is abased among the
multitude, as if it were a trade of Butchers or murderers: Architecture with
Geometry is decayed, Armorie by too much peace is grown rustie: of Vestiture,
we spoke before: Shipping only and Merchandise now remain in better case then
other trades, for indeed one Mechanicke Art has devoured all the liberal,
Aenei. lib. 3.
as the Harpies did AEneas supper.

CHAP. XVII. New Names of false Religions.
SECTION. I.
WHen all Creatures had been fram'de --

Sanctius his Animal, mentisque capacius altae
Deerat adhuc, and quod dominari in caetera possit. Metamor. lib. 1

So all Arts being handled, sacred Divinity remains, which as it is most pure
and Angelical, so being corrupted becomes most devilish: the maine corruption
thereof is called false Religion: and of this kind, the first was Paganism,
Hell enisme, Helleni sme belonging to the Greeks, that worship many Gods.
Aeneid. 8.
or Polutheisme, for which Egypt was infamous, as the Poet says;

Omnigenumque Deum monstra and latrator Anubis. The greatest cousenage in this
kind, was of Oracles, as that of Dodona, where Jupiter answered, striking the
Caldrons with a silver wand: that of Jupiter Hammon* in the confines of Egypt,
that of the Trees of the Sun and Moon, speaking partly Curtius in the life
of Alexander.
Greek, partly Indian: that of Delphos, where a woman of fifty year old
answered, sitting upon a brazen three-footed stool, in Greek verse: that of
Latona in Butus a City of Egypt: that of Amphiaraus in Trophonius den: and of
late days the Oracle that answered Mottenzuma a King in America: for although
at the death of Christ, Oracles did generally cease, as appears by Plutarch,
yet it is plain by the story of Julian, as also by Dioclesian, and others,
(...) in his book of Eps^lo^ and I^ta. See Tacitus his^my. lib. 4.
that sundry particular Oracles did remain: the Collusions herein were
manifold: first the Priests often answer in stead of the Oracle, and so spoke
feelingly as men of good gifts. Secondly, the Devil persuaded the people, that
he was a God, and so commanded many both cruel Sacrifices, as the offering
of men in Scythia, and obscene customs, as of Ceres in Eleusis, Isis in Egypt,
Bona Dea in Toby Mathewes Sermon on good Friday.
Rome: Thirdly, it was pretended that things future were told, when indeed the
predictions were doubtful, that might strike sail according to the wind, or
were drawn from Nature, as from Physic and Astrology, wherein the Devil is
not a little seen, as being a spirit, and of long experience, or were taken
from the Scripture, as answers given to Alexander concerning his victories,
were taken out of the eight of Daniel; or lastly were known by some
commission: thus Satan might easily have told the destruction of Ahab, which
he was enjoined to procure.

SECTION. II.
THe second illusion in Paganism was used by Law-giuers, thus Minos pretended
that he had conference with Jupiter about his Laws, Solon, Lycurgus and
Charondas with Apollo, Phalcas with Saturn, Numa Pompilius with the Nymph
Aegeria, Diodorus, and Pliny also would have us believe that Moses used the
like art in promulgating his laws, but we have learned better things: The
ground of this fallacy was, that man by nature acknowledging a Deity, is by no
obligation so firmly bound, as by some Religion true or false.

SECTION. III.
A Deceit like the former, was much used in matter of war, when was devised
that Verse of Thucidides: Thucid. lib. 2.


Doriacum veniet Loimo comitante duellum. Or in Greek thus:

(...). Some read Limos, that is famine and not plague, but the truth is, it
was devised after the event, as such things are accustomed to be done: so
Codrus king of Athens being slain, the Lacedaemonians left the war of Attica,
being deceived by an answer, wherein they were forbidden to kill the King of
Athens: which thing, as I suppose, was craftily broac'ht by Codrus himself,
meaning to die for his Country; for the rumor being diuulged abroad, that if
the King died, the Lacedaemonians should depart without victory: the King in the
habit of a Faggot-carrier entering into the host, and brawling with a
Soldier, was by him slain, who stripping him, and finding that he was the
King, filled the Army with a vain superstition, whereupon the war ended.
The like is to be found in Scipio the elder, at the siege of new Carthage in
Spain, who having learned by certain of the Country, that the River had a
hig^ water about noone, told his Soldiers in the morning, that in his dream
he had seen Neptune standing upon the water, and promising him that he would
make it increase about noone, so that the boats approaching to the City, they
might scale and win it: the Soldiers at noone seeing the River to rise, some
subtle persons also giving it out, that they saw Neptune with his three forked
mace upon the River, flew upon the walls, and took the chief City of Spain
the first day of the siege. The most excellent in this Kind were Sertorius, and
Eunes a bondsman: the former kept a tame white Do, which he made his Soldiers
believe was Diana; by occasion whereof he won many victories, against his
Contrymen the Romans in Spain; the other persuading diverse, that he had
spoken with the Goddess of Siria, holding in his mouth certain These last
stories are in Justin, Liuie, Florus.
little Walnut-shels with Aqua-vitae in them, did seem to spit fire as he
spoke, and so wan that credit with many, that he stirred up that great servile
war against the Romans. In a word, the greatest Stratagem of war, in those
days, was some superstitious opinion bred in the hearts of fools, and
maintainde by the tongue of the wiser:

SECTION. IIII.
A Fourth cousenage in Paganism, was in Images, which they made the people
believe, could turn their eyes, sweat, and show many like prodigies; the
ground was, they thought they could do miracles, the greatest part herein was
iugling, and devises by hidden Instruments; besides, it is certain that the
Devil can do wonders, though not truly miraculous: yea will some say, but he
brought a foure-folde wind upon the house where Jobs children feasted: We
might answer, that there is a wind called E^n^phias, wherein three winds
concur, which a spirit might turn about and make it seem four; but we
answer, that indeed it stroke the four corners of the house, though it were
but one wind, which action though it exceed the nature of the wind, yet it
well agrees to the natural force of the Devil: they add further that the
plague in Egypt came with sending of evil Angels; some Psalm. 78. 49.
say, it is meant thus, Messengers of evil, meaning Moses and Aaron, but taking
it to be meant of Devils, as it is intimated in the 17. of Wisd. we say, that
they may add terror, and have to the pestilence, but can not send it in an
instant: what think you then (say some) of men turned into wolves, as
Nabucadonoser was into a beast, and the daughters of King Praetus into Kine? we
say it was a kind of melancholy, wherein men think themselves to be beasts:
Again, we think that plague was inflicted upon Nabucodonoser by God, not by
the Devil. Further they allege Matthew. 12. 27.
the casting out of Devils by evil men, but we say, either they cast them out
by consent, not by miracle, or that wicked men may do miracles, but the Devil
being actualy damned, cannot: lastly, they add the things done by the
Magitians of Egypt, or to be done by the Beast, but these are apparitions Apoc.
13. 13.
and not real.

CHAP. XVIII. The Impostures of Turcisme and Iudaijsme.
SECTION. I.
BEsides Paganism there are two other false Religions out of the Church: First
a great and general Apostasy, then Iudaysme: the Apostacy was begun by
Mahomet one of the finest Iuglers since the creation, he was a Mungrell, borne
of an Ismaelite, and a Jewish mother: he pretended the study of coniuring ten
years, and having married his Mistress, which was very wealthy, by
drunkenness (as it is thought) falling into the falling-sickenes, when she
rebuked him, as if he were a drunken beggar, he meaning that she should publish
what he said, entreated her to conceal it: for as a River stopped, grows
higher above the banks, so there is a generation called Women, which being
desired to be silent, will tell it more liberally; he told her then to this
effect: Have you not read that Daniel was sick when he saw the Angel? It is
the Angel Gabriel which appearing to me, thus astonisheth my senses; she
promised silence with her tongue, but not for her tongue with her heart: At the
next Gossips meeting, she told them her husband was a Prophet, and so from
women it went to men: in the mean while Mahomet had taught a Dove to pick
corn out of his ear, which he said, was the Holy Ghost in the likeness of a
Dove. About the neck of this Foul, he put a plate with golden letters, to
this sense; Let Mahomet be King: the simple Arabians which had lately revolted
from Heraclius the Emperor of Greece, because his Muster-Master being
demanded pay, had rudely answered them, saying, we have not enough for our
Greeks and Romans, and shall these dogs crave their hyre, immediately
elected Mahomet their king, who thereupon craving, as it were from heaven, that
he might have some excellent laws to rule them by, commanded them to go into
the Wilderness, where suddenly a Bull, or (as some think) an Ass came out of
a Den* with a book of laws tied about his neck: This beast he had taught
to take bread from his own hand, and these Laws himself An Heretic denying
the Godhead of Christ. Smithes boooke called Gods arrow against Atheists.
had framed, with the aid of one John a Monk, and Sergius a Nestorian: this
book at this day is called the Alcheron. His other prankes I will not recite,
as being at large repeated by Fox, Smith, and others.

SECTION. II.
ANd as this Sect was bred by fraud, so it was fed by deceit, as it may
appear by the poisoned doctrine, vomited out in the Alcheron: First, they
teach that a man doing good works, may go to heaven, of what Religion so ever
he be, but every man must destroy the adverse Sect with fire and sword to
increase his own. The first clause is the true effect of Atheism, the latter
does make them affect all their bloody conquests, and therefore at their death
they give Legacies and stipends to Soldiers, for the enlarging of the Sect of
Mahomet: Next they teach, that they pray to Mahomet, to commend their Prayers
to God, and so say they, you should do to Christ, as being but a holy man, and
not God, as was Mahomet: this was the devise of Sergius, who was a Nestorian as
was said* Besides they teach Polygamie to be lawful, and punish Adultery
with death. I know not whether they do better in the latter, or worse in the
former, but sure it agrees with reason. If a man have four wives, and as many
concubines as he can keep, for so much is allowed by that law, if yet he will
commit Adultery, he is not worthy to live. Furthermore, they abhor Swines
flesh and Bells, the one to please the Jews, the other to displease the
Christians: They allow also Circumcision, but in the eight year, not on the
eight day. Lastly, Friday is their Sabbath, that they might differ both from
Jews and Christians. Thus from a mungrell Mahomet, came a mungrell Religion,
compil'de of Names, shadows and impostures.

SECTION. III.
IVdaisme also is tainted with the like error of Names, for in three things
they differ from us. First, they have feined such a Messiah as is beyond all
Poetry, of whom this is the description. Enoch and Elias shall come again,
and prepare for his coming, he shall be a man only, not God, at his coming
he shall deliver the Jews from the power of all Nations, and shall bring them
to Jerusalem, which he shall repair with Salomons Temple, and there offer
sacrifice, and restore all the ceremonies of Moses. Likewise, all the fathers
shall then rise from the dead, and live with the Messiah, who shall make a
feast with the flesh of Leuiathan, which is a kind of great fish, whereof only
two were created at the beginning, See Job. 40. 41. Chap. And the Jews upon
them.
one presently killed and salted against this feast, the other to be eaten
fresh. This Messiah shall die, after a while the last resurrection shall be, if
you ask them of the weeks of Daniel, they will agree like the Chaldrons in
Dodona, like the Bricklayers of Babylon, or like our common makers of
Almanackes, it is no marvel though it be said, that a Veil is drawn over
their heart, otherwise it were not possible for a man to dote upon such old
sick men's waking dreams: next, they differ in their practice of usury, by
which, they think they may use us, as the Athenians (...) 3. lib. (...).
did the Aegenets, whose right thumbs they cut off, that they might be unfit to
sail: they think it lawful for them to take any forfeyture, be it never so
unequal, any morgage, any pawn, they are not afraid of that wenn which we
call (...), that is usury upon usury, no they dread not to take ten in the
hundredth for a week: their pretense is, because we are strangers, as if we
were all Cananites, or some of the seven Nations, which were as well to be
oppressed by usury, as to be rooted out by Iosuah: and mark this in them, that
whereas in ancient time Publicans and Sinners were counted as all one amongst
them, now themselves are the Publicans or Tole-gatherers of the great Turk:
Lastly, they allow Polygamie as well as the Turks, but are circumcised upon the
eight day.

SECTION. IIII.
THeir practices are no less entangled with error then their doctrine, for,
first they devised certain Et quicquid Graecia menda^ a^det in historij^.
Iuuenal Sat. 6.
books of Tradition, called the Talmud and the Chabala, wherein are more lies
then in Lucians true story, more then ever the Grecians devised, and yet these
are so obstinately maintained, that if any of their Children shall but incline
to hear our reasons and books, they will not stick to hurl them into hot
furnaces: Again, they have such an inueterate hatred against Christ, that in
contempt of him they will crucify Children upon Good Friday: besides if the
husband or wife turn Christian, the Iudaysing party maryeth another. Lastly,
their wondrous skill in wresting places from us by false interpretation, as it
can be ascribed to no other thing then their endless diligence (for they have
set down how many letters and points there be in the Bible, and how often each
is repeated, yea, many of them can recite the whole context without book*) so
it is a great cause of their obstinacy, which is also confirmed partly by our
ignorance, partly by our divisions.

SECTION. V.
Neither may we think, that only circumcised persons are Turks and Jews,
many with us baptized maintain both Sects in their lives. The Turks think a
man may be saved in any Religion with good works, and have not we men at
their death that are to choose their Religion? Do not many think they may be
saved, though they live as ill as he, that determines never to repent till he
die, though they eat as if they should die to morrow, and build as if they
should live for ever? The Turks deny the three persons, and we believe them
not, because we know them not: they hold Polygamie, but punish Adultery, we
the contrary. The Jewish usury, malice, and lying, iam gentilitate sunt
donata, they are become Gentlemen, O ungentle gentiles. Is not this to harden
the Jew, and to* awake the drowsy trumpe of the Turk? either live according
to your Baptism, or else be Circumcised: If you would but keep your words as
well as they, we would not complain of your deeds, but were Justice as
speedy with you as with them, we would say, redeunt Saturnia saecla.

CHAP. XIX. The Dreams of the Graecians.
SECTION. I.
GReece the Epitome of the World, Athens of Greece, so it was in ancient time,
but now it is the slave of slaves. The wild Boar has entered into her
Vineyard. The Turk in the great Temple of Constantinople, ties Lions and
Bears, and other wild beasts, which he feeds with the flesh of the Greeks
and other Christians. Their children are Tithed to be his Vassals and
Ianizaries, which afterward prove the most savage enemies to their Country,
the rest are forbidden to learn liberal Arts and Sciences, as Julian also
forbad the Christians. Their daughters are taken to be Concubines to the Turk,
all ancient Laws, divine and humane, are now bridled by the will of a
Barbarian: the most wise, witty, active Nation in the world, is subject to the
most cruel, unlearned, intractable, and vnfatiable Government. Where be now
the Olives of Athens, the Swans of Thebes, the pleasures of double Sea'd
Corinthus, the liberties of Laconia? Where be the houses of Elis, the horsemen
of Thessalia, the footmen of Macedon? Where be the Palms of Epirus now called
Albania? My belly my belly, I am pained with grief, the famous Nation,
spectacle of all wisdom, where were the seven golden Candlesticks, to which
Saint John wrote, now is in the iron Furnace, Fellonia est quod sit animo
fellio. Bracton.
and serves in Brick and Clay, under a far more fierce, fell, and fellonious
Pharaoh.

SECTION. II.
THe cause of this woeful misery rests to be inquired, some say it was
because the Greek Church brake down Images, other because they could never
endure the Popes supremacy: Others that because in the days of Gregory the
ninth, they revolted from the Latin Church, but these opinions According to
the proverb. ^ater^m. ^^uas.
smell too much of the Bab^lonish Brickes, which all the water in Tybris cannot
make white and sweet: Some ascribe it to the iarres and broils between the
brethren, about the Empire of Greece: Some have accused Constantine the Great,
for remoouing the Imperial seat from Rome to Bizance now called
Constantinople: As also for disfurnishing all Europe of their ordinary
Legions, by which each Border was kept from invasion, these causes are true,
but they are too low. Physic says, that all rhume comes from the crown of
the head, so say we, all trouble in a Nation comes from some sickness in the
head, this Church and people always* Aus^^n^ ad Q^od (...) in (...) upon (...)
were full of fancies and heresies, within four hundredth years after Christ,
there were noted eighty several heresies in that Country, but even at this
day their Dreams are many, though their troubles be not Dreams; but their
Dreams are these: First, they will not worship Images, least they should seem
to agree with the Roman Church, and yet they will adore Pictures: This is not
unlike certain L^^ro pr^^o.
pleasant men in Suetonius, who would seal bonds, thus, Caio Caesare and Iulio
Caesare consulibus, whereas Ca^us Julius Caesar was but one man. But Bibulus
his fellow Consul was counted a gull, and a Cipher according to the Verses.

Consule sub Caio factum hoc and Caesare nuper,
Nam Bibulo factum Consule nil memini.
This done, Caius and Caesar Consuls were,
For under Bibulus naught done we hear.
So these men know no Idol called an Image, but An Epistle of Epiphanius
translated by Jerome.
yet they run a whoring after idle Pictures: when Epiphanius rebuked the
Veil at Anablatha, because it had only the figure of a man upon it, think
we that Images and Pictures did not seem equally idle Idols unto him?

SECTION. III.
ANother dream of the Grecians is, that they acknowledge the proceeding of the
holy Ghost from the Father, but not from the Son: their Bulwark is a
Bul-rush, their staff is a staff ofreede, which who so leans on shall fall,
and the Cane shall run into his hand: but what think If Pl^nie fable not in
h^s seventh bo^ke of natural history.
you is their defense? tricks of Philosophy, which are like the lances of the
Pigmies: it is said that Empedocles was burnt in Aetna, whilst he curiously
inquired into the mysteries thereof. Oh, but this is a greater mountain of
fire, this is higher then the highest Alps, then Caucasus, then Paropanisus;
higher then Mount Picus, nay higher then the heaven of heavens: this mountain
burns more then Aetna, then Vesuuius, then Hybla, nay then Hell it self; if
men dare so presumptuously look against the Sun, that are no Eagles: it is
said when Augustine was writing of the Trinity, he saw by the sea side a
Child digging a little hole in the ground, and taking water with a spoone out
of the sea, to pour into this hole, the child being demanded why he so did,
answered he would lade the whole sea into it; he replied, the sea is too
great, the hole, the spoon, and thou too little; to whom the child answered,
so art thou unable to write of the Trinity, and so vanished: but I fear my
waxen wings will burn, if I fly too near this glorious Sun, and therefore
I leave the Grecians to their Phaulosophie. Eui^l wisdom


SECTION. IIII.
A Third Greekish dream which keeps them still in their Lethargy, as if they
slept upon a bed of Mandrakes, or had eaten the grains of Requies sancti
Nicholai, which Saint the Greeks so much Especially in Russia.
worship: this dream I say is, that they read their Liturgies ^^: strange
tongues to diverse of their Churches: In Russia at this day they read the Bible
in Slauonian, which the common people understand not: so the Jews read in
Hebrew, whereof many thousands of that Nation know not a word, what is this but
to pluck out Sampsons ^ies, and to make him grind and play upon a Harp: we
have a fable that the Dragon fighting with the Elephant, pluckes out his eyes,
and so seazeth upon him: the eye of the people is Gods word, which if it be
read in a strange tongue, is like the eye of Pentheus when he was mad, who
thought as Virgill says,

Et geminum Solemn, and duplices se ostendere Thebas:

This is a famine like that of Tantalus, Semper eget liquidis, Metamor. lib. 3.
semper abundat aquis, or like that of Narcissus, Exigua prohibemur aqua: for
this people daily handles the Bible, and yet knows it not, and are like
those men which were with Paul, who saw the light, and heard the sound, but
neither saw the person, nor understood the voice, or like the thirsty glutton
in Hell, who saw Lazarus in Abraham's bosom: these politic Churchmen are like
Vespasian, who inuading the Empire, first made sure of Alexandria, where were
all the Garners of Rome, that he might make the Romans yield for fear of
famine: these men forestall the bread of God from the people, but Pro. 11. 26.
the people shall curse them.

SECTION. V.
HEre I may take up the complaint, which Scanderbeg the King of Albania did use
in his life time, which was that Kings of Europe did not agree to that
overthrow of the Turks, which agreement howsoever it sound ill in the ears of
Politicians, who remember the saying of Scipio Nasica, that if Carthage were
destroyed, the Romans should have civil wars, the verity of which speech
was confirmed by Scylla, Marius, and other firebrands of the State, yet without
question, it is not alone to be imputed, to these and other such devises of
men, but partly to our iniquities, which make us partly unworthy to so noble an
enterprise, as killing the Erimanthean Boar by Hercules, Calidonian by
Meleager, the Tarentine by Pisistratus; partly to these doting dreams of the
Grecians themselves, out of which they cannot yet be awaked by the shrill
trumpets of woeful war, and the iron whippes of long and loathsome servitude,
but still they sleep on both ears, as if they had taken Ladanum Paracelsi, to
be made Eunuchs before they wake; well, proximus ardet Eucalegon, our wall is
the next, and it is to be feared, that Greekish lying errors, drunkenness,
inconstancy grow both rife among us, and the better nourished, by how much we
exceed them in wealth, peace and liberty: the Jews that were Gods people, are
now runnagates for all their boasts of religion, and the Greeks that have
been Conquerours are now bondmen, for all their boasts of learning: these
patterns are pensiled out to us, not that we should insult over their present,
but consult against our own suture misery, and learn by their dreadful and
cruel yoke, to beware of the lees of laziness, and the lies of heresies, and
not to suffer Cadmus or Jason to sow the Dragons teeth in our land: that is,
the subtle seeds of endless envy and restless contention.

CHAP. XX. The Wolf of Romulus.
SECTION. I.
ROmulus and Remus as the Fable goes, Dlutarch in Romulo. (...) Dion^sius
Halicarnasseus. V^rgil in the and of the 8. book of his A^neid.
were nourisht by a she Wolf, indeed by Laurentia the wife of Faustulus,
which woman obtainde this worthy Title for her unchaste and cruel behavior:
certes, what she was I know not, but this I am sure of, that her elder nursling
Romulus, could howl as well as any Wolf in Arcadia: yea and both rob and
kill, as appears by the murdering of his brother Remus and king Tatius, by
the erecting the Asilum and Sanctuary for all that were in debt, in bondage, or
in want, though they were as badde as he, of whom it Iuuenal. Sat. 4.
is said Monstrum nulla virtute redemptum -- A vitijs: as also by the stealing
of the Sabine women, for which, and other like Woluish deeds he was carried
away in a tempest by the King of Lycaonia, I VVo^fe^and. Dan^us ^n his book de
Sort^arys.
mean the Prince of darkness, for so Danaeus proves; howsoever Proculus
swear that he saw him like a God. But to leave him tormented where he is,
howsoever we praise him, where he is not, the Romans his successors, would
never leave his Woluish nature: the Kings, Consuls, Emperors, did howl and
prey so well, that no Princes in the earth which are called (...) shepherds of
the people could save their fleecie flocks from their all-deuouring teeth, but
after Constantine went to Byzance, Syluester and his successors, Boniface the
third and the eight, Zachary, Alexander, Gregory the seventh and ninth, with
others, did find such means, that they made Charlemaine Emperor, overcame
the Lombards, got Rauenna from the Emperor of Greece, after changed the Empire
to Otho the great, and in conclusion, trodde upon the neck of Frederick the
first, and got the Emperor to be chosen by the seven Electors, thus set
down in these verses:

Maguntinensis, Treuerensis, Coloniensis,
Et Palatinus dapifer, Dux Potiferencis, The (...) of (...)

Marchio praepositus Camerae, pincerna Bohemus.
Since which time the Turk has always incroached V^^sleg^nd in h^s Antiquili^
into Europe, like the Sea, that plucked Pharos from Egypt, Sicily from Italy,
England from France.

SECTION. II.
BEsides these Woluish devises, all sealed with the Fishers Ring, they have
found Lime-twigges to catch men, specially if they be pursie and fat, to
reckon all were endless, I will name some few, that you may know the birds by
their neasts: first, they have set up a great Kitchen, full of Grydirons and
Caldrons to broyle and boil souls in, out of which none can escape, except he
pay to the Master-Cooke great store of Vnguentum Album, that they may say a
Requiem for his soul: this Kitchen is like an Iron-Mill, which consumes all
the wood in the Country, or like the table of Vitellius, or Heliogabalus: in
this they burn all the Straw and Hay, for so they call their venial sins,
for which they get silver, gold, and precious stones: If a man should ask them
how they know it, if you be an ignorant man, it may be they will trouble you
with a Scripture or 1. Cor. 3. 12.
two, otherwise they will bring an old mootheaten book out of a dark corner,
called Traditions and another out of a darker then that, called the Legends and
visions of Saints; and with these Fables, worse then Esops or Ouids, they make
the people believe those things, which themselves deride.

SECTION. III.
AVricular confession is another Lime-twigge, or rather a hook even to catch
Leuiathan himself, for by this trick they have searched out, the secrets of
all Princes and States, and few forts of Virginity have been found strong
enough to keep out these bold and cunning Scalers. Hanibal was commended much,
because he knew the secrets of his enemies, but had he had a few Counceilers
of this pack, he would have found himself to have been but a nouice. It was
said of Julius Caesar, that he was Omnium faeminarum vir, omnium virorum
faemina: Suetonius in Julio.
which speech, though it be literally true of too many of them, yet it may be
another way interpreted of them in this manner; that of all persons that seem
to be weak as women, they are most manly and potent by the means of this
confession, and yet of all that pretend secrecy like men, they are the most
open tongued (I had almost said womanish) that may be; for by this devise there
is no Mars but they will take him in a net, no Pharaohs chamber in which they
will not croke like the Frogs of Egypt: And to conclude, they are as skillful
in the planet of Venus as Ptolomie or Alfragan, but in a worse sense.

SECTION. IIII.
A Third devise is in their Images, Pilgrimages and Saints: this fetch does get
as much as Bells Image did eat, and of affinity to these are their Iubelies,
which they like good Cronologers, Meton, Calippus and others, have varied in
diverse periods, drawing it from the hundredth to the fiftieth, I to the five and
Read S^al^ger d^em (...) temporam and upon E^s^bius.
twentieth year, not unlike Claudius Caesar, who set out the plays called
Saeculares, which by custom were kept every hundredth year, when as many, that
were not fifty year old, had seen the former plays in Augustus time; so
that the Crier could not publish his Proclamation almost for laughter. Not all
the Nauigations into West India, were ever so profitable to Spain, as these
policies have been to the keeper of Tybris Bridge: whence his name Pontifex
in part is drawn. The ground of all these is in Pardons, Bulls, Indulgences,
things more attractiue of gold, then the lodestone of Iron, then Amber or
Iette of straw; to these we may add the Cruciats, whereby pardon is promised
them, that will fight for the recovery of the holy land, by these he has
drawn many Emperors and Princes out of Europe, which otherwise should have
had both time and power to have bridled him: he has also found means in their
absence, that their Countries should be invaded, and he receive the gain of
the war. By these and the like Stratagems Pope John.
John the three and twentieth left behind him five and twenty millions of
Ducats, and Boneface the eight had as much treasure taken from him by a French
Captain, as would satisfy all the Princes of Europe for their expenses a
whole year: what shall I say of the forty thousand pounds, for the
tolleration of stews yearly Jn his book iayned to that de Heresibus.
taken? He that will know more, may read Curaeus.

SECTION. V.
ANother Arttificiall fire, is the name of Clergy, which hatcheth forth so
many orders, that they seem to swarm like Locusts, of all which the latest
set up by Ignatius Laiola, who turned Christians into Jesuits, and as one said
Iesuitas in Suitas has A (...) ^. See (...) Idololat^ra.
surpast all the rest, not only in strictness of vows, namely single life,
wilful poverty, regular obedience, but especially in diligence, and that of
diverse sorts: first Arts and tongues, heretofore buried in the grave of
idleness, now by industry they are revived, neither have they neglected
History, or other humanity, next they have been diligent in catechizing, a
thing before Luther unknown in that Church. Besides, they have refined all
their opinions, so that they were almost filed away: the newest Popery then is
scarce so old as the coming in of Beer. Furthermore, these diligent
bloodhounds, by their endless intelligences, which they have in each
Country, by their Arts of settling and observation, as they call them, by
their Inquisition proceeding from a hot burning zeal, have wondrously labored
to repair their ruins, so long foretold and now begun, they see what
Countries have revolted from them, all Great Britane, with Ireland, Denmark,
Swethland, and Norway, great part of France with both Germanies, Bohemia,
Poland, Hungary, nay they see themselves bearded in Italy, not only by the
Venetians that ever suspected them, but even by their best friends Millan and
Naples. We say that wild beasts when they are ready to die, bite most fiercely:
So do these Wolves, seeing this great Earthquake in their estate, among other
things, they Apoc. 11. 13.
have locked up the Bible in a strange tongue from the people, herein
surpassing the Jews and Russians, for they read the Scriptures only in a
strange dialect, but these in a language that has no affinity to the mother
tongue. To conclude,

Qui cum Jesus itis, ne itis cum Iesuitis. SECTION. VI.
THe last, but no ways the least Policy, is a fiction, far beyond
Heliodore, Apollodore, or Sir Philips Musidore, it is the description of
Antichrist, the manner whereof is this in effect. There shall arise a man, begot
by the Devil of a woman, which shall be of the Tribe of Dan, but this man
shall pretend that he is a Jew and the Jews Messiah, he shall reign three
years and a half, he shall fight with Gog and Magog, he shall bring down
fire from heaven, he shall put down Mass and openly be of no Religion, but
secretly worship the Devil called Mauzzim, he shall kill Enoch and Elias which
shall come out of Paradise to fight against him, whose bodies shall be left
unburied three days and a half: He shall reign in Jerusalem, and forty five
days after his death, the day of judgment shall be. This is their Antichrist,
a thing stranger then the Crocodils of Nilus, then all the rare things of
Arenoque or Guianoque, rivers in America: But because I cannot in prose
express it, you shall hear the tenth Muse her self, utter it in her own
language thus,

A thing more strange, then on Niles slime the Sun
Ere bred, or all which into Noah's Arc came: Dunne in his Satyrs.

A thing which would have posed Adam to name,
Stranger then the seven Antiquaries studies.
Then Affricks monsters, Guyanes rarities,
Stranger then strangers.
This Antichrist is most poetically figured also by the famous heir Apparent
to Homer and Virgil, in his Faiery Queen under the names of Archimagus,
Duessa, Argoglio the Soldane and others, throughout Saunders eight Book de
visibili Monarchia. Bellarmine 3. book, De summo P^atifice.
the first and fifth Legends. If any man doubt whether this fiction of
Antichrist be general among them, let him consult with the principal Wolves,
who have howled lowdest in this matter.

CHAP. XXI. The resurrection of Heresy.
SECTION. I.
THe resurrection, as other mysteries of the Gospel, was heard of among the
Heathens by a kind of tradition: But as Fame and waters, the further they go,
the more they are corrupted: So these traditions issuing from ^he true
fountain of truth, when they came into the Copper-mines and muddy channels of
the Heathens, were made bitter and vnpure. Among the rest, the Egyptians,
Pythagoras Herodotus in E^terpe. For Pythagoras, see Ar^stotle. Lucian. O^^d.
and Herod in the Gospel, did dream of a passing of Souls from body to body,
which we call (...), by which as many think, the Resurrection was darkely and
corruptly intimated. We read in the Scriptures, that John came in the spirit
of Elias, and so I think by the contrary, many pernicious Heretics of our
time, are led with the same spirit of the Devil, which was in Simon Magus,
Cerinthus, Ebion, Arius, Samosatenus, so that it may seem, that as Protesilaus
obtained leave of Pluto to see Laodimia: Claudian de raptu Proser.
So these men for a time have got license to reuisite the earth. It Is said in
Claudian when Pluto married Proserpina, Ixion, Sisiphus, Tantalus, Tytius and
the Belides made holy day, and the like Tale is told of our Lady coming to
Purgatory: for there is but a Wanscot between it and Hell, and the fire in
them both, is all of one substance, only the one Arius, a Priest in the Church
of Alexandria, Anno 320.
is temporal, the other everlasting: But howsoever these Tales be, both the
German and Transiluania can tell you truly, that they have many that follow
that doctrine of Arius, denying Christ's divinity: and if you tell them that
he voided his bowels, as he should have done his excrements, and that this
Calvin in his Institutions.
befell him at the Prayer of Athanasius, they will not stick to deride you,
and call Athanasius heretic, yea, and to condemn the whole Church. Seruetus
one Bellarmine in his book De Trinitate.
of this crew was not afraid to call the Trinity a three headed Cerberus.

SECTION. II.
THe cause and remedy of these prodigies is hard to find, as it was said of
the Allobrogians, it was harder to find them out, then to overcome them: the
cause therefore, or rather the occasion was this, men desiring to reform the
Romish Synagogue in all points, thought with the Hermites friend to cast away
the whole apple, because part of it was rotten: so these men seeing other
points to be doubtfully, or dangerously set down, suspected also the doctrine
of the Trinity.

En quo discordia Ciues --
Perduxit miseros, en queis conseuimus agros,
Barbarus haec tam culta noualia miles habebit?
The remedy is a general Council, which now may not be hoped for, the
Churches of Greece cannot come, as being oppressed by the Turk, they of Italy
and Spain will not come, knowing they cannot be parties, except they be
Judges: they that are in France Germany, England dare not come, remembering the
infidelity at the Council of Constance, where John Hus, and Jerome of Prage
were burned, notwithstanding the Emperors safe conduct, as also their
insufficient Read Gentilet about this matter.
dealing at the Council of Trent. To this may be added, that these Heretics
themselves do reject also Councels, Fathers, Antiquity, wherein they show
themselves to be more wilful, then the old Arrians, who neither at, nor after
the Council of Arimine, refused any such trial. Lastly, the sluggishnesse of
Magistrates, a maine remedy for this malady, is much to be complained of, for
these men will not compel the guests to come to the feast, these follow neither
the example of the Jewish Kings, as Ezekiah and Josias, nor of the heathenish
Nabuchodonozer and Darius, the Mede nor of Christians, Theodosius and others,
who compelled the heretics to renounce their blasphemies.

SECTION. III.
AN other maine cherishing cause of these heresies, is our ignorance and
contradiction in our See Zanchiuz contra quendam Arianum. Parsons in his book
of Equivocation.
interpretation of places concerning the Trinity, this appears by the
objections, wherewith they choke us out of our own Writers, the tree in Aesope
was most sorry, because it was torn with wedges made out of her own body; so
we are most wounded with our own weapons; many of our Authors writing rather
to confute others, then to confess See Remists upon Ioh. 1. and Bellarmine in
the beginning of the book De Trinitate, and Danaeus upon him.
the truth, and yet the slanders of diverse men are intolerable: the effect of
these errors is most tragical, for the Turks whose maine heresy is
Arianisme, are hereby made most obstinate, not only in their barbarous
opinions, but even in their wars, who in their savage manner of proceeding
do exceed the Goths, Hunnes, Vandals, and Lumbards.

CHAP. XXII. Frenzy with many heads.
SECTION. I.
GEryon for his three bodies, Chimaera for her three faces, Cerberus for his
three, and Hydra for her fifty heads, are most famous in Poets: but this age
has brought forth a Monster, which for number of heads, sting, and poison,
has been most miraculous, their names are more then the names of Diuelles in
Agrippa, names that would have posed Cyrus, Simonides, Cyneas and Themistocles,
to have remembered: the general name is Anabaptists, we call them the Family
of Love, in the Law Countries there be two and thirty sects of them, which
like Sampsons Foxes are tied by the tails, but differ in their heads and
opinions, they all agree in this, to fire the Church, and yet each man contends
for his own Sect: Like as men that fight at sea with fire and sword, wasting
each other, till at the length a storm arises which casts away both sides.

SECTION. II.
TO name their opinions were to desire the life of Methusalath, for a man may
be thirty years of their sect, and yet not know the Tyth of their doctrine,
yet the maine points are these; first, they believe no story of the Bible, if
you take it literally; for they take the Serpent to be nothing but man's
concupiscence, Eve the affection, Adam reason assenting to it: the Virgin
Marie they interpret righteousness, and every man perfectly regenerated, is a
very Christ: nay, they are notable Critickes, for they teach their Nouices the
Etimologies of all names in the Bible, for example, thus, Caine slew Abel, that
is, Possession slew Vanity: And many Allegories they frame hence, like the webs
of Spiders, insomuch as they say, there shall be no resurrection of the body,
but only a rising from sin, there is no holy Ghost but only good thoughts:
this coin Acts. 23. 8
they borrowed from the Saduces: again, they deny Magistrates, and war, and
going to law, all taking of oaths, all property of goods or wives, therein
going beyond Plato, who held all things should be common, but wives; who
therein (as one said) was contrary to many Cities, where nothing is common but
women: also they rebaptize men baptized by Heretics, and they dream that men
Dei-fide, and Elders illuminated as they term them, must be taught by
Revelation not by Scriptures: from the former opinion they are called
Anabaptists, Read of these matters in Prateolus. Knox. Knewstubs, Bateman his
book of the leaden Gods.
from the latter, Enthusiasts: and to conclude this, they imagine all nations
shall one day be of their sect: think you that Endimion did ever dream such
dreams, or the seven sleepers that slept from the times of Decius to the
days of Theodosius, but what will not Novelty and Singularity bring forth?

SECTION. III.
THere is yet a peculiar faction of this litter, the most deformed and
prodigious that ever was heard of: It is the faction of the Libertines, set up
by Coppin and Quintan, two base persons in the Low Countries, whose story you
may read in Bellarmine: Bellarm. lib. 2. de peccato.
the sum of their opinion is, That sin is nothing but scruple of
conscience, for every man (say they) may live as the spirit moves him, and
regeneration with them is nothing but a mind freed from fear of sinning: I
think a great cause of these errors, has been the supposition, that heaven
is nothing but a good conscience, and hell a badde. Now a good conscience they
expound to be, a mind void of care, a badde the contrary: do we dream or
are we awake? is it possible that men should thus play with edge tools? there
were among* Philosophers two hundredth eighty eight sects de Summo bono, but
these men are worse then those that built Babel, they have not found out new
tongues but new Dialects, or rather the sordid language of Canters and Cheaters.

SECTION. IIII.
Neither has our own Country been free from this vermin, there was one Hacket
executed for this sect, who gave it out publicly, that he was Christ, he had
two forerunners, the one of judgment, the other of mercy, Coppinger and
Ardenton: it was thought he dealt by Sorcery: sure I am, he dealt by the enemy
of mankind, he himself died blasphemously: Coppinger hearing of his death,
knocked out his own brains, as it is said, for grief, that he had been so
bewitched by him. We read of a bondman, that pretended he was Agrippa the
nephew of Augustus, and being brought to Tyberius, and demanded how he came to
be Agrippa, answered as thou came to be Tyberius: the like impudency we read
of Perkin Warebeck here in England. But with what brass (do you think) was
his forehead Hacke.
armde, that in this light of knowledge in the mother City of this land, in
the most open place thereof, durstpublish himself to be Christ? To end this
argument, I take it we are to be taught hereby, that we never can be secure,
if we trust in our own strength: this man had all the privileges from falling
that might be, and yet when the rain, the wind, the floods came, it appeared
he was built upon Sand, wherefore let us not so much contemn his iniquity, as
condemn our own imbecility.

CHAP. XXIII. The Viper of Schism.
SECTION. I.
THere is a Fable that the young Vipers eat out the sides of their damme, this
to be a fable, Gesner shows, proouing the Viper to be nothing else but the
English Adder. But whatsoever become of this fable, sure it is, that we have
store of Scismatickes, which do truly eat out the sides of the Church their
mother: and first for their name, there is some doubt, wherefore as Ovid says
of one:

Matre Palestina, dubio genitore creatus. M^tamor. 5.
So the mother of these, namely madam Pride we know, but Brown of whom they
were first called Brownists, as himself refuses the Name, so is he by them
rejected: Some therefore father it upon him, that was wont to spit at the name
of an Archbishop, as people were wont to do when they named Barrowe.
the foul thief, and others commend him that said, what thou do, do
quickly: And thereupon being demanded, why he compared himself to Christ, he
answered, not my self to Christ, but you Green^wood.
to Judas. Some of these charitable spirited fathers, may justly have this
Bastard imputed to them, and I know not whether some that have revolted from
them, may not still be charged with keeping of the child. For one of them
being being demanded, why he kept a Living in our Church, answered, he wished
that he had a hundred, for the Israelites might rob the Egyptians. This
charity was as hot as Hell fire, and therefore he that had it, may be justly
Archbishop among them, if he will not spit at this name as well as his fellow.

SECTION. II.
THeir opinions are like the Element of fire, Aslacus de triplicicaelo.
which is excessus feruoris. But as Aslacus intends to prove this fire to be
no Element, so I think this feruor may be proved to be no Religion, proceeding
neither from Prudence, Charity, nor verity: They think first Bishops to be
Antichristian with all adherent Officers: Secondly, Ministers by them elected,
to be Apostaticall not Apostolical: Thirdly, the Church, because it is
compounded of so many open evil livers to be an Adultresse. Fourthly, set
Prayer to be Swines flesh, yea though we say the Lords Prayer, for as they
fancy, this is a pattern of Prayer, not a Prayer, and so Greenewoode answers
to that Numb. 6. 23.
place in Numbers. Fifthly, they call singing of Psalms in the Church, howling
of Wolves, croking of Ravens: And sixthly, they will neither be judged by a
Bishop nor by Elders, but by popular suffrages and voices, hating Monarchy as
Tyranny, for which they call our Church no Church, and Aristocracie as See the
Epistles of Junius to them of Amste^dam.
Oligarchy, for which reason they term the reformed Churches bad Churches,
they lean rather to a form of Democracie or Ochlocracie, wherein the headless
and heedlesse multitude Steeres the Helm, I think as wisely as Palinurus when
he was sleepie. Seventhly, they hold that Universities and Degrees should be
abolisht, and no marvel, for they desire the Study of Arts, and tongues were
cast away.

SECTION. III.
THeir disordered practice is little wondered at by wisemen, because they see
it does necessarily flow from their Lunaticke opinions, yet it is pitied by
good men, derided by bad. Why? will you say, may not a man laugh at these
follies compounded of pride, ignorance, and contention, as the man at Venice
said: Gunpowder was made of Saltpeter, Brimstone and Cole. I answer, were not
the Cananite in the Land, this contention might be borne with, or derided: But
while these men play the Devils on the Stage, many times there comes a Devil
more then tale. Public enemies come in, whilst we regard not civil mutinies:
therefore Heraclitus tears, are here far more seemly then Democritus
laughter. To return to their practice, it is a manner of Prophecy as they
term it, wherein diverse of the ancient private men do publicly expound
Scripture. The Pastor himself concluding the exercise, this was also practiced
in the reformed Churches some few years ago, but now they relinquish it,
sinding it to be obnoxious to error, and alteration: but these men obstinately
retain it, and indeed their frantic opinions were more tolerable* were it
not for their contumacy and uncharitable censures, wherewith they rend us as
with horses and thorns, (...)* (...) his first (...).
as it was said of Metius Suffetius: is it not strange that a brother should
excommunicate a brother, that a man should cast his own Father out of the
church? we read that Marcion the Heretic was excommunicated by his own
Father, but a like madness to this we never read; also their rebaptizing of
their Sectaries, and the approbation of new marriages, the former wives being
yet alive, do spring from one bitter root.

CHAP. XXIIII. Donatisme.
SECTION. I.
DOnatus a Sectarie first, after fell into grievous Heresies, him the Brownists
have revived ^4 Num^dian (...) be affirmed ^^ Church without him, and h^s
Sect^ries to be C^r^stians.
in full force, but they have many other fautors and abettors that craftily
favor the Schism, of the fire whereof they smell very strong, the mantell of
holiness couers all their designs, so that few of them are found which wish
not to seem either better, or other men then they be: When Hercules had lost
his Oxen, and had Bat^man in ^^^ (...) Gods.
long time sought them in vain, they were at last discovered by their
bellowing to be in Cacus den: now Cacos in Greek signifies evil, which
draws men backwards by the tails as Cacus did the Oxen. For these men look
one way and go another, like men that row on the water, or like Crabs on the
land: We should walk as our head Christ does: but these men like the
disseuered parts of a S^ake, ^nne several ways. There was a man that
bringing his Mare to drink, thought that he saw the Moon drunk up by his
Mare, which indeed was only hid and obscured in a cloud; the next day
consulting with his neighbors of Gotham, after much ^aying of their cods heads
together, it was concluded that they should rip the mare and let out the Moon:
Ever since these Goths or Goats have thought all the world beholding to them
for the recovery of the Moon: So in like manner, these Catharists think
Puritans.
all purity to have been borne, and shall die with them, and therefore say to
every man that will not spit just as they do, Touch me not, I am holyer then
thou. Stage-keepers in Cambridge with their visards on, do so long drive away
every man that they like not, till at the length they fill the Ha^l so full,
that fuller it could not have been, if they had called all comers: so with
their seemly visards of imagined severity, they do so drive away bad men from
their company, till at length they have filled the scaffolds with hypocrites,
and the profane without break the Chapel windows, nay sometimes break
down both Chapel and College, for when men see these lean prayers make
such fat fasts, they condemn first the professors, and then the profession:
It Is said that in the Temple of Ianus there was the Image of Mars, of which I
think these men are the Priests; for without they have the double face of
Ianus, and within nothing but Mars and contention.

SECTION. II.
AN other means whereby these men enlarge their kingdom of Crickets, is
Martinisme or Libelling against just authority: It is said that Julius Caesar
did ever answer Libels with Libels, never proceeded any farther, but as Dion
shows, he never forgave a man but in show: this seeming neglect is much
imitated in Rome at this day, and Vespasian a military man is much commended
for it, but Augustus a wise, and Tiberius a crafty Ptince, as living in times
more peaceable, and their state being somewhat litigious, did use more
corrasiues to heal this ytching humor of Writing, not Satyrs or Epigrams, but
these lawless Libels that are written in blood like Dracoes Laws. Manlius
that defended Cicero pro Sex. Rosci. Amerin.
the Capitol, was after by public sentence thrown down from that hill, for
that he had spread certain slanders, which did touch the famous Camillus: if
many of these were so served, or had their legs broken, as had the dogs,
that did not only bark, but bite them that came to the Temple; we should
never have heard of Martin Senior and Martin Junior with all that rimelesse and
reasonlesse rabble of railing Rabshekes. To conclude, I would never have this
pack punished, but either with silence, or Camerina A loathsome fence in
Sicilie.
with exemplarie justice, if they be found out: for as I take it, all answer
to them is impertinent, and does but move Camerina, which is against the
Oracle: (...)


Ne moueas Camerinam, immotam sistere praestat. And against those two verses,
used among us for a byword; Seu vineo, aut vincor, the rest is too well
known; for as Socrates said, if an Ass kick thee, will thou kick him
again? I am persuaded, nothing has so much made them press themselves to
death, and stand so often in white sheets, as for that they see learned men
vouchsafing them an answer.

SECTION. III.
THe third disease of these men, is the greedy Worm, otherwise called
covetousness, some call it the Dropsy, which if a man have, he will drink
of a cup as big as a Church; for these Cormorants under pretense of
abolishing superstition, have devoured up Church-liuings, whereby they make
their Nativity Pies the fatter; for certain it is, they would have the Bishops
hyde (to use their own words,) cut into many thongs, yea as many as Dido cut
the Bulls hyde into, when she A^n^id. 1.
bought the ground of Iarbas, whereupon she built Byrsa; again these men would
have all Tithes reduced (...) was (...) Edo (...). S^a^^^ ^po^ V^^^us.
to stipends and alms: thus would they serve the Church with base money, as
we did them in Ireland at the rebellion of Tyrone: a pleasant man said, that
in their Church there was sometimes conscientia, but as the first letter of
Caesar's name, being stricken of with thunder; there was left aesar, which
signifies a God in the Hetruscan tongue, denoting Or Hetrurian.
that he should die, and be Deified: so the first syllable con being cut of,
there was left scientia, making men like Heathenish Gods, knowing good and
doing evil; at length comes the barbarous Barber and powles of sci, (as the
Amonitish King cut the garments of David's Ambassadors by the middle) and
there was left entia; that is wealth and large maintenance; now these men, as
if they threw the cast, called loose all, for the Church, would sweep away
entia without all conscience, which I believe will one day trouble them, as ill
as ^ycoph^on in Cassandra.
Hercules did the Whale, when he was in the belly of it: some have wished the
Sexton had been in the Belfrey, when they drunk up the Church, that so they
might be never free from the belly ach, like the Melancholy man at Argos, that
thought he always heard Music: others have wondered, that they are not
molested with the stone, having devoured so many stones, as if they had the
teeth of Saturn the God of Time, who eat a stone in stead of Jupiter,
Athenaeus Dypnosoph^sta.
some suspect that they have a leather case for their tongues, because they
suppe up such hot broth, and have no hurt, so that they may seem to be
chimnies not men, and if you will have them living Creatures, then are they
Camels, which eat when they Apoc. 19. 17
sleep: these are the birds of pray, which devour the flesh of the Whore,
that is, Abbeys, Nunneries, and by consequent, Colleges and Churches, as if
they were Popish also: not unlike one that said, we must eat no flesh in
Lent, because the earth was accursed, of which it comes: as for bread and wine
they come from the sea, not from the earth, and had he dwelt at Venice where
nothing grows, he had spoken truly, thus these men call the long ears of the
Hare horns, that is they term Tithes, Jewish and Popish rytes, being
somewhat of kin to Dionisius the Elder, who took away Aesculapius golden
beard, saying it was unfit, Apollo the Father should be beardelesse, and
Aesculapius his son should have a beard; also that Apollos golden coat was
too heavy in Summer, too cold in Winter.

SECTION. IIII.
BEsides their practices, their opinions all bewray of what house they come;
the name of Bishop like learned Critics, they turn into bite-sheepe: the
Litourgie into a Lethargy: the service they call the Starve us, drawing here
in the yoke with Barrow, for The Romish Bee-^^ue.
in Ulysses Plough, were Asses as well as Horses: here is all the difference,
the Catharist like a Protestant, skarde out of his wits, stares as wildly
upon the Church as Agane did upon her Son Pentheus when she took him for a
Bore: Ille mihi feriendus Metamor 3.
Aper, etc. But the Brownist has a full frenzy, like the daughters of
Praetus, that took themselves for kine, and rages like Hercules and Ajax in
the Tragedy, the former grants these opinions to be true, but will not leap
out of the Arc of Noah into the water: the other like the Raven flies at
large, and will not return with the Dove: the one stays in the house with as
perfidious a mind as Ziba, the other flatly runs away like Agar, or the two
servants of Shemei: but to proceed to their proper opinions, they will have
Lay Elders in the church, and widows, whereof the former implies a
contradiction according to their own doctrine, for besides, that no lay man
can be Ecclesiastical, as they say, it is many times seen in the reformed
Churches that a Civil Magistrate is one of the Lay Elders, besides how
unreasonable is it, that he that never knew any difference, save between Cow
and Cow, should Lucian in iudicio Deorum.
for a year or two come to judge of those things, which a Synod or Council
could hardly determine: but to amend the matter, they would have all Councels
and laws as well Civil, as Canon, to be abrogated; to which desire we answer,
is Pacuuius did at Capua, who when the people would have had their Magistrates
killed, desired then first to agree upon the election of new Officers, the
people nominated diverse, but could agree of none, whereupon the Massacre was
delaide, afte^ forgot: so say I, let these men make us new laws in stead of
the old, else we shall have deformity in stead of uniformity. Oh what a stir
have they made about possession and obsession, questions of as little necessity
as of great trouble, what is this, but to bring up Guelphes and Gibelines
again, the Frigosi and the Sea the Florentine story.
Adorni, nay indeed the Guysiard and the Condy.

SECTION. V.
ALl these tumults in religion come by imposture of names: the Pagan takes
Devils for gods, therefore in America they worship the Devil, least he should
hurt them: the Turk dreams of Mahomet as of a Prophet, not as a Cousener: as
an ignorant husband oftentimes entertaines the Adulterer, that pretends
kindred, in stead of kindness intended to his wife: the Jew fancies a Messiah,
in the letter for one in the spirit, like him that said, Pilate was a Saint,
because he was put in the Creed: The Greek will have pictures instead of
Images, not unlike our men that would not have it called the Absolution but the
Remission, in the book of common Prayer, which desire one compared to that of
the men of Bengala, which are so afraid of Tigers, that they dare not call
them by that name, Doctor Boys in his notes upon the Letany.
but by some more gentle, least otherwise happily they might be tor^e in
pieces by them. The Roman Wolf talks of Religion, means policy, like
Vespasian that put out an Edict, wherein he signified, that the Temples of the
Gods, and the Palaces of the Prince, were defiled by the common use of Urine:
therefore he appointed certain places of marble, where this should be done,
and that the fuller should receive the liquor, and pay tribute to the Emperor
for his charges herein. Young Titus said it was sordid, but the old man wild
him to smell of the money, which he told him after came as tribute. The Arrian
thinks the three persons in the Trinity are but three names, not unlike the
Poets that make Thebes in Egypt with a hundredth gates; and Thebes in Greece
with seven gates to be all one, or like the old Chorographers that made Spain
a City, and the Ocean a river; so would these men circumscribe God within their
shallow brains. The Anabaptist thinks all things should be common, and
therefore wives, like the Fox, who having lost her tail, would have had all
the Foxes to cut off theirs, that by the public calamity, she might help
her private shame; like bad Parliament men, who make motions for laws in show,
but indeed for private gain or grudge: so the men of this generation Herodotus
in Clio.
having cast of the veil of their own shame, like the wife of Candaules, move
other men to do the same. The Barrowist like a drunken man calls his mother
harlot, and will not dwell with her, if she marry a new husband: nay, if she
will not sweep her house with the broom of Discipline, which he will make or
buy. The Catharists like a wild Ass snuffes the wind in his nostrils, as he
Lycophron in Cassandra.
runs, and like Proteus King of Egypt, will neither go by land nor sea, but
diggs a new way under the earth like a Mole; he likes nothing but that which is
new, as our Dames do with Cheries; or as the Romans that would eat no fish,
except they saw it swim in the water and in the sauce, the self same day.
Tell them of ancient Fathers, and they will stop their nose, and it may be
their ears, as Ulysses did against the Sirens; but show them a new Writer,
though he were as factious as Cateline, and you shall please them as well as a
Bear with honey. This is my Dream and now I am awaked.

FINIS.
Errata.
FOlio 5. line 30. read hence for thence. f. 7. l. 21. read Parelins for
parel. ns. f. 11. l. 10. r. Aolus for AEolus. f. 13. l. 19. r. Hitruians for
Hetru. fol. 19. l. 4. r. Apozeme for a Pozeme. f. 29. l. 11. r. these for this.
f. 37. l. 11. r. frugality for infrugality. f. 41. Minetius for Minutius. f.
58. l. 3. r. Colocuntosis for Colakuntosis. f. 65. l, 14. r. are for and. f.
74. l. 4. r. quisquis for quisque f. 75. l. 15. r. Corbulo for Corbuto f. 87.
l. 18. r. bawd for band. f. 103. l. 13. r. Hella for Hibla.


