The Countess of Mountgomeries URANIA. Written by the right honorable the Lady
MARY WROATH. Daughter to the right Noble Robert Earl of Leicester. And Niece
to the ever famous, and renowned Sr. Phillips Sidney knight. And to y^ most
(...) Lady Mary Countess of (...)

LONDON Printed for JOHN MARRIOTT and JOHN GRISMAND And are to be sold at
their shoppes in St. Dunstons Churchyard in Fleetstreet and in Poules Ally at
y^ sign of the Gunn.



THE COUNTESS OF MOVNTGOMERIES URANIA. THE FIRST BOOK.
WHen the Spring began to appear like the welcome messenger of Summer, one
sweet (and in that more sweet) morning, after Aurora had called all careful
eyes to attend the day, forth came the fair Shepherdess Urania, (fair
indeed; yet that far too mean a title for her, who for beauty deserved the
highest style could be given by best knowing Judgments). Into the Meade she
came, where usually she drove her flocks to feed, whose leaping and
wantonness showed they were proud of such a Guide: But she, whose sad thoughts
led her to another manner of spending her time, made her soon leave them, and
follow her late begun custom; which was (while they delighted themselves) to
sit under some shade, bewailing her misfortune; while they fed, to feed upon
her own sorrow and tears, which at this time she began again to summon,
sitting down under the shade of a well-spread Beech; the ground (then^blest)
and the tree with full, and fine leaued branches, growing proud to bear, and
shadow such perfections. But she regarding nothing, in comparison of her woe,
thus proceeded in her grief: Alas Urania, said she, (the true servant to
misfortune); of any misery that can befall woman, is not this the most and
greatest which thou art fallen into? Can there be any near the unhappiness of
being ignorant, and that in the highest kind, not being certain of mine own
estate or birth? Why was I not still continued in the belief I was, as I
appear, a Shepherdes, and Daughter to a Shepherd? My ambition then went no
higher then this ^state, now flies it to a knowledge; then was I contented, now
perplexed. O ignorance, can thy dullness yet procure so sharp a pain? and
that such a thought as makes me now aspire unto knowledge? How did I joy in
this poor life being quiet? blessed in the love of those I took for parents,
but now by them I know the contrary, and by that knowledge, not to know my
self. Miserable Urania, worse art thou now then these thy Lambs; for they know
their dams, while thou do live unknown of any. By this we^e others come into
that Meade with their flocks: but she esteeming her so^^owing thoughts her
best, and choycest company, left that place, taking a little path which
brought her to the further side of the plain, to the foot of the rocks,
speaking as she went these lines, her eyes fixed upon the ground, her very soul
turned into mourning.

Unseen, unknown, I here alone complain
To Rocks, to Hills, to Meadows, and to Springs,
Which can no help return to ease my pain,
But back my sorrows the sad Echo brings.
Thus still increasing are my woes to me,
Doubly resounded by that monefull voice,
Which seems to second me in misery,
And answer gives like friend of mine own choice.
Thus only she does my companion prove,
The others silently do offer ease:
But those that grieve, a grieuing note do love;
Pleasures to dying eyes bring but disease:
And such am I, who daily ending live,
Wayling a state which can no comfort give.
In this passion she went on, till she came to the foot of a great rock, she
thinking of nothing less then ease, sought how she might ascend it; hoping
there to pass away her time more peaceably with loneliness, though not to
find least respit from her sorrow, which so dearly she did value, as by no
means she would impart it to any. The way was hard, though by some windings
making the ascent pleasing. Having attained the top, she saw under some hollow
trees the entry into the rock: she fearing nothing but the continuance of her
ignorance, went in; where she found a pretty room, as if that stony place
had yet in pity, given leave for such perfections to come into the heart as
chiefest, and most beloved place, because most loving. The place was not unlike
the ancient (or the descriptions of ancient) Hermitages, instead of hangings,
covered and lined with Iuie, disdaining ought else should come there, that being
in such perfection. This richness in Natures plenty made her stay to behold
it, and almost grudge the pleasant fulness of content that place might have, if
sensible, while she must know to taste of torments. As she was thus in passion
mixed with pain, throwing her eyes as wildly as timorous Lovers do for fear of
discovery, she perceived a little Light, and such a one, as a chinke does often
discover to our sights. She curious to see what this was, with her delicate
hands put the natural ornament aside, discerning a little door, which she
putting from her, passed through it into another room, like the first in all
proportion; but in the midst there was a square stone, like to a pretty table,
and on it a wax-candle burning; and by that a paper, which had suffered it
self patiently to receive the discovering of so much of it, as presented this
Sonnet (as it seemed newly written) to her sight.

HEre all alone in silence might I mourn:
But how can silence be where sorrows flow?
Sigh's with complaints have poorer pains out-worne;
But broken hearts can only true grief show.
Drops of my dearest blood shall let Love know
Such tears for her I shed, yet still do burn,
As no spring can quench least part of my woe,
Till this live earth, again to earth do turn.
Hateful all thought of comfort is to me,
Despised day, let me still night possess;
Let me all torment^s feel in their excess,
And but this light allow my state to (...)
Which still does wast, and wasting as this light,
Are my sad days unto eternal night.
Alas Urania (sighed she)! How well do these words, this place, and all agree
with thy fortune? sure poor soul thou were here appointed to spend thy
days, and these rooms ordained to keep thy tortures in; none being assuredly
so matchlesly unfortunate. Turning from the table, she discerned in the room a
bed of boughs, and on it a man lying, deprived of outward sense, as she
thought, and of life, as she at first did fear, which struck her into a great
amazement: yet having a brave spirit, though shadowed under a mean habit, she
stepped unto him, whom she found not dead, but laid upon his back, his head a
little to her wards, his arms foulded on his breast, hair long, and beard
disordered, manifesting all care; but care it self had left him: curiousness
thus far affoorded him, as to be perfectly discerned the most exact piece of
misery; Apparel he had suitable to the habitation, which was a long gray
robe. This grieuefull spectacle did much amaze the sweet and tenderhearted
Shepherdess; especially, when she perceived (as she might by the help of the
candle) the tears which distilled from his eyes; who seeming the image of
death, yet had this sign of worldly sorrow, the drops falling in that
abundance, as if there were a kind strife among them, to rid their Master first
of that burdenous carriage; or else meaning to make a flood, and so drown
their woeful Patient in his own sorrow, who yet lay still, but then fetching a
deep groan from the profoundest part of his soul, he said. Miserable
Perissus, can thou thus live, knowing she that gave thee life is gone? Gone,
O me! and with her all my joy departed. Will thou (unblessed creature) lie here
complaining for her death, and know she died for thee? Let truth and shame make
thee do something worthy of such a Love, ending thy days like thy self, and
one fit to be her Servant. But that I must not do: then thus remain and
foster storms, still to torment thy wretched soul withal, since all are
little, and too too little for such a loss. O dear Limena, loving Limena,
worthy Limena, and more rare, constant Limena: perfections delicately faign'd
to be in women were verified in thee, was such worthiness framed only to be
wondered at by the best, but given as a prey to base and unworthy jealousy?
When were all worthy parts joined in one, but in thee (my best Limena)? yet all
these grown subject to a creature ignorant of all but ill, like unto a Fool,
who in a dark Cave, that has but one way to get out, having a candle, but not
the understanding what good it does him, puts it out: this ignorant wretch not
being able to comprehend thy virtues, did so by thee in thy murder, putting out
the worlds light, and men's admiration: Limena, Limena, O my Limena. With that
he fell from complaining into such a passion, as weeping and crying were never
in so woeful a perfection, as now in him; which brought as deserved a
compassion from the excellent Shepherdess, who already had her heart so
tempered with grief, as that it was apt to take any impression that it would
come to seal withal. Yet taking a brave courage to her, she stepped unto him,
kneeling down by his side, and gently pulling him by the arm, she thus spoke.
Sir (said she) having heard some part of your sorrows, they have not only made
me truly pity you, but wonder at you; since if you have lost so great a
treasure, you should not lie thus leaving her and your love unrevenged,
suffering her murderers to live, while you lie here complaining; and if such
perfections be dead in her, why make you not the Phoenix of your deeds live
again, as to new life raised out of the revenge you should take on them? then
were her end satisfied, and you deservedly accounted worthy of her favor, if
she were so worthy as you say. If she were? O God (cried out Perissus), what
devilish spirit art thou, that thus do come to torture me? But now I see you
are a woman; and therefore not much to be marked, and less resisted: but if
you know charity, I pray now practice it, and leave me who am afflicted
sufficiently without your company; or if you will stay, discourse not to me.
Neither of these will I do (said she). If you be then (said he) some fury of
purpose sent to vex me, use your force to the uttermost in martyring me; for
never was there a fitter subject, then the heart of poor Perissus is. I am no
fury (replied the divine Urania), nor hither come to trouble you, but by
accident lighted on this place; my cruel hap being such, as only the like can
give me content, while the solitariness of this like cave might give me quiet,
though not ease, seeking for such a one, I happened hither; and this is the
true cause of my being here, though now I would use it to a better end if I
might. Wherefore favor me with the knowledge of your grief; which heard, it
may be I shall give you some counsel, and comfort in your sorrow. Cursed may I
be (cried he) if ever I take comfort, having such cause of mourning: but
because you are, or seem to be afflicted, I will not refuse to satisfy your
demand, but tell you the saddest story that ever was rehearsed by dying man
to living woman, and such a one, as I fear will fasten too much sadness in
you; yet should I deny it, I were too blame, being so well known to these
senseless places; as were they sensible of sorrow, they would condole, or else
amassed at such cruelty, stand dumb as they do, to find that man should be so
inhumane.

Then fair Shepherdess, hear my self say my name is Perissus, Nephew I am
to the King of Sicilie, a place fruitful and plentiful of all things, only
niggardly of good nature to a great man in that Country, whom I am sure you
have heard me blame in my complaints. Heir I am as yet to this King mine
Uncle; and truly may I say so, for a more unfortunate Prince never lived, so as
I inherit his crosses, howsoever I shall his estate. There was in this Country
(as the only blessing it enjoyed) a Lady, or rather a Goddess for incomparable
beauty, and ma^chles virtues, called Limena, daughter to a Duke, but Princess
of all hear^s: this star coming to the Court to honor it with such light,
it was in that my blessed destiny to see her, and be made her servant, or
better to say, a slave to her perfections; thus long was I happy, but now
begins the tragedy: for wars falling out between the people and the
Gentlemen, the King was by the people (imagining he took the other part)
brought into some danger, and so great an one, as rudenes joined with ill nature
could bring him into, being at last besieged in a strong hold of his, all of us
his servants, and gentle subjects, striving for his good and safety; in this
time nothing appearing but danger, and but wise force to preserve men's lives
and estates unto them, every one taking the best means to attain unto their
good desires. The Duke (father to the best, and truest beauty) would yet bestow
that upon a great Lord in the Country, truly for powerful command and means,
a fit match for any, but the wonder of women, since none could without much
flattery to himself, think he might aspire to the blessing of being
accounted worthy to be her servant, much less her husband. She seeing it was
her fathers will, esteeming obedience beyond all passions, how worthily ^oeuer
suffered, most dutifully, though unwillingly, said, she would obey; her tongue
faintly delivering, what her heart so much detested; loathing almost it self,
for consenting in show to that which was most contrary to it self; yet thus
it was concluded, and with as much speed as any man would make to an eternal
happiness. While of this, and so my misfortune, I remained ignorant, till one
day the wars being a little ceased, though not ended, the siege still
continuing, I stole from mine uncle to see my heart, which she kept safe with
her: but when I came thither, I found, or feared I found no room for it. She
who had it, being in the power of mine enemy (for so I accounted him, when he
enjoyed my loss, my hopes being frustrate, my joys lost and spoild, I grew
from my self, my senses failed me, a trembling possessing my whole body, so
as this distemper was marked, and pitied of all: but what did comfort me, was,
that she did seem to pity me. Then did I bless my torments, that had
procured me such a favor. There were none, but carefully sought my health,
especially her husband, whose diligence was as tedious, as his wives was my
only joy. Grieved I was to stay and see my misery, yet sad I was to go from
seeing her, who gave me (though a barred) delight in beholding her: but knowing
passion the greater Lord over my strength, I took my leave, pretending
business, having only taken the opportunity that way afforded me to visit
them, passing so near by them; they all seemed sorry for my going, and Limena
indeed was so; then by vnus'd paths I got back to the King, often, as I rode,
looking to that place where I left my soul prisoner. When I had been a while
at home, remembering, or rather never letting the beauty of Limena be absent
from me, I say remembering her, and my everlasting wretched state in missing
her; calling my mischief by his gain to account, I found so much cause to
lament, as in short time I was but mournful sorrow; my friends grieved, and
generally all did show displeasure for me, only my self found nothing but
cause to proceed in this despair, love having truly changed me to that most
low, and still unlucky fate. Business of State I neglected, going about as in
a dream, led by the cruellest of hellish spirits, Despair, till I was awaked
by a command to go and lead some troops which were gathered by the Kings
friends together coming to raise the siege, yet desiring me to be their head.
I went, and thus far willingly, having so much hope left me, as to think I
might by this means conclude my afflictions with my end; yet first I resolved
to write unto her, that she might know, she had so unblessed a creature to her
Servant. When I had written my letter with shaking hands, and yet a more
shaking heart, I gave it to a Page of mine, who was newly come unto me, and
never had been seen in her Fathers house, giving him besides directions how to
carry himself, which he discreetly did observe, and found as fit an
opportunity as could be wished: for her husband being gone to see an ancient
house of his, she walked alone into a little Grove below the place of her
abiding; he perceiving her, knew straight it was she; wherefore he followed
her, having before hid himself in the uppermost part of the thicket, expecting
occasion whereby to perform his Masters command. He then seeing it offered,
would not neglect it, though somewhat timerously, esteeming her for her
excellencies rather some Goddess of those Woods, then an earthly Creature: but
remembering the infinite (yet not sufficient) praises I had given her,
concluded, it could be none other then Limena; so as coming to her, he on his
knees delivered the letter, saying these words; The woeful Perissus his Lord
and Master presented that, with his service to her. This (though but little)
was more then I could have said, if in his place: For Lord, how was I afflicted
with millions of doubts how it might be delivered; then, whether she would
accept of it; and most, what she would conceive of my boldness, quaking when I
gave it him, knowing how wretched a creature I must be, if it offended her,
yet wishing I might have had the papers place once more to have been touched by
her, though, if it brought dislike, for that to have suffered martyrdom. But
she for my happiness took it, and with a pretty blush read it, which since I
perceived did spring from love, yet blushed to see it self so lively in her
cheeks. When she had read it, Good youth (said she) commend me to your Lord:
but for his letter, say, It needs no answer till he come himself, and fetch
one. With this he returned, and so with much comfort to me, hope being glad to
build on any small ground, how much more then on so likely a possibility. I
then, Hopes servant, as before only slave to Despair, made all haste I could
to see her, having good and welcome means affoorded me, being able with
conuenience to take her F^thers house in my way to the new-raised Army. Thither
I came, which though in a wild Forest, yet it was pretended, I left the great
roads for my better safety. Thus was a color set upon my love, which but for
her service, and so the safelier to serve her, would suffer any gloss but
truth in affection. Being there ariu'd, I was extremely welcomed of all: her
Father, a grave and wise man, discoursed with me of business of State: after
him, and so all supper time, her husband discoursed of hunting, an exercise fit
for such a creature. Neither of these brought my Mistress from a grave, and
almost sad co^ntenance, which made me somewhat fear, knowing her
understanding, and experience, able and sufficient to judge, or advise in any
matter we could discourse of: but modesty in her caused it, only loving
knowledge, to be able to discern men's understandings by their arguments, but
no way to show it by her own speech. This (and withal fear of discovering
some passions, which she, though excelling in wit and judgment; yet could not
govern, at least, guiltines forced her to think so) was the reason ^he held
her gravity; yet after she grew more merry. And I finding a fit time by her
husbands going out of the chamber, with some company that was there, humbly
desired an answer of my letter. She blushing, and as if ashamed so much
innocent virtue should be discovered with my Louer-like importunity in her,
though strong in constancy; yet woman's affection gained so much by looks, and
sweet though-fearing words, as I was resolved, and assured of her love, which
made me proud of such a treasure, begin to dispose part of it to my benefit,
for looking about, and seeing every ones eyes carried their own ways, I kissed
her; she, not offended, yet said; Let not my freedom make you dispose
otherwise then virtuously of me: I vowed more then that liberty I would not
ask, which I know, if I had offered, her virtue would have refused, nor truly
would my dear and worthy affection permit me to demand, and this held our
loves more firm, when tied by virtue. But not to hold you long with this
(which yet to me is some ease for the present, although the bitterer the
conclusion is that follows). We had as many such meetings as true, or fained
means could compass us, ^till our misery was such, as this wild man her
husband (whether out of true consideration of his great unworthiness, or
proceeding from his froward disposition, I know not) grew jealous (an humor
following base minds as readily, as thunder does the lightning), then had he
rashness to accompany the other, which framed a determination, which was soon
altered from that name by performance, that she should stay no longer with her
father, but go with him to his own house; this I had notice of, but all that we
could do, could not hinder the accomplishing his will, and save her honor,
which to me, more dear then mine own life was esteemed. But the night before
her going I came thither, where I found the accustomed entertainment, he using
me with all show of respect, which in that kind I embraced; our hearts being as
far from meaning truth in giving or accepting, as truth is from bare
complement, but greatness in me made him use it; and care in me (of my better
self) receive it; my heart swelling with hate and scorn, even almost to
breaking, when I did see him. That night I saw her, and but spoke to her, so
curiously her husband watched us, yet could he not keep our eyes, but by them
we did deliver our souls, he only able to keep her dainty body in his
wicked prison. The next day they went, and so went all worth with this odd man
to have her delicacy kept like a Diamond in a rotten box: yet she considering
it to be to no purpose to contend, where she was miserably bound to obey,
observed him, as well as she could bring her spirit to consent to; yet did he
begin for her welcome to grow cursed to her; with her Servants he first began,
finding, or better to say, framing occasions to be rid of them all, placing of
his own about her, which she suffered, only contenting her self with the
memory of our Loves: yet wanting the true content which was in our
conversation, she grew sad, and keeping much within, grew pale, her rosy
cheeks and lips changing to wanness: but this was all the change, her noble
heart free from such a sin. This was but part of her affliction, still vexing
her sweet disposition, with speaking slightly of me, and then telling her of
her love to me; which brought her to that pass, as at last I was not named,
but she would blush; then would he revile her, and vilely use her: but she
patiently, and silently bare all, not suffering me to have notice of it, lest
it might, as it should have done, move me to revenge her wrong for my sake
endured. Thus it rested, she restlesly bearing all the ills that froward Nature
(mixed with peevish and spiteful jealousy) could afflict upon the purest mind;
using no other means, but gentle and mild persuasions, which wrought no more
in him, but that still his madness increased. Now was his house not far from
the way which I must pass between the Camp, and the great City of Siracusa,
being one of the chief of that kingdom; and which at that time had yielded it
self again unto the King. I hearing Philargus (for so was this vnwor^hie man
called) was at his house, with his truly virtuous wife, whom my soul longed to
see, I resolved to lodge there that night, not (alas) mistrusting the
misfortune, but coveting to see her, whom more then my heart I loved, or loved
my heart the better for being hers. So I went thither, where I was by him
exceedingly well welcomed in outward show, though his meaning was contrary,
which I should have found, had his devilish plots bin ready, Jealousy having
now blinded him to all good nature or judgment. She poor Lady (poor only in
this fortune) sad and grieved, all her smiles turned into sighs, and
thinkings, which made me fear, and wonder, wondering at the change of her
beauty, which yet in p^lenes showed excellency; and fear I did, lest my
absence had offended her^ but I was deceived, while I lest thought of the true
cause, or could imagine such villainy plotted against so rare perfections.
Desirous to know the cause, I remained almost impatient, not venturing to
speak to her before her husband, for hurting her: but he going out of the
room, after we had supped, either to cover the flames which were ready to
break out in huge fires of his mistrust, or to have the company fitter for
him, aff^cting still to be chief; his absence, howsoever, gave me opportunity
to demand the reason of her strangeness: She sighed to hear me call it so,
and with tears told me the reason, concluding; and thus do you see my Lord
(said she) the torments I suffer for your love; yet do you more torture me with
doubting me, who have no happiness left me, but the knowledge of my faith to
you, all afflictions being welcome to me, which for your sake I suffer.
Between rage and pain I remained amazed, till she, taking me by the hand,
brought me more woefully to my self with these words. And yet am I brought to
a greater mischief; with that fixing her weeping eyes upon mine, which
affectionately answered hers with looks and tears. I must my Lord (said she)
entreat you to refrain this place, since none can tell what danger may
proceed from mad, and unbridled jealousy; Refrain your sight? Command me
then to die (said I). Have I deserved to be thus punished? Shall his brutishnes
undo my blessings? yet this place I will, since you will have it so, hoping
you will find some means to let me know Philargus house is not in all places.
That I will do, or die (said she). Miserable wretch (cried I), art thou borne
to such fortune, as to have this Lady love thee, and her unmatched goodness to
suffer for one so worthless as thy self? No, no, my Lord (said she) in this
you wrong me, and that judgment which heretofore you said was in me, since if
you were unworthy then, my choice was imperfect: but you are worthy, and I
worthily chose you; I loved you, and constantly loved you, and in this doe^ I
best allow of my own judgment. I hope that love is not clean gone (cried I),
(my speech by love directed to say thus), nor will you forget me, though from
our most desired meetings, we must be barred. My love, my Lord (said she) had,
and has too sure a ground to know remove, I too truly loved, and do love you,
ever to forget it, or to let it have least shadow of lessening, though veiled
in absence, but rather (if increase can be where all is already possessed) it
shall increase; Love living best where desert, and sufferance join together;
and for witness of it, take this (said she, bestowing her picture upon me, which
is all the Limenas I shall now enjoy, or ever did, more then her loved, and
best b^loued sight. The case was blew, commanding me withal to love that
color, both because it was hers, and because it self betokened truth. By this
time her husband was come, who told us, 'twas time to go rest. We obay'd: and
this was the last time that ever I saw my dear, and most worthily accounted
dear Limena: for the next morning I was by day to be at the City, and so from
thence to return to the Camp. Thus took I my leave, and my last leave of
virtuous Limena, whose sad face, but sadder soul foretold our following harm,
and succeeding ruin. For within few days after my return to the Camp, there
came a Messenger early in the morning, and (O too early for my fortune) whom I
strait knew to be Limenas faithful Servant. At first, it brought joy to me,
seeing a letter in his hand; but soon was that turned to as much mourning,
cursing my hands that took it, and eyes that read so lamentable a letter; the
contents (nay that it self) being this, and the very same my Mistress sent,
and woe is me, the last she ere can send. Urania read it, while he with tears
and groans gave the true period to it. The Letter said thus.

MY only Lord, think not this, or the manner strange I now send, knowing
already some part of the undeserved course taken with me; only pity her, who
for your sake suffers patiently; accept these my last lines, and with them the
sincerest love that ever woman gave to man. I have not time to speak what I
would, therefore let this satisfy you, that the many threatenings I have heard,
are come in some kind to end^ for I must presently die, and for you; which
death is most welcome, since for you I must have it, and more pleasing then
life without you. Grant me then these last requests, which even by your love I
conjure you not to deny me, that you love my poor memory; and as you will
love that, or ever loved me, revenge not my death on my murderer, who, how
unworthy soever he was, or is, yet he is my Husband. This is all, and this
grant, as I will faithfully die

Yours.


Alas, fair Shepherdess (said he), is this a letter without much sorrow to be
read? and is not this a creature of all others to be beloved? Never let him
breath, that will not heartily, and most heartily lament such a misfortune. It Is
true, said Urania, reason and worth being companions: but yet I hear not the
certainty or manner of her death, then will I not fail to lament with you.
Alas, said he, hear it of me, only fit to tell that story. After my
departure from his house to the City, and so to the Camp, the jealous wretch
finding my Lady retired into a Cabinet she had, where she used to pass away
some part of her unpleasant life: coming in, he shut the door, drawing his
sword, and looking with as much fury, as jealous spite could with rage
demonstrate; his breath short, his sword he held in his hand, his eyes
sparkling as thick and fast, as an imperfectly kindled fire with much blowing
gives to the Blower, his tongue stammeringly with rage bringing forth these
words; thou have wronged me, vild creature; I say thou have wronged me: she
who was compounded of virtue, and her spirit, seeing his wild and distracted
countenance guest the worst, wherefore mildely she gave this answer.
Philargus, said she, I know in mine own heart I have not wronged you, and
God knows I have not wronged my self: these speeches, said he, are but the
followers of your continued ill, and false living; but think no longer to
deceive me, nor cosen your self with the hope of being able, for in both you
shall find as much want, as I do of your faith to me; but if you will speak
confess the truth: O me, the truth, that you have shamed your self in my
dishonor, say you have wronged me, giving your honor, and mine to the loose,
and wanton pleasure of Perissus; was I not great enough, amiable, delicate
enough, but for lasciviousness you must seek, and woo him? Yet Limena I did
thus deserve you, that once better then my self I loved you, which affection
lives in the extremity ^till, but has changed the nature, being now as full
of hate, as then abounding in love, which shall instantly be manifested, if you
consent not to my will, which is, that without dissembling speeches, or
flattring finenes you confess your shameful love to the robber of my bliss:
you may deny it, for how easy is it to be faulty in words, when in the truth
of truth you are so faulty? but take heed, unfeignedly answer, or here I vow
to sacrifice your blood to your wanton love; My Lord, said she, threatenings are
but means to strengthen free and pure hearts against the threatners, and this
has your words wrought in me, in whom it were a foolish baseness for fear of
your sword, or breath to confess what you demand, if it were true^ far more
did I deserve eternal punishment, if I would belie him, and my self for dread
of a bare threatening; since sure, that sword, were it not for danger to it
self, would, if any nobleness were in it, or his master, choose rather to dye
it self in the blood of a man, then be seen in the wranglings between us:
yet do I not deny my love to Perissus in all noble, and worthy affection,
being I think nursed with me, for so long have I borne this respective love to
him, as I know no part of my memory can tell me the beginning. Thus partly you
have your will in assurance, that that inseparable love I bear him, was before
I knew you, or perfectly my self, and shall be while I am, yet always thus
in a virtuous, and religious fashion. O God, cried out Philargus what do I
hear? or what can you style virtuous and religious, since it is to one besides
your husband? has shame possessed you? and excellent modesty abandoned you? you
have in part satisfied me indeed, but thus to see, that I have just occasion to
seek satisfaction for this injury: wherefore, resolve instantly to die, or
obey me, write a letter straight before mine eyes unto him, conjure him with
those sweet charms which have undone mine honor, and content to come unto
you: Let me truly know his answer, and be secret, or I vow thou shall not
many minutes outliue the refusal. She, sweetest soul, brought into this
danger, (like one being between a flaming fire, and a swallowing gulf, must
venture into one, or standing still, perish by one) stood a while not amazed,
for her spirit scorned so low a passion; but iudicially considering with her
self what might be good in so much ill; she with modest constancy, and
constant determination, made this answer. This wretched, and unfortunate body,
is I confess in your hands, to dispose of to death if you will; but yet it is
not unblessed with such a mind as will suffer it to end with any such stain, as
so wicked a plott, and miserable consent might purchase: nor will I blott my
fathers house with Treason, Treason? Nay, the worst of Treasons, to be a
Traitor to my friend. Wherefore my Lord pardon me, for I will with more
willingness die, then execute your mind; and more happily shall I end, saving
him innocent from ill, delivering my soul pure, and I unspotted of the crime
you tax me of, or a thought of such dishonor to my self; I might have said
to you, but that this cruel course makes me thus part my honor from you; yet
can you not part infamy, and reproach from you, nor me, said he: Prepare then
quickly, this shall be your last; My Lord said she, behold before your eyes
the most distressed of women, who if you will thus murder, is here ready: then
untying a dainty embrodered wast coat; see here, said she, the breast, (and a
most heavenly breast it was) which you so dearly loved, or made me think so,
calling it purest warm snow; yet never was the color purer then my love to
you, but now it is ready to receive that stroke, shall bring my heart blood,
cherished by you once, to dye it, in revenge of this my wrong revenge; nay,
such revenge will my death have, as though by you I die, I pity your ensuing
overthrow.

Whether these words, or that sight (which not to be seen without adoring)
wrought most I know not, but both together so well prevail as he stood in a
strange kind of fashion, which she (who now was to act her part for life, or
death) took advantage of, and this your cruelty will more appear when it is
known you gave no time for consideration, or repentance, said she; you deserve
no such favor from me, said he, but rather that I should with out giving care
to that bewitching tongue have revenged my harm, but since I have committed
this first, like faulty men, I must fall into another: Charity, but in no
desert of yours, procures this favor for you; two days I give you, at the end
of which be sure to content me with your answer, or content your self with
present death. The joy she at this conceived, was as if assured life had been
given her, wherefore humbly thanking him, she promised to satisfy him so fully
at that time, as he should (she hoped) be pleased with it. Away ^hee went
leaving her to her busy thoughts, yet somewhat comforted, since so she might
acquaint me with her afflictions, for which cause grieuing that I should be
ignorant of the true means to her end, she so prettily gained that little time
for the rarest lamp of excellent life to endure. Then called she a faithful
servant of hers, and the same who brought me the doleful letter: First, she
coniured him by the faith he bare her, to obey what she commanded, and to
be secret; then related she this soul rendering story to him, which she
inioyn'd him truly to discover to me, by his help getting pen and paper, and
having written that dolorous, yet sweet, because loving letter, sent him to
me that day she was to give her answer, which she assured him should be a
direct refusal, esteeming death more pleasing and noble, then to betray me,
who (for my now grief mixed with that blessing) she inricht with her
incomparable affection, giving him charge to deliver it to mine own hands, and
besides, to stay with me, assuring him I would most kindly entreat him for her
sake, which she might truly warrant him, being Commandresse of my soul. He
found me in my Tent, ready to go forth; with a wan and sad countenance he
gave that and my death together; then telling the lamentable story I now
delivered you. With floods of tears, and storms of sighs he concluded: And
by this, is the rarest piece of woman-kinde destroyed. Had I grown into an
ordinary passion like his of weeping, sobbing, or crying, it had not been fit
for the excessive loss I was fallen into; wherefore like a true Castaway of
fortune, I was at that instant metamorphosed into misery it self, no other
thing being able to equal me, no more then any, except the own fellow to a
cockle shell, can fit the other. This change yet in me, which to my self was
so sudden as I felt it not, was so marked by my friends, and by all admired, as
those who feared the least, doubted my end; which would it then had happened,
since, if so the earth no longer had borne such a wretch,, this sad place been
molested with a guest perpetually filling it; and these places near, with my
vnceasing complaints. Despair having left me no more ground for hope but
this, that ere long I shall ease them all, death proving merciful unto me, in
delivering this griefe-full body to the rest of a desired grave. My Lord
Perissus (said Urania), how idle, and unprofitable indeed are these courses,
since if she be dead, what good can they bring to her? and not being certain
of her death, how unfit are they for so brave a Prince, who will as it were, by
will without reason wilfully lose himself? will not any till the contrary be
known, as properly hope as vainly despair? and can it be imagined her
husband (who, passion of love did in his fury so much temper) should have so
cruel a hand, guided by so savage a heart, or seen by so pitilesse eyes, as
to be able to murder so sweet a beauty? No my Lord, I cannot believe but she is
living, and that you shall find it so, if unreasonable stubborn resolution bar
you not, and so hinder you from the eternal happiness you might enjoy. Only
rare Shepherdess (said the loue-kill'd Perissus), how comfortable might these
speeches be to one, who were able to receive them, or had a heart could let in
one sign of joy? but to me they are rather bitter, since they but cherish me
the longer to live in despairefull misery. No, she is dead, and with her is
all virtue, and beauteous constancy gone. She is dead: for how can goodness or
pity be expected from him, who knew nothing more, then desire of ill and
cruelty? Thou art dead, and with thee all my joys departed, all faith, love
and worth are dead: to enjoy some part of which, in short time I will be with
thee, that though in life we were kept asunder, in death we may be joined
together, till which happy hour I will thus still lament thy loss. If you
be resolved (said the dainty Urania), folly it were to offer to persuade you
from so resolute a determination; yet being so brave a Prince, stored with all
virtuous parts, discretion and judgment, me thinks, should not suffer you to
bury them in the poor grave of Loves passion, the poorest of all other: these
inuit me, as from your self, to speak to your self; Leave these tears,
and woman-like complaints, no way befitting the valiant Perissus, but like a
brave Prince, if you know she be dead, revenge her death on her murderers;
and after, if you will celebrate her funerals with your own life giving, that
will be a famous act: so may you gain perpetual glory, and repay the honor
to her dead, which could not be but touched by her untimely end. Her honor
touched, and touched for me? O immortal God (cride he), thou will not (I hope)
let a slave live should touch on such a thought, nor me to live after it were
borne, if not to sacrifice my blood to wash away the stain. But I pray you
since you undertake thus to advise me, how can I do this, and yet obey my
Limena's command, in not revenging her death? Why that (replide the discreet
Urania) proceeded wholly from the love she bare you, which rather is another
motive to stir you, if you consider it, since the danger she apprehended you
would run into, to right so delicate, yet unhappily, injured a Lady, and
for you injured, forced her to use her authority for your safety. But let not
that preuail^, nor hinder a deadly revenge for so detestable a fact. Thus
shall you approve your self, a brave and worthy Lover, deserving her, who
best deserved: but let it never be said, Perissus ended unrevenged of
Philargus, and concluded his days like a Fly in a corner. These words wrought
so far in the noble heart of Perissus, as rising from his leauie Cabine, then
thus said he: Is Perissus the second time conquered? I must obey that reason
which abounds in you; and to you, shall the glory of this attempt belong: now
will I again put on those habites which of late I abandoned, you having gaind
the victory over my vow. But I beseech you, tell me who my Counselor is,
for too much judgment I find in you, to be directly, as you seem, a mere
Shepherdess, nor is that beauty suitable to that apparel. My name, said she,
is Urania, my bringing up has been under an old Man, and his wife, who, till
lately, I took for my Father and Mother but they telling me the contrary, and
the manner of their finding me, makes me find I am lost, and so in truth, is
much of my content, not being able to know any more of my self: I delighted
before to tend a little Flock, the old pair put into my hands, now am I
troubled how to rule mine own thoughts. This do I well credit, said Perissus,
for more like a Princess, then a Shepherdess do you appear, and so much do
I reverence your wisdom, as next unto Limena, I will still most honor you:
and therefore, fair Urania, (for so I hope you will give me leave to call
you), I vow before heaven and you, that I will never leave off my Arms, until
I have found Philargus, and on him revenged my Ladies death, and then to her
love and memory, offer up my afflicted life: but first shall you have notice of
the success, which if good, shall be attributed to you; if ill, but to the
continuance of my ill destiny. But if your fortune call you hence before you
shall be found by them, I will employ (since the world has not a place can
keep the beauty of Urania hidden, if seen, then will it not be adored),
they shall not leave, till they have found you; nor will you scorn that name
from me, who shall now leave you the incomparable Urania. With these words
they went out of the Cave, he straight going to a large Holly tree (the place
rich with trees of that kind), on which at his coming to that melancholy
abiding, he had hung his Armor, meaning that should there remain in memory
of him, and as a monument after his death, to the end, that whosoever did find
his body, might by that see, he was no mean man, though subject to fortune.
Them he took down and armed himself, but while he was arming, Urania
entreated him to do one thing more for her, which was to tell her how he came
to that place. And that was ill forgot most fair Urania (said he): then know
that as soon as I had received that letter so full of sorrow, and heard all
that miserable relation, I was forced, notwithstanding the vow I had to my
self made (of this solitary course you have reli^ued me from) to go against
the Enemy, who with new forces, and under a new Leader, were come within sight
of our Army: I thinking all mischiefs did then conspire together against me,
with an enraged fury went toward them, hoping (and that only hope was left
me) in that encounter to end my life, and care together in the battle, yet
not slightly to part with it, in my soul wishing every one I had to deal
withal had been Philargus. This wish after made me do things beyond my
self, forcing not only our company and party to admire me, but also the
contrary to be discouraged, so as we got the day, and not only that, but an
end of the wars: for the chief Traitors being either killed or taken, the rest
that outliu'd the bloody slaughter, yielded themselves to mercy, whom in my
Uncles name I pardoned, on condition that instantly they disbanded, and every
one retire to his own home. This done, and my Uncle quietly settled in his
seat, in the midst of those triumphs which were for this happy Victory, I
stole away, leaving a letter with my new Servant, directed to the King, wherein
I humbly asked pardon for my private departure, and with all the intreates that
I could frame, persuaded him to entertain that servant of mine, and to accept
of him as recommended by me, and accordingly to esteem of him. Then took I
my way first to her Fathers, to know the manner and certainty, where I found
unspeakable mourning and sadness, her Mother ready to die with her, as if
she had brought her forth to be still as her life, that though two, yet like
those eyes, that one being struck in a certain part of it, the other unhurt
does lose likewise the sight: so she having lost her, lost likewise all comfort
with her; the servants mourned, and made pitiful lamentations: I was sorry for
them, yet gratefully took their mourning: for me thought it was for me, none
being able to grieve sufficiently, but my self for her loss. When her Mother
saw me, who ever she well loved, she cried out these words: O my Lord, see here
the miserable Woman deprived of all joy, having lost my Limena, your respected
friend. Full well do I now remember your words, when with gentle and mild
persuasions, you would have had us stay her going from this place unto his
house. Would we had then feared, or believed: then had she bin safe, whereas
now she is murdered. Murdered (cri^d I), O speak again, but withal how? Her
husband, said she, led her forth, where in a Wood, thick enough to shade all
light of pity from him, he killed her, and then burnt her, her clothes found
in the Wood besmeard with blood, and hard by them the remnant of a great fire;
they with such store of tears, as had been able to wash them clean, and
quench the fire, were brought to the house by those, who went to seek her,
seeing her long stay; not mistrusting harm, but that they had forgotten
themselves. The rest seeing this doleful spectacle, rent their hair, and gave
all testimony of true sorrow: then came these news to us; how welcome, judge
you, who I see feel sorrow with us: her father and brothers armed themselves,
and are gone in search of him, who was seen with all speed ^o pass toward
the Sea. Thus hear you the Daughters misfortune, which must be followed by the
mothers death: and God send, that as soon as I wish, my Lord and Sons may
meet with that ungrateful wretch to revenge my miserable child's loss. This
being done, she swounded in my arms, my self being still in my transformed
estate, helped her as much as I could, then delivering her to her servants, I
took my leave, buying this armor to go unknown, till I could find a place
sad enough to pass away my mournful hours in. Many countries I went through,
and left (for all were too pleasant for my sorrow), till at last I lighted on
this happy one, since in it I have received as much comfort by your kind and
wise counsel, as is possible for my perplexed heart to entertain. By this
time he was fully armed, which made the sweet Urania admire him; and if more
pity had lodged in her then before, she had affoorded him; his goodly
personage and doleful looks so ill agreeing, had purchased; for she did pity
him so much, as this had almost brought the end of some kind of pity, or pity
in some kind love: but she was ordained for another, so as this proved only a
fine beginning to make her heart tender against the others coming. Now was he
ready to depart, wherefore they came down from the rock, when being at the
bottom they met a young sh^pherd, whose heart Urania had (although against her
will) conquered. This Lad she entreated to conduct Perissus to the next town,
which he most willingly consented to, thinking himself that day most happy
when she vouchsafed to command him; withal she enjoined him, not to leave him,
till he saw him shipped, which he performed, coming again to her to receive
thanks more welcome to him, then if a fine new flock had bin bestowed on him.
Perissus gone, Urania for that night drove her flock homeward, giving a kind
look unto the rock as she return^d, promising often to visit it for brave
Perissus sake, and to make it her retiring place, there to pass some of her
melancholy hours in. The next morning as soon as light did appear, or she
could see light (which sooner she might do then any, her eyes making day,
before day else was seen) with her flock she betook her self to the meadow,
where she thought to have met some of her companions, but being early, her
thoughts having kept more careful watch over her eyes, thought it self grown
peremptory with such authority. She found none come, wherefore leaving the
flock to the charge of a young Lad of hers, took her way toward the rock,
her mind faster going then her feet, busied still, like one holding the
Compass, when he makes a circle, turns it round in his own center: so did
she, her thoughts incircled in the ignorance of her being. From this she was a
little moved by the coming of a pretty Lamb toward her, who with pitiful
cries, and bleatings, demanded her help, or she with tender gentleness imagined
so; wherefore she took it up, and looking round about if she could see the
dam, perceiving none, wandered a little amongst bushes and rude places, till she
grew something weary, when sitting down she thus began to speak: Poor
Lamb, said she, what moan thou make for loss of thy dear dam? what
torments do I then suffer, which never knew my mother? thy miss is great, yet
thou a beast may be brought up, and soon contented having food; but what
food can be given me, who feed on nothing but Despair, can that sustain me?
No, want of knowledge starues me, while other things are plentiful. Poor
innocent thing; how does thy wailing suit with mine? Alas, I pity thee, my
self in some kind wanting such a pity. Then she did hear a noise in the
bushes, looking what it should be, she saw a fierce she-wolfe come furiously
toward her: she, who (though a spirit matchless lived in her) perceiving her,
wished the beast further, yet taking her wonted strength of heart, and virtuous
thoughts together, she thus said; O heaven defend me miserable creature if thou
please; if not, grant me this blessing, that as I shall here end, not knowing
any parents to sorrow for me, so those parents (if living) may never know my
loss, lest they do grieve for me. As she thus religiously gave her thoughts,
and her last, as she thought to the highest, the beast running toward her of
the sudden stood still; one might imagine, seeing such a heavenly creature, did
amase her, and threaten for meddling with her: but such conceits were vain,
since beasts will keep their own natures, the true reason being, as soon
appeared, the hasty running of two youths, who with sharp spears, soon gave
conclusion to the supposed danger, killing the wolf as she stood harkening to
the noise they made. But they not seeing Urania, who on her knees was praising
God, said one to another, Alas, have we hasted to kill this beast, which now is
not for our turn, little help can this give to our sick father. Urania then
looked up, hearing humane voices, which she so little expected, as only death
was that she looked for: but then perceived she two young men, whose age might
be judged to be some seventeen years; faces of that sweetness, as Venus
love could but compare with them, their hair which never had been cut, hung
long, yet longer much it must have been, had not the dainty natural curling
somewhat shortened it, which as the wind moved, the curles so pretily played, as
the Sunne-beames in the water; their apparel Goats skins cut into no
fashion, but made fast about them in that sort, as one might see by their sight
they were wild; yet that wildness was governed by modesty, their skin most
bare, as arms and legs, and one shoulder, with part of their thighs; but so
white was their skin, as seemed the Sun in love with it, would not hurt,
nor the bushes so much as scratch; on their feet they had a kind of shoes,
which came up to the anckle. Thus they were before the Prime of Shepherdesses,
who coming to them, and saluting them, they stepped back in wonder to see that
beauty, which yet in the masculine they came near to, then laying admiration
so far a part, as to keep themselves safe from rudeness in some kind, one
of them began: Divine creature, pardon this our boldness, which has brought
us thus rudely to your presence, if we have offended, let our humility in
sorrow excuse us; or if this beast we have killed was favored by you, take us
who are rude men, to serve you in that stead: in the mean time accept our
petition to be forgiven our fault. Urania, who had before in their outsides
seen enough to be wondered at, hearing their speech, bred more admiration, she
answered them; Your beauties mixed with so much mildness and sweetness, might
plead for you, if you had offended, which I saw not: but in having given too
much respect to me, the most miserable of women; nor any rudenes see I, but in
that beast which you have so manfully destroyed: if your habits show wildness,
your speech takes away that error; nor have you committed any fault, if not in
saving me to live to greater miseries. The young men then blushing, humbly
thanking her, were taking their leaves, when she courteously desired them, that
since they had rescued her, she might know the men that saved her, and the
adventure brought them thither. They answered; Withal their hearts they would
satisfy her demand, but for that time desired to be excused, since they were
sent by their old weak father to get some food for him, which when they had
done, they would return to her. She hearing this; Alas (said she), shall you
who have kept me out of the throat of a ravening wolf, want what I may help
you to? Go to your father, I will accompany you; this Lamb shall feed him,
at this time sent of purpose without doubt, to cherish so good and blessed a man,
as is father to two such sons: and then may I know your story and his
together. They happy to see so fit a dish for his age, on their knees would
have thanked her, but she hindered them; and so together they went toward the
place where he remained, which was in a Cave under a great rock near to the
sea; when they ariu'd at the place, the elder of the two went in, telling the
old man of the fair shepherdesses coming, and her kindness to him. Wherefore he
sent out a young maid, who was clothed in plain (but neat) apparel: of such
beauty, as who had seen her alone, would have thought her incomparable, but
Urania excelled her; meeting of her, knowing by the youth she was his sister,
most sweetly saluted her, taking her by the hand, went in, where they found the
old man so feeble, as ^e had but his tongue left to serve himself or them
withal: and well did it then serve him for the good of the young men, thus
beginning to Urania: Admired Shepherdes, and most worthy to be so; since the
inward beauty of your mind so much excells the peereles excellency of your
outward perfections, as virtue excels beauty, see here a poor sign of
greatness, ouerwhelm'd with misfortune, and be as you are, all excelling, a
happy means to aidean else destroi'd hope of rising; sit down here, and grudge
not me that honor; for before the story be ended, you will see more reason to
pity the^ scorn, and you my sons and daughter come near, for now shall you know
that, which I have til this present kept from you, for fear I should not else
have held you in this poor, but quiet living. They being ready to sit, and
hear the story, a man's voice made the^ stay, and Urania entreated (as in less
danger if seen then the other) to go forth, she perceived a gentleman of that
delicacy for a man, as she was struck with wonder; his sweetness and fairnes
such, as the rarest painters must confess themselves unable to cou^terfeit such
perfections, and so exquisit proportion. He had a mantle richly embroidered
with pearl and gold, the color of that and his other apparel being watchet
suitably imbrodered, his hair fair and shining, so young he was, as he had
but the sign of a beard; Arms he had none, save a sword to defend himself,
or offend his enemies, he came softly and sadly on toward the rock, but his
eyes to the seaward: she beholding him, said; O sweet Island, how mai'st thou
indeed boast thy self for being the harbor of all excellent persons. He whose
mind was distant from him, held his eyes and thoughts as at first fixed,
beseeching the sea, if she had Amphilanthus in her power, she would be
pitiful unto him: after he had concluded these words, he (whose soul was
absent from him) looked toward the Island, when his eyes were soon called to
admire, and admiringly behold the rare Shepherdess, who in the same kind of
wonder looked on him. He ravished with the sight, scarce able to think her an
earthly creature, stood gazing on her. She who poor soul had with the sight
of Perissus, given leave for love to make a breach into her heart, the more
easily after to come in and conquer, was in so great a passion, as they seemed
like two Masterpieces, framed to demonstrate the best, and choicest skill of
art, at last (as men have the stronger and bolder spirits) he went unto her,
not removing his eyes in the least from hers, and with a brave, but civil
manner thus spoke unto her. If you be, as you seem an incomparable
Shepherdess, let me be so much favored of you, as to be permitted to ask
some questions: but if you be a heavenly person as your rareness makes me
imagine, let me know, that by the humble acknowledging my fault, I may gain
pardon. Alas Sir, said Urania, so far am I from a heavenly creature, as I
esteem my self the most miserable on earth; wherefore if any service I can
do may pleasure you, I beseech you command me, so may I receive some
happiness, which I shall obtain in obeying you. What I will demand, said he,
shall be such things as you may easily grant, and by that make me your servant.
I desire to know what this place is, but most what you are: for never can I
believe you are as you seem, unless for the greater wonder all excellency,
should be masked under this Shepherdess attire. For the perfections in me, as
you call them, said Urania, were they not made perfect by so excellent a
Speaker, would be of no more value, then the estimation I make of my poor
beauty; touching your demands, I will as well as I can satisfy you in them.
This Island is called Pantalaria, governed by an ancient worthy Lord called
Pantalerius, who having received some discontent in his own Country, with his
family, and some others that loved and served him, came hither, finding this
place vnpossest, and so named it after his own name, having ever since in
great quiet and pleasure remained here; himself and all the rest taking the
manner and life of shepherds upon them, so as now this place is of all these
parts most famous for those kind of people. For my self I can say nothing, but
that my name is Urania, an old man and his wife having bred me up as their
own, till within these few days they told me that, which now more afflicts
me, then the poverty of my estate did before trouble me, making me so ignorant
of my self as I know no parents. For they told me, that I was by them found
hard by the seaside, not far from these rocks, laid in a cradle with very
rich clothes about me, a purse of gold in the cradle, and a little writing in
it, which warned them that should take me up to look carefully to me, to call
me Urania, and when I came to sixeteene years of age to tell this to me, but
by no means before, this they have truly performed, and have delivered me the
mantle and purse, that by them, if good fortune serve, I may come to knowledge;
inioyning me besides, not to keep this my story secret from any, since this
sweet place intising many into it, may chance to bring some one to re^ease me
from this torment of Ignorance. It could not be otherwise, said he, since such
sweetness, and peerless louelynesse are matched together. But now, said
Urania, let me know I beseech you, who I have discovered my self unto; Let us
sit down, said he, under these Rocks, and you shall know both who I am, and
the cause of my coming hither: Nay, answered Urania, if it please you, let us
rather go into a Cave hard by, where I have left an old weak man, ready to
tell me his Story, having with him two of the finest youths, and a Maid of the
rarest beauty that eye can behold, and desirous he is to speak, for long he
cannot endure. So together they came into the Cave, the grave man reverently
with bowing down his head, saluting him thus; Brave Sir, for Majesty do I
perceive in your countenance, which makes me give you this title, Welcome to my
poor abiding, and most welcome, since now I trust, I shall dispose of my
Sons, according to my long wish and desire: sit I beseech you down, and tell
me who you are, that then I may discourse to you the lamentable fortune I and
these my children are fallen into. The stranger sat down between the old man
and the excellent Shepherdess, beginning his Tale thus. My name sa^d he, is
Parselius, Prince of Morea, being eldest Son unto the King thereof, which
Country I left with a dear friend of mine, who besides the untying band of
friendship we live linked in, is my kinsman, and heir to the Kingdom of
Naples, called Amphilanthus, resolving not to return, till we had heard news
of a lost Sister of his, who in the first week after her birth was sto^ne
away, since which time an old man, whether by divination or knowledge, assured
the King her Father, she is living. Wherefore the most brave of Princes,
Amphilanthus, resolved to seek her, my self loving him as well, or better
then my self, would not be denied to accompany him: for having been ever bred
in neerenesse of affections, as well as in conversation together, it could not
be, but we must like the soul and body live, and move: so we betook our
selves to the Sea, leaving Morea, passing many adventures in diverse Countries,
still seeking the least freq^ented, and priuatest places keeping to the West,
for that way we were directed by the wise man. At last we arriu^d in Sicilie,
which Country we found in great trouble, wars being broke out again after
the departure of Perissus, Nephew to the King, who had settled the State in good
peace and quiet. But their hearts either not fully reconciled, or only
reconciled to him, after his departure, which as we heard was strange and
sudden, being never since heard of, they rebelled again; but we soon appeased
the business, settling the King in his seat with all quiet and safety. Then did
Amphilanthus and I, though against my heart, part our bodies, but never shall
our minds be parted, he in one ship, taking I know not justly what course, but
I trust the happiest: my self guided by fortune, not appointing any one place
to bend to, was brought hither, promising at our parting to meet at his
Fathers Court in Italy within twelve months after. But shorter I hope now my
journey will be, since I verily believe, you most fair Shepherdess are the
lost Princess, and rather do I think so, because you much resemble Leonius,
the younger brother to Amphilanthus, whose beauty in man cannot be equaled,
though surpassed by you. When he had concluded, the old man with tears thus
said: O Almighty God, how great are thy blessings to me, that before I die,
thou doft thus bring the most desired happiness I could wish for, in sending
hither that Prince, who only can restore our good unto us. Most mighty and
worthily honored Prince; see here before your royal presence, the unfortunate
king of Albania, who in the wars between Achaya and Macedon, taking part
with Achaya, was beaten out of my country, and forced to wander, seeking
safety far from the place, where my safety ought most to have been. I came to
your fathers Court, it is true, poor, and unlike a Prince, which sight took
away so much as pity; Courtiers, rather out of their bravery, contemning, then
compassionating extremity: besides, your Mother, being Sister to the
Macedonian king then living, would not permit me any favor, my kingdom in the
mean while spoild, and parted among such, as could prevail by strength and
policy to get shares. When I found my self in this misery, with my wife and
some few friends we went away, leaving Morea, and al hope of gaining any good
in Greece, following what course our stars would guide us to, we came hither,
where it pleased God to bless us with these two boys, and this daughter,
after whose being seven years old, she died. Yet for all it is, and was a joy
to me, to see of my own for my posterity, finding that likelihood of princely
virtues (as I hope) shall be one day manifested, it has grieved me to think
how I should leave them; but now my hopes are revived, since I trust that
danger is past; your noble, and magnanimous virtues being such, as to take
pity of any, how much more then will your honor be, to assist distressed
Princes? And now may you well do it, since a servant of mine, who I have oft^n
sent thither, to see how things pass, does assure me, your Uncle is dead, and
a mighty Lord being next heire-male, which by the laws of the country was
otherwise, has got the Crown, having enclosed your fair young cousin, right
heir to the kingdom of Macedon, being only daughter to the late king, in a
strong tower til she be of age, and then to marry her; or if she refuse, to
keep her there still, and this is the best she can expect. Wherefore sir, thus
you are bound to rescue her: then I beseech you take these two young men into
your protection, who till now, knew no other, then that they were mean boys,
I not daring to let them know their birth, lest those great spirits which live
in them, should have led the^ into some dangerous course: but still I have kept
them under, making them know hardness and misery, the better still to endure it,
if so cross their fortunes be; or if they come to enjoy their right, they may
know the better to command, having so well learned to obey and serve. And most
delicate Shepherdes, do you I pray accept of this young maid for your friend
and companion, since if you be the King of Naples daughter, or any other
Princes, you need not scorn the company of the Albanian Kings daughter.
Parselius taking the old King in his arm^s; And is it my good fortune most
famous King of Albania (said he) to have it in my power to serve so excellent
a Prince? Doubt not then but I will with all faithful love and diligence (as
soon as I have concluded this ^earch, with meeting my dearest friend in
Italy) go into Morea, and from thence carry such forces as shall (with my
other friends I will join with me) restore you to your right, and pull down
that Macedonian Usurper, were it but for wronging you. But since I have so
fair an occasion to revenge such injuries offered so virtuous a Prince as your
self, in keeping a kingdom, and usurping another from his rightful Queen, I
am doubly bound: your sons I accept to be my companions, and as brothers to
me will I be careful of them; the like did Urania promise for the young Lady.
Then the old king before ouer-charged with sorrow, was now so ravished with
joy, as not being able to sustain, bursting into floods of kind tears, and
his soul turned into a passion of joy unsupportable, being only able to kiss
the Prince Parselius and Urania, embracing, blessing, and kissing his children,
giving them charge faithfully and lovingly to obserue^ and love that brave
Prince, and sweet Shepherdes, like a child for quiet ending, gave up the ghost
in their arms he best did love. Great sorrow was made among them for his
death; but then growing almost night, Urania for that time went home, leaving
the three to attend the Kings body till the next morning, directing Parselius
to the sad abiding of the perplexed Perissus, promising to come to the Cave by
Sun rising to dispose of all things.

Urania being come home, little meat contented her, making haste to her
lodging, that there she might discourse with her self of all her afflictions
privately, and freely, throwing her self on her bed, she thus began: Alas,
Urania, how does misery love thee, that thus makes thee continually her
companion? What is this new pain thou feel'st? What passion is this thy heart
does entertain? I have heard my imagined Father, and many more, talk of a
thing called Love, and describe it to be a delightful pain, a sought, and
cherished torment, yet I hope this is not that: for ^laue am I enough already
to sorrow, no need have I then to be oppressed with passion: Passion, O
passion! yet thou rulest Me. Ignorant creature to love a stranger, and a
Prince, what hope have thou, that because thou art not known, thou should be
known to love in the best place? I had rather yet offend so then in a mean
choice, since if I be daughter of Italy, I chose but in mine own rank, if
meaner, ambition is more noble then baseness. Well then, if I do love, my
only fault is in too soon loving; but neither in love, nor choice: Love
plead for me, since if I offend, It is by thy power, and my faults must, as
made, be salu'd by thee. I confess, I am won, and lost, if thou, brave
Prince, pity not, and save me. Sweet Chastity, how did I love, and honor
thee? Nay, almost vow my self unto thee, but I have failed, Love is the more
powerful God, and I was borne his subject: with that she rose up and went to
the window to see if it were day, never knowing before, what it was to wish for
any thing (except the knowledge of her self) now longs for day, watches the
hours, deemes every minute a year, and every hour an Age, till she again
inioy'd Parselius sight, who all that night took as little rest; hope, love,
and fear so vexing him, and tyrannizing over him, as sleep durst not close,
nor seize his eyes to any the least slumber, all his content being in thinking
on Urania; wishing from his soul she were the lost Princess, that then they
might happily enjoy; which wish by love was chid, since love was able in him to
make her great enough, and those wishes were but to add to that which ought to
be so perfect, as it self should of it self be sufficient to make happiness,
which is the greatest greatness. Then did he resolve, whatsoever she was, to
make her his Wife; his Father, Country, Friend, and all must love Urania. Thus
all must yield to her, or lose him already yielded. He whose youth and manlike
conversation scorned the poor name and power of love is now become his
Bondsman, cries out on nothing but Urania; thinks of nothing, hopes for nothing,
but the gain of her perfections to his love: accusing this night for
spitefully being longer then any other that ever he knew, affection and desire
making it appear tedious unto him, and why? because it kept Urania from him. O
(would he say) how happy were thou Parselius to land on this shore, where thou
have gaind the Goddess of the earth to be thy Mistress, Urania to be thy love?
But then would a lovers fear take him, making him tremblingly sigh and say;
But if she should not love again, wretch of all men, what would become of thee?
Courage then joining with hope, would bring him from that sad despair, giving
him this comfort; Yet sure (said he) her heart was not framed of so excellent
temper, her face of such beauty, and her self wholly made in perfectness, to
have cruelty lodged in her: No, she was made for love, then she must love; and
if so, pity will claim some part; and if any, or to any, who more deserves it
then my self, who most affects her^ With that he went to the mouth of the
rock, from whence he might discouerall the plains, carefully and lovingly
beholding them: You blessed Plains (said he) which daily have that treasure,
which the rest of the world wanting, confesses sense of poverty; dull earth,
ignorant of your riches, neither knowing, nor caring how to glory sufficiently
for bearing, and continually touching such perfections, why do not thou with
all excellencies strive to delight her? sending forth soft and tender grass,
mixed with sweetest flowers when she will grace thee, suffering thee to kiss
her feet as she does tread on thee? but when she lies on thee, do thou not
then make thy self delicate, and change thy hardness to daintines and softnes?
Happy, most happy in her sweet weight; and yet when she does leave thee do not
the flowers vade, and grass die for her departure? Then he perceived her
coming a far off down the plains, her flock some feeding but most
leaping, and want only playing before her. And well may you do this most lucky
flock (said he) having such a Commandresse, and so fair a Guardian: well
does joy become you, showing you sensibly do know the blessing you enjoy. But
what will you do when she shall leave you? leave this pleasure, pine, starve,
and die with so great misery. Alas I pity you, for such a change will be. And
what will thou, sweet Island, do? let in the sea, be drowned, and lose thy
pleasant solitarines. Having thus said, he left the desolate rock, and went to
meet her, who with equal love and kindness met him; such indeed was their
affection, as can be expressed by nothing but it self, which was most
excellent. When the first passion was past, which joy governed for sight, love
taking the place of speech: Ah Urania (said he); how did the Sun show himself
in his brig^te^t and most glorious habits to entertain thee in these meades,
coveting to win thy favor by his richness triumphing in his hope of gain?
What moved thy sight then in my soul? Think you not it grew to rauishing of my
senses? The Sun (said she) shined (me thought, most on you, being as if so
fond, as he did give himself to be your servant, circling you about, as if he
meant, that you should be the body, and himself serve for your beams. With
that he took her hand, and with an affectionate soul kissed it, then went
they together to the Cave where the two young savage Princes, and their Sister
attended them: then did they privately bury the old King, promising (if
businesses went well, that they by Parselius favor might recover their right)
to fetch his worthy body, and lay it with the other famous Kings of Albania.

This being agreed upon they went out of the Cave, Steriamus and Selarinu (for
so the young Princes were called) went first in their savage habits, which they
resolved to wear till they came where they might fit themselves with apparel,
and Arms befitting their Estates: Parselius then promising to knight them:
Next after them went the Morean Prince leading Urania, and she holding Selarina
by the hand. Being come into the Plain, Parselius again speaking to Urania,
urged the likelihood of her being the lost Princess, besides, assuring her,
howsoever, of no lower an Estate if she would go with him. She made him this
answer. A Prince, said she, can demand or promise but Princely things; I
believe you to be so, because you say so; and that face, me thinks, should not
dissemble, out of this I credit you, and so consent to go with you; then nobly
and virtuously, as I trust you, dispose of me. He casting up his eyes to
Heaven, Let me, nor my attempts prosper, said he, when I break faith and
virtuous respect to you; now let us to the Ship. Nay, I beseech you first, said
she, permit me to take my leave of my good friends, and formerly supposed
Parents, lest my absence bring their death, if ignorant of my fortune: besides,
we will carry the mantle and purse with us. He soon agreed unto it, and so
together they went to the house, the late abiding of the matchless
Shepherdess, where they found the good old folks sitting together before the
door, expecting the return of Urania. But when they saw her come so
accompanied, they wondered at it; and though poor, yet were they civil,
wherefore they went toward them, and hearing by the fair Shepherdess who the
Princes were, kneeled down, and would have kissed the hand of Parselius: but
he who respected them for their care of Urania, would not permit them to do so
much reverence, lifting them up, and embracing them, told them the same story
of his travel, and cause thereof, as he had done to Urania, and then
concluded, that the likelihood of her being that sought for Princess, was the
reason why they agreed to go together, he promising to conduct her safely into
Italy, and if she proved the Princess, to deliver her to her father, which
verily he believed he should do; and seldom do men's imaginations in that
kind fail, especially having so good grounds to lay their hopes upon. The old
folks sorry to part with Urania, yet knowing she was not ordained to tarry
with them, would not seem to contradict their wills: wherefore fetching the
mantle and purse with the little writing delivered them to Urania, whose good
disposition was such, as she could not refrain from tears when she parted
with them, they wishing their age would have permitted them to have attended
her, but being feeble it was not for them to travel, especially to go so
uncertain a journey, but in their place they desired their daughter might
serve her; which she willingly consented to.

Thus euerything concluded, they took their leaves, and way to the Ship, which
they found where Parselius had left her, but not as he had parted from her;
for much more company was in her, and a strange encounter, he found his
Servants Prisoners, his Arms possessed, and all his goods in the hands of a
Pirat: yet had he governed it so, as this mis-aduenture was not dicouer'd till
they were aboard. Parselius alone in regard of his company and some women,
would nevertheless, have ventured his life to have kept Urania free, such was
his love, by none to be surpassed: his compassion likewise was great on the
other Princess; in himself, feeling the just cause, as he thought, they had
to mistrust him, and his promises to be valuelesse, this accident being the
first of their hoped for joys.

But she, whose truth in belief would not permit her to have the least part
of suspicion to enter, much less, lodge in her breast against him, hindered
that brave (but doubtful) attempt, using these speeches to him.

Be satisfied, my dearest friend, said she, and hazard not your self in this
kind, seeking to alter what is ordained by Fate, and therefore not to be
changed: but rather give us example, as confidently, and mildly to suffer this
adversity, as happily we might have enjoyed the other we expected. He only
with a languishing, but (to her) loving look, answered her, when the Pirat,
contrary to their expectation, came, and kneeling down before Urania, used
these words.

Let not, fairest Princess, this accident trouble you, since your imprisonment
shall be no other then the command of me, and mine: neither most noble Sir,
be you, or these other offended^ for sooner will I do violence on my self
then any way wrong those that come with this Lady: Be patient, and you shall
soon see, the cause of my taking this noble prey; this said, he rose, and
placing them all on fine seats in the Cabine, where lately the Prince had sat
free from both the bands of love, and imprisonment, himself sitting before
them began his discourse in this manner (while the ship under sail was guided
the way which he directed the Pilar) My name (said he) is Sandringall, borne
and bred in the land of Romania, being servant to the King thereof: this King
lived long as one may say, the favorite of fortune, being blessed in his
government with peace, and love of his people, but principally happy in two
children, a son, and a daughter, younger by some years then her brother, he
being called Antisius, and she Antisia; promising in their youths all comfort
to succeed in their age: but destiny herein commanded, disposing quite other
ways, and thus it was. The King my Master having in his youth been a brave and
valiant Prince, giving himself unto the seeking and finishing adventures, a
strict league of friendship grew between him, and the King of Achaia, for
whose sake he left his country, with a great army assisting him against his
Macedonian ^nemie: after returning with honor and content, the Achaian King
grateful for such a courtesy, being grown in years, sent Ambassadors to
demand his daughter in marriage for his son, and withal to have the
Princess sent unto him, to be brought up together, to the end, that
conversation (a ready friend to love) might nurse their affections so well, as
she might as contentedly be his daughter, as it was affectionately desired of
him. His son, as towardly a Prince as those parts had, called Leandrus, with
whom few Christian Princes will compare, except the two Cousens Parselius and
Amphilanthus: but to my discourse. My Master soon consented to the Achayan
kings demand, which although for the farnesse of the country he might have
refused; yet the neerenes of their loves was such, as he could not deny him, or
his request, resolving instantly to send the one half of his happiness to his
old friend; and for this end he sent for me, but herewithal begins my misery,
caused by my treachery, which heartily I repent, and am ashamed of. I being
arrived at his Court, out of an ancient confidence which he had of my loialtie
to him, committed this charge unto me, to see his Antissia carefully conducted
and delivered to the king of Achaya: giving me directions, and counsel how to
carry my self; besides sole authority and power in this embassage. Thus we
departed, my wife attending on her person; accompanied we were with most of the
nobility, their loves being such, as they parted not til they saw the young
Princess shipp^d. Covetousness (a dangerous sin in this time) bred in my wife
(seeing the infinite riches the father had sent with his child); her
persuasions besides (or rather joined to the devilish sense of gain) made me
consent to detestable wickedness. Led by this wicked subtilty, we resolved not
to take our way to Achaya, but to put in to some Island, there to sell the
Jewels, and leave the Princess in a religious house, not to be known while
her dear Parents should esteem her lost, we using the gain to our own
profits. More cunningly to carry this, we sent a servant of ours before into
the ship, with such provision as our plot required, toward night, the sweet
young Lady embarked, with belief to go into Achaya; we purposing nothing
less: for in the dead time of the night we set the ship on fire, having
before (when most slept) conuaide the treasure into the long boat: then with
as much amasement as any (nothing like the bellows of that fuel) I took the
Princess in mine arms leaping into the boat, calling to my wife to follow
me, withal cutting the cord, lest others should leap in: she leaped, but
short, her fin so heavy drowning her, and my trusty servant, with all the
knights, in number twenty, and the Ladies sent to attend Antisia were drowned,
or burnd, or both. Then played I the waterman, making toward the next shore we
could discover; day breaking gave us sight of one, yet only for flattring hope
to play withal, not to be enjoyed, for instantly were we set on by rouers, who
kept about these coasts. The Princess they took from me, and all the
treasure, leaving me in the boat, and towing it by the ship in the midst of
the sea, left me with bread and water for two days, but without oar, sail,
or hope; yet such, and so favorable was my destiny, as within that time a
Pirat scouring the seas took me up, who not long after was set upon by
another. But then did the first arm me to serve him, which in gratitude I did,
and so well defended him, as we had the victory by the death of the other,
slain with my hand: for requital hereof, he bestowed the new won Bark upon
me, and men to serve me. Glad was I of this, having means to search for the
Princess, which I vowed with true and humble repentance to perform, never
giving over, till I had found the lost Antisia, or ended my life in the
service. And this is the reason I took you, for having landed here, and by
chance seen you, I straight remembered your face, wherefore I determined by
some way or other to compass the means to get you before my parting hence;
and had not this happy occasion befalne me, some other had not failed to
atchiue my purpose. Then tell me where have you been these ten yeeres^ for so
long it is since you were lost: and with all I beseech you let my submission
and repentance gain my pardon. Truly (said Urania) you have told so ill a
tale, as if I were the lost Princess, I should scarce forget so great an
injury: but satisfy your self with this, and the hope of finding her, while
you have in your power one, who (alas) is lost too. The Pirat at this grew much
troubled and perplexed, for so unadvisedly having discovered his former ill:
thus they remaind, the Pirat vexed, Urania grieved, Parselius in soul
tormented, the others moved as much, as respect in them to the other two, could
move in noble minds, least, or not at all, thinking of themselves, in
comparison of them: all sitting with arms crossed, and eyes cast down upon
the earth, except the Pirat, whose mind was busied with higher thoughts, none
knowing to what end they would have ascended, had not a voice awaked them,
which came from a Sayler, who bad them prepare. This called not the rest from
their sorrow, nor moved Urania so much as to hear it, who sat not tearelesse,
though speechles, while her sighs accompanied the wind in loud blowing.
Sandringal looking forth, saw the cause of the cry proceeded from the sight of
the great Pirat of Syracusa, whose force was therabouts too well known: then
did he take his arms, delivering Parselius his own into his hands, entreating
his aid. Parselius lifted up his eyes, and as he raised them, he placed them
on Urania, as the sphere where they alone should move, using these words: Now
have we some hope, since once more I possess my arms: those (in show) savage
youths helping him. By this time was the other ship come to them, when there
began a cruel fight between them: being grapled, Parselius encountered the
chief Pirat, Sandringal a black Knight, who was so strong and valiant, as
Sandringal gaind much honor so long to hold out with him. Parselius killed his
enemy, when at that instant the black Knight struck the head of Sandringal from
his shoulders; which Parselius seeing, Farewell Sandringal (said he), now are
Antissia and Leandrus well revenged for thy treason. With that the black Knight
commanded his part to be quiet, himself throwing down his sword, and pulling
of his helm, ran and embraced Parselius, who knowing him to be Leandrus, with
as much affection held him in his arms: thus was the business ended, all
growing friends by their example. Then were all the prisoners brought forth of
both the ships, amongst whom he knew one to be the Squire of his dear friend
and Cosen, Amphilanthus, and two Gentlemen who had mortal hatred (as it did
appear) one unto the other: for no sooner came they together, but they would
have buffeted each other, wanting weapons to do more; the one of them Leandrus
took into his custody, while the other began his story thus. My Lords (said
he) first let me beseech pardon for this rudenes; next, claim justice on this
villain, who has not only wronged me, but in his unmannerly discourse injured
the brauest Christian Princes; and that you may know the truth, give me liberty
to speak this to you. My name is Allimarlus, borne in Romania, and Page I was
unto the King thereof; but being come to man's estate, and so much knowledge, as
to see and commiserate my Masters misery, which had the flood from two springs;
the first was the loss of his daughter Antissia, being sent under the conduct
of his faithful (as he esteemed) servant Sandringal (who so well he trusted,
as he would have ventured his life in his hands; which appeared in putting the
fair Antissia in his power, who as himself he loved) to be delivered to the
King of Achaia, desiring a match between her and the kings son, called the
hopeful Leandrus; but in the way the ship was spoild by an unlucky fire, and
she (as it was coniectured) lost, which since proved otherwise, not being
swallowed by the unmerciful sea, but betraide by her Guardian, and stolen
again from him by Rouers; since which time little news has been heard of
her, saving hope of her living. The other, and greater affliction was, and is,
a wicked woman he has made his wife, after the death of his virtuous Queen,
who died as soon as she had seen her worthily beloved Son Antissius
blessed with a Son, whom they called after his own name, who having endured
a long and paineful search for his Sister, at his return took a sweet and
excellent Lady, called Lucenia to wife; who, though she were not the fairest,
yet truly was she beautiful, and as fair as any in goodness, which is the
choicest beauty. But this second marriage made them first know misery, the
king old, and passionately doting on her: she young, politic and wicked,
being the widow of a Noble man in the Country, whose beastlines and cruelty
cost the Prince his life, and bred the ruin of the State, as I have since my
departure from thence, understood by a Knight of that Country. But to my
discourse: The King one day after he had banished his son Antissius the
Court, and by her damnable counsel put such jealousy into his head, as he
now feared and hated him, that once was three parts of his joy. This and the
loss of his other comfort Antissia, did so perplexe him, as one day being at
dinner, he began with tears to speak of Antissius, blaming his unnaturalness
to him in his age, who had so tenderly and lovingly cherished his youth: but
little of that she would suffer him to discourse of, lest his deserved pity
might have hindered her ends, and so her plots have faild, or been discovered.
Then spoke he of his young friend and once hoped for son Leandrus, who in
search of Antissia, was said to be slain, by reason that his Squire returned
to the Court (after long seeking his Lord, who by misaduenture he had lost),
bringing his armor shrewdly cut and battered, which he had found in a meadow,
but no news of his Master; only this probability of his loss a country
fellow gave him, telling him, that gallant men in gay armours had not far off
performed a gallant fight, wherein some were killed, and one Knights body
carried thence by a Lady, who followed the Knight, having but one more with
her, whither they went, or more of the matter, he could not tell. With this and
the armor he returned to the old King, who the kindest of fathers, did
accordingly suffer for this too likely disaster. From that he fell to the last
and first of his misfortune, speaking of Antissia, and bewailing her loss:
concluding, How miserable am I of all men, that do live to lament for these
many afflictions? one child dead by his living undutifulness, the other lost by
treachery in a man I most trusted; and to be besides, the occasion to bereave
my dearest friend of his only comfort, which as one of my equal sorrows I
esteem. I seeing his vexation, and just cause of mourning, offered my best
service in seeking the Princess, who not being dead, I might hope to find, and
bring some content unto his age. He hearing me say this, fell upon my neck,
kissing my forehead, and yet weeping so, as they resembled the watery and
parting kisses the sweet Rivers give the sweeter banks, when with ebbing they
must leave them: so did his tears, so did his kisses on my face, both meet and
part; at last his ioy-mixt sorrow let him speak these words: And will thou O
Allimarlus do this for me? shall I yet find so true a friend? a servant, and a
faithful one (said I) who will not live, if not to serve you, and so my faith
to live in me. Then he took me up in his arms, and calling for a sword of
his, which he had worn in most of his adventures, gave that with the honor of
Knighthood to me; then kissing his hands and the Queens, I took my leave. He,
though glad to find my loyalty, and hoping to hear some news of his
daughter, yet was sorry to part with me: so few were left that he could trust,
his kind wife having taken care that her Minions and favorites should most
attend his person.

Long time was I not landed in Greece, in that part called Morea, before I met
an old man, who told me something of the Princess, but nothing of her certain
abode: yet I rejoiced to hear of her, not doubting but to bring her to delight
her grieved father, who never indeed tasted of true happiness since her loss,
that being the thread to his succeeding miseries. That old man likewise told
me, I was in my way of finding her, if I held on to Laconia. I earnestly
desired his company, which he affoorded me, and so we went together, resolving
still to enquire, and to leave no likely place unsought in all Greece, till we
had found her. A pretty space we thus continued, the old man passing away the
time with good discourse, which made the way seem shorter, telling me many
adventures which had befalne him in his youth, having led the life that most
brave spirits use; but one I best remember (being his own story, the place
wherein we then were producing it), it was this, and in truth worthy of note.
Whatsoever I now, fair Knight, (said he) appear to be, know I am in birth
quite contrary: poor, and alone now, once a Duke, and one of the mightiest,
richest, ancientest, and sometimes happiest of these parts; this country
wherein you are, being mine, only subject in homage to the famous King of
Morea; my education had been most in the court; my time, some spent there, some
time abroad: but weary at last of either, as a hound will be, who never so well
loving hunting, will at last take rest: so did I lie down at mine own home,
determining to end my days in quiet plenteousnes, taking my own delight; to
add unto which, I brought with me a virtuous Lady, and such a one, as might
for goodness equal any of her rank, and truly not vnbeautifull: yet so much was
I besotted on a young man, whom I had unfortunately chosen for my companion, as
at last all delights and pastimes were to me tedious and loathsome, if not
liking, or begun by him. Nay, my wives company in respect of his, was
unpleasing to me. Long time this continued, which continuance made me
issue-les, wherefore I made him my heir, giving him all the present honor I
could in my own power, or by the favor of the king (who ever graced me much)
procure him. But he the son of wickedness, though adopted to me, esteeming
possession far better then reuersio^, gave place so much to covetousness, as
murder crept into credit to attain the profit, wherefore he practiced to make
me away: my friends and kindred had before left me, expecting nothing but my
ruin, seeing me so bewitched with my undoing. The plot was laid, and I thus
betraide where most I trusted; the time being come for the execution, the hired
man (being mine more for justness, then his for rewards) came unto me, and
upon promise of secrecy discovered the truth unto me, making me besides
promise, to be persuaded by him; which was, for some time to retire my self,
till a party were made in the Country strong enough to pull down his pride,
who had gained such power, as he was grown more powerful then my self, then
might I be my self, and rule in safety. I consented to the concealing, but
never could be won, to think of harming him, whose ingratitude I believed
sufficiently would one day burden him. But how often did I entreat and beseech
him to perform his part, and satisfy his Master in killing me? whose
falsenesse and wickedness more grieved me, then ten deaths (could I have
suffered so many) yet his honest car^ ouer-ruled me, and I submitted to his
Counsel. Then took he my clothes, apparelling me fit for the change of my
fortune: He, (poor man) returning to my Castle, for so till then it was,
credibly reporting, that I going to swim, as often I did in this sweet River
which runs along this Valley, I was drowned (we being then in that place,
and indeed, the sweetest in the world.) This in some kind was true, said he,
for drowned I was in sorrow and tears: which, could they have made a stream
for bigness answerable to their swift falling, had questionless made his
framed report true. This being told the Duke, as then by my imagined death,
imaginarily he was, did make show of insupportable grief being so possessed, as
he seemed dispossed of senses, furiously, and suddenly stabbing the good man,
who for my life lost his own: This was counted a passionate act, Love
transporting him so much beyond himself, as he was not able to resist his own
fury, while his deuillish cunning did both set a Gloss upon his brutishness,
and keep his Treason vnreueal'd: the poor soul falling dead at his feet,
while he said, take this for thy detested news bringing. Then did he make a
solemn funeral for my dead mind, though living body, He apparrell'd himself,
and his Court in mourning, which gave much content to the people who loved me,
while indeed, their black was but the true picture of his inward foulenes. My
wife did presently retire to a house her self had built: but when he had (as
he thought) sufficiently played with the people, he began to exercise his
authority, beginning with my wife, picking a quarrel to bereave her of her
estate, which he in short time did, turning her to seek her fortune: Patiently
she took it, having yet some Jewels left her, she bought a little house in a
thick and desert wood, where she was not long before I came unto her,
discovering my self to both our equal passions of joy and sorrow. Privately we
there continued many years; God in our poverty giving us an unexpected
blessing, which was a daughter, who grew up and served us; for a servant our
means would not allow us, though our estates required it. Seventeen years we
thus concealed lived, but then, as ioies, so tortures will have end; The Duke
in all pleasure and plenty, I in misery, and pouery. One day the young Prince
accompanied with his most noble companion Amphilanthus, (who for the honor of
Greece was bred with him) and many other brave young Nobles who attended them,
went forth to see a flight at the brook; when after a flight or two the
Princes Hawke went out at check, which made them all follow her, and so long,
as at the last (for rescue of my afflictions) they were brought to my poor
abiding, which by reason of the farrnesse from the Court, and foulnes of the
weather, (a sudden storm then falling) they accepted for their lodging: which
although so mean as could be, yet they pleased to like it, rather looking into
my heart for welcome (where they found it) then into the meannesse of the place.

After they had refreshed themselves and discoursed freely with me, it pleased
my Prince to say, that my estate and life, agreed not with my conversation:
wherefore he would not be denied, but needs must know the truth; which out of
obedience, more then desire, with heart-tearing grief I discoursed to him. He
gave few words for answer, but commanded me the next day with my Wife and
Daughter to attend him to the Court, which feign I would have refused;
foreseeing (that which soon after ^ollow'd) the destruction of my once most
loved friend: who, though he had changed gratefulness to the contrary, and
love to hate, yet my affection could not so much alter it self as to hate
where once so earnestly I affected, or seek revenge on him, whose good I ever
wished. But we obeyed; then the sweet young Prince presented me to his Father,
who instantly called me to mind, remembering many adventures, which in our
youths We had passed together: pitying my fortune as much as he had in younger
days affected me, yet glad in some kind, to recompense my faithful service to
him; instantly sent for the Usurper, who by reason of a journey the King made
to see his Realm, and show it to his Son before his departure, who was to
go thence with his excellent Cosen in a search by them undertaken, was come
near to the place of the Tyrants abode. He refused to come, but soon by force
he was brought before the King; who with mild fashion, and royal Majesty
examined the business, which he confessed: but rather with a proud scorn,
then repentant heart: wherefore the King with just judgment degraded him,
committing him to a strong Tower, whereinto he was walled up, meat given him
in at the window, and there to end his days: which were not long, pride
swelling him so with scorn of his fall, as he burst and dyed.

The Dukedom after this sentence was restored to me: but truly, I was not
able so to recover my former loss, wherefore humbly thanking the King, and his
Son, besought them to give me leave to bestow it on my Daughter; which was
granted me, my wife thinking she had seen enough when I was my self again,
departing this life with joy and content. Besides, I made one suit more, which
was, that since the Prince had with so much favor begun to honor me, it
would please ^im to proceed so far as to bestow one of his young Lords in
marriage on my Daughter. The King and Prince both took this motion most
kindly, wherefore choosing a hopeful young Lord, and him the Prince most
loved, gave him to her: the marriage was with much honor celebrated in the
Court, at which for their unspeakable honor, Parselius (for so the Prince is
called) and Amphilanthus Prince of Naples, were made Knights; and bravely for
the beginning of their succeeding glory began those sports of Field, as since
have made them famous over the world. This ended, I went away kissing the Kings
and Princes hands, undertaking a Pilgrimage: which performed, I returned to
this place, where like an Hermit still I live, and will continue while life is
in me; this Valley, those sleepie woody Hills, and the Cave I rest in, shall
be all the Courts or Palaces that these old eyes shall ever now behold. As
thus we traveled on, determining to conclude that days journey with the end
of his story, and resting in his Cell that night, we were called from that
resolution by a noise within the wood, of Horse, and clashing of Armor, which
drew me to see what the matter was. Arriving at the place, we found two
gentlemen cruelly fighting, and by them many more slain: but that which most
amazed us, was, that hard by them on the ground, was one of the Mirrours for
beauty to see her self lively in, so fair indeed, is she, and such a fairenes
has she, as mine eyes never saw her equal, if not that rare Shepherdess by
you, or the incomparable Lady Pamphilia, Sister to the noble Prince Parselius,
who I need but name, the world being sufficiently filled with his fame. This
Lady lay along, her head upon her hand, her tears ran in as great abundance,
as if they meant to preserve themselves in making some pretty brook of truest
tears, her breath she took rather in sighs and sobs, then quiet breathing,
yet did not this alter the color, or feature of her heavenly beauty: but
resembling the excellent workmanship of some delicatly proportioned fountain,
which lets the drops fall without hurting it self: or like a shower in April,
while the Sun yet continues clear and bright and so did she seem to our
eyes.

As we were admiring her, there came a Knight in black Armor, his Shield
suitable to it without any Device, who not seeing the Lady, stepped to the two
Combatants, willing them to hold their hands, till he did understand the cause
of their enmity; They refusing it, turned both on him, one stricking him
forcibly on the shoulder, he seeing their rudeness, and feeling himself
smart, forgot parting, and made himself a party, sticking one of them such a
blow as made him fall dead at his feet. Whereupon the other yielded, delivering
his Sword, and turning to the Lady, who now the Knight saw, with admiration for
her fairness and sorrow, unbinding her and sitting down by her, finding I
was likewise a stranger, called me, and the good Hermit to hear the discourse
which the vanquished man delivered in this manner.

Two of these which here you see lie slain were half brothers, Sons to one
mother; the one of them my Master; who on a day, after a long chase of a
Stagge, happened into a Merchants house, not far hence, where this Lady did
then remain: They were ciuilly and courteously entertained for being Gentlemen
well borne, and in their fashion pleasing, they were respected, and beloved of
most; never having attempted, or to man's knowledge embraced, or let in a
thought contrary to virtue till their coming thither, where they resolved of a
course worse then man could of man imagine, if not proud by experience. For
there they saw that Lady, desired her, and plotted to obtain her, purposing
with all ill meaning to enjoy her, nothing being able to give other end to
their wicked minds but this^ whereto their beastliness, and true justice has
brought them: having made this place their bed of death, as it was meant for
their lascivious desires. Great they did imagine her of birth, by the honor
done unto her; this was another spur to their deuillish longing; yet to be
certain, with a good fashion dissembling their inward intent, (as well they
could, for they were Courtiers) entreated the Merchant to tell who this Lady
was, that they might accordingly honor and respect her. He told them her name
was Antissia, and that she was daughter to the great king of Romania, betrayed
by her Guardian, taken from him again by Rouers, and sold by them on this
coast, at the Town called S. Anzolo, where I a Merchant (said he) bought her;
they not knowing who they sold, nor I what I had bought: till some days after
she her self (entreating me no more to suffer her to be made merchandise, but
to carry her to her father, who would reward me sufficiently for my pains)
told me the unexpected secret. The brothers hearing this, inflamed more then
before, beauty first enticing them, then ambition wrought to compass a kings
daughter to their pleasure; much commending themselves for placing their loves
so worthily, yet still forgetting how unworthy and dishonorable their love
was. Desire makes them now politic, casting all ways how they might betray
her; consulting together, they at last concluded, to get the Princess into the
Garden to walk, having before appointed these slain men to attend at a door,
which opened into the field, which they opening, persuaded her to go out a
little into so sweet an air: she fearing nothing went with them, when no
sooner she was forth, but she found she was betrayed; crying for help would
not avail her, yet the pitifulness of it brought forth most of the house, who
perceiving what was intended and near acted, no fury could be compared to
theirs (and fury indeed it was) for they but five, and unarmed, attempted to
rescue her from us, being all these; and two of them so amorous, as they in
that raging passion (love being at the best a mild frenzy) would have been
able, or thought themselves so, to have withstood them, and many more,
especially their Mistress being in presence. This noise also brought forth the
good woman, wife to the honest merchant, where began so pitiful a monefull
complaining between her and this Princess, as truly moved compassion in all,
my heart I am sure weeping for them: yet the mad Lovers had sense of nothing
but their worst desires. With these words the Princess fell into a new sorrow,
which the Knight perceiving (whose heart was never but pitiful to fair
Ladies) persuaded the sad Antissia so well, as he proceeded; Then being possessed
of the Lady, my Master led the way, bringing his brother and us to this
banquet; this place being set down for her dishonor, but destined for their
graves. Then grew a strife for the first enjoying of her, so far it
proceeded, as from words they fell to blows, and so in short time to this
conclusion: for they fighting, we following our Masters example, followed them
in death likewise all but my self, and I now at your mercy. He had but
concluded his story, when I pulling of my helmet, kneeling down to the
Princess, told her who I was, and likewise my search for her, which she (with
as much joy as on a sudden could enter into so sad a mind) received with
gracious thankfulness. Now had the black Knight in like manner discovered his
face, which so excellent in louelines, I cannot say fairenes, as the whitest
beauty must yield to such a sweetness; and yet does his mind as far excel his
person, as his person does all others that I have seen, and so will all allow,
for this was Amphilanthus; who with mild, yet a princely manner, told the
Princess, That she might leave her sorrow being fallen into his hands, where
she should have all honor and respect, and within short time by himself be
delivered to her father. But first he was to perform his promise to his
dearest friend and Cosen Parselius in meeting him in Italy, the time prefixed
being almost expired, and his search vt^erly fruitless. But I pray sir (said
Parselius) how came that brave Prince again into Morea? By a violent storm
(said he), wherein he suffered shipwreck. This done, Amphilanthus, Antissia,
the Hermit, and my self, took our ways to the Merchants house, whom we found
returned, but ready again to have left his house, filled with discontent and
passion for the unhappy accident: his wife in that desperate grief as hardly
could she have endured with life, had not the blessed return of Antissia
given comfort, like life unto her sorrows. The servant to the slain Knight
guided us within sight of the house: but then with pardon and liberty of going
his own way, he departed.

That night we rested there, the next morning parted our selves; Amphilanthus,
Antissia, the Merchant and his wife, took their iourny together toward the
Court, there to leave her till he had found Parselius, and so end his vow; the
old Hermit returned to his private devotions, my self took my way to the next
port, to ship my self for Romania, in the same ship was also this man, who
hearing me discourse of my adventures with the Master of the ship, gave ill
language of Amphilanthus, then of Parselius, saying, they were Cosoners, and
not Princes, but some odd fellows taking good names upon them, since it was
very unlikely so great persons should be so long suffered abroad, and travel
in such a sort alone, and more like runne-awaies, then Princes. These much
moved me: but to put me quite out of patience, he went on, giving vilder,
and more cursed speeches of my own Lord: this made me strike him, and so we
fell together so close, as one or both had dyed for it, had not the company
parted us; and after we had again gone to it, but that this ship came and
took us, and so made us Prisoners to save our lives. But now Sirs, if you do
not justice, you wrong your selves, in not revenging so great an injury done
to the brauest Princes.

Parselius replide: We were not worthy to live, if we did not right so
worthy a Gentleman as your self, and revenge the wrong done to so great
Princes, whose greatness yet cannot keep ill tongues in awe sufficiently,
but that in absence they are often wronged; and therefore friends must revenge
that, which they ignorant of otherwise may suffer. But herein we may be
thought partial; for this Knight you see is Leandrus, my self Parselius, one
of the cousoning Princes (as it pleased his honesty to call me): I would
advise therefore, that this rare Shepherdess should appoint him his
punishment. The young Knight kneeled down to have kissed the hands of the two
Princes: they taking him up, gave him thanks for his discourse, commending him
much for his loyalty and valor.

Urania, (who was as heartily angry as the Knight) seeing her Parselius thus
wronged, could find no less punishment for him, then death. But then the
Prince did with sweet persuasions mitigate her fury: but brought it no lower
then to public whipping, submission, and recantation: Lastly, humbly on his
knees to ask pardon of the Romanian K^ight.

All now satisfied but Urania, (who could not easily forgive an iniure done to
her other self) sent him a shore to the next land they saw, Then did the
knight again speak: My Lord Parselius, with your leave, I beseech you permit
me to take so much boldness, as to beseech my Lord Leandrus to do me so much
honor, as to tell me the adventure, which caused the report and suspicion of
his death: they both agreeing, Leandrus thus began. After I had left you most
noble Parselius, I went to my own country to visit my father, where still I
heard the noise of Antissia's loss, the likelihood of her beauty, the grief
of Parents, and the wrong done to my self: these did not only inuit, but
command me to be diligent, in making al these pieces join again in the first
body of content; which I persuaded my self able to do, by seeking and finding
of her. The one I resolved, the other I nothing doubted: then with my fathers
consent I left Achaya, taking my way among the Greek Islands, and passing the
Archipelago. I left no Island that had a league of land unsought, or unseen:
then shipped I my self, and past into your Morea; so after I had seen all those
places, I went again to ^ea, resolving afterward to take toward Italy,
whither for farnesse it might be the traitors had carried her; my companion
then leaving me to go to his heart, which he had left in Cecillia. But being in
the Island of Cephalonia, there was a solemn and magnificent Feast held, which
was by reason of a marriage between the Lords daughter of that Island, and the
Lord of Zante's son, a fine and spritefull youth; Iusts, Tilt, and all other
such warlike exercises being proclaimed. Hearing this, I would needs show my
self one, as forward as any stranger to honor the Feast. The first day (which
was the wedding day) Arms were laid aside, and only dancing and feasting
exercised: after supper every one preparing for the dancing again. With the
sound of trumpets there entered one in habit and fashion like a Commander of
horse, who delivered some few lines to the new married Pair, dedicated as to
their honor and joy, which they received most thankfully, promising freedom
and welcome to the whole company. Then entered in twenty Gentlemen presenting
soldiers, and so danced in their kind, making a brave and commendable
demonstration of Courtship in the brauest profession, honor abounding most,
where noblenes in valor, and bounty in civility agree together. After they
went to a rich banquet: the brave Masquers discovering themselves, were found to
be gentlemen of both Islands, equally divided in number, as their affections
ought to be to either, and therefore had put themselves into the euenest and
perfectest number often, and ten. But to leave sport, and come to earnest; the
manner of that place was, that from the banquet the Bride must be stolen away
(to bed the meaning is), but she took to the fields. Most did miss her, for
there wanted no respective care of her, but al were satisfied with the fashion,
correcting such as spoke suspiciously, and expecting to be called to see her in
bed, waited the calling. But the time being long, some hastier then the rest
went to the chamber, where they found she had not been. This was instantly
blown abroad; all betook themselves to Arms who could bear any, the Ladies
to their tears, every one amazed, and chiefly the Bridegroom perplexed. The
old fathers vexed, the mothers tore their gray locks, such disorder in general,
as cannot be expressed, but by the picture of the same accident, Some mistrusted
the Masquers, but soon they cleared themselves, putting on Arms, and being as
earnest as any in the search. I a stranger, and loving business, would needs
accompany them (which the favor of a Nobleman, with whom I had got some little
acquaintance, did well aid me in) whose fortunes were in finding them, more
happy then any others, ouertaking them, when they thought themselves most
secure, being together laid within a delicate Vineyard, a place able to hide
them, and please them with as much content, as Paris felt, when he had
deceived the Greek King of his beautiful Hellen; laughing at the fine deceit,
and pitying in a scornful fashion those, who with direct pain and meaning
followed them, commending their subtilties and fine craftiness, in having so
deceived them. Kissing and embracing, they joyfully remained in their stolen
comforts, till we rudely breaking in upon them, made them as fearfully rush
up, as a tapist Buck will do, when he finds his enemies so near: yet did not
our coming any whit amaze them, but that they were well able to make use of
the best sense at that time required for their good, which was speech, uttering
it in this manner.

My Lords (said they), if ever you have known love, that will (we hope) now
withold you from crossing lovers. We confess, to the law we are offenders,
yet not to the law of love: wherefore as you have loved, or do, or may, pity
us, and be not the means that we too soon sacrifice our bloods on the cruel
altar of revenge, while we remain the faithful vassals of Venus. Let not your
hands be soild in the blood of lovers; what can wash away so foul a stain?
You may bring us (it is true) unto our just deserved ends: but then take heed
of a repentant gnawing spirit, which will molest you, when you shall be urged
to remember, that you caused so much faithful and constant love, to be offered
to the triumph of your conquest, over a lover unarmed, wanting all means of
resistance, but pure affections to defend himself withal, and a woman only
strong in truth of love. For my part, she wan me, my companion was by him
gaind; so as promising assistance in place of arms, and help in stead of
force, we sat down together, he beginning his discourse in this manner.

To make long speeches, striving to be held an Orator, or with much delicacie
to paint this story, the time affoords not the one, our truth and love
requires not the other; wherefore as plainly as truth it self demands, I will
tell you the beginning, success, and continuance of our fortunate (though
crossed) affections. I loved this Lady before she had seen this young Lord, she
likewise had only seen my love, and only tide her self to that, before he
saw her; love made me her slave, while she suffered as by the like authority.
I sued, she granted; I loved, she requited; happiness above all blessings to
be embraced. Our eyes kept just measure of looks, being sometimes so
inchain'd in delightful links of each others ioy-tying chain (for so we made
up the number of our beholdings), as hard it was to be so unkindly found, as to
separate so dear a pleasure. Our hearts held even proportion with our thoughts
and eyes, which were created, nursed, and guided by those, or rather one hearts
power. But Parents having (were it not for Christianity, I should say) a cruel
and tirannical power over their children, brought this to us disastrous
fortune: for discovering our loves, set such spies over us (scorning that I
being the younger brother to an Earl, should have such happiness, as to enjoy
my Princess) as we could never come to enjoy more then bare looks, which yet
spoke our true meanings after it was discovered. This course enraged us, vowing
to have our desires upon any terms whatsoever, always considered with true
nobleness, and virtue. Thus resolved, We continued, till her Father concluding
this match, shut her up in a Tower, wherein he then kept (in her) his choicest
Treasure, till this day of her Marriage: which opportunity we took, purposing;
More he would have said, as it seemd, truly to manifest the virtuous
determination they had, in their accomplishment of their desires, when he was
hindered by the rushing in of others with their Horses. Rising, We discerned
the deceived youth with some others in his company; Fate, like his Love, having
guided him to that place. In charity we could not leave our first professed
Friends, nor could I part my self from such and so true Love: wherefore
resolutely taking my companions part, defended the Lovers, pity then taking
the place of Justice in our Swords; the Husband being unfortunately slain by
my Companion, truly I was sorry for him, and glad it was not I had done it. But
soon followed a greater and more lamentable misfortune: For one of the young
Lords Servants, seeing his Master slain, pressed in, unregarded, or doubted,
upon the unarmed Lover, who was this while comforting his Mistress, and not
expecting danger, was on the sudden thrust into the back, as he was holding
his only comfort in his arms. He soon (alas, and so forever) left his dear
imbracement, turning on him who hurt him, repaying the wrong with giving him
his death: but then soon followed his own, the wound being mortal which he
had received, yet not so suddenly, but that he saw the destruction of his
enemies. We being as fierce, as rage, and revenge could make us, then he
remaining alone (besides my self) alive, and yet dying, giving me infinite
thanks for my love, and willing rescue lent him, with many doleful and (in
affection) lamentable groans and complaints, he took his leave of his only
and best beloved, then of me; to whom he committed the care of her, and his
body, then kissing her departed. But what shall I say of her? imagine, great
Prince, and all this brave company, what she did; You will say, she wept, tore
her hair, rent her clothes, cried, sobd, groand; No, she did not thus, she
only embraced him, kissed him, and with as deadly a palenesse, as death could
with most cunning counterfeit, and not execute, She entreated me to conduct her
to the next Religious house, where she would remain till she might follow
him. I admird her patience, but since more wondered at her worth. O women, how
excellent are you, when you take the right way? else, I must confess, you are
the children of men, and like them fault-full. The body we took with the help
of a Litter which passed by (having before conuayd a hurt Knight to the same
Monastery next to that place) and in that we conuayd it thither, where we
buried him, and almost drowned him in our tears. Thinking then to have removed,
she fell ill, not sick in body, but dead in heart, which appeared; for within
two days she dyed, leaving this world, to meet, and once more joy in him, who
more then a world, or ten thousand worlds she loved, and still desired; which
made her choose death being her then greater joy, burying them together a
little without the house (the order of that place not permitting them to be
laid within it.) After this sad (but honest) performance of my word, I went on
in my Journey, meeting within few days after, a Page belonging to my dead
friend, who with his Masters Armor followed him, love and obedience bringing
it into his mind. The armor was good, being that which I now wear, mine own
hackt and cut in many places. With much sorrow the youth received the woeful
tidings of his Master, then obtained I so much, as to have those arms, which
with violent sorrow he consented to, helping me to arm my self in them,
though so, as had I been any but his dead Lords friend, he sooner and more
willingly would have wound into his funeral shirt. He took my armor, and
laid it together under a tree which grew in the midst of a fair and pleasant
plain: then (although against my will) he kissed my hands, and with as much
true-felt sorrow as could lodge in so young years, took his leave of me; only
beseeching me, when I remembered my unfortunate friends, I would also with some
pity think on his misery: this was my adventure. And then past I by sea, till
on a rock I suffered shipwreck, being taken up by this famous Pirat whom you so
valiantly have slain, being I assure you, none of your least victories, he
having had as much strength and skill, as in any one man need remain: but
knowing me, and some power I have with the king of Cecile, my dear and worthy
friend P^rissus his Uncle, whose excellent company I gained in Achaya, he then
being there, and with whom I traveled many months, almost years, till I
began this search: this man, on condition I would mediate for him to the King,
or his Nephew, let me go at liberty, and armed in his ship, till such time as
we fortun^d to land; always concluded, that while I was with him, I should
defend him with my best means. This made me resist you till heaven told me my
error, which I repent, and heartily ask pardon for: and this sure was the
reason that my Page imagined my death, if he found (as by all likelihood he
did) my arms.

Then did Parselius again embrace Leandrus: turning to the Squire of
Amphilantus he demanded what he knew of his Master. Truly (replide he) nothing
but the joy I conceive to hear by this gentle Knight that he is living: I
parted from him in a great storm, having been in Germany sent thither with an
army from the Pope to assist the Emperor against the Duke of Saxony, who was
slain by his hand, and for this act was by the Emperor and the other Princes
made King of the Romans, having protected the Empire against such an enemy;
since till now never having heard news of him: but he meant to seek still for
you, and therefore left Germany, and in the Mediterran sea, my self, ship, and
all my Lords treasure was taken by this Pirat, whom your valor has destroyed.
Thus with prosperous wind and infinite joy for Amphilanthus his new title and
hon^ur, they sailed toward Italy, hoping to land not far from the Town
where the king of Naples at that time kept his Court, which was at that great
City: but being within the sight of the shore because it then was evening they
resolved not to land till the next morning, and so take the day before them.
This thought the best (like men's counsels) proou'd the worst; for in the night
rose a terrible and fearful storm, being so violent, as it took not away
rest only, but knowledge from the Pilot, being only able within some hours to
assure them, that they were far distant from Italy. The tempest continued in as
great (i^ not greater) fury, nor any more comfort had they, save that now they
enjoyed light, and yet could that light scarce be counted day, being but as
day-breake before the Sunrising; so as it was but as to distinguish the time
of day from night, or as if it were to hold a candle to them, the more to see
their danger, so thick, cloudy, and uncomfortable, as they could discern
nothing, but what was nearest them, which was peril. Cunning now prevailed
not, for the most skillful confessed, that now he was artlesse, heavenly powers
working above the knowledge of earthly creatures, which way they were by force
carried, was utterly unknown to them; sails, tackling were gone; the mast,
either by force, or hope of safety cast ouer-board; thunder, lightning, wind,
rain, they wanted not; none being able to express the desperatenes of this
storm, but by saying, it was the picture of the last day for violence, but
like the world for strangenes and uncertainty. Thus they continued in the day
(having only the shadow of a day) and in the night fearful flames, which yet
they thankt, because by the^ they could discern themselves. When heaven did
think this storm had lasted long enough cross to those, though cros^, yet
still most loving lovers, it commanded the seas to be at quiet, which being
performed, the Pilot again began to use his skill, which first had means to
let him know, that so far they were from the place resolved on, as in stead
of the coast of Italy, they were within sight of the Island of Ciprus: this not
only amazed them, but much troubled them, considering the barbarousnes of the
people who there inhabited, and their extremity such, as of necessity they must
land to replenish their wants, caused by the rigor of the tempest: yet were
they come to such a part of the country, as there was no harbor or port to ride
or land at; wherefore they were forced to coast the country; night again like an
evil spirit possessing them, almost all tired and weary with the length and
violence of the storm. Some were laid down to see if rest would possess them:
others fallen asleep, none enduring it like the excellent Urania, which brought
comfort (though in sorrow) to the loving and noble Parselius, never showing
fear or trouble: encouraging all. And yet she did fear, but seeing his, she
dissembled hers, in care of not further harming him, She, I say, when all were
gone to rest, stood as Sentinel, but by her own appointment, love commanding
her soul to take no advantage of restfull hours; which she obediently did,
sleep never but by loves liberty possessing her eyes: which freedom her
passion had not yet allowed her, but molesting her patient sweetness caused her
to walk up and down in the maze of her trouble. The Moon (though coldly)
smiling on her, and her loue^ she perceived a great fire, whereupon she called
the company, demanding what their opinions were of it; they could not give her
a direct answer, till being come somewhat nearer, they pereeiued it was a Ship
was fallen a fire in the midst of the Sea, and right against it a very good
Harbor. Pity, and noble compassion straight moved in them, so as they haled
to the burning Bark, to know if there were any by ill fortune in her, and if
so, to succor them, but hearing no answer, they concluded she was empty:
wherefore passing on they landed in the Island, which no sooner was done, but
their former wonder was increased, by the sudden falling a fire of their own
Ship, which had but deliuerd her self of the^, and then as a Martyr suffered
for the pain they had in her endured. But this past, admiration brought new
sorrow to them, considering they were in a strange Country, among barbarous
people, deprived of all hope to get thence any more, but there to continue at
the mercy of unchristened creatures. Parselius wished, but still found himself
further from succor of any but his fruitles wishes: all his tormenting grief
being for Urania. Urania did as he did, justly requiting his pain, for all
hers was for him. All lamented and pitied Urania, and the dainty Selarina, who
mildly, yet with a more Woman like manner ^uffered these afflictions, loving
and pitying Urania, being an obligation they were all in their hearts, as they
found, bound unto. Leandrus sorrowed for her, and bewailed the two young
Princes, whose Father had lost his Kingdom, for his love to his Father, which
stirred in him a commiserate passion. Thus, all for others grieved, pity
extended so, as all were careful, but of themselves most careless: yet their
mutual care, made them all cared for. Parselius with a brave courage, at last
advised them to go^ on, yet left it to their own minds, fearing to persuade,
least harm might after follow, grieve, fear, persuade they did and all
distractedly, so much they feared, and most was for Urania: so much can worth,
sweetness, and Beauty work in noble minds. His advise was to go on, and
this was allowed, for what could he propound that Urania liked not of? And if
she consented, what spirit could deny? Thus, on they went (but as in a
Labyrinth without a third) till they came within sight of a rare and admirable
Palace.

It was situated on a Hill, but that Hill formed, as if the world would needs
raise one place of purpose to build Loves throne upon; all the Country besides
humbly plain, to show the subjection to that powerful dwelling. The Hill
whereon this Palace stood was just as big as to hold the House: three sides of
the Hill made into delicate Ga^dens and Orchards: the further side was a fine
and stately Wood. This sumptuous House was square, set all upon Pillars of
black Marble, the ground paued with the same. Every one of those pillars,
presenting the lively Image (as perfectly as caruing could demonstrat, of
brave, and mighty men, and sweet and delicate Ladies, such as had been
conquered by loves power: but placed there, as still to mainetaine, and uphold
the honor, and House of Love. Coming toward it, they imagined it some
Magical work, for so daintily it appeared in curiosity, as it seemed as if it
hung in the air, the Trees, Fountains, and all sweet delicacies being
discerned through it. The upper Story had the Gods most fairly and richly
appearing in their thrones: their proportions such as their powers, and
quallities are described. As Mars in Arms, weapons of War about him,
Trophies of his Victories, and many demonstrations of his Warre-like Godhead.
Apollo with Music, Mercury, Saturn, and the rest in their kind. At the
foot of this Hill ran a pleasant and sweetly passing river, over which was a
Bridge, on which were three Towers: Upon the first was the Image of Cupid,
curiously carved wi^h his Bow bent, and Quiver at his back, but with his right
hand pointing to the next Tower; on which was a statue of white Marble,
representing Venus, but so richly adorn^d, as it might for rareness, and
exquisiten^sse have been taken for the Goddess her self, and have causd as
strange an affection as the Image did to her maker, when he fell in love with
his own work. She was crowned with Myrtle, and Pansies, in her left hand
holding a flaming Heart, her right, directing to the third Tower, before which,
in all dainty ^iches, and rich delicacy, was the figure of Constancy, holding
in her hand the Keys of the Palace: which showed, that place was not to be
open to all, but to few possessed with that virtue.

They all beheld this place with great wonder, Parselius resolving it was some
Enchauntment; wherefore was the nicer how they proceeded in the entering of it:
while they were thus in question, there came an aged Man, with so good a
countenance and grave aspect, as it struck reverence into them, to be showed
to him, by them. He saluted them thus: Fair company, your beholding this place
with so much curiosity, and besides your habits makes me know you are
strangers, therefore fit to let you understand the truth of this brave
Building, which is dedicated to Love. Venus (whose Priest I am) thinking her
self in these latter times, not so much, or much less honored then in ages
past, has built this, calling it the throne of Love. Here is She daily served,
by my self, and others of my profession, and here is the trial of false or
faithful Lovers.

Those that are false, may enter this Tower, which is Cupids Tower, or the
Tower of Desire: but therein once enclosed, they endure torments fit for such a
fault. Into the second any Lover may enter, which is the Tower of Love: but
there they suffer inexpressible tortures, in several kinds as their
affections are most incident to; as Ielo^sie, Despair, Fear, Hope, Longings,
and such like. The third which is guarded by Constancy, can be entered by none,
till the valiantest Knight, with the loyallest L^dy come together, and open
that gate, when all these Charms shall have conclusion. Till then, all that
venture into these Towers, remain prisoners; this is the truth. Now if your
hearts will serve you adventure it.

They thanked the old man for his relation, but told him they had some Vows to
perform first: which ended, they would adventure for imprisonment in so rare a
prison. The old Priest left them, and they weary, laid them down near the
Tower of Desire, refreshing themselves with some little meat, which Vranias
maid had in her Scrip: but wanting drink, they all went to the River, whereof
they had but drunk, when in them several Passions did instantly abound.

Parselius forgot all, but his promise to the dead King of Albania, for the
settling his Sons in that Kingdom. Leandrus afflicted with the loss of
Antissia, must straight into Morea to find her, and take her from
Amphilanthus; Steriamus and Selarinus would not be refused the honor of
Knighthood, Mars having so possessed them with his warlike disposition, as
worlds to their imaginations were too little to conquer, therefore Albania was
already won. Urania, whose heart before was only fed by the sweet looks,
and pleasing conversation of Parselius, loves him now so much, as she imagines,
she must try the adventure, to let him see her loyalty is such, as for his
love, and by it she would end the Enchantment. Selarina, thought she saw within
the Gardens, a young Prince with a Crown upon his head, who beckned to her,
wherefore she would go at such a call. Vrania's maid beheld as she believed
Allimarlus in the second Tower, kissing and embracing a Blackmoore: which so
far enraged her, being passionatly in love with him, as she must go to
revenge her self of that injury. These distractions carried them all, as
their passions guided them. Parselius having knighted the two Princes, took
their way to the next Port: Urania now not seen or thought on. Leandrus
hasting another way, to find means for his Journey. Selarina to the Tower,
and knocked with that fervent desire to accomplish her end as the gate opened;
all the three rushed in, ^triuing who should be first. But Selarina was then
soon made to know she should not contend with Urania, wherefore she was locked
into the first tower, burning with desire to come to that sweet Prince, which
still she sees before her: he calling, she with incessant desire striving to
go to him. Urania went on, when entering the second tower, guarded by Venus,
she was therein enclosed, when as thus much sense came to her, as to know she
had left Parselius, which strak her into a mourning passion, confessing that,
an unpardonable fault, and what he in justice ^ould not excuse. Then despair
possessed her so, as there she remaind, loving in despair, and despairing
mourned. The shepherdess her servant continuing her first passion got into
that Tower too, where she still saw her affliction, striving with as much
spiteful jealousy, as that fury could vex her withal, to come at the Moore
to pull her from her knight. Thus were the women for their punishment, left
prisoners in the throne of Loue^ which Throne and punishments are daily built
in all humane hearts. But how did the honest Allimarlus carry himself in all
these changes? Alas, with much grief and sorrow for this misfortune, he not
having drank, being the only sensible man left; wherefore fearing more the
harm of Parselius and his companions then the Ladies, who were (without
question) safe, though far from being ^ree, he followed them, lest harm
might from those furious humors grow. They made such haste, as no rest could
inuit their stay, till they were tired with their own minds travel, and then
all three lying down in one another arms, they yielded unto sleep. In
which, new torments vexed them: for then did they come a little to themselves
(or a little more from themselves in another kind) and as men long held in a
trance, awaked. Parselius weeping for Vrania's unkindness, who had (as he
dreamed) forsaken him, and left him sleeping, while she went with another. The
two Princes bewailing the death of their Sister, who they imagined taken
violently from them, and sacrificed to Venus.

Thus they again fall into strange and new distractions, which grieved the
young Knights very soul to see, but having no hope of seeing them restored,
while they continued in that Island: soothing them up in their own opinions,
knowing it dangerous and idle to cross mad men, with gentle peswasions gained
Parselius to go with him, when he promised to bring him where Urania with her
new friend did abide, and then he might recover her, and kill his enemy. The
other he likewise gaind, promising they should have the means to kill their
adversaries likewise.

Thus he got them thence: traveling in this sort, till they came to the sea
side where they found a small Bark, and in her two persons, an old man, and a
little Boy being Fishers^^ and having taken some, had then newly put a sho^e to
dress, and so to satisfy their hungers with their gain. The Romanian Knight
saluted the old man, entreating, that that company might go into his boat,
and time it was to prevent the coming harm, for then were they ready to r^nne
into the sea; but by force they got them into the Bark, where no sooner they
were, having freed themselves from the land (which was the nature of those
charms), but their good spirits again possessed them. Then did Parselius
bewail Urania, cry out of his miserable fortune in having lost her, beseech
every one to pity with him so great a mischief. The knight wept to see these
changes, but then mildly told him all that had happened. Grieved Parselius did
remain; but considering heavenly powers had caused this, he the more quietly
endured it, yet not without a bleeding heart, and often showring eyes: O Urania
(would he cry), how justly may thou hate me, for leaving thee? Damned
country, can it be that thou were ordained for love to have a Throne in, and
yet to be the hell of lovers? Much more he cried, and sorrowed out, while the
old man had gained the knowledge of this adventure from Allimarl^s, who was by
him known, so as beseeching Parselius to lay by his mourning, or at least to
give ear to this story, said he, which will increase compassion, and passion
in you; with that the grave old man began thus. Lamentation (brave Princes) is
that which I must treat of; but first I must tell you, as one of the parts of
this story; I am called Seleucius, brother I am to the king of Romania, Lord to
this young knight: and thus from me (the most unfortunate of Princes) hear the
wofull'st and most disastrous history, that ever Princely ears gave attention
to. I was brother, and sometime heir to this unhappy king, being thought lost:
but after found in such an adventure of enchantment as this seems to be.
Returned, married, and was blessed with two children, of whom I am sure this
Gentleman has already discoursed unto you, wherefore that part I will leave,
and come to the last. My Nephew Antissius being come from the fruitles search
of his sister Antissia, my brother would needs marry him to a Lady in the
country, which he (although never having bin in love) might have questioned;
yet he ever loved to obey his father, and so they were married. O Antissius,
worthy Antissius: with that the tears ran down his long white beard,
resembling drops in snow, stopping his breat^, that scarce the last word could
be heard. In this time did all the Princes join, concluding it with sobs, and
groans, every one having equal feeling of sorrow, though for several things.
At last he cried out these words: Pardon great Prince this sad interruption in
my story, which I am forced to do, heart-rending sorrow making me ever do so,
when I think of (much more name) my dearest Nephew, and his unfortunate loss;
being such a wound to that country, as none can imagine but our selves, who
daily feel the misery. He being married by his fathers command, who longed to
see some fruit from so wor^hy a stock, his obedience having mastred his
affection, which rather was to follow Arms, then fall into the arms of Love:
he worthily loved his wife, and lovingly lived with her; within that year
being blessed with a Son, whom after his father they called Antissius: with this
ioy'd-at birth began the ruin of all (yet not because of his birth, for in him
we have yet our last hope) but by reason that the Grandmother lived but to
kiss her babe; after whose death the king again married, and her, whose
wickedness I am sure has come unto your ears. This malicious creature, after
^he had caused Antissius to be banished and most honest men to lose their
lives, or places, she yet not satisfied with such sins, as never the earth
sufferd in one body the weight of more; treason, adultery, witchcraft and
murder, were plentifully in her, yet while he lived she was not contented.
Wherefore to bring this to pass, was now her only study. In this time some one
or two honest hearts were left, who gave the king warning of her, ventring
their heads to save his body from harm; her immoderate desires so much known,
as they cried out against her; she being a Queen salued not, nor covered her
sin, which in her greatness appeared the greater fault; a spot being more marked
in a Diamond, then in an ordinary piece of glass. Long time it was ere his
honest and unspotted love would believe it, or hearken to it, while she
delighted her self in her own shame, and his dishonor. At last (though
extreme loath) he seemed to see it, slaking his violent love to her, and often
refraining her bed, made her discern it, though delighting her self so much
with others, had somewhat blinded her from seeing, what but for policy, she
cared little for. But then did she never leave the poor man with her
flatterings and disfembling falsehoods, till she had gaind the cause and ground
of his most just offense, and deserved mistrust, and unusual strangenes, which
at last (undone by her bewitching fawnings) she gained. Then had she enough,
vowing to be reuengd on al, and under this color to execute her malice, and
purge her spleen upon the famous Prince his son; which by her cruel
practices, she at last unfortunately brought to pass. For first (by means as
she pretended that she was slandred) she got her good honest husband to banish
any, who had in the least, spoken of her lightness; putting into that number
those whom she hated, having suffered (as she alleagd) as much by their
slanderous reports, as almost if it had been a truth she had merited, wishing
she had still continued widow, rather then to come to this height of honor;
and having it, to fall so low as into the shame of dishonor: beseeching him
thoroughly to revenge her, or to permit her to retire to the most lonely and
private life^ rather then there openly to sink under shame and infamy: or if
she could be found faulty, then to cut off her head, far unfit to live wife
to so virtuous and good a king. To satisfy her, whose dissemblings were of
force to bring new heat into his aged heart, which like old wood will
presently kindle, he struck off the heads of those loyal servants, who had
honestly (though indiscreetly) told him of her sin, men, not loving that
discourse of any. This done, he came to receive thanks: but she telling him
this was nothing, and unless he would do more to right her, so shamefully
wronged, she would go away, and execute some mischief on her self; her spirit
and conscience not being able to sustain themselves enduring such abuse: and
then (if ever he loved her) he would be sorry, he had wronged so true and
faithfully loving a wife, while he did credit pickthanking Counselors. He
seeing this passion in his dear wife, vowed reuengefull justice on all she
could accuse. Upon this vow, and some other assurance which was given by
execution, her holy Majesty seemed somewhat satisfied, and then conten^ed (as
it were) to live, having new life given in her justice, and faith-trying
honor. She came abroad, but oft-times blushing; modesty was the color put
upon it, when indeed it was affection to a young Lord in the Court: who after
she found she could not win with all inticements and loue-showes, she accused
him for seeking her, and so with many more lost his head. Now was Antissius and
his virtuous wife confind to a Castle, some twenty miles from the Court, he
being accused of popularity, and aspiring to the Crown. This was the power of
that insatiable Monster, as she could, and would banish from him his best, and
only true comforts. My Nephews misfortune increasing, and his hate to live,
growing every day stronger in him, he gaind for all this the Queens leave to
go, and live with me. She willing to it, hoping his former ill usage would
provoke him to that he might die for, else she would find a means to
compass it. But few plots needed, this being the beginning, and his soon
following overthrow; for the people finding her government absolute, and that
being bent to the ruin of the land, followed the virtuous Prince in great
numbers, and at al times, which he as much as in him lay, did put off and
avoid: yet not so, but that the Queen wrought cunningly enough upon it, to
mix jealousy with the fathers love to his son, she never ceasing to wish
the subjects love as great and firm to his Majesty, as she, and all others
saw their hearts were placed upon his worthy son, which though he for his
affection to him, did not yet make use of, yet it is a fine thing, said she, to
be a king, and a terrible matter to be tempted: were you not safely blessed
with so honest a son. And therefore you must trust more to the loyalty of
Antissius, then the faith of his people, who, he might perceive, regarded
nothing less then their due respect to him. Sparingly she spoke well of him,
but freely to make suspicion. Thus now was he fallen into the path, which led to
the court of her malice: for buzing these things in his old, and fearful
ears, she at last brought to this fullness of ill. One day as she had
appointed (being privately with the King in a Gallery) two of the Counsel came
in, in have, yet a dissembling fear in their faces, counterfei^ing need, but
doubt and unwillingness to discover what moved in them this sudden approach.
The King urged them, when with tears they told him, that they had gaind
knowledge of a dangerous conspiracy, which was plotted, and to be instantly
executed upon the persons of his Majesty, and his most royal Queen, by
Antissius and my self, the treason being this: to depose him, kill the Queen,
banish the Counsel I make himself Monarch of Romania, dispose the offices,
already disposed of, among his favorites, and the whole realm, as he best
liked to his followers, and associats, and in this kind make a conquest of it.
Then alas sir (said they), what will become of poor Romania, when your virtue
and wisdom shall be put by, their government, and his green capacity, and
those young wild headed Counselors shall rule over us, who were fitter at
school to learn obedience and loyalty, then to sway a Scepter, besides the
wrong and sin, of taking the lawful Prince from among his people. This related
and seconded by the Queen, who still in a double manner cleared, and condemned
poor Antissius, whose just and virtuous heart never thought of such a treason,
nor of her (if not with sorrow for her wickedness). It wrought so far in the
jealous breast of the old man, as he manifested his crediting it, and with all
the fear he conceived of it, expressing as much hate to his son, as such a
wicked practice might justly challenge. Then hastily (as fear is always
sudden) he demanded advice, with the best and readiest way to avoid the
danger. They yet having gone but half way of their devilish progress,
replied: That since it pleased him to have such confidence in them, as to ask
their advice in so great a business, they would as honestly discharge
themselves, and this they held the safest, and the best course; which was, that
the Prince (who they must still love and reverence, and whose fault cut their
hearts to think of) should be sent for, but in such manner, as he should have
no cause to distrust, lest then he went about to gain by force, what they
before had been informed, he hoped to compass by a private conspiracy. This
advice, and the plot it self, he imparted to some more of the Counsel, who
already were sufficiently instructed in their parts, and so accordingly agreed;
consenting, nay commending the grave, careful, and honest advice of the other
two. Then was a Messenger straight dispatched to the Prince, (who like a brave,
but innocent Heart came into the toil) with order to come himself, his wife,
and Son unto the King, whose age, and weakness being great, and his
affection only left strong in him, toward him, and his, would have them nearer
to him, and for that he would recompense him, for the injuries in former times
done to him: I was not at home, for had I bin, the journey surely had bin
hindered, while Antissius doubting no treason, his noble heart being free from
thinking any, in haste (hoping that way to express the joy he felt by these
unexpected glad tidings) posted to the Court, leaving word, that I (who was to
return in a very short time after) should with all convenient speed accompany
his wife, and son to the King. Few days he had rid, before he was encountered
with a troop of horse, under the command of an ancient friend of his, and a
friend indeed he was in this action, being betrayed as well as he, sent under
color of love to the Prince, who since he had (or at least it being thought
he had) so much disliked his father, as he had forbid him his once
heeld-deerest sight, and that the people had taken notice of it in a dangerous
kind: to prevent any bold or hazardus attempt might happen by a rude multitude,
the Queen had sent this troop to guard him, and that she knowing the love
this Gentleman bare Antissius, had made choice of him to conduct his person
thither. Antissius was somewhat troubled with this accident, wondering why she
should be on the sudden so kind, knowing that there was none whose ruin she and
her godly crew more shot at: yet could not he (who saw only with the eyes of
virtue) pierce into this plot. Mildly and graciously he saluted the Captain
and his men, yet telling them, his innocence had been guard enough for his
person.

They went on, but when they were within ^ight of the great City of
Constantinople (the Court then being there) they perceived a far greater
number of Soldiers, with which sight he saw his end, and soon heard he
sentence of his death: for then did they set upon him, crying, Down with that
Traitor, that disobedient child, the incurable grief of his loving father, the
dishonor of our Country, and the Canker of the States quiet. With these cries
they rushed violently upon the Prince. The first troop seeing this Treason,
did their best to defend Antissius; but their lives could not buy his safety,
in vain striving to alter destiny: the period of his days being come with a
blow given him by a traiterous villain, which struck his head in two. Grief
of this accident turned to fury, his party ^ighting as if Antisius had been in
every one, and so to be defended; but that was past, their loves only living
to him. Yet dyed it too, for none were left of the whole Troop, but the
Captain, and some ten more. The Queens men having gained almost what they
sought, fully to give her satisfaction in his death; yet wanted part, since
they could not get his body, to be made a present to her cruelty. For the
Captain perceiving their drift, hindered them of it, taking him up when he saw
the vnluky blow given, and in the heat of the ^^ight fled away with it,
knowing this a better piece of service, then to have lost his life in revenge
at that time: since to better purpose he might save it in serving his Son, to
have a just, and fit requital for such a wickedness, on those shameful
murderers. They came with this body (of the most beloved Prince, while he
lived, and the most pitied and honored after death) to my house. Just as I
returned, did I encounter this sad and disastrous adventure; In stead of a
brave, courageous, and (with it) pleasing presence, I met his bloudlesse, pale,
and martyrd body. There I saw the hope of our Country, and comfort of mine age,
changed again into our first being: So much it afflicted me, as I stood
amazed with grief, speechless, and senseless of sense, but sorrow: till
sorrow being pleased to make me have more feeling of her power, gave me leave to
let these words come from me. O Antissius, has life been lent me to see this
day! Miserable man, miserable Country, wretched age, wherein such cruelty does
reign; O Antissius! but then by their honest good persuasions (telling me the
necessity, and ensuing dangers, if not prevented, that the rest living might
fall into) I strove to endure this calamity with as much patience, as so
miserable a man could let sink into him, and indeed for this young youths
sake, who is the young Antissius, heir to these miseries, and the overthrown
estate of Romania. But then followed a second cause of grief; For his virtuous
wife came to us, who hearing such loud cries, and distracted noyses, left her
Chamber, following the cries till they brought her to that most lamentable
spectacle. When she saw the cause of their wailing, she put them aside, going
to the body, and kneeling down by it, used these words; My dear, was it for
this, that unnatural Father, and monster of women, sent for thee? That no
sooner thou should see thy Fathers house, but with it thou must see thy
house of death? Alas, were thou too good, too hopeful, too full of all virtues
to live among us, who can now but assist thee with our tears? But long shall
not this worldly sorrow triumph over me in thy loss, for I must, and will be
with thee; with that kissing the pale lips of her dearest love, and as it were
breathing her (though not last, but fortelling) last breath into him, she rose,
and rising, a little seemed to smile, joy within her (for assured going to him)
having caused that Countenauce; which by some was disliked, not being, to their
weak apprehensions, sad enough, for such a cause of woe. As soon as she had
left the body, she came to me, earnestly entreating me, that I would suffer
none to trouble her, she having some private devotions to perform, which
being ended, I should be welcome to her. For my part, I so little mistrusted
her intent, or imagined a Woman had so strong a spirit, as to dye when she
would, granted what she asked, being confident, her goodness would keep her
from doing any violence on her self. Having left me, she went to the room
where her young Son lay, and then fast sleeping, when as weeping over him (as
the Maids ^ince told me) well may thou sleep, dear heart, said she, for
long, I fear thy quiet will not last; thy being Son to so worthy a Father,
and unfortunate a Mother, must cast some storms on thee, it being fault enough
in thee to have such Parents: at least, thy wicked Grandmother will think so,
who hating truth will make thee suffer for thy Fathers sake. Sleep then
quietly, my sweet, and lost Antissius, nor now look up to see thy woeful
Mother, or to take her last farewell: but thus receive her blessing, which as
the blessing of her own soul, she wishes may come, and stay upon thee, God
sending thee a more happy life then thy valiant Father had: let his gifts of
virtue, courage, and magnanimity live in thee, and his misfortunes take their
grave in me; Alas, Antissius, my only sweet Babe, I must leave thee, then
again kissing him, she said. This is the difference in affection, twixt a
Husband and a Child, otherwise no fear of misfortune should carry me from
thee, but my sweetest I must go, leaving Antissius, to fly to Antissius. And
good maids, said she, have a kind, and just care of this young Prince, he may
live to requite your pains, and revenge the wrongs done to his distressed
Parents. They vowed all faith and dutiful service to him; then again, as
loath it must be the last, she kissed him, and so went to her Chamber: yet at
the door, turning back, affectionatly, and with watery eyes, cast her last, and
kindest farewell look on him. When she came into her Chamber, She locked the
door, not suffering any to stay or come to her: where she continued till (I
thinking her stay long, besides, having business with her concerning the dead
Prince) I went to her Lodgings, where long I knocked, and indeed, so long as it
vexed me: but after fear possessed me, when I considered what the danger
might be, and her freedom, and liberty, such as none had ever received that
dishonor, of being barred her presence. Wherefore I sent for some of my
Servants, who by my command brake open the door. Entering the room, We found
her laid upon her bed, newely dead, yet her own accustomed sweetness in her,
lying as straight, and unmoved, as if death had only then shown, he could in
his panges be mild, yet receive his gain: so as well it may be said, he
deprived her of her life, yet left her own beauty and grace to triumph over
his fury. By the bed side stood a Table covered with a Carpet of Crimson
Velvet, and on the board a Letter, which I took up, and seeing it directed to
me, I read it, and here (brave Princes) you may see the very same, my dearest
Niece left to me, which never will I p^rt with, till time give end unto my
days, or life to accomplish her desires. The Letter was this.

SInce it has pleas^d God for the overthrow of this Land, and grief of all
good hearts, (among which you, and I, hold the nearest places in sorrow) to cut
this thread of admiration in sunder, and leave the heavy burden of lamentation
upon us, taking away our joy, our comfort, our only Hope Antissius, I feel my
self altogether unable to sustain so great, and killing a loss, then let me
crave this of you (which the assurance of your love to your dead Nephew, and
dying Niece, imboldeneth me to ask) that you will grant these three things,
and see them accomplished: Let the love you bare to your dead Nephew continue
and live in the same strength to your living Nephew. Let nothing hinder you
from seeking a deadly revenge on his Murderers. Lastly, let me be here
privately buried with him. Let these requests be welcome to you my dearest
Uncle, and not deny the dying Lucenia.


No Stranger I think would have denied so just requests, proceeding from a
Lady of her worth, and being dying; what then wrought in me, who wanted not
love, or resolution of revenge? One of her desires I instantly performed, for I
buried her with her busband, and then upon the Tomb, my self, the Captain,
and the Servants to the lost Antissius, took a solemn oath to have revenge:
but by the brauest Princes, whose worths must needs abhor so detestable
practices; other means, though they diseru'd the worst, and basest, honest and
noble hearts did detest them. This done, we parted every one a several way,
and to a several King, to make our misery more manifest; out of Justice
demanding their aid, to pull down wickedness, and again settle worth in
Romania, my self remaining one whole year after, nere the Hellispont
disguised, and almost begging my living, with this my last hope. Still they
sought us while we were among them, but then perceiving the continual hazard,
and ableness in this latter Antissius to travel; We left Greece, my self
alone going with him: But how this was difcouer'd, or that this young man must
inherit his Fathers misfortunes, we hardly did escape taking. Upon the missing
of us, Ambassadors were sent in all haste to all the near Princes, to whom
with much falsehood, their false fault was covered with as foul a veil,
working so far as belief, or fear of war made show of, so much as
prevented the succor we had hoped for. Finding this, we took this Boat,
coasting (not daring to stay any where) till we could be secure, Many places we
have seen, but found none to rescue misfortune: not caring whither we went, so
we were freed from her malicious power. Hither Fate has brought us, and here
we have found, and served some Noblemen, and good Princes, who have promised
their help: so as, if you (brave Prince) Parselius, and these with you will
likewise assist us, I fear not, but assure my self of our hoped-for comfort.
Thus if pity dwell in you, you will pity us, and this Allimarlus is your
Lord, and Prince. Parselius then embraced him, so did Steriamus and Selarinus:
all promising (their former vows, and business ended) they would attend and
rescue them, in the mean time, they would advise them to leave that shore, for
fear of danger, considering the Charms, which yet to any but such as
adventured the Towers, or unfortunately drank of the River were nothing: yet
that scarce known, made cause of doubt. So they resolved and betook
themselves to the Sea, when they saw floating upon the water, a man past sense
or power to help himself, being now subject to the Sea, and the disposition
she might be in to destroy him, or succor him. Parselius in Charity willed
them to go toward him, the Tide bringing him a pace (as in love of him) that
way. Being near, he perceived the man to be his dear Friend Leandrus, who
(in the same fury they had before fallen into, but wanting such help as they
had) ran into the Sea, mis^ing a Boat to convey him, but not fury to cast away
himself, crying out he would have Antissia in spite of the valiantest black
Knight. But quickly was he cooled with loss of strength, to save himself from
loss, senses were come to him, but alas, too soon to lose them again, and
life with them, if this happy adventure had not come unto him. For then cry^d
out Parselius, O take up that worthy body, save that noble person from such
loss; with this they made to him, taking him up, and after much care, getting
life again, to put it self into the Cage of the body, when knowing his
friends, but forgetting all things else, they embraced, as souls would (if not
by a greater joy hindered) rejoice in the other world, for encountering their
best friends. On they rowed, sometimes Parselius and the other Princes ayding
the old man; taking their turns till they discovered a Morean Ship, to which
they haled. She coming, and her rulers knowing their Prince, with all joy and
duty received him, and his company into her. Then securely they sailed toward
Greece: where being landed in Morea, they determined, that since instant aid
could not be given them, they should there in a strong Castle remain, not
Prisoners, but Commanders of that place, being an impregnable Fort, and in such
a place, as none could land without their favor; so might they use the
opportunity of place, and time. The Romanian Knight, after this place was by
the Prince delivered to Seleucius and his Nephew Antissius (in the same ship
had thither brought them) took again to the Sea, intending to go into
Romania, and so hired them for Constantinople. But soon were they altered: for
meeting another ship which desired to know something (the cause of that ships
journey being for discovery) he found in her the ancient servant, and the
same faithful Captain who had so loyally served the first Antissius. Finding
him (and by him, that the Prince was to be found) he with him returned to the
Castle: where being received, and ready to make his discourse, I will leave
him, and go again to Parselius, who took the directest way to the Court,
which was then kept in Arcadia, being a time the King had in pleasure made a
journey that way, to delight himself in that most delightful Country. Being
there arrived, no joy could be compared to the Kings and Queens, seeing their
dearest Son returned: but little joy felt he, Urania being lost, which only
to Pamphilia he discovered, who out of a dear and sisterly affection, the like
bewailed absence. Sports and pleasures were every day offered, while he still
knew of none, being in them as in another World; only wherein his own person
was required, there his valor failed not, though his Soul which governed
that, was otherwhere. Some days this lasted: but Parselius, whose love still
urged him, could have no rest, coloring his pain with the loss of his friend
and cousin, which indeed was the cause, but in the feminine gender. The King
was the less displeased, because it was on so worthy a subject; yet he was
sorry, being the louingest of Fathers, that his dearest son should be
displeased, and most troubled, when he saw he would not stay, but again go
seek his Friend. Yet before his depart, he gayn'd the promise of his Father,
to raise men to assist Steriamus in his journey, to conquer his right: which
was granted both for that just Cause, and likewise, because the fair young
Princess Meriana, Queen of Macedon, by right should be unto her right
restored. Thus departed Parselius, leaving Steriamus and his Brother to attend
their business, and see the men raised, himself promising within fit time to
take their journey to return. Leandrus likewise accompanying Parselius to the
Court, gave his word to use his best power in gayning forces from his Father,
to assist in this deserved occasion, they having suffered for their Parents
loves. To which end he went into Achaya, giving his hand to Parselius, to be
with him in Morea within six months, which was the time appointed for their
marching forwards toward Macedon, or Albania, as at their next meeting they
would agree on. Thus they parted: Parselius as his destiny would guide him,
Leandrus to Achaya, and the other Princes remaining in Arcadia with the King,
very much esteemed of.

But soon after the Court removed nearer to the Sea; while Amphilanthus, who
has been too long forgot, not being time enough remembered, being the most
matchless Prince with the fair Antissia, being in the Merchants house as the
Romanian Knight told Parselius, finding fit time, and longing to meet his
friend, with the Princess, and the honest pair, took their way toward the
Court where the king lived: by the way it was Antissia's fortune, to mark
(with so yielding a heart) the loveliness, sweetness, bravery, and strength of
the famous Amphilanthus, which in many adventures he made testimony of in her
sight, before their gaining the Court, as this (alas) made her acknowledge, she
had seen but him, who might be thought a Prince, she had heard of none but
him, all others virtues being single in them, but knit in one in him. This made
her like, that made her love: and so she did (poor Lady) to her lost liberty;
he, the more he saw her respect to him, answered it with his to her: kindness
then betrayed them, she showing it, he (as a kind-hearted Prince to Ladies)
receiving it. By this time they were content to think they loved, and so to
know those pains. He was not unexperienced, therefore soon saw remedy must be
given: and cruelty he imagined it would be in him, who discerned he might by
his art help her, if he refused that good, to one so fair, and so kindly
loving. This made him in charity watch his opportunity, or at least not to
loose any, being most with her; and contentedly, because lovingly passing the
time, entertaining themselves with fine discourse many hours together. The
good people weary with traveling or seeking other necessaries for them,
necessarily leaving them then, not with much complaining of their absence.

At last they came unto the Court, being two months after the departure of
Parselius, and the next week after the secret departure of Steriamus, which
was such, as hereafter you shall hear. His arrival was as pleasing to the
People and Prince, as fair weather is after a storm, or plenty following a
great dearth: so generally and particularly was he beloved; his enemies (for
no great man, nor good man lives without) being forced in truth to confess he
deserved much admiration. He came pleasantly thither, and for some days
continued so: but after, whether miss of his friend Parselius, or some other
private cause to himself moved him, is not known: but sad he grew, and
shunning all other company, would retire himself with Antissia into
Pamphilia's chamber, where he would, when he speak, direct his speech to her;
still blaming her brothers for so strangely leaving their Country, he could not
offer speech to her, which she received not with much respect, yet was she
generally the most silent and discreetly retired of any Princess. But one day
as they were alone together, some discourse falling out of the beauty of
Ladies, Amphilanthus gave so much commendations of Antissia, as she between
dislike, and a modest affection, answered, he had spoke sufficiently in her
praise: for truly my Lord, said she, me thinks there is not that beauty in
her as you speak of, but that I have seen, as fair and delicate as she; yet
in truth she is very white, but that extreme whiteness I like not so well, as
where that (though not in that fullness) is mixed with sweet louelines; yet I
cannot blame you to think her peerless, who viewes her but with the eyes of
affection. Amphilanthus gave this reply; That he till then had never seen so
much Womanish disposition in her, as to have so much pretty envy in her, yet
in his opinion (except her self) he had not seen any fairer, Antissia with
that came to them, which brought them into other discourses, til they were
forced to part. They gone, Pamphilia alone began to breath out her passions,
which to none she would discover, resolving rather so to perish, then that any
third should know she could be subject to affection. Alas, would she say
(weeping to her self) what have I deserved to be thus tyrannically tortured
by love? and in his most violent course, to whom I have ever been a most true
servant? Had I wronged his name, scornd his power, or his might, then I had
been justly censured to punishment: but ill Kings, the more they see obedience,
tread the more upon their subjects; so does this all conquering King. O love,
look but on me, my heart is thy prey, my self thy slave, then take some pity on
me. Being heavy, she went into her bed, but not with hope of rest, but to get
more liberty to express her woe. At last, her servants gone, and all things
quiet, but her ceaselesse mourning soul, she softly rose out of her bed, going
to her window, and looking out beheld the Moon, who was then fair and bright
in her self, being almost at the full, but rounded about with black, and
broken clouds. Ah Diana (said she) how do my fortunes resemble thee? my love
and heart as clear, and bright in faith, as thou art in thy face, and the
fullness of my sorrows in the same substance: and as thy wane must be, so is
my wane of hopes in my love; affections in him, being as cold to me, as thou
art in comparison of the Suns heat: broken joys, black despaires,
incirkling me, as those disseuered clouds do strive to shadow by straight
compassing thy best light. When she had (as long as her impatient desires would
permit her) beheld the chaste Goddess, she went to her bed again, taking a
little Cabinet with her, wherein she had many papers, and setting a light by
her, began to read them, but few of them pleasing her, she took pen and paper,
and being excellent in writing, writ these verses following.

HEart drops distilling like a new cut-vine
Weep for the pains that do my soul oppress,
Eyes do no less
For if you weep not, be not mine,
Silly woes that cannot twine
An equal grief in such excess.
You first in sorrow did begin the act,
You saw and were the instruments of woe,
To let me know
That parting would procure the fact
Wherewith young hopes in bud are wrackt^
Yet deerer eyes the rock must show.
Which never weep, but killingly disclose
Plagues, famine, murder in the fullest store^
But threaten more.
This knowledge cl^yes my breast with woes
T'auoid offense my heart still chose
Yet faild, and pity does implore.
When reading them over again; Fie passion (said she) how foolish can thou
make us? and when with much pain and business thou have gained us, how do
thou then dispose us unto folly, making our choicest wits testimonies to our
faces of our weaknesses, and, as at this time do, bring my own hands to
witness against me, vnblushingly showing my idlenesses to me. Then took she
the new-writ lines, and as soon almost as she had given them life, she
likewise gave them burial. And yet, said she, love must do thus, and sure we
love his force the better for these fancies. Then putting out the light, lest
that should too soon wast, beholding her passions, which in hotter flames
continued (then the united one of the candle could aspire to comparison with
the smallest of millions of them) turning her in her bed with a deep
loue-sigh, she cried: O love, thou do master me.

Thus did the love wounded Princess pass that night, or the greater part of
it; convenient time for sports in the morning being come, the king sent for her
to attend him and the Queen, to see a match which was made at the Iusts only,
partly to please the king, but most to welcome Amphilanthus. Pamphilia and
Antissia were placed together; Antissia dearly loving her for her cousins
sake; whom so well she loved, as she gloried to have all ears and eyes partake
the knowledge of it. Pamphilia did embrace her company, being excelling in
sweet conversation, as far as pleasant and harmless mirth could extend: and
fit was such a companion, for the melancholy which abounded in the Princess.
Being at the window, and all having once run over, Amphilanthus gaind the
first honor. Whereat Antissia being joyful, Well may it be bestowed on him
(said she), for sure none can in all brave exercises come near your matchles
Cousin, for delicate finenesse, and peerless power. It Is true (said
Pamphilia): yet if you saw my brother Parselius, you would (and indeed must)
confess, he comes the nearest to him, and nearly matches him. I know not him
(said Antissia), but if he do but second this, you may boldly say, no Princess
living can compare with you for a Cousin and a Brother. By this the match was
ended, and the Knights coming to the king, he gave them thanks, embracing
his best beloved Nephew. Then went each one to his Mistress, to receive their
opinions in the defense of their favors: Antissia telling Amphilanthus, that
in her mind, he alone deserved the honor of that day. He replied; Her wishes
and favor did purchase him that honor, more power living in them, then in his
arm or skill. Then did all return, the Knights conducting every one his
Lady, Pamphilia went alone, for she not enjoying her love, loved to be alone,
as she was alone in perfect and unfortunate loving; thinking so slight a thing
as a Knights leading her, might be a touch in her thoughts to her spotless
affection, nor would she ever honor any one, with wearing a favor in those
sports; having vowed, that only one should enjoy all love and faith from her;
and in her constancy (this not being known, her passions so wisely governed,
as she was not mistrusted to love so violently) made her of many to be esteemed
proud, while it was that flame, which made her burn in the humblest subjection
of Loves meanest subjects; yet was her choice like her self, the best. No day
passed without some exercises on horseback, wherein Amphilanthus did still add
fame unto himself, by that to make Antissia the more his Prisoner: But now is
the time for his depart in the search of his friend arrived; if it grieved the
Court to part with him? it surely heartily perplexed her, whose life depended
on his sight; so it tormented her, as with the flowing of tears, her face was
martyred so much, as she was not fit to come in company, having turned her
delightfulness to sorrows, faining her self ill, and so keeping her chamber,
being seen of none but of Pamphilia, to whom she had freely discoursed both
her affection, and success in her love; who like a worthy friend, accompanied
her in this sorrow. The night before he was to go, he came into her chamber to
bid her farewell, and to entreat her to remain there till his return; the
king having given him his promise, that all honor and respect should be used
to her; the Princess Pamphilia (he durst say) would do the like; and for his
own part, care and diligence should not want in him to make his speedy
return. The poor Lady could but with a speechless mourning behold him,
holding his hand fast in hers, at last sorrow brought forth these words for
her. My Lord, God knows how I lament for your going, how much more must your
absence afflict me? As you see the one, and may judge of the other, have pity
in hastening hither to her, who till then daily will find a death-like life. So
he took his leave of her, promising to perform her commands: then turning to
Pamphilia (who had all this while beheld this so sad, but loving parting),
Madam (said he) is there any thing left to make me so happy, as that it may be
in my fortunes to serve you, and so to be blessed with your employments? My Lord
(said she) it is sufficient to be commanded by one, and so beautiful a Lady:
for my part, I will entreat your speedy return, and that you bring my brother
with you. With this he left the Ladies, one to lament, the other forced to
comfort. His journey he took directly toward the sea, meaning at the first
convenient Port to take shipping, and so to pass into Italy, whether, it
might be his friend was gone, according to their first agreement. But coming
into a place not the richest, but well distant from the worst of countries, in
a part within some leagues from the sea, the least inhabited of any of those
quarters, being somewhat hilly, and desert-like, he went among some of those
hills to rest himself, choosing one, the side of it being a fine Wood, the
foot of it beautified with a pleasant and swift River, before it a pretty
Plain which went not far, before another Hill proudly ouer-lookt her
lowliness: his horse he gave to his Squire, himself walking down into the
Wood, and being taken with the pleasures of that place, he laid himself among
them on the ground, speaking these words: What destiny is this, unhappy man,
that no time will be permitted me to endure happy in? How is the world
deceived, in thinking happiness consists alone in being beloved? when as if it
proceeds from other then their own chosen love, it is a punishment; like as
the being crammed, when one is full: Love then (I beseech thee) make me less
happy in not being loved, or truly blessed with enjoying her heart, who has made
mine her Captive. But O me, I do fear that she does love: wretch that I am,
what then must needs befall me? Death, I cruell'st death, when by a Love
procured. More he was a saying, and surely had discovered his passions in a
greater, and more exact manner, but that he was called to attention by a
delicate (yet doleful) voice, a Lute finely played upon, giving music to his
Song, which was this.

A Dieu sweet Sun
Thy night is near
Which must appear
Like mine, whose light but new begun
Wears as if spun
By chance not right,
Led by a light
False, and pleasing, ever wun.
Come once in view
Sweet heat, and light
My heavy sp'rit
Dulled in thy setting, made anew
If you renew,
Daysies do grow,
And spring below
Blessed with thy warm'th, so once I grew.
Will thou return,
Dear bless mine ^yes
Where loves zeal lies
Let thy dear object mildly burn
Nor fly, but turn
'T is season now
Each happy bow
Both buds and bloom^s, why should I mourn?
No sooner had he ended his song, but the same voice (though in a more plaining
manner) brought forth these words: O life, O death? why am I cloyd with one, and
slave for the other, much more of me desired? False joys, leave, forced
pleasure fly me, music why abide you? since joy, pleasure, and true music
(which is love) abandons me, shuns me; alas true piece of misery: I who am
despised, hated, scorned, and lost. Are these my gains ungrateful love? take
here thy conquest, and glory in thy purchase, while I live loathing my self,
and all, but her by whom I remain a wretched forlorn slave: yet some comfort
I have to sustain me, that I suffer for the rarest and most excellent of
women, and so long Cupid use thy force, and tyrannize upon my slaughtered
heart. These words were to the brave Italian, so just the image of his own
thoughts, as they were as if his, or like two Lutes tuned alike, and placed,
the one struck, the other likewise sounds: so did these speeches agree to his
encumbered thoughts. Willing he was to comfort him, but loath to disquiet him,
knowing in this estate lonelines, and disburdning of some part of the like
grief does ease one: wherefore he remained in a doubt what to do, when as the
young man (for so he perceiu^d from such a one the voice did come) not caring
which way he did take, or seeing any direct path, but that his fantasies led
him in, came hard by the place where Amphilanthus lay, who viewing his youth
and delicate beauty, admired and pitied him. He passed on toward the River,
his eyes, as it were, imitating the swift running of that stream, his Lute he
held in his hand, till again having some more Verses framed in his mind
(perfect lovers never wanting invention) he again played, and sung; having
done, O Love, said he, once ea^e me, or let death seize me, giving conclusion
to my dolorous days. What do I gain by being a Prince? What auailes it me to
hope for a Kingdoms Government, when she who is my Kingdom to me, and my
Princess does reject me? Woe is me that ever I knew Morea; Woe is me that ever
I beheld Pamphilia; O Phamphili^, would I were but so much honored, as thou
would but think me worthy to kiss thy hands, that would revive me, and for
that favor would I think my self sufficiently requited for all my
torments-bearing.

Amphilanthus hearing his Cosen named, and the young man discover himself to
be a Prince, wondering in his travels he had never seen him, desirous to be
resolved of his estate, and name, with all the true cause of his desperate
grief, went toward him courteously, and with respect due to him, saluted him
thus. Sir, let not, I pray you, my boldness in this interrupting your more
pleasing thoughts, be displeasing to you, since it is my fortune (not desire to
trouble you) which brought me hither, wherefore, I hope, I shall obtain pardon
of you. The young Prince soberly, and a little blushing, answered. No fault can
I find with your being here, or any thing except my own fortune, which thinks
it self never cursed enough to me; but since, as I assure my self, you have
heard my Passions, till now never known to man, let me know by whom I am
discovered? Upon promise to have the like courtesy from you; replied the
valiant King, I will not hide my self from you: He consenting, the stranger
Prince began. Then Sir, know I am called Steriamus, Prince and rightful King
of Albania, brought unto this country by the virtuous and noble Prince
Parselius, who has undertaken to assist me in recovering the Kingdom lost in
my Fathers days, but what talk I of a Kingdom, having lost the power of my
content and happiness; now Sir, perform your word: I am said the other,
Amphilanthus King of the Romans. Steriamius knowing him to be that famous
Prince, in whose search his friend was gone, fast held him in his arms,
crying; yet am I happy to see the most renowned Prince breathing before I dye;
for now may I ending say, I have seen the worth of the world, and feel her
greatest cruelty. Amphilanthus blushed to hear his virtue so extold, but
lovingly embracing in like manner the Albanian Prince, was again solicited by
him, to tell him all his story, which in this manner (sitting down by the
River side) he did discourse. My self and my brother being brought by that
worthy Prince to his Fathers Court, were there left, he first having received
promise, and command being given for men's raising, to restore me (miserable me)
to my kingdom, as I before told you, he took his leave, being gone in the
search of you, but promised return within six months into Morea, being now
gone into Italy, hoping to meet you there. I remaining, grieved to part with
him, but more afflicted with an incurable wound, which in that Court I
received. But before I go any further, I pray tell me whether you have lately
seen the Princess Pamphilia, for surely then shall I find one pain troubles
us, and one cure only for us; I saw her very lately, replied Amphilanthus
being but almost now come from her Fathers Court, but for all that you may
safely go on with your discourse.

Then, said he, it was my happiness to see her, but my misery to fall in love
with her, (cruel she) who if she prove not merciful to me, I must for her,
thus ever suffer: besides, it hinders my going on, in the regaining of Albania;
for, what is a Kingdom to me, being subject to a greater power of the mind?
What can that Realm prove to me, if Pamphilia martyr me? What is a Court to
one cast down to the lowest of Loves slaueries? No Selarinus, thou art worthy,
and free, and therefore fit to rule; and God send thee that, and all other good
fortunes, and this among the rest, that thou never come to the knowledge of thy
miserable Brothers end, whose misery did thus begin.

One day as the King and Queen were walking in the Garden, attended on by all
the Princes, Ladies, and Knights of the Court, every one discoursing as best
pleased them, Pamphilia walked alone, none daring to present himself to her:
such was the respect all bore unto her, and fear of displeasing her. I saw
her, and with that sight lost my self; Love then emboldned me so, as armed
with his fire, I went to her, and took the boldness to walk by her, and
offering discourse (I confess unworthy of her hearing) she entertained me
modestly and gravely: Love for me finding this hope, forced me to use the time,
and to speak something of it self to her: which she perceiving (yet out of
pity not willing too curstly to deal with me) showed me in her countenance
dislike of my speeches. And yet not to put me too much besides my self,
called other to her, to add (as she faign'd) to her company: With a bleeding
heart I suffered this disgrace, which yet was by her so handled, as none but my
own soul could witness it to any. Thus that day past, sorrow increasing in
me, and little mirth growing in her. Often times would she be ready to sigh, but
loving that breath, which she drew for so loved a cause, she did strive to
fetch it back again; or else it was to cover her long breathing. Many days
this continued, till one night standing in a round window in a great Galerie, a
Lady who did much use to accompany the Princess (though she be of the Queens
Chamber) standing by her. Madam, said she, did you ever see so silent a Prince
as this is? Surely if he were to win his Kingdom by words, as it must be
done by swords, the Country might remain a long time without the lawful
King. Pamphilia looked (O me a deadly wound that sweetest look did prove)
pleasingly upon me, saying, My Lord, you see this Lady finely begs discourse
from you. Alas Divine Princess, said I, what discourse can proceed from a dead
man? I never heard till now, said she, that dead men walked, and spoke. Yes
Madame, cried I, as you have seen trees continue green in their branches,
though the heart be quite dead, and consumed away, hollownesse only remaining:
And so is nothing left in me but empty hope, and flourishing despair. Is there
no cure, said she? Yes that there is, said I. Show it, said she: I looking
about, and seeing the other Lady parted from me, besides hard by a fair Glass
(many hanging as ornaments in that Gallery) I took it up turning it to her,
mine eyes only speaking for me. She (with seeing her face, saw my cause of
torment) said as little as I: only taking the Glass turned the other side,
which was dull like my gains, and with as much scorn and contempt, as could
appear in so much beauty (like as if the Sun would in spite show himself in a
storm), she turned from me. I stood still, for indeed I could not move, til for
my last comfort, sense came to me, to show me, I was in no fit place so to
betray my passions: wherefore getting so much strength (although no more, then
as men after a long sickness gain, when they go with feeble joints, the length
of a room; so much had I), and that little with much ado, brought me to my
chamber, where I opened my breast to al sorrow, and let mine eyes make full sea
of tears. Thus I remaind, till this resolution took me, to wander I cared not
whither, so it were far from knowledge of any, and to leave that most cruel
beauty to her own content; which yet I fear she has not, though I truly wish
she had. I called my brother to me, telling him he must be secret to me, as he
did hope for love from me: which he vowed, not mistrusting what I meant, till
'twas too late to go back. With sobs and tears he besought me to alter:
but I told him there was no remedy, nor must he break his oath. Then against
his heart he said, he must obey. My charge was this; never to reveal my manner
of going, nor ever to seek after me, or suffer any that he could hinder. Then
went I to Pamphilias chamber, where I humbly desired to speak with her; she
gave me leave: but when I was ready to say something she prevented me. If you
have, said she, any business, I shall be ready to do you any service in it: but if
it be concerning your glass discovery, know this, you shall do best to be
silent; for a greater offense you cannot do me. Alas Madam (said I), have you
no pity for me? I have pity for any (said she), leave this folly, and I shall
wish you well. That was so cold a favor for my desires, and my dutiful
affection such to her, as not to give her the least cause of dislike, besought
her, she would honor me but so much, as I might kiss her hands before my
departure, which was forced by an adventure, calling me away: she nobly granted
that, and said, she wished me good fortune. I told her, my fortune could only be
made by her. Then can it prove little, said she. With trembling and death-like
palenes I left her lodgings, having yet the favor which my lips received, in
touching her fairest hand; which kiss shall never part from me, till these my
lips do kiss with death. Then wandered I away, till I came hither; never
finding any place to please me, nor, alas, does this, or can any thing but her
pity please; only this is less distastefull, then those where greater noises
be. Here I am quiet, but for my own quiet, but for my grief, which never
gives me rest. In a little cave in the ground is my lodging, one Squire
attending me, who from a Town not far hence fetches me provision: this
Lute (a quality I learnd in the Court since my coming thither) misfortune, and
my Mistrisses disdain, my discourse and companions: and thus lives, and daily
dies the rejected Steriamus. Having finished his tale, his eyes flowed again
with tears, as if it were their office to give the full stop of his discourse.
Amphilanthus embracing him; Steriamus (said he) leave these lamentations; for a
fury in one (who how worthy soever, yet being a woman), may change. How many
have bin condemnd for cruely, that after have proved kind enough? yet speak I
not this of Pamphilia, who has still kept a constant resolution to her self.
But sure some strange occasion makes her (so full of judgment and sweetness)
carry so strict a course in your affections: yet let not that make you forget
your self. The poor Albania (poor in missing you) calls upon you, the rest
of the world has need of such Princes: then let not passion overthrow a brave
spirit: absence can bring no hope, presence and desert may, if any thing. Or
say she never love you, there are other fair Ladies, who will be liker
themselves, pitiful and loving. Never shall other love possess my heart
(cride he), and that O heavens still witness for me, and behold this vow,
That when I change, it shall be unto death. Then shutting his hands one fast
within the other, he groaning said; Nor ever let these hands part, if I part
from this my love. Time (said he) will give you (I trust) unexpected cause of
comfort, in the mean time let us talk of something else. Then Steriamus invited
Amphilanthus to the Cave, dearly loving him for his brave advice, but most for
his cosins sake. There they sat together, lay together, and passed some days
together, till the Albanian was overcome with the Italians (neuer-fayling)
persuading speeches; so as they took their course toward the sea, falling
into that way which brought them directly to the Castle, where young Antissius
and his Uncle were by Parselius left. There they found them, and met the honest
Captain, who was brought thither by the Romanian Knight, who after the whole
discourse was told to Amphilanthus, as before it had been to Parselius by the
old Prince, and young Knight, continued the story thus. After that (devil of
women) the Kings wife had wrought the ruin of Romania, Proclamations out for
the bringing of either or both of you, for which large sums of money were
offered: but if you could be delivered in alive, those sums, and great
honors with brave possessions: you my Lord made a Traitor, and you Sir having
your head at sale. Then obtained she, that her son was made heir apparent to
the Crown; and that if the King happned to die, while the new Prince was under
years, that then she would govern as Protectresse, till he came of age. This
sure, she grew weary of the old man, whose age, and dotage (she having
employed them to her use, was now cloyed with them) troubled her; to be rid of
him was then her study. At last finding an easy way (as she thought) she called
one of her servants to her (being one who ambitiously sought to win the honor,
of being her favorite) leading him into a private Cabinet, where she plotted
al her wickedness; there she began with false and forged flattrings to entice
him to her purpose; dissimulation, and protestation of her affections she
wanted not, to draw him into the yoke of her witchcraft. And what (said she)
though the world do tax me for loving many? do not you accuse me, my only
dear; for sooner will I die, then wrong your love. If my fashion, which is
free and familiar, make you doubt me? consider why it is, since it were neither
wisdom, nor safety for us, to use you only kindly in all sights. The graces
others have, is but to blind their eyes, which else would be clear sighted to
our ill, and this even by the love you bear me, I conjure you to believe; and
this should you well find, were I at liberty and free. What freedom would you
ask? To be my self, said she, and so to take a husband I could love, as I
love you; and so would make you, were the old man dead. Is that the bar, cride
he, dear Lady? He is dead, or even as good, for two days is his longest term
of life. That done, enjoy me, who am only thine; and verily the thing is
easy, safe; and doubtless do it then, and by it purchase me. He long time
bewitched with her craft, allured by her beauty, and continued in error by her
falsehoods, believed she spoke unfeigned from her heart, letting himself covet
that, which with murder (and treacherous murder) they must gain from the true
owner But he looked no further then his love, to compass which, no means
seemed ill, so partial was he to his vild desires. Thus was his word engaged,
and the kings life limited; which end of time being come, they enticed the
grave man into a Park, where they murdered him, bringing home the old body
besmeared in his own blood, couerd with their mantles (as the fault was with
their fained talles), which were, that in the Wood certain men, hired as it
was likely by you, set upon him, killed him, and wounded them; showing some
slight wounds which they had (for the greater show of truth) given themselves.
The Queen being brought to this sad fight, took on strangely, rending her
clothes, crying, and even howling so, as most did pity her, and few or none
accuse her guilty of the crime, so cunning was she in her deep deceits. Then
was the Council called, who came, in show sad, but in hearts joyful, wicked men,
loving nothing more then change; they brought also the young king to his
mother. The people being assembled, and the false report of the kings death
deliuerd, wherewith they were satisfied, pitying the wounded body, yet crediting
the murderers. Thus was the poor doting King rewarded for his fondnes. A
funeral was made with all ceremonious cost and pomp, the young unlawful king
being that day crowned, as soon as the body was interred. This was yet but one
part of the play, the other soon followed. She thinking her self no way
secure (so many knowing of her sin) to avoid punishment on earth, would run
yet faster to meet more punishments cause, in the other world, by heaping
murders upon murders: for inuiting all those except her Minion) to a private
banquet, she poisoned them, reserving the favorite for some other virtuous
purpose; who being in the pride of his desires, expecting when he should be
made her husband, often urged it: but she put it off with pretense of fear,
least that the too sudden marriage might give occasion to the world to doubt,
what was most true, and what their guiltiness made them mistru^t.

Thus it past a while like a calm tide after a tempest: her son and she
being in full possession of all, the neighbor kings sent to condole the death
of the king, and to congratulate the other, whether out of love, or desire of
peace (a sweet thing to spritelesse Princes). Among the rest came one, who
accompanied the Ambassador of Morea, a Gentleman of excellent parts, winning
the love of all that conuersed with him, having a modest government over a
strong and dainty wit: but as he was in this happy, he was crossed with the
violent love of the chastlesse Queen, who affected him after her wonted
fashion, but so fondly and intemperately, as she caused most to look with
gazing eyes on her: he was not of the highest stature, though far from being
low; his hair fair, and that beard he had, something inclind to yellow. She
saw this Gentleman (who since I learnd, was Son to the Duke of Mantinea, and
Captain of a troop of Horse, which was part of the Kings Guard, and the
Noblest part; because that Company must ever be choice men, and all
Gentlemen): She wooed him, plainly said, She loved him. Yet could not this
prevail, wroth in him, withstanding all her baits: which being meant as
refusals, proved inticements to bring her on; like a Spaniell, that fawnes on
the man's cruelty. Her passions then grown immoderate and vngouernable, years
increasing in her, and strength of judgment failing her more then in her
youth, gave such open testimony of her love, as her latter servant (but
companion in mischief) perceived it; his confidence having been such, as that
blinded him long time, giving liberty and assurance in that to her, and her
ends, which never were but either politic, or lascivious. But he as having new
sight given him to see her shame, and his own together; hate taking the place
of love, his desires flew to the ruin of her, as before to the continuance of
their days in their own pleasures never enough enjoyed. He plotted to undo
her, and watched the opportunity, which he obtaind by his diligent prying;
that, bringing him to discover her going into her Cabinet with his stranger,
pretending there to show him ^ome jewels. They were no sooner within the room
(she having but put the door a little to, not close), but her enraged enemy
came, and finding means of discerning what was to be seen, lost it not, but
stood still looking in^ She (whose thoughts carried her to higher points then
care) took no heed of that which most concerned her: for there he saw her with
all passionate ardency, seek, and sue for the strangers love, yet he
immovable, was no further wrought, then if he had seen a delicate play-boy
act a loving woman's part, and knowing him a Boy, liked only his action; then
with much ado he brought forth these words: Alas Madam, why seek you at my
hands your dishonor and my shame? How dare you venture your honor in the power
of a stranger, who likely would use it to his glory, and your reproach? Besides
you know I love one, whose worth and truth must not be hurt, or blotted in my
fault, my life not worthy to satisfy the crime, should her unspotted loyalty
suffer for my sin. Yet satisfy my desire (said she) and then love whom you
will. Love whom you will (cried out the furious forsaken) rushing into the
room as much unexpected, and unwelcome, as thunder in winter, which is counted
prodigious. The Queen stood amazed while he used these speeches; Fie
faithless Woman, verifier of that fault whereof I hoped, women had been
slandred, and not subject unto: have I obeyed you in your wicked and abominable
treasons, thus to be rewarded? She finding he had not only found her, but
also had discovered her false-hood, withal considering his rage, she fell at
his feet, asking pardon. Pardon your self, said he, if you can, and me who
want it, as drought does water: Be your protestations, vows, and daily given
oaths come to this? With that most furiously he ran toward he, but the
Morean in humanity saved her from hurt by him; but to hinder that, he was
forced to struggle with him, who was a strong man, and then had double power.
This noise called in some that waited without, others ran to tell the king,
either to show forwardness in service, or indeed business, not caring what they
carry, so it be news; wanting the chiefest part, which is judgment, to know,
where, when, and what to tell. But in brief, the king came, and finding this
unfortunate disorder, not being able to win from them by fair means the truth,
(to avoid all ill) committed them to prison, from whence (for the speedier,
and so more secure proceeding) the next morning they were brought to public
arraignement: but the King was not present, fearing those things (which after
brake forth) would then be blown forth. And indeed it was so, for the accused
being demanded what he could say in his own defense; said, Nothing but
wherein he must accuse himself. Being urged to that, he confessed all,
finishing his speech thus; For her sake, by her consent, knowledge, and
command, I slew the King; she having given me her faith (which as a faith I
esteemd; but alas, it was a shadow put in a false light) that she would marry
me; this added to a natural ambition I had to greatness, not iudicially
weighing, how heavy in justice this weight of honor should be, so diuellishly
sought for, or attained. For this he was condemned to die, the manner by four
wild horses: but before his execution she was examined, with whom few words
were used, before she confessed her self guilty. She was likewise condemned (for
being a subject, she was under the law), and so had her head struck off, the
stranger was delivered free again. Many pitied her, to whom she had done good
(for none can be found so ill, that some will not commiserate); yet the most
(like the base world) left her, having held with her while her power shined,
but now set with her light, running to the rising strength, not to the
declined: few said, she was wrongfully put to death, either for love to her,
or to make business: for no sooner was she dead, but one of her antienter
favorites rose in rebellion, the people apt to take any occasion to stir new
afflictions: but a great party he has go^ten, and so much gaind, as the King
is now shut up in the great City of Constantinople, the Rebel (as the
unlawful king does call him) besieging him, and vowing never to lay down
Arms, till he has gotten him in his power: and now do they all cry out for
Antissius, honoring the very name as a god; wishing for you Sir, and vowing if
they can recover you, to make you their King. Thus have I left them, the
General (for so he is called) having enjoined me to find you out; they are
infinite strong, and want but you, and some brave men to govern them. Go now
I beseech you; never had Romania more need, nor shall you ever find a fitter
time.

The Princes sat a while in consultation, at last they resolved presently to
take the journey in hand, not holding it good to loose so fit an opportunity.
The Squire of Amphilanthus was sent to find Parselius in Italy, and to acquaint
him with their affairs, withal to entreat his company. This concluded on, all
went to rest, Steriamus desiring, that because his name was not yet known by
desert, it might be still kept secret; and most he desired it, by reason of his
vow. They agreed to it, and he was only called, The true despised, which was
all the device in his shield. Amphilanthus did desire to be held unknown too:
but his reason was, that it was not so safe for so famous a man to be commonly
known, in so great and imminent dangers; besides, the renown of him, might
make many refuse the combat with him, who else he might for sport or profit
encounter: he had Love painted in his shield, and was called, The Knight of
Love.

Toward Romania with prosperous winds they sailed, choosing the way by sea as
the shortest, and less troublesome. In a fit and short time they arrived in
Romania, landing a little from the Town, for fear of unknown dangers, and so
they past to the Army, where Antissius and his Uncle being known, unspeakable
joy was made, the General yielding all into his hands, and taking his
authority from him. Upon this the Usurper sent for a Truce, but that was
denied: then he desired (rather then to continue immured in that kind,
besides, ready to be famisht), that they would bring three Knights into the
field, the which number he would also bring, himself being one, and those
six to end the business, which side ouercomming, the other should depart with
peace, and never make more warre^ one against another. This was accepted,
Amphilanthus and Steriamus being two, the third they had not yet appointed, nor
would, till the day of combat; still expecting some famous Knight, or
Parselius himself, might come to fill the number: if none, then the young
Knight their first acquaintance should be the man.

The day come, when as the Lists were made without the Town, the Judges
appointed, old Seleucius, Uncle to Antissius, and the honest Captain
Lisandrinus, were the Judges for their side: on the other, were the Admiral,
and Marshall of Romania. The Gates were all set open, and free liberty given
every one to pass where he listed, only inioyn'd to go unarmed. The first
that entered into the field was the King, on each hand of him his two Companions
in fight; before him six men bare-headed, one carrying his Helm, three other
his Spears, the two last his Sword and Shield: his Armor was green, floured
with Gold; the furniture to his Horse of the same color, cut into Garlands of
Laurel, and embroidered with Gold; but so artificially joined together, as they
seemd when the Horse stird, to rise as ready to crown each part of his
conquest. In his Shield he had a crown of Bays, held up by a Sword; Word he
had none, so as it seemd he staid for that, till his hoped for victory had
provided one for him. The other Knights were both alike in Watchet and Gold;
their devices a blew Cloud, out of which sparkled fire.

But then came the honor of his sex, never enough admired, and beloved
Amphilanthus, his Armor was white, fillited with Rubies; his furniture to his
Horse Crimson, embroydred with Pearl; his Shield with the same^ device, from
which he took his name. Steriamus according to his fortune was in Tawny,
wrought all over with black. As they were entering, a brave Gentleman in a
murry Armor, fillited with Diamonds, his furniture richly wrought with Silver
and Gold, came to Amphilanthus, using these words: My Lord, your worth cannot
be hid, though you have obscured your name; they both (but the former most)
ties me to be your servant, and as the first favor I shall receive, beg the
honor of being third in this brave exploit; not that I am so ignorant, as to
think my self worthy of being your Companion, but wholly out of ambition to
serve you. Amphilanthus looking upon him, seeing the richnes of his Arms, and
the bravery of his Personage, being as comely and strong^ set, as ever he had
seen any, made him this answer. Sir, the honor is mine, to gain so brave a
Companion and friend, wherein I rejoice; and in place of your love to me, give
you mine, which is and shall be firm unto you, and with all my heart embrace
your offer to be the third, not now doubting of the victory, having so happy
a beginning. Then they embraced, and taking him on the left hand of him, and
Steriamus on the right, they went on to the Judges: and all six meeting
together, speaking some few words one to another, they parted to meet, never
more to part on some sides. Amphilanthus encountered one of the Watchet Knights,
Steriamus the King; and the Forest Knight (so being called, because of his
Device, which was a great and pleasant Forest, most pleasantly set forth, as
the cunning of the rarest Painter could devise) met the other watchet knight.
The first Knight lost his Stirrup, else there was no advantage on any side, and
thus they continued the three courses; then lighting and drawing their swords,
there grew the cruellest, and yet delightfullest Combat, (if in cruelty there
can be delight) that Martial men ever performed, or had been seen by judging
eyes: for never was courage, magnanimity, valor, skill, and nimblenesse,
joined better together; so as indeed a Kingdom was too low a prize for such a
Combat. Long it continued, till the Knight of Love, disdaining one man should
hold out so long with him, gave him such a wound in the head as therewith he
fell down dead at his feet. At the same instant the King gave Steriamus, a
great hurt in the body, but he was quickly paid with a wound in the belly,
which gave him his discharge, and freed him from any more trouble of ruling or
obeying. The Knight of the Forest seeing his Companions good fortune, knew it
his part to accompany them, so as with a surely given stroke, the head of the
other, and last knight fell to kiss his feet. Steriamus was carried presently
into the Town, where by the help of a good Chyrurgion, he was soon
recovered. The Judges all in face glad, (howsoever some of their hearts were
affected) came to them, who with the rest, presently proclaimed Antissius King,
who was by the people received with much joy at the Coronation, which was
within short time. Antissius created the General, Duke of Neapolis, and
Lysandrinus Duke of Selybria.

All things being in quiet, the Knight of Love would needs return into ^orea,
to see things fitting for Steriamus, and to accompany him in his Conquest. With
him went the Knight of the Forest, between whom grew so strict a bond of
Friendship, as was never to be broken, they two lying together in one room,
Steriamus in another, by reason of his hurt. Amphilanthus in the night often
turned, and turning, still did end with sighs. The Forest Knight perceived
it, yet let him alone till the morning, when being ready to rise; My only
friend, said he, Your last nights ill rest made mine unpleasing to me, and
most, because mine ignorance hinders me from being able to serve you. I cannot
be yet so bold to demand the cause, since what proof have you of me, that I
should think you might esteem me worthy of such a favor? Yet this you may
be confident of, that death shall ceaze me, before I refuse to venture life to
obtain your desires; and lose it rather, then reveal any secret you shall
impart to me. Amphilanthus answered, that he saw unexpected good happen to him
in all things (especially in this blessed frie^dship) but in that which he most
sought for, nor would I conceal the cause of this my pain from you, were it
once discovered to her from whom I suffer it, but till then I must conceal it;
and you, I hope, on this occasion will excuse me: and for proof of your
accepting this for that which it is, being truth, tell me your love, and
fortune in it, which shall bind me to confidence, and engage me to the
relation of mine. My Lord, said he, to satisfy you (which is the all of my
wishes) understand, that my poor self (only rich in the honor of being your
friend) hunting one day in a great forest, my Father, the king of Bohemia, and
many other Princes of Germany, being assembled; It was my fortune following
the sport more eagerly then the rest, to go so far from my company, as I was
left in the woods all night: there I took my lodging, resting free from
passion, if not rage, for wanting judgment so to be lost. In this night, and
midst of it (for I waked with the dream, and found it was not day) me
thought I saw a Creature, for shape a woman, but for excellency, such as all
the rarenesin that sex, curiously, and skilfully mixed, could but frame such
an one; and yet but such a one in show, like a Picture well drawn, but the
subject more perfect, apparelled in green, her hair hanging careless,
nothing holding it, but a delicate Garland, which she wore upon her head, made
of Pansies, and Wood-binds. Her face bare, boldly telling me, not I only, but
all hearts must burn in that pureness: Eyes like the perfect'st mixtures of
heavenly powers, not to be resisted but submitted to. Lips fully commanding
the plenty of duty, when they seemed to demand obedience: Her neck the
curiousest pillar of white Marble, breast of Snow, or smooth waves of Milk,
swelling, or falling, as the sweet gale of her most sweet breath did rise, or
slack. All other parts so exquisite as none, save only she, can be so
excelling. This I found in her, who me thought, came to me using these words.
Arise, leave Bohemia, and rescue me from the hands of Rebels. I cride out,
stay, O stay, and tell me how, and where^ In Hungaria, said she, with that I
waked having her Image so perfect in my breast, as nothing can remove it from
me. A pretty while I lay still, wishing to sleep again, so once more to have
beheld her; but she was too rich a Jewel slightly to appear to such
worthless eyes. Contented with that I had seen, I lay feeding on that and my
resolution which was to seek her. When day began to appear, what joy was it
to me^ But for my greater comfort I found hard by me this Armor laid with this
Shield, and Sword. I staid not but put it on, thinking with myself how to
attain to the honor of Knight-hoode, my Father having refused it to me,
because my elder Brother, being weak and sickly, had not demanded it;
resolving I should attend his increase of strength, my Fathers whole content
being in that Son. Considering this, I knew it no way to go to him:
wherefore armed, (my Squire carrying my Sword, I passed unto the Emperors
Court, who without delay gave me what I demanded, honoring me with the gift of
an excellent Horse, and furnishing me with all conueniencies.

Then took I my way for Hungary, which Kingdom I had no sooner entered, but I
met the news of a great rebellion made by the uncle Kings Bastard son,
called Rodolindus, against the Daughter and Heir of the second brother, called
Melasinda, who was Crowned Queen, after the decease of her Uncle and Father.
But he envying her greatness, and ambitiously seeking the honor himself,
claym'd a contract between the King and his mother, with all vows and
protestations of marriage. Witnesses he produced, true or false they made a
terrible stir, and brought the fairest Malasinda into great danger. Troops I
continually met, some with the Queen, some against her: with much difficulty
I pass^d till I came to an ancient Lords Castle, within two leagues of the City
of Buda, whereshe was enclosed; this nobleman held with his Sovereign, and
after much discourse of those affairs, he led me into a Gallery where he
showed me the picture of that distressed Princess; truly, I will not say, so
well drawn, as that which remains figured in my heart, but so well, as none
but her Counterfeit could appear so beautiful, and such, as I knew it to be
the same which in that blessed night in the Forest showed her self to me.
This made me conclude, the adventure was reserved for me: wherefore carefully
examining all things that had passed, and curiously and affectionatly weighing
the business, and means to atchieue the finishing, not leaving any thing
vnask'd, that might avail, concluding to adventure what ere came of it. The
good Lord advised me, (perceiving my purpose) to be ruled by him: which I
consented to, when I found he meant honestly for his Princess good, and
circumspectly for my safety, by no means suffering me to enter the Town, as
my self, (by reason of a great hate had been between our Parents) but as an
aduentrous Knight, who hearing of her troubles offered my service to her. She
most fair, most lovely ^hee, accepted me into her service, where I performed
what was put into my trust: in two days killing two of the mightiest, and
strongest knights of all his party. In the end, the Council of both sides,
and the people weary of war, advised, and agreed upon a peace, on those
conditions, that he should lay down all claim to the Crown, yielding it
wholly to her; but in requital, she should take him for her Husband. This was
bitter to her, but this she must do, or be left alone, people-lesse, and
kingdome-lesse. I was but one, and unable to set the Crown, and keep it on
her head against the whole state: wherefore loving her so much, as not daring
to think of any harm to her, in giving ill advise, (nor could my soul allow
her less then the kingdom) with the rest, I persuaded for him; till she told
me; She was sorry she no better deserved my love, but that I would think
another fitter for it, or she unworthy of mine.

I swore (and truly) the world had not that treasure I more couetously sought,
then her enjoying; she urged the unkindness between our Parents, made me
doubt: I firmly vowed, her love made me secure, and happy: but what I did, or
said in this, was only for her good and safety.

With much ado, and long persuasions I won (her love to me) her yielding
for the other; so the match was concluded, and peace on all sides, I leading
her the day of her marriage to her wedding Chamber, where I left her to her
husband; the next morning she came down into a little Garden, whereinto no
window looked, but that in her Cabinet, nor key could open but her own. Into
this place I was conuay'd by her woman a little before, where meeting her, we
passed some hours together. Thus was I the blessed man, inioying the world of
riches in her love, and he contented after, having what he sought. Thus I
lived a while, till I found him altered, and the face of the Court a little
changed toward me (for former causes they pretended, forgetting me, and what
was done by me for them) which made me, fearing her harm, leave the Country
for a while, which little time to me already seems ages, being yet but
months, and few in number, though in love innumerable. She was sad, and
grieved for my going; I played the woman too, and wept at our departing, but
soon I hope again that we shall meet, howsoever I will see her, though in
private, and venture life for it. After that I left Hungary, I came through many
Countries, till I came into Italy, and so hoping to meet you there; but
hearing of your being in Morea^ I went cross the Sea into that Country, and
so had mist you, but that I fortunately met your Squire, who seeking Parselius
enquired of me, for him, and I for you of him. We resolved each other, I
telling him where I had left him, which was in Elis, after a delicate and
strange adventure finishing, and being directed by him how to know you, I was
the better instructed to present my service to you, which the fame of your
worth had long since dedicated to you.

Leave complements dear friend (said Amphilanthus), it is not now time to use
them, our loves having sealed them up in truth; give such delicate phrases to
your next Mistress. My next: why, think you I will change? If you be wise
(said Amphilanthus), and would my fate would change, then were I happy; one
such minute, whereof it seems you have had seasons, would be more welcome to
me, then the Crown of Naples; yet would I have her chaste still, and then I
hope I should with truth and service win her. Is she yet to be won (said the
Bohemian)^ Yes (said the Italian), by me she is: and what tormenteth me is, I
fear she loves my friend. He is no friend that will not yield to you (said he).
I should not love him (said Amphilanthus), if his love to me should exceed
that to so incomparable a creature. How know you she does love (said the
Prince)^ I only fear (said he), and dare not hope it is my self: but surely
she does love. Hope and believe (said he) and that will make you bold to show
yours to her, and then who can refuse you? Would this were true, and then had I
the only victory I seek. Adventure brave Prince (said the Bohemian), never yet
faild your conquest on men, and women are the weaker and gentler: besides, you
are (the world says happy in those wars) so fortunate and so loving, as you
cannot fail, nor she resist. I am no coward, though mistrust my strength in
her sight; her looks (said Amphilanthus) are to me (if frowning) more terrible
then death: yet come what will, I must adventure; if I obtain, I will be as
free with you, as you have been with me, else keep my disgrace, my fortune,
and affliction from discovery made by my tongue. Will not your face declare it
think you? therefore to avoid such inconvenience, woe bravely, and
resolutely, and then win joyfully, and blessedly. Morning being somewhat spent,
they rose, and so took on their way, Steriamus having yielded to Amphilanthus
earnest persuasion, to go with him into the pleasant Morea. Parselius, after
he had left his Fathers Court and friends together, with his sad thoughts, he
betook himself to Elis, and so to ship for Italy, to fetch his friend to
assist the two Princes, and after to go and redeem his heart out of the
enchantment: as he past along in the country of Elis, one day being so busied,
as his thoughts had cha^gd him into themselves, his horse carrying him which way
he best liked he was called upon by a rude voice, which wild him, to know
himself better, then so proudly to carry himself before a Princess. Looking
up to see what, and who this was, he perceived close by him a troop of Ladies,
all on horseback, and many Gentlemen and Knights attending them, but one who
had aduentur'd to instruct him a little more then the rest, to whom he thus
spoke; Truly sir (said he) this fault was caused by melancholy, not by rudenes;
for I have bin too well brought up to be uncivil to Ladies. It appears so
indeed, said he, that thus you stand prating to me, and do no reverence to her
who best deserves it. The Prince angry at his boldness, but unwilling to wrangle
with him, only turned to the Ladies, and made a reverence to the^, offering to
pass by the^; but the first Knight seeing that: Stay Sir (said he) you have
not done all, it is not a courtesy shall serve, for we must see if your valor
be equal to your manners. They have commonly gone together (said Parselius):
but where are your Arms? Hard by (said the other), and that you will too soon
find. I Am sure (said he) I have found words enough, which may make me hope to
escape the better from your blows. He went and armed himself, the like did all
the rest, while the Prince stood beholding the Lady, who was of great beauty
and bravery; apparreld in a hunting garment of green cut with red, the upper
and lower part of her gown embroydred with gold, and red, afeather of red and
green in her head; the furniture to her horse of the same color and richnes,
to whom Parselius thus spoke: Madam, if I had offended you, the least of your
corrections had made me submit, without the fury of your Knights, who me
thinks were very confident of the due respect you may challenge, else unarmed
they would not have bin so forward to the combat. Sir (said she) you are
deceived in this, for such is their valor, as none yet ever equaled them,
especially him that first spoke; nor have they reason to trust any further on
me, then their own swords will warrant them in; but indeed the cause of all
this, is a vow which I have made, which is this; My self being daughter to the
Prince of Elis, which Country is in homage subject to the king of Morea, it
was my ill fortune to fall in love with the scornful and proud Prince of that
Country, called Parselius, who did not content himself with disdaining me,
but boasted of my subjection, and to my self, when I with humility besought
his favor; he told me, he was no subject to Love. This has made me vow
revenge, to which end I keep these knights about me, and never meet any
stranger, that they encounter not, nor shall, till we meet him; and if good
fortune fall, that we win him by combat, I will then win him by love, or
obtain my will by force.

By this the Knights were come, who setting on the brave Prince one after
another, he overthrew them all, and left them, most not able to go thence,
some stark dead, the best, legs or arms broken. This done, the Lady again
spoke: Sir, since fortune and your power, has left me guardlesse, I hope you
will conduct me to the Town, besides, let me know who you are. Madam (said
he) as I take it, by the course of Arms you are mine; for if you were to win
me by their conquest, by the same reason you must be lost, if they be
vanquished. It Is true Sir (said she) and such indeed were the conditions; yet I
had hoped you would never have called that in question. Nor truly Madam (said
he) do I it, with any meaning to keep you, though my victory gives you to me:
but to show I am civil, and not unmannerly, I will deliver you here to your
Ladies and Pages; that I am not proud or scornful, I kiss your hands: but to
let you see I disdain an unworthy love, or a forced one, Parselius bids you
thus farewell, and will yet pray, that your senses may tell you, a lower
choice, and an humbler mind will prove more fit and happy for you; and such I
wish you, since for me you have been distempered.

Thus he departed, leaving her amazed and afflicted, with hate, disdain,
scorn, and all other she accused him of, till shame overcame, and forced her
to return to a good old man her father; whose mild and good example, brought
her to follow the counsel of Parselius, who held on his journey, taking ship
for Italy, he landed in the kingdom of Naples; those very parts, making him
remember that, which too well still continued in his mind, which was the sweet
and delicate Island, wherein he found the sweetest, and delicatest of
Shepherdesses; the thought of whom brought forth these words, his heart
bleeding as fast, as before his eyes had shed sad drops. O sweet Island, cride
he, and yet desolate Pantalarea, how do our afflictions suit as one, and so
our destinies? Urania has left thee, and thou mourn'st; Urania has left me,
and I pine. Dearest Urania, dear unto me still; why would thou for novelties
leave thy faithful Parselius? why would thou not be as well then advised, as
till that time be gouernd by my counsel? Yet fool, most blame thy self: for
why did thou permit-her dainty lips to touch that charmed Brook? nay, still
add unto thy folly; why would thou drink so ha^tily thy self, and so have
no means left to help or save? Accursed Spring, from whence did run the ruin
of my bliss. Bewitching stream, to charm me to the loss of my souls joys;
spitefullest of the gods, or goddesses; was it for revenge, because we would
not try your charmed house, that yet their cruel trial should be made upon
us? Unlucky tempest, constraining us to land on that much more unlucky shore.
Leaving his ship, he went a land, commanding his servants to go to the Court,
and if they came before him thither, there to attend till his coming, but
secretly; himself going along the seaside, his mind as vnrestingly running on
Urania, as a hurt bird, that never leaves flying till he falls down: no more
did he rest, till death-like sleep did force him to obey; yet were his
dreams often of her, his mind then working, and presenting her unto his
imagination, as in day his thoughts did to his heart: so did the eyes of his
loving soul, ever behold her, accusing himself for his folly, fearing the
power of the charms, whose wicked might, might alter her; assuring himself,
she must be deceived by them, if ever she did change. In this violent fever
of sorrow he went on, till he discerned a man come from under the ro^ks that
proudly showed their craggie faces, wrinkling in the smiles of their joy, for
being above the Sea, which strove by flowing to cover them; but for all that
ambition, was forced to ebb in penance for that high desire. He came armed at
all points, leading in his hand as beautiful a Lady as Nature could frame, and
sorrow suffer to appear so; being such an one, as both had used their best art
to frame, and suffer to show excellent; had she bin free, how much more rare
must she then of necessity appear, who in misery showed so delicate? The
Morean Prince staid to behold, and beholding did admire the exquisitenes of
that sad beauty, but more the^ that did the cruelty of the armed man seem
wonderful, for leading her to a pillar which stood on the sand (a fit place
that the sea might still wash away the memory of such inhumanity) he tied her
to it by the hair, which was of great length, and Sun-like brightness. Then
pulled he off a mantle which she wore, leaving her from the girdle upwards al
naked, her soft, dainty white hands he fastened behind her, with a cord about
both wrists, in manner of a cross, as testimony of her cruellest Martyrdom.
When she was thus miserably bound to his unmerciful liking, with whipps he
was about to torment her: but Parselius with this sight was quickly put out of
his admiration, hasting to revenge her wrong, setting spurs to his horse, he
ran as swift as Lightning (and as dangerous this happned to the Knight) toward
them, yet sending his voice with more speed before him, crying, vilde Traitor,
hold thy hands and turn thy spite on me, more fit to encounter stripes,
hoping thus to save her from some, which if but one, had been too much for
such delicacie to endure.

But he (whose malice was such, as the nearer he saw her succor, the more
was his fury increased) looking up and seeing a brave knight accompany that
voice, casting his hateful look again on her, and throwing away the Whips,
drew his Sword, saying, nor yet shall this new Champion rescue thee; then
ready to have parted that sweet breath from that most sweet body, Parselius
came, and struck down the blow with his Sword, though not so directly, but
that it a little rased her on the left side, which she perceiving, looking on
it, and seeing how the blood did trickle in some (though few) drops, Many more
then these, said she, have I inwardly shed for thee my dear Perissus; but
that last word she spoke softlier then the rest, either that the strange Knight
should not hear her, or that she could not afford that dear name to any, but
her own ears.

She being thus rescued, the Knight struck fiercely at Parselius, who met him
with as much furious strength, giving him his due in the curstedst kind, and
fullest measure, making such proof of his valor (justice being on his side,
which best guides a good sword in a noble hand) as in short time he laid him
at his feet, pulling off his helm to cut off his head. But then the Lady
cride unto him, beseeching him to stay that blow; the like did another Knight
newly arrived, who untied the Lady. Whereat Parselius was offended, thinking
himself highly injured, that any, except himself, should do her that
service, telling him, He much wondered at his boldness, which had made him
offer that wrong unto him. I did it (said the new Knight) but to give her ease,
and so to bring her, that we both might acknowledge humble thankfulness for
this brave and happy relief, which has brought her blessed safety^ Parselius
hearing this courteous answer, was satisfied: then looking on the vanquished
Knight, he demanded, Why he had used that cruelty to so perfect a Lady? As
he was answering, the stranger Knight knew him, casting his eye upon him, and
without any word, would as soon have deprived him of his life: but Parselius
stayed him, blaming him for seeking the death of a man already dying. He
confessing his fault, asked pardon; and pulling off his helm, told him, that
there he stood ready to receive punishment for twice so offending him.

Parselius, though not knowing him, yet seeing his excellent personage, and
princely countenance, embraced him, telling him, That honor might gain, nay
challenge pardon for a greater fault, then was possible to be committed by
such a brave Knight, he likewise taking off his helm. When Limena (who was
this sad tormented Lady) saw her Perissus (for Perissus it was), the joy she
conceived was just such, as her love could make her feel, seeing him her soul
had only loved; after so many cruel changes, and bitter passions in their
crossed affection. This being past, the wounded Knight began thus.

First (said he) let me know by whose hand I have received this worthy end,
and indeed, too worthy for so worthless a Creature, who now, and but now,
could discern my rash, and wicked error: which now I most heartily repent.
Now are mine eyes open to the injuries done to virtuous Limena, her chastity
appears before my dying sight, whereto before, my eyes were dim, and ears
deaf, seeing and hearing nothing, but base falsehoods, being governed by so
strong and undeserved Jealousy.

Next, I must ask pardon of you my Lord Perissus, deny not these Petitions, I
humbly beseech you, both unto a dying man, who in his life, did offer you too
foul, and too unpardonable an injury. Perissus seeing his speedy end
approaching, having the noblest and freest heart, forgave him that offense,
which proceeded from the same ground that his crosses came from, both taking
root from Love, and yet Love in that kind changed nature with madness, when
attended on with so much jealousy; then with a mild voice, he spoke.

Philargus, said he, I am glad your punishment is accompanied with so happy and
true repentance; I do freely forgive you, and think no more of that past,
then if never done. But this I desire you will demand the like of your
excellently virtuous wife, who has been the patient of all your fury. That I
do, said Philargus, and let my soul enjoy no happiness, if I wish not her as
well as it. Then dear Limena, have you pardoned me? if not, O do, and forgive
unfortunate, and ill-deseruing Philargus My Lord, said she, I most sincerely
and heartily forgive you, and so I pray, do you the like for me; my dearest
then, said he, I happily, and thrice happily now shall welcome death. For your
other demand, said the brave Prince, my name is Parselius, Prince of Morea:
Philargus kissing his hand, gave him thanks, and weeping for joy said. Most
fortunate end, how do I embrace thee, coming so luckily, and brought thee by
such royal hands? Then taking Perissus by the one hand, and Limena by the
other, he said, I have yet one request more to make, which granted, I shall dye
with all content, and this is only in you two to consent to, they promised that
then he should not be refused. These misfortunes, said he, which now are past,
and I hope shall have burial in me, have nevertheless (it is most likely)
left some false conceit remaining in the hearts of some people: which to
remedy and utterly take away, desiring Limena's honor (which without question
remains spotted) might flourish as deservedly, as the clearenesse of it self
is, without so much as the shadow of a thought to the contrary. I beseech you,
for your own best fortunes, and my quiet departing, to promise me that after
my death you will marry each other. One more worthy (my Lord), more loyal,
more chaste, the world holds not; and this are you bound to do for her, who
for you has been wronged; and Limena deny not this to your dying husband, being
the last he can ever ask you. He needed not urge them much to what they most
coueted, and purposed in their hearts before: yet to give him full satisfaction
(though on her side with bashful and fearful consenting) they yielded to
him. Then my Lord (said he) take her, and my hearts prayers with best wishes to
you; and my best beloved Limena, in witness of my love to you, I bestow on you
this most worthy Lord, far better befitting you, and my whole estate: with
that, embracing them, kissing her; and lastly, lifting up his eyes to heaven,
he departed, they like true friends closing his eyes. Being now grown late,
(...) that night they went into the Cave, which but lately had been the pri^on
of sweet Limena: with them they carried the body, laying it in the further part
of the hollownesse. Then did Parselius tell them how infinitely happy he
esteemed himselfe^ in having come so luckily to serve them, of whom, and whose
unfortunate affection he had heard, having had it from the rare Shepherdess.
Name her he could not, his breath being stopped with sighs, and his tears
falling down in all abundance, sent from his heart, which dropped like the
weeping of a Vine, when men without pity wound it. Perissus seeing his sorrow,
made have to ask the cause, fearing some great harm had befalne that Divine
Creature, of whom he gave such praises, as Limena thought they were too much,
which he perceiving left, with demanding of her safety, and why his greeuing
was; which Parselius having passionatly, and truly related, he desired most
earnestly, to hear the rest of Limena's story; which she thus began.

My Lords, after I sent the Letter, and the time expired, Philargus came for my
answer, or to perform his vow, which with desire I attended, although he
contrary to my wishes prolonged it. When he had what I resolud to give him for
satisfaction, which was a direct denial, being in these words: I know, as your
wife, I am in your power to dispose of; then use your authority, for so foul a
stain will I never lay upon my blood as to betray the Prince: name you in
truth I durst not, least at the last that might move my affections. Then did
he command me to go with him, (to my death I hoped) when he brought me into a
great Wood, in the mid^t whereof he made a fire, the place being fit, and I
think, sure had been used in former time to offer sacrifice in to the Siluan
Gods. Then he made me undress my self, which willingly, and readily I did,
preparing my self to be the poor offering, but the richest, that richness of
faith in love could offer. When I had put off all my apparel but one little
Petticote, he opened my breast, and gave me many wounds, the marks you may
here yet discern, (letting the Mantle fall again a little lower, to show the
cruel remembrance of his cruelty) which although they were whole, yet made
they new hurts in the loving heart of Perissus, suffering more pain for them,
then he had done for all those himself had received in his former adventures;
therefore softly putting the Man^le up again, and gently covering them, lest
yet they might chance to smart, besought her to go on, longing to have an end
of that tragical history, and to come again ^o their meeting, which was the
only balm could be applied unto his bleeding heart. She joyful to see this
passion, because it was for her, and sorry it was Perissus did sorrow,
proceeded: And after these, threatening many more, and death it self, if yet I
consented not. But seeing nothing could prevail, he took my clothes, and
with them wiped the blood off from me, I expecting nothing but the la^t act,
which I thought should have been concluded with my burning; his mind changed
from the first resolution, so as taking me by the hair, and dragging me into
the Wood among the bushes (whose cursenesse seconded their masters fury)
tearing my skin, and scratching my bare legs, to a tree he there tied me:
but not long ^ continued there, for he going a little from me, returned with a
Pastors coat, which he took from a poor man, that was in that Wood, seeking a
lost Beast; with this he disguised me, and also having taken the man's Horse,
took me behind him, putting a gag in my mouth, for fear I should speak for
help, posting unused ways through the desert to the Seaside, where he got a
boat, and so passed over to this place, where ever since we have remained; for
my part, with daily whippings, and such other tortures, as pinching with irons,
and many more so terrible, as for your sake (seeing your grief my dearest
Lord) I will omit, declaring only this I must speak of, belonging to my story.
Once every day he brought me to this pillar where you found me, and in the
like manner bound me, then whipped me, after washing the stripes and blisters
with salt water^ but this had been the last (had not you thus happily arrived);
for he determined as he said, after my tormenting had been past, in stead of
washing me with the seawater, to cast me into her, and so make a final end of
his tormenting, and of my torments. To this end he likewise went yesterday to
the Town, and bought this armor, arming himself, to the intent, that after
his purpose was accomplished, he might take his journey which way best he
pleased. Thus my Lords have you heard the afflicted life of poor Limena, in
whom these tortures wrought no otherwise, then to strengthen her love, and
faith to withstand them: for could any other thought have entered into my heart,
that would have been a greater affliction to my soul, then the cursed strokes
were to my body, subject only to his unnaturalness, but now by your royal
hand redeemed from misery, to enjoy the only blessing my heart can, or ever
could aspire to wish, and here have you now your faithful Love Limena.
Perissus embraced her with that love, his best love could express, and then
speaking to the Morean Prince, he said: The thanks most brave Prince, for this
happiness belongs unto you, which is so much, as my life shall ever be
engaged to pay the due unto you; and my sword employed to the best of my power
to serve you, vowing, that when I (and the same I profess for my dearest here)
prove ungrateful, we will no more see light: nay let us be as wretched as
ever we were, if that sin know us. Parselius with much affection requited
their protestations, making the like for himself in his love to them; so for
that night they went to rest. The next day taking their journey to Naples, to
provide such things as were necessary for them; thence went they into Sicily,
having a brave ship, which the Governor of that Town (knowing Parselius)
provided for them; going himself, and many more brave Gentlemen, to conduct
them over: whither being come, they found the Country in great trouble, the
King being dead, and an Usurper in his stead: but quickly were those stirs
appeased by the presence of Perissus, well helped by the Company which came out
of Naples with him; but most, and indeed chiefly compassed by the valor of
Parselius, who with his own hands (in a battle which was fought between the
usurper, and an army that came to aid Perissus, as soon as his arrival was
published) killed the false king and his two sons, being counted the valiantest
men of all Sicily, and in stature were little less then Giants. This being
finished, Perissus was crowned King, and soon after was the last promise
performed in the marriage, which was solemnly, and with great state
accomplished.

Then did Parselius take his leave of the King and Queen, returning to Naples,
and so to the Court of that King, where with all joy and welcome he was
received, the triumphs and feasts making testimony of it; Yet was his sorrow
such for Urania, as all those sports were rather troublesome, then pleasing
unto him.

Some few days after the triumphs began, the Squire of Amphilanthus found him
there, to whom he delivered his Message; with much joy did the old King receive
the Squire, bringing him such joyful news of his Sons being well, though
much more welcome had he been, if he could have told any thing of his return
thither. Parselius demanded of the Squire how he found him out; Why Sir, said
he, My Master going away from Morea, with Antissius, and that company, sent
me by Sea, to seek you in this Country, by chance our Shipp sprung a leake,
so as we were forced to put in again to mend her: after we had been a day at
Sea, before she was thoroughly mended, came a brave Gentleman, called
Ollorandus, younger Son to the King of Bohemia, who seeking my Lord, to whom
he has vowed his Love, and service, knowing me to be his servant enquired of
me for him; I told him, where at that time he might find him. Having done this
I took the boldness to ask him, if he heard any news of you, and withal
the cause why I asked; he answered me that having past Italy, in search of
Amphilanthus, and hearing he was cast upon Morea by Shipwreck, he followed
after him till he came to the Court, which at that time was in Arcadia, there
he heard that he had been there, but was again gone into Italy to seek you,
and that he would with you soon return again into that Country, to go
into Albania; wherefore he desiring to see something in those parts passed up
and down, sometime to Morea, where in Elis he met with you, having (as he
merrily told me) passed a pretty adventure, with a Lady and her Knights. From
thence he came to that part of the Kingdom, where I was put in by that
chance, meaning there to ship once more for Italy: but I telling him of my
masters journey to Romania, he with all speed followed him, there to deserve
his friendship by his service, and thus came I to be so fortunate to meet you.
Then did Parselius acquaint the King with his intent, which was to follow
Amphilanthus; so taking his leave, he went with as much fortunate speed as
might be to o^ertake his friend, promising the old King, to hasten his Sons
coming, withal, letting him know the hope he had of Vrania's being his
Daughter; which hope was as comfortable to him, almost, as if he had already
enjoyed her.

Parselius in his journey traveled with great pain of mind, the like sufferd
Pamphilia, who all this while continued her Love, and life in Morea, who by
loves force was, it seemed, transformed into the same passion; her louesicke
Companion still accompanying her, till one morning, her dear (though unquiet)
affections calling her to attend them, made her see day sooner, then otherwise
she had by many hours, and seeing it to make use of her light: for though the
sight which she desired, was hid from her, she might yet by the light of her
imaginations (as in a picture) behold, and make those lights serve in his
absence. Even as the morning seems for cleerenes, fairenes, and sweetness: so
did she rising, that daintiness waiting on her, that the greatest light could
say, he excelled her, only in heat, but not in brightness; and in some kind,
he gained at that time advantage on her, whom absence held in cold despair.
Quickly was she ready, and as soon left her Chamber, going into the Gardens,
passing out of one into another, finding that all places are alike to Love,
tedious. Then opened she a door into a fine wood, delicately contrived into
strange, and delightful walks; for although they were framed by Art,
nevertheless they were so curiously counterfeited, as they appeard natural.
These pleased her only to pass through into a little Grove, or rather, a
pretty tuft of Ashes, being environed with such unusual variety of excellent
pleasures, as had she had a heart to receive delight from any thing but Love,
she might have taken pleasure in that place: for there was a purling,
murmuring, sad Brook, weeping away her sorrows, desiring the banks to ease
her, even with tears; but cruel, they would not so much as stay them to
comfort, but let them slip away with as little care, as great ones do the
humble Petitions of poor suitors. Here was a fine grove of Bushes, their roots
made rich with the sweetest flowers for smell, and color. There a Plain, here
a Wood, fine hills to behold, as placed, that her sight need not, for natural
content, stray further then due bounds. At their bottomes delicate Valleys,
adorned with several delightful objects. But what were all these to a loving
heart? Alas, meer^ly occasions to increase sorrow, Love being so cruel, as to
turn pleasures in this nature, to the contrary course, making the knowledge of
their delights, but serve to set forth the perfecter mourning, tryumphing in
such glory, where his power rules, not only over minds, but on the best of
minds: and this felt the perplexed Pamphilia, who with a Book in her hand,
not that she troubled it with reading, but for a color of her solitariness,
she walked beholding these pleasures, till grief brought this Issue. Seeing
this place delicate without, as she was fair, and dark within as her
sorrows, she went into the thickest part of it, being such, as if Phoebus
durst not there show his face, for fear of offending the sadd Princess; but a
little glimmeringly, as desirous to see, and fearing to be seen, stole here,
and there a little sight of that all-deseruing Lady, whose beams sometimes
ambitiously touching her, did seem as if he shined on purest gold, whose
brightness did strive with him, and so did her excellency encounter his
rays: The tops of the trees joining so close, as if in love with each other,
could not but affectionatly embrace. The ground in this place, where she
stayed was plain, covered with green grass, which being low and thick,
looked as if of purpose it had been covered with a green Velvet Carpet, to
entertain this melancholy Lady, for her the softer to tread, loath to hurt her
feet, lest that might make her leave it; this care proved so happy, as here
she took what delight it was possible for her to take in such kind of
pleasures: walking up and down a pretty space, blaming her fortune, but more
accusing her love, who had the heart to grieve her, while she might more
justly have chid her self, whose fear had forced her to too curious a
secrecy: Cupid, in her, only seeking to conquer, but not respecting his
victory so far, as to allow so much favor, as to help the vanquished, or
rather his power being only able to extend to her yielding, but not to master
her spirit. Often would she blame his cruelty, but that again she would salve
with his being ignorant of her pain: then justly accuse her self, who in so
long time, and many years could not make him discern her affections, (though
not by words plainly spoken;) but soon was that thought recalled, and blamed
with the greatest condemnation, acknowledging her loss in this kind to
proceed from virtue. Then she considered, he loved another, this put her
beyond all patience, wishing her sudden end, cursing her days, fortune, and
affection, which cast her upon this rock of mischief. Often would she wish her
dead, or her beauty mari'd, but that she recalled again; loving so much, as
yet in pity she would not wish what might trouble him, but rather continued
according to her own wish; complaining, fearing, and loving the most
distressed, secret, and constant Lover that ever Venus, or her blind Son
bestowed a wound or dart upon.

In this estate she stayed a while in the wood, gathering sometimes flowers
which there grew; the names of which began with the letters of his name, and so
placing them about her. Well Pamphilia, said she, for all these disorderly
passions, keep still thy soul from thought of change, and if thou blame any
thing, let it be absence, since his presence will give thee again thy fill of
delight. And yet what torment will that prove, when I shall with him see his
hopes, his joys, and content come from another? O Love, O froward fortune,
which of you two should I most curse? You are both cruel to me, but both alas
are blind, and therefore let me rather hate my self for this unquietness;
and yet unjustly shall I do too in that, since how can I condemn my heart,
for having virtuously and worthily chosen? Which very choice shall satisfy me
with as much comfort, as I felt despair. And now poor grass, said she, thou
shall suffer for my pain, my loue-smarting body thus pressing thee.

Then laid she her excelling self upon that (then most blessed ground) and in
compassion give me some rest, said she, on you, which well you may do being
honored with the weight of the loyallest, but most afflicted Princess that
ever this Kingdom knew: Joy in this and flourish still, in hope to bear this
virtuous affliction. O Morea, a place accounted full of Love, why is Love in
thee thus terribly oppressed, and cruelly rewarded? Am I the first unfortunate
Woman that bashfulnesse has undone? If so, I suffer for a virtue, yet gentle
pity were a sweeter lot. Sweet Land, and thou more sweet Love, pardon me,
hear me, and commiserate my woe, Then hastily rising from her low green bed;
nay, said she, since I find no redress, I will make others in part taste my
pain, and make them dumb partakers of my grief; then taking a knife, she
finished a Sonnet, which at other times she had begun to ingraue in the
bark of one of those fair and straight Ashes, causing that sapp to accompany
her tears for love, that for unkindness.

Bear part with me most straight and pleasant Tree,
And imitate the Torments of my smart
Which cruel Love does send into my heart,
Keep in thy skin this testament of me:
Which Love engraven has with misery,
Cutting with grief the vnresisting part,
Which would with pleasure soon have learnd loves art,
But wounds still curelesse, must my rulers be.
Thy sap does weepingly bewray thy pain,
My heart-blood drops with storms it does sustain,
Love senseless, neither good nor mercy knows
Pitiles I do wound thee, while that I
Unpitied, and unthought on, wounded cry:
Then out-liue me, and testify my woes.
And on the roots, whereon she had laid her head, serving (though hard) for a
pillow at that time, to uphold the richest World of wisdom in her sex, she
writ this.

MY thoughts thou have supported without rest,
My tired body here has lain oppressed
With love, and fear: yet be thou cuer blessed;
Spring, prosper, last; I am alone unblessed.
Having ended it, again laying her sad perfections on the grass, to see if
then some rest would have favored her, and have thought travel had enough
disturbed her, she presently found, passion had not yet allowed time for her
quiet, wherefore rising, and giving as kind a farwell-looke to the tree, as one
would do to a trusty friend, she went to the brook, upon the bank whereof
were some fine shadie trees, and choice thorn bushes, which might as they were
mixed, obtain the name of a pretty Grove, whereinto she went, and sitting down
under a Willow, there anew began her complaints; pulling off those branches,
sometimes putting them on her head: but remembering her self, she quickly threw
them off, vowing how ever her chance was, not to carry the tokens of her loss
openly on her brows, but rather wear them privately in her heart. Further
would she have proceeded, but that she heard behind her a rushing in the
bushes. Looking back, she perceived Antissia close by her; who having noted
the sadness in the Princess, and her solitary retiredness, imagined (by her
own passions) the cause must needs be love: but that imagination growing to
belief, belief brought fear, fear doubt, and doubt the restless
affliction, suspicion; her excellencies making the assurednes of her no less
excellent choice, so as the more perfect she confessed them both to be, the more
did those perfections make her perfectly jealous. This was the reason that she
came thus forth, and in as private sort as she could, that so she might by
chance ouer-heare her secret complaints, and so (though for a certain
vexation) be sure of her most troubled knowledge.

But herein she was deceived: for although she heard much of her sorrow, yet got
she no assurance for whom the sorrow was, never in all her extremest
sufferings, once naming the mouer of her pain, which kept her love in as much
secrecy, as that, secretly after brought tormenting pain, proceeding from
unhappy ignorance. But Pamphilia perceiving her, smiling, yet blushing,
doubting her passions were discovered, and her love betrayed to her Companion;
she nevertheless to make the best of it; How came you hither fair Antissia
(said she)? I did not think this sad place, could have invited so much
happiness to it, as your presence; who being happy, must make all places
partake with you?

This place (said she) has her blessing already in you, the saddest being
forced to deserved joy, enjoying so good fortune, as to have Pamphilia in it.
But I pray, if I may be so bold to ask such a question of you (which the
confidence of a friend makes me venture upon) why are all these grievous
complaints? for never heard I greater, neither was sorrow ever richlier
apparreld, then lately you have dressed her: If it be for love; tell me who that
blessed creature is, that does possess such a world of treasure as your heart?
and deny not this to your friend, and servant, who will faithfully serve you in
that, or any other you will impose upon her, though sure in this little pain,
will serve to win your ease, if you will suffer your self to have ease; no man
breathing that will be so void of judgment, or can have power to resist, what
you in love might demand, but must be so far from denying, as he will
without question venture his life, to gain so precious a prize.

Your own worth (said Pamphili^) makes you thus confident, and your happy
fortune, in meeting an an^^erable affection, thus feareles: but alas for me, I
that know worth (greatness, nor the truest love can bring ones desire, if
destiny have otherwise appointed) can never let so much flattring hope blind
me with conceit of mine own deserts (which it may be are seen but by my own
eyes), as to imagine their merits may gain my ends. No sweet Antissia, love is
only to be gaind by love equally bestowed, the giver, and receiver
reciprocally liberal, else it is no love; nor can this be, but where
affections meet; and that we must not all expect, nor can it reasonably be
demanded. Since how should the power of love be known, but by his several
usage of his subjects? If all were used alike, his justice must be examined^
but be it as it will, some must and do suffer; yet speak I not this of my
self, or in confession that I am pinched with these tortures, for Lord knows,
how far am I from these like vanities, then how can I satisfy your loving
demand, and friendly promise? You cannot thus dissemble (replied Antissia),
your own hand in yonder fair Ash will witness against you. Not so (said
Pamphilia) for many Poets write as well by imitation, as by sense of passion;
therefore this is no proof against me. It is well said (answered Antissia) in
your own defense: but I pray, why did you but even now with sighs and tears
(as I judged by your voice) blame both love, and absence? Many reasons there
are to accuse both (said Pamphilia): but let me be so much bound to you, as
to know the reason of your inquisitiuenes? If it were only for my good, me
thinks you grow too near me; bare friendship not being able so cunningly to
sift one, therefore it makes me think some other cause moves this care in you;
if so, freely speak it, and I will as freely satisfy you. Well (said
Antissia) then confess you love, and I will soon follow with the other. It
were to small purpose (replide Pamphilia) to deny it, since you have discovered
me; I confess it, and am no whit ashamed of it, though grieved by it. My
curiosity (said the other) was, and is, lest it should be he whom I affect.

Alas (cride Pamphilia), can so base an humor as suspicion creep into so
brave a heart as Antissia's? and to gain such power there, as to make her
mistrust her friend? Truly I am sorry for it; and would advise you for honors
sake, quickly to banish that Devil from you, which otherwise will daily
increase new mischiefs. I know (said Antissia) it is the worst of Monsters:
yet this is no answer to my question.

It Is true (said Pamphilia): but ^ being innocent of it, forgot first to clear
it. But I pray Antissia, what do you see in me, that I should love
Amphilanthus more, then respectively?

This (said she) that all perfections having joined, and united their strengths
to make you wholly excellent, it cannot be, but you in all things must
manifest it, and in judgment are you not called to express it? And if in
judgment, wherein can there be more discerned, then in the choice of friend or
Love? If so, can you choose other, then the most deserving? and then, must it
not be the most excellent of men? and is not Amphilanthus that most excelling
Prince?

In truth (answered Pamphilia) I confess this latter part to be true: for
assuredly there lives not his equal for all virtues, which well might make me
(if I were such a one as you say) to have that ambition in me, to affect the
worthiest; but so much perfection I wa^^, as that part has faild also in me:
yet this I will say, I love him as he merits, long conversation as from our
youths; besides, our blood claiming an extraordinary respect.

You will not deny you are in love with him then? Why should I not (said she)?
I Am sure I know my own heart best: and truly so far is it from suffering in
this passion, as it grieves me you mistake me so much. but Lord what strange
and dangerous thoughts does this bring into our breasts? Could any but a Lover
have so troublesome a conceit? Why sweet Antissia when did this opinion first
possess you? or what gave you occasion to conceive it? Has my speech at any
time betrayed me? Has my fashion given you cause to suspect it? Did I ever
enuiously like a Lover, seek to hinder your enjoying him? Did I unmannerly
press into your companies? Some of this surely I must have done, or you
unjustly accuse me.

None of these could you fail in (cride she); so great a wit, and matchless
a spirit would govern themselves better, then to offend in such fond parts:
but the reason I have already given, being equal excellencies; and the belief
proceeds from this, that me thought you did with as feeling an affection
accompany my sorrow when he went away, and more nearly I imagined by your
fashion it touched you, then pity of my grief could have procured. Then I
considered my eyes had been so fortunate, as to look upon the best, why then
should not the best of our sex also look on the rarest object; and looking so,
must not the same conclusion be, that beholding as I did, love must come in and
conquer; as on me, so then looking with my eyes, of force you must love him.

What a progr^sse (said Pamphilia) has your troubled imagination made to find
a poor cause, to forge a poorer vexation? If all these things were true, and
that I loved Amphilanthus, what then? were it any more then my extremest
torment, when I should see his affections otherwise placed? the impossibility
of winning him from a worthy love, the unblessed destiny of my poor unblessed
life, to fa^l into such a misery; the continual aff^ictions of b^rning love,
the fire of just rage against my own eyes, the hatred of my breast for letting
in so destroying a guest, that ruins where he comes; these were all, and these
alone touching me in all disquiets. Wha^ need should they have to molest you,
since so perfectly you are assured of his love, as you need fear no occasion,
nor any body to wrong you in that, wherein he will not wrong his worthy choice
and constancy? What harm then could it be to you, if you should love him? The
loss of my content; since that your love (said Antissia) must not be refused,
but sought; and if obtaind, woe be to any other that aspires to that place;
better never to be borne, then know the birth of so much folly, as to adventure
to be a rival with the rarest Princess Pamphilia; therefore knowing this
harm, I had rather you did not love him. Well, then be satisfied (said the
sweet, but sad Pamphilia), my love to him proc^eds from his never enough
praised merits, but not for love otherwise, then I have already expressed.

A^tissia was with this answer thoroughly satisfied, taking the Princess in her
arms, protesting her life too little, to pay for requital for this royal
freedom she had found in her, and the^ favor received from her; expressing
then her love in the best manner she could, plainly making confession of all
to her; concluding, that had not her incomparable virtue bound her best
respects to her, yet the resemblance which she had in her face of that famous
Prince, and her only beloved, would have forced her to love her. The delicate
Lady told her, she could not better please her, then in telling her she did
resemble him, since then she was sure she was like to true virtue; for he was
of that the only body: but this love, and his dependances do so vex us, as
they take away all other society; to amend which, let us return to the Court
(said she). I am contented, said Antissia. So rising, and holding each other by
the arm, with as much love, as love in them could ^oyne, they took their way
back toward the Palace; but in the great Garden they met the King and Queen;
so they attended back on them into the Hall, whither they were no sooner come,
and settled in their places, but they were entertained with this adventure:
Ten Knights coming in russet Armours, their Bea^ers up, their Swords in
their hands; who coming more then half way to the State, making low
reverence, stood still, parting themselves to either side of the Chamber, to
let the followers better be discerned. Then came ten more, but in black
Armours, chained together, without Helmets or Swords. After them came six
armed like the first, three carrying Spears of infinite bigness; one, the
Shield, and the other two the Sword and Helmet of a Knight, who for countenance
seemed no lover; his color like a Moore; his fashion rude and proud, following
after these six, who, as the first, divided themselves.

Then came this man to the State, leading by the hand as sweet a Lady, as he
was ugly; she as mild in countenance, as he insolent; she as fearful, as
he bold: on the other hand of her, another Knig^^ sad, but it seemed amorous.
The King and all the Court beholding, and expecting the issue of this business,
when the stout man in a hollow and hoarse voice delivered these words.

King of Morea, I am Lansaritano, whose fame I doubt not, has spread it self
to your ears: Lord I am of the Islands of Cerigo, Dragonero, and other lesser
circkling my chief Island, as subjects to my greatness. This Lady you see here,
is my vassal by birth, but by my choice honored with my love, which she
foolishly refuses, judgment so far failing her, as not to be able to
discern the happiness, and unspeakable good, blind Fortune has given her, in
letting my high and noble thoughts abase themselves so low, as to look on her
my creature, and favor her with my liking. She whom I might command, I have
bin contented to woe; she who should obey, ignorantly refuses: yet ^ (Master of
worth) will not force her, but have compelled my self to consent to satisfy a
fond request she has made to me, which is, to come into this Court with her,
and this knight my Cosen whom she loves, and is the bar from my enjoying her:
and here if she can find a Knight, who for her sake will enter into this
quarrel (which she calls, The de^ence of true Love) he must observe this, to
give her to one of us, and fight with the other: if it happen he choose him (as
well it may be he will defend Ladies, he will dispose of her to her beloved), he
must combat me: if he overcome, she shall be free; else yielded to me: which
I make no question of, since I never yet knew any had the fortune, how stout,
valiant, or hardy, could hold out with me. These bound men are Knights, and her
Brothers two of them, the rest her friends and kindred, who upon her vain
complaint, fearing violence would have been by me justly used upon her, made an
insurrection, which soon I appeased, and for the love of her would not yet put
them to death, but have brought them with me likewise on this condition; that
when I have fought and vanquished that bold and fond man whosoever, that will
adventure to combat with me, I shall strike off all their heads. This Sir is
the cause of my coming, wherefore I desire leave of you that she may have
one, if any Knight will undertake it, or dare maintain her cause, which she
accounts so fair and good.

The King was sorry for the Ladies sake, his Court was so unprovided of those
brave Knights which were wont to honor it, especially that his famous Nephew,
and brave Sons were all absent, who he knew would defend a Ladies cause,
especially a loving Lady, as she seemed; wherefore he made this answer.
Lansaritano, I am troubled, so brave a man should fight in so ill a matter,
since if I were as you, she that would not by my worth be won, should not
be thought worthy to be gaind by the hazard of my self, into which you must
run, if you encounter Knights of my Court; for surely no brave man will give
her from her own affection: but now indeed is your fortune good, in coming
when the Worthies of our parts are absent; yet doubt I not but I have still
some here, who honor Ladies so much, as they will venture to deliver them from
force in love; therefore I give yo^ free liberty to pronounce your challenge.

I am sorry (said he) that all your Worthies be not here, that I might for my
glory overcome them one after another; but since they are absent, any one here
take her part that will, or give her to me, if none will adventure combat,
otherwise I am ready to meet him with the Lance three courses, and then end
the Combat with the sword; if no one dare undertake it^ you must sweet Lady
be mine for want of a knight for your Champion^ She looked sadly, and wept so
loue-likely, as all pitied her, but none offered their service, the valor
being known, and the strength much feared of La^saritano; till Selarinus
disdaining such a man should have, though so little, a cause to add more fuel
to the fire of his pride, stepped forth and said: Most mighty King, may it please
you to honor me so much, as to permit me the liberty of this adventure,
wherein I doubt not, but to do justly, and to lay Lansaritano's pride as low,
as the ea^^h will suffer his body to lie upon it.

The king glad to see the fine young Prince so forward, but loath to venture him
in so dangerous a business, told him, That the true nobleness and bounty of
the kings of Albania his Predecessors did again live in him, to maintain
which, he was very willing to grant his request, but his tender years made
him loath to adventure him alone. Then Sir (said he) should I both shame my
self, and the brave Princes before by you mentioned: but as I am alone left
here of my blood, I will alone adventure. Then he asked the Lady if she would
accept him, and stand to his censure? She answered; Most willingly she would.
He then gave her to her beloved, saying; Prepare your self, and know
Lansaritano, that you shall find enough to do, when you encounter Justice and
resolution, which are the two I take with me in this Combat against you.

The fury of the vain man was such, to see so young a man answer him, as he
could scarce give one word again; but at last his breath smoked out these
words. Alas, poor Boy, I pity thee; wherefore pray thee be advised, and
hereafter when thou have a Beard come, and it may be I will grace thee, with
fighting with thee; unless thou do hope I should have some pity on thy fair
face, and so forbear to hurt thee in the fight. (...) ^ince you have no brauer
Knights, Great King of Morea, farewell, I will return: and now fair Lady,
what think you of your servant my self? will you love me, or let this smug
Youth be your Champion?

The king was infinitely offended with the proud speech of Lansaritano, the
like was all the company; yet none adventured to answer but brave Selarinus
himself, who again courageously, yet mildly told him; That he need not
learn, to know words were not the weapons to be used in fight, therefore he
would answer him no further in that kind, but he should give him
satisfaction with his Sword and Spear for the Ladies sake, before his parting
thence, whether he would, or no; and then have occasion to speak better of
him, if he left him to speak at all.

The King embraced the young Prince, and straight sending for an Armor, which
was the first that ever Amphilanthus had worn, having left it there, taking
another which was brought him from Italy, after his first Victory of fame,
which was there performed against two Knights, in the defense of an injured
Lady; this he put on, which was all White, save just against the Heart he
had the figure of a heart wounded curiously made, and so artificially, as one
would have thought his heart had been seen to bleed through the Armor: with
these Arms Selarinus was armed, the King girting the sword to him, and kissing
him, wished as good fortune to him, as the first Lord of those Arms had, and to
prove as worthy to wear them. He on his knee humbly gave him thanks; then
turning to the Lady, willed her to take her loved Servant, if she accepted him
for her Knight. She joyfully beholding him, and smiling on her love, who
equally expressed his joy, followed him, who now appeared a young Mars; yet was
her joy mixed with fear, of falling again into his hands; till which time
she, and this she told him, esteemed her self the ^appiest woman breathing,
in such a Defendant.

Then went they into the Lists, the King and all the Court taking places fit to
behold the fight, Lansaritano cursing his destiny that brought him the
dishonor to meet a child (as he termed him, though after he proved
otherwise unto him) in the field. Lansaritano was conducted into the field by
his own knights in the same manner, as they entered the hall. The Lady who was
called Nallinia, and her late distressed, but now revived associats were placed
in a seat by themselves, to see, and to be seen as the prizes of the combat.

Then came Selarinus into the field, attended on by the Marshall, Master of the
Horse, and the chief officers of the kingdom of Morea, the Marshall being a
grave old man, but in his youth one of the best knights of that Country, gave
him his first Spear. The King of Pamphilia (brother to the King, who was newly
come thither to visit him, but principally his Niece, who by his gift was to
enjoy that kingdom after his decease, and therefore bore that name likewise
given by him) was one of the Judges, the Prince of Elis the other for
Selarinus; and these two did Lansaritano accept also for him, doubting no wrong
in so just a kings Court.

They ^^^uely encountered, running the two first courses without any advantage;
the third, Selarinus received so strong a Counter-buffe on his breast, as beat
him back upon his saddle, being a pretty while before he recovered again:
but Lansaritano having more strength, but as great a blow, showed no moving in
himself, though the blow was so forcible, as the girts brake, and he came
over his horse, by the slipping o^ his saddle. Selarinus looking back, saw him
on foot, which comforted him much, fearing that he had, till then, received
the worst: but being satisfied, with new courage he leapt from his Horse,
scorning any advantage, and drawing his sword, went toward his enemy, who met
him pufft up with as much fury, as a ship runs upon a rock withal, and alike
did he prosper.

A long time did this combat endure, Lansaritano so bravely and valiantly
behauing himself (as how could he do other, fighting before his Lady, to win
his Lady, as it won unexpected fame to the brave Albanian, who still continued
with the better: for though Lansaritano as valiant as most, and as strong as
any, yet had his enemy this advantage over him, that in valor he equaled him;
and what in strength he faild of, in nimblenesse and cunning he excelled him,
which brought him the victory with the others death, being given by a thrust in
the face, his Beauer by chance flying up, the pin being cut in the last blow
before. Then were the Knights and the Lady set at liberty by the brother of
Lansaritano, who was one of those, and the same that carried his Helmet. He now
being to succeed his brother in his commands, took his leave of the King and
the Court. The Lady had ever affected this Knight, and was married before her
parting to him, given in marriage by the Brother, who was called Sarimatto;
they returned, and she lived after with much content with her husband, who was
no way like his Cousin, though big, and strong, and as valiant, but mild,
courteous, and honest; proving a true friend and servant to the Court of Morea.

With infinite joy the Prince was conducted to the Palace, there entertaind by
the King and Ladies, who all joined in honoring him, who had so much honored the
sex, letting his first adventure be in the defense of a woman; then carried
him to his chamber, where his wounds were dressed, which were many, but none
dangerous; yet had the loss of much blood made him fainter then he was. This
was his first aduentrous trial of Arms, and accordingly did he proceed
bravely and happily.

But now to Leandrus, who was left in his way to Achaia, to get forces to
assist the Princes. Long he rid not without an adventure, those places
affording many, and pleasant ones, yet was his scarce one of that number: for
after he had left the court, he took his directest way to that part, which was
nearest for him to pass thence into Achaia; as he went thinking of his
friends, but most of his love, his heart having received a cureles wound by the
never failing commanding eyes of Pamphilia, sometimes purposing to ask her in
marriage, another time hoping first by his desert to win her love, then
promising himself the furtherance of Parselius, the labor of Rosindy, the
favor of Amphilanthus, the earnestness of his own affection, and louer-like
importunity; these he resolved should woe for him, and thus he meant to have
her: yet wanted he her consent, the better part of the gaining, and the harder
to be gaind: yet these conceits pleased him, as mad folks delight in their
own odd thoughts: and so was this little less then madness, had he had
sense to have considered her worthy self not to be given, but to her own
worthy choice, and by it. But thus he satisfied himself, till wanting this
happiness of selfe-fram'd delight also, he fell into such despair, as proved
far worse then many hells unto him.

As he past (yet in his pleasure) along a way, which divided it self (near a
delicate fountain) into three parts, he sat down on the side of that
Fountain, drinking first of the Spring, and then taking out a paper wherein
he had written some sad verses, he read them to himself; they were these.

Drown me not you cruel tears,
Which in sorrow witness bears
Of my wailing,
And Loves failing.
Floods but cover, and retire
Washing faces of desire
Whose fresh growing
Springs by flowing.
Meadows ever yet did love
Pleasant streams which by them move:
But your falling
Claims the calling
Of a torrent curstly fierce
Past wits power to rehearse;
Only crying,
Or my dying
May in stead of verse or prose
My disasterous end disclose.
When he had read them, and was putting them up again, having first kissed
them, because they should go to his Mistress, he heard the wayling of a man,
and looking up, saw a Knight (as he seemed to be) lie by the side of the
Fountain on the other part from him, and besides, heard him use these
speeches. I wonder when time will permit me ease, and sorrow give conclusion
to my days, or to it self; if not wearied, yet for pities sake, tormenting
me, the most afflicted soul breathing; miserable Clarimatto, accursed above
all men, and abused beyond all men, and more dishonored then any creature, and
by whom, but by the most esteemed creature, a woman, and a fair woman; but the
cage of a foul mind, and the keeper of a corrupt soul, and a false heart,
else would she not, nor could she have given herself (once mine) to any other.
She was mine by vow, by solemn prosession, but now an others: fickle sex,
unsteady creatures, worse I will not call you, because indeed I love her,
though abused by her, and shamed in her. Leandrus went to him, and kindly
offered his service, if he needed it. He casting up his weeping eyes, in tears
thankt him, but said; One man was enough to suffer in so slight a cause, and so
undeserving a creature. He desired to know the matter. He answered, he had loved
a Lady, she had done the like to him, or made him think so: but having what
she would, she had changed, and not only so, but given her self to his enemy,
being first betrothed unto him, and in that time he was providing for the
marriage, married the other; and this is the cause of my torment; hither I am
come to revenge my self of him, and in him of her, if she love him still.
They are in a strong Castle of his, where they merrily live, while I am
miserably vexed with tortures, and dishonor, the worst of torments. What was
the original cause of his malice?

Truly Sir, this cruelty he uses but to me, as belonging to my destiny.
Neglected I have been of my friends for bearing this disgrace from mine enemy,
and the hater of all my Country, the reason of his hatred to us proceeding
from this. The King of Morea in his youth was a brave man at Arms, and
followed, and finished many adventures, by chance at a great Just held in
Achaia for joy of the birth of the Kings son, called Leandrus, as after I heard
he was, and proou'd a Prince worthily deserving the joy, then showed for
receiving of him. This Lords father was likewise there, and encountering the
King was by him thrown to the ground, which disgrace he took so heavily, as
he would have revenged it with his sword, but that being forbidden (the end of
those triumphs, reaching no further then sport) discontented, and burning in
rage, he went thence, watching when the King returned in his journey, in this
very place he set upon him troops of his coming all these several ways, and
at once charging him, who only for his pleasure had sent his greatest company
before him, following with two Knights and their Squires; but in this conflict
the King got so much of the victory, as he slew his Enemy with his own
hands, but could not keep himself from being taken prisoner, and carried
almost to the Castle; whither if he had gone, without doubt he had thence
never returned.

But the Squires seeing his distress, and the death of the other two, their
Masters, ran every one a several way, till they got a good number of the
train together, who with all speed, and fury pursued them, ouertaking them
hard by the Castle, and taking their Lord from them, most being killed, some
few got into the hold, where relating their unlucky adventure, the wife of the
slain Lord, and Mother to this Lord (having as great a spirit as any woman
breathing) made a vow to be revenged of all the Court of Morea, of the King
and his posterity especially. And this she has hitherto performed with great
cruelty, her son having been nursed in this hatred does likewise continue it
with more violence, as his spirit is so much greater, as commonly a man's is, in
respect of a woman's: and this is the cause why he hates all the Moreans, of
which country I am, borne in Corinth, my heart truly scorning him for his
other injury done me, am invited hither for these two reasons, to be revenged
on him.

Leandrus thanked him for his discourse, but told him he had by it made him
long, to try if he could be made a Prisoner also for so just a cause, or
deliver those so unjustly enclosed, and the rather said he to serve one so
much iniuried as your self, whose quarrel lay on me, and do you defend the
honor of your King and Country, she not being worth fighting for.

He answered that was true, yet his honor he esteemd worth clearing, and that
called upon him.

While they were thus discoursing, the Lord and the false Lady came lovingly
hand in hand together down one of the paths, she smiling in his eyes and want
only courting him, seeking to give him occasion of mirth, but he went on like
a man to whom ill was succeeding, he had some servants with him armed, and his
own armor was likewise carried by him, if he should have any occasion
suddenly to use it: he was of a clear and pleasing complexion, a person
amiable and lou^ly, curld hair, fair eyes, and so judicial a countenance, as
might have made the worthiest woman like him, and so well he deserved as it
was pity he fell into her hands, who undid both his mind, and body, making
him as wicked as her self which was the worst of her sex. He looked upon her
with love; but his speech was sparing, either that naturally he had not store
of words, or his inward heaviness at that time made him silent. When he came
near the fountain, Clarimatto approached to him; My Lord, said he, I am sure
you know the cause of my coming into these parts, if not, examine your heart,
and that will tell you the injuries you have done me, or if that be so impure,
or partial, as it will not, for offending, be true to so false a master,
behold this creature by you, your shame, and mine, and in her forehead the
fair field of our disgrace, you shall see it written in spots of infamy and
wrong.

The Lord knew his face, and with it the offense, therefore answered him thus.
Sir, said he, if on these conditions, I acknowledge the understanding of your
rage, I should make my self guilty of what I am free from; to my knowledge I
never wronged any, if unwillingly, I made amends, and am ready so to do. Can
you give me my honor again, thrown to the ground by you, and your
in^atiable Love, cride he? You wrong us both, said he, and this shall be the
Ground of my revenge and answer to you; with that he armed himself, she
crying to him, not to adventure his dear self against that stranger, whom she
knew full well; she kneeled to him, held him by the legs, kissed them, gazed
on him, in terms called him dearest. All would not serve, he encountered his
enemy, and truly was he justly made so by his own ill deserving. They fought,
like two, one having got, and earnest to keep a Mistress, the other having
lost, and reuengfull to gain his honor, and kill his Rival, and Vndoer in
his Love; at last, the true cause got the upper hand, and the Lord came to the
lower side of Victory; which the servants perceiving, rushed all upon
Clarimatto. Leandrus finding the wrong they offered, and the other was like to
suffer, stepped in to his rescue. A fight was among these performed fit, and
only the prize of Love fit to be the end of it. Clarimatto nimble, valiant,
and having Justice on his side, fought accordingly, and so as the Lord having
lost much blood out of two wounds given him by his foe, nor had he escaped
free, but was hurt in some places, the Lord then gave back a little, his men
cirkling Clarimatto about like busy Bees when angered, using their best (or
better to say, more malicious) means to hurt him, who protected by a brave
spirit, and undaunted courage laid about him without fear, but not without
such hurt to them, assisted bravely by Leandrus, as they began to flee. Their
Master seeing that re^il'd them, vowing to hang who ever saved himself by base
flight, and kill those that fought not better, though he by that means let the
hateful enemy pass. This urged them again to perplexe them, but could not
now compass him, he having to prevent that danger, got the Fountain at his
back, there defending himself; but alas much like a Stagge at Bay, that must
for all his courage, yield to the multitude and force of many Dogs: and so was
he like to do, ( Leandrus having a new supply set on him) for having received
a wound in the thigh, he bled, so fast as almost his powers faild him, his eyes
beginning with faintness to dazzle, and his strength so fast to decrease, as he
leand himself against the Fountain, holding his Sword straight out, meaning
he that first seized him should also meet his own end; and with this
resolution stood the brave reuengefull Lover, his soul bidding his friends and
all farewell: Leandrus being but in a little better case, when as an unexpected
good hap befell them by the coming of a Knight in black Armor, who seeing
this cruel fight, and unmanly comba^ing of many against two, came happily and
speedily to their succor, even when one had done his last for that time to
defend himself, which the Lord perceiving, pressed in upon Clarimatto,
although almost as weak as he with loss of blood (spite procuring that, lest
he might else want his will in having his end some way) so as both valiant,
both strong, were now without ability to show valor, if not in dying with
their Swords in their hands, and without strength having no more then hatred at
that time, allowed to both in those weak limbs, which was no more, then
instead of running one at the other, they reeld and fell one upon the other, in
the fall, the Sword of Clarimatto finding a way into an unarmed part of his
Riuals body, which a blow at the first encounter had left open, but till then
well guarded by the skill and courage of his Master, whose Sword missed him,
who else with that had with him taken a grave, both agreeing (by disagreeing)
to death. The new-come Knight made a quick dispatch of the rest, some by
death, some by yielding. Leandrus, though weak, going with much care to
Clarimatto, and who had in all the fight behaved himself so worthily not
fearing any thing but continuance of disgrace, and freeing all in true worth,
and love to truth.

The business ended, the stranger and Leandrus took up the wounded
Clarimatto, and having, with untying his Helm, given him some air, he came a
little to himself, but so besmeer'd with blood as at first he was not known
to the Knight, whose Helm was likewise off; but when discovered, O Clarimatto,
said he, happy I am to help thee, but unhappy to find thee thus, my dearest
friend, What destiny brought thee hither? What happiness in unhappiness met,
to make me meet thee thus? Accursed, yet now blessed occasion, if thou outliue
this victory. If I had conquered, said he, death yet might have honored me,
but to live vanquished, rather wish I to dye. Thou have brave Clarimatto, said
he, overcome, and slain thine Enemy with thine own hands. Then am I
contented, said he, though ^traight I die, and most that I shall yet end in
your arms, whom of all men I most love, none but your self could have had the
destiny to help me, who only was, and is best beloved of me, and herein has
Destiny blessed me.

Then came the Lady, who with as much contempt of them, as sorrow for her
lover, looked upon them both, the one dead, the other dying, she said nothing,
but kneeled down by her latter loved friend, and kissed him, rose again, and
looked with infinite hate upon Clarimatto, and then taking a knife she held
under her Gown, stabbed her self, falling between them both.

The black Knight went to the Castle whither Clarimatto was carried, and soon
after died; the bodies of the others were buried in the place where the fight
was, the keys were delivered to the black Knight, who delivered many brave
and valiant Knights, caught by ^reason, and unfortunate spite, and all Greeks.
Then was Leandrus brought into a rich Chamber, and the black Knight, who had
taken possession of that Castle, for the King of Morea, bestowed the keeping of
it on Clorimundus his Esquire. With many tears and sighs Clarimatto was
buried, who was extremely beloved of this black Knight, which was Rosindy,
with whom he had been bred, and nursed.

This being done, and Leandrus, past danger, though not for weakness able to
remove, Rosindie left him in the custody of the new Governor, and other
Knights, who loved him so well, as there was a question, which they more
affected their delivering joy, and happy inioying, or his safety who had been
the first cause to bring them the other; herein their worths appeared, and in
better hands Leandrus cannot be left, till his ability call him again to
service in other parts. But now Rosindy, must be a little accompanied, who
taking on his journey, still resolved to perform the command of his Mistress,
which was to pass all Greece, and accomplish such adventures as might make him
worthy of her love, and yet not to discover the end of his travel, or
himself, to any without ex^raordinary occasion. To observe this, he put on
those black Arms, bearing no Device in his Shield, because his desire was
only to be called the unknown Knight; the cause why she had thus commanded
him was, that the more his honor was known, the more he might be feared when
time might serve for him to deliver her from her Prison, and bondage wherein
she lived, from whence as yet she could not be released.

Thus vuknowne he passed among his best friends, and meaning so to continue he
passed from this place to his Fathers Court, there to see what adventure would
happen to add to his fame; besides, to know the certain time of the pretended
Journey for Albania, but especially when they appointed to free Meriana the
chief end indeed of his journey. So he came to the Court, and sending one
Squire of his, who well knew all the parts of it, came to Pamphilia's Chamber,
who hearing who it was that desired to speak with her, she straight sent for
him, from whom she learned that her dearly beloved Brother was hard by, but
resolving not to be known, had entreated her to come into the pleasant Grove
there to confer with him, which she with much willingness, and desire
performed. Now this Squire was not known of many, besides Pamphilia, nor any
whit of Antissia, whose jealousy infinitely upon this increased, and the more
means were sought to alter it, the greater did the heat grow; like a Smith
that puts water into his Forge, to make the fire more violently hot. The sweet
(but sad) Princess not mistrusting this, went (as appointed) into the Grove,
the suspicious Lady, whose heart now lay in her eyes to discover her, soon and
secr^tly followed her, where she discerned (being in the Evening) a knight so
like in proportion to hers, or so had the power of doubt made him, as she ever
believed it to be himself: but when she saw their affectionate imbracements,
then was her heart like to break, not being able to sustain, but for fear of
discovering, as softly, but less quietly, being confident, her confidence in
his love, which had before but flattered her to his own ends, and not for love,
had been a bayt to draw on her destruction. With this dolorous opinion she
retired into her Chamber, where she fell into the most grievous complaints that
ever poor afflicted suspicious Lady had endured.

The Princes continuing in the Wood, with all love and kindness the black
Knight beginning his discourse. My best, and only dear Sister know, that
after my departure hence, I past through most part of Greece to seek
adventures, till I came into Macedon, where I found the King dead, and an
Usurper strongly placed and settled in his room: the same of Meriana's beauty I
likewise encountered, but (alas) she was shut up in prison by that Traitor, and
so close kept, as none could gain a sight of her, but with much danger. The
Villain (though her near Kinsman) keeping her thus, with intent to marry her,
if he can gain her consent; if not, so to hold her enclosed during her life.
But by a blessed chance, as it may happen, I got the sight of her, truly so
rare a creature, as my commendations, which cannot with all worldly eloquence,
if with best art, imploid to set forth the nearest of her praise come near to
the lowest degree of her perfections; what then should I venture to commend
her, whose delicacie may receive wrong by my imperfect tongue, not sufficient
to extol her? Let it suffice, my eyes saw that, which made my heart her slave;
and thus I compassed my joy. I lay in a house, the Master whereof had served
her Father and Mother, waiting in the Queens chamber. and now has liberty to
see her when he will, or has any business with her, as to bring her new
apparel, or such necessary things, he being Master of the Wardrobe. This
man with whom I often conferred concerning the Princess, finding my longing to
behold her, and heartily wishing her liberty, brake with me about it; I
hearkened to him, and so we grew so far, as we were fast enough to each
other, for betraying our purpose. Then he caused me to put on a suite of one
of his servants, who was just of my stature, and taking new apparel to carry
her, sent it by me, withal, his excuse, that he was not then able himself
to come, I went with it, imagining my self more then a Prince, in being so
happy to be his Servant to such an end. When I came, the Maids that attended
her, told her of my coming, and of my self, being a stranger, and never there
before; she sent for me demanding many things of me, which (as well as so
much amazedness, as I was in, beholding her, could permit me) I answered. She
took delight to see me so moved, imagining it had been out of ba^hfulnes,
which she made sport with.

Thus for some time it continued, till one day my Master went himself, with
whom the Princess had much discourse concerning me, and among the rest, she
very much pressed to know what Country man I was, and at last directly who I was:
for (said she) either he is a very foolish fellow, or some other then he
seems to be, which I rather do imagine; therefore fail not, but tell me by
the respect and love you bear me, what you know of him?

He who loved me as his Son, was loath to discover me directly, for fear
of danger; yet considering, that if at all, he were much better tell who I
was, and the cause of my disguise, which would purchase me more good, then
dissembling. Upon promise of her being no way offended, nor discovering it,
which if known, would cost my life; he told her all, and withal added my
extreme affection to her. When she at first heard it, she seemd offended,
yet after said, she was contented to keep counsel, upon condition that I
presently went thence, and never more attempted to come where she was, in so
disguised a habit to wrong her.

When I received this message of death, I knew not whether I should thank or
blame my friend: in an agony I was afflicted to the highest, perplexed in
soul; in brief, I was but torment, and with it tormented my self. Words I
had none, nor other action, but going straight to my chamber, throwing my self
on the bed, and there lay I senseless, speechless, and motion-lesse for some
hours, as they told me, in which time he went to her again, telling her how
he had left me, and that she had killed a brave Prince, and her hopeful
kinsman; adding, How do you think Madam ever to be freed, when you use such
as would venture for your freedom with this scorn? long enough will you
remain here, and be a Prisoner for any hope you can have of delivery by
these fashions: but it may be you affect this life, or mean to marry
Clotorindus; if so, I have done amiss, for which I beseech you pardon me, and
him, with whom I will likewise leave Macedon: for what shall I do here, where
worth is contemned, and slavery esteemed?

When she heard the honest speech of my Master, and saw the likelihood of
loosing him, in whom only she could have assurance of truth and trust, she
told him, his love and truth had gaind his pardon; for she would not have him
go by any means. For me, she would have me sent to her, with whom she
would speak (since she could not believe, such a Prince would take such a
course for her love), and direct me what I should do, if she found I was the
man he spoke of. He returning, told me of it; and the time being come, I
resolved (though for it I did die) since she did mistrust me to go like my
self; so as putting on my own clothes, and my Sword by my side, but my
Masters cloak upon them, I past into the Garden, and so into a Gallerie, the
honest man directing me there to tarry, till she came unto me. When she
appeared, it was like a blazing Star, foretelling my lost life and liberty,
if she did still perseuer^ in her cruelty. But when she spoke, my heart was
so possessed, as I had not one word to answer her; only throwing off my
disguise, kneeling down, and gazing on her, was the manner of my suing to her.

She came then nearer, and taking me up, she said: My Lord (for so my
Servant tells me I may call you), much do I wonder, why disguised till this
time you have continued? If for love, your judgment much erred, to think I
could affect so low as a Servant; if for other ends, my self would never do
my self the wrong, to think of any unnoble course: and if the first, why did
you not seek to discover it?

Divine Lady (said I), far be it from me to have a thought to iuiure that
virtue, which admiringly I love, and loving, honor; the reason why I remaind
disguised and unknown, was the happiness I conceived in seeing you, and the
fear I had to loose that happiness, no way so much flattering my self, as to
have a hope to attain to that, whereto my best thoughts ambitiously did flee:
fear kept me silent, love made me fear. Now you have it, dispose of me
mercifully, else soon after this discovery, be pleased to hear of my sad
end. She it seemd had pity, but not so much as to express it, wherefore she
only answered thus. To assure me of your love, and you of pity, this is the
course you must take; instantly leave this place, nor return unto it, until
such time as your fame by your noble deeds may prove such, as shall make you
worthy of my love; then return, release me with your own hands; make me
perfectly know, you are Prince Rosindy, and I will give my self unto you. I with
all joy promised those conditions should be performd. She smiled, and said, a
Lover would promise any thing. I will die (said I) but accomplish these. Then
will I be yours (said she). That gave me a full heaven of joy; so kneeling
down again, and taking her hand, I kissed it, and on it sealed my vow. But one
thing more (said she) I would have you do; let all these deeds be done, while
you still keep your name of the Unknown, and so be called till you return,
unless some great occasion happen to reveal your self. I promisd likewise
this, and so by that name of Unknown, I have past these ten months, never
discovering my self to any, but lately to Leandrus, and a brave Gentleman
(then told he her the whole adventure), and now unto your self. With promise
of her love, my vow anew solemnly made, I took my leave, my heart filled with
sorrow to part, and my soul ready to leave this earthly cage, grieuing so much
to leave my better self: she in like sort was sorry, and pretily expressed it;
yet would not let too much be seen, lest it might stay me, so we parted. I
happy, and sorry; she sorry, and most happy in her own noble virtues. But now
me thinks the time is so long, as desire makes me haste homewards, accounting
that my home where my soul remains: but to this place I came first of
purpose, to hear what resolution was taken for the conquest of Albania, but
most for the relief of Macedon. To obey my Ladies command, I came secretly,
and so will remain unknown, but to you my dearest Sister: now tell me what
you hear, and keep my knowledge to your self?

Pamphilia with infinite joy hearing this story, and the brave fortune like to
befall her dear brother, took him affectionately by the hand, using these
words: Most worthy to be held dearest brother; the happiness is much greater
which I conceive, then able to express, seeing the likelihood of your worthily
merited fortune: What I know, I were a poor weak woman, if I would conceal
from you, or reveal of you. Therefore, know the intent was to conquer Albania
first: but whether the absence of Steriamus will hinder it or no, I yet know
not; but this I believe, that such means may be wrought as to prefer Macedon
before the other, and since your content, and fortunes lie that way, if you
will trust me, I will order it so, as that shall be first.

Bind me more if you can, sweet Sister, and to make me happy, enjoy the
authority over me and mine (said he). Then did she entreat him, that he
would for a while tarry there, which he granted, till such time as they
could order their affairs according to their own minds. While this content
lasted to Pamphilia, as much grief increased to Antissia, which grief at last
grew to rage, and leaving sorrow fell to spite, vowing to revenge, and no more
complain; this thought did so far possess her, as her countenance bewrayed
her heart, shunning the sight of Pamphilia who with love and respect did coue^
hers. This change made the sweet Princess infinitely admire, what the reason
should be that now moved her, she seeming to have remaind satisfied. But
those who know that languishing pain, also know, that no perfect satisfaction
can be, unless the humor it self with satisfaction do quite leave the
possessed: for as long as one spark lives though never so little, it is able
with the least occasion, or sign of occasion, to make a great fire, and so did
it now prove. Pamphilia desirous to have no unkindness between them, sought all
ways to please her: this was as ill a course, as if of scorn she had done it,
or in pity (having deceived her) would show the most despised, and
contemptible friendship, which is pity. Madness grew so upon this, as she burst
out into strange passions, especially one day, when as Ambassadors came from
the young King of Romania, to give thanks to the King of Morea, for his royal
courtesy to his Aunt^ who by the Knight of Love, he understood to be in his
Court, giving withal such infinite praises of him, to the unspeakable joy of
the old King, and all the Court, knowing him to be Amphilanthus, as mirth
liberally showed her self in all faces but Antissia's. The Ambassador having
delivered letters to her, both from Amphilanthus, and the King, wherein she was
entreated to come into Romania to him, and by her servant advised, not to
refuse the Kings demand, but to go with the Ambassador, which was the new
Duke Lizandrinus, whither in short time himself would also come: but the more
sweet and kind language he used in his letter, the greater was her conceit,
it was used to flatter her, complement never being used in the time of her
happiness, especially when she came to the point of going, she directly
concluded, that he had laid that trick upon her, to be rid of her sight, and
the fre^lier to enjoy his new Mistress, and this she angerly told Pamphilia,
whispering in her ear, withal adding, that he might as well have told her thus
much himself, considering she saw him, and you brave Lady (said she) last
night in the Gardenwood. Pamphilia between fear to have her brother discouerd
by her malice and disdain so unjustly to be accused, her blood scorning to lie
still when it was wronged, boldly showed it self in her face with thretning anger:
but this moved a contrary effect the^ fear, increasing base jealousy in stead
of noble thoughts and assurance of that she falsely conceived, proving this to
be true, that mistrust which is most times built upon falsehood, gains greatest
assurance from the falsest grounds. She seeing her blush (as she called it) by
that judging guiltines, and that, working spite, went away laden with scorn,
and her own suspicion, which now wrought to fury. Into her chamber she went,
where throwing her self upon her bed, careless of ease or hansomnes, she brake
into these speeches. Accursed day that first knew Antissia breathing, why was
not the air pestilent, the milk poison, the arms that held me serpents, and
the breasts that gave me suck venomed? and all these changed from their proper
goodness to have wrought my destruction? Miserable fate that brought me to be^
lost, and found by him who now ^uines me, Treacherous Love, but more
treacherous Lover; I might (wretch that I was) have taken heed by others, and
not have run into the same danger my self; now I am well requited, and paid
in the same kind, for glorying at them, and in my gain, while they waild under
the weight of his forsaking them; now must I tread with them in the path of
that misery. Fond creatures that joy in this, beware, this must at last be
your own; your turn 'twill be (though last) to lead the dance.

False creature; was it not enough to deceive me of my liberty, and honor,
but to overthrow me utterly? to destroy my quiet content, which in the smart of
your love I enjoyed? Cursed be the time I admired your sweetness, and
familiar kindness, your loving care, and tender respect, which made my heart
too soft, yielding to the power of your allurings. Is it come to this? Was all
your fondness for this purpose? Did you only strive to win, to cast away at
pleasure? Were all your desired meetings for this, to make me the more
miserably end with neglectiue forsakennesse? If any man could be true, I
assured my self it must be you. O that I had enough considered, there was
doubt justly made of man's truth in love; then had I more safely defended my
self from this disaster. Amphilanthus, thou were Noble, just, free: How is
this change? Can nobleness be, where deceit rules? Can justice be where
cousonage gouerns? can freedom be, where falsehood lives? Those were: but
these are now in thee. Was thy sadness for this new wound? Alas, I assured my
self it was for parting from me, that so much change did grow. Could not I
(blind fool that I was) have marked his often frequenting Pamphilia's Chamber?
his private discourse with her? his seeking opportunity to be in her
presence? his stolen looks? his fearful but amorous touching her hand? his
kissing his own hand, rather coming from hers, then going to hers? Loving it
more for having touched that beloved hand, then for being his. Often would he
do this, and look on me, then did I believe, all was meant to me, which he
did to her, and wished it had been I, his eyes betrayed me, my belief bewitched
me, and his falsehood must kill me. Churlish affection, why torture you me
alone? make him likewise smart, make her likewise vex. But I need not curse
her, since (poor Lady) she is but entering into her following perplexity. Alas
Pamphilia, I pity thee, and indeed love thee no whit less then before; I
cannot, nor may not blame thee for loving him, since none can resist his
conquering force in love, nor for seeking him: for whose soul would not covet
him? but I blame him for spoiling poor hearts to his glorious triumph.
Unnatural man that preyes on his own kind, nourishing his life with the ruin
of simple innocent Lovers; a cruel food, but crueller deuourer of them: which
has wrought this hardness in me, as from hence to love thee, but till I can
be revenged of thee; and such a revenge will I have, as thy hard heart shall
melt for it, if any goodness be left in it; for over the world will I seek
thee (my journey to Romania once ended) to be thus quit with thee, that thy
false eyes, and flattring tongue, shall be no longer able to deceive, or
betray thy self or others, but behold the true end of me, who gain my death
by thy falsehood, and in thy presence will I conclude my life with my love to
thee. I wondered, yet never had wit to doubt, why so much Ceremony lately came
from you; ceremony indeed, being a shadow, not substance of true love. Change
wrought it, and change put on the habit of that which once was love: for once I
know you loved me, and was fond of me; fond, I fondness it may most properly
be called; for love is eternal, but this changeable. Many we see fond of
sports, of horses, of dogs; and so was it my dogged fortune, to have you fond
of me: but the immortal part, the soul, is not fond, but loving, which love
for ever lives; and this love wanted I, only enjoying his fond, and fondly
proou'd desires, which are removed, and have left nothing behind, but the sad
remembrance of my once great and highest esteemed blessing; now remain I,
thrown down into the darkness of despair, and loss, by loss of his
affection.

Thus discoursing, tossing upon her Bed, she remained; fed not, nor slept all
that night: the next morning early going to the Garden Woods, whither she
sooner came then Pamphilia, where being a while, and sitting under the same
Ash, wherein the other affectionate afflicted Princess had written the
Sonnet, she was invited, either by her own passion, or the imitation of that
excellent Lady, to put some of her thoughts in some kind of measure, so as she
perplexed with love, jealousy, and loss as she believed, made this Sonnet,
looking upon the Sun, which was then of a good height.

THe Sun has no long journey now to go
While I a progress have in my desires,
Disasters dead-low-water-like do show
The sand, that ouerlook'd my hoped for hyres.
Thus I remain like one that is laid in Briers,
Where turning brings new pain and certain woe,
Like one, once burned bids me avoid the fires,
But love (true fire) will not let me be slow.
Obedience, fear, and love do all conspire
A worth-lesse conquest gained to ruin me,
Who did but feel the height of blessed desire
When danger, doubt, and loss, I straight did see.
Restless I live, consulting what to do,
And more I study, more I still undo.
Undo (cride she), alas I am undone, ruind, destroyed, all spoild by being
forsaken, restless affliction which proceeds from forsaking: yet would I be
beholding to this Enemy of mine, if forsaking in my torments would possess
me, so I might remain forsaken by them: but that must not be, I must only
know pleasure, happiness, and the chief of happinesses love, from my beloved
forsake me; but pain, torture, and shame will still abide, and dwell with me.
Then went she a little further toward the River, where by the bank under the
Willow lay the supposed Amphilanthus, the cause of all this business; his
Helm was off, by reason of the heat, and securenesse from being discovered,
not indeed being possible for any, except Antissia, who had by Pamphilia's
leave a key to those walks to come within them of that side of the River: she
had gone to him rashly, had not his voice staid her, whereat she started at
first, and then trembled with fear and joy, thinking by that likewise it had
been her Love: Jealousy had so transformed her, as it was impossible for her
to hear, or see, or know any thing but Amphilanthus, and her sorrow for him;
when at another time she would have laughed at her self for making such
vnlikelinesse vex her; he spoke but low, as it were whispering to himself
these words. O my dear, when shall I (wretch) again enjoy thy sight, more
dear, more bright to me then brightest day, or my own life? Most sweet
Commandresse of my only bliss, when, oh when shall I again be blessed? Can
thou leave me thy loyal servant, here or any where, but with thy best
deserving self? Shall I lie here in secret, complaining, when they self may
succor me? Quickly alas, relieve me, never more need, never more love sought
it. These words gave her full assurance 'twas he, and jealousy told her they
were spoken to Pamphilia. Rage now outgoing judgment, she flew to him;
ungrateful man, or rather monster of thy sex, said she, behold before thee,
thy shame in my dishonor wrought by my love, and thy change? Rosindy was
amazed, and feared betraying, wondering his Sister was so careless of him: she
seeing her rash and unpardonable fault, in having thus wronged her Love, stood
in such a depth of amazedness, and torment (all affections working at once
their own ways in her) as she was a mere Chaos, where vnfram'd, and
vnorder'd troubles had tumbled themselves together without light of Judgment,
to come out of them.

The black Knight beheld her, wondering more at her manner, and former speech,
then now heeding his being known, admiring at her passion, and not
understanding her words, to his thinking never having seen her, and therefore
not guilty of her blaming him. But now was she a little come to her self, but
so as fear, and modesty causd so much bashfulnesse as scarce she could bring
forth what she desired; but with eyes cast down and a blushing face, she with
much ado, said thus. Sir, I beseech you as a Lover (for so I perceive you are)
hide the imperfections of one of that number, my self unfortunately having
fallen into the worst extremity, which is Jealousy, and worse, if may be
worse, without cause as now I perceive, but falsehood which has caused it. I
mistook you, and more have mistaken my self, or indeed my better self:
conceal I beseech in this, and if I may serve you in any thing, for requital
command, and I will obey you. Fair Lady, said he, I cannot but exceedingly
pity your estate, and with the happiest amendment to it^ My humblest suit unto
you shall be only this, that you will conceal my being here, not esteeming
me so worthy as once (after your going hence) to remember you saw me, till such
time, as it may fortune, I may do you service, or that I come to acknowledge
this favor from you, and I shall in the like obey you. As she was answering,
and promising that, Pamphilia came, but with infinite discontent against
Antissia for being there, when as she without dissembling, but withal
unfeigned love, and shame, fell at her feer, beseeching her pardon, crying out,
that never lived there a more vnbless'd Creature then her self, who had now
lived to wrong the two perfect mirrours of their Sexes, with the base (and most
worthy of contempt) humor of suspicion.

Pamphilia took her up, and quickly was the peace made, the one seeking to
give all satisfaction, the other willing to receive any, rather then for that
business to make more stirring. Then with promise of her secret holding, the
Knights being there, not so much as desiring to know his name, lest that might
make suspicion, she desired to know, to discover. Again she departed
contended, and as happy as before she had been disquieted; only now grieved
that she had wronged Amphilanthus. She gone the dear Brother and Sister sat
down together, Pamphilia speaking thus.

My long stay (said she) might have marred your promise and my desired care of
keeping you secret, had not this good chance of acknowledgement wrought the
contrary; but howsoever it had brought little harm to you, since long, I
fear, you will not here abide, after you understand the news I bring, which
is this. My Father was this morning in Council, where it was set down that
Macedon is fittest to be first releeu'd, and the rather, because it is more
easy to gain the Kingdom out of one Usurpers hand, then out of many. My
Mother has been infinite earnest, and as earnest as if she knew your mind,
her reason being, that the young Queen is her Niece, as you know, and Macedon
once quieted, Albania will be the sooner won. Selarinus the younger Brother
likewise has desired the business of Albania may be laid aside till Steriamus
be heard of, not willing to be thought hasty in winning honor, and love in
his own Country in the absence of his Brother: and in truth, I must say, he
does like himselse in it, and that is like one of the finest Princes I know,
for so he is, and the like will you say when you once know him, and know him
you must, his ambition (as he terms it) being to gain the honor of your
friendship, and to be your Companion in your travels. I have promised him to be
the means for him; and believe me brother, you will thank me for it, since a
sweeter disposition matched with as noble a mind, and brave a courage, you
never (I believe) encountered.

Rosindy was so joyed with this discourse, as he knew not almost what this last
part of her speech was: wringing her hand, O said he, the blessed Messenger of
eternal happiness; but what Forces shall go to redeem her? The number from
hence, said she, are fifty thousand, from Achaia twenty, from Romania twenty,
the Achaians are to be demanded by Ambassadors now appointed; that Army to be
lead by Leandrus, the Romanians by Lysandrinus, the same Duke who is here now
with us, and who certainly assures my Father, that number will not be refused
by his Master, but rather more forces added to them. Now does my Father wish
for you to lead his men, desiring you should have the honor of this brave
attempt, by strong working of divine knowledge, I think, understanding your
mind. Choose now whether you will break promise or no, to your Mistress; yet
do I not see, but the liberty she gave you, will permit you to do this; No,
said he, dear Pamphilia, counsel me not to be unjust, and in the greatest to
mine own vow, and that vow to my Love? But thus you may help me, assure my
Father that you know where to find me, and let him reserve the honor of the
charge for me, and you bring me to receive it, in which time I will post to
Macedon, and get leave to return, and take the charge: This they agreed upon,
so being somewhat late she left her Brother there, promising to come again to
him after Dinner, and then to let him know the Kings answer, and so take leave
of each other. She returned when as she found the King and the whole Court
assembled to see, and hear a strange adventure. An aged man of grave and
maiestick countenance, hair white as snow, and beard down to his girdle,
bound in strong chains of iron; a young man likewise enchaind with him, four
Squires leading them, the old man with tears, and pitiful groans telling his
story thus. Most famous King, behold before you the distressed king of
Negroponte, brought into this misery by my own folly, so much doting on a
daughter of mine, as I suffered my self to fall into the sin of
forgetfulness to this my son, too worthy I confess for me, deserving a
far better title then my son, unless I had been a more natural father; For
such was my affection to that ungrateful child of mine, as I disinherited my
soon called Dolorindus, whose virtues appear by the black sins of his
sister, who I even now grieve to name: but why should my sorrow be increased
with the sight of your noble compassions? or better to say, Why should so
worthless a creature move sorrow in such royal minds? to avoid which, I will
as briefly, as my miserable relation will give me leave, discourse my tragic
story to you.

After I had unnaturally disinherited Dolorindus here present, I gave the
kingdom (which came by my wife, and she dead) to Ramilletta, my ungracious
daughter, who requited me, as Vipers do their Dam; for no sooner had she the
possession, but she fell into such ill government, and indeed beastly living,
as the report wounded my honor, and staind my blood: I ashamed, grieved at it,
told her of it, persuaded her to leave it, telling her, how cruel a blow it
was to my soul; to see her shame. She made me no answer, but with her eyes
cast down, left the room where I was. I thought confession and repentance had
caused this countenance: but alas, I was deceived, for it was rage, and scorn
procured it, as soon I found: for instantly came in a number of her servants,
who took me, and cast me into a dark terrible prison, where they kept me one
whole year: then came Dolorindus, and strove with all his wit and power to
release me; but finding it could not be wrought by other means then good
nature; desiring, that as he had life from me, he might have death also with
me. She taking some pity of him, or rather not willing to shed his blood her
self (though she cared not who did) told him, that if he could overcome two
knights, which she would appoint to encounter him, he should have his own,
and my liberty, else to be at her dispose. This he agreed unto, glad that he
had a shadow of hope (for no more it proved) for my release, undertaken by him.
The day was appointed, when as I was brought into a little place, made of
purpose for seeing the combat; she, and her servants hoping this would be the
last day of my trouble to them, when I should see Dolorindus slain, and her
cruelty increase, both which must (as they did trust) end my life with breaking
of my heart; and so indeed it nearly had, and would assuredly, had my son
been killed, whose love to me, did make my fault so foul before me, as affection
proved curster then affliction. But to the matter: so bravely did my Dolorindus
behave himself for our deliueries, as although the other were such, as still
if a challenge were made, they were chosen; if any valiant man had been named,
they had bin instantly commended with him; nay, such confidence all had of
their strength, as if the kingdom had bin in danger to be lost, and only to be
saved by combat, these would have been set for the Defendants, yet were these
two overcome by Dolorindus, and in our presence had their lives ended by his
brave arm, who yet had sufferd his blood to accompany their deaths, trickling
down as fast, as the tears from a mothers eyes, for the loss of her dearest
son: so much indeed he lost, as he was for faintnes forced to be carried
away to Chirurgions (I thought) and so to safety. In some kind this was true,
but not to liberty; for she seeing the honor he had got, and fearing the love
of the people would fall upon him, seeing his worth, she kindly in show brought
him into a rich chamber, and had his wounds dressed, taking infinite care of him:
but as soon as he recouerd, he was for safety shut into a strong Tower,
where he remaind till within these few months, my self carried back again
into my prison, where I was vexed with the continual discourse of her bravery,
of Dolorindus death, and of her marriage with an undeserving man, who in my
life of government I ever hated, no worth being at all in him, that he should
deserve mention; but that he had no worth in him meriting mention; never so
detestable a Villain breathing. This creature she fell in love withal, and
lived withal; but now I think is partly weary of, because she does expose
him to fight for her honor, being before so fond of him, as she was afraid the
wind should almost blow upon him: but him she has brought, and three more his
brothers; and if these four can be overcome, by any Knights in this Court,
we shall be set at liberty, else remain Prisoners, which we have consented
unto. Now Sir, if you please to give us such knights, they shall enter.

The King answered, that such unnaturalness deserved a far sharper
punishment, and that there was no sense, a Combat should end so foul a
business. He replide, that he was contented, and therefore desired but the
knights, and for the matter, it was already determined. Then stepped Selarinus
forth, desiring to be one; Pamphilia likewise entreated, she might have the
favor to bring another, who she would undertake for, meaning the Prince of
Corinth; the Prince of Elis would not be denied to be the third; and
Lisandrinus humbly besought in such a business he might be the fourth.

This was agreed upon, so Pamphilia went to the Wood, and there discoursing the
business to her brother, he instantly resolved to be one, and whether she
would or no, came with her, his Beauer close for fear of discovery, doubting
nothing else but his face to betray him; for so much was he grown in height
and bigness, as he could not be taken for Rosindy. The four Defendants being
there met, the rest entered, Ramiletta going in the midst of the four
Challengers, two before her, two behind her, but so far asunder, as they made
from corner to corner the fashion of a Saltier cross. So terrible were these
to behold, as few could endure to look upon them, only her servant was a
little milder in his countenance, and somewhat less then the others. Their
hair was of a brown red colour^ and bristled; their eyes of answerable
bigness to their bodies, but furiosly sparkling fire. When Pamphilia saw these
Monsters, she would as willingly have had her Brother thence, as he
ambitiously wished to have the Combat begin: then followed fifty knights
without swords, but their Beauers close, being such, as the old King told the
Court, were taken, seeking to deliver them from bondage, and who were brought
along with them for witness of their valor and power. These huge men, who
were called the ter^ible and unconquered Brethren, nor the Lady, made any
reverence, but gazed upon the company and Ladies, who there stood to behold
them: then were they carried to the Lists, the old man again speaking: Sir,
these are the Challengers; may it please you that the Defendants likewise go.
The King was sorry for the Knights, and in his mind more troubled, then long
time before he had bin, once being of the mind to have hindered it: but
considering his honor was engaged, in that, he went on, commanding his great
Marshall nevertheless to have some other number of Knights ready armed upon any
occasion. This was done, and so being all in the Lists, the Judges placed, and
the Trumpets sounding, Ramiletta was brought in her Chariot of pale green
Velvet, made of an unusual fashion, and those fifty knights standing round
about her, the old man and his son being in a feate behind her in the same
Chariot. The Iusts beginning, the Unknown Knight encountered the greatest of
the four; Selarinus the next in bigness and fierceness, almost his equal;
Lisandrinus the third, and the Prince of Elis the fourth. The first encounter
was strong and terrible, for the mourning Knight was struck flat upon his
back, and his adversaries horse was with the blow struck dead, his Master by
that means falling to the ground; Selarinus and his enemy both unwillingly
saluting the earth with their heads, the rest had likewise that fortune: then
bravely began the fight with the swords, which continued one whole hour, no
advantage being seen, till the Prince of Elis with extreme loss of blood,
and a wound in his leg, fell to the earth; at that instant had the unknown
Knight given his enemy a wound in the thigh, which was so great, and besides
given cross, as he could not stand, but like a huge mast of a ship, with the
storm of this blow laid his greatness along; the other going to strike off the
Prince of Elis his head, was by the black Knight hindered, striking off that
arm, which was depriving the Prince of his life. At this he cried out, giving
the watchword which was among them, so as the other, who had now even wearied
their foes, left them, running to the place where the Princes sat, catching
Pamphilia in their arms, and straight carrying her into the Chariot; the other
fifty at the instant got Swords for the accomplishing of their wills, privately
hid in the Chariot, a place being made under the seat for them, the Hilts
only out, which were taken to be but artificially made to seem Swords, and
placed for ornaments round about the body of the Chariot, being all painted
about, and carved with Trophies, and such like devices. Then did the old man as
soon as they had their prey, turn Chariot man, driving the Horses with great
swiftness, the King cride for help; but alas, in vain as it seemed, tearing
his hair for this oversight. But soon was this business ended, for Selarinus
marking their treason, leapt up upon his horse again, pursuing them, and
ouertaking them, killed the former horse, the rest running, fell over him, so as
the Chariot was staid. Then came two strange Knights, who by chance were going
to the Court, to whom the Traitor cride for help, saying, That that Knight by
force would take his Lady from him, beseeching even with tears to have their
help, for (said he) here is the famous Princess Pamphilia, whom this Villain
would take from me, and abuse. With that the strange Knights began to prepare,
but Selarinus told them, they were best take heed, for (said he) this is all
false that he reports, and he has stolen by treason this Lady from the Court,
where there is yet a cruel fight, I having left them to rescue this Princess.
One of them straight knew his voice, so as drawing their swords on his side, as
before they were ready to do it against him, they drew to the Chariot,
demanding of the Princess if this were true? She answered, Yes; and therefore
(said she) assist this worthy Prince. Then they took the old man and youth,
and as before they were in counterfeit chains; they made them sure in true
ones, tying them with the false Ramiletta to the hind end of the Chariot, so
putting their Squires to lead the horses. With this brave Princess they
returned, and most fortuately for the other distressed Knights at the Court, who
were so tired with the terrible Brothers, and fifty other, as they were almost
at their last, the poor unarmed Courtiers lying as thick slain, as if they
had strewed the place with their bravery, in stead of flowers: the Marshal came
with his troop: but so little could he avail, as only taking the King, and
carrying him away to safety with the Queen, and such as did run with them,
left the two brave Combatants to defend themselves, who did so bravely, as they
had slain two of the Brothers outright, Rosindy having killed one, wounded the
other in the thigh, and now was fighting with him, whom Selarinus had first
encountered, but very weak with wearines, and loss of blood, the fierce man
pressed sorely on him, when Selarinus again came, and finished his begun work,
giving him a blow on the head, which made him stagger, and seconding it, laid
him on the earth: then leapt he from his horse, lifting the black Knight up in
his stead, and so struck he off the head^ of that Traitor. Now was there but
one left, and he wounded, yet the number of Knights were little decreased, so
as if the two new knights had not come, they would have been in a far worse
case, who so bravely behaved themselves, as soon the victory was clearly
theirs. Rosindy bestirring himself in such manner, as who ever had seen him,
and told the Queen his Mistress of it, that alone, without any other Conquest,
had been enough to win her.

By this all was quiet, then took they some of those Knights, who had yielded
and demanded mercy, the wounded Brother, and the traitorous old man,
Ramiletta, and the youth, going with this troop into the Palace; the body
likewise of the Prince of Elis they carried with them, which yet seemd but his
body, no breath stirring, nor any show of life appearing, till being laid in
his bed, and carefully looked unto, his old Father being there grieved in heart,
yet the better contented, since if he died, it would be to his honor for ever,
to end his days in so noble an adventure; life again possessed him, but
weakly expressing it self for many days, yet did he rocouer. When this
company came into the Hall, straight came the King unto them, running to
Pamphilia, and weeping with joy to see her free again, so as in a pretty space
he could not speak unto her, but when, O my dear heart (said he) what treason
was there here against me, to deprive me of thy sight? She comforting him,
and letting some tears fall, as dutifully shed to wait on him, besought him,
since she found that blessedness, as his so great affection to her, that he
would thank those, who restored her to him; then taking them all one after
another in his arms, he desired to know the black Knight.

Pamphilia then answered. Sir, said she, this Knight is so engaged by a vow, as
he can hardly let his name be known; yet since, this liberty was given, that
upon extraordinary occasion he might reveal himself, I will undertake the
discovering, and fault (if fault there be in this) upon me, and then turning
to him, Brave Brother, said she, comfort our Fathers age with the happiness
of the sight of such an incomparable Son, with that Rosindy pulling off his
Helm kneeled down. But when the King beheld him, he fell upon his neck, with
such affection kissing him, as if all his love were at that instant in him, and
joined together to express it to him. Then was command given for a rich Chamber
for him, whither he was lead, Selarinus accompanying him, being less hurt then
he, yet had he not escaped free from remembrance of that devilish creature.
All now at peace, no discourse was but of the valor of the defendants, but
especially the honor of Rosindy was blazed abroad, having with his own hand
killed one of the Brothers, wounded another, and wearied the third to death,
slain many of the Knights, and by his example done so much, as encouraged the
weak bodies of the rest, whose hearts never faild. Then Selarinus was
commended exceedingly, and indeed with great cause, for his valor was ^quall
with most, his care that day exceeding others. Pamphilia being saved from
imprisonment by him. Lisandrinus will all honor respected, who made manifest
proof of his valor, and affection to the Court. The Prince of Elis did so
well, as made all assured of his being a brave Knight, this the first of his
adventures having so manfully performed: for had not an unlucky blow in the
leg hindered him from standing, he had also slain his foe. The two last
Knights were of the Court, one, Son to the Marshall, called Lizarino; and the
other, Tolimandro, Prince of Corinth. The Traitors were all carried to a strong
Tower, where they remaind till the Knights were well again recovered, which in
short time was to the great joy and comfort of every one.

Now did Pamphilia think it fit to acquaint the King with her Brothers
business; wherefore first asking lea^e of Rosindy, she did; the King being
infinite glad of this news, went straight unto his lodging, whom he found
alone, but for Selarinus, who never left him, as strict and firm an affection
growing between them, as ever lived in two men's hearts, one unto another. Then
did the King impart unto him, what Pamphilia had told him, which was confirmed
by Rosindy, the match liked, and commended by the King: the resolution was, as
Pamphilia before had told him, and he chosen General of the Morean forces,
Selarinus his Lieutenant^ and thus with preparing for these wars, and every one
contented (except the loving Ladies); Love must again be a little discoursed
of.

Parselius (who making haste after Amphilanthus) ^ooke his way through Morea;
but after not as he was directed by the Squires, but along Achaia, crossing
the Gulf of Lepanto, which course might make him miss the King, if he came
short of the Combat; they resolving to take their course back again by sea
to Morea, as well to try adventures in the Islands, as to hasten the forces,
that being a shorter way: but here did Parselius, as destined for him (for till
now he still obeyed the other) meet a greater force then he imagined, being
in a Forest benighted, and having none with him except his Cousins Squire, and
his own. In that solitary place they laid them down for that night: The next
day going on in that Desert till they came to a strong and brave Castle,
situated in a little Plain, a great moate about it, and over it a draw Bridge,
which at that time was down, and some Servants upon it, looking upon the water
which was broad and finely running: when the Prince came near the place, they
turned their eyes to him, who courteously saluted them, and demanded, whose
Castle that was; they replied, it was the Kings, and that there lived within it
his fair Daughter Dalinea. Is she, said the Prince, to be seen? If so, I
pray let her know that here is a Knight desires to kiss her hand, well known
to her Brother, and who had the honor to be his Companion. One of the
servants instantly ran in, others went to take their horses, while Parselius
lighted, and put off his Helm, wiping his face with his delicate white and
slender hand, rubbing his hair, which delicatly and naturally curling made
rings, every one of which were able to wed a heart to it self. By that time
the Messenger returned: leading him first into a stately Hall, then up a fair
pair of stone stairs, carved curiously in Images of the Gods, and other rare
workmanship: at the topp they came into a brave room richly hanged with
hangings of Needle-worke, all in Silk and Gold, the Story being of Paris his
Love, and rape of Helen; out of that they passed into another room, not so
big, but far richer, the furniture being every way as sumptuous if not
bettering it; but what made it indeed excel, was that, here was Dalinea
sitting under a Cloth of Estate, of Carnation Velvet, curiously and richly set
with Stones, all over being Embrodered with purle of Silver, and Gold, the Gold
made in Suns, the Silver in Stars, Diamonds, Rubies, and other Stones
plentifully and cunningly compassing them about, and placed as if for the Sky
where they shined; but she standing appeard so much brighter, as if all that
had been, but to set forth her light, so far excelling them, as the day
wherein the Sun does show most glorious, does the drowsiest day. Her Ladies
who attended her, were a little distant from her in a fair compass Window,
where also stood a Chair, wherein it seemed she had been sitting, till the
news came of his arrival. In that Chair lay a Book, the Ladies were all at
work; so as it showed, she read while they wrought. All this Parselius beheld,
but most the Princess, who he so much admired, as admiration wrought so far,
as to permit him to think that she equaled Urania; this was a sudden stepp
from so entyre a Love, as but now he vowed to his Shepherdess, being an
Heresy, as he protested, for any man to think there lived a creature like his
Love. But into this he is now fallen, and will lead the faction against her.
Uncertain Tyrant Love, that never brings thy Fauourits to the topp of
affection, but turns again to a new choice; Who would have thought any but
Vrania's beauty, could have invited Parselius to love? Or who could have
thought, any might have withdrawn it, till this sight? Which so much moved as
he loves Urania, but for being somewhat like to Dalinea, but her, for her own
sake. He was not so struck with wonder when he first saw Urania, (though with
it he lost his liberty) as he was now wounded to death, loosing life if no
compassion succeeded; this first sight won him, and lost his former Bondage,
yet was he freed, but to take a new bond upon him. He went toward her, who
with a Maiesticke, yet gracious fashion met him, who saluted her thus. My fare
leading me (I hope for my greatest happiness, I Am sure yet for my best
content, bringing me thus to behold your excellencies) from far places,
vnlooking for pleasures, am brought to the height of them most incomparable
Lady, in coming thus into your presence, whereto I was emboldned by the love I
bare your Brother, by the courtesies of your servants, the honor your self
granted me in licencing my approach: but most by my own soul, which told me I
must not pass without paying the tribute of my best service, to the Princess
of all women; for how would my conscience accuse me in such a neglect? How
would my heart blame me for such an omission? But how might brave Leandrus
chide Parselius, if he yielded not himself at the feet of his worthily
admired Sister? Dalinea hearing him call himself Parselius, with a sweet and
pleasing blush, desired pardon, that she had so far forgot her self, as not
to do him sufficient reverence; but yet a little blame your self, great
Prince, said she, who unknown, and vndiscouering your self to any, you come
among us: pardon this rudeness, and be pleas^d to accept my submissi^n for it;
to deserve which favor, I will strive in giving you the best welcome to
deserve it. He took her hand, and kissed it, which although she could in
respect have hindered, yet so delicate was his hand, as she was content to let
him hold and kiss hers. Then she brought him under the State, where two
Chaires being set, they passed away some time, discoursing of adventures, and
of the sweet content the Companion Princes enjoyed in their youths, she
infinitely delighting in those stories, especially when they touched on her
brother, whom entirely she loved.

Parselius finding which way her affection lead her, made his attend her, and
all his stories, either beginning, or ending with the praise of Leandrus. Thus
one pleased, and the other contented, that it was in him to content her; they
passed some days love creeping into the heart of Dalinea, as subtly as if he
meant to surprise, and not by open force take her: Discourse procured
conversation, sweet conversation, liking of it self; that liking, desire to
continue it; that desire, loving it, and that the man that affoorded it: and
thus far come, I should wrong her if I should not say, she yielded in her
heart to love his person, whose discourse had made his way, by taking first her
ears prisoners, now her eyes likewise execute their office, brings his
excellent shape, his beauty, his absolute brave fashion: then her understanding
besets her, tells her how excellent his wit is, how great his valor, how
matchless his worth, how great his descent, and royal possessions; all these,
alas, joined, and made a curious, and crafty work to compass that, which love
himself without half, or any in comparison of these assistants, could have
made his subject. But as the rarest Jewel is not to be had but at the highest
rate: so her peerless perfections must have all this business to gain her;
but now she is won, and he almost lost, not daring to think so, or ventring
to win it: He would with his eyes tell her his heart, with kissing her
delicate hand, with a more then usual affection, let her feel his soul was
hers: She found it, and understood what he would have her understand, nay,
she would answer his looks with as amorous ones of her part, as straightly,
and lovingly would she hold his hand, but knowing modesty forbid, she would
sigh, and in her soul wish that he would once speak; but bashfulnesse
withheld him, and woman modesty kept her silent; till one afternoon, walking
i^to a most curious and dainty Garden, where all manner of sweets were ready in
their kind to entertain them; Flowers of all sorts for smell and color; Trees
of all kinds of fruits, and walks divided for most delight, many Birds
singing, and with their notes welcomming them to that place: At last, a pair
of innocent white Turtles came before them, in their fashion woing each other,
and so won, enjoying their gain in billing, and such like pretty joy.

Parselius taking advantage on this, how blessed (said he) are these poor
Birds in their own imaginations, thus having one another love! It Is true, said
Dalinea, but more blessed are they, if the story be true, that they never
change. Having once, said he, made a perfect choice, none sure can after
change. I never heard man accuse himself, said she, but rather when he had
run into that fault, find something amiss in his former love. I am sorry,
replide the Prince, you have so ill an opinion of men, since that I fear, will
hinder you from honoring any with your love. Why should you fear that answered
she? Because (sighed he) I would not have such admirable Beauties
unaccompanied, but joined to a worthy associate. These must, said she, for any
thing I see remain as they do (if such as you say) long enough, before they
will be sought; fear (cryde he) makes men speechless, and admiration hinders
the declaring their affections. A poor lover, said she, such a one must be,
who wants the heart of one such little Bird as this. I see most perfect Lady,
said he, then, that this bashfulnesse is neither profitable nor commendable,
wherefore I will now, encouraged by your words, rather commit an error in honest
plainness, then in fine Courtship, and if it be an error, take this with it,
it is not meant amiss, though it may be rudely performed, as^ what but
rudeness can come from a wandering Knight?

Not then to color that which is most clear, and perfect in it self, with
fine and delicate Phrases, or to go too far about from the right way of
discovering, give me leave, most excellent Princess, to say, that so excelling
was your power over me, when I first saw you, and so strongly has continued
the honor in keeping the conquest, as I am, and ever must be your devoted
Servant, my love being wholly dedicated to you; and this I would feign long
since have said, but I feared your displeasure, nor had I now ventured, but
that me thought you bid me be bold, taking your discourse wholly to my self.
Then did you take it right, said she, for I confess; with that she blushed
so prettily, and looked so modestly amorous, as she need have said no more,
to make him know she loved him: Yet he covetous to have the word spoken, taking
her in his arms, be not so cruel my only life said he, to bar me from the
hearing of my bliss; Why then, said she, I must confess I love you.
Blessedn^sse to my soul cried he, these words are now; my dearer self can
thou affect poor me? I honor your worth, and love your self, said she, but
let your love be manifested to me in your virtuous carriage toward me. Virtue,
said he, made choice for me, then can she not abuse her self; and virtue in
you made me most to love you, then assure your self, that only virtue shall
govern me. Thus they lovingly and chastely lived a while, only pleased with
discourse; but that grew to leave place to more enjoying it self, being loath
that any time should be spent without it, envying the night that kept them so
long absent; to avoid which he so earnestly sued, and she so much loved, as she
could not refuse, what he desired for their equal contents: so as making two
of her maids, and his Squire only acquainted, one morning they stole out of
the Castle by a back door, which opened just upon the Mote, and having a boat
there, wherein they used to row for pleasure, they cr^st the water, and so
walked unto an Hermitage hard by, where after they had heard Praye^s, the
Hermit played the Priest and married them. With infinite joy they returned, to
come to the height of their desires, where we will ^eaue them a little, and
speak of Berlandis, Squire to Amphilanthus, who longing to see his Lord, and
seeing little hope of getting Parselius thence, resolu^d to try how he might
get him from that lazy life, and win him again to follow Arms: but alas,
this was as impossible, as it was for Urania to believe, that Parselius would
forsake her. Many times he urged him, many times he told him of adventures,
which himself and his Cosen had past, to their eternal fames; often he
remembered him of the promises he had made, and vows which ought to be
performed: but these wrought nothing, vows he remembered not, but this last
holy one, which was most religiously to be observed: promises he had made,
but those might stay till some other time, or till he had longer solaced
himself in these new delights.

To conclude, Berlandis concluded to leave him, and so telling; and taking his
leave of him, departed with this message to Amphilanthus, that he would in
short time come unto him; in the mean time, entreated to be pardoned, since
in his time he had a little absented himself from him upon a like, though not
so just an occasion. Then he charged Berlandis, not to let any know where he
had left him, except his own Lord, and to entreat likewise his secrecy to
all others to deny his finding of him.

Thus Parselius obscured himself for some time, while the fame of his Brother
bravely filled the world, and had shind alone like the greatest light, had not
one eclipsed it with his greater power, which was, and is, Incomparable
Amphilanthus, who with his two companions left Romania, intending to go to
Morea, as I before said, hasting thither, as in pretense of the Albanian
business. After they had taken ship, they came down the Archipelago, and
amongst those Islands staying at Sio for fresh water, and to take in some
passengers, left by that ship there, at her going to Constantinople; into the
which Island, the Knight of the Forest would needs persuade the rest to enter,
seeing it delightful, and loving naturally to see novelties, and venture as
far, and oft-times as happily as any: this motion was agreeable to
Steriamus, whose heart yet faild him, for all Amphilanthus did warrant him to
go where his soul was Prisoner, for fear of offending her, though so much
he loved, as if he had been sure to see her, and with that sight to die
instantly, rather then live, and not see her, he would so have suffered death.
But Amphilanthus was loath to loose time, yet he was contented to content his
Friend, so as they passed up a good way into the Island themselves alone,
without any other, not so much as their Squires with them: long they had not
gone, before they met three fine young Maids, apparreld after the Greek
manner, carrying each of them a basket, wherein were several delicate fruits;
the knight of the Forest went to them, desiring to be resolved of the manner
of that place, and whether they could let them understand any adventure. The
maids with much sweetness, and modest fashion replied; They were but of mean
Parentage, and not accustomed to such businesses, but (said they) this last
night a brave Gentleman lay at our Fathers house, much complaining of the loss
of a young Prince, called Dolorindus, Prince of Negropont, who landed here, and
since was never heard of; much he seemd to doubt his danger, and especially to
fear Treason, the Lord of this Island being indeed the most cruel, and
treacherous man breathing; old, and yet so ill, as his white hairs have gaind
that color from black, since he practiced villainy, for these forty years
plotting nothing, but the destruction of brave Knights, and delicate Ladies, of
which he has store in his Castle, where in dark and ugly prisons he
continues them, only letting them have light when he sends for them, and
sports himself in their torments: and this proceeds from no other cause, but
out of a general hate to all, where virtue lives, and beauty dwells. His wife
of as sweet a condition, who is worn away to bare bones with mere hateful
fretting, to hear that any should live inricht with goodness. From this pair
are brought a forth couple of as hopeful branches, as can proceed from so
good stocks; their parents ill, which they have bin many years practiced in to
come to perfection, being fully flowing in them, so as they in this kind
excel, having so many years fewer, and yet as much sin in them, falsehood,
and all treason abounding, with ill nature in them: one of them being a
Daughter, and the elder called Ramiletta, the most cunning, dissembling,
flattering, false Creature that ever sweet air suffered to breath in, without
corrupting it with her poisonous treasons; the other a Son vilde, crafty,
and beyond measure luxurious.

These three are now gone a journey, whither I cannot tell you, but surely to
some villainous purpose, bravely they are attended on, and richly set forth,
the old woman only left behind with her practices to help if occasion serve,
or by as much ill to rescue, if harm befall them. It was a glorious sight to
see the brave furniture they had, delicate Horses and gallant troops of
Knights to the number of fifty, besides four, who were the fiercest and
strongest of this Country, ugly and fearful to behold, being Brothers, and
called the terrible, being of stature little less then Giants; and indeed
such, as surely for being so much above ordinary stature were anciently termed
so: a joyful sight this also was, for every one rejoiced so much at their
going, as in great troops the people followed them to the sea, heartily
wishing never to see them return any more.

Has there been no news of them since (said the Knight of Love? None
(answered the Maids), nor will be we hope. But are there any prisoners
remaining in his Castle (said he)? So the knight told my Father (said one of
them) and we are all certain of it, if he put them not to death before his
going, which I the less think, because his wicked mate so much affects the
like pleasure in torturing, as she holds them surely living of purpose to
delight her self. Will you favor us with the guiding us to the Castle said
Amphilanthus? withal our hearts, said they, if we were sure to bring you safe
back again, but fearing that, we rather desire pardon, then to be the means
of bringing hurt to such Gentlemen. Let the hazard of that lie on us, said the
Knights, and the content to this Country, especially to your selves, when you
shall see it freed from such Tyranny.

Much ado they had to persuade the Maids, to conduct them; yet at last, they
preuaild, and altogether went to the house of the Traitor, by the way eating of
those fruits they had in their Baskets: within few hours they arrived within
sight of the Castle, and drawing nearer they saw two Gentlemen fighting on the
Bridge, but presently they lost the sight of one being fallen. Then another
advanced himself who by that time that they came near enough, to descry any
thing done on the Bridge, they saw likewise betrayed by a false place in the
Bridge, which they but coming on it strait opened, and as soon as they were
fallen, shut again; they of the house so well acquainted with it, as they
easily avoided it.

They seeing this treason, hating deceit of any thing, stood conferring what
they might do to avoid this trick, when as the man that combated the other
two, came unto them, courteously entreating them into the house, if it pleased
them to enter without blows: or if they would try their forces, as all yet
had done, he was the man that first would wait upon them in that exercise.

They assuring themselves no good could be in that creature, who had betrayed
any, as curstly replied, as he had mildly (but craftily) spoken; telling him,
that courtesy in Traitors must be as dangerous, as his kindness would prove,
if they were so ignorant as to trust him, who they saw before their faces, had
betrayed two, who fought with him: wherefore they were resolved to be so far
from receiving his complement, as they would make him bring them to the surest
entering into the Castle; which if he refused, they would cut off his head.
With which words they laid hands on him, and that but done, when with a loud
and terrible voice, he gave notice to them within of his danger, which brought
out many to his succor, that place never being without some always armed.
They rushed all on the Knights, who bravely behaved themselves, making quick
work amongst them: but then came more, and such numbers, as with their
freshness and companies, they put the Knights more to their skill, then in
long time they had been: yet they whose hearts were filled with true worth and
valor, would not think themselves in hazard, but still confident of victory,
pursued their Enemies to the Bridge, who seeing their want of strength to
master the three, gave back of purpose to win them to their snare: but soon
did they find their deceit, so as avoiding the bridge, they escaped the plot, and
got the knowledge of it; for they fearful, and some vnskild, run upon the
false place, which opened, they falling in: and the three knights seeing the
place opened, discovered the breadth to be no more, then one might stride
over, so as they bravely ventured leaping over it and entered the gate.

Presently was a great cry and noise in the Castle, all now that could bear
Arms running upon the knights; and so did they perplex them, as they forced
them to take the benefit of putting their backs to a brave fountain, which
was in the midst of a square Court wherein they were. This gave them ease and
safety, being sure to have no hurt, but what they saw; thus they fought till
none were left that durst fight with them.

Then stood they a while to breathe, and rest them, when showers of arrows
came upon them out of the windows, and from the battlements; these vexed them
more then any thing, not knowing what to do against them, but only covering
themselves with their Sheilds, made them their defenses, while they rested a
little. But no sooner had they gained breath, but they ran up the stayres,
and finding most of them women, yet cruel in that kind, and skillful in
shooting, they would not contend with them with their Swords, but running
forcibly (in spite of their skill and continual shots) within them, knowing no
means to be secure, the number being so great, were forced, for all their
charitable mind, to begin at home with that virtue, and for their own good to
hurt them; which in this manner they did, throwing such as they could lay hands
on out of the windows, pursuing the rest, who running from them, yet still
galled them with their arrows, such was their nimblenesse and cunning, as they
would shoot when they ran fastest. But at last they got the end of their
travel, with the end of them, most killed or bruised with the fall, the rest
throwing down their bows, and craving mercy.

But now came they to the place, where the spring of all mischief sat, the
Mistrisse of wickedness, and that Castle, in such distress, because they were
not distressed; as malice and all vices mixed together, could hardly be the
figure of this woman: but what could she do? All cunning now faild her,
though she began with humility, fawning and flattringly begging life,
succeeding with cursings, reuilings and threatenings: but all prospered alike;
for they taking her, commanded her to bring them where the Prisoners were.
When she saw no craft would prevail, she cast her hateful looks upon them,
and by an unlucky chance espying a Dagger at Ollorandus back, stepped to him
hastily, drawing it out, and as suddenly being vnmarkt, struck Amphilanthus
(who was then looking from herward, careless of her) under his Armor, giving
him such a wound, as the blood fell in great abundance from him: but soon was
that well revenged, if her life were answerable for such a mischance; yet did
they keep her alive, till the Castle was settled, one drop of his blood being
more worth, then millions of lives of better people. Then she was terribly
tortured, and yet kept long in pain for her more lasting punishment, and
lastly burned.

By this were most dead or yielded, all being safe, Amphilanthus was carried
into a rich chamber, where his wound was searched and dressed by the three
Sisters, who were now come into the Castle, brought in by Steriamus of purpose
to dress the Prince. Ollorandus being so perplexed that it was his unlucky fate
to have the weapon, that hurt his friend, as he was truly sorrow it self, even
being ready with it to have parted his own life from him, had not Amphilanthus
coniured him by all loves, and friendships, and protestations to forbear.

Quickly did the Sisters assure them of his safety, which as a blessing came
unto them. After he was dressed he sent his friend to fetch the Prisoners all
before him, which was done, where were of Knights and Ladies such store, as (if
in health and strength) there had been a fit number for the furnishing a brave
Court, but as they were, it was a sight of commiseration, so pale, and weak
they were with want of food, and their bodies so abused with tortures, as they
appeard like people of purpose made to show misery in extremity. Among them
was Dolorindus, whose own mind, and this usage, had brought him into a fit
estate to answer his name. Amphilanthus knowing him, first took care of him,
calling for his own apparel which was brought, and causing delica^e food to
be brought him, cheerished him so, as by that time that he was able to travel
for his wound, Dolorindus was likewise fit to accompany him, which in few days
came to pass by the diligence and care of the three Sisters, who were next in
true succession by the Mothers side, to the ancient Lords of Si^: their Father
came unto them with the Squires, to the Princes, and those of the Ship. Then
prepared they for their departure, Amphilanthus bestowing the Castle and the
Island upon the Sisters, his kind Chyrurgions, promising to send his faithful
and best esteemed servant Berlandis to marry the eldest, as soon as he could
find him, and on the other two, Steriamus and Ollorandus bestowed their
Squires, giving them the Order of Knighthood, who well deserved it, proving
worthy of such Masters, making the world see, that such example as daily their
Master showed them, must needs make brave men leaving that place in quiet,
having taken the oaths of all the Inhabitants in Berlandis name, and his
wives. Then took they Ship again for Morea, but passing along the AEgaean
Sea, they entered many Islands, seeking and finding adventures, but in one,
being (though little) yet plentiful, as a greater, delicately compassed with
Snow white Rocks, yet mixed with small fine trees, whose greenenesse gave them
hope to see, but pleasure gave them heart to go into it; when they found it
within such a place, as a Lover would have chosen to have passed his time in,
and this did urge the four Knights all amorous, and yet in several kinds to
express their passions several ways.

Amphilanthus left the other three, taking the direct way to the heart of the
Land, as ever aiming at that place, having the best, and most power continually
over that part. Steriamus took on the right hand; Ollorandus to the left, but
Dolorindus who never knew difference of fortune (still having lived in a
constant state of her displeasure) went away between them all, his thoughts
(as ever in action) better being able to utter forth his passions being alone,
which in this kind he did: when he came into a dainty fine wood of straight
high Oaks, and young Beeches, mingled with a few Ashes, and Chestnut trees;
in the mid^st of the Wood was a Mount cast up by nature, and more delicate then
Art could have fram^d it, though the cunningest had undertaken it, in the
midst of it was a round Table of stone, and round about it Seats made of the
same Stone, which was black Marble, some Letters, or rather characters he
found engraven in the upper part of those seats, and on many of the Trees,
which curiously encompassed it; and many Ciphers, althougth but one for
meaning, though in number many; Lovers had done these as he thought; lovers
made him remember he was one, and that often he had carved his Mistrisses name
upon Bay trees, to show her conquest, which she had requited, cutting his name
in Willowes, to demonstrate his fate. This afflicted him, and moved so much in
him, as he could not but frame some verses in his imagination, which after
were given to Amphilanthus, and his other companions; the lines were these,
place and fortune procuring them.

Sweet solitarines, joy to those hearts
That feel the pleasure of Loves sporting darts,
Grudge me not, though a vassal to his might,
And a poor subject to cursed changings spite,
To rest in you, or rather restless move
In your contents to sorrow for my love.
A Love, which living, lives as dead to me,
As holy relics which in boxes be,
Placed in a chest, that overthrows my joy,
Shut up in change, which more then plagues destroy.
These, O you solitariness, may both endure,
And be a Surgeon to find me a cure:
For this cursed corsiue eating my best rest
Memory, sad memory in you once blessed,
But now most miserable with the weight
Of that, which only shows Loves strange deceit;
You are that cruel wound that inly wears
My soul, my body wasting into tears.
You keep mine eyes vnclos'd, my heart untied,
From letting thought of my best days to slide.
Froward Remembrance, what delight have you,
Over my miseries to take a view?
Why do you tell me in this same-like place
Of Earths best blessing I have seen the face?
But maskd from me, I only see the shade
Of that, which once my brightest Sunshine made.
You tell me, that I then was blessed in Love,
When equal passions did together move.
O why is this alone to bring distress
Without a salve, but torments in excess?
A cruel Steward you are to inrole
My once-good days, of purpose to control
With eyes of sorrow; yet leave me undone
By too much confidence my third so sponne:
^n conscience move not such a spleen of scorn,
Under whose swellings my despaires are borne.
Are you offended (choicest Memory),
That of your perfect gift I did glory?
If I did so offend, yet pardon me.
Since 'twas to set ^orth your true exclencie.
Sufficiently I thus do punished stand,
While all that cursed is, you bring to my hand.
Or, is it that I no way worthy was
In so rich treasure my few days to pass?
Alas, if so and such a treasure given
Must I for this to Hell-like pain be driven?
Fully torment me now, and what is best
Together take, and memory with the rest,
Leave not that to me, since but for my ill,
Which punish may, and millions of hearts kill.
Then may I lonely sit down with my loss
Without vexation, for my losses cross:
Forgetting pleasures late embraced with Love,
Lin^k'd to a faith, the world could never move;
Chain^d with affection, I hoped could not change,
Not thinking Earth could yield a place to range:
But staying, cruelly you set my bliss
With deepest mourning in my sight, for miss
And thus must I imagine my curse more,
When you I loved add to my mischiefs store:
If not, then Memory continue still,
And vex me with your perfectest known skill,
While you dear solitariness accept
Me to your charge, whose many passions kept
In your sweet dwellings have this profit gaind,
That in more delicacie none was paind:
Your rareness now receive my rarer woe
With change, and Love appoints my soul to know.
When he had made this, and committed them to that keeper, who yet would not be
persuaded to set him at liberty, but continued the more to molest him, like a
soar that one beats to cure, yet smarts the more for beating. So did Memory
abide with him: Then walked he on to meet his friends, who were all in their
kinds as much perplexed as himself. Amphilanthus alone, and so the abler to be
bold in speech, began thus, walking (with his arms folded, lovingly for love,
one within the other) along a sweet River. Unhappy man, sighed he, that lives
to be vexed with the same that once most delighted thee; who could have
thought inconstancy a weight, if not to press me on to more delight? Le^^ I
till now any wherein change brought not unspeakable content? When I took
Antissia, thought I not I was happy in the change? When I before had altered
from and to that love, did it not bring a full consent of bliss? But now that
I have changed, and for, and to the best, alas, how am I troubled? How
afflicted? How perplexed? Constancy I see, is the only perfect virtue, and
the contrary, the truest fault, which like sins, intices one still on, of
purpose to leave one in the height: as the height of enjoying makes one leave
the love to it. I have offended, all you powers of love pardon me, and if there
be any one among you, that has the rule of truth, govern me, direct me, and
henceforth assure your self of my faith, and true subjection, error makes me
perfect, and shows me the light of understanding. But what talk I of truth?
Why commend I faith when I am uncertain, whether these will win? She alas,
she does love, and woe is me, my hope's in this quite lost, she loves, and
so I see my end; yet never shall that come without a noble conclusion, and
that, her eyes and ears shall witness with my loss. Dearest once pity, my
sad looks, shall tell thee I do love, my sighs shall make thee hear my
pains, my eyes shall let thee see (if thou will but see me) that only thy
sight is their comfort; for when from thee they stir, they must find a new
seat to turn in, and a head to dwell in, and so now they have, for nothing see
they but thy delicacy, nothing view but thy perfections, turn from all to
thee, and only turn unto thee; My soul has also eyes to see thy worth, Love
has now framed me wholly to thy Laws, command then, here I breath but to thy
love, from which, when I do swerve, let me love unrequited; but dearest be
thou kind, and then have I all bliss. Why should not thou leave one, since
for thee I Will leave all? Be once unconstant to save me as 'twere from death, who
for it will be true, I vow, and this vow still will keep, that only thou art
worthy and alone will I love thee.

Then casting up his eyes, he saw before him a rare meadow, and in the midst of
it a little Arbor, as he so far off took it to be, but drawing nearer he
found a delicate Fountain cricled about with Orange, and Pomgranet trees, the
ground under them all hard sand, about the Fountain (as next adjoining) was a
hedge of Iesamnis mingled with Roses and Woodbines, and within that, paued with
pauements of diverse colors, placed for show and pleasure; on the steps he sat
down beholding the work of the Fountain which was most curious, being a
fair Maid as it were, thinking to lade it dry, but still the water came as
fast, as it past over the dish she seemd to lade withal: and just thus said
he, are my labors fruitless, my woes increasing faster then my pains find
ease. Then having enough, as he thought, given liberty to his speech, he put
the rest of his thought into excellent verse, making such excelling ones, as
none could any more imitate or match them, then equal his valor: so exquisite
was he in all true virtues, and skill in Poetry, a quallitie among the best
much prized and esteemed, Princes brought up in that, next to the use of Arms.
When he had finished them, he sat a while still, then looking on the
Fountain, he said, Dear hopes spring as this water, flow to inioying like
this stream, but wast not till my life does wast in me; nay dye, run to my
Love, and tell her what I feel; Say, and say boldly, till I knew her self I
was but ignorant, and now do know, that only she, and she alone, can save or
ruin^ me.

Many more, and far more excellent discourses, had he with himself, and such
as I am altogether unable to set down, therefore leave them to be guessed at by
those who are able to comprehend his worth, and understanding; such may
express his passions, all else admire, and admiringl^ ^steeme so incomparable
a Prince, who for a little while continued ^hus, but then leaving the Fountain
he went strait on, and followed on his way till he came unto a Hill, the sides
appearing rocky, the topp he might discern green, and some trees upon it; he
by little and little climbed to the topp, where in the middle of it he saw a
hole, and looking in at that hole perceived fire a pretty way below it, and
that fire as if it were stirred by some hands, whereupon he concluded, that
this was some poor abode of some miserable people, either made so by want or
misfortune, which likewise might be want, that being the greatest misery.

Round abo^t the top he sought, but at last thought with himself, that there
was no way to see the Inhabitants but by some way in the side of this Rock,
wherefore he went down again, and half about the Hill, when he found a
little door of stone, the even proportion of the opening making him know it
to be so, else nothing could have disordered it, so close it was, appearing but
like chinkes or clifts. He pulled at it, but it would not stir; then he
knocked, when straight a little window was opened, and out of it an ugly old
Dwarf looked, whose face was as wrinkled as the rock, his complexion
Sand-colour without so much red as to make a difference 'twixt his lips, and
face; his hair had been black, but now was grown grisled, yet still kept
the natural stubbornness of it being but thin, and those few hairs desirous
to be seen stood staring, neither were they of any equal length, but like a
horses maine, new taken from grass, which by the wantonness of some of his
companions had been bit, and natch'd in diverse places. Beard he had none, to
distinguish his sex, his habits being forced to speak for him to that
purpose; only a wart he had on his right cheek, which liberally bestowed some
hair according to the substance, for the sight of such as saw him. He was not
only a Dwarf but the least of those creatures, and in some sort the
ill-fauoured'st; this youth seeing Amphilanthus, straight cried, alas we are
betrayed, for here is an armed man that will assuredly destroy us.

The Prince promised on his word, he, nor any there should have the lest harm,
if he would let him but come in unto him; the old Dwarf scarce knew how to
trust, having before been in his trust deceived, wherefore he desired first to
know who he was that gave his word. The King answered, I am called, and known
by the name of the Knight of Love, but mine own name, said he, is
Amphilanthus. Praised be heaven, said he, that you are landed here, for alas my
Lord, I am your Subject, miserably perplexed, by a cruel and tyranicall man,
Lord of the Island of Strombolli, and who has undone me, and my children; then
leaped he from the window, and opened the door which was made fast with many
bolts of iron: the door open the King went in, though with some difficulty at
the entering, by reason the place was low, and fitter for such a man as the
Host, then the Romanian King. In the room he found a woman, in height and
loveliness answerable to the man, and three younger men then himself, but all
of his proportion, who seemed to be his Sons. Then did Amphilanthus desire to
know the cause of his complaining against the Lord of Strombolli, which the old
Dwarf began to relate in this manner.

May it please you, great Prince, to understand, I am called Nainio borne in
Strombolli to pretty possessions, the which I enjoyed some years after my
Fathers decease, but the Lord of the Island, (or better to say, the Governor)
passing that way, and seeing my living pleasant and delightful, groves of
Orange, and Lemmon Trees, all other fruits plentif^lly yielding themselves for
our uses, grew in love with the place, and in hate with me; first, he
peremptorily commanded me to bring my wife, and these tall men my sons, to
attend him, his wife and children. I that was borne free would not be made a
slave; wherefore (I must confess unadvisedly) I gave too rough an answer,
that bred dislike, and gave just occasion against me. Then sent he for me,
made me a scorn in the eyes of all men, and when he had gloried enough in my
misery, scoffing at my shape and stature, saying, I would make a fit Commander
against the Infidels, he put me, and my family into a little boat, and when
shipping went for Greece, sent me along with them: but such kindness I found
among them, as they indeed carried me, but brought me back again; this was
discovered, whereupon I was to die: but my pardon was got by the Lady, wife to
the Lord, a virtuous and sweet Lady, on condition if ever I were found in
Str^mbolli, or any part of Italy, I should die for it. Then went I away, and
with the first mentioned Sailors got into this sea, and so unto this Island,
where I have remaind but in continual fear; for considering the danger I was
in for my life, it so with the memory frights me, as I had rather have
steru'd here, then gone hence for fear of harm, every one that I hear or
see in this place being as a Sprite unto me, and so did you appear, till you
told me who you were, so much do I yet stand in awe of the cruel Island Lord.

The King smiled to hear his discourse, but most to see his action, which was
so timorous and affrighted, as never any man beheld the like; and as did, so
did his Sons, like Munkeys, who imitating one another answer in gestures as
aptly and redily as one Ecco to another, and as like, and so the sport was
doubled. Great delight did he take in these little men; wherefore gently and
mildly he gaind so much of them, as they would with him leave that place,
conditionally that he would not carry them into Italy, where they more feared
their first enemy, then trusted to the power of the King, such a Lord is
coward fear over base minds, as understanding gains small place in their
hearts, as by this appeared, else might they have been assured in his company
in Strombolli it self.

But consents agreeing on both sides, they went out of the rock to meet the
other Princes, the Dwarfes quaking at every leaf that shook, and fainted when
they heard the Armor a little clash in his going; but directly they lost life
for a while, when they met the other Knights, not being able to believe they
were their Lords friends. But after they grew more valiant, like a coward, who
against his mind being brought into the middle of a battle, can neither
run, nor his cries be heard, and therefore of force must abide that hell
torment: So were these brought to it by sight of fights, when death could only
have relieved them from fear.

Amphilanthus following on, came to a great Cave, into which he went, putting
the Dwarfes before him; a great way they passed into it till he came to a
River, which either was black, or the darkness of that shadowed place made
appear so: the vault was of height sufficient for him without trouble to walk
in, and of breadth for three to go a front, paued and covered round with free
stone, when he came to the River he desired to pass it, but at first saw no
means; at last he discouerd (or fear in his Dwarfes discouerd for him, they
being able to discern, having been long in the dark, which though at first it
blindes like Love, yet it gives at last fight to get out of it); so they found
a board, which was fastened with chains to the top of the Vault, and two pines
of iron that held the chains, being stuck into the wall; those being pulled
out, the chains let the Planke fall gently down, just cross over the water,
which was not above six yards over, but being on it, they might see a great way
up and down the stream. Then passed they on to a door which they opened, a
pretty way along the same vault from the brook, and the end of it, through which
they entered into a dainty Garden, and so into a fair Palace of Alabaster,
encompassed with Hills, or rather Mountains, of such height, as no way was
possible to be found to come at it, but through the same vault the King came.
Diverse Gardens and Orchards did surround this palace: in every one was a
fountain, and every fountain rich in art, and plentifully furnished with the
virtue of liberality, freely bestowing water in abundance.

These places he past, staying in a large stone Gallerie, set upon pillars of
the same stone; there he sat down, complaining still of his Mistrisse, whose
heart was stored with pain and love, equally oppressing her. O (cride he) my
dearest love, the sweetest cruel that ever Nature framed, how have I miserable
man offended thee? that not so much as a look or show of pity will proceed
from thee to comfort me: are all thy favors locked up, and only sad
countenances allotted me? Alas, consider women were made to love, and not to
kill; yet you will destroy with cruel force, while I changed to a tender
creature, sit weeping and mourning for thy cruelty, which yet I can hardly
term so, since thou know not my pain.

Further he would have proceeded, when a door opened into that room, and out
of it came a grave Lady, apparreld in a black habit, and many more young women
attending her; she straight went to him, saluting him thus. Brave King,
welcome to this place, being the abiding of your friend, and servant. He
looking upon her, perceived wisdom, modesty, and goodness figured in her
face; wherefore with a kind acceptance he received this salutation, desiring
to be informed of the place, but most to know how he came known to her.

Sir (said she) my name is Mellissea, and having skill in the Art of
Astrology, I have found much concerning you, and as much desire to do you
service. Can you find good Madam (said he), whether I shall be happy in my
love, or not? In love my Lord (said she) you shall be most happy, for all
shall love you that you wish: but yet you must be crossed in this you now
affect, though contrary to her heart.

But shall I not enjoy her then? miserable fortune, take all loves from me, so
I may have hers. She loves you (said Mellissea), and it will prove your fault
if you lose her, which I think, you will and must; to prevent which, if
possible, beware of a treacherous servant. For this place, it is that anciently
reverenced, and honored Island of Delos, famous for the birth of those two
great lights, Apollo and Diana; the ruins of Apollo's and Latona's Temples
remaining to this day on the other side of that mountain, called Cynthus; once
rich and populous, now poor and peoplelesse, none or very few inhabiting here,
besides this my family; the sharp and cruel rocks which girdle this Island,
guarding it self and us from dangerous robbings. But must I loose my Love
(said Amphilanthus)? Accursed fate that so should happen. I yet do hope, if I
may be assured she loves me, this will never be.

Well my Lord (said she) to let you see, that hope is too poor a thing in
comparison of truth to trust to, I will give you these tokens, to make you truly
see my words are true; you have lately had a wound by a woman, but this a
greater and more dangerous you must suffer, which will endanger your life far
more then that last did; yet shall the cause proceed from your own rashness,
which you shall repent when it is too late, and when time is past, know, the
means might have prevented it: but to do what I may for your good, I advise
you to this; alter your determination for your journey to Morea, and in stead
of it, go straight to Ciprus, where you must finish an Enchantment, and at
your return come hither, and with you bring that company that you release
there, then shall I be more able to advise you, for this does yet darken some
part of my knowledge of you.

He remaind much perplexed with those words; yet as well as such affliction
would permit him, he made show of patience. Then did Mellissea send one of her
Maids to bring his companions to him, hoping their sights, and the discourse
of their fortunes would a little remove his melancholy from him: in the mean
time he with crossed arms walked up and down the Gallerie, musing in
himself, how he should so far and deadlily fall out with himself, as to be
the cause of his own misery, not being able, though he had the best
understanding, to reach into this mystery. Sometimes the Lady discoursed to
him, and he for civility did answer her; yet oft-times she was content to
attend his own leisure for his reply, so much power had his passions over him.

Thus he remaind molested, while Steriamus following his right hand way, was
brought into a fine plain, and thence to the foot of a mountain, where he
found rich pillars of Marble, and many more signs of some magnificent
building, which sight wrought pity in him, remembering how glorious they seemed
to have been, now thrown down to ruin; And so (said he) was my fortune
fair, and brave in show, but now cast low to despair and loss. O Pamphilia,
Goddess of my soul, accept me yet at last, if not for thy servant, yet for
thy Priest, and on the Altar of thy scorn will I daily offer up the sacrifice
of true and spotless love: my heart shall be the offering, my tears the
water, my miserable body the Temple, and thy hate and cruellest disdain, the
enemy that lays it waste. Once yet consider, greatest beauty, mightiest
riches, sumptuousest buildings, all have some end; brightest glory cannot ever
dure; and as of goodness, must not ill have so? grant this, and then thy rage
must needs conclude.

Yet thus, did not his pain find conclusion, but a little further he went
among those ruins, where he laid himself not down, but threw himself among
those poor and destroyed relics of the rarest Temples, where hard by he
heard Ollorandus likewise complaining. My Melasinda (said he) how justly may
thou blame thy Ollorandus, who still travels further from thee, who strove to
bring thy love still nearest to him? Can thou imagine thy immaculate
affection well bestowed, when so great neglect requiteth it? Will thou, or
may thou think the treasure of thy love, and richest gift of it well
bestowed, when absence is the payment to it? If against me and these thou
do but justly except, yet what does hold thee from killing that slave, and
setting thy dear soul at liberty? No, thy virtues will not like a murderer,
it must be as it is, Destiny must only work, and despairing sorrow tire it
self in me. Steriamus wanting pity, knew the miss, and therefore would be
as charitable as he could: to show which goodness, he rose, and went to
Ollorandus to put him from his mourning, who was then again entering into his
waylings, telling him, they were too long from Amphilanthus. As he start up,
behold Dolorindus, who came sadly toward them, whom they called to them, and
so together went from that place, meaning to ascend the mountain: but then
came the servant of Mellissea to them, entreating their companies from her
Mistrisse to the Palace, where they should meet their companion. They soon
consented to that inuitation; whither being come, they told all their
adventures one to another; then were they brought into a fair room, where
after they had eaten, Mellissea again thus spoke.

My Lords, the time calls upon you, occasions being such, as your presences are
required in several places: wherefore first to you my Lord Steriamus I must
say, you must haste hence, and as you desire your own happy ends in love,
observe what I advise you. Go from hence into Arcadia, fear not, for nothing
shall encounter you of harm. Dolorindus, do you the like, for much is your
being there requisite: from thence go to Saint Maura, and in a rock which
lies just against it toward Cephalonia, privately remain till fortune call
you thence by help, which shall appear death; this may seem hard and
terrible, but fear it not, since it shall bring your happiness; then go into
Greece again, and help your friends, and your self in the Conquest of
Albania. They took her hand, and kissed it, on it swearing to obey her Counsel.
Amphilanthus was sorry for his vow, especially that his journey was staid to
Morea: but he made the cause of his grief, for parting with his friends.

Then to Ollorandus she thus spoke: The good that shall come to you must
proceed from this brave King, who shall give unto you both security of life,
and your only love: life he shall venture for you, and save yours by the
hazard of himself: keep then together, and still be your loves firm and
constant, assisting one another; for a time will be, when you shall merit this
from Amphilanthus, giving him as great a gift. And credit what I say; for it is
as true, as by my means you received the Armor in the Forest, when you were
fast sleeping, it being laid by you, from which you have taken the name of
Knight of the Forest. For you my Lord, think not but I am as careful, or
more of you then any, though I have left you last; for as yet I can say little:
but fear nothing except what I have already warnd you of; my Art shall attend
you, and I never fail to serve you, make haste then to Cyprus, and be
careful. Then all promising to perform her will, with tears in their eyes
they took leave of each other.

Steriamus and Dolorindus demanding what service Amphilanthus would command
them. He answered, They should honor him much in remembering him to the King and
Queen, to whom by Steriamus he sent the old Dwarfes, and the youngest Son
called after his Fathers name, he desired Dolorindus to present to Pamphilia
from him.

Thus they parted, and Amphilanthus, Ollorandus, and the other two dwarfes who
served them for Squires, took their way for Cyprus. Quick was the journey of
the other two, arriving in Laconia, and so hasting to Mantinea, where then the
King was; but being near, Steriamus began to faint, fearing the sight of her,
he most desired to see, yet encouraged by Dolorindus to perform what he had
engaged his word to do, they went on, coming to the Court, when the King, and
all the Princes were assembled to judge the Traitors. But Steriamus whose same
was now far spread for his noble Acts at Constantinople, and diverse others,
was soon known in the Hall, and as soon with great joy brought before the
King, to whom he delivered the Present, and service of Amphilanthus.

The King infinitely rejoiced to hear of his brave friend, and taking the
Dwarf (the Queen with as much love accepting the other) desired before they
passed to the Judgment to hear of their adventures. Then did Steriamus openly
relate all, that had happened him after his depart, until their coming
thither, in so good words and Princely a manner, as all admired, and loved him;
especially, for doing it with such affection, and truth, to the eternal
renown of incomparable Amphilanthus. Then presented he Dolorindus to the King,
whose name and presence was welcome to at that time; especially, assuring
himself now to have an end and true knowledge of the Traitors, who were lead
(at their coming in) aside, so as they neither saw them, nor heard the
relation of the adventure at Sio, which was extreme strange, and wondered at by
all, the more the cause of admiration was, the more still increased their
honors that atcheiued it. Then went the Princes to Pamphilia, who much
commended Steriamus for his discourse, kindly of Dolorindus, accepting the
Dwarf, promising to love him for his Lords sake: then were all placed again,
Rosindy taking Steriamus, and setting him between him and his friend
Selarinus, who was true joy it self to see Steriamus again, the traitors then
entr^d, to whom the King thus spoke.

Without any more falsehood, truly declare unto me who you are, and your true
names, for those you took upon you, I know are false: then discover the cause
of taking my daughter, deal truly, if any pity be expected by you, to be
showed unto you. The old man curstly replied, He wondered a King should have so
ill a conceit of another of his own rank, as to think falsehood could be in a
royal breast, and more did he admire that the King of Morea who before had
been counted just, would offer that injustice to the King of Negropont, who
having been ill used by an ungrateful Child, and coming thither for succor
should be made a Prisoner like a Traitor, and used like thieves.

Then answered the King, behold my Lords before you the vildest of men, and
falsest of Traitors; to prove which Dolorindus stand forth and witness against
him; Dolorindus indeed came forth, the Traitor seeing him, straight too well
knew him; wherefore roaring out he cried, I am undone, for now all is betrayed.
Then did Dolorindus again tell the manner of his treacherous taking, and
imprisoning him, and withal the winning, and destroying of the Castle, and his
servants; the burning of his wicked wife, and the bestowing of the Island upon
Berlandis, and the other two their Squires, whom they had matched to the three
Sisters. These creatures being past help to be saved, fell down on their
faces, confessing the truth, which was this.

The Son to this wicked man seeing the picture of Pamphilia, which was sent
some two years before by Pamphilia to her Uncle, but taken away by Pirates who
after landed at Sio, and among other things sold that. He fell in love with it,
and so longed to enjoy her, as nothing but death appeared in him; which the
devil his Father perceiving, plotted all ways he could; to which end, he
invented that false Bridge, hoping to get some of her brothers or friends, if
not, some that might bring them means to find a trick to gain her.

Tenn months this continued, then came the poor Dolorindus, who by Treason
they got, and having heard his Story, which almost was the same he told for
himself, only this differing, that the Kingdom was not given by affection to
the daughter, but by right, as being a gift given by the Grandfather to his
Daughter, and her first borne, which happened to be a Daughter, and so she
elder, put Dolorindus by. The rest was true of her ill deserving, but the
Father righted by his Son, by a Combat against two mighty men was delivered
from prison, she put down from gouenment and committed to his Prison, where
shortly after she died.

This Story the wicked man made his own, and his Son took the name of brave
Dolorindus, forging the rest, and making that deceitful Chariot of purpose to
betray the Princess whom they purposed to have carried with them to Sio, and
to keep her by that Treason against all, at least the amorous Lover should
have had his desire.

This being confessed, and he no Prince, but an usurping Lord of other men's
rights, and a Kings, and Princes honor, they were all condemned and executed
according to the Archadian Law. Now is the time of Steriamus departing come,
and also for Dolorindus who taking their leaves of the King, and Court,
promised Rosindy, and Selarinus to meet them soon after in Macedon; kissing
Pamphilia's hand once more to bless his lips with the last affectionate kiss,
he can ever have from her, or give to her, he departed with his friend
toward Snt. Maura, perplexed in soul, love working more terribly, now then
ever, like that killing disease which parts not but with life: and so was this
sickness come now to the height in him. A little less case felt Antissia, who
now must soon leave Morea; the Abmassadour recovered of his hurts, and others
chosen to go in Commission with him concerning the forces, being the two brave
Princes of Corinth, and Elis, Brother to the proud lover of Parselius, who he
met as you have heard. More honorably Antissia could not be accompanied, and
since she must go, 'twas thought fit she went with them.

The day before she was to go, not having all night taken any rest, she rose
earlyer then she was accustomed, and sooner then any was stirring she came
into Pamphilia's Chamber, who she found sweetly sleeping, but drawing the
curtain she awaked, and seeing her, wondered what occasion had called her up so
soon, and at that hour to be dressed, wherefore she said, why, what
disturbance, sweet Antissia, has thus raised you? What disquiets molested you?
Can your thoughts afford you no more rest? Or, is it joy for your departure,
makes you thus early, and takes away that dull humor of sleep from your
spirits? Joy to part? O me, replied she weeping. No Pamphilia, my heart does
break to think of it, my soul is tortured so, as it enioyes no peace for
griefs additions.

The loss of your company is much more to me, said the Princess; for you
gone, who shall I have the blessing to converse withal? With whom, or to whom
may I freely say my mind? To whom speak my pain? To whom wail my
misfortunes? Thus is the loss most in me; for you go to your Nephew, where
you soon will see your love, while I lamenting, spend my time I am to tarry
here; which since you go will seem ages to me.

Why will you be thus cruel, most sweet Pamphilia said she, to add unto my
torments, by the expression of your favor to me? I shall go it is true, to my
Nephew, rather to content him then my self, since what will his Court be to me,
when I shall be in the Dungeon of Despair? For seeing my Love, much hope I
have, when he favors me not so much, as by these Princes to send one poor
remembrance, to let me know he thinks on such a soul; a soul indeed,
won, and loft by him, who now despises the memory of her, who disdained not
to love, and serve him, and who I know, suffers in honor for him: but let her
suffer, and be he as ungrateful as he will, I yet must love so much as to
lament his loss. But me thought you touched even now of parting, whither, rare
Lady, will you go? Or what quarrel have you to poor Morea, to leave it
desolate, as so it must be when you forsake it? I shall leave it but for a
while, said she, and then it will be freer, and safer from afflictions, when
the most afflicted shall be absent from it. Go I must with mine Uncle, to be
seen to the Pamphilians, and acknowledged their Princess; which Country my
Uncle in his youth (being as brave and valiant a man as ever breathed) won
from the subjection of Tyrants; in requital whereof the people chose him their
King, their love being then so great, and still continuing, as they have given
him leave to choose his Successor, which by reason he never married, had else
fallen to them again for choice. He long since chose me, and to that end gave
me that name: but he growing old, or rather weak, and they desirous to know
me, gained of him to make this voyage for me, with whom I do return speedily,
and now rejoice in the soon coming of it, since you and I must part.

O name not that word, great Princess, sighed she, but rather spend this
little time in such content as our hearts can permit us, disposing these hours
to a more pleasing purpose, pray therefore rise, and go into the solitary
wood, where we may unheard, and vnperceiu'd, better discourse our woes, saddly,
and freely complaining. I will ever yield unto your desires, said Pamphilia:
then go you before, and I shall soon follow you. Antissia left her, taking
the way to the Walks. Pamphilia got up, and as she was making her ready, her
passionate breast scarce allowing her any respite from her passions, brought
these Verses to her mind, wherein she then imprinted them.

Dear Love, alas, how have I wronged thee,
That ceaselesly thou still do follow me?
My heart of Diamond clear, and hard I find,
May yet be pierced with one of the same kind,
Which has in it engraven a love more pure,
Then spotless white, and deep still to endure,
Wrought in with tears of never resting pain,
Carved with the sharpest point of cursed disdain.
Rain often does wash away a slender mark,
Tears make mine firmer, and as one small spark
In straw may make a fier^ so sparks of love
Kindles incessantly in me to move;
While cruelst you, do only pleasure take,
To make me faster tied to scorns sharp stake,
It Is harder, and more strength must used be
To shake a tree, then boug^es we bending see:
So to move me it was alone your power
None else could ere have found a yielding hour
Cursed be subjection, yet blessed in this sort,
That against all but one choice, my heart a fort
Has ever lasted: though beseig'd, not moved,
But by their miss my strength the stronger proved
Resisting with that constant might, that win
They scarce could parley, much less foes get in.
Yet worse then foes your sligh^ings prove to be,
When careless you no pity take on me.
Make good my dreams, wherein you kind appear,
Be to mine eyes, as to my soul, most dear.
From your accustomed strangeness, at last turn;
An ancient house once fired, will quickly burn,
And wast vnhelp'd, my long love claims a time
To have aid granted to this height I clime.
A Diamond pure, and hard, an vnshak't tree
A burning house find help, and prize in me.
Being ready, she went into the Garden Woods, where she saw Antissia sadly
walking, her eyes on the earth, her sighs breathing like a sweet gale claiming
pity from above, for the earth she said would yield her none, yet she besought
that too, and at last passion procured alteration from mourning, she began to
sing a Song, or rather part of one, which was thus.

STay mine eyes, these floods of tears
Seems but follies weakly growing,
Babes at nurse such wayling bears,
Frowardness such drops bestowing:
But Ni^be must show my fate,
She wept and grieved her self a state.
My sorrows like her Babes appear
Daily added by increasing;
She lost them, I loose my Dear,
Not one spared from woes never ceasing:
She made a r^ck, heaven drops down tears,
Which pity shows, and on her wears.
Assuredly more there was of this Song, or else she had with her vnframed and
unfashioned thoughts, as vnfashionably framd these lines. But then Pamphilia
came to her, saying; Sweet Antissia, leave these dolorous complaints, when we
are parted, let o^^ hearts bleed tears: but let us not deprive our selves of
this little comfort^ at least, let us flatter our selves, and think we now
feel some; and when absence makes us know the contrary, then mourn. Alas
(said Antissia) I foresee my harm, my Spirit tells me once being gone, gone
will my joys be altogether: sadness will presage any thing (said Pamphilia),
especially where that may procure more sadness; melancholy, the nurse of such
passions being glad, when her authority is esteemd, and yielded to: and so
much has it wrought in me, as I have many hours sat looking on the fire, in
it making as many sad bodies, as children, do variety of faces, being pleased,
or displeased, or as mine own fancies have felt pains, and all this was but
melancholy, and truly that is enough to spoil any, so strangely it grows
upon one, and so pleasing is the snare, as till it has ruind one, no fault is
found with it, but like death, embraced by the ancient brave men, like honor
and delight. This I have found and smarted with it; leave it then, and nip it
in the bud, lest it blow to overthrow your life and happiness, for my sake be
a little more cheerful, and I will promise you, when you are gone, I will as
much bewail absence.

Antissia took her hand, and though against her will kissed it, saying;
Admired Princess, let your poor unfortunate friend and servant, be in
absence but sometimes remembered, with a wish to see her with you, and that will
bring an unspeakable content to that distressed creature, on whom fortune tries
her curstest power in despitefull rage, and cruelty. Doubt not me more dear
Antissia (said she), for those wishes shall be, and attended with others for
your happiness, then distrust not me for Pamphilia must be just.

Thus in kind discourse they continued, promising to each other, what was in
love demanded to demonstrate their affections, till it was time to retire.
Little meat that Dinner served them, whose hearts had filled their Stomachs
with love and sorrow: after Dinner, going again to that sad place that night
being the last, lying together, and with sad, but loving discourse passing
those dark hours day being loath to see Antisius tears, but greiu'd, and
afraid to see Pamphilia weep, did hide her face till the Sun greedy of so
precious, and sweet a dew looking red, with have came into the room, where
they blushingly ashamed so to be surprised, put on their clothes, not to be in
danger of his heat.

No sooner were they ready, but Antissia was called for, who the sweetest Lady
accompanied to her Coatch with maine tears, and sad, because parting kiss,
taking leave of each other, Antissia by her sorrow foretelling her coming, or
indeed but showing her already befallen loss, Pamphilia was sorry for her
going, because she was now assured of her love: the Court did in general
lament, such love and respect she had gained by her courteous and sweet
behavior, many wishing her married to Parselius, that so they might still
keep her with them, so many well wishes she had, as surely made her journey
more prosperous, for safety; and speedily (considering the way) she arrived at
Constantinople, being lovingly, and kindly entertained by the King, and
affectionatly by her Uncle, whose joy was greatest knowing what hazard she had
suffered, aiming now at nothing more then how to get the brave Leandrus to
perform what before was determined between their Parents.

She gone, preparation was made for the journey of Pamphilia, rich Chariots,
Coaches, furniture for Horses, and all other necessary things that could be
demanded for service, or state; the Liueries for her servants being of the same
colors the Cha^^ots, and other furnitures were, and them all of her own
chosen colurs, which were Watchet and Crimson, as the Chariots were Watchet,
embroydred with Crimson and purle of Silver, one with Pearl, all the rest
alike. The King and Queen did accompany her to the seaside, all the other
Princes bringing her aboard, and there kissing her hands.

Thus away she went sailing with gentle and pleasant wind, till the Pilate told
the king, that a great fleet followed them, by their colors, and the shapes of
the ships, showing they were Italians. Wherefore they not knowing the business
prepared for the worst; when they perceived out of the greatest and fairest of
these ships, Knights unarmed, and Ladies armd with beauty, able to conquer
worlds of hearts, to issue, and enter a delicate Galley, which straight made
way by oars toward them.

The King seeing it, and Pamphilia being above any Princess courteous,
commanded their ship to strike sail, least harm might befall them in their
coming aboard. Straight came they into the ship, the first and chief of those
Knights with a grave, and manly fashion, delivering these words holding a Lady
(most exact in all perfections) by the hand. Most incomparable Princess, the
fame of whose worth the world is filled withal, and yet wants another to be able
to comprehend the fullness of it. Be pleased to know, that this Lady and my
self are your devoted Servants, Perissus and Limena of Cecillia, rescued and
saved from ruin and death by your magnanimious brother Parselius, to whom we
were now going to manifest our gratefulness to him, but hearing by a ship
which came from Morea, just as we were putting a shore, that the Prince is
neither there, nor has been of sometimes heard of, withal of your journey, we
resolved to attend you, and to you do the service we owe him, which by him I
know will be a like taken, as to himself; such is his affection to you, such
admirable perfections living in him, as love, and affection to his friends are
plentifully flourishing in him; wherefore we beseech you to accept of our
affectionate services, which shall ever (next to Parselius) be most
deuotiouslie observing to your commands. Him we love for his virtues, and the
benefits we have received from him; you were love for him and your own
merits, whose name does duly claim all eyes, and hearts to love and admire.

Pamphilia, whose modesty never heard her own commendations without blushing,
pretily did now express a bashfulnesse, but her speech delivered with
confidence showed those words, nor the speaker of them need for them blush,
they were these.

Brave and renowned King, of whose virtues mine ears have long since been
witness; be pleased to hear your servant say, she does bless her eyes,
that presents such worth unto them, and esteem this as my chiefest happiness,
that for the first encounter in my journey, fortune favors me with the
meeting of such excellent Princes, in whom are all the powers of true
worthiness, that can be in either, or both sexes; and in you most happy
Queen, the rare virtue of matchless and loyal constancy; and much do I
bless my destine thus to enjoy your companies, which Parselius shall thank
you for, and I him for you.

Then she presented them both to her Uncle, who kindly welcomed them, being
glad such royal company would ^ttend his Niece to honor her Coronation, which
he meant should be with all speed after their arrival, he determining to
retire to a religious house, he had built to that purpose. Thus with happy and
pleasant content she sailed toward Pamphilia, while Parselius all this while
continuing in sweet delight, it is now fit time to let him see his fault
committed in the greatest kind of ill, being breach of faith in love.

One night in his sleep, Urania appeared unto him, seeming infinitely
perplexed, but as if rather filled with scorn, then sorrow, telling him, he was
a Traitor to love, and the subtillest betrayer of truth. Now may you joy said
she in your sha^e and change, your cruel falsehood having undone my trust, but
think not this troubles me farther, then for virtues sake; so far are you
now from my thoughts, as I study how I never more may hear of you; and to
assure you of this, you shall see me give my self before your face, to another
more worthy, because more just. This in soul so grieved him, as he cried,
sobd, groand, and so lamentably took on, as the kind Dalinea lying by him
awaked, having much ado to bring him out of his woeful dream. But when he
recovered his senses, they were but to make him more truly feel pain,
continuing in such extremity of weeping, as she feared his heart would break
withal, which made her heart even rend with compassion. Much she entreated,
and even besought him to tell her the cause, but this of any secret must be
kept from her; she begged, he continued in laments, till at last he saw he
must not leave her thus in fear. Wherefore after he had a little studied how
to be more deceitful, or as equally as he had bin before, weeping still, and
she accompanying him in tears seeing his fall so fast; which he finding made
him weep the more, both now kindly lamenting each other, they remained the
most perfect souls of affliction, that ever had earthly bodies about them.
Compassion he had in great fulness to Dalinea, torment for Vrania's scorne^
affliction for her loss, hateful loathing his fault, condemning himself more
^ruelly then she would have done, all joining as it were for his utter
destruction; yet remained he in his bed, framing this excuse to satisfy his
wife, telling her that he imagined he saw all Arcadia on fire, the earth
flaming, and in the mid^st his father burning, who with lamentable cries
demanded help of him; wherefore said he, certainly some ill is befallen, or
befalling him, which makes me resolve instantly to go unto him. O take me with
you, said she. My dear, said he, pardon at this time my leaving you, for
should I carry you where troubles are? no, Sweet, remain you here, and be
assured, you soon shall hear of your Parselius, and if all be well, in short
time I Will return for you; besides, our mar^yage not yet known may wrong you if
not carefully carried: then dear love be patient, and stay here.

She could not deny, for words failed her, only she sob'd, and washed his face
with her tears, who was as much afflicted. Then rising he sent her Maids unto
her, and so departed to his chamber, where he armed himself: then being ready
to go to her, he thought the word or show of farewell, would but give new
wounds, wherefore writing some few lines, he delivered them to the Steward, and
so with charge to give the letter to her own hands, he took his horse,
hasting he knew not whither, regarding neither way nor any thing else; then
came he to the Sea side, his Squier nor daring to speak one word to him all
that journey; when he sent Clorinus (so was he called) to prouid a boat for him,
he thought it not fit to deny, nor durst he venture to council. In the mean
time came a little Barque, into which he went, turning his horse loose, not
considering what grief and trouble might come for his miss. But he who sought
for death, thought of no earthly content: he being in, they put again from the
Land, and at Clorinus return, were quite out of sight. He finding his Masters
horse without his Lord, fell into pitiful complaining not being able to
guess other then the worst mishappe: long he was resolving what to do, but in
conclusion he vowed to spend his life in solitary search of him, and so to
dye; but by no means to go to Dalinca, nor to be an ill news bringer to his
Parents. Heavily and afflictedly he passed on by the Sea side, till he met
the Squier of Leandrus, who joyfully asked him for his Lord, he as sadly
replied, he had lost him; then followed Leandrus who knowing the youth asked
for his friend, but to him he could make no answer but in tears. Sraight
fear possessed him, the youth still wept, Leandrus sighed, and taking him
aside coniured him to tell what he knew of his Lord.

Then did he relate all unto him, hiding only what might touch Dalinea; this
much moved the Prince, yet he sought to comfort Clorinus, telling him, he did
not see by this, any other harm likely to follow but some private grief had
made him take this course, and therefore willed him by any means to make no
business of it, but go and seek him as carefully as he could; aduising him by
reason of his love, which he knew he bare to Urania, to go to Ciprus, least
thither he were gone to try the enchantment. Thus they parted, Leandrus much
greiued for Parselius, not indeed being able to judge of the matter, yet took
he a good courage to him, as a happy foretelling of his friends safety, and
so took his way to Dalineas Castle, whom he found in as much molestation, as
ever loving, and faithful wife, felt for the absence of her husband. But when
she saw her Brother, the joy of that, and her judgment contending with her
passion, made her hide it so well, as he only believed she had been ill of a
fever, which was true, but it was the Hectique fever of love; Some days he
tarryed there, all which time she held in good order: but he once gone, she
fell into the most dolorous, and insufferable passions, that violence in
violent love could produce.

Parselius with a hartlesse body and wounded soul, never asking whither they
carried him, nor speaking one word, held on till they landed him in an Island
which they knew, so going away from them, he sought the most obscure place he
could, but finding now none sad enough desiring to outgoe Perissus in his
desolate living, which made him again remember the happiness he had in the
finding Urania, for whom he now suffers, was assaulted with a new kind of
sorrow, yet all but running to the end of torturing him, embracing memory for
telling him all her perfections, as if the fault, the misery of her rage, the
misfortune of her loss, were not enough to perplexe him, but he must needs add
memory as a plague of his own bringing, and cherishing. Then did he wish he
were in that Island, and that he might spend his days in the same rock, and
that it might likewise include his miseries, cursing his indiscretion, that
suffered the Ship to go away before she had conuayd him thither; then seeking
for some other Barque that might do it, he ran to the Sea again, where he
found a little boat, and in her an old Hermitte, with him he would go, nor
could the old Father dissuade him. To a Rock they came being a pretty way
within the Sea, where being landed, the old man ledd the way up to the top,
where it seemed there had been anciently a Temple of great state, and
bigness, as yet by the ruins did appear: among those sad places the Cell of
this good man was made, with this religious man, and in this solitary place he
resolved to end his days thinking he could not do better then hide his face,
which even himself was ashamed of, for having committed so execrable an
offense.

Then sat they down together, the old Hermitt consenting to his stay at last,
but something against his will, at first he took him, and he happy (if that
word may be used in that misery, where happiness, nor content, or any thing but
afflictions are) but use what term you will to this, here he stayed, and being
set they told their own stories to each other, Parselius beginning.

Aged and grave Father, give me leave by way of confession to tell you my
woeful life, which being so delivered claymes secrecy of it self, did not
your goodness otherwise warrant me that from you. My name is Parselius, borne
(in an unhappy hour, and under a cursed plannet) in Morea, Prince thereof, and
of all miseries, my possessions so largely extending in that continent, as none
has a more mighty inheritance. I was bred much at Athens, yet could I learn
no way to avoid misfortune, but how to be subject to it I was most apt,
humility to subjection reigning more in me then rule. My trauells I began
(as likewise all my good) with a Cousin of mine, also bred there, and for the
only happiness I ever tasted, We ^ent sometime together in the search of one,
who I ass^^e my self I have found, and with the finding lost my self, having
before that parted from my friends, to the most excellent (and in tha^ my sin
the more excelling) I came into an Island where I found, her, whose beauty
excelled all things but her mind, which yet beautified that^ else ma^chlesse
body, with her I fell in love, and loved her earnestly: villain that I ^ay, I
loved, and so prove by the change, my fault, much more that I must say I ever
loved her who (sweetest Creature) believing me, that then was just, went with
leaving that Island where she was bred, trusting me who have deceived her.

Many dangers we pass^d, she in all of them fearing nothing but my harm^, who
since have brought the greatest to her: at last a storm took us when we were
as we thought safe, and in sight of Ital^, and wherein we might have landed, but
desteny otherwise appointed for us. This tempest brought us from joy and
comfort to despair and loss; for we were carried (in the many days that it
endured) to Ciprus, where landing, by wicked charms our ship burned, and we
were forced to go up into the Island for succor.

Then arrived we at an inchaunted Palace, made of purpose for my destruction,
wherein Urania is enclosed, she whom once I did best love, who ought still to
have been best loved, and she for whose loss in my falsehood thus tormenteth
me, thence parted I deprived of all sense, but, by leaving that Land came
again into them to be more vexed with them; a while (and wretch, too small a
while,) lamenting her imprisonment, and my want which wilfully, I caus^d to be
no longer want, but direct loss.

O fault unpardonable, why do I live to confess it? and shame in me, not
quite devouring me: but I who was borne to ill, ledd by the servants of Hell,
or Hell it self conspiring my ruin, brought me into Achaia, and so into the
power of vild change.

There I saw Dalinea daughter to the King of Achaia, she blinded not alone
mine eyes with admiration, but my judgment, blotting out and forceing my
memory to be treacherous to me, made me forget all thoughts of my more
deserving love, and truth it self: letting me see nothing but desire of her
love, she virtuous (and too perfect for such a worthless Creature as my self)
could but allow of virtuous yielding, I to enjoy, granted any thing, and so I
married her, with whom I remained some while as happy as any blessing in a wife
could make me, and yet in that am most unblessed, not being able to continue
in that happy state of still enjoying her, too great a portion of good for me,
(wretched man) to have. For one night I saw Urania in my sleep appear unto
me, or better to say, my conscience taking the advantage of my bodies rest, the
hateful enemy to the souls bliss, and in that quiet showed unto me, my
dearest shepherdess justly ^ccusing me, and condemning me. I had no way to
escape, if not by this means; I rose, I left Dalinea for Vrania's fury, whose
sweet substance I lost for Dalinea's love, I have now left both, both ini^r'd,
both afflicted by me. Why should I then continue such an aff^^ction to the
rarest of women? and a vexation to the worst, as I am unto my unblessed self,
Assist me^ good Father, in my mi^ery, this is truth I have told you, and more
then ought to live on earth or I hope can be found again; wherefore that as all
ill is in me, I desire, nay, covet to end, that the world may be no longer
infected with that plague, but as knit in me, that knot may never be vnty'd,
but end, and conclude with me.

Then wept he, as if it had been to satisfy a drought with rain, sheding
tears in such abundance, as they left that name, to be more properly termed
little streams.

Well, it was that the Sea was the place of receiving those springs, which from
the Rock ran into her, which in madness of despair he would once have
followed, offering to tumble into her; the old man striving with him, stayed him,
who had lost all power to resist, grief having taken away his strength, and in
place of it given him only might, in weakening passions, working for their glory
to destroy. Then did the aged Hermitte comfort him, chiding him for his wilful
sin, in seeking to murder himself. Religiously he wrought upon his fury,
so as he brought him to a more peaceable bearing his afflictions, but not to
any more easy.

This storm a little quieted (as after a tempest of Thunder, a shower of rain
is thought little) the good man to pass the time began his story, the relation
whereof gave some liking to Parselius.

But because the Drums beat, and Trumpets sound in Morea for the releife of
Macedon, and the brave conquest of Rosindy, the Hermitts discourse must a
little stay, while wars, the noblest, because professed by the noblest, take a
little time for them. The time come for the Armies marching, brave Rosindy
took his journey with his most noble companions: he General, Selarinus
General of the Horse, the Prince of Corinth and Elis, had their places
reserved for them, as Serieant Mayor, and Commander of the Archers; Many brave
Knights and bold men went along some out of love, some for ambition, some for
honor, many for preferment. The rendeuous was at Cariapaiary in the Confines of
Macedon, not far distant from the River De^oda, where they met the Romanian
Army led by Lisandrinus as desired, but with it came Antissius to see the
brave wars, and to receive Knighthood of Amphilanthus, who not being there,
he soon left the Army to find him out, promising when he had from him
received that honor, (and only from him would he have it) he would return to
them, where ever they were. Thus marched they on with all the bravery that
might be, every one striving who should be most sumptuous, to express their
loves and respects to their General: who was more generally beloved then any
Prince, except his Cosen, and Brother, every one wearing his Colors in honor
to him, which was Oring-tawny and white.

Thither came to the place of meeting, also the Achaians ledd by Leandrus, who
after he had visited his Sister, and once again seen his aged Father,
followed the Army gone before, and ouertooke them before their coming to the
Town. With them (and much true affection in himself to the General) he came
to Rosindy, of whom he received most loving welcome; who ever could imagine
glory, might here have seeene it at the height of perfection: magnanimous
spirits, brave and unconquered men, undaunted soldiers, riches of all
gallantry in every respect, and what was most and best, all excellent
soldiers, and true soldiers, the excellentest men.

Thus then was all that could be wished in this Army together joined: none
refused passage, but willingly yielded it to be rid of their force, so as love
or fear, made free and open way for them, till they came within the skirts of
Macedon, there they met some, but poor resistance, till they came to a great
Plain, near the river of Deuoda. There they saw a great Army, and by
intelligence, knew the Usurper was there: they went as near him, as discretion
would permit them, considering night grew on, and as iudicially provided for
the Army, the General himself going to settle every Quarter in his right
place, being so expert in the learning of the Art of a Soldier, as he could
justly tell what compass of ground would serve from one hundred to thousands.

When he had settled them, he returned to his Tent, where he with the Princes
and Commanders supped, after consulting what would be fittest to be done the
next day; many opinions were given: some to set upon the King and his Army, but
that Selarinus liked not, for (said he) we are but strangers, and all our
hope and power in the Army, if we be overthrown, all is lost for us; if he
loose the day, he is in his own Country, and may have aid instantly brought
to him: therefore I think fitter to let him urge us, then for us to press him
to fight; besides, no question but he will do that, why then should we be
so forward? Let us patiently go on with temper, and the greater will be our
benefit. Rosyndie much commended his advise, and resolved to be persuaded by
it.

While thus they sat, came a Trumpet from Clotorindus with a defy, and
challenge to fight the next morning This was accepted, the hour appointed,
eight of the clock; thus every one betook themselves to rest, hoping for the
next days victory. As soon as day appeared, Rosyndie took his Horse, and
rid through all the Army, aduising, entreating, commanding, and using fair
words, entreaties, peremptory authority, and all in their kinds, as he found
the subjects, on whom they must be used, with such judgment, as bred not
only love and fear, but admiration in all hearts, to see so great
understanding and unusual exc^llencie in so few years. But now all are ready,
his Army he ord^r'd thus; the foot he divided in three bodies, the Vanguard
led by himself, accompanied with Leandrus; the Maine battle by Selarinus
accompanied with Lisandrinus, the Rear, by the grave Marshall, who went with
him out of love to his person, with him was his son Lesarino: some of the
Horse (by reason of advantage was found in that place) were put on either side
as Wings; the right hand Wing given to Tolimandro, the left to the Prince of
Elis, some Foot placed to flank the Horse, and some Horse put in each
division.

Clotorindus had put his men much in this kind; so they charged the Vantguard
of the Macedonians, led by a brave and valiant Gentleman, called Thesarenus,
Prince of Sparta, who did so bravely, as had there been but few more of his
spirit, the day had hardly bin lost, at least not so soon won. Rosyndie with
the vantguard charged the Macedonians where there was a cruel fight, the
Morean Horse first defeated, then the Vantguard broken and disordered, which
Selarinus perceiving, came with the Maine-battaile to the succor, where so
bravely he found Rosindie fighting as he had made walls of dead men of his
own killing, round about him, as if they had been cast up of purpose for his
safety: or as a List roped in for the combat, which he was in, with the
young Phalerinus, Prince of Thessalonica, who more delicately and bravely held
out, then any he had yet encountered: but what with weariness, and besides
seeing the new succor come, was forced to yield; Rosindy taking him in his
arms, in stead of disarming him, taking his word, in stead of his Sword, which
noble act bred such love in the young Prince toward him, as he after proved
a true and faithful subject unto him. Then did Rosindy, and Selarinus haste to
the battle, which was now by the overthrown of the Vantguard, required to
come up, and the Rear with the strangers to advance against the Macedonian
Horse. A great while the Moreans had the worst, but at last by the valor of
Selarinus, Leandrus (who had changed his white Armours, innocent color, to
reuengefull blood), Lisandrinus, the Princes of Corinth and Elis, and the
Marshall with his son, but especially by the judgment mixed with true
valor, and the care, matched with excellent skill of Rosindy, the Victory
came on their side, with the shameful flight of Clotorindus; the execution was
great, and endured long, the Conquest greater, the booty very rich, and thus
with the loss of ten thousand on the one side, and thirty on the other, the
retreit was sounded: the next day the dead of both sides buried, and Rosindy
with his brave troop marched on toward Thessalonica, where the Queen was,
and into which Town the Vsurpe^ was got, of purpose, if not by strength, yet
by tricks to save himself, and keep the Crown; but neither he must do.

Then did the brave General set down before Thessalonica, and incompa^sing it
round, cutting off all victual by land, and blocking the sea and ships hindered
all good from their aid; so making it a rare and cruel siege. Now did Rosindy
endure the length of this with much pain, longing in his very soul, to see
his Lady, which within some time after he did, but so, as the great longing
he had satisfied by her sight, was turned to sorrow for it: his desire and joy
to see her changed to grief, and wishing he had not seen her, the cause, and
his affliction as he termed it, proouing terrible. Thrice were their sallies
made forth by the besieged, but to as little purpose, as if they meant only to
come forth to be honored with wounds, and being vanquished by their mighty
Enemies.

One day they saw a white Flag upon the Wall, which gave them to understand, a
Parley was demanded by the beating likewise of a Drum, which Rosindy did in the
same manner answer, they came upon the Wall, the Prince and his companions to
the Wall, then did Clotorindus speak thus.

Great Prince Rosyndie, and you brave Princes his Companions, what injustice
do you go about in seeking to deprive me of mine own, who never wronged
you, nor would have denied to have served any of you with my own person and
means, if you had requird it? now for you to seek to take a Kingdom from
me, lawfully my right, both by being next heir male, and besides mine now by
marriage with Meriana, daughter and heir, as you term her, to the Crown,
what exceptions can you now take? Let me then as a Friend, and Kinsman (as by
marriage I now am to you) gain peace; I that have been by your own will made
your Enemy, desire an end of these cruel wars. Let me be accepted as a
Cousin, and my friendship taken as proferd by a friend, rather then thus continue
shedding of blood, let the conclusion be welcome, and the trumpets and drums
turned to Music of joy. This I demand for my self as your friend, if you
please, and for my wife your Cousin, who infinitely is grieved to have her own
blood seek to shed the blood of her dear husband.

Husband, false Traitor, replied Rosindy, she whose matchless worth so well
knows it self, cannot abuse that knowledge of truth, to yield the treasure of
it to so base a place, and which never had stain, but by this thy wronging
her, who cannot live to undo that, with bestowing it on one so vild and
treache^ous as thy self. For thy friendship I refuse it, and so I answer for
my friends here present contemning thy baseness, so as we should hate our
selves, if a thought of thy submission (if not to punish thee) could come into
our hearts. Thy false tale of marriage we loath to hear of, since as falsehood
we hate that, and thee for it. Thou say, we have no just quarrel; O
Monster, what Justice more can be required, then taking Arms to the putting
down a Rebel and a Traitor to his rightful Princess? Alliance thou
claimest, I acknowledge none: and had there been no other cause, this had been
enough to have made us ruin thee, for framing so false a report, and wronging
(with thy filthy tongue) thy Queen, and the Queen of true virtue, and of
Macedon. Therefore recant and deliver her, or here I vow to fire the Town, and
break open the gates, to let in our just revenge to thee, and on thee.

Is this the requital of my kindness (said Clotorindus)? farewell, do thy
worst proud Prince, and all thy fond company: but take this with thee before
the Town be won, thy heart shall ache more, then ever any wound could come
near thee to bring it, or the wound of thy fond love.

With that he went from the wall, and in stead of the white Flag, presently a
bloody one was h^ng forth, which continued till the next day, when as to the
same place Meriana was brought, with an infinite number of armed men, dressed
as to her Wedding, a Crown on her head, and her hair all down. To this sight
was most of the Army drawn, but Rosindy, with most have greedily beholding her
beauty, and harkening to her speech, which was this.

Clotorindus, thou have now (I confess) some pity in thee, since thou will
free me from my miserable living, I thank thee for it, and Rosindy I hope
shall requi^e it, to whom I commend my best and last love; farewell brave
Prince, but be thus confident that I am just. With that they enclosed her
round in a circle, often before seeking to hinder her last speech.

Presently was she out of Rosindies sight, and presently again brought into
it to his extremest misery, for only that peerless head was seen of him,
being set upon a pillar, and that pillar being upon the top of the Palace, the
hair hanging in such length and delicacie, as although it somewhat covered
with the thickness of it, part of the face, yet was that, too sure a knowledge
to Rosindie of her loss, making it appear unto him, that none but that
excellent Queen was mistrisse of that excellent hair. His soul and heart
rent with this sight, and the seeing it a far off, rising with such speed, as
it seemd a Comet to show before their ruin, or like the Moon, having borrowed
the Suns beams to glorify her pale face with his golden rays. All the
Army made a most pitiful and mournful cry, as if every one had lost a
love, the Princes cried upon revenge, that word wrought most upon Rosindy, the
rest being before but a time to lull his passions in their rest, which were
restless afflictions. Long it was before he spoke, at last he cried, Arm
and assault this wicked Town. Then went he in the head of the Army to the
Gates, which with Engines that they had, and guided with fury, by the next
morning, they broke open, not before when judgment governed, being able to
persuade themselves they could have compassed it.

The Gate open, they with furious rage, and merciless cruelty, proceeded,
sparing not one creature they met, hasting to take down the Head of his
dearest love, and hopes. But when he came thither, he saw that taken away
also. O cruelty unjust (said he), will thou not suffer me to see her once
more? Wretched Fate, that I must now be barred from taking yet the last kiss
from thy dear, though pale dead lips, on them to seal the last of my life?
He complained thus, yet his grief increased his rage, so as he came into the
Palace, where he found Clotorindus in the Hall, with a Dagger in his hand,
who as soon as he saw him, with a hellish countenance, he looked on him, and
in a cursed voice, said, Thy Victory shall yet never be honored by my death,
which but with mine own hand shall be brought me: then stabbed he himself
in many places of his body, and so fell. The Prince scorning to touch him,
commanded the Soldiers to take him, and throw him into the Ditch, esteeming
that too good a burial for him.

Then went he on further, hoping in despair to know how his soul was parted
from him, and where the body did remain, meaning on that place to make his
Tomb, and in it to consume, pine, and die. With this he went into many
rooms, but found no body: then went he to the Gallerie where he first spoke
with her, throwing himself upon the ground, kissing the place, and weeping out
his woe. Selarinus staid with him to hinder any rash, or sudden attempt, he
might make upon himself; Leandrus and the rest made safe the Town, and took
all the people that were left (which were but few) to mercy in Rosindies name,
who lying thus, at last start up, crying, he heard his Lady call for help.
Selarinus doubting it had been but some unruly passion, mistrusting more his
friend, seeing the vehemence of his passion, then hoping the truth of this,
followed him, till he came into a Tower at the end of the G^llery, where he
also heard a voice pitifully complaining, at last hearing it bring forth these
words. O Rosindy, how justly have thou^ dealt with me, and royally performd thy
word? but wretch that I am, I shall not do so with thee, for here must I
consume my days unknown to thee, and wald up with misery, and famine die.

This was enough for the two brave men to make new comfort, in new strength to
relieve her, wherefore Rosindy cried out, do thou live my Meriana? here is
thy faithful love, and servant come to rescue thee. O my Lord, said she, never
in a happyer time, quickly then give me life with your sight. Then ran
Selarinus down with joy to call for help, Rosindy examining every place,
where he might find the fittest to come to throw down the wall; but then a new
fear took him, how they might do that, and not hurt her; but the greater
danger must be avoided, and the less taken, so the soldiers came and threw
down the wall, Rosindy still crying to her to take heed; and when they came to
the last blow, that there was a place appeared (though small) into the room,
none then must work there but himself, least dust, or any the least thing
might offend her.

But when the wall was so much down as she was able to come out, with what joy
did he hold her, and she embrace her love? Imagine excellent lovers, what two
such could do, when after the sight of one dead, the other walled to certain
death, seeing both taken away, and met with comfort, what could they say? what
joy possessed them? heavenly comfort, and all joys on earth knit in this to
content them.

Then did Rosindy as much weep with joy, as he did before with mourning, and
she weeped to see his tears, so as joy not being to express it self, was
forced to borrow part with sor^^w to satisfy it.

Selarinus chid them for that passion, and so brought them out of it, bringing
them into the Hall, whither by that time the other Prines were come, and the
chief of the Army. In that brave and most warlike presence did Meriana give
her self to Rosindy, being there betroathed: then were the others of the
people taken to Meriana, the Macedonians from all parts coming with
expresslesse joy unto her, yielding themselves as her loyal Subjects, and
taking others to her, and Rosindy of allegiance.

Then sent he new Governors and Commanders to all the fron^ier Towns, and
into the chief strength within the Land, requit^ng the Moreans with the
estates of those that were lost in the bettaile, and the Town; the strangers
with the booty, which was infinite, and other such rewards as bound their loves
to him for ever, not being able to hope to thrive so well in the next
business, which now must be for Albania.

The Queen Meriana, and Rosindy in this content, the counterfeting was found,
and the device discovered, which was told by a servant of Clotorindus used in
the business, which was, that pillar had bin made and set there by her Father,
a man excellently graced in all arts, and especially in prosepectiues, to try
his skill he made this, which though so big, as one might stand in it, yet so
far, it seemd but as a small pillar, of purpose made to hold a head upon, and
so had they raised her within it, as no more appeard above it then her chinne
coming over it, it was as if stuck into her throat the just disstance and art
in the making being such and so excellent as none could but have thought it had
been her head cut off, besides the grief and her own complexion naturally a
little pale, made her seem more then usually, and so nearer death, the intent
being to make Rosindy believe she was dead, which conceit, he hoped would
lead him thence; she being gone, for whose sake he came thither, which if it
had taken effect, then she should have lived as she had done before, but seeing
neither his false tale, nor this took the way he wished, he walled her up,
purposing that since he could not win, nor keep her, none should else enjoy
her; but now all is ended with the blessing of enjoying, in a better estate who
can be left? Amphilanthus following his way to Ciprus with his friend
Ollorandus, quickly landed there, taking their way as they were directed by
passengers, (the Country now full of people, that came to see the end of this
business) to the throne of love, the plain before it, being all set with
Tents, and covered with Knights and Ladies.

The first Tent Amphilanthus knew to be some Italians, wherefore he went into
that, and finding it belonged to the Duke of Millan, whose opinion of his own
worth, and the beauty of his Mistress had made him adventure the enchantment,
was therein enclosed, he discouerd himself unto his servants, who presently
made offer of it to his service; which he accepted, yet did he charge the men
not to let him be known by any but themselves: there they rested for that
night, the next morning going among the Tents, finding many brave Princes, and
excellent Ladies, some come to adventure others, only to behold the adventures
of others: many of these the two excellent Companies knew, but they keeping
their beauers down^^ were not known of any.

One Lady among the rest, or rather above the rest, for exquisite wit and rare
spirit, so perfect in them, as she excelled her sex so much, as her
perfections were styled masculine.

This Lady (as her judgment was greater then the rest, so her observation was
likewise more particular) cast her eyes upon these strangers, but most on the
Italian: she sighed at first sight, aftergrew sad, wondering why she was so
troubled, not knowing the face of her trouble, never then resting till she had
got the truth of whence he was, and so the means to see him; he having
inquired of every ones name and title, came also to know her to be called
Luceania Daughter to a noble man, who was Brother to the famously virtuous, but
unfortunate Lady Luceania, wife, and Mother to the first, and this last
Antissius King of Romania.

Wife she was to a great Lord in the same Country, who though unable to
flatter himself with conceit of worth, sufficient to end so rare an adventure,
yet partly for novelties, and most to please his spiritfull wife, he came
thither, loving the best company, for these reasons.

The Prince was glad to here this, because he was now sure of acquaintance
quickly there. As soon as his name was known, she studying to have her ends
by his knowledge, watched the next fit opportunity, which was offered the next
day by a general meeting of all the Knights and Ladies. He seldom bashful,
put himself among them: Luceania must needs know him, wherefore she asked
those that accompanied her, who that stranger was, they all answered they knew
him not, nor could they learn of any who he was.

Is it possible, said she so brave a Prince should be unknown? many desiring
to do her service, she being for noble behavior, courtesy, wit, and
greatness of understanding loved, and admired of all such as could be honored
with her conversation; to please her, every one endeavored, and one forwarder
then the rest (as more bound in affection) went to him, telling him, that a
fair Lady much desired to know his name.

Can it be answered the King, that any fair Lady should so much honor me, as
to desire so worthless a thing as my name? There is one Sir, said he, who
curiously desires the knowledge of it, which must be more worthy ^hen you do
accound it, otherwise could she no covet in, and such an one is she, said he,
as if you can deserve beauty, you will acknowledge, only deserves honor, and
service.

They b^long, said the King to all such excellent creatures, yet Sir, (...), it
is my ill fortune at this time that I am not able to satisfy her de^^^^,
although this grace shall ever make me her servant. The Knight ac^^^nted with
such vows went back to Luceania, truly telling her all that ^^^had said, which
although delivered by a far worse Orator, yet gaind ^^^y more favor for him:
she esteeming wit beyond outward beauty, b^t both there joined, it is
necessary for to yield as she did, for before she desi^'d his name only, now
finding judgment and brave Courtshipp, she long's for his society, and these
accompanied with seeing his excellently sweet, and ever conquering
loveliness, did join as to the conquest of her, for she who before had
known love rather by name then subjection, now she finds her self loves
Prisoner, affection before, but companion like^ now mastring, and now she finds
it expedient to know that delightful cruel, who had with so pleasing a dart,
wounded, and ceazed her (till then commanding) heart.

The next evening was resolved of for her gain of knowledge, and rather then
miss, there she would employ the same louesicke Knight again, who to be
graced with her commands would do any thing.

The evening come, and Amphilanthus, his companion assuring themselves they
were unknown, freely came into the company. She who now was by the art of
love taught to watch all opportunities, and never to loose any, was walking
with her husband forth, to pass away the time in the cool air: Amphilanthus
and his friend discoursing of their own passions, finding the greatest miss
ever in most company, their Ladies being absent, were so transported with their
passions, as they were close to this amorous Lady, and her Lord before they
discouerd it, which when they found, asked pardon for their rudnesse, they
would have returned: but she who was now, not to put of her hopes till the next
meeting, resolud to make use of this, so with as enticing a countenance, as
Caesar understood Cleopatras to be, she told them she saw no error they had
committed, that place being free to all, but tur^ing her self toward her
husband, she smiling said. Would you think my Lord, this Knight were ashamed
of his name? I see small reason that he should, said he, why think you that
he is? because he refuses too tell it said she.

Although (excellent Lady) answered Amphilanthus, it may be my name is not so
fortunate as to have come to your ears with any renown, yet am I not ashamed
of it, a vow only having made me conceal it. May not that vow be broken,
said she? This may, and shall (said he) to satisfy your desire, though some
vows are so dear, as nothing, nor any force may prevail against them. With
that she saw Ollorandus had undertaken her husband, which gave her more
liberty in her desires, again urging with fine and amorous countenances the
breach of his vow. The commanding power (said he) which your perfections carry
with them must prevail; then be pleased to know I am Amphilanthus, King of
the Romans.

Pardon me my Lord, (said she) that I have been thus bold with you, which was
caused by (with that she blushing held her peace, desiring to be thought
bashful, but more longing to be entreated for the rest). Nay, speak on,
excellent Lady (said he), and bar not mine ears from hearing what you
surely once thought me worthy to know. Well then my Lord (said she) you shall
have it, my desire to know you, was caused by an vnresisting power, your
excellencies have over my yielding affections to you; the first time I saw you,
I received the wound I now perish in, if you favor not.

Amphilanthus was rather sorry, then glad to hear this speech, being to him,
like as where the law is that a man condemned to die, may be saved, if a Maid
beg him for her husband: so he may be saved from death, but wedded against
his heart to another; affection before having wounded him, he can scarce
entertain this: but considering gratefulness is required as a chief virtue
in every worthy man, he courteously replied, that till that time fortune had
never so honored him, as to bring him to the height of so much happiness as
to be graced with such an affection.

She who loved, and desired, took the least word he spoke for a blessed
consent, was about to answer again, when they saw Ollorandus come with her
husband to them, who with much ado (as he counterfeited,) had told who they
were; the good man hearing that these were two of them relieved, and won
Romania to quiet by their own valor, but especially rejoicing that
Amphilanthus (of whom the world was filled with same) was there, came to welcome
him, nor would be denied, but they must lodge with him in his tent. Luceania
was not grieved at this motion, though Amphilanthus would willingly have gone
back to his Milan Tent, where he might have comforted himself, with
discoursing to his own thoughts; But the Lady now keeps him prettily well
from those passions with continual discourse of other things.

Much he enquired after the manner of ending the enchaunment, which he longed
for, that then he might again see what he only coueted: Love still increasing
in her, as longing grew in him to see his dearest Love. He kindly entertained
her favors, and cour^uously requited them, and one day the more to express
his respect to her, he took this course, which in his own mind was plotted
rather to get more freedom, and to make proof of his valor, his friend and
he only acquainting Luceania and her Lord with it, changing their armors and
colors, the better to be unknown, came in the morning with Trumpets before
them, challenging every one that desired to try his strength, to the Just, to
break six staves a piece, and this to continue six days, in defense of
their Mistrisses beauty. Amphilanthus was in Watchet and White; Ollorandus in
Orange color, he having no favor; and therefore in spite wore that color:
the other had a scarf which Lucenia sent him the night before, which he wore
on his right arm. This challenge brought forth all the knights, and they the
Ladies; the first was an Italian, and encountered Ollorandus (who was to hold
the first three days, if so long he could without foil, by Amphilanthus
appointment, if not, then he to come in). This Italian was strong, and the
stronger, for that he was in love; and more, because his Mistrisse at that time
made him the bolder, being favored with her sight, and blessed with her loving
wishes. But these could not prevail against the Bohemian, who had the stronger
spirit waiting on him of perfect love, which overthrew the Italian, lying on
the ground, flatly confessing his overthrow.

Two days he thus kept the field, without show of loosing the honor to any:
but then came one, who encountered him with such clean strength and valor, as
he was forced to confess, he matched him; nor did it turn to any dishonor
to him, when it was known who it was, being Polarchus, Bastard son to the
king of that Island: but soon did Amphilanthus revenge his friend, and so by
conquest kept the field, though he confessed, he had seldom felt such an
encounter as the last of the six courses, the other five having lasted without
any advantage: this with the loss of his stirrops, but the falling back of the
other upon his horses back, and trumbling down, striving to recover his
saddle. Thus he redeemd his friends mischance, maintaining the field against
all comers, in the defense of his mistrisses beauty.

Two days he held it, in which time he woone the same of the brauest Knight.
The last day they were a little hindered from that sport, by the coming of a
great, and brave troop of knights, having with them two of the beauties the
world could hold excellent; they rode in a Chariot of watchet Veluer,
embroidred with crimson silk, and Pearl the inside, the outside with purle of
silver: and yet that riches poor, in comparison of the incomparable
brightness and clearenesse of their own beau^ies. Soon were they known: for
who could be ignorant of the perf^ctions of Pamphilia and Limena: for he that
never saw Pamphilia but by report, seeing this unspeakable beauty, said, it
could be no other then that peerless Queen, none else could so excel in
true perfection. Two Knights rid on each side of the Chariot, one in armor of
Gold, enameld with leaves of Laurel; the other all black: thus they came with
great magnificence and state, when Amphilanthus was ready to encounter a new
knight, that would needs have the favor to be thrown down by the conquering
Prince, who soon receiud the honor, his vanquishing power gave all other,
kissing his mother without desire o^ pleasure.

Then did the Prince look about him, casting his eyes by chance toward the
troop, at which sight he straight knowing the never enough exalted Princess,
he went toward her, his eyes meeting the vnresisting power of her eyes, who
was soueraign of al hearts; telling the new Queen, that certainly now the
charms must have conclusion, she being come to adventure for them. I hope my
Lord (said she) there will be an end of them, since I know I am able to bring
one part to the conclusions demand, being that, I think you have not been much
troubled with all, and in truth I cannot blame you much, since liberty is an
excellent profit. But what color shall we have next; the last I saw was
Crimson, now Watchet and White; do you add to your inconstancy, as fast as to
your colors? None can be accused dear Lady (said he) for their change, if
it be but till they know the best, therefore little fault has yet been in me:
but now I know the best, change shall no more know me. Every change brings
this thought (said she): but here is the Queen Limena, whose noble virtues
were rescued by your friend, and my brother from cruelty and death, though not
of them, but her person dying, they must (if not for him) have remaind the
outward tombs of her honor. Then kissed he her hands, and so conducted the two
Queens to the fittest place to see those begun sports, and to be beheld of the
Knights.

Amphilanthus continuing his still enjoyed victories, none parting from him
without flat falls, or apparent loss of honor. Then the Knight of Victory,
and the Black Knight came unto him with these words: Victorious Sir, we see how
bravely and happily you have carried your self in this challenge, and so as we
should be too bold flatterers of our selves, if we would hope to get the
better of you: yet being knights and servants to fair Ladies, we are engaged
in honor to try our fortunes with you, defending that these two Ladies are
fairer, and more truly worthy then your mistrisse. I said the Knight of Victory
defend the Queen Limena: and I (said the other, the incomparable Pamphilia.
Your demand (said Amphilanthus) shall be answered, although I must confess,
it rather should be yielded unto without blows; yet will I proceed in the
begun challenge, though against beauties matchless; and first answer you, who
defend the Queen Limena.

All eyes were fixed upon these two, one known powerful, and not to be
vanquished, the other outwardly appearing excellent, and so did he prove
himself: for never were six courses run more finely, then these were; so as
every one said, that none but another Amphilanthus could have performed them so
delicately; yet a little difference there was between them, which made a
question to whom the whole honor did belong. Amphilanthus lost his stirrops,
and the other was struck flat upon his horse: but the Prince himself ordered
the business thus; that he would make an end of that mornings triumph, and
the other should have the after noones trial.

This was agreed on by all, and he much commended for his royal courtesy;
when no one came, Amphilanthus lighting from his horse, came to the stranger,
who stood ready to receive him with his right Gauntlet off, but his Beauer
down, to whom the Prince with a grave and sweet countenance delivered the
Spear, and liberty for the free accomplishing the rest of that exercise. The
stranger with all respect, and indeed affection, received that favor, wishing
the happiness to conclude the time with as much bravery and good fortune, as
Amphilanthus had done the days past.

Then did the Prince boldly show himself to all, many there knowing him, and
coming humbly to acknowledge their loves and gratefulness unto him, for
infinite favors received by them from him: for indeed no man was ever
enriched with a more noble, free, and excellent disposition, then this exquisit
Prince had flowing in him: after dinner this most honored and beloved Prince,
with the admired Queens, Ollorandus, and the rest came again to see the
conclusion of that brave sport, in which time the Knight of Victory so stoutly
behaved himself, as thereby he gaind exceeding great fame, but now was
evening beginning to threaten him with her power to overcome his victories,
which yet remaind whole unto him, few being left that were not by Amphilanthus,
Ollorandus, or himself, taught how to adventure in such like businesses. He
now having a little time left him to breathe in, none coming against him, he
looked about, and cast his eyes on her, whose beauty he so bravely defended
with such affection, as he stirred not them, nor his mind from that beloved
object, till a boy in shepherds apparel delivered these words to him, almost
pulling him, before he gave him hearing. My Lord said he (for so my master bid
me call you), I come from yon man, one, who not skill in arms, but truth of
his Ladies beauty brings forth, and by me sends you word, that your Mistrisse
Limena is not one half so fair, as his Queen Pamphilia: it is (he says) no
boldness to defend her, whose beauty is without compare; wherefore he
desires you to prepare your self: but take heed Sir, he is mighty strong.
Good Boy (said the Knight), tell your Master I will attend him, and I pray thee
advise him as well for the love I bear thee. Then came the Shepherd knight
(for so they called him) all in Ashcolour, no plume nor favor, only favored
with his Ladies bent wishes (the best of favors). The encounter was strong and
delightful, shiuers of their spears aseending into the air, like sparks of a
triumph fire: four courses they ran, without any difference for advantage; the
fifth, the knight of Victory lost both stirrops, and a little yielded with his
body; the other passing with the loss of one stirrup; the sixth and last,
being (if it were possible) a more strong, and excellent course: their
ambitions equal to honor, glorious to love, and covetous of gain before
their Ladies, scorning any place lower then the face. Both hit so luckely and
equally, as their beauers flew up, the knight of Victory being known to be
Perissus, the other Amphilanthus, who confident that now he had truth on his
side, and desirous once more to try the strength of the other, while most eyes
were on the Champion, he stole away, and armed himself. Amphilanthus at first
knew not Perissus, many years having past since their la^t meeting: but when
he heard Perissus named, with what joy did he embrace him, being the man, who
from his youth, he had like himself loved, admi^ing his virtues, and loving
his person. This done, they went to Pamphilia's tent, where she gave
Amphilanthus infinite thanks for the honor he had done her: but yet my Lord
(said she) I must blame my poor beauty for the delay you had in your Victory,
which I confessed, when I saw so long differring of your ouercomming, grieuing
then for that want, which brought your stay in winning.

Detract not from your beauty, which all judgments know without equal (said
he), nor from the bounty of the renowned and famous Perissus, but give the
reason where it is, which is want in my fortune to obtain any thing that most
I desire, or seek, such crosses hitherunto accompanied my life. Then did
Pamphilia entreat him to take knowledge of the other knight, whose name was
Millisander, Duke of Pergamus and her subject, whose father, though newly dead,
and therefore wore that mourning armor, yet would not stay, but attend her
thither; then Amphilanthus desired to know how it came about, that she honored
that place with her presence. The Queen willing to satisfy his demand began
her discourse in this manner. Mine Uncle King of Pamphilia, coming for me to
carry me into his Country, and there to settle me (as long since he resolved)
by the consent and leave of my father, I went with him, by the way winning the
happiness of the companies of these excellent Princes, Perissus and Limena:
after our arrival I was crowned, and being peaceably settled, mine Uncle
retired into a Religious house, where he will end his days: I heard still the
same of this enchantment, of which I had understood by my brother Parselius,
who had himself got some unfortunate knowledge of it; I desired to adventure
it, being assured that I was able for one part to conclude it, since it is to
be finished by that virtue I may most justly boast of. Thus resolved (honored
with the presence likewise of this excellent King, and virtuous Queen, with
the consent of my people, leaving the government for this time with the
Council) we came to adventure for the Throne of Love. Which (said
Amphilanthus) I am also to try; wherefore let me be so much favored, as I may
be the Knight to adventure with you, and you shall see, I want not so much
constancy, as not to bring it to end, though it pleased you lately to tax me
with it. My Lord (said she) I taxed you only for Antissia's sake, who (poor
Lady) would die, if she thought that you had changed, she so entirely loves
you. Has she spoken to you to speak for her (said he)? in truth she did
well, since love much better suites with your lips then her own: but shall I
have the honor that I seek? You shall command my Lord (said she), and we
will surely bring an end to it; your valor, and my loyalty being met together.
He made no other answer then with his eyes, so for that night they all parted,
every one expecting the next mornings fortune, when the Throne should be so
bravely aduentur'd for. All that would try their fortunes had free liberty;
so six couples ventured before the peerless pair; but all were imprisoned,
to be honored the more, with having their delivery by the power of the most
excellent, who being ready to adventure, they were hindered a little by the
coming of a Gentleman in white armor richly set forth, and bravely
accompanied, who coming directly to Amphilanthus desired the honor of
Knighthood, telling him he had sought many places, and passed many Countries
to receive that favor from him, which, but from him he would not accept,
withal pulling off his helm, which presently made him to be known to be
Antissius King of Romania. Amphilanthus with due respect to him welcomd him,
protesting he could never merit so high an honor as this was unto him,
wherefore without delay in the sight of all that Princely company, he girt the
sword to him, and he with Perissus put on his spurs; then came Allimarlus to
kiss his hands, who most kindly he received; and now my Lord (said he), you
are very fitly come to see the Throne of Love won (I hope) by this surpassing
Queen, and your servant my self.

Antissius went to salute the Queen, so together they passed toward the
Bridge. Antissius and Ollorandus going together, twind in each othe^s arms
Pamphilia being thus apparreld in a Gown of light Tawny or Murrey, embrodered
with the richest, and perfectest Pearl for roundnesse and whitenes, the work
contrived into knots and Garlands; on her head she wore a crown of Diamonds,
without foiles, to show her clearenesse, such as needed no foil to set forth
the true brightness of it: her hair (alas that plainly I must call that
hair, which no earthly riches could value, nor heavenly resemblance
counterfeit) was prettily intertwind between the Diamonds in many places,
making them (though of the greatest value) appear but like glass set in gold.
Her neck was modestly bare, yet made all discern, it was not to be beheld
with eyes of freedom: her left Glove was off, holding the King by the hand,
who held most hearts. He was in Ashcolour, witnes^ing his repentance, yet was
his cloak, and the rest of his suite so sumptuously embroidred with gold, as
spoke for him, that his repentance was most glorious; thus they passed unto the
first Tower, where in letters of Gold they saw written, Desire. Amphilanthus
knew he had as much strength in desire as any, wherefore he knocked with
assured confidence at the Gate, which opened, and they with their royal
companions passed to the next Tower, where in letters of Rubies they read Love.
What say you to this, brave Queen (said he)? have you so much love, as can
warrant you to adventure for this? I have (answered she) as much as will bring
me to the next Tower, where I must (I believe) first adventure for that.

Both then at once extremely loving, and love in extremity in the^, made the
Gate flee open to them, who passed to the last Tower, where Constancy stood
holding the keys, which Pamphilia took; at which instant Constancy vanished,
as metamorphosing her self into her breast: then did the excellent Queen
deliver them to Amphilanthus, who joyfully receiving them, opened the Gate^
then passed they into the Gardens, where round about a curious Fountain were
fine seats of white Marble, which after, or rather with the sound of rare and
heavenly music, were filled with those poor lovers who were there imprisoned,
all chained one unto another with linkes of gold, enamiled with Roses and other
flowers dedicated to Love: then was a voice heard, which delivered these
words; Loyallest, and therefore most incomparable Pamphilia, release the
Ladies, who much to your worth, with all other of your sex, yield right
pre-eminence: and thou Amphilanthus, the valliantest and worthiest of thy sex,
give freedom to the Knights, who with all other, must confess thee
matchless; and thus is Love by love and worth released.

Then did the music play again, and in that time the Palace and all
vanished, the Knights and Ladies with admiration beholding each other. Then
Pamphilia took Urania, and with affection kissing her, told her, the worth
which she knew to be in her, had long since bound her love to her, and had
caused that journey of purpose to do her service. Then came Perissus, bringing
Limena to thank her, who heartily did it as she deserved, since from her
counsel her fortunes did arise. Amphilanthus likewise saluted her, having the
same conceit of resemblance between her and Leonius, as Parselius had, and so
told her with exceeding joy, all after one another coming to her, and the
rest. Antissius casting his eye upon Selarina, fixed it so, as it was but as
the setting of a branch, to make a tree spring of it: so did his love increase
to full perfection. Then all desired by Pamphilia took their way to her Tent,
every one conducting his Lady, Amphilanthus Pamphilia, Perissus, his Limena;
Ollorandus, Urania; Antissius, Selarina, the King of Cyprus his Queen, his
brave base Son Polarchus, the Lady he only loved, who was Princess of
Rodes. Many other great Princes, and Princesses there were, both Greeks and
Italians; Allimarlus for old acquaintance leading Vrania's maid: thus to
Pamphilia's tent they came, where most sumptuously she entertained them: then
did all the great Princes feast each other, the last being made by the King of
Ciprus, who out of love to the Christian Faith, which before he contemned,
seeing such excellent, and happy Princes professors of it, desired to receive
it, which Amphilanthus infinitely rejoicing at, and all the rest, Christened him
with his wife, excellently fair daughter, and Polarchus his valiant Son, and
so became the whole Island Christians.

Then came he unto Amphilanthus, humbly telling him that the disgrace he had
from him received, he esteemed as a favor, and honor sufficient, to be
overcome by the valiantest King, who none must resist; to manifest which, he
besought him to accept him unto his servant, and friend, with whom he resolved
to end his days.

Amphilanthus replied, the honor was his, to gain so brave a gentleman to his
friendship, who should ever find him ambitious to express his love to him:
but said he, assuredly you never adventured the throne, but that you were in
love. He blushing, told him it was true, but (alas) my Lord, said he, I have no
hope now to win her. Then told he the King, the whole story of his love,
beseeching him to assist him, which he promised to do, and for that purpose to
take their way by Rodes, and so at the delivering of her to her Father, to
solicit his suit for him, she extremely loving him, he kissed the Kings hands
for it. And thus every one remained contented, Urania, longing to see
Parselius, and yet not daring to demand any thing of him, till one day, (and
the first of their journey) she prettily began with Pamphilia, taking occasion
upon her own discourse as you shall hear. But now that every one resolves of
going homeward, what can be imagined of loving Lucenia? whose heart is now
almost burst with spite, and rage, which she showed to the King himself, when
he came to take leave of her, telling her that it must be his ill fortune to
part with her, that being finished which brought him thither. She answered, it
was true, it was finished now to her knowledge, which she doubted not had had
many ends with such foolish creatures as her self, else said she, had I never
been deluded with your flatteries. I never said he, protested more then I
performed. It was my folly then, said she, to deceive my self, and wrong mine
own worth, with letting my love too much express it self, to give advantage
for my loss, when as if you had first sued, your now leaving me might have
been falsehood, where as it is only turned to my shame, and loss. I am sorry
said he, I shall part thus much in your displeasure, since I know I once was
more favored of you. You cannot right me more, said she, then to go, and
gone, never more to think of me, unless your own Conscience call upon you.
It will not I hope replied Amphilanthus, be ouerburdened with this weight,
since I will (now as ever I did) obey you, and so brave Lady farewell well.
She would not wish him so much good, who now she hated, so as only making
him a small reverence they parted, the Prince going to the Kings and Queens
who attended for him, the King of Ciprus bringing them to the Sea, the morning
before their taking Shipp, presenting them with the Shepherds, and
Shepherdesses of those Plains, who after their manner sang and sported before
them, to the great delight of all, especially Pamphilia, who much loving
Poetry, liked their pretty expressions in their loves, some of which she caused
to be twice song, and those that were at the banquet, (which was made upon the
Sands, they being served by those harmless people) to be written out, which
were two songs, and one Dialogue delivered between a neat, and fine
Shepherd, and a dainty loving Less, it was this.

Sh. Dear, how do thy winning eyes
my senses wholly tie?
She. Sense of sight wherein most lies
change, and Variety.
Sh. Change in me?
She. Choice in thee some new delights to try.
Sh. When I change or choose but thee
then changed be mine eyes.
She. When you absent, see not me,
will you not break these ties?
Sh. How can I,
ever fly, where such perfection lies?
She. I must yet more try thy love,
how if that I should change?
Sh. In thy heart can never move
a thought so ill, so strange.
She. Say I dye?
Sh. Never I, could from thy love estrange.
She. Dead, what can thou love in me,
when hope, with life is fledd?
Sh. Virtue, beauty, faith in thee,
which live will, though thou dead,
She. Beauty dies.
Sh. Not where lies a mind so richly spedd.
She. Thou do speak so fair, so kind,
I cannot chose but trust,
Sh. None unto so chaste a mind
should ever be unjust.
She. Then thus rest,
true possessed, of love without mistrust.
An other delicate Maid, with as sweet a voice, as her own lovely ^weetnes,
which was in her, in more then usual plentifulnesse, sang this ^ong, being as
it seemd fa^ne out with Love, or having some great qua^ell to him.

Love what art thou? A vain thought,
In our minds by fancy wrought,
Idle smiles did thee beget,
While fond wishes made the nett
Which so many fools have caught.
Love what art thou? light, and fair,
Fresh as morning, clear as the air:
But too soon thy evening change,
Makes thy worth with coldness range,
Still thy joy is mixed with care.
Love what art thou? a sweet flower,
Once full blown, dead in an hour.
Dust in wind as staid remains
As thy pleasure, or our gains,
If thy humor change to lowre.
Love what art thou? Childish, vain,
Firm as bubbles made by rain:
Wantonness thy greatest pride,
These foul faults thy virtues hide,
But babes can no staydnesse gain.
Love what art thou? Causeless cursed,
Yet alas these not the worst,
Much more of thee may be said,
But thy Law I once obay'd,
Therefore say no more at first.
This was much commended, and by the Ladies well liked of, only Amphilanthus
seemed to take Loves part, and blame the maid for accusing him unjustly,
especially, for describing him with so much lightness. Then to satisfy him, a
spruce Shepherd began a Song, all the others keeping the burden of it, with
which they did begin.

WHo can blame me if I love?
Since Love before the World did move.
When I loved not, I despaired,
Scarce for handsomeness I cared;
Since so much I am refined,
As new framed of ^tate, and mind,
Who can blame me if I love,
Since Love before the World did move.
Some in truth of Love beguiled
Have him blind and Childish styled:
But let none in these persist,
Since so judging judgment mist,
Who can blame me?
Love in Chaos did appear
When nothing was, yet he seemd clear:
Nor when light could be descride,
To his crown a light was tide.
Who can blame me?
Love is truth, and does delight,
Where as honor shines most bright:
Reason's self does love approve,
Which makes us our selves to love.
Who can blame me?
Could I my past time begin,
I would not commit such sin
To live an hour, and not to love,
Since love makes us perfect prove,
Who can blame me?
This did infinitely please the brave King; so cunningly, and with so many
sweet voices it was sung: then the banquet ended, they took leave of the kind
King of Ciprus, and his company, all the rest taking ship with Pamphilia,
sailing directly to Rodes, where they received unspeakable welcome, being
feasted there eight days together, and for show of their true welcome, the
Duke of that Island bestowed his consent for marriage of his daughter, with her
long beloved friend Polarchus, whose joy and content was such, as the other
amorous Knights wished to know. Then took they their leaves of the Duke, and
all the Rodean Knights and Ladies, taking their way to Delos, Polarchus
promising within short time to attend them in Morea.

The end of the first Book.
THE COUNTESS OF MOVNTGOMERIES URANIA. THE SECOND BOOK.
ALL this journey did Urania pass with much grief inwardly suffered, and so
borne, desirous to know where her love was, yet bashful, durst not ask, till
one day Perissus sitting between her and Limena, took occasion to speak of
his first finding her, and so of the obligation they remaind tied unto her in,
for all the fortunes they enjoyed; and so from that, to speak of the rescue
Parselius brought Limena at her last breathing, as she thought. I wonder (said
Urania) where that Prince is, since so many brave men being here, me thinks
he should not be absent; nor could I have thought any but himself might have
ended this adventure. Truly (said Perissus) when we parted with him, I never
saw a more afflicted man then he was (except once my self), and all was for
the loss of you. I thought rather (said she) he had been offended with us for
aduenturing; which well he might, considering by that folly we lost him. Nay,
said Allimarlus (who was then come to them), he had no cause to blame you,
having committed as great an error, and the same, himself, then told he all
the story to her, of what had past after the drinking the water, and so much as
he knew, or heard by others of him, while he was heard of. Then came Pamphilia
and Amphilanthus, who went on with the discourse, that now Urania was resolved,
and assured of his affection, which so much ioyd her, as the absence of him
grew the more terrible to afflict her.

Then to Delos they came, whose milke-white rocks looked smooth with joy to
receive within their girdle, the worlds treasure of worth, now being in their
presence richer, then when most treasure was within her: then took they
directly to the Palace, at the entering into the vault meeting the grave
Melissea, who with her maids ca^rying torches of white wax, conducted the
Prince through that into the Gardens, all now in hope or fear to know their
fortunes. Urania desiring to know her self; Pamphilia to be resolved, whether
she should gain by her loyalty. Amphilanthus when he should enjoy, and
Antissius longing to be assured, if he should have Selarina, who as much
desired the same knowledge of gaining him, such affection had grown between
them, he being (as she did verily persuade her self) the self same little
King, that beckned to her out of the enchanted Garden. Allimarlus must by any
means be gaind by the Shepherdess.

Thus they all expecting, and Perissus happily enjoying, they continue in the
Palace, while the grave Hermit must next have time to tell his story to
distressed Parselius, in this manner beginning.

My loving and afflicted son, hear your poor friend say, his name is
Detareus, borne in Dalmatia, and Lord of Ragusa: I was bred a Courtier, and
accordingly thriued; repentance being at last their best fortunes. In that
Court I lived in good favor with the king, and honored with the office of
Steward of his house: Children I had, and all other contents: but at last my
wife died, and so did the best of my happiness; for alas, soon after fell my
miseries to increase; and for the greater sharpnes of them, to be thus
springing from my own best remaining comfort: for I called to my chamber my
dearest daughter, ( Bellamira by name) to be with me, and to govern my
servants; but she having such beauty, as to be a fit bait to catch misfortune,
and bring it to me, the king liked her; which I perceiving, hasted to bestow
her, and so I did on a great heir, who was called Treborius, with whom she
happily lived.

But this King still loving her, and as a lover seeking all means to gain his
mind, never spared feastings, and all occasions, to draw company to the Court;
yet all was because she must be there, otherwise were none in his opinion
present: her husband also was extremely favored by him in outward show, and
his house often visited by his Majesty. He saw it: but seeing his wives virtue
spotless, ouer-lookt the temptations, which were but as two Glasses, set to
see both sides of her nobleness, and worthy chastity. Much ado there was,
all eyes beheld it, all spoke of it, all admired her. I discerning this, at
last gave over the Court, scorning to be used in the slights, which were for
her dishonor, and mine in hers: I retyrd, she then having no fit occasion to
visit the Court, did likewise so. No country sports faild to give delight, I
oft-times with her, and her loving husband; they often with me.

But now must these be crossed, not being fit for subjects to live in content,
when the Prince is not pleased; to break which, he sent me Ambassador to Italy,
to the king of Naples, father to the glory of Princes, your matchles cousin; her
husband he employed another way, hoping to win her in our absence: but herein
he was deceived, for she would not have the shadow of such times afforded him,
wherefore she went with her husband, thereby that plot was hindered, and the
kings immoderate affection crossed; but whereby my misery most increased was,
that in my Embassage I fell in love with a Lady, whose sweetness and delicacie
was able to have made Troylus false. This Lady I loved, this Lady (happiest
destiny as I then unwisely coniectured loved me) but alas, she had a husband, a
terrible and wretched bar in the way of those loose and wicked enioyings
which we coueted yet so we ordered our affairs, as we came to have private
conference, and many several meetings.

This Lady was of Apulia, and one, who if the enjoying her were death, and life
the missing it, death had bin sweeter, and more to have bin prised. As I went
to the Court, I saw her, she after came thither, at the assembly which was for
my entertainment. We liked, loved, and enjoyed: then did I not fail, to
seek all means to win, and keep her husbands favor, which was the way for
my blessing: he embraced it, and truly I must confess, used me so well, as
had any other matter been the end of my deceiving, but what was, I should have
been sorry, so to have abused his trust.

But what shall I say; you know love, and therefore brave Sir pardon it, or
rather the relation of that which was in me; so much power had this affection
in me, as I drew out the time of my stay to last, weauing the longest web that
faining occasions could allow me, the spider love working for me.

But now comes my affliction in love, and yet happiness in the end, for time
grew for my departing, which word I may justly use, since it was like death (or
that it self) to me, or any passionate servant. To his house I was invited in
my way home (we yet having remaind at Rome) thither we went, and made as many
days iourneyes as we could, still to win of time: at last we there arrived,
where want was none, if fault; only I found the continual company of her good
man, that which I disliked, yet we conuersed freely (as well we might) before
him, he being as free, as noble courtesy could desire expression in: but we
were not fully contented with this, wherefore we would venture for more, which
cost all; for he lying from his Wife that night, by reason of care to her,
lest continual business might disquiet her. I having notice of it, when all
were in their beds, and sweet silence spread with sleep over all the house, I
rose out of my lodging, and softly went unto her Chamber, where I found her
sleeping, at my coming to the bed side; she awaked, but how did she blame
me? (and yet truly I believe, it was the hazard I had put my self in, she
more accused, and chid, then my self): for she did not too cruelly reject
me, though earnestly she entreated, nay coniurd my sudden retyring, which I
after some hours yielded unto, taking my leave of her with as sad and dying
affection, as if I had foreseen the ensuing harm, which thus happened.

I had at my rising lighted a Candle, which carelessly (my mind only on my
adventure) I left burning on the Cubbord in my Chamber; this light by miserable
mischance wasting it self to my ruin, burned so into it self, as not being
able to sustain, or in malice falling down to throw me to the bottom of
all destruction, took hold of the Carpet, so setting that on fire (the blaze
aspiring to my end), fired the hangings, they hating the injury, the guest
they honored had done to their own Lord, in angry flames made testimony of
their loyalty to their Master, giving him knowledge by their light to see my
fault, and to be as torches for the conducting him unto my misery. The fire
great, the smoke greater, and which more hastily flew about to call witnesses
of their innocencies, raised the servants; they, their Master; he careful of
me, sent to my chamber to call me to safety, but more respecting his wife (as
dearest to him) went himself to save her, when at the door, how unwelcome a
meeting had he, encountering in me, the robber of his honor? He stood still,
and in truth I must ever say, he beheld me rather with ^orrow then fury, nor
would he suffer any to be witness of his ill, but seeing me unarmed, and only
in my Cloak, he entreated me to pass into the next room, which I did, and
seeming cheerful enough to all else, took care of his House to preserve it if
possible. Then brought he unto me a suit of Clothes, and having caused me to
make my self ready, together we went forth unnoted by any, (as well we might,
considering the business they had to save the place from destruction.) When
we came into a fair Field, he with tears, thus said.

Till now had I never the misfortune to be acquainted with the worst of
offenses; which is breach of the true law of Friendship, but since I am fallen
into the wretchedest experience of it, I must, like the most miserable, seek a
way out of it. You cannot deny but you have deserved death, and in the worst
kind; yet though I may have it, yet will I leave the fault where it is, and in
the brauest manner, wipe away the stain, which cannot be washed but with your
blood, or cleansed by my end. Take then this Sword (throwing one to me) and
said he, defend your self. I besought him not to put me to such a trial; I
had deserved no favor, nor wishd I any to my self, only that he would honor
me with giving me my death, and spare his wife, who was (for all my shameful
attempt) virtuous, and untouched. He only shook his head, and fetching a
deep groan, bid me leave speech, and go to the conclusion, which must be
death. We fought (for my part) with so much foul guiltiness, as me thought,
strength, cunning, all good, and understanding had abandoned me: he furious,
reuengefull, (and as I preceiu'd, greedy of end) pursued me, who only held my
Sword, not to offend, but to defend me, till some (who I descern'd not far
off) could come to part us; but he likewise seeing them, ran ^o fiercely at me,
as I must either lay my self open to take death, or holding but my Sword out,
give him his end, which I most unwillingly did, forced to it by the frailty of
the Flesh, which in the apparent dangers, is always kindest to it self. Those
I saw, came, and just to take up his body, and who (alas) followed them, but
the poor Lady? extremity of shame bringing her to show her shame: She seeing
him slain, cried out, O spare not me, who am the woeful cause of all this
misery, let me at last be thus far blessd, as by your hand to be sent again
unto him, from whom your sin and mine have parted me, never let so detestable
an offense rest unpunished? Shame calls upon you, and calls to me for
satisfaction.

The servants amazedly beheld us, till she never ceasing accusing her self,
nor urging death, seeing she could not get it, kneeled down, and taking a cold
kiss from his lips, that were to her doubly dead in affection, and pale death,
suddenly rose up, and in rising taking his sword, with furious and hateful
spite to her self, and wrong done him, threw her self upon it, falling down
upon him, joining in that manner her broken vow again in a new one, with their
ends. Then did the servants find the cause, whereupon they set on me, for I
would not yield to go with them, choosing, and de^iring rather to dye with
them, then outliue them in such shame; but too happy, and contrary to my wish
was my destiny, for I slew them. Being then left with the two dead bodies, I
fell into such complaints, as sorrow, and shame, could procure in me, crying
out, where affliction has judged it self in being excelled, as in my misery;
why should it not have end in death? then gave I my self many wounds, never
ceasing wounding, while my wounded soul abided in my body; at least the soul
of humane sense, for so it only proved, for others following their Master and
Mistress, found us all in the entertainment of wounds, palenesse mixed with blood
in the outside, in stead of the more natural habitations, the veins having
made open floods to drown themselves in, as a river may swell against it
self, to loose her own name, and yield it to a greater by her own Pride.

Their bodies they carried away, mine remained like a tattered Ensign, rather
a glory of gain then loss, and so poor a thing was I: but a charible man
more loving goodness then me, and yet loving me for goodness sake, (to make
me have a better ending then in blood) took my martyred body away: with
bathings, and many more fine curiosities he brought me to know I lived, to be
more knowing my daily dying. In a little Cell he recouer'd me, but to no more
health, then to be able to go thence, for longer I would not stay, then I had
ability to go away. I discovered nothing of my self to him, but by him all
that had passed after I left sense till his recovering me; the general report
was, I was burned, some few said murdered, all agreed I was lost, and in that
was true agreement, for so I was, and am. Then left I Apulia, and in Hermits
Clothes roam'd up and down, till I lighted on this place, never finding any
that could content me but this: What since became of my poor Daughter, her
misfortunes, or blessings, I can give no account of, but I fear the worst,
since one day, one instant, and one Planet gouernd, and gave our births, only
2^. years differing in time; here have I since remaind, and till now, never
disclosed my self, nor would have done to you, had not your freedom first
engaged me: repentance has been my blessed delight, having enjoyed that, as
plentifully, and comfortably as ever joy was to souls.

Now sir, you see before you, where misery has not been sparing, where
afflictions have not faild their greatest bounty in excessiveness, and where
only comfort of a happy repentance rules, and gives a sweeter consolation, then
worldly pleasures could with all glorious paintings give liking. Then did
Parselius again grieve for him, and yet comfort sprung; as after a hard Frost,
flowers though dead, may appear living, retaining some warmth in the root, as
in his breast: that he might, with gray hairs know a change from misaduentures
to a pure content.

Thus they continued, sometimes Parselius wayling, sometimes the Hermit
relating his Stories past, he bent to comfort, the other to Despair, though
sometimes a little moved to hope, but with as small strength, as life has in
the last gasp.

But now must Steriamus, and his companion find their way to their destined
relief, following the course ordained for them; they took to the Sea, and so
toward St. Maura: Steriamus ever bringing into his sight, the sweetness and
braveness of Pamphilia, blessing Mellissea for sending him to such a heaven of
joy as to see her, and with her favor to speak to her, and for his happiness
to kiss her hand, she mildly permitting him. O (said he) Steriamus now shall
thou end happily (if so thy Destiny be) since thou had a kind parting from
thy better self. Then beheld he the Sea, which calm and smooth gave them
quiet passage: so, said he, appeard my Mistress, gently letting my good come
unto me, to pass me unto an unlooked for content. Dearest Loue^ how does
sweetness better fit with you, where truest sweetness dwells, then harsh
cruelty? Then did night possess them, but so still an one, and so brightned by
the favor of the fair Moon, who seemed chastely to behold her self in the
smooth face of the Sea, which yet sometimes left her plainnes, rising, as
catching at her face; or, as with love to embrace it, or rather keep her in
her dwellings, wherein she was deceived: for favors are not ever so free, as
though lent, to be possessed for ever, and thus greedy was I (said he) but she
as chastely refused me, yet did their sight bring some Verses into his mind,
which were these.

PRay thee Diana tell me, is it ill,
as some do say, thou think it is, to love?
Me thinks thou pleased art with what I prove,
since joyful light thy dwelling still does fill.
Thou seemst not angry, but with cheerful smiles
beholdst my Passions; chaste indeed thy face
Does seem, and so does shine, with glorious grace;
for other loves, the trust of Love beguiles.
Be bright then still, most chaste and cleerest Queen,
shine on my torments with a pitying eye:
Thy coldness can but my despaires discry,
and my Faith by thy clearenesse better seem.
Let those have heat, that dally in the Sun,
I scarce have known a warmer state then shade^
Yet hottest beams of zeal have purely made
my self an offering burnt, as I was won.
Once sacrificed, but ashes can remain,
which in an Iuory box of truth enclose
The Innocence whence my ruins flows,
accept them as thine, it is a chaste Loves gain.
Having done them, he said them to Dolorindus, whose thoughts were as busily
employed in the same kind; now were they come within sight of St. Maura,
wherefore Steriamus demanded of the Mariners, if they knew the white Rock,
they did, and so in the long Boat carried them unto it, where landing them
they departed; the Princes taking to the topp of it, viewing it, and the
ruins; admiring what they should do in that desolatnesse, where they found no
man, no place for man to bide in save one little Cave, where^ into they went,
and sitting down they afresh discoursed of their Fortunes: Steriamus relating
to his companion, the manner of his living in Pantaleria, in the little Cave,
and so his youth, but when he touched of Pantaleria, he could not pass it over
without some passionate remembrance of it, where he only lived free, and
therefore as he called it happy. Delightful Pantaleria (would he cry, when I
remaind in thee, how was I Lord of my self, and so of all quiet content? days
were then past in hunting, or some other country delights, which now waste in
being hunted by afflictions: no pain knew I, if not by surfeiting of pleasure,
yet proved I a man esteeming change my greater happiness, when brave Parselius
with the rarest of women, except my Lady released me from ignorance, bringing
me into the world, to be the riper in miseries fruit, what happiness (in
comparison of the woe we Princes suffer) does remain in a country life? O
Pantaleria would I had still remaind in thee, or would I had never known
delights, which were still springing in thee, like thy dainty flowers, and
tender grass which increased in plenty of sweetness, being corrected for the
little height it some times got, by the tender sheep, as my sorrows abound by
the cruelty of my dearest love. Cruel love, Ah cruelst of cruelties, why end
you not your tyrannies, or let tyranny end, with ending me? Cursed be the time
I ever suffered the unrightful Monarchy of love to govern me, and thus to
soueraignize over me, giving wounds, and a little easing them, as to make one
hope, the danger of death were past, of purpose to make them more intolerable
in the suffering, else why brought you me from joy to misery? then a little to
enjoy a glimmering hope to be put into a darker night of sorrow with parting
from it, else might you have left me in the sweet Morea, when Pamphilia smiled
on me? Love you invited me, but steru'd me, you again feasted me, but
poisoned me, forcing me to drink of absence. You (said Dolorindus) do lament,
as if alone you were appointed to suffer, or alone did endure affliction, when
too couetously you hoard unto your treasure, what belongs to other men; you
call love a tyrant, when you are a greater, taking away the inheritance of
others, as from me your friend, who have as much right to misery as any, living
in as great excess of it, and having as large possessions in that government:
then spare me liberty to complain with you, permit me to say misfortune is as
much mine as yours, and then like fellow subjects let us bewail the weight of
that unjust tyranny. Pardon me dear friend (said he^), if I would wholly take
ill to my self, since it is to free you, and all worthy people from that,
which I am fittest to bear, as a creature framed for the vassalage of Love,
and his cruelty: but since you ask liberty to bewail, take it, and let that
bring your freedom, while it redoubles on my breast, as being mine and yours,
tell me then all your woe, and know you speak to woe it self in speaking
unto me. Then Dolorindus (beginning with the set order of lovers, which is with
sighs and tears) began his discourse thus. Free from the knowledge of harm,
it was my hap to meet a Lady, hunting in a great Forest, attended on by many
brave Gentlemen and Knights; but being more then woman-like excellent in
riding, she had left her Ladies, or rather they had left her, not able to
attend her in that surpassing quality. I young, and affecting sport, fell into
the company, marking more that brave Diana then the chase she followed, which
was of a Stagge, who though he took pride in being so pursued, and that it
was in him to make her follow, stoutly commanded her attendance, yet cowardly
flying from her, thinking it better to trust to his speed then her mercy, yet
was he rewarded at last fit for his merit, for standing at bay, as if to
threaten her dogs, and even before her face gazing on her, she stroke him with
a Crossebow to the heart; then weepingly he fell down at her feet, groaning
for her unkindness: yet was not this the cruelst blow she gave, for (O me)
she did likewise wound my breast. Then came they all about her, admiring the
hurt, while I admired, any seeing her, could live unwounded. Some praised the
hounds that so truly hunted: I praised mine eyes that never were at fault, till
they brought home the honor of the day, which was the loss of my poor heart,
hunted by mine eyes unto that bay.

When all the rights were done, and dogs rewarded (I alone unsatisfied for my
great gift), she nobly entreated the company to go with her unto her house,
which all agreed unto, and my self unknown to any there, took my way with
them, boldly aduenturing on that inuitation. We sat down at dinner, all the
discourse was still upon the sport that morning, the Stagge afforded them, to
which I gave a poor assistance, for having been bred abroad to learning, and
to arms, I was an unexperienced hunts-man, which she marked, and accordingly
made use of, telling me, that sure the hunting was not pleasing to me, or the
want of that exercise had made me unskillful in the discourse. I said, the
latter was the true reason, for till that day I never saw that sport, though I
had known the field delights in many sorts. Then fell she to discourse of
martial things, being excellently learned in all the Arts, knowledge no way
scanting her. Thus dinner past, when horses again were brought forth, and she
waited on by us, went forth to see Hawks flee, spending the afternoon in
that delight, inuiting us again with her, when before supper, choice of
music was bestowed upon us: all these did well, and best to serve her best
beloved self; but these (alas) proved but more hurts to me, making me by
them see my greater loss, love like a se^pent poisoning my joys, and biting
my best days, venomd all my bliss, making my new pris'd wound death to my
hopes, and sorrow to my soul.

Pity I wanted, pity I sought, but pity durst not ask; and thus did grief
take me, and in me make abiding: commiseration was the mark I aimed at, but
fear held my hand: I saw her fair and delicate, and therefore imagined soft
pity to be within so sweet a cage; yet had her eyes such powerful might, as
gave command, that none should dare to claim so rich a bliss; overwhelmed
with the cruelst spite that Nature could inflict upon a man, I remaind, which
was filled with a youthful bashfulnesse, which ouerswaied my humblest heart,
disasters glorying in my patient suffering, excessiveness of sorrow flowing in
me, for now was the time to part; or if I would remain, I must not hide my
self, or longer stay unknown; for then was her husband to return from a
journey made unto the neighbor I Will, wherefore I thought it not amiss (the
company all gone) to take my time, and thus I spoke unto her.

If that which I must say should turn to give offense, accursed would I think
the time, and words I go about to utter; but coming from a man wholly devoted
to your service, I hope they will produce such ends, as they are now directed
to, and so may make me blessed, if blessing can descend on one so much unblessed
yet as my self: this time wherein I have enioied the full of outward joy
beholding you, has yet brought loves attendants, loss and fear with it,
loss of my liberty tied wholly to your will, and fear in my heart, if you
despise my love; cause of affection I can challenge none for me, if not in
gratitude to me, who give my self for it, a strangers name may make you scorn
me, not knowing worth in me, but boldness, fitting all contempt; these yet you
may cast by, for this stranger, your servant, am son to the King, and your
humblest lover Dolorindus. She (who before did in her looks manifest the
breeding of a cursed reply) a little smoothed the tempest of her rage, and wi^h
sober reverence, demanded pardon for her using me with no more respect; and yet
my Lord (said she) the fault may sooner be pardoned, since 'twas you which were
the cause of it. Then did I again solicit: she modestly, but confidently much
refused. Her husband then arrived, who knowing me gave free and noble welcome;
I sought how still to induce the man to love my company, and to seek it, which
he did also, having his ends, which surely he might gain, so I might compass
mine; to which (for all her chaste replies, and curious preserving of her honor
in her words), at last I did obtain, and so her love, in as equal measure, as
mine was to her, which was without compare, had hers not equald it.

Thus it continued for some years; all the mirth and sports that were in
Negropont, were still at her Castle; Maskes, Iusts, Huntings, nothing can be
thought on, that was not in plenty at her house. My self (though son unto
the king, yet my sister being to inherit the kingdom) was not so much looked
after (if not by no^le minds) as she who was to rule; so as I gained by that
means, both more freedom, and less ouer-seers of my actions. To a Mask that
we had there, wherein I was, a Lady came, whose ill 'twas to fall in love me,
and so violently did it flame, as it grew dangerous; if she were refused, a
woman's hate (which is the deadliest) I was to expect; if I consented, just
disdain from my dear self I was to merit. Hate could not stir me to such
ill, but fear (lest it would blaze unto her hurt) made me yield some content.
In these two straites I was: if I would have asked leave, and told the cause,
it yet might purchase doubt: if I denied, certain hurt ensued. To avoid both,
I did kindly use her, and such words spoke before my only love, as I did wish,
that she should understand, while still the other took them to her self.

Thus it was well: but how could well long last with me? from this well grew my
worst ill, and that ill, all my woe; for my loves husband grew to doubt his
wife, which well he might: for though she were assured, or truly might be of my
faith to her; yet could she not but sometime show dislike, that she sought to
win me, or that she should aspire to be her rival love; this made that secret
dear affection seen, which so long had lain close, wrapped up alone in
knowledge of our souls. He had no sooner found this, but he straight
studdied by skill to be revenged, and yet to seem still ignorant of the plot;
and thus his wicked practice he began. A solemn feast he made, which was to
last for twelve whole days, the reason he alleged was this: an old man once
did say (whose skill was very great in the Art of Divination, as 'twas held),
that he should never live to fifty years of age; which time being then
expired, this feast for that cause was appointed. Many Ladies thither were
invited with their Lords, and many knights, who were to win fair Ladies, and
with the rest this amorous Lady came, whose welcome to my love was like hers
unto me. I grieud that she was there, because I saw she did displease her
eyes, who firmly held my heart. The Lord (whose name was Redulus) never showed
better cheer, his heart never more foul, nor thoughts more ^ulled with base
framed tricks. At the first show, which was by candle light, and neither Masque
nor properly any one thing, but a mingle of diverse sorts; I sat between those
two, whose loves in several kinds I held: my Ladies intruth mixed with a
little fear, the other in violence heated with dislike. I had but one love,
yet of force showed two; faith and sincere affection to my choice dissembled:
and a faign'd respect to her had chosen me. The husband watching all and
catching with as many several watches, our close looks, as spiders flies, with
numbers of her webs: then did his wit begin to play that part allotted to it
self, which was to throw a spiteful jar among us three, which was effected
by this diuili^h means; flouting the Lady whom my soul best loved, telling
her how she had made such a choice he could not blame her for, since he a
Prince, a dainty youth, a neat and courtly Knight, delicate, amorous, how can
he be s^ene without admiring, and then loving? yet truly wife, said he, I
better do deserve your love, since I have loved but you, and you have many
partners in his love: I speak not this for jealousy, nor am I angry with it,
or displeased, but only pity you who are deceived. Courtiers you know will
love choice of Mistresses, alas what luck have you to fall into this snare? to
love, and to be couzened of your love, by one you make your friend, and sweet
companion? justly yet this is done, that you afford your friend a part in all.
Selinea (for so was she, dear she my, Lady called) knew not at first with what
face, or in what kind to receive these words; the husband first was the
informer, the business his dishonor, the loss hers, the fault her lovers,
these called her sharpest and best pleased wits to aid, at last she thus did
say. My Lord, you say you pity me in this kind; were I guilty, you had more
just cause to hate me, for truth in men (except your self) their truths and
falsehoods are indifferent to me, having no further reason to commend, prize, or
dislike them, but for virtues sake, and so am I in my own opinion blessed in
your love, as I should despair of blessing if I deserved it not in the same
height of loyalty: for the Prince, he has (it is true) many noble parts able
to win women's affections, but yet none such where true worth remains, as to
divert them from a virtuous life, since that leaves the name and property when
it runs to change. If I were single, it might be I should as soon like him as
any other; but I loved you, and love you, never to change from that love:
therefore I pray you take home your before-giuen pity, and bestow it where it
wants, since I have yet no use of it, and continue that love you did bear me,
which shall be requited with as lasting a faith in me. He who expected rather a
cursed and sharp answer, then so mild an one, took her in his arms, and
kissing her, swore, he loved her well before, but now his heart was wholly
hers: thus she, as she hoped, had satisfied him, who seemed contented, but
his mind was no more then before quieted; for then he went to Melinea, and
talking with her, discoursed how infinitely he was afflicted with the wrong
that Dolorindus did him in his reputation and honor, courting of his wife so
publicly, and striving to discredit him unto the world, and so undo his
happiness at home, which he enjoyed while Selinea lou^d him: but now such
power had the earnest and importunate love of the Prince gained over her weak
powers to resist, as he had made her his. But yet said Melinea he loves her
not assuredly, as you imagine. Be not deceived sweet Melinea, said Redulus;
for never did man more passionately affect then Dolorindus does, did you but
see his sleights, nay his passions if they fail, you would swear no man did
violently love but he; his sighs, with folded arms, and stealing looks,
discouers what he feels. How have I seen him when he talked with you, and
kissed your hand, throw even his soul out at his eyes to her? Surely, my Lord
said she, you cannot see this, but you do speak it only to try if I would
prove so unworthy as to join with you in doubt of her, who is as good as
fair. No I protest said he, I speak as I believe and know; but yet I am
assured that his love is the greater, and the cause that she did ever bend to
think of love: A Princes name is able to attract a chast-borne ^aide to know
loves heat and force; what then can love and strong affection joined win on a
woman? Take you heed fair maid, love is a power that will, though once
gainsaid, the second time come in with arms, and make your chastest thoughts
contribute to his tax, had you been in the chamber, or but marked the
piercing darts he sent by looks of love, such as had been enough to burn a
heart that would contend, but yielding, to make joy glory in greater pride,
then ever joy did know. I found some verses too, which he has made, and given
his mistress; by them you may guess in what estate his restless burning
soul continues flaming to my utter shame, and ruin of my name.

Then took he forth some verses which indeed I do confess I made and most
unfortunately lost; those lines gave full assurance of the truth, and bred as
true a hate in her to us, which though she strove to cover and dissemble, (with
show of sorrow only for my grief) yet he perceived, as having eyes of Art,
and those directed by a devilish wit, these found what he did seek; then
wrought he still on that, and so at last came to his practice end; which
happened the day before the feast had full conclusion in this hapless kind.

The jealous and despightfull Melinea, when dancing did begin, of purpose let
the paper fall, but so as Selinea must be next to take it up, which soon she
did, and opening it, discerned it was my hand, and that the subject of those
lines was love, which was most true, but alas falsely held from her, to whom
they, and my firmest thoughts, were only bent and dedicated, with affections
zeal, and zealous love; these and my negligence in not seeking to confirm her
trust, confident of her love, made her alas believe too soon.

The paper was with feigned anger snatched quickly from my mistress, she with
blushing said, Why Melinea, I thought you had not been one so much given to
Poetry till now? I made them not said she; No, (sighing said the other) I know
that, with which she looked on me, but with so cruel eyes, (and yet
affection went with them, though shadowed with her scorn, which might be pity
called.) These struck my heart in sunder with their sight: (O me, cried I)
have I framed these to spoil my fortunes which should have procured my bliss,
by telling what I could not utter? speech tied by a power of a greater might.
Alas that ever I did take a pen in hand to be the Traitor to my joy; this
grief made me as guilty seem by shame and silence, which did then possess my
most distracted senses, as if I had been as false as they made me appear. The
dancing went still on, but she (who was the best) like to her heart she ruled
her feet, in sad and walking pace; now was the plot well forward, he wrought
still, and finding fault there was no nimbler sports, came and entreated me to
take his wife, and so begin a more delightful dance. He saw my grief, she
found his drift, two hated me to death, all were disorderd, but I only lost;
thus passed the night, the morning come, to part we were directed by our words
given at the meeting. Feign I would have spoken, but she who thought me false,
avoided it, and gave but liberty to say farewell, which even with tears I did:
She loath now to behold me, who of late she loved, cast down her eyes, not
gracing me with one poor look, which though disgraceful, yet as hers, had
been more welcome then the sweetest smiles that ever lover ioyd in from his
Love. Thus we were parted to despair and loss, yet meant I not to leave my
mistress so, but quickly found a means to visit her, when she continuing still
her cruel frowns to me, I got yet liberty by my cares watch, to speak with
her, although against her mind; but then more cruel then the fiercest Lions
enraged by famine, did bring forth these words.

False man (said she) have you not yet enough, that your deceit has come
unto mine eyes? For, false you are, else had you loved me still, you would have
diligently cleared this doubt: but O you think this not enough, nor I
sufficiently afflicted with your fault, but more you would entice me for more
pain, glory in your injustice, and make triumphs for your ill, blaze to the
world the sin of your ingratitude, and change, and that once done, hope then
to win again; but who? none but so lucklesse, and unblessed a soul as I
was, who did trust you, cruel you, the worst, and falsest of your changing
sex.

This being said, but force could hold her; wherefore for fear of further
rage, I let her go, remaining like the Creatures Metamorphos'd into stones.
Yet at last, I went into my Chamber, and there framd some lamentable lines, to
let her see, how cruelly she had with scorn, and strange mistaking, martyred
me. When I delivered them, she took them with these words, I Will read them,
said she, only to perceive how well your vain continues in this change; or,
if you please, I Will be you messenger and give them Melinea from your self.
These wounded me more then the sharpest Sword, but more alas, grew my mishapp:
for she hating so much, as once before she loved, desired me to love my self
so well, as to refrain to show my eyes to her, where so much false ingratitude
did dwell, and for my sake, she would not only do the like for me in
keeping from my sight, (least I with seeing her should see my shame) but would
for my foul fault, hate all men's loves; this I besought her to recall, she
said, it fixed was: then went I thence and mourned a while unseen; at last, my
Fathers misery called me to succor him, that done, again, I sought to gain
her pardon, but alas, in vain, for she resolud to nothing but my grief,
shunned as she promisd my then loathed sight. After her husband dyed, I then
did woe her, offered marriage, sought with more then Vassal-like desire, but
nothing mooud her, until love again did take anew the conquest of her heart,
making her contrary to all her likings, (which she till then had published)
choose a brave young Lord, in truth a worthy man, but contrary in all the
outward marks which heretofore she said could win her love.

When I saw this, I knew there was no hope, I left her, and the Country,
blaming fate that thus had made me causelessly accursed. Farewell (said I) dear
Lady of my soul, and farewell all love to your wayward sex, where judgment
lives but in the shallow being of an outward sight; cursed is that man that puts
least trust in you: more certainly the ficklest weather has, more staidness
feathers, and more profit drops of rain in Snow which melts with it, while you
spoil only me: thus I departed when she married last, and then for her sake
vowed, as she had done, but with more manly constancy, to hold a true and a
loyal oath, never to love, or choose a Creature of so light a kind, as
generally all women be, the best alone being good, that while she is pleased
she will give equal love; suspicious s^xe, and fondly ignorant, that will not
know the truth, least truth should show the fault, in base suspecting without
cause.

Stay, stay, said Steriamus, you grow cursed against the louelyest, sweetest,
happiest birth, that ever earth did bear; your mother was a woman, and you
must be favored by an other, to be blessed with brave posterity. Women, why
blame you them, the dearest souls, and comforts of our souls? Love in
abundance made you too far crossed, blame Love then, not her scorn, which
surely was not scorn but perfect grief. Be charitable, and ask pardon for
this sin, for never will I give it other name, nor suffer those blessed
creatures to sustain so great abuse, as your rage lays on them.

As thus they were in deep, and almost collerick dispute, against, and for the
worth of women kind. Parselius and the Hermit did arrive, who went that day
together for some food, but when they heard men's voices, and both loud, they
went into the Cave, and so did end their argument with kind conclusion: for
strait Parselius was discovered to his dear and loving friend, who likewise
was with tears of joy embraced, where altogether they remained, with love
relating still their fortunes, which did pass away the time with pleasant
sweet content; for such was pain to them so truly borne, as joy had gained
that name if offered them.

But now Pamphil^a hastes homeward, and the greatest Lady must dispatch her
guests. The Queen of all bra^e beauty, and true worth, Pamphilia, thinking it
long to hear her fate in Love, yet daring not for modesty to ask, what most
she coueted to understand, fai gn'd a desire to return again unto her People,
who expected her, this also was a truth, and therefore just excuse.

The Lady knowing most things, also found this drift, yet did as finely strive
to cover it; wherefore one day dinner newly done, she took her company into a
room, the fairest and best furnished of that place, and by a witty slight
divided them into the windows, and some pretty places every one a sunder from
their friend, each one imagining she was with 'tother, then came she to
Pamphilia and thus spoke: Rarest of women for true loyalty, I know your longing
which proceeds from love, and grieve I do, that I cannot be blessed with power
to tell that happiness you seek, but Destiny that gouernes all our lives has
thus ordained, you might be happy, had you power to wedd, but daintiness and
fear will hinder you: I cannot find that you shall marry yet, nor him you
most affect, many afflictions you must undergo, and all by woman kind, beware
of them, and so the better speed.

Pamphilia only sighed, and turned her blushing face unto the window, while the
Lady went unto Urania, to whom she thus discoursed. Fairest, and sweetest,
leave off your laments for ignorance of your estate, and know that you are
daugher to a mighty King, and sister to the brauest living Prince, the honor
of all Knights, and glory of his Country, renowned Amphilanthus; the manner,
and the reason of your loss, shall be brought to you in a fitter place. Now
for your love, alas that I must say, what Destiny foretells, you shall be
happy, and enjoy, but first, death in appearance must possess your dainty
body, when you shall revive with him you now love, to another love, and yet as
good, and great as he. Be not offended for this is your fate, nor be
displeased, since though that must change, it is but just change, bringing it
from him alike disquieted.

The Lady left her, who impatient of her ill went to Pamphilia, whom she found
still without speech, and as (if one would say) fixed like the heaven, while
the world of her thoughts had motion in her grief. Urania likewike vexed in
her soul, showed in her face the small content she knew; they both stood
gazing in each others face, as if the shining day Star had stood still to
look her in a glass, their blood had left their cheeks, and sunk into their
hearts, as sent in pity down to comfort them; at last assured confidence did
come and plead for part, and so they sat and spoke; while Mellissea passed
unto the King, to whom she only told that fair Urania was his sister, and
that although so dear to him, yet to make her live contentedly, he, and none
else must throw her from the Rock of St. Maura into the Sea; fear not, but
do it (said she) for this must make her live, and forget her unfortunate
love, (which virtue that water has.) For his Love, she did assure him he was
blessed in that, if being certain of her heart, could bring it him; but yet
said she; Nay, say no more, cried he, this is enough, and let me this enjoy,
I Will fear no ills that Prophesies can tell.

Then went he to the window, where he found the sad sweet couple, whom he
comforted, kissing his Sister, and with eyes of joy, telling Pamphilia, he was
happy yet: then Ollorandus came, and so Perissus with his Queen, who Mellissea
had assuredly foretold, the constant being of their happy days. Antissius was
the ioyfull'st man alive, for he had such a lucky fortune given, as to love
well, and to be well beloved, and what was most, to gain that he most sought,
and happily still to continue so; the like had Selarina, so as well it might be
said, these of all the others had the happiest states. Good Allimarlus, and his
loving love had promise to obtain, so all are blessed but those to whom best
blessings did belong. All thus resolved, they think of their return;
Pamphilia homewards needs would take her way, but Amphilanthus gained so much
at last, with help of fair Urania, and the rest, as she resolved to see Morea
first, and therefore sent Mellisander unto Pamphilia to satisfy the Council of
her course, and to assure them of her speedy coming to them, after she had
seen her Fathers Court; so with kind farewells they left Delos, soon after
landing in Messenia, and with all this royal troop came to the aged King,
whose joy was expresselesse grown, to see this company, the glory of those
parts. Much did he welcome fair Urania, glad in his heart to see her, who he
knew would bring such comfort and content unto her father, his beloved friend.
Feasts were proclaimed throughout the kingdom, Iusts, and all exercises were
brought forth to welcome these brave Princes to the Court, Pamphilia's honor,
honoring all the rest; yet could no^ that, or any other joy (though all joys
were so plentifully there, as bare accepting had inioyed them) give least
delight to her, whose wounded heart did feed upon the sore, was lately given
by cursed foretelling of her loosing fate. Into the garden woods (her old sad
walk) she therefore went, and there as sadly did again complain. Alas
Pamphilia, said she, lucklesse soul, what cruel Planet gouernd at thy birth?
what plague was borne with thee, or for thee, that thou must but have a virtue,
and loose all thereby? Yet it is all one, dear love, maintain thy force well
in my heart, and rule as still thou have: more worthy, more deserving of all
love, there breaths not then the Lord of my true love. Joy then Pamphilia, if
but in thy choice, and though henceforth thy love but slighted be, joy that at
this time he esteems me. Then went she to the Ash, where her sad sonnet was
ingraued, under which she writ: Tears some times flow from mirth, as well as
sorrow,
Pardon me then, if I again do borrow
Of thy moist rine some smiling drops, approouing
Joy for true joy, which now proceeds from loving.


As she past on, she heard some follow her, wherefore looking back, she
discernd Urania and Amphilanthus, to whom she straight returned, and with them
walked as while up and down the wood, til Amphilanthus advised them to sit
down, so laying his Mantle on the grass, the two incomparable Princesses laid
themselves upon it, the king casting himself at their feet, as though the
only man for truth of perfection that the world held, yet that truth made him
know, that they were so to be honored by him; then laying his head in Vrania's
lap, and holding Pamphilia by the hand, he began to discourse, which they so
well liked, as they past a great part of the day there together; Pamphilia
still desiring him to tell of his adventures, which he did so passing finely,
as his honor was as great in modestly using his victories in relation, as in
gaining them: but when he spoke of Steriamus, his finding him and his
passions, he did it so pretily, as neither could procure too much favor for
him, nor offend her with telling it, yet still did she hasten the end of those
discourses, which he no whit dislikt; but Urania desird still to hear more
particularly of him, as if she had then known what fortune they were to have
together; at last the king proceeded to the coming to the Island, now called
Stalamine, anciently Lemnos, where (said he) the Lady is called Nerena, a woman
the most ignorantly proud that ever mine eyes saw; this Ladies ill fortune was
to fall in love with Steriamus, who poor man was in such fetters, as her
affection seemd rather a new torture, then a pleasure to him: yet left she not
her suite, telling him she was a Princess descended from the kings of Romania,
absolute Lady of that Island, and for his honor (if he knew truly what honor it
was to him) his love. He told her, 'Twere more credit he was sure for her, to
be more sparingly, and silently modest, then with so much boldness to
proclaim affection to any stranger. Why (said she) did ever any man so fondly
show his ^olly till now, as to refuse the profferd love of a Princess? and
such an one, as if a man would by marriage be happy, should be only chosen
as that blessing? I am (said he) truly ashamed to see such impudent pride in
that sex most to be reverenced: but to let you know, that you too far
exceed the limits of truth and understanding, by vainly ouer-esteeming your
self, I will assure you that I love a Princess, whose feet you are not
worthy to kiss, nor name with so fond a tongue, nor see, if not (as the Images
in old time were) with adoration; nor hear, but as Oracles; and yet this is a
woman, and indeed the perfectest, while you serve for the contrary. How call
you this creature, said she? Steriamus was so vexed that plainly she called you
so, as he in very fury flung out of the house, nor for the two days which we
staid there, afterward ever came more in; she perplexing him still, leaving
him in no place quiet, till she got your name. Then made she a vow to see you,
and follow him, till she could win him, letting her proud heart bow to nothing
but his love, wherein the power of love is truly manifested. I would be sorry
(said Pampilia) to see her upon these terms, since she must (filled with so much
spite against me) with all malice behold me. I wish she were here (said
Urania), since it is a rare thing surely to see so amorous a Lady.

Thus pleasantly they passed a while, till they thought it time to attend the
King, who about that hour still came forth into the Hal, where they found him,
and the adventure soon following, which he last spoke of: for the kings being
set, there entered a Lady of some beauty, attended on by ten knights, all in
Tawny, her self likewise apparreld in that color; her Pages, and the rest of
her servants having that liuerie. The knights being half way to the State,
stood still, making as it were a guard for the Princess to pass through, who
went directly to the king; then making a modest, but no very low reverence, she
thus spoke. Although your Majesty may well wonder, first at my coming, then at
the cause, yet (I hope) that excuse I bring with it, will plead for my
justification. It is not (I am most assured) unknown to you, although one of
the greatest Christened Kings, that loves power is such, as can command over
your hearts, when to all other powers, you scorn so much as yielding. This
has made me a subject, though borne absolute; for whatsoever I seem here to
be, yet I am a Princess, and Lady of the sweet, and rich Stalamine: but alas
to this Island of mine, came three knights (knights I call the^, because they
honor that title, with esteeming it higher then their own titles, for Princes
they were, and the rarest some of them of Princes, as when you hear them namd,
you will confess with me). One of these, my heart betraying me, and it self
never before touched unto the subjection of his love, whereof if he had bin so
fortunat as to be able to see the happiness was fallen unto him in it he might
have justly boasted of it. But he slighting what his better judgment would
have reuerenc'd, refused my affection, mine, which only was worthy of gain,
being so well knowing as to despise liberty in giving it self to any of meaner
quality then Steriamus, whose proud refusal, yet makes me love him, and take
this journey in his search, coming hither where I hoped to find him, both
because I heard he lived much in this Court, and that he had bestowed his love
upon your surpassing daughter Pamphilia; these brought me assurance to win him,
having given my self leave to show so much humility as to follow him: next to
see that beauty which he so admired, and as if in scorn contemned mine in
comparison of it, which I think, Sir, if you well behold, you will judge
rather to merit admiration then contempt^ Fair Lady said the King, that Prince
you speak of has been much in my Court, and not long since, but now indeed is
absent, not have we heard any thing of him, since his departure: for your love,
it is so rare a thing to be found in one of your sex in such constant fury,
as to procure, and continue such a journey, as that of it self (without the
mix^ure of such perfections as you see in your self) were enough to conquer
one, that could be overcome: but for his love to my daughter, there she is to
answer you if she please, and clear that doubt, since it is more then ever I
knew that the Albanian Prince did love her, more then in respect unto her
greatness. Nereana turning to Pamphilia, earnestly, and one might see
curiously, and like a rival, therefore spitefully beholding her, thus spoke.
Well might he (brave Princess) bestow his affections where such unusual
beauties do abide; nor now can I blame him for prostrating his heart before the
throne of your excellent perfections. Pamphilia blushed, both with modesty, and
danger, yet she gave her this answer. Madam (said she) I know you are a
Princess, for before your coming hither, I heard the fame of you, which came
swifter then your self, though brought by love: and in truth I am sorry, that
such a Lady should take so great and painful a voyage, to so fond an end,
being the first that ever I heard of, who took so Knight-like a search in hand;
men being used to follow scornful Ladies, but you to wander after a
passionate, or disdainefull Prince, it is great pity for you. Yet Madam, so
much I praise you for it, as I would encourage you to proceed, since never
fear of winning him, when so many excellencies may speak for you: as great
beauty, high birth, rich possessions, absolute command, and what is most,
matchless love, and loyalty: besides, this assurance you may have with you,
that to my knowledge he loves not me, and upon my word ^ affect not him, more
then as a valiant Prince, and the friend to my best friends. Thus are you
secure, that after some more labor you may gain, what I will not accept, if
offered me, so much do I esteem of your affectionate search.

These words were spoken so, as, though proud Nereana were nettled with them,
yet could she not in her judgment find fault openly with them, but rather
sufferd them with double force to bite, inwardly working upon her pride-fild
heart, and that in her eyes she a little showed, though she suffered her knees
somewhat to bow in reverence to her. Answer she gave none, scorning to thank
her, and unwilling to give distaste; having an undaunted spirit, she turned
again to the King, using these words.

For all this (said she) great King, I cannot think but Steriamus loves this
Queen, for now do I find a like excellent mind enclosed within that
all-excelling body, such rarenes I confess living in her beauty, as I cannot
but love his judgment for making such a choice. and the rather do I believe he
loves her, because he affects hardest adventures, and so impossible is it I see
to win her heart, as it may prove his most dangerous attempt, yet bravely does
he, in aspiring to the best. Then brave king, and you fair Lady, pardon me,
and judge of my fault or folly with mild eyes, since neither are mine wholly,
but the Gods of love, to whom I am a servant. The King told her, more cause he
had to commend, and admire her, then to contemn her, since for a woman it was
unusual to love much, but more strange to be constant. After this, and some
other passages, Amphilanthus and Ollorandus came, and saluted her, giving her
many thanks for their royal welcome: she kindly received them, desiring them
to give her some light how to find Steriamus: they answered her, that from
Delos, he was directed to an Island, called St Maura, but more they knew not,
nor heard of him since his going thither with another good Prince, called
Dolorindus.

Having this little hope of finding him, she gave them thanks, and so took her
leave, nor by any means could they persuade her stay, in her soul hating the
sight of her, who though against her will had won, and then refused that, which
she for her only blessing did most seek after, yet would she honor her
worth, which openly she protested, but never affect her person. Thus the
strange Princess departed, neither pleased nor discontented, despising any
passion but love should dare to think of ruling in her: but because she must
not be left thus, this story shall accompany her a while, who took her way to
the sea, thinking it better to trust her self with Neptune, then the
adventures which might befall her, a longer journey by land.

She taking ship at Castanica, meant to pass among the Islands, and by power
commanded the Sailors to bend their course for St. Maura, which they did, but
in the night the wind changd, and grew high, turning (toward day) to a great
storm, not meaning to be cursed, but when the fury might be seen; thus were
they with the tempest carried another way then they intended, and at last
safely (though contrary to their wills) being in the Mediterran sea, were cast
upon Cecily, at a famous place called Saragusa. Then she, who saw there was no
way to contend against heavenly powers, would not in discretion chafe, though
blame her fortune: on land she went to refresh her self, and so passed toward
the City of Seontina, where she determined to stay some days, and then
proceed, or rather return in her journey, the weather being hot, and travel
tedious.

One days journey being past, she wild her servants to set up her tents, hard
by a Wood side, where she had the benefit of that shade, and before her a
delicate green Plain, through the which ran a most pleasant River: she
liking this place, which (as she thought) humbly by delights sought to inuit
her stay in it, as a Woman that would take what content she could compass,
for that time laid aside State, and to recreate her self after her own
liking, went into the Wood, pretending, her thoughts would not be so free, as
when she was alone, and therefore bid her servants attend her return: they
willing to obey her, and best pleased when it was for their ease, let her go,
who taking the directest way into the heart of the Wood, and so far, (not for
the length of the way, but the thicknes, and the likeness of the paths, and
crossings) as she wandered in amaze, and at last quite lost her self, straying
up and down, now exercising the part of an aduenturous lover, as Pamphilia in
jest had called her, a thousand thoughts at this time possessing her, and yet
all those as on a wheel turned, came to the same place of her desperate estate.
One while she cursed her love, then dislike of her folly, for aduenturing, and
rashly leaving her Country: she raild at the vncareful people who permitted her
to have her fond desires without limiting her power, but that she checked
again, for said she, rather would I be thus miserable, then not absolute.
Blame her Desteny she extremely did, reuiling her birth, and all that ever she
had gloried in, except her self, with whom her own ouer-valuing conceit,
would never let her quarrel; she wished Steriamus unborn, or that her eyes
had never seen him, spitefully imagined Pamphilia had bewitched her: in sum,
often times cursing all, seldom or never speaking, or thinking good of any,
all good thoughts wholly bent to her own flattery, which by that, were made
ill. Vow she did to turn away all her servants and take new Sycillians to
attend her, but that was as quickly corrected, wishing she had her old ones
with her, only now desiring to be at Lemnos, where she might freely speak
ill of that Enchantresse Pamphilia, who has (said she) with her beauty
overthrown my love, and lastly forespoken my journey and the finding of
Steriamus.

Thus chafing, railing, cursing, and at last crying for anger or fear, she
straglingly continued till night showed her sad face, threatening more cruelty
for her punishment. Her servants sought her, but in vain, so as half the
night being wasted, they gave over till the next morning, concluding then to
divide themselves, and so look for her, none fond of finding her, so proud and
cursed she was: but duty told them she must be sought, lest she finding her
self neglected, might bring their greater harm; so some taking charge of her
tent, and other, provision, the rest, with part of her Damsels went in search
of her; they traveled, while she at night being weary, laid her down, and
having finished her exclamations, with mere wearines of envious thoughts fell
asleep, resting till break of day, when she was awaked by one, who gently
pulling her by the sleeue, and then folding her in his arms, used these words.

Liana (said he) why alas thus long have thou tormented thy poor slave
Allanus? O look but lovingly now upon me, and for that loue-looke, all former
ills shall be forgotten, thy scorn shall be no more thought on, thy cruel
strangeness, and causeless suspicion no more presented to mine eyes, nor
shall thy leaving me be mentioned, nor thy flying from me, put again in
remembrance, all shall rest vncald, as bills cancelled; throw off then thy
curstness, and now embrace me with thy pardoned love? hold me in thy favor,
as I do thee in my breast: strive not anew to abandon me, who lived but in thy
search, and will to please thee now die, rather then living, give offense unto
thee.

She whose pride could hardly permit the embracing, if Steriamus had offered
it, before she loved him, seeing (the day now broke) a man thus bold, and what
was more for her vexation all tattered, and torn, his rayments like one, who
in contempt of handsomenes had put on those misshapen, and ill suited clothes,
and for newnes rags, in great dispite. Villain said she, touch me not, nor
dishonor my habits with thy rude handling them, struggling with all her power to
get loose from him, who mildely said he would not offend her. Thou do offend
me said she. Thou have long afflicted me said he: let me go hence Villain
cried she: O pity me said Allanus? I hate thee said Nereana. These cursed words
being to a mad man, as indeed this ragged creature was, distractedly fallen
into that miserable estate by mistaken love: he fell into his old fits, and
then forgetting himself, his finding her, Liana, and all, grew to apprehend,
that this was the Goddess of those woods, who had put on that habit to
disguise her self. O pardon me divine Goddess said he, who have thus far
forgotten my self toward you, but blame your outward show rather then my
neglect? She, the more he spoke, grew the more distemperd, at last with rage
growing almost as madd as he, who now, fully persuaded she was that Goddess,
whether she would or not, would worship her, and that he might be sure of her
stay, he tide her to a tree; then to have her in her own shape out of those
vestures, which he imagined made her unwilling to abide with him: he vndress'd
her, pulling her hair down to the full length; clothes he left her none,
save only one little petticoate of carnation tafatie; her green silk
stockins he turned, or row^ld a little down, making them serve for buskins;
garlands he put on her head, and arms, tucking up her smock-sleeues to the
elbowes, her neck bare, and a wreath of fine flowers he hung cross from one
shoulder under the other arm, like a belt, to hang her quiver in: a white
stick which he had newly whittled, he put into her hand, instead of a boar
spear: then setting her at liberty he kneeled down, and admired her, when she
almost hating her self in this estate fled away, but as fast as his sad mad
nesse would carry him, he pursued her. The more he followed, the greater was
her speed, till both weary, and she breathless, cast herself down by a
clear spring, (into it she was about) but the picture of her own self did so
amaze her, as she would not go so near unto her metamorphos'd figure. This
spring was in the midst of a fair meadow, the ground painted over with all
sorts of dainty flowers: the weeping of it running waste, seeming merry tears,
or a pleasant mourning; but she past the pleasure of those delicacies, sense
having out-gone her, or at least (in great weakness ready to depart) lay
vnvaluing as ignorant of those sweet delights, till night being again come,
she yielded unto the just demand of sleep, her body being too weak for such
a spirit. The madd man in like manner rested, but a pretty distance from her;
toward day she was awaked, and called from her rest, by a song which was sunge
by one not far from her, who in like manner had there taken his lodging; day
was a little breaking forth, like hope to enjoying, which made her see, the
voice belonged to a Knight of excellent proportion, for so much she might
discern, with a soft (but sweet) voice he brought forth these words.

HOw do I find my souls extremest anguish,
With restless care my hearts eternal languish?
Torments in life, increasing still with anguish,
Unquiet sleeps which breed my senses languish.
Hope yet appears, which somewhat helps my anguish,
And lends a spark of life to salve this languish:
Breath to desire, and ease to forgone anguish,
Balmes, but not cures, to bitter tasting languish.
Yet strait I feel, hope proves but greater anguish,
False in it self, to me brings cruel languish.
Could I not hope, I suffer might my anguish
At least with lesser torture smart and languish.
For (Rebel hope) I see thy smiles are anguish
Both Prince, and subject, of e'relasting languish.
O Nereana, said she, what luckles chance is befallen thee? how art thou lost,
abused, neglected and forsaken? yet these thou art not altogether fallen into,
since thine own royal spirit shall never leave thee, and if once thou can^t
but get free from this place, thy worth and deserts shall shine more glorious
over these mishaps, and thy power reward thy servants disloyalty: and now it
may be, nay I assure my self, here is a means presented to me for my
delivery; with that rising, she went where the Knight lay, who after the song
remained a little quiet, (I mean in show) coming to him, she used these
words. Sir, welcome to this place, since I assure my self you are of purpose
sent to do me service. The said Knight looking up, and seeing her strange odd
attire, gessing her by her speech to be as vain, as her apparel was
fantastical, rising from the ground, he said. If my service (which would
prove to my perpetual grief) were allotted to madness, I cannot find where
better to bestow it, then on you; otherwise, I trust I shall not attend your
follies. My follies, cryde she; I tell thee greatest Princes may esteem
themselves honored, if I command them. If distraction rule them, I believe
they cannot find a fitter mistress, answered he. O God said Nereana, when was
virtue thus abused? I tell thee base Knight, I am a Princess. I am not base,
said he^ nor can I think you are a Princess, since so unprincely terms come
from you. Why, what are you said she? I am not ashamed of my name said he;
wherefore (if you can, and have such understanding as to be sensible of it,)
know that I am called Philarchos, youngest son to the King of Morea, and
brother to Parselius and Rosindi, and to find Parselius, (whom we have lost)
I am now going. I thought you were said she descended of some insolent race,
for much do you resemble that highly admired Lady, your proud Sister Pamphilia.
He who was naturally melancholy, and sadder now, because in love, grew
extremely angry, yet moderating his fury he only replyde thus. A woman and
being mad, had liberty to say any thing: whereupon he went to his horse, and
leaping on him made as great haste as if he had feared infection, leaving her
in all the disorder that might be imagined, the trampling of his horse awaked
the mad man, who being now out of his former fit, but still distempered rose,
and going to the spring to drink, found Nereana sitting by the side of it in
such a passion as she perceived him not till he was close by her; then rising
in a chafe, she would have left the place; but he staying her, fair Nymph
said he, flee me not, I mean no harm unto you, but rather will beseech you
to be merciful to the most hapless of men, and to this pity I conjure you by
the true and earnest affection that Alfeus bare you: by his love I say, I sue
to you to have compassion of me, turn this sweet water into a spring of love,
that as it has been ever called by that blessed name of Arethusa, you now
having taken again your own shape, and resumd your natural body from that
Metamorphosis, taking name, and a new being again unto you, having by this
gained a Godhead for ever, bless, and enrich this water with that gift, that
when my cruel (but still beloved) Liana, shall drink of it, the virtue of it
may turn her heart to sweetest pity. Nerena, as much afraid as her proud
spirit would permit her, remembering how he had used her the day before, amazed
with what he said, never having heard of any such thing as a Metamorphosis,
her wit lying another way, scorning his sight, disdaining his speech, and yet
forced to suffer it; in few words, doubting that silence might inrage him, she
made this answer. I am not a Nymph Arethusa, nor a Goddess, but a distressed
woman. Then said he, are you the fitter for me to keep company with: not so
neither, said she, for I am a Princess. Can Princes then be distressed, said
he? I thought they had been set above the reach of misery, and that none but
Shepherds and such like, could have felt that estate. O yes, said Nerena, and
I am here a spectacle of the frown of fortune; wherefore let me entreat you
to give me some ^ase in my affliction, which is to leave me, since your
company is one of my troubles. Would my sorrows were as soon to be helped,
as your request might be granted, then should I be in hope to be, said he,
happy: but alas, mine can never have end, yours may and shall; for I will no
longer trouble you; with that he sadly went from her, leaving her, whose
intolerable pride was such, as she would not let him stay so much as in her
presence, though after she wished for him, and would gladly have had his
conversation, pardoning his mean estate and madness. So long was she in that
place, as famine, cold, and want wrought kindness in her, who else despised,
and contemned all, and all things; from hill to hill she went, loving them
for imitating the height of her mind, and because she might by their help
see if any passengers passed that way, besides to hide her self among the
bushes, even as it were from her own self. Now berries and such poor food
was her richest fare, and those esteemed, since they held her life with her:
thus was truth revenged of ignorance, she continuing thus.

While Philarchos held on his course till he came to the City of Syracusa,
where standing upon the haven, there arrived a great troop of Ladies, and
brave Knights; but one Lady (seeming the only one for delicacie, and to be
the mistress of the rest) passing by him, cast her eye on him, viewing his
rich armor and brave stature, instantly staying, saluted him thus. Sir, your
outward countenance tells me, that in so excellent a body, as brave a mind
inhabits; from you therefore I beseech pity and assistance, being like to
perish otherwise, under the disfavor of my father; if you will aid a
distressed Lady, and thereby gain honor to your self; grant this unto your
servant Orilena, Princess of Metelin, and some other neighboring Islands which
lie in the Archepelago. He whose spirit was wholly guided by worth, stedily
beholding her, replide, that his greatest happiness (and that whereto he only
did aspire) was to serve Ladies, to defend them from injuries, and to bring
them to their best content: wherefore although he had promised himself
another way (or indeed no perfect known way, since it was in search of a
brother of his) that, and all other occasions should be laid aside, to relieve
such a creature as her self; and in this he spoke truth, for this was the Lady
he loved, she yet ignorant of it. Then she entreated the knight to go aboard
with her, not desiring to delay time; he was soon entreated to such a
blessing: wherefore he consented, and being in the ship, she began her
discourse thus.

A Gentleman in Mitalen, being son to the richest, and noblest man for descent
in all the Country, my father has chosen to bestow on me; this man might (I
will not deny) more then merit me, were his conditions answerable to his
means; but as he is rich in all worldly treasure, so he is the treasure of all
hellish properties: the best of his qualities which are smooth fashion, and
eloquent speech, turned, and imployd to no other use, then flattery, and
deceitful glozings. These work on my father, and so have they their part in
me; he believes, and loves him; I perceive, and hate him; but which works
most with my father is, that he so much seems to desire me out of affection
(as he says) that he will take me with nothing; such affection and fondness
my father bears, and carries over a young sister of mine, as to make her
Princess of his Islands, he consents to give me to this Prince of wickedness;
I having no means to save my self from the destruction this loathed match
would bring me, I went to this Lord mine Uncle, to whom I declared my
misfortune and ensuing ruin, if I did marry so. He taking pity on me,
conveyed me thence with these Knights and Ladies, whose affections to me are
such, as not to leave me in such distress, but accompany me rather in
adventure of ill, then assured ill: but alas what shall I say? I am the
miserablest of women, if I fall into his hands again, which I hope you will
keep me from. I was by the advice of these my friends, put into the search of
Amphilanthus, the honor of Knights, of Parselius, Rosindy, Perissus,
Steriamus, or Selarinus, all which are famous men, whose honors shine equally,
and either of whose assistance had been assured gain: but some of them are (as
I perceived by one I met) so far off, and there in such employment, as I
ventured not to obtain their favors: after I met a knight, who told me,
Amphilanthus and Perissus, with the valliant Ollorandus, were gone into Morea,
wherefore thither I purposed to go, but a storm took me, casting me upon
this place, where I have gaind this happiness (as I hope it to my self) by
finding you; wherefore I pray honor me, with telling me who you are.

Most worthy Lady (said he), since you had desire to have some of these
named Knights, you may think your fortune the worse in finding me, and
putting confidence in me, so far short of those Princes: wherefore I would
desire to conceal my name, till my actions may allow the bold discovery of
it; let me then (I beseech you) be so favored by this second honor, as to
give me leave, only to be called your Knight, till I merit by my service to
you, your knowing more of me. She granted his request, verily imagining him
to be some of them by his speech, and thereupon her comfort increased. Then did
she bestow a very rich and costly armor on him, his own having been but
hardly used, by a cursed, but overthrown enemy, which happened in this manner.
After he had left Athens, and at his return receiud the honor of knighthood,
it was his determination to seek his brother Parselius, and to that purpose he
passed through his fathers Countries unknown, not leaving any adventure
unattempted, wherein he might make trial of his force, which he made so good
testimony of, as he was feared in all those parts, being called the Knight of
the Spear, by reason he carried the figure of one in his shield, as he did
that shape on his arm: but hearing no news of his brother, he took to the
sea, and among the many Islands, it was his fortune in Metelin to win and loose,
where his greatest honor he obtaind, his freedom he lost, happening thus.

Passing by a strait way into a fair meadow, he saw a marvelous rich, and
costly Pauillion placed, about it many Tents, and before them all, a shining
Pillar of Gold, whereon were written these words: The worthiest Knight, and
Servant to the fairest Lady, defends this, and the honor of themselves,
against any bold man that dares gainsay the worth or beauty of them. He
scorning such presumption, struck upon the Pillar: whereupon one came to him,
telling him, his Lord would soon encounter him. Straight came he forth, being
one of the cruellest, and hard-fauoredst men, that could be a man, and no
monster; his bigness extraordinary, his fierceness such, as could not be
withstood with ordinary strength: armed he was with plates of iron, and his
horse answerable to his master in all things, so as an excellent choice was
made, as if both framd for one another, and never were two beasts better
matched; none fit to ride the one, but he who was fittest to be master of the
other. This creature came (with a troop of his vassals before him, for so he
called them) into the field, each of them carrying the Sheilds and Helmets of
those knights he had conquered before that Pillar, all which they placed in
order as they were won, but for his greater glory, on the ground. Then
advanced he to the Greek Prince, scornefully pitying him, who so boldly
ventured his youth against such an experienced conqueror. But he in whom
virtuous modesty lived, mixed with manly strength, only desired the fight,
rather then discourse; so they ran one against the other with such comeliness,
fierceness, and strength, as in either part was seen rightly placing those
properties. The Prince had his Helm struck off; the other was run through the
shoulder, part of the staff staying in him; withal he fell from his horse,
but being recouerd, and seeing the danger the other was fallen into by loss of
his Helm, he in regard of that, forgot his hurt, and with furious rage set
upon the Prince, who covering himself with his Shield, as nobly and bravely
defended himself; they fought till the blood ran as fast from their wounds, as
dropps from a lovers eyes, coming from as heart-bleeding a cause; for at last
the Monster was killed, and the Prince taken out of the field for dead; but who
except love could be such a Surgeon; for whether was he brought but to the
Princess, who lay but one league thence, an excellent Surgeon, and as
excellent a Lady, who so carefully tended him, as he in short time recovered,
but to a more lasting pain (for favor and cures bringing tormenting wounds),
she put balm to the hurts given by the enemy, but she a friend foe-like did
make much deeper, and more harmefull ones, piercing the heart which in the
fight kept it self secure, now fallen into extremity of loss: but what was
gaind besides this? danger, and threatening ruin: for the younger sister called
Erinea fell inamord with him, and so passionate was she of him, as she ran to
her father, cast her self at his feet, besought him to get that stranger for
her, or to see her soon buried. He whose fondness was, and is without
expression, vowed to satisfy her. The Prince got notice of it, and so
privately stole away, his affections being gratefully, and passionately placed
on the other, kindness wounding, and bringing love. Then passed he, where he
heard still of the flourishing fame of his kindred: lastly, his Brothers loss,
which he gaind by the meeting of the Squire Clorinus: then vowed he a search
for him; but finding her, for whom he had lost himself, he left the former
to follow her, and find himself; so storms sometimes prove blessings, for
one tempest brought them in one place to meet.

Thus passed they together, he freely (because unknown) beholding her; she
kindly, because he was to serve her, entertaining him: then at last they
arrived at Metelin, where they met for their first welcome this encounter; a
Pillar of red Marble, as threatening blood, on which hung in bloody letters
these words, written in white Marble, seeming like drops of blood in snow; The
true Servants of Erinea maintain this with Sword and Spear against all, that
do defend the traiterous Knight of the Spear. He, whom this did most concern
(yet having power to perform his former resolution) inly fretted, but
otherwise made no other show, then in demanding of the Lady, who this Knight of
the Spear was. She sighing, made this answer: Alas my Lord (said she) you lay
too hard a tax on me, since I cannot pay it, without yielding as tribute many
tears, and even the breaking of my heart to say he is, and is not now here:
but yet to deny nothing to you, who so freely have granted my request, I will
say what I know of him; He was, and (I hope) is the true image, or rather
masculine virtue it self; the loueliest that Nature framd, the valiantest that
followed Mars and his exercises, the wisest that wisdom dwelt in, the sweetest
that nobleness graced with sweet mildness, and the mildest that sweetness
honored: excellent in eloquence, true in profession, and making his actions
still the same with his word; truth gouernd him, and he truth, honored by being
so true in worth: but for his name, or birth, I can say nothing, since but
after a cruel combat I first saw him brought half dead to me; yet so much
spirit had that decayed fire left, as burnt my heart. I might blush to say I
loved, because a maid should not think of, much less acknowledge such a
passion: but Sir, to deny that which is truth, I should wrong you, and most
abuse my love, which grew from an unusual ground, when pale wan lips won
kisses, where despair made hope, and death affection: but from these sprung my
desires, which lie as deadly wrapped up now in folds of loss, no expectation of
any good remaining, but that my faith which still lives shall breathe justly in
that love, till life to death give new possession.

How came your hopes so to despair (said he)? Alas Sir (said she) the sight
of his wounds, and image of death, made me at first fear in love; then having
recouerd him, I hoped in love; but then my younger sister (of whom I have
spoken, still being the bar in my joys) fell in love with him, as meaning to
disinherit me in all possessions of very thoughts, and the dear enjoying of
them, for yet my love aspired no higher then to think of him, not aduenturing
to let him see I loved, so she gaind thus much of me, she spoke to my father,
she wooed for her self, she vowed, she plotted, she did al to gain, and ruin
me. But he, whether pitying me: for surely Sir, he could not choose but know I
loved him, since my fashion showed it, though my speech not daring boldly to
say it, flatteringly demonstrated, some thing made those faultrings in my
talk, my blushings said, I surely feared, or loved, and fear must of
necessity be barred, since he was rather prisoner unto me, though I indeed was
subject to his love.

But are you freed (said he)? O no (cride she) nor ever will, nor was my
lothnesse to discourse for that, but for this desperate affliction; he finding
he was sought, and not consenting to be made by force to yield, to other then
his own made choice, he stole away; and truly say I so, since he robbed me of
my best and chiefest part. Often have I cursed my self, that I never followed
him, or did mistrust that he would so depart; which though in love I would not
have gainsaid, yet with my Love I would have gone along: a Pages habit for his
sake would I have prized more, then Princes Roabes at home. But he did go, and
I unblessed maid remaind behind, unhappy, dispossessed, and disinherited of all, if
you do not relieve me to some good, which I expect alone from you to have.

Do you not know that Knight (said he) who thus you do affect? Thus far,
said she, his face is so engraven in my thoughts, his picture drawn so lively
in my heart, as soon his knowledge would come unto me, if I might be happy
with his dear sight. Dear Lady (said he) I can thus much say, he loves as
much as you have here expressed, and yet that is so fully to make him plainly
discern the heaven of true content, as if ought might make him more dear
appear before your eyes, he would attempt to gain that, though the loss of
life must attain it; love then still him, who is your best beloved, and loves
you best, and only, and thus take unto your service that so wishst for Knight,
more happy, in this expressed love, then in a million of possessed Isles. I am the
man you do enrich with love, I am the blessed borne man to such a fate, and I
the true unfeigned loving man, who loves love truly for this happy love. She
blushed to see she had first told her tale, but he did kiss away that blush,
for then had he thrown off his helm, and held her in his arms, boldly
possessing what she freely gave. She saw him, knew him, and so knew al joy.
Then put he on his helm, and struck the Pillar thrice; straight from a Wood, a
little distant off, ten knights arrived, the foremost of the which thus spoke.
Fond man be gone, this work is not for thee, unless thou be that Traitor we
expect. I am no Traitor (said he), yet the man you falsely have called so, and
written too.

Many have fondly said as much, said he, who after have recanted, and yet lost
their heads, for taking falsehood to themselves. Falsehood never lived, or had a
spring in me, I am Philarchos, Knight of the Spear, said he, sought for by
Erinea, but disdaining her, am hither come to right her sister Orilena, wronged,
and abusd by her.

With that they parted, soon again they met: but he who now knew it was no time
to spare, aimed fully at his heart, which he did, parting it to divide the
former wrong among the rest, who followed him in fate. The second at the
encounter lost his horse, and brake his thigh, with meeting with the earth; the
third his ribs: then did they surely find this was the Knight. The fourth did
break his arm, and shoulder both, the fifth had but a fall and found his
legs to run away, and call more company, while all the other five at once,
(and contrary to the law of arms) assailed him. He now was to win his prize
for honor and love, wherefore courageously he withstood them all, though the
blows that met at once, given by four spears, were terrible, yet he like
the pillar of true worth stood vnmooud; the fifth killed his horse, so as he
was forced to fight on foot, leaping nimbly from him, as disdayning to have a
fall, any way, or on any terms, they rudely assayl'd him, keeping their
horses: but soon had he brought two of them more humbly to yield, and
respectively to encounter him: for wounding the horse of one of them, he ran
away with his Master, madd with the hurt, and casting him, he hanging by the
stirrup, never left running and striking, till he had torn him in pieces; the
other he stroke off his arm, with the anguish of which blow he fell from his
horse, the Prince quickly leaping upon him. Now were there but three left, and
he again mounted, feared not what their forces could do unto him, and soon
made he an end of them; one he wounded in the body to death, the other with a
blow on the head, the blood springing out of his eyes, nose, and ears in
greatest abundance choked him, he having no time nor means, to pull off his
helm, so near the brave Knight followed him, nor had it been to any other
end, if he had gayn'd the opportunity, then as if he would with good manners
have stood bare headed, to have his head cut off with more respect, and ease to
the Conqueror, who now had but one left to withstand him, who seeing his
fellows fate, would not endure, but turned his horse and fledd; yet before he
went, the Knight perceiving his intent, (not caring to hinder him,) cut the
bridle, and raines of his horse, which gave him such liberty, as the poor
distressed runaway, knew not how to govern him, nor himself: if he leaped from
him, he fell into the hands of his enemy, whose fury he durst not trust; if he
kept the saddle, he was in as great danger, going where the madness of the beast
would carry him, but soon was he out of those fears: for Tolimargus (the
sweet youth the Lady had described to her Knight, seeing the flight of the
poor Knight) encounterd him, and his Knights in number twelve, made a ring
about him, while Tolimargus struck off his head.

Then spurd they al toward the brave Philarchos, who had now in this space
pulled off his helm, and so taken a little breath, besides drunk a precious
drink Orilena gave him, which did so refresh him, as he was well able to have a
second encounter, which quickly happened, and a sharper then the first: for all
those thirteen, desiring either to kill, or take the Prince, ran upon him,
who fearcelerly attended them, and with his Spear killd the first, with his
Sword the second, and then encountered Tolimargus, who he knew to be the chief
by his armor, to whom he thus spoke. If worth be in thee, or so much sense to
be sencible of the shame thou do to the honor of Knighthood, let thy knights
stand still, and end the combat with my self, who am as good a man as thou art,
and therefore no disgrace, but an honor to fight with me. What art thou (said
he) that thus dare compare with me? I am (said he) Philarchos of Morea. If
(said he) thou had not thus butcherd my knights, and the rest of my
Countrymen, I could find in my heart to grant thy request, nay save thy life,
for I have no quarrel to any, but to the Knight of the Spear, that Traitor,
who has won my love, and mistrisse from me, and cowardly run away when he had
done. Villain (said he) he run not away from any man, but from the fond
affection of Erinea: and to show thee the better that he fears none, nor thy
force, here I am, the same Knight of the Spear, to punish thy presumption for
aspiring to my love. Then set they all upon him, but what with fury and hate to
him, who was his rival, he did such acts, as in short time he left none to
revile him; the las^ was Tolimargus, who held among his men, as far from
blows as he could, till (they were all killed) hee^ was forced to conclude the
combat himself with the loss of his head, which Philarchos cut off, and
presented to Orilena, who commanded it to be set upon the top of the Pillar,
and all the other bodies laid about it, as the trophies of that victory.

This being done, they hasted to a Castle of her Uncles (that good man who had
carried her away from her harm) and there they shut up themselves (that place
being of good strength) till they could get forces to assist them, or peace
with the Duke. While the bruit of this victory spread it self over all
Meteline, coming to the Dukes ears, and also to Erinea's, she fell down at
his feet again, beseeching that she might be favored so far, as to have
permission to destroy this rebellious company, who would (she said) else ruin
them. The father old, and doting, granted it; then she at last brought forth
this plot, to proclaim, that whosoever could bring in Orilena, dead or alive,
should have the Castle of the Sun, (which was the fairest in that Country,
and had been Apollo's temple) and all the royalties thereto belonging; but he
that could bring her alive, with her servant the Knight of the Spear, should
have the honor, and Isle of Samos, to him and his for ever. This promise was
imagined to be of such force, as to bring in either of them or both: lastly
she laid another, which was by promising her self to any one, who could bring
in his head. This was spread abroad, which made much danger, and hazard to the
brave Prince, and his friend; yet such a spirit had he, as aspired to nothing,
but the noblest, and most difficult adventures. Certain notice the Duke and
his amorous daughter got of the Knights being there, and his Daughters
return, by the first Knight that fled, and who was the cause of Tolimargus
coming, though he discovered not to him the name of the Knight. Then gained
they notice of their being at the Castle so as not having a readier way, they
raised men, and violently beseig'd the place, and so straightly, as at last
famine grew to be as cruel, and cursed a threatner, as the Duke; yet they
resolved to end there, famished for want of food, rather then yield, and so be
famished with want of each others company. Then went they into the Chapel,
and there together prayed, together wept, at last together married, vowing to
dye religiously, virtuously, and lovingly together. At there return, they went
to eat that poor remaining that there was left them, and having done, they
went again to pray; then returned into their chamber, where they spent the
night in full discourse, ye^ so full of love, as love seemed to please it self
in excellent sorrw: tears, and sighs were the banquets for their nuptials,
complaints of cruelty their enioyings, and what could be wished to give true
delight, contrarily wrought against them.

The morning come they rose, and as one, parted not, but together went to the
top of the Castle, whence they saw their ruin, then kissing her, and gently
weeping on her face, he said. My dear, mistake not you these tears, which now
I shedd only in tenderness unto your state, and for you, who was sauer of my
life; How can life better be disposed of, then to her service who did once
preserve it? when I a stranger, hurt, and mangled, was conducted to your house,
how was I there relieved, and cherished by your care? this was but to this end,
and this end is more welcome then a life, which without you I otherwise had
gained. Farewell dear love, more kind, and sweet then blessings in distress;
I Will fight for thee, and this must be my last, yet fear I not, for do but see
my end, and that will make me live with joy in death, when I see thee beholding
me from hence, my courage will increase, and make my blows more terrible, and
fatal, then the harm which falls in storms from high. Farewell once more my
dear, my life, my joy, and my last comfort: sweet weep not for me, nor mar
those dear eyes, which wound me more to see them harm themselves, then
strokes that from the enemy can come, and be assured the victory will turn
to us, if you but let their cleernes shine on me; but dim them, and I die.
The sweetest soul did weep, yet wiped away the tears to favor him, and show
them bright; farewell my life, said she, if thou do die, for after thee I Will
never more see day: then kissed they once again, and so did part; he to the
gate, whereout he sallied, then armed in ^edd: his shield with the old device,
which was an Azuer Spear, upon his ^rme a scarf of Azuer color, given him by
his love, and thus against the enemy he came, who never stayed to meet him,
but with troops incompassing him round, who fought with rage against all hope,
more then a hope ^o dye like to himself, and to renown his blood, that though
shedd by such ^orce, yet so well shedd, would write his fame eternally to
times, and wit^esse worth with valor joined, made love the crown whereat they
lei^el'd still.

To say what courage he did show, how many slew, what wounds, what ^roaks, it
were but tedious, and most vain; but so much did he there, as ^ade a way
through the thickest, and so passed in spite of what their furyes, or their
numbers could do to hinder him. A path he made of men, and pa^ed the ground
with bodies, while their bloods sought how to bath them ^leane, and wash their
wounds: which given on so ill grounds, did blush or shame. He being passed,
and on the other side, cast up his eyes, to see if ^ee beheld; which when he
saw, and that she made a sign to him, to escape, and even with hands held up,
and knees bent down she did beseech, he ^rauely answered, (with his sword
wau'd round about his head, as who should say) no here I Will dye, or set my Lady
free. With that, behind him ^^me a gallant Knight, and fifty more, who never
speaking word; as he a^aine did charge his enemy, charged in with him, and did
so bravely help, (...) in short time, the conquest was disposed to brave
Philarchos, and his new come friends; then did they seek among the prisoners,
where they might find the spring of all this ill; at last they got the Duke;
and then with guards brought him into the Castle, when kind Orilena came unto
her Knight, and holding him fast in her tender arms, wellcomd him to his own,
and her command; but as she did embrace him, she perceau'd the blood to run
along his arm, wherefore she went, and speedily did fetch an excellent
baulme, and then disarming him, did dress his wound: but when his helm was
off, the stranger Knight caught him with all true love into his breast, and
lovingly thus said.

My Lord, how blessed am I to see the Prince I seek? he also having pulld off
his helm, but young Philarchos knew him not; wherefore my Lord said he, the
honor you have done this day, is to your self, in rescuing a poor distressed
Lady, and restoring her unto her birthright, which she else had lost: for me,
this favor, and the aid I had from your brave self and these your followers,
shall ever bind me to be still your friend, and faithful servant, when you
shall dispose of me, and mine, which still you freely may, and shall command;
yet let me know I do beseech you, who you are, and how that you knew me? My
name (said he) is honored most by this brave title of your friend, my self am
called Antissius King of Romania, settled, and restored by your excellent cosen,
(and the worlds greatest worth) Amphilanthus; the knowledge that I have of you
is this: I saw your picture in the famous Court of your father the Morean King,
and withal your name, and many of your acts were there related, while you
passd unknown, but as the bare Knight of the Spear; joys infinitely did
possess the Court, to hear the fame which all parts holds of you: besides, so
like you are to that brave King, whom heaven does favor for the earths best
good, as for his sake, (if for no other cause,) I should affectionatly love
you. The honors which you lay on me (said he) great King are such, as I but
weak in worth, can hardly bear the weight of, yet the last affects me most,
that I am something like that matchless King, whose worth, ambitiously I seek
to imitate, though sure to come as much below the reach of it, as it is from me
unto the cleerest star.

Then did they bring the King into a room, where they disarmd him, and then
went back unto the Duke, whom they had put into a gallerie well guarded, and
respected like himself: him they found, not overthrown with grief, for
neither was he sad, nor any way dismayed, but seemed to bear his overthrow
patiently, to him Philarchos thus began. My Lord, for so you are to me, since
I am husband to your elder child, who fondly, and no way humanely, for love to
Erinea, you forget, and would disinherit; but she, (borne to more good) was
first releiud by me; lastly, and most, by this great King, heaven so much
favoring her, as to have succor sent her from far parts; before his coming
we were married, determining to die, (if such our fates) in holy wedlock. Now
you may discern what wrong you did, and if you please, accept me for your
son, and pardon what without your knowledge, we in love, and great extremity
have done; nor think she has dishonored her self, or you, in making me her
husband, for I am a Prince, and son unto a mighty King: my name Philarchos,
my Country Morea, third son unto the King thereof. Then did the Duke embrace
him, speaking thus: What has been done, I do confess was hard, and most
unjustly against mine own child; but she has married unknown unto me, in
that she has done like offense; so set them just in sight, and hers the
greater will appear: yet since her choice is such, and where such worth is, as
I truly speak, more cannot flourish in so tender years, I love her, and
commend her: thus worth does govern, where rule else would show. Then kissed he
his new son, and presently his daughter was brought forth, whom he did kindly
welcome, and so did confer that Island straight upon the new married couple,
making him Prince of fruitful Metelin, and other Islands which were also his:
but himself and Erinea left the joyful pair, and went to Samos, where they
lived, she studying how to vex or hurt her sister: thus ill natures breath but
in malice, and feed still on spite. Then did the young Romanian King take
leave, first telling how he came unto that place, which was by chance; for
leaving the Morean Court, upon the coming of the happy news of Victorious
Rosindy, he desired to return for his own Country, and there he would raise
more men (but as he trauelld, he would still inquire of Parselius and
Philarchos, whom he longed to meet), and go himself to succor and redeem
Albania (Love, what a Lord art thou, commanding over all; for Selarina was the
cause of this)? Then going back, he fell upon this I Will to take in water, and
by meerest chance, meeting a Peasant of that Country, learned the state at that
time, that the place was in; this brought him to the happy succor of the
louingst pair that ever loved, and did enjoy their loves. All well, the Duke
departed, and they safe, Antissius took his leave, with Allimarlus, Steward of
his house, and many more who did attend on him; a little before whose leaving
Morea, Leandrus hasting to his heart, desired to be the messenger of that so
happy success of brave Rosindy, and so there arrived, to the infinite content
of all the Court; relating the dangerous attempts, but then concluding with the
happy end of joy and marriage, delivering letters from the King and Queen, who
gave precedence in place, and government to her husband: for (said she) he won
the kingdom by his sword, me by his love; both his, none but himself can here
bear rule. A little after Leandrus did arrive, Amphilanthus took his leave,
and with his Sister went for Italy (as he pretended), but St. Maura was the
shrine he bent his pilgrimage unto. The night before, great sorrow was, to
part, between Pamphilia and Urania; yet time grew on, the king came in, and so
with kind and sad farewels, he left the Court, promising to return with speed,
and to conduct Pamphilia to her kingdom, from whence, he by his persuasions
had yet detaind her. The way he and his sister took, was straight unto the
sea, none going with him, but his dear and faithful friend Ollorandus; the
evening after his depart, Leandrus remaining in the Court, and his passions
more violently increasing to the height of discovering, looking out at his
window, saw Pamphilia alone in a fair garden, walking in such a manner, as he
could hardly give it that title; for so stilly did she move, as if the motion
had not been in her, but that the earth did go her course, and stir, or as
trees grow without sense of increase. But while this quiet outwardly appeared,
her inward thoughts more busy were, and wrought, while this Song came into her
mind.

GOne is my joy, while here I mourn
In pains of absence, and of care:
The heavens for my sad griefs do turn
Their face to storms, and show despair.
The days are dark, the nights oprest
With cloud'ly weeping for my pain,
Which in show acting seem distressed,
Sighing like grief for absent gain.
The Sun gives place, and hides his face,
That day can now be hardly known;
Nor will the stars in night yield grace
To Sun-robd heaven by woe o'rethrowne.
Our light is fire in fearful flames,
The air tempestious blasts of wind:
^or warmth, we have forgot the name,
Such blasts and storms are us assind.
And still you blessed heavens remain
Distemperd, while this cursed power
Of absence rules, which brings my pain,
Lest your care be more still to lower.
But when my Sun does back return,
Call yours again to lend his light,
That they in flames of joy may burn,
Both equal shining in our sight.
Leandrus now grown resolute not to loose for want of attempting, would not
let this opportunity pass, nor let slip so precious an advantage, went into
the garden to her, and indeed it was properly said so, for such business had
her passions, as til he interrupted them with words, she discerned him not, his
speech was this. Is it possible (most excelling Queen) that such a spirit, and
so great a Princess, should be thus alone, and adventure without guard? My
spirit my Lord (said she) as well guards me alone, as in company; and for my
person, my greatness, and these walls are sufficient warrants and guardians
for my safety. Yet your safety might be more (said he) if joined with one, who
might defend you upon all occasions, both with his love and strength, while
these dull walls can only incompasse you: but if traitors assail you, their
help will be but to stand still, poorly gaine-saying. Love is oft-times as
slack (being treacherous) answered Pamphilia, from assistance, thus are these
walls more secure: and for strength I had rather have these, then ones power I
could not love. Such is your discretion (said Leandrus, as to know, that love
with discretion is the truest love; and therefore to a brave Princess, and
especially to you, whose virtue and beauty cannot be demanded by any, whose
deserts might challenge meriting of them, discretion should adventure to
pe^swade you to make choice of some one you might affect for a husband, since
you were not only framed the most incomparable Lady of the world, but also a
woman, and so to be matched with one sit for your estate, in birth and
greatness, and so judgment will continue affection between you. Discretion
in love, I must confess (said she) as discretion it self is best^ but if love
come wholly to be gouernd by it, that will have so great a power, as love will
loose name, and rule, and the other for riches, or other baser things, shall
p^euaile against the sweetest passion, and only bliss, which is enjoying;
therefore my Lord Leandrus, by your favor, I must say, I think you err in
this, and in the truth of love, which is a supreme power, commanding the eyes,
and the heart: what glory were it to him to have a cold part of wisdom to rule
with him? No, his honor is to be alone, and therefore does he often express it,
in making proud and great ones, desperately affect meaner ones, in respect of
them, and all to yield to his law; they then that truly understand great Love,
must so observe, as their merits may purchase from him so great a grace, as to
be able to choose fittest loves; his power must not be limited, nor his
government mixed, as if he had a counsel set about him, or a protector over
him, his knowledge wanting no advice, his knowledge never knowing partner, who
is in truth all wisdom all knowledge, all goodness, all truth; he must not
have it said, that love with discretion is the truest love, since in truth of
love, that is but a bastard, brought up at home like a right borne child: and
yet is his judgment such, as he makes discretion shine through all his acts;
but how? as a servant to his greater power; as if your heart should command
your tongue, to deliver what it thinks, but discreetly to do it so, as
offense may not proceed from it: here is discretion, and yet the tongue is but
the hearts messenger. Leandrus, whose end was to procure favor, not to
contend, wittily took hold of this last speech, thinking it better to make
this the introduction to his love, then any longer to wait or expect, occasion
offered, which if once but let slip, seldom comes again, so as letting her
loveliness, and her own words to be the beginning and means for his
affections knowledge, he answered thus.

Madam (said he) it is most true, that the tongue is but the hearts messenger,
yet messengers from such a part, are to have, and carry credence; then let my
tongue be the deliverer to you of the most fervent affection that ever heart
bare to Princess, with the truest and unfeigned love; disdain not then my
affection, since I will with loyalty and service deserve your favor, as well or
better then any man breathing: a Crown I will add to yours, and the
sovereign command of Leandrus: but what talk I of a Crown to her, who wears
the crown of all virtues? My Lord (said she) I cannot but thank you for your
princely offer; but it must be my fathers liking, with the consent of my
nearest and dearest friends that can set any other Crown on my head, then that
which my people have already settled there; and the consent of so great a
people, and so loving to me, must not be neglected; what virtues are in me,
shall appear through the obedience I owe, and will pay to his Majesty, and the
rest: therefore I am altogether unable to give you satisfaction any further
then this. It is you that must, and may say all, said he. Then can you have no
answer, said she. Why? are you not (cried Leandrus) sovereign of your self by
Judgment, years and authority, unlimited by fortunes, by government, and the
love of your Parents, which will go with you in my choice. These still are but
the threads that tie my duty, replide the Queen: but if they consent (said
he) will you eternise my happiness with your agreeing. Give me leave first
(said Pamphilia) to know their minds; and that can be no hinderance, nor
furtherance of your affairs, nor shall my answer be more displeasing to you,
then now it might be. Your doubtful answer will breed despair in me, cried
he. It were much safer (said she) to doubt, then vainly to nurse hope. Then
bent she her walk homeward, which he durst not withstand, though fearelesse of
any man, or monster, yet trembled he in her presence; both they went, and so
continued both loving: both complaining, and neither receiving comfort; he
beholding her, and in her seeing no affection, nor cause of hope, she seeing
him, but with eyes of thankful respect without love; yet went he further, and
so still made the greater distance. Yet was not this all, for her love was set
not to be stirred, or moved to other course, then whether the fortune of her
choice did guide her. She sighed, he thought it did become her, and so sighed
too: she grew pale, and sad, so did he, wanting what he sought. She oft-times
would discourse of love: he thought it was the prittiest theme, and answered
her in that. She would complain of men, accuse their fickelnesse, and change,
he joined, though contrary in sex to speak of women, and their slightings.

Thus they agreed, though in a different kind, and both did please, because
they both did love. He strove by some pleasing talk in a third person to
bewail his case, she would not know his meaning, yet with wit would let him
see she loved, and not himself. Cruel it was to understand her affection was
elsewhere placed, yet sometimes would he flatter himself, and give his
fawning hopes leave to dissemble, and cast a glass of comfort on him, but
glasse-like was it brittle, although fair, fair in hope, broken to despair.
Love violentest storm, that can bring shipwreck to a quiet heart, why do you
travel thus to bring home gain only of loss? Be favorably kind, love
should be mild, while love you are most cursed; and this did poor Leandrus
know, whose springtime joy, was turned to winter-griefe; yet still he did
pursue, and so unfortunately must proceed. Pamphilia loyal, loving, and
distressed, because passionate, that night after this discovery, which though
kind, yet to her was displeasing; when each retired to their rest, she went
unto her watch of endless thoughts: into her chamber she hasted, then to bed,
but what to do? alas not within that to sleep, but with more scope to let
imagination play in vexing her; there did she call his face unto her eyes, his
speech unto her ears, his judgment to her understanding, his bravery to her
wit; all these but like that heap of stars, whose equal lusture makes the
milky way. One while she studied how to gain her love, then doubt came in,
and feared her in that plot; his looks she weighed, if out of them she might
but gain a hope, they did assure her joy, then did her heart beat quick unto
that bliss, but then again remembrance threatened loss, how he had loved, and
might again choose new. False traitor, cried she, can thy baseness be so vild and
wicked, in bringing thus in mind, what thou in goodness should have cast away?
what if one errd, must that be registered? what virtues have thou laid aside,
which in him dwell, and thus uncharitably bringst his worser part in sight to
harm him, but thou faylest now I know his worth, and do excuse that fault,
and here I vow to live a constant love, and lover of his matchless excellence:
then turned she to the window, poor dull night said she, keep still thy
sadness till thy Sun appear, and mine together, shineing as light, Dark art
thou like my woes, dull as my wits; with that she laid her down to rest, but
it is not granted her, it must not yet be, she must more endure.

Then rose she and did write, then went she to bed, and took a Candle, and so
read awhile; but all these were but as lime-twiggs, to hold fast her thoughts
to love, and so to all unrest which governed her, for till the day did break,
she thus did wander in her rauing thoughts: then did sleep covet place, but
she was called to go a hunting with the King and Queen, which she obayed, and
as her manner was, as soon as the Stagge was roused, and Dogs let in unto his
overthrow, she followed them, and left the rest, (that either were not so well
horsed, or lose affecting such a violent sport) behind, and bravely in followed
the pleasant chase, which did continue till the Sun was set. Then did they with
much glory view their spoils, ioying as in a conquest of great gain, but what
did most content the fairest Queen, was the sweet evening, in which she
inioyed all the content the dainty Air could give, which was as clear, as her
clear heart in love, and that as clear, as cleerest sweetest air. But as she
rode softly to cool her self, a delicate sweet voice invited her to stay,
and so to see the owner of that music, the voice did draw them to a pleasant
Grove, and then unto a swift, sweet Rivers side, where on the brinke amonst
the seges, sat a Nymph of all perfections that were chaste; hard by her on the
bank her quiver lay, her bow by that, and she vndressing was to bath, and wash
her in that pleasant stream. Pamphilia was almost amas'd, to see so rare, and
exquisite a creature as she was, wherefore commanding all the men to stay,
she and her Ladies only went to her, whose modesty and bashfullnes was such,
as she even quaked to see those women there, and well might she, who never saw
her self in shadow, but she diued to hide her self from her own eyes, yet
had she loved.

The Queen perceiving that she was afraid, most mildly spoke thus to her.
Sweet Nymph be not thus dismayed, we are none such as will give cause of any
harm to you; we are your friends, and following the sport which you often do,
by chance, or hunters fortune are benighted: going unto the Court we heard
your voice, which has a power sufficient to attract all creatures, like the
sweet youths Harp, that drew dumb things to admire his choysest tunes: let
me not now disturb you sweetest Nymph, nor bar us from such heavenly
harmony; then did she sweetly make this fine replye; Great Princess pardon I
beseech this rudnesse in me, which has made me dumb, till now unable to give
answer, but my lips vnseald by your great Grace, my speech made f^ee to
satisfy your will, I must confess, when I did see you first I was amas'd, and
did wish my self again in this fair River, so to hide my worthless self
from your all judging eyes. Often have I seen you hunt in these fair plains,
and sometimes taste of this (then blessed) brook; behind the seges, I did once
lie hid, when you dry, and far from all places fit to entertain your virtues
in, sat down, and drank of this clear water. O said I, how blessed were thou
if thou could but know into what happiness thou shall arriue^ first to be
touched by those best dearest lips, and so to pass into her royal breast?
How did I think I saw the ^treames which were below, haste as for sorrow they
had missed that fate, and those above come hastily to catch; if not to touch
yet one kind look on them? this while I loved, and so was sencible, but since
Despair had married me, and I wedded my self to chaste Dianas life. Let me
entreat you sweet Nymph said the Queen, to tell me all your story, and this
night will be more pleasing to me, if so spent, then any that my fortunes yet
have known, she then with reverence due to her state, thus did begin her
tale.

My name (great Queen said she) is Allarina, a Sheepheardesse by birth, and
first profession, and so had still been, had I not lucklesly professed a
Lovers name, and left my former happy (because contented) life. At fourteen
years of age I first felt pain, but young, and ignorant, I scarce did know
what was my torment; ^ distempered was, slept not, nor fed, my coulor waxed
pale, my mirth decayed, and sighs did wholly breath my breath^ admire my change
the Sheepheards generally did, bewail my ill the sheepherdesses would, my
parents grieved for me, I for my part knew only that I knew not what I ayld,
till one day walking to a pleasant wood, which was upon a hill, I did consider
with my self, what was the first original of all this pain; I could not
suddenly find out the ground, till at the last considering well each thing, I
found his name most pleasing was to me, and so as I did in my heart ever
thank the means that did bring him to be but spoken of. None in my thoughts,
appeard so excellent, none spoke like him, none sung like him, nothing could
he do, that did not seem best, and nothing done by others but did show dull,
and quite void of any pleasingnes, so excellent appeard he unto me. When this
came to my mind, then straight I sight, blushed, and laid my hand upon my
panting heart, and then cried out, I hope this is not love; but love no sooner
was (by poor me) named, but as if called, he straight possessed my heart, alas I
yielded then to know I loved, and love joyed, I confessed I was his slave, and
such a slave was I alas soon grown, as but that slavery ^ did affect: my
health then alterd, and my mother put me into the hands of a Physician to be
recovered (as she hoped) by him, but all in vain, it was not in his power,
the cure was not ordaind for him.

Then came my love to visit me, which gave me life, and comfort: thus I did
remain, and five years loved him, yet he ignorant that my affection so was
placed on him. I surely borne for this conclusion, could not permit my self to
say, or show I loved more then in poor sad looks, blushing when he did ask
me of my sheep, vnsteddily, and with a down cast look, not daring to behold
what most I loved, for fear of burning what was scorched before. I gave my
answers vnresoluedly; he by all this perceived that I loved, for it was not
sillines he saw, that made that innocent-like fashion show in me, wherefore he
meant to watch me, and so find where my love was; but then it was too late, for
not imagining it was himself, he married. After this I grieved, and almost
dyed, but remedy was past, and I undone; yet one night, (blessed night for me,
and my desires) he came, and fetched me to his sisters house, where being set
between us two, he fell into discourse of many pretty things, and all of
love, and all as I did find, to gain by art, to know were I did like; at
last we fell unto a foolish sport, which was, to tell truly what we were asked,
and so to draw a lot who should demand; it fell to him, who pretily to cover
his intent, he first demanded of his sister, what life she thought the
pleasantest and best. She said, the shepherds. Then he asked, if ever she did
wish in love, and gain it to her full content? She said, she never could
obtain so just a satisfaction, for her wish was still above the benefit she
gaind. Then was it come to me to be his servant, his question was, Which was
the blessedst half hour I ever knew? I said, a time I followed a poor bird
to shoot at it, and as I thought (O me the dearest thought) a thought which
ioyed my soul, I hit the bird. Who did you think of (said he)? Then I blushed,
he urged, and swore I marred the Play, and must be punished for so foul
offense. I pardon asked, and said I would confess: but when I came to say but
these few words, It was your self, my speech again did fail, my spirits
fainted, I looked pale, and red, and sighed, and smild, and all in instant
space; love never had more strange diversity then in me at that present; I was
dumb, then spoke a little, half what I should say, and turned the rest to
comfort my poor heart: then did he take me in his arms, and strictly did
conjure me to say out. Why then (said I) I thought on him I loved: this made
him yet more curious, holding me still, perceiving I was not displeased,
sweetly persuading me to say the rest; when I with soft and fearful words,
afraid to hear my self say, I did love; 'Twas you, said I: he then 'twixt joy
and grief, wept, the like did I. This passed, continually he tended my poor
flock, forsook his own, if they did stray from mine, his songs were of me,
and my thoughts on him.

Many sweet, pleasant, and delightful games he did invent to give content to
us, at last his sister grew to malice his respect to me, and to discern all
was for my delight, which he did studdy, or present to us: she had much pride,
and such as Sheephardesses seldom know, yet flowed it in her, who else was
like us, mild, and sufficiently witty. This her malice flew unto the height of
slighting me, which I perceauing, let her go alone vnwaighted on, or yet
accompanied by me. Two years this did endure, when all plagues grew, for then
his wife did likewise did likewise stomach me, and out of the poor wit she
had, (which s^^ce was sense) did manifest her rage. I was in troth most sorry
for her hate, so much I loved him, as I loved all was his, and her, though not
so well as the worst beast he had, since she alone I saw my bar for bliss.
He saw my patience, which was often times mooud even into spite, yet covered,
and suppresd with the dear power of my deerer love. Then was there entertayn'd
at brave Mantinia, a great Ambassador, whether we were called, among the
strange delights, to represent our innocent pastimes, in which, my love and I
were placed for the chief, for he at wrestling, and those sports of strength,
did far excel the others of these plains; my self for pastoral songs,
dances, and such like had the first place among the maids, and so came I, great
Princess, to be blessed with seeing you, which sight still lives ingrafted in
my breast. But what became then of your love, said the Queen? Why that alas
was al my sorrow, and my change cride she, grew from his change, which in this
sort befell: he having thus in pure and spotless sort gaind my best love,
could not yet be content with such enjoying, but did covet more, which to
prevent, I found convenient means and slights still to avoid, which he
perceau'd, yet then affected me so much, as nothing could withdraw him from my
love: arguments he would frame, even against his own desires, and swear,
that where true love was, loose desires were distant, and unknown, nor could a
man so much affect, where he had once gaind all, as when he knew there did
from him lie hid, a richer treasure then he had possessed, and more devoutly,
and with greater zeal did he love, where he still was so refused, then if he
had by yielding obtained all. I did believe, and much commend his mind, and
what I praised, or liked he likewise seemed to be affected with; but what in
men can last in certain kind? there was a meeting amongst us, and thither on
May day every year (being the day we celebrated feasts) the rarest, and the
choycest beautyes came, among the rest one, who in truth I must confess, was
fair above the common beautyes in our time, but of the meanest parentage and
rank, being a servant to a Shepherdess, who was of greatest place, for there
is difference, and distinction made of their degrees, (though all below your
fight) as well as in the great ones, and as much curious choice, and shame to
match below their own degrees, as among Princes, whose great bloods are
touched, if staind with baseness in the match they make. This woman yet allured
my love to change, and what was worse, to scorn me; long I was, before I would
perceive it, yet at last too clearly it discovered was: she then attended on
the May Lady, of purpose there enticed, where he for his wished ends might her
behold.

The heardsman then, who kept the Cattle both of his sisters and his own, did
grow enamored of this beauteous Less; at last, love gaind the hand of
judgment, and so privately they married, then did he grow more sure, and
surely did enjoy, for who could with much cruelty refuse, especially not borne
to chastity: then were his looks all cast on her, his speeches wholly bent to
her, her wit admired, her jests told, wondered at, into all company she must be
admitted, all respect her, and I quite cast off; my soul was wounded with it,
and my heart wasted, and dried up; that truly I was grown a woman, worthless
for outward parts to be looked on; and thus tormented, I desired often to speak
with him, but he did more shun me, then ever once he coueted my sight. If I
came in, where he alone did stand, instantly he went out, or would turn his
ba^ke, in sharpest scorn unto my loving eyes. Aye me, cried I, am I come to
this pass? have I lost all my liberty for this? have I adventured death, and
shame, to come unto this shameful end in love? my parents have I left, and
they displeasd have rated me, for my immoderate love, and all to be requited
with gain, at last of foul disdain, for fervent truth? The world was filled
with my constancy, all with broad eyes saw his disloyalty; some pitied me,
others flouted me; I grieved, and yet at last resolved either to speak or
write; speak alas I could no^, for I did fear to give offense, still fondly
loving him: when I was in my bed, and thought of all my woes, I could resolve
to speak my mind, and frame my speeches in as moderate kind as might be,
rather demanding pity, then to discover, that I did dislike him for his
change; but when I saw him, and did view his eyes, if on me, cast but in a
cruel sort, so far I was from any power, or true ability, to touch of
wrongs, or to beg poor compassion, as I stood amazed, trembling, and even as
one cast unto death. Then did I silently lament this harm, and mournefully
bewail my misery, speaking unto my self, as if to him, and frame his answers
like unto his looks, then weep, and spend whole nights in this distress, my
heart almost unable to sustain so cursed a Dialogue, as I had framd millions of
times to vex my soul withal, at last I writ a letter, I remember these being
the contents, and almost the same words.

IF what I write may prove displeasing unto you, I wish my hand had lost the
use to write, when I writ this, my eyes, sight for seeing it, and my heart, had
then rent with sorrow for punishment, in so offending you, who for all your
cruelty, can do no other then love you still. But the affliction that I am
fallen into by your change, makes me send these lines unto you, and to beseech
you by the love you once bare me, to let me know the cause of your great
strangeness toward me; if proceeding from my part, be just; and tell it me,
who will not only curse my self for doing it, but with all true humility
demand a pardon for it; my soul is purely yours, in love untouched, unstained of
any blame or spot; faith was the ground whereon I placed my love, loyalty, the
hope I held it with, and my self your most unfeigned lover, the poor creature
to be looked upon with reward for these: but you give scorn, alas once look
on me, that beauty which decayed now in me, once pleased you best; when wasted
it, but in those years I still was true, and chaste to you? if my face be not
so fair, my mind is fairer, clothed in truth, and love, and thus will I ever
deserve you more then any: pity me, alas I crave it, and most justly from your
hands. Did I neglect at any time, what I did owe, to pay unto your will? if so,
my confidence might make me err, but never did I willingly commit such fault,
blame then the trust I had, and just assurance of my confidence in you: will
you reject me, since I pine for you, the tears which still for you I shed,
have marred, and dulled mine eyes, and made me worthless to behold; look then
but on my faith, and pity me, who will die as I was, and am, which is
sincerely yours.

This I read, this I corrected, and often staind with blots, which my true
tears in falling as I writ had made. I sent it by a youth, who still had loved
me, and did serve my love; he gave it him one morning as he waked: his answer
was, that he would speak with me. The next day he did come, and found me in my
bed, bathing my self in my poor, yet choice tears; he most unkindly only sat
him down, not once so much as looking on my woes, or me, speaking these words,
with eyes another way, and voice displeasd: You writ a hansom letter, did you
not, said he? Alas said I, what should I do oppressed? I am half mad, distracted
with your scorn; I could not silent be, nor yet could speak. You wronged your
self, said he. Wherein cried I? With that he rose, and not giving me so much as
kind, or unkind looks, spoke to another whom he called in, and so together left
me and my woe. After that time he strove by all plain ways, and crafty
slights, and all to make me see, how I was cast away, and left by him. I
patiently did seem to bear my loss: but oh my heart could not let me do so,
though in the day I strove to cover grief, in night time I did open all the
doors, and entertain each servant that woe had. Once I remember after many
months that this disaster had befallen me, he merrily did speak among us
all, and also to me, as one among the rest, and the greatest stranger to his
thoughts: I ioyed that so he favored me; for though he used me, as but if in
trial of my truth, I earnestly loved him, and ioyed to see him: my poor cold
heart did warm it self to think of what had past, and leapt when I saw him;
but yet that leap was like, or did resemble a strong conuultionat the latest
gasp, for then it fell down dead in my despair: but being thus together, he
was pleased to say some verses to me, which were good, and truly such as I did
much affect. I thought they were his own, and so was vexed, because to me they
did not then belong, as once all that he made, or framed were. He did commend
them very much himself, and said, he liked the strength that was in them. I
said they were most good, and like him, which made them much the better, so
discoursing on, I took the boldness to say something to him, knowing that
they might speak in kind for me, and yet my self not beg again, they were
these.

WHen I with trembling ask if you love still,
My soul afflicted lest I give offense,
Though sensibly discerning my worst ill;
Yet rather then offend, with grief dispense.
Faintly you say you must; poor recompense
When grateful love is force, I see the hill
Which marrs my prospect love, and Oh from thence
I taste, and take of loss the poisoned pill.
While one coal lives, the rest dead all about
That still is fire: so your love now burnd out
Tells what you were, though to deceiving led.
The Sun in Summer, and in Winter shows
Like bright, but not like hot, fair false made blows
You shine on me, but you loves heat is dead.
He made no answer, but only said, they were very fine ones: after this he
continued in his peremptory course of hating me, and I in my poor way of
suffering all, till so ill I did grow, as though not in him, yet in each one
else, I did obtain, what I did claim from him, for they did sorrow for my
misery, and he still triumph, as if in a gain to overthrow a soul given to
his will. At last, extremity of grief and pain, brought me unable to do any
thing: those that best did consider my mishape, justly did know the cause;
others smile, and say, 'twas, for I was forsaken; others laugh, and say, I was
grown dull: some said, my prose was gone, and that I only could express my
self in verse. These I did hear, and this in truth had troubled me, if
greater matters had not shut my ears and heart from weighing such slight
things as these. I gave my self then wholly to the fields, nor kept I any
company but with my flock, and my next kindred which would visit me. With my
poor sheep I did discourse, and of their lives make my descipherd life:
rocks were my objects, and my daily visits; meekness my whole ambition,
loss my gain; and thus I lived, and thus still ran to death. But one day as
I past among the rocks, which were both steep, yet easy to ascend; the
country hilly, the earth black, the mourning only couerd with Heath and
stones, to express the ill nature of that soil: I went still in it, till at
last descending one of the steepest, and most ragged of those hills, the top of
which was crowned with milk white rocks, in bigness strange, and fashion far
more rare; I sat down in a stone of mighty height, which like a chair in just
proportion, did give me room and ease. Yet some thing unsafe it was to look
down (for those whose eyes will dazell if on any high place) for the height
was great, and that stood, as if only framd to sit, and see the bottom
directly under. Looking a while, I saw some folks below, and as it were, a
Spring where they did drink: I left the rock then, and did straight descend
unto the Plain, the descent was not tedious, but slippery. When I thither
came, of all the company, one man was able to declare any thing of the nature
of it, for the rest were strangers, and not the same Countrymen. I ciuilly
demanded, if that spring were medicinable, or what made them with so much
affectionate ceremony to drink, and as it were, adore it. That man made
answer, it was that divine and sacred water, which did cure all harms. I
blamd him, knowing he had said too much, since only one was fit to be termed
so; but he, more servant to adoration then divinity, told me many strange works
that water had performd. I did for novelties take of the stream; drinking of
it, I found it did me no harm. Then I demanded, what it would procure? he
said, Quiet of spirit, comfort in this life. How long I demanded ought we to
drink thereof? Seven times (he replied), and thrice seven days. I living not
far off, resolved the task, and drank, and found such good, as soon I was
alterd in all things but my truth, which now alone to me remains vnharmd; my
whole condition alterd, I grew free, and free from love, to which I late was
slave. Then finding this true virtue in my self, and my poor self returned to
me again, I did embrace it in the same true sort that love held me, and so we
did agree. I love my self, my self now loves me. But after to avoid all new
delights, or to be sued too, or intised again, ^ put on these habits, hoping
by pureness, and vowed chastity, to win Diana's favor, which now is all my
ambition, and my hope. Thus here I live in expectation, not assurance of her
acceptance: into this Brook I oftentimes do go, and now was going just as
you did come; remembrance of my faith I keep, and joy alone in that, without
desire, or thought of loves variety. My days remaining, I have given to
truth, and as a Nymph I still will here remain; my name I also changed with my
life, from Allarina to Siluiana, these habits keep me from discourse with men,
my vow from yielding; so I now live free, and uncontrolled of Fortunes self. My
Mistrisse I adore, ^ keep her Feasts devoutly, and thus I do remain your
humblest Vassal, mighty Princess, else sole Mistrisse of my thoughts, and
freedoms rule.

Happy you are (said the excellent Queen) so to be able to master your self:
but did you never see him since you wore these habits? Oft-times great
Princess (said she) I have seen him, and so perceived desire new in him to
win me back, but now it is too late. I must confess, who once had told me, I
could have beheld his face without my souls affection to it, I should hardly
have believed it, much more to find my heart so free from love, as now it is,
and as he made himself to me, even a mere stranger; so are now mine ey^s and
thoughts as far, from touch of love, as if I had been borne never to know
love, or such passions, when as once my eyes hung after him, as steru'd without
his sight, my soul loved him as a blessing, and I was indeed only his, now am
I free my self, void of those troubles, love provoked in me; I can with
quietness hear all his acts, see him this day intolerably fond of one I hated,
then change to a new; all that mooues not me, save only that I out of pity,
pity their ill haps. Once I was jealous, vexed if he did throw by chance a
look on any, but my self, that fault he punished with his stern neglect, and
plagueing me in the sharpest kind, striving to make me see his change, and
scornefully expressing to my sight, disdain of me, and fondness in such
loves. These are requited now, he grown to pity, when I scorn to take it, he
to love me, when I am vowed elsewhere: thus love rewarded is with scorn, and
scorn, with pitilesse regard returning home. I cannot yet believe (said
Pamphilia) but you love him still, for all this liberal and excellent
discourse. I never will live hour (said Siluiana) to hate him, though I am
made free from bond of vain affection; and thus much truly I do still remain
his friend and servant, to defend him from all harms, I may by my respect make
void, and were it in my way to do him, though a just ill turn, and many
leagues off, I might do^ him good, that journey I would take, yet love I not
ought, but fair chastity. This sweet discourse concluded, the brave Queen
took leave of the fine Nymph, and so returned, with promise, when she hunted in
those parts, she would find her: then going to the Court, she went into her
chamber to take rest; little of that sufficed her, for though great as any, yet
in love was as much subject, as the meanest borne. Pamphilia (said she) can thy
great spirit permit thee to be bound, when such as Allarina can have strength
to master, and command even love it self? Scorn such seruilitie, where
subjects soueraignize; never let so mean a thing ore-rule thy greatest power;
either command like thy self, or fall down vassal in despair. Why should
fond love insult, or venture in thy sight? let his babish tricks be prized by
creatures under thee, but disdain thou such a government. Shall blindness
master thee, and guide thee? look then sure to fall. Shall way ward folly rule
thee? look to be despised. Shall foolish wantonness entice thee? hate such
vice. Shall children make thee follow their vain tricks? scorn then thy
self, and all such vanities. Yet when all this is said, and that the truest
knowledge tells me these are true, my wounded heart with bleeding does profess
vassalladge to the great and powerful might of love. I am prisoner, guard me
then dear love, keep me but safely free from yielding, and keep me, as thou
have already made me, thine.

Much of the time, she had to be at rest, she thus employed: then rising, the
day telling her all brightness waited on her; she rose, and went to the sweet
Limena, who accompanied her, into her sad fine walks, being there alone, (save
with her second self,) surely said she, you that so perfectly and so happily
have loved, cannot in this delightful place, but remember those sweet (yet
for a while cursed) passages in love, which you have ouergone: speak then of
love, and speak to me, who love that sweet discourse, (next to my love) above
all other things, if that you cannot say more of your self, then your dear
trust has graced me withal, tell of some others, which as truly shall be
silently enclosed in my breast, as that of yours; let me but understand the
choice varieties of Love, and the mistakings, the changes, the crosses; if none
of these you know, yet tell me some such fiction, it may be I shall be as
lucklesse as the most unfortunate; show me examples, for I am so void of hope,
much less of true assurance, as I am already at the height of all my joy.
Limena beheld her, both with love, and pity, at last; my dearest friend (said
she) fall not into despair, before joy can express, what surely is ordained
for you. Did ever any poor drop happen to fall but still for love? Will you be
poorer then the poorest drop of rain, which for the love to earth, falls on
it? raise up your spirit, that which is worthy to Monarchise the world, drown
it not, nor make a grave by sad conceits, to bury what should live for royalty;
yet if you do desire to hear, of Love, and of loves crosses, I will tell you
a discourse, the Scene shall be in my Country, and the rather will I tell it,
since in that, you shall see your self truly free from such distress, as in a
perfect glass, none of your true perfections can be hidden, but take not this
tale for truth. In Cicilie (not far from the place which gave my Father birth,
and where I much was bred) there lived a Lady, mother to many, and delicate
Children; but, whether her fortune fell with the loss of her Husband, (as
many, woefully have with that felt their undoing) or that misfortune (so great a
Prince) ought not to be vnattended, I know not, but she affecting her friends,
as friendship could challenge, a young Lord came with one of her nearest allies
to visit her; this visitation made him see her daughter, elder then three more,
that at that same time were in her house: he receiving welcome, took it, and
occasion to come again, those again commings brought mischeuous affection,
that affection, mischiefs self, for thus it happened.

The Lady loved him, he liked her, he sued, she innocent could not deny, but
years did pass before they did enjoy. At last, three years almost worn out,
he found a time, or rather her, much unprovided for refusal; both extremely
loving, nothing was amiss as they imagined, nor was ought denyde, some years
this passed too, in all which time, she who did only love, for Loves sake,
not doubting least that might be a touch unto her affection, or spot in so
much clearenesse, as her heart held to him, let busy speeches pass unregarded,
smiled when friends bid her beware, esteeming her constant opinion of his
worth, richer then truths which she thought falsehoods while they were against
him. Thus the poor Lady was deceived, and most miserably undone, he falling in
love with one so inferior to her in respect of her qualities, compared with
hers, though of greater rank every way, as his nearest friends condemned him
for so ill a choice; but she was crafty, and by art fair, which made him look
no further. At last, it showed so plainly as she must (if not wilfully blind)
see with the rest; but how did she see it? alas with dying eyes; all passions
compared to hers were none, the ordinary course of sorrow abounded in her,
rising to such a height, as out flew despair; melancholy was her quietest
companion, while monefully she would sit, days without words, and nights
without sleep. Often would she tell these pains before him, though not to him,
pitifully would she lament, and he take no more notice of it, then if he
heard it spoken of an other. Alas would she cry, I am no more worthy to live, I
am a shame to my house, a stain to my sex, and a most pitiful example of all
mischeife; shameful creature, why live thou to disgrace all thy friends?
poor soul, (poor indeed, but in true goodness) leave this unhappy body, take
thy self away, and when thou have left me, it may be thou may be better, and
win pity: hence forth must blame infould me, now must shame cover me, and
despair with loss destroy me; yet had thou changed to a better, and
constanter, it would not so much have vexed me, but when I see my deserts, my
love, and my self cast off, only by subtlety betrayed, and in so vild a
place, alas it rents my heart, both with loss, and your fault. Can worth
procure no more favor? must all yield to outward fairenes? she is fair I
confess, so once you thought I was, and if not so perfect, thank your own
strangenes, and my tears shed for your falsehood, which have furrowed, and
worn wrinkles, (where smoothness was) with their continual falling. Had you
no way to shun me, or my love, but by your change? you might have justly dealt
yet, and but said, I can no longer love you, I had then sat down alone with
loss, but now doubly afflicted, as loosing, and being deceaud; your want of
truth, is a greater plague to me then my misery, in that I loved you better
then my self, so much is your unworthiness my extremest torment. Often was I
told that I would hurt my self in trusting.

I replied, I had rather be wretched in loss, then unhappy in suspicion;
these now befall me, yet suspect I not, for apparent truth tells me I am
forlorn. Once I remember I was to speak to him, and (fool) I took the time
when she was by, with what scorn did he put me off, and slightness hear the
business, which concernd himself, yet coming from me, was unpleasing: would
yet I could be more lucklesse, so it came not from thy worthlesnesse, for it is
that, not my misfortune, tortures me. While yet she thus continued in her
woes, her beauty dying, as her fortune wasted, he careless man of any good, or
respect, save of his own desires, would many times come to her, rather as I
conjecture, thinking to betray her, then for any affection he then bore to
her, while she (poor hapless lover) never denied what he commanded. Poor
soul, how glad would she be to receive one look; one word gave her new life
again, but a smile made her hope, which lasted to make her the stronger, to
suffer again the misery he allotted her. Well, so it continued, and she was
undone, imagine then, brave Queen, in what misery she was, and most, when he
that should have comforted her harm, held still his cursed neglect: Till being
near her end, as it was thought, rather (and only sure for his own honor)
then her safety, he sent often to her; this made her take joy, assuring her
self, he now felt, he was bound to love her, since thus she was near death
for him; this made her hope, he would be grateful in affection, though not
passionate. Much did he flatter then, and protest respect of her, above his
life, and that her life and safety were more dear to him, then his own heart
blood. Expresseles consolation were these vows, but broken, greatest plagues;
what should we trust, when man the excellentest creature, does thus excel in
ill? No sooner was she amended, but he sent again with all show of affection,
his coming he excused, as out of care to her, lest others would have visited
her too, and so might trouble her in weakness, and bring danger to her health.
These glosses were to her like faith, beleeud, and cheerish'd, til soon was
she made to know, men's words are only breath, their oaths wind, and vows
water, to begin with her ensuing grief, her newborn hopes soon died, those
ties she had knit up were broken asunder, in more violence, which death brought
heavy misery unto the mother of these misaduentures; for soon after fell his
direct leaving her, not scanting any contempt or scorn, but turning all show
of favor to her; after that fell a new change, for then this dainty woman must
yield her fortunes to a new choice in him, and to an other, whose beauty wins
him from her craftiness. Then did she likewise fall to new dislikes, crying
out against disloyalty, complaind of her misfortune, cursd her credulity, and
fond hopes, never ceasing complaints, nor reuilings, for her thoughts, choosing
the first forsaken lover, to hear her accuse him even unto her face, he who
had from her changed lately to her, and now from her unto an other love; cruel
this needs must be to see him blamd, and for that fault which she had suffered
for, alas then would she say, what hap have I to accuse my Fate, and still to
hear the accusation from an other to the same purpose: Disloyal Lincus, has
thy poor lover Alena deserved this hate? can thou without shame consider my
wrongs? think on my deserts, I challeng none, but leave them to thy self to
judge. I am your lost forsaken, I am yet your truest love, and I am indeed the
unhappiest sufferer of your blame. Pelia complains of your disloyalty, and to
me, from whom you flew to her, if she dislike, what shall I do, who bear
the marks of shame, and loss for you? my reputation marred, my honor in the
dust; are these requitalls to be scornd, despised, and hated at the last?
unkind man, for worse I cannot call you, yet turn back again, and look on my
desearts, if not on me, and you shall find cleerenes in them, to discern these
other faults by pureness to tell you, none but it self deserves you, grief to
move all your compassions to it, lastly, just claims to make you grateful;
but you I see despise all virtuous ways, go on your course then while I
mourn for you, and my extremest cross. Thus did she often complain, yet never
shund his sight, least he should think his change could alter her^ the more he
saw her patience, the more, and insolentlyer did he press on it, striving of
purpose to afflict her most, which the sight of his alteration needs must
bring, when she beheld him kiss his new loves hand, with melting heart, and
passionate respect, smile in her eyes, beg for her grace, write to her
praise, and expression of his love; these alas cried she were the baits that
first betrayed me, thus once he did to me, thus fond was he of me, thus
careless of all else, but now transformed, as is his truth, and faith. Many
persuaded her to keep away, to scorn as much as he, to hate as much as he; no
would she cry, his fault shall never make me il, nor will I chang though he so
fickle be, yet be assured I love him not, nor can be more deceived by him,
or any other, only thus far the remnant of my love extends, that I wonll take
any course, though painful, dangerous, and hazard my life, to keep him from
least harm.

Thus did a loiall lover live, and this is commonly the end of loyalty to men,
who never knew but the end of their own wills, which are to delight (only
Perissus excepted). And to satisfy you, I have given you this short example of
true love, feigned I confess the story is, yet such may be, and will be
lovers Fates.

Pamphilia gave great attention to it, and the more, because her last
adventure, and this discourse did somewhat near concur, as ending in
misfortune. why (said she to her self), should all choose: these or such like
woeful histories, of purpose to torment me with fear, that I may live to see
like woes? alas, Love shield me from such harm; I now behold clear joy, so
did Siluania, and Alena, and Pelia, yet what conclusion have they? utter ruin
and distress for reward. These thoughts so inwardly afflicted her, as she sat
still, her color not changing, nor any motion in her outward part, while the
soul only wrought in her, and yet, not to let the world be ignorant of her
operation, sent tears from out her eyes, to witness the affliction that she
felt; tears which did fall with such louelynes, as louelines did fall and bide
with them. So much did Limena love her, as she grieved for those tears, and
with cries gave testimony of her sorrow, while she vnstirr'd, still let them
slide upon her softest cheeks, as if she did consent to honor her true tears,
with touching that earths-heauenly place; her heart did beat with pain, and I
think grief, that her eyes should be more happy in ability to demonstrate her
pain, then that which best knowing her mind could attain unto; I feel said
it the torment, they show it, like players of an others part, and so did it
swell, as Limena was forced to help, and with comfort and persuasions appease
the rage.

Thus they continued till Nanio the dwarf came to them, telling his Lady the
happy tidings of Rosindy's arrival, with Selarinus, this awaked her, and made
her melancholy companion, yield to her better friend, joy; back they went
together, and with much content met the King Rosindy and his companion in the
Hall, where the King and all the Court were assembled, joy plentifully
disposing it self to every one. Amphilanthus holding his course toward St.
Maura was thither brought safely, and speedily, then going to the Rock, he
took Urania in his arms using these words.

My dearest Sister, and the one half of my life, Fortune (never favorable to
us) has ordained, a strange adventure for us, and the more cruel is it, since
not to be avoided, nor to be executed but by my hands, who best love you; yet
blame me not, since I have assured hope of good success, yet apparent death in
the action, I must (not to prolong time, or amaze you with discourse, alas that
I must say these words) dearest Urania, I must throw thee into the Sea; pardon
me, Heaven appoints it so. My dearest brother said she, what need you make
this scruple? You wrong me much to think that I fear death, being your
sister, or cheerish life, if not to joy my parents; fulfill your command, and
be assured it is doubly welcome, coming to free me from much sorrow, and more,
since given me by your hands: those hands that best I love, and you to give it
me, for whose dear sake, I only loved to live, and now as much delight and
wish to die. Kind tears proceeded from them both, and mournful silence did
possess their tongus, till she again besought, and he refused; but yet at
last resolving, if she perished to end with her: he took her in his arms,
and gently let her slide, showing it rather to be her slipping from him, then
his letting her fall, and as she fell, so fell his heart in woe, drowned in as
deep an Ocean of despair; but soon was he called to wonder, and all joy; for
no sooner had she suncke into the water, but the waves did bear her up again,
to show the glory they had in bearing such perfections; but then the Deepes,
ambitious of such a prize, sought to obtain her, opening their hearts to let
her sincke into them, when two men in a boat came rowing toward her, and one
who lay in a craggy part of the Rock, furiously threw himself unto her, she
only saying, Live happy Amphilanthus, and my only dear Parselius, farewell:
that called him, who leaping in, cried; Parselius will never outliue Urania; and
sunk straight with her, then were both pulled up, and safely brought to land,
by the help of the other two, who leaping out of their boat into the sea,
spared not danger, or life it self; all four then soundly washed, came a
shore, where Amphilanthus embraced them, and with tea^es of joy welcomed his
sister, and his friends, who now well understood the operation of that water;
for Parselius knew nothing of his former love to her, only the face of Urania,
and being assured of her neerenesse to him in blood, rejoiced with them, the
others did the like. Now was Steriamus released of his unfortunate love,
esteeming Pamphilia wholly for her worth, not with passion thinking of her.
Vrania's desires were no other, then to go into Italy to see her father: and
Dolorindus to accompany his friends whither they would go. Thus happily were
all delivered of the most burdenous tormenting affliction that souls can know,
Love, and Love was pleased, because now he might have new work in new kinds.
Parselius longs to see his Dalinea: Urania wishes it also without jealousy,
or anger, but loves her heartily for her Cosins sake: most happy Princess to
be deliuerd from such a hell, as loving him, who had (although so near to her)
been so far from truth to her. Amphilanthus was so overcome with comfort and
joy, discerning this fortunate and blessed issue of the adventures, as
kindness now wrought like sorrow: then embracing all, they took to the boats,
the Hermit going with them to the Island, where with kind loving persuasions,
they invited him to leave that place, and to accompany them thence: but he
excused himself, promising to be ready at any time to do them service, but
his vow he could not break: then he entreated them, that if by chance in their
travels they happened into Dalmatia, they would enquire for his unfortunate
daughter Bellemira, and by some means to let him understand of her. They
promised this: so with more kind farewels, they parted from the Hermit, and at
Amphilanthus ea^nest entreaty went together for Italy, where they arrived, and
so past unto the Court. But what joy? what content did all hearts feel, in
seeing the Princess of true worth and admiration returned? Then did the old
king, whose hair and beard like snow make a true resemblance of it, joy (like
the Sun) heating and melting; so did joy melt his heart into tears, and they
like a thaw, dropping on the lower snow, he held them in his arms; they
kneeld, he kissed them, but could not speak, so was he wrapped and ouerwhelmd
with joy. At last Amphilanthus spoke, beseeching him to salute the other
Princes, which he did, and then turned to them, and again kissed, and embraced
them. This being past, they were conducted to their lodgings: Urania having
rich robes fit for her birth brought unto her, till then having worn her
Shepherdess attire, which she resolved to do, as long as she lived unseen of
her father, and only to receive them from his hands. Now was Italy filled with
delight, being the pleasing'st and delightful'st of any; sports are new
in^^nted to give welcome, and Iusts proclaimed, wherein these Knights must also
show their skill, the Ladies came from al parts to see Urania, the Knights to
honor Amphilanthus: the first day of the Iusts, the King being ready to go
forth of the Hall to the lists, there entered an old man, in habit like a
Pilgrim, with a staff of that fashion in his hands, barefooted, and with all
demonstration of that life, he spoke loud, and besought the King to stay till
he had deliuerd some things fit for his knowledge, then all placing themselves,
he began thus.

Most happy King, receive these speeches from me (a miserable man, if you pity
not), a Prince I am by birth, but a Villain by nature; Prince I was of Istria,
and brother to the King of Dalmatia, proud I was, and accompanying that vice, I
had malice, and all ill abiding in me, which causd a detestable treason in me,
for hearing many prophesies, and likelihoods of the greatness, and worth of
Amphilanthus, I studied how I might any way cross the success, he then being
but of tender years, scarce having attained to seven years of age; but that
which most moved me, was, that a learned man said, he should rule over the
greatest part of the world, and live to be Lord of my Country also^ to avoid
this, I vowed to loose no means or opportunity; wherefore I went to the Court
of my brother, where there then lived a great, and a wise man; this man
confirmed, what before I had heard, adding more unto it for his increase of
honor, for he had cast his nativity, having gaind it from one, who was at the
birth of the worlds wonder, your son.

Upon this I disguised my self, and hither I came into your Country and Court,
where I found the Queen newly brought to bed of a daughter; this I thought
might be a means for my safety, for no magic could withstand the happy
fortune of Amphilanthus (though a danger he should fall into uncertain to
recover it, and by a woman). So determining to have my ends some way, having
some skill in Magic, I cast a sleep upon all the attendants where the babe
lay, and being in an evening, took the child, and conveyed it away with me,
purposing to keep her to protect me from danger, while I would practice the
ruin of the Prince by any deuili^h plot, and to be the cause of as much hurt
as might be to his worthiness: but otherwise, and better for the good of all
these parts it happened, I being in all my charms and spells, prevented by a
greater power, yet was I glad I had the child, with whom I took my way to the
sea, where fitting down, and looking on the sweetness and delicacie of the
babe, unawares by Robbers I was set upon, no help being left me by learning,
or art, to relieve me in that adventure, death being only expected by me, they
proved more merciful, saving my life, but took what I had from me, and the
child, which most of al I esteemd; then woefully did I return to mine own
Country, there I fell to my books, and called others of that art unto my aid:
but do what I, or they could, we were barrd from knowledge or guess, what was
become of the child, or what course it should run, heavenly powers hiding it
from me, to keep her safety nearer to her, till this year it was discovered
to me, that she was safe in the conduct of a great Prince, her estate
unknown to her self, and him, nor was her inprisonment hid from me, though
the place and manner was; her disguise was showed me, being Shepherdesses
attire, since which time I have bestowed my time and labor in seeking her, and
now Sir, where I stole her; here I find he^, this being your daughter, and I,
(Sir,) the Traitor.

This then being done, they all again embraced her, but Urania desired to know
one thing more, which was how the Mantell, and Purse was left unto her. That
(said the old man) was done by him or her I know not which, that protected you,
nor can you know that, till you finish an adventure, which is only left for
you to end. Then did every one adiudge the old Prince to no less then death;
but the King nor Amphilanthus would consent to it, saying, Their joys and
welcomes should no^ be mixed with blood: then did he profess repentance, and
for that, and their great mercies, he received pardon, and so returned toward
his country, half way in his ^ourney he died: thus the adventure concluded,
they went forth to the Iusts which were ready to begin with their presence. The
first day was concluded by a match made of twelve to twelve, with sword and
spear, which were to their renownes performed: then the P^inces determined to
manifest their valors, yet every one privately taking this resolution, made a
shrewd mistaking among them: for the King and Queen being placed, there entered
a Knight in black armor, his devise, the Wo^ld burning, and Cupid houering in
the flame; this Knight was straight encountered by a Prince of Apulia, a brave
and valiant Gentleman, but too weak for him^ then the Princes of Vihin, of
Milan, Sauoy, Florence, Mantua, Modina, and many others met him, and so the
earth, as his Livery. Amphilanthus seeing this, stole away, hoping to revenge
his Country men against this stranger; so taking a white armor, like a young
Knight came in, and fitly; for then did the black knight want work: but long
he did not complain of that, for this encounter was strong and furious, the
black Knight taking him for some such an one, as the other kind-hearted Princes
were, which made him ^it the more carelessly, and so gave the Prince the
advantage to shake him shrewdly; which he meaning to mend the next time, with
great rage met him, who never yet was overthrown, or near the hazard of it:
but so terrible was the meeting, as both their horses were struck upon their
buttocks, yet again recouerd; three courses they ran thus without advantage,
wherefore by the laws of those Iusts, they were to end it with the sword,
which they did, fighting without mercy or fear, the white armor of
Amphilanthus looking pale with rage to see his blood, while the other mourned
for his masters hurts, which were many. Long they fought on horseback, the^
both agreeing (their horses being faint) they lighted, and so continued the
fight, till the King sent down Urania to entreat them, that they would give
over, since they hoped the quarrel was not deadly, besides the greatest pity
such Knights should be lost at the time, when pleasure, not war, should be
exercised. They at her desire yielded, while all judgments gave them the
honor, of the most worthy to be admired Combatants, Italy had ever known.
Faint they were, and so sat down, taking one another by the hand, as witness
their malice was ended, and so might every one truly believe, when they beheld
their faces, for the black Knight was Parselius, who feigned himself not well,
of purpose to be the abler to combat all comers. The two friends did then
condemn each one himself for hurting the other (but these chances often
happen among Knights): so they went to the King, whose grief was great to see
their hurts; but knowing by his Chirurgions none of them were dangerous, though
painful, his content was infinite to see their valors. Urania was sorry for
Parselius, but tended Amphilanthus wholly, till he came abroad, which was some
two days after; strange happiness wrought by divine power to work such change,
who once would have left all friends for Parselius. During which time, the
sport ceased, and began again with his presence: the other Princes every one
had their trials in full manner, and Steriamus for his honor had this
adventure befall him. The fame of this meeting, and the Iusts being noised over
all those parts, there came most Knights and Princes, to whose ears the
tidings came, among which was the Prince of Piemont, as proud and insolent, as
those vices could corrupt man withal: this man pufft up with ambition in the
worst kind, aspired to love Urania, and therefore put himself to the bold
discovering of it, and not content with that, demanded a favor of her to
wear, which she refusd, hating vice so much, as for that, she abhorred him.
He scorning to be denied, when he should have hated himself for such an
attempt, gave some speeches not befitting her to take, and withal snatched a
glove from her, which he swear to wear; yet mildly she took small notice of
either of them, but her spirit made her color show, she was offended; this was
in the chamber of Amphilanthus in the window. Steriamus standing by, and seeing
it grew offended, and so much, as it making his ^i^s give testimony of the
fury he had boiling within him, he spoke these words; Presumption has causd
in you this unmannerliness, but truth in me prouokes these words; lay down
the glove again, and your self at her feet, humbly submit and yield your
life to her disposing, for having done so unpardonable an act, and leave your
hopes to her mercy, or here receive this from me, that you shall have my heart,
or I yours to satisfy her right. He laughed, and said, the glove did well
become his hatt (having put it into it in that time), and that there he would
wear it in despite of him, or the best Knight. Steriamus struck his hat off,
with all giving him such a blow in the face, as he made him stagger; then took
out the glove, and kissing it, told Urania, that thereby he had the happiness
to begin his service to her, being long before engaged unto it: if she would
take it from him, she had the power to do that, and what else she pleased,
since he desired to be but accounted her humblest servant; yet his desire was
so much to be honored, as to be permitted to wear it as her favor, till he
brought him humbly to submit for so great a presumption. She who had ever loved
Steriamus from his youth, and by this was engaged, besides his aduenturing to
save her in the sea, to gratify him, yet tender of being cause of harm to
him, she only spoke thus: My Lord (said she) your merits so far beyond my
deserts, make me amazed, in what manner to carry my self, I am doubtful; yet
I will rather offend in the good, then ill; wear not this I beseech you, too
mean for you, since taken from so ill a place, but let me have it, and accept
from me a more worthy, and a fitter favor, and one untouched by any hands, but
those that present it with all true respect unto you, He gave her the glove,
and took from her a scarf, which with infinite content, he tied (assisted by
her also) about his arm; then went she to the fire, into which she threw the
glove, wishing that there the danger of Steriamus might end, with the
consumption of that leather. Then did the disgraced Prince go out, and
instantly send to Steriamus t, o give him satisfaction, which he presently did
yield unto, and kissing Vrania's hand, went down to arm himself in a private
place, and in an armor not known, being ru^set, and as plain an one as could
be, his riches consisting in his worth, and his Mistrisses favor. Straight was
the Court filled with the news, that two brave combatants were entering the
Lists; the King, Amphilanth^s, (though weak) and all the Court came, except
Parselius, who could not so well stir abroad as Amphilanthus, by reason he
had lost much more blood; his staying within, made Steriamus not missed; so all
assembled, the proud Prince comes in, suited to his humor, his attendants many,
and showed they had received their education from him; the other had none with
him, but carried his spear himself; the Judges were made, the Prince of Sauoy
his Cosin-german, chosen by him; and Amphilanthus, desired by the other; the
Trumpets sounded, and they encountered; Steriamus was struck back on his horse,
and the other his horse fell with him, so they fought on foot; fierce and
cruel was the fight, lamentable was the sight of it, for except those choice
Princes, none could equal this Piemountois, and that he knew, which did
encourage, or made him more prize his power then his worth, as one might say, a
Horse were a brauer Creature then a man, because he draws, or bears more.
Steriamus fought for honor, and that to be received from Urania, the other, to
repair his honor, touched for Urania: thus they past no fury, no strength, no
harm shunned, or spared which was not called to the highest account, nor any
skill wanting, which was not, (if a little stirred) renewed, and paid with
judgment, and discretion.

Most said, no combat, (except the last) could compare with this, yet in some
sort did this exceed, as being one more bloody, ground hate, and all cursed
additions being joined together in them, to be at height and govern, nay, spend
themselves in the furious, and deadly conclusion. At last, much care was had to
save them, when even their eyes dasled, and their legs grew false to their
bodies, no longer willing to support them. Then fell the Piemount Prince, and
Steriamus upon him, not of purpose, but by weakness; his helm he pulled off,
and would have killed him, but his spirit ended (in show) with his fury, for
then he fell off from him in a swound, appearing as dead as he. The Judges came
in, and finding it was the brave Prince, Amphilanthus fell down by him, the
King came from the window, Urania ran to him, and wiping his face, rubbed his
temples with her hand, when life again possessed him, and how could it be
otherwise, being in her arms, where life of love did dwell? When he beheld
where he was, and remembering what he had began for her, fearing he had lost
his honor by the others victory, he offered to get up, and being on his knees,
scarce able to rise higher, crying out, Miserable Steriamus to live to see thy
shame, and before her, where honor strives to be, and from whom all my honor
must proceed; he cast his eyes, and saw where the other lay dead, then was he
satisfied, and well might he be so, since this was none of his smallest, but
one of his chiefest victories, the strength, valor and skill of the other
being so well known, as none could yield him conquered, but by an
unconquerable spirit.

Steriamus gaind the victory, and so, as great honor as could be given to any
in a single fight; he was not the strong^st, but as valiant as any, and (except
the cousin and brothers) equal with any. This past, they were taken up, in the
raising them, the Prince breathed, and looked up, whereupon Steriamus would
stay, and hear him speak; he unwilling, yet by him before he would be dressed,
was forced to confess his folly, and in as humble manner as he demanded, asked
pardon for presumption to Urania; then he for gave him, and kindly reconciled
themselves, so embracing the proud Prince, departed, proud now that he had
lived to goodness, shaking off the other pride with his life. Steriamus was
conducted to his lodging, where Urania visited him often: the body of the other
to a place appointed, till his burial; the Prince of Sauoy taking order for
him, not with excessive sorrow for his death, who in his life time never cared
for him, nor any that had so much virtue; for this was a fine young Gentleman,
virtuous, and valiant, and now by his cousins death, Prince likewise of
Piemount. Every day were new shows, and triumphs, and by reason these brave
Princes could not be any of the number, martial exercises were for a while
laid aside, and Court sports gained the place; Amphilanthus, Parselius, and
(within few days) Steriamus being spectators: but one afternoon, with sound
of Trumpets, there entered into the hall a brave Knight, and with bravery
unusual, he was attended with many servants, all in one color livery, which
was Sea green and crimson, as coats of seagreene velvet, embroderd with
crimson silk, in the fashion of hearts, stroke through with darts; twenty of
these he had, every one of them carrying a picture, then came two richer then
the former, holding one fayrer then the rest (or he was deceived) for this was
the picture of his mistress, the Knight then commanded them to set them down,
which they did on both sides of the chamber, the faces to the States, he
standing in the middle with his mistrisses thus speaking. Famous King of
Naples, and no more famous, then truly meriting that fame; I am hither come
upon command, sent by a power that only has sovereignty over me, else free,
my name is Polarchos, son to the King of Ciprus, but subject by love to the
Lady of Rhodes; I went to the Court of her Father, desirous to see all places,
there did love surprise me, and I sacrifice my liberty on the altar of her
commands; Often times I went afterward to see her, and was (like the fulfilling
of wishes) welcome to her, though not to her father, after he discouerd our
loves, which though his dislike could not alter our affections, being strong,
and young, yet it opposed our often delightful meetings, subtilty was then to
come into freedom's place, and danger, where safety was wont to dwell, we only
secure in our loves trials, I had many put upon me, but I passd them all, the
more to increase her liking, and her fathers hate to me. Then was there an
enchantment, wherein faith in love, and valor was to be showed, and approved;
but since the rarest living Prince, your most excellent son, had the power, as
justly deserving it, to conclude those charms; I will let the description of
that pass, since how impossible is it, but that you have heard the whole
relation of it by him.

Then to proceed, I was so much honored, as to be carried to Rhodes, and peace
made with her father, and his consent gaind for our marriage: then departed he
with his royal company, leaving me assured, and so certain of all content, as
then I imagined; but after there departure, some two days before the
sole^nizing of the marriage, we were discoursing of many things, among the
rest, of the adventures at Ciprus, which brought on the pleasant Just we had
there: begun by matchless Amphilanthus, and his worthy companion Ollorandus,
with whom I did well enough, but was by your Son laid on the ground; this I
took for no disgrace, but as a due, when I presumed to meet him, who was to
be yielded to by all: but though I thought this no dishonor, the hearing it
bred disdain in my mistress, wherefore she told me, that unless I would wipe
away this stain, she would never look upon me, and though she could marry no
other, yet she would not perform it with me, this grieved me, and so much was
I vexed with the teller of this to her, as to begin, I could have found in my
heart to kill him; but what would that avail? She was angry, and wilful in
her resolution, and being Princess of that Island, I had but a small party
there, to force her to perform her word, and faith engaged; yet thus far I
brought it, I undertook to carry her picture through all Greece, and Italy,
and Just with all, that would venture their Mistresses Pictures against mine,
if I overcame, I was to have her instantly upon my return, and all their
Pictures, as my gain to present her withal, only I excepted, Amphilanthus and
Ollorandus whom I had before been so much engaged to. She was contented with
this, and so I took my way; Most of Greece I have passed, and all good fortune
has yet attended me, never receiving the worst of any, but I must confess, my
Destiny has yet held me, from meeting the renown of Knighthood, the three
Brothers, and their Companions; the last I met withal, was a Romanian Knight,
and he brought, as assured gain, this Ladies, the Princess Antissia, but has
courteously left her to grace the other Ladies; Now Sir, my humble request to
your Majesty is, that I may have permission to try my fortune here.

The King rose up, and embraced him, giving him welcome, and liberty; so did
Amphilanthus, Parselius, Steriamus, Ollorandus, and lastly, Dolorindus came
unto him, but not with so loving a countenance, for he was resolved to encouter
him, so much had the resemblance of Antissia wrought on his mind; then the
King desired to have the orders of the Iusts proclaimed, which were, That no
man must come into the Field to Just, without his Ladies Portraiture. That if
he were overcome, he must leave it behind him, as his sign of loss. That he
must not offer to defend that with the Sword, which he lost with the Lance.
That they were to run six courses, if done equally, to continue till the
Judges decided it. And lastly, if the Challenger were overcome, the Defendant
had free liberty to dispose of all the Pictures before conquered; this being
done, for that night they parted, Polarchos to his Tents, which were set up at
the end of the Lists, being infinite rich, and beautiful. The princes brought
him thither, though feign they would have had his company in the Court, but
that was contrary to her command, who he must wholly obey.

The morning come, there assembled all the Court, the Judges were the four
first named Princes, then came in the Prince of Milan, attended on, like
himself, two Knights of Milan carrying his Ladies Picture, which was, indeed,
as lovely as any could be, but brown of complexion, Daughter she was to the
Duke of Florence, and who at that time he was extremely passionate, of being
to be his wife, within few weeks after; this Prince ran finely with an
excellent grace, and delicate Horsemanship; but Polarchos had run with
Amphilanthus, with equal strength, for some courses, wherefore this young
Prince must be contented to leave his picture behind him, which he did at the
fourth course, and thus did his misfortune bring in many, for that day he
gained seven to the number of his Victories, and the second day, almost as
many. Now was he to stay but six days in every Kings Court, not as long as he
found Knights to Just with, but those that would, must within that time do it,
or not else. The third day he had but few, by reason the Knights were
unprovided, but the fourth and fifth, he had enough to do, to conquer so many
as came. The sixth day, there entered a Knight in gold armor, his plumes,
furniture to his horse, liueries all yellow and gold, so as he was called the
jealous Knight; before him was carried the picture of Antissia, so he came to
the Judges as the custom was, but they refused him liberty, saying, that since
that Princess had been once before brought in, it was not lawful to bring
her again, since so it run to infiniteness; yet he much urging, and the
challenger being as courteous, as valerous, consented on this condition, that
this should be the last example, so they parted, and encountered with great
force, and finenesse, the yellow Knight had a while the worse, but he recouerd
himself prettily well again, and brought it to that pass, that in five
courses, there was little advantage; but then Polarchos knowing his conclusion
was near an end, like a man that in earnest, desird to win his Ladies love,
encounterd him, and stroke him flat on his back, passing only with the loss
of his stirrops, so the honor was given him, and the other unknown, got away
as he came, but with somewhat less reputation, yet no shame; since he did
best of forty that Iusted of that Court.

Thus the Iusts had end, and Polarchos with much honor, was brought into the
Court, where he continued some days, and having now finished his charge
departed for Rhodes, with all lovely triumphant trophies. At Rhodes he was
received kindly of all, except his mistress, who examining all that he had done,
and finding none of the famous women among them, told him that those were
nothing to her, unless he had brought Pamphilias, Vranias, Selarinas, and
Limenas pictures, or that he had overthrown, Parselius, Rosindy, Steriamus,
Selarinus, Perissus, Leandrus, or such Knights, looking with so despightfull a
contempt on him, as it a new moved his passions, into a still continuing hate,
for he seeing this, and all his labor no more esteemd, grew to abhorring that,
which before he sought, and scorn, what he adored. Is all my labor (said he)
requited thus? the trauells, the hazards I have run into, rewarded with this
slightness? Farewell, fond unworthy woman, and when Polarchos next seeks
thee, use him thus; now I hate thee, and will no more ever see thee, or think
of thee, if not with scorn. With that he flung out of her presence, and
straight went to his lodging, where he meant to stay that night only, and the
next day take his journey homeward, but he was thus prevented; for she seeing
his mind altered, and how like she was to fall into this loss, she called her
trustiest servants to her, and gave them charge how to fulfill her commands,
which they accomplished; for in the dead time of the night, when he slept
secure from Love passions, which were wont to hold his eyes open, and busy his
soul, he now freed from them, enjoyed quiet rest, till he was disturbed by
the rude rushing in of certain men into his Chamber, who taking him
unprovided, laid hold of him, and binding him with cords, and iron chains,
carried him into a strong tower, which was on the topp of the Castle, the
windows bard thick with iron, nothing else to keep Sun or cold from him,
no bed but the hard floor, nor meat, but bread and water.

Thus he lived a while, true spectacle of misfortune, in unfortunate love,
those hands that lately defended her beauty, now bound for maintaining so false
a shadow, and all the honor he gaind for her, turned to disdained hate, surely
a just punishment, when worth carries a sword against worth to defend the
opposite, Poor Polarchos, into what affliction art thou brought^ how will thy
friends lament thy misfortune, and redress thy wrongs, if they may attain but
the knowledge of it? but thus thou must yet continue tortured for thy too great
goodness.

Amphilanthus having now recouerd his strength pretily well, came unto his
father one day, telling him what promise he had made unto his cousin, the Queen
of Pamphilia, to conduct her home, and therefore besought his leave to depart,
and also permission for Vrania's going; besides, Steriamus was now to proceed
in his business concerning the recovery of his kingdom; these he said, and no
other should have carried him from his presence. This indeed was true, and so
gaind he the liberty he demanded, though with hearty grief to part with them:
the Queen was also sorry, for he was their dearest child; yet his honor was
more dear to them. Then took he leave of all the court, and, and with his
brave companions, and sweet Urania, took shipping for Morea. Perissus having
all this while continued in Arcadia with the King, feign would take leave of
them, but the happy news of their arrival did stay him. If the Morean King
were upon this, even ravished with joy, none can blame him, since he ^ad at
that time the whole worth of the world in his presence. Pamphilia never more
contented, having her two dearest brothers with her, whither also soon came
Philarchos to fill up their joys, bringing with him his beautiful, and
chastely loving Orilena; all were full of comfort, all comforted with this
happiness: bravery of Knighthood shined there, the only beauty of virtue, and
virtuous beauty was there assembled. As thus the Court was flourishing in
glory, despising any sorrow, a sad spectacle called them one morning a little to
compassion, a Lady in mourning attire, attended on with numbers of Knights and
Ladies likewise in that habit, came into the Hall, the Ladies face covered with
a black Veil; next to her followed an other Lady, carrying a most sweet and
dainty child in her arms, she coming to the State, did not kneel down, but
threw her self at the Kings ^eete, crying out with such pitiful moan, as all
hearts did join as in love to condole with her.

Long it was before she could bring forth any thing; at last, O my Lord (said
she), as ever you had compassion of an afflicted creature, verify it in favor
showed to me. I am a Lady, and a miserable soul, forlorn by fortune, and my
love: I was resolute, but alas, what woman can see my years, and still
continue so? I was deceived, and am, and this now grieueth me. Assist me
gracious Prince, it is alone in you to redress my harm: then do it, and do
it to her, who suffers by your blood.

The King was amazed, not being able to guess at the business; yet taking
her up, desired to know more of it, promising his best power and aid in it.
The business then my Lord (said she) is this: I am dishonored if you help
not; one of your Knights traveling in search of a friend of his, unfortunately
(for me) lighted on my house, where I with ciuility, and courteous manner
intertaind him: so well he liked the place (and then my self) as he never
ceased continual importunity, woing, and sparing no means to win his end,
till he procured this end for me: yet being chastely bred, and honoring virtue
above all respects, or passions, I would not consent till he married me: then
we kept together some times, he leaving all other courses, contented to
obscure himself, his name and estate, to be in my arms; happiness to me like
assurance of heaven, for as heaven I loved him, and would not refuse any
danger, his love might expose me unto. But he having enjoyed his desires, and
seeing I had no hidden beauty more for variety to delight him with all, he
left me with a feigned excuse, never since having so much as looked after me,
or let me know he lived. What torment this was to me (Great King) confider?
but most, finding my self with child; then came the hazard of my honor in
mind, the danger of my disgrace, the stain I might bring to my house: for few
will believe us, poor women, in such extremity, but rather will increase our
infamy. What pain ever was sufferd by woman, I endured in soul and body, till
the time of my delivery came, when God sent me this babe: having gaind some
little strength, I left my Country, and hither am I come unknown to any,
humbly to crave your favor; one of your Knights has done me this abuse, and
therefore from your hands I implore right.

Sweet Lady (said the King), I pity much your fortune: but tell me who this
Knight is, and I vow he shall not stay in my Court, or favor, if he do not
before me satisfy you, so as this can be verified against him.

Sir (said she) if one of these words I have spoken be false, let shame, and
perpetual loss requite me: no Sir, I have spoken only truth, and desire but
to be justified; yet wi^h I not so great an ill to befall him, for God knows
my soul is purely his, loving him as it self, and but for him, would have so
much tried the sincerenesse of it. Then call (I beseech you) your Knights
together, and of them demand, what they will alot me; I will be disposd of by
your self and them, for justly may I put my self to you, since he is no other
that has abused me, but your own son, the winning and forsaking Parselius.

The King at this grew infinitely troubled, not knowing what to say, or do in
it; at last he called his son, who all this while was talking with Leandrus
about Pamphilia: he coming to him, the king demanded of him, if he would upon
his Honor, resolve him directly of one thing he would demand; nay more, he
charged him on his blessing, not to conceal that from him which he was to
ask. He vowed, nothing should make him answer false. Then tell me (said he),
have you a child, or are you married to any without my knowledge? He fell
straight on his knees; If ever (cried he) I gave my word to marry any, or had a
child by any, let Heaven (bless you, said the Lady, staying him from further
proceeding). Vow not (said she); for never knew I man b^t you, and you are
husband to me, and father to this babe. Her voice he th^n began to know, yet
being impossible (as he thought) for Dalinea to (...) her, he desired to see
her face. Nay (said she), first promise to be just before your father, and
this royal presence, confirm what privately before on^^ ^^ee you vowed in
sacred marriage. What I did vow (said he) I never will deny^ then royal Father
(said he) hear me with patience and favor; and yet before I speak, call
Leandrus hither: so he was called, when Parselius with eyes filled with tears thus
began. Wretch that I was, wandering in search of my friend Amphilanthus (as I
pretended, but indeed that only was not my voyage), I fell into the confines
of Achaya, where I met Berlandis, who came to seek me from his Lord, and to
entreat my company in finishing the war for Antissius; I consented: but
passing through that Country, I chanced to come to the Castle of Dalinea, your
fair and virtuous Sister; her I fell in love withal, forgot all former vows,
and truths in love; her I sought, flattered, wept to, protested what loves art
could instruct me in: but all in vain, virtue in her was a strong rock
against my vehement suite, till at the last pity procured reward; to me she
granted, on the making her my wife: I did that willingly, and as my only
happiness. But long I had not thus enjoyed her, but one sad night I dreamed of
my first Love, who furiously reuild me for my change, then sent revenge in
scorn, and worst contempt. I waked distracted; she, dear she, my wife was
grieved with my pain, asked the true cause, complaind with me, grieved with
me, wept with me, who wept to cosen her; yet I was forced to it. At last I
made a faignd excuse, and by that means liberty to go. From thence I parted,
after lost my Page, flying from all but sadness, which did live, fed by my
sorrow, pressed with the heauiest weight of soule-felt-mourning, I got unto the
sea, and so shipped and saild to St. Maura, where with an Hermit grave, and
poor, I wasted out some time, till sweet divine Urania was by her dear
brother thrown into the sea. I saw her fall, and heard her cry, farewell; I
leapt unto her, and so came a shore by help of Steriamus, and his friend, good
Dolorindus. Straight I found the good, for then all fortunes passed in my
crossed love; I quite forgot, nay, that I had e're loved, so far was passion
from me; yet the love, chaste love of Dalinea as my wife, I yet retain, and
only she do I affect and love. This Sir is true, and humbly I ask pardon for
my fault, which I had meant more privately to have confessed; and you Leandrus
pray now pardon me, your Sister has lost nothing by this match, nor shall have
reason to complain of me, if true affection, and a loyal love, can merit
loves requital from her breast. I know she loved me, and I love but her. For
you sad Lady, if you be not she, you wrong your self extremely; and I vow,
that (but her self) I never yet did touch, nor ever will; then seek another
husband, and a father for your child.

I Will seek no other (answered she), then take your loyal Dalinea to your
self: and this was Dalinea, whose firm love, but violent, had brought her to
that place, despairing of Parselius and his love. Parselius took her in his
arms, and scarce could satisfy himself with joy, to see his dearest Dalinea.
The King forgave them, and with fatherly affection wept, and kissed her, and
the babe: then did Leandrus embrace them both, she asking pardon, and
Parselius too he did forgive, and so all were content. Urania as untouched with
love or anger likewise welcomd her, so did all else; the mourning was cast off,
and all the joy expressed, that clothes or Triumphs could produce: but
Pamphilia admiringly beheld Urania and her Brother, at last, O love (said
^h^e), what strange varieties are here? assuredly none but thy servants can let
such wauerings possess them; protect me yet from such distress, and let me
be ordaind, or licensed to be the true pattern of true constancy, and let my
love be loyal to me.

These passions often did vex her, and perplexe her soul, one day especially
when all alone in the Woods ^hee thus did complain. Never at quiet tormenting
passion, what more can thou desire? What, covet that thou have not gaind? in
absence thou do molest me with those cruel pains, in presence thou
torturest me with fear and despair, then do burn with desire to obtain,
yet sealest up my lips from discovering it; leave these contrarieties, and
make me live peaceably, and so happily: scorched I am with heat of doubt, my
hopes are burnd to ashes, and only the smoke of suspicion fuming of my whole
self, now consumed by this fire. Could I believe those sighs were for me?
Could I hope his sadness proceeded from this ground? Could I think his looks
on me were love? Could I imagine, when he prouokes me to discourse of such
like passions, it were to find my affections seat? I might then be so
fortunate as to discover that, which hidden, ruins me: but passion, thy ends
are only to afflict, never to help; thou do still work against thy self,
as if thine own mortal enemy. What ill spirit but thy self, would find
causes to hurt? what nurse would no^ feed her babe rather with milk, then
weane it, to starve it, if not able else to sustain it? but you a cruel nurse
deny me food, and famish me with despair, a lean living, and a miserable
fate; unnatural this is to murder, what your self did breed; you bred me to
this woe, will you forsake me now in necessity? you have given me education,
brought up in the learning of love; was it to be after condemned, for being so
ill a scholar? or have I learnd now enough, and so must make use of it? Teach
me a little more, and only to know this, the Pelican lets out her blood to
save her young ones: but passion, you let me with all your childrens
affections pine and starve; one drop of life-bloud, hope would cherish me, but
hope abandons me, and I remain an unfortunate witness of your tyrannies.
Welcome my tears (cried she) you are more tender and more kind, striving to
ease me by your careful means; then wept she, sighed, sobd, and groand in
her anguish; but when the spring had run it self even dry, she rose from off
the grass, which a while had been her bed, when these extremest weights of
heaviness oppressed her: and to make her the trulier deliuerd of her sorrow,
Amphilanthus came unto her, and straight followed Urania and Limena. This brave
Prince discernd her eyes somewhat sweld, whereat his heart did melt with
pity, and kindly asked the cause: she that now might have had her wish, yet
refusd that happy proffer for her delivery; modesty and greatness of spirit
ouer-ruling her, so as she made a slight excuse; and yet that enough to make
him know, she desired not to reveal her secret thoughts. This taught him
civility not to urge, that gave her time to know she did amiss in being so
secret, as locked up her loss, in stead of opening her blessing. Then sat they
all down together, Amphilanthus laying his head on Pamphilias Gown, which she
permitted him to do, being more then ever before she would grant to any: then
fell they into discourse of many things, and as all must come to conclusion, so
they concluded with love, as the end of al sweet pleasure. Then variety of love
came among the^, I mean the discourses in that kind, every one relating a
story, Urania was the last, and hers was this. In Italy as once I went abroad
into some Woods, where a dainty river want only passed, it was my chance,
walking up and down, to call to mind the sweet Island wherein I was bred, and
all those pleasant passages therein, so far those thoughts possessed me, as
they moved sadness in me, and that, passion, and passion, attendance on that
power; so as I threw my self upon the ground, there a while remaining as in a
trance, lull^ into it by those charms. Awaked I was out of this sweet sleep
by a voice, which I heard most lamentably to complain, sadness never being
sadder then in her; this brought me to other of passions companions, desire,
and longing to assist that afflicted creature, who by the words was spoke,
appeard a woman and a lover. I drew nearer to gain a sight if I could of her,
when I perceived her lie upon the earth, her head on the root of a weeping
willow, which dropped down her tears into the Christalline streams, hanging
part of her fair arms over it, to embrace it self in that clear glass.
She lay between the body of that sad tree, and the river which passed close
by it, running as if in haste to carry their sorrows from them, but sorrow in
them had too sure abiding: she was in the habit of a Shepherdess, which
pleased me to see, bringing my estate again in my mind, wherein I lived first,
that had bin enough to call relief from me; wherefore I was going to her, when
she brake forth into these speeches, being mixed with many sighs, and fearful
stopps: Poor Liana (said she) is this thy fervent loves reward? have I got
the hate of my friends, the curse of my parents, and the utter undoing of my
self, and hopes, to be requited with falsehood? Alas unkind shepherd, what
have I deserud at thy hands, to be thus cruelly tormented, and undeservedly
forsaken? never can, or may any love thee better then I did, and do, and must,
though thou prove thus unkind. That word (unkind) brought a kind company of
tears to second it; which I seeing, stepped unto her, who sorrowfully, and
amazedly beheld me, fear and grief joining together in her face, offering at
first to have gone from me; but I would not permit her to have her mind in
that, no more then fortune would suffer her to enjoy; she staid, when I used
these words: Seek not to leave me, who have been pincht with these torments,
having loud, and sometimes wanted pity as much as you; shun not me experienced,
since you cannot be better accompanied, then by me, who am not ignorant of such
pains, and have as much lamented absence, as you can dislike falsehood, but now
I have gained freedom. Would all could find that cure (said she): but since
you command, who seem most fit to be obayd, I will not flee from you, nor had
I at first offered it, if not out of shame, to have my follies discouerd by any
except wild places, and savage mountains, as gentle and tenderhearted as my
love. It is no blame (said I) to love, but a shame to him, who requires such a
constant and worthy love with no more respect; nor think you do amiss, or shall
do, if you relate to me the whole story of your (as you call it) ill fortune,
since means are allowed in all businesses for redress, and that you may chance
to find here, at least some ease, the very complaining giving respit from a
greater sorrow, which continual thinking, and plodding on, will bring you. You
shall have your will (said she) and be by me denied nothing, since I see you
govern or master Fate; and most I am engaged to refuse none of your commands,
since I have once seen a face like yours, and no way inferior to your beauty,
as much tormented, as I am now afflicted; her name was Urania, her dwelling in
an Island where I was borne, and my misery for me, though the place is called, the
pleasant Pantaleria. I more curiously beholding her, called her to mind, having
bin one of my best companions; wherefore embracing her, I told her she said
right, and that I was the same Urania, afflicted then for ignorance of mine
estate, now known to be daughter to the King of Naples, but hers proceeding
from love, I again entreated the understanding of it: she then rose up, and
with sober, and low reverence she began her discourse thus.

Most excellent Princess, poor Liana your servant, being (as you know)
Daughter to the chief Shepherd of that Island, who had the title of Lord over
the rest, being indeed a Noble man, and a great Lord by birth, in his own
Country, which was Prouence; but misery glorying to show in greatness, more
then in meaner sorts of people. It happened so, as the Earl of Prouence took
dislike with him, and that growing to hate, he so far prosecuted his spite,
as he ceased not till he had undone him, (an ^asie thing for a Prince to
compass over a Subject.) Then having nothing left him but life, and
misfortune, he left his Country, seeking to gain some solitary place to end
his days in, he happened into that sweet Island, and (as you have heard I am
sure very often) with his few friends, that would not forsake him, else left by
fortune, inhabited in it, and called it by his name; nor did I till after your
departure, know my Father to be other then the chief Shepherd. But my
misfortune brought that knowledge, and makes me desire a speedy end; for thus
it was.

I being his only child, and so heir to all his estate, (which was great for
a Shepherd) was by many sought, i^deed most, if not all the young, and best
Shepherds of the Country; those youths all striving for me, made me strive
how to use them all alike, and so I did, likeing none, but courteously refusing
all, till (as every one must have a beginning to their misery) there came a
Shepherd, and a stranger he was in birth to that place, yet gained he a nearer,
and choycer acquaintance with my heart, and affection, then any of our
home-bred^ neighbors. He called himself Alanius, and so if you have heard
part of my discourse, I am sure you have already with that understood his name,
being the head-spring to my calamity; for, Alanius I affected, and only
loved; and to say truth, most desperately did love him, (O Love, that so sweet a
name, and so honored a power, should bring such disasters;) secretly I loved
somewhile unknown unto himself, but not before his heart had made it self my
prisoner, little imagining, mine had been so much his subject.

But so it continued, till his pain made him discover his love, and that
pity I held over his pain, mixed with mine own affection, compelld me to
yield to my misfortune; yet, was Alanius then worthy of my love, for he loved
me, and I must ever love him still, though he be false. False, murdering word,
which with it self carries death, and millions of tortures joined with it; yet
thou art so, and I unfortunate to call thee so, else no worth wanted in thee.
But this is too sadd a relation, I will proceed with the continuance of our
Loves; which was for a pretty space, when another, who had before Alanius his
coming thither, sought me for his wife, being of good estate, and of equal
hope, to rise in his fortunes, given to husbandry, and such commendable
qualities as Countrymen affect, and so it was my fathers mind to breed me too,
and therefore had given his consent, looking to the towardliness of the man,
and the great blessing he had received, in more then usual increase of his
stock. These were allurements to him, while they were scarce heeded by me, the
riches I looked unto being fortune in our Loves, till one day, my Father called
me to him, telling me, what a match he had made for me, and not doubting of my
liking, showed much comfort which he had conceiud of it, and so went on with
joy, as if the marriage had been straight to be consummated. I was, truly, a
little amazed withal, till he finding I made no answer, pulling me to him,
told me, ^hee hoped my silence proceeded from no other ground, then
bashfulnesse, since he assured himself, I would not gainesay what he
commanded, or so much as dislike what he intended to do with me, wherefore he
would have me join my dutiful agreement to his choice, and order my love to
go along with his pleasure, for young maids eyes should like only where
their Father liked, and love where he did appoint. This gave me sight to my
greater mischief, wherefore I kneeld down, words I had few to speak, only
with tears I besought him to remember his promise, which was, never to force
me against my will, to marry any. Will (said he) why your Will ought to be no
other then obedience, and in that, you should be rather wilful in obeying,
then question what I appoint; if not, take this and be assured of it, that if
you like not as I like, and wed where I will you, you shall never from me
receive least favor, but be accounted a stranger and a lost child.

These words ran into my soul, like poison through my veins, chilling it, as
the cold fit of an Ague disperseth the coldness over all ones body; for not
being Alanius whom he meant, it was death to me to hear of marriage, yet
desirous to seem ignorant, and to be resolud, who it was, I desired to know,
who it was it pleased him to bestow upon me. He replied, one more worthy then
thou can imagine thy self deserving, then naming him; that name was like a
Thunderbolt to strike my life to death, yet had I strength, though contrary to
judgment, to do this. I kneeld again, and told him, that if he please to
kill me, I should better, and more willingly embrace it, else, unless he did
desire to see me wretched, and so to con^clude my days in misery, I besought
him to alter his purpose, for of any man breathing I could not love him, nor
any, but. That But I staid withal, yet he in rage proceeded: But, cried he,
what, have you settled you affections else where? Who is this fine man has
won your idle fancy? Who has made your duty void? Whose fair tongue has
brought you to the foulness of disobedience? Speak, and speak truly, that
I may discern what choice you can make, to refuse my fatherly authority over
you? I truly trembled, yet meaning to obey him, as much as it was possible for
me to do, in my heart, loving the expression of duty, I told him it was
Alanius. Alanius, a trim choice truly (said he) and like your own wit, and
discretion; see what you have done, choose a man, only for ou^side; a
stranger, and for any thing we know, a runaway from his country, none knowing
him, nor himself being able to say, what he is? I weeping implored a better
opinion of him, since I assured my self, that if I could come to the blessing
of enjoying him, all happiness in this world would come with it, else desird
he would wedd me to my grave, rather then to any, but Alanius, whom only I
did, or could love, and one whom I had not placed my affections upon alone, but
life, and all hope of comfort. How he was moved with this (alas sighed she)
imagine you; truly so much, as (being by nature choleric) I verily thought,
he would have killed me, his eyes sparkled with fury, his speech was stopped,
so as not being able to bring forth one word, he flung out of the room,
locking me fast up for that night, without hope, or comfortable company, but
my own sorrow, and tears, which never left me; and those were more pleasing
to me, when I said to my self, thus do I suffer for Alanius. The next
morning he sent one of his servants to me, a young Ladd who loved me well, (but
was faster tied in service to your command, said she to me, once ouerioy'd,
when you sent him to attend a Knight, and after your going away, also left that
Island, whether to seek you, and so to serve you, or hating the poorness of
that place when you were absent,) but this youth being sent by my Father, to
know if I continued in the same disobedience, I was in the night before, I sent
him word, that I should hate my self, if my conscience should ever be able to
accuse me of such an offense; but true it was, my love continued as firm, and
vnremouable to Alanius, as it did: for alas, what can change a constant heart,
which is fixed like Destiny? I could not let any thing come near me, which
might be mistrusted to lead one piece of change, or carry one ragg of it
abroad, my heart like the Woole the briars catch, torn, and spoiled, rather
then pulled from it. O intolerable servitude, where fast holding is a loss,
and loosing a gain, yet rather had I lose, while I keep virtuous constancy.

With the answer I gave, returned the youth, whereupon without seeing me, he
sent me to a Sisters house of his to be kept (and sorry I am, I must call her
his Sister, or keep this memory of her, for a more devilish creature never
lived) there I was half a year, without means to let Alanius know of my
imprisonment; he sought (guided by love) for me, but having no truer a
director found me not, till one day coming with his Flocks, as he was
accustomed to do, into the fair Plain, where we were wont to meet, he met
this Ladd, who seeing him sadd, asked what he ayl'd. Alanius replide, how can
he choose but mourn, whose heart is kept from him? Indeed (said he) I cannot
blame you having such a loss, and yet sure you have a heart in place of it,
else could you not live to feel, and discover the want of yours; but did you
know what tormenting sorrow she feels for you, you would yet be more
perplexed. Wretch that I am (cried he) can she be tormented, and for me? and
live I to hear of it, without redressing it? Yet what talk I (fool that I
am?) Can my cries aid her? Can the baying of my Lambs assist her? Can my
poor Flock buy her freedom? Can I merit her release? Or can, indeed, my
self think I am worthy, or borne to such a blessedness, as to relieve her,
vexed, and harmed for me? What power have thou but over thy tears to flow for
her? What assistance, but sheep, innocent, as thy self, and loyal passion?
What Arms but thy Sheepe-hooke, which can only catch a beast, while thou
(unworthy cr^ature) art not able to help her? The poorest thing can assist a
friend of the same kind, but thou can neither help her, nor thy self,
worst of things created; end, and rid the World of such corruption, for why
should I breath, if not to serve Liana? You may serve her, and relieve her,
said the youth, if you will hear, and but take advise: and more will I do for
you, then I would for any other, since I find you love her (as indeed you ought
to do). Then be satisfied thus far (if you will trust me, who will never be
but true), I will tell you where she is, and give you all assistance toward
her delivery. She is in yonder house, upon the top of that hill, which shows
it self as boldly boasting in the cruelty is committed there, by warrant of a
cruel father: with her Aunt she is (yet still your Liana) so close kept, as
none, save my self, may see her, who from her father visits her once a day,
though not for love that he sends, but to try, if by his vnfatherly tortures,
she may be wrought to leave loving you: but so much he fails in this, as it
is impossible by famine to make one leave to wish for food, but rather with the
want, to increase the longing to it: which he seeing, threatens the forsaking
her. Often have I carried this message, and as often returned sorrowful, receiving
his doom, but direct denial to his demands; and truly it has even grieved
my soul, to see how terribly she has been perplexed and handled, by those rude
and merciles executors of his will, who can no way alter her, if not to blame
them for their curstnes, who never was but mild to them, and this morning did I
see her, when she vtterd these words. Alas (said she) unhappy Liana; how art
thou afflicted for thy constancy? yet this tell my father, his kind commands
had more wrought in me, then his cruelty, yet neither against my loialty in
love; but now so hardened I am against pain, with use of pain, as all torment,
and millions of them added to the rest, shall have no power to move, the least
in my affection to unworthy change, for then should my soul smart, as only
now my body is subject to these torments. This I told truly to my Master, who
nothing was moved by it, but to more rage, sending another of my fellows to
his sister, coniuring her, that since neither persuasions, nor the begun
tortures would prevail, she should use any other means, with what affliction
she could to alter her, sparing none (so her limbs were not harmd by them)
which no doubt shall be executed. Wherefore you must think speedily to aid
her, who indures for you, still resolud to bear misery for you; and assure
your self she will endure al can be laid upon her, rather then fail in one
title to you, or Loves fealty; and no way I know more sure and speedy, then to
write her a letter, which I will deliver, and therein let her know, the true
and constant affection you bear her (which will bring sole comfort to her
doleful heart), and that (if she will venture) to bring her self to happiness
in freedom, and to make you mutually contented, she must meet you in the little
wood, next below the house, where you will not fail her, and carry her from
these miseries into all delight and pleasure. Ah my dear friend (said he), how
have thou bound me by thy friendship, and loving care to us both? but how can
thou perform this? If that be all (said he) let me alone, nor take you care,
for it shall be my charge, which I will honestly discharge, and deliver it with
mine own hands, as if it came from her father, which shall be the means to
have the room private for our discourse: what shall then hinder me, from
discovering your desires, and her happiness? This agreed upon, they parted for
that time, the youth to his flock, Alanius to his pen and paper, that evening
meeting again, according to appointment; and then leaving Alanius to prepare al
things ready against my coming, to co^uey me to the next town, there to be
married, himself coming to me, leaving the false shepherd, who fairly like the
falsest betraier of blis, promised to be in readiness for us: the honest lad did
his part, telling my aunt that he was to speak with me presently, and in great
private. She mistrusting little (and glad to let any of my fathers men see how
circumspectly she kept his orders), brought him up, instantly after, she had
afflicted me with iron rods. When I saw the Youth, Alas (said I), are you come
with more torments? for pities sake let me now have an end, and take my life,
the best and last prize of your tirannies. His answer was, he could not alter
his Masters will, nor be a messenger of other, then he was entrusted with all,
as he was with a secret message unto me; wherefore entreating mine Aunt, and
the rest by, to leave the room, they left us together; they gone, and we free
from danger, he began thus: Think not sweet Liana that I am now come with any
matter of grief, but with the welcome tidings of the long desired bliss of
enjoying, if you will not your self mar your own content. Is it possible
(cried she) that I can live to see happiness? Read this (said he), and then
tell me, whether you may resolve to be happy or no, or so refuse it. I took
the letter, and with excessive joy (said she) I opened it, finding in that his
firmness: for what was there wanting, which might content me? loyalty
professed in large protestations, affection expressed in the dearest kind, and
sweetest manner; besides a means for our happiness most of all believed, and
sought. What can you imagine then Madam (said she) that I did? I kissed the
letter, wept with joy, too soon foretelling the greater cause, which for his
sake I suffered, tears proouing then but slight witnesses for my far deeper
suffering; when I found all this contrary, and my Alanius false, the heavens I
thought would sooner change, and snow lie on AEtna, then he would break his
faith, or be ungrateful to me, who then for him ventured life and fortunes;
for, to fulfill his desire, I went with the Youth, called Menander, having gotten
such things as were necessary for my escape, assisted by a maid in the house,
who much pitied my estate, but more loved Menander, who made use of it that
night for my benefit. In a disguise which he had brought thither, under color
of necessaries, we left the house, and soon arrived at the appointed Grove,
which was at the Hills foot. All the way fear possessed me, left I had too
long staid, and so given him cause of unkindness, that I no faster hasted to
him, who alone could truly give me life in comfort, and desire to see him, made
me accuse my self of long tarrying, especially when I saw him there; but what
saw I with that? death to my joy, and martyrdom to my poor heart: for there I
saw him in another arms, wronging my faith, and breaking his made vows. I
stood in amaze, not willing to believe mine eyes, accusing them that they would
carry such light to my knowledge, when to bring me to my self, or rather to put
me quite from my self, I heard him use these speeches: It is true; I loved
Liana, or indeed her fortune, which made me seek her; but in comparison of
thee, that affection borne to her, was hate, and this only love, rather
esteeming my self happy in enjoying thee, and thy delights, then if endowed
with this whole Island. What is riches without love (which is in truth the only
riches)? and that do I now possess in thee. These words turned my amazednes to
rage, crying out; O false and faithless creature, beast, and no man, why have
thou thus vildly betrayed thy constant Liana? He looking up, and perceiving me,
and his fault, said nothing, but as fast as guiltines stored with shame could
carry him, he fled, his delight (or wanton) following him, which way they
took, when out of the Grove, I know not, nor the honest Lad, who would not
leave me, bearing part with me in grief, and I with him of shame, infinitely
molested, that he was made an instrument in my betraying. When I had endured a
little space (like a Cabinet so filled with treasure, as though not it self, yet
the lock or hinges cannot contain it, but break open): so did the lock of my
speech fly abroad, to discover the treasure of my truth, and the infiniteness
of his falsehood, not to be comprehended, Passions grew so full, and strong in
me, I swounded, and came again to feel and increase misery: he persuaded, I
was willing to hear him, who I saw had been in goodness to me, cosned as I
was. We left the Grove (accursed place, and in it my cause of curses) coming
into a fair meadow, a dainty wood being before it, and another on the side of
it; there did my unfortunate eyes again meet with Alanius, unlucky encounter
where I saw such falsehood, which yet boldly venturd toward me, he running
with greatest haste after me, but sending his voice before him, coniuring me by
the love I bare him, to hear him, calling me his Liana: but as I saw him, so
did his error appear unto me, and yet did grief rather then hate hold the
glass to me^ for though he had neglected, and deceived me, and so forsaken my
truth, to joy in the loose delights of another, yet I mournd that he was
deceitful, for (God knows) I love him still. I fled from him, but sent my
hearts wishes for his good to him, like the Parthian arrows, which by his
cries seemd to wound him, and my words (though few) to strike him, which as I
ran from him, I threw back to him; It is true, I was yours, while I was
accounted so by you; but you have cut the knot, and I am left to join the
pieces again in misfortune, and your loss of love: all happiness attend you,
the contrary abiding in me, who am now your forsaken, and so, afflicted Liana.
With this I got the Wood to shelter me, and the thickest part of it, at my
petition to grant me succor, coveting now the greatest shade to hide me from
him, to whom, and into thick shades, I lately ran. In this manner I lived a
while there, never seeing company, or light, but against my will, still
haunting the priuatest places, and striving to gain the sea, which soon after
I obtaind, getting the opportunity of a youths passing into Italy, who had
sought Perissus, to bring him notice of his Uncles death, the King of Sicily;
with him I passed, and so came into this country, where ever since I have
romingly endured, never in any one place settled. The youth Menander and I,
parted at the sea, he (I think) going to seek his Master, or rather you, then
did she close her speech with multitudes of tears, which truly mooud me to
much compassion, beginning then to hold her dear to me. I persuaded her to
leave that life, and live with me, who would accompany her sorrows, rather
then afflict her with mirth; and besides, it might be, in my company she
might gain remedy for her torture. No remedy but death (said she) can I have,
and too long (O me) have I sought that; yet to obey you, I will abide some time
here, and but here in these woods, beseeehing you not to urge me to the Court,
when the poorest place, much better does agree with my estate. I to enjoy her
conversation, granted to any thing, concluding that I should often visit her,
and so pass our times together in loving discourse.

This, said Amphilanthus, (by your favor sweet sister) proves you love; the
water it seems, has not so thoroughly washed away your affection, but relics
remain of the old passion.

No truly dear^st brother (said she) all those thoughts are clean droun'd;
but yet; I will go on with my story. Do dear Sister (said he) and begin
again at (But yet). She blushed to find he had taken her, and yet daintily
proceeded. That promise most religiously was kept between us, every day I
visiting my Shepherdess. But one day as we were together discoursing and
walking in the wood, we heard one not far from us, sadly to sing an od kind
of song, which I remember, getting afterward the copy of it; and if I be not
deceived sweet Cousin (said she) you will like it also; the song was this,
speaking as if she had by him, and the words directed to her, as his thoughts
were.

YOu powers divine of loue-commanding eyes,
Within whose lids are kept the fires of love;
Close not your selves to ruiue me, who lies
In bands of death, while you in darkness move.
One look does give a sparck to kindle flames
To burn my heart, a martyr to your might,
Receiving one kind smile I find new frames
For love, to build me wholly to your light.
My soul does fix all thoughts upon your will,
Gazing unto amazement, greedy how
To see those blessed lights of loues-heauen, bow
Themselves on wretched me, who else they kill.
You then that rule loves God, in mercy flourish:
Gods must not murder, but their creatures nourish.
Pamphilia much commended it, which pleased Urania infinitely, touching (as she
thought) her one estate, while a proper song, and well composd: truly (said
Amphilanthus) is this to be so much liked? but my cousin only does it to please
you. No in truth, said Pamphilia, it deserves in my judgment much liking; he
smild on her, Urania going on, you seem Brother, said she, a little willing to
cross me this day, but I will proceed in discourse. The song (you are pleased
to jest at) being ended, the same voice again did begin to lament in this
manner: If scorn be ordaind the reward for true love, then I am fully
requited? if firm affection must be rewarded with contempt, and forsaking, I
am richly paid? but if these deserve a sweet payment, which alone consists
in dear love, then am I iniurd, and none more causelessly afflicted, or cruelly
rejected? Love, suffer what thou will, faith endure all neglect, but ever be
your selves pure and unspotted. Unkind Liana, yet pardon me for calling thee
so, since my heart grieves at that word unkind, yet give me leave to tell thee,
I have not deserved this punishment from thee, nor merited this rigor, if
another offense may make me faulty, I am most guilty, else as free as my love
still is to thee, from blame, or thought of stain in it: art thou not then
unjust (sweet Judge of all my harms) to punish me without a fault committed:
Pity me yet, and recall the censure wrongfully given on me, condemned without
a cause, and still led on toward execution in daily tortures without merit.
Did any man die for another act? then I must also suffer that tyranny, else
consider, falfe judgment is a shame unto the Judge, and will lie heavy on his
conscience: call back then e're I die, this vnmerited verdict, since my truth
with-stands thy cruelty. I would with Liana have gone to see who this was that
thus accused her, but that we heard him again say some Verses, which being
concluded, we went to him; but as we went, we heard another speak unto him
thus. Alanius, why do you thus accuse Liana, and torment your self with that,
which were she certain of, she would, and must pity you? nor can you blame
her for flying you, seeing as we both believed your unkindness and foul
error. Alas, said Alanius, far be it from me ever to blame her, nor can my
soul permit me to love her less, though she were cursed; nay, were she false,
I yet should love her best; but being by you assured of her truth, give me
leave to blame her rashness, and curse my own ill fortune, and unlucky life,
which gave, and gives such dislike and smart unto my dearer self, and my sad
days. Liana now knew not what to do, when she was certain this complainer
was Alanius, and the other (as she did imagine) Menander: but I willing to
reconcile such broken fortunes, made her go toward him, accompaning her
sorrows my self. When being near him, and he looking up, perceiving her
(without ceremony, or regarding me) ran unto her, and kneeling down, cried out
these words. Alas my dear Liana, what has your unhappy slave Alanius deserved
to be thus pitilesse tortured? hear but the truth, and before you rashly
censure me, consider my great wrongs, which I still suffer by mistakes in you.
Liana, who loved as much as he, and was as equally perplexed, yet now a little
more, if possible bearing her own, and his sorrow; for her affliction as being
his, and caused by her, she lifted him up from the ground, and with tears
said: Think not my Alanius thy Liana can be other to thee, then thou will have
her be, yet blame me not directly for these things, since here Menander can
resolve thee of the cause: yet let that pass, and now be confident, thy love
has such command me, as had thou been (false she would not say) as we
imagined thy repentance, and thy loved sight should have destroyed all those
thoughts, where in offense might have been borne to thee, and so forgetfulness
in me had gouernd with the memory of thy love. Then rising, with a kiss the
lovers reconciled themselves, and cast away their mourning: but the story being
strange where on their mistaking did arise, you shall hear that some other
time.

Nay sweet Urania (said Amphilanthus) let us hear it now, where can we be
better then here? what company so pleasing, or dearer to us? If Pamphilia be
agreed (said she) I will continue it. Take no care of me (said she), for
believe it, I am never so happy, as when in this company; eyes then spoke, and
she proceeded. We sat then down, and Alanius kneeling before us, began: The
first part of my life (and the happy part I am sure) this Shepherdess has
related, and brought it to the full period of it, nay to the height of my
misery; wherefore I will begin with the succession of that, and as I imagine
where she left, which was with her leaving me in the plain, or better to
resolve you of the deceit, with the night before we were to meet; she coming
before me to the place appointed, saw (as she imagined) my self her lover,
wronging my love, and her: well, and ill for me she might conceive of it so,
but thus in truth it was. There lived a Shepherd then, (and my companion he
was) who bewitched with a young maids love, that unluckily had placed her love
on me, plotted to deceive her, and in my shape to win, what his own person
could not purchase him; wherefore that (in that) unlucky night, he came unto my
lodging, and stole away my clothes, I usually on solemn days did wear; in
these habits he went into the Grove, being so like in stature, speech, and
favor, as he oftentimes was taken, even for me. Knowing her walk in the
evening, to be toward those woods, in the Plain he saw her, and followed her
into the Grove, ouertaking her, just in the same place appointed for our
bliss; being a little darkish, she mistook him, and hoping it was I, was
content to be blinded: but wherein I do most accuse him, was, he used some
words (to give her true assurance 'twas my self) concerning dear Liana. These
unhappily ^hee heard, and these, I must confess, gave full assurance of my
faulsest fault. I cannot blame thee sweet, love made thee fear, and fear
enraged thee, and yet (my heart) thou might have heard thy poor Alanius
speak, yet, as this honest Ladd told me, thou did never hate my person,
though condemn my disloialtie, which in my greatest misery, gave yet some
easy stopp unto my pain, and that thou did assure me of, for in all thy
fury and flight, thou seemedst to wish me blessed. She having made more have
then I, came thither first, and so perceived (as she mistrusted) my amiss. I
following my first directions, likewise came, but in her stead, only I
discernd the footesteps of a woman having gone in have; I had no thought, nor
end of thinking but of Liana, feared some danger to her self, or harm which
had ensued, as the night and unfrequented places might produce. Not dreaming on
this harm, I followed those steps, (for hers I knew they were, her foot so
easy was to be discerned from any others, as a dainty Lambs from any other
sheep) long had I not persued, and even but newly in the meadow, when I did
see my dear, but she as much offended therewithal, as I was ioyd at first,
fledd from me, giving me such language, as my fate appeared by that, to be
undone. I cried to her, she ^ledd from me, accusd me, and yet did wish all
happiness attend me; this was comfort in despair. I followed still, till I
lost, not my self, but my wits, growing as madd, and doing as many tricks, as
ever creature distracted did or could committ.

From Pantaleria I got into Cicilie, in a boat taken up by a Pyrat, for a
booty, but finding in what estate I was, he landed me at Naples. There I passed
some time, where yet the fame lives of my madness; distempered as I was, I
fell in company with a loving Knight, (as since I understood by this my dearest
friend) who was in the next degree to madness, loving overmuch, and with him
came into this kingdom, where I have lost him, but here gained my friend
Menander, who conducted me unto a virtuous Lady, skillful in Physic, who
never left with curious medicines, and as curious pains, till I recouer'd my
lost wits again. Then being sensible (and most of my distress) I took my
leave, and with Menander, came unto this place, being directed by as sadd a
man, as I then was, now come again to life by you, my dear forgiuer, and my
only joy.

What man directed you so near the Court, said Liana? an unlikely place to
find my sorrow by. A poor, and miserable Lover too, said Alanius, who we
found laid under a Willow tree, bitterly weeping, and bewailing the cruelty of
a Shepherdess who had unwillingly made her self mistress of his heart. We went
to him, to demand some things of him, which as well as grief would suffer him,
he answered us, but so strangely, as appeared, he desired to speak of nothing
but his Love, and torture for it; telling us, that he was a man, whose Destiny
was made to undo him, loving one, who no grief, tears, prayers, or that
estate they held him in, could bring to pity, having settled her love so much
upon another, as she hated all that sought, (though for their good) to work
her thoughts to change.

By the discourse, and description, we soon found, it was no other then your
sweetest self, my dear Liana, that brought us hither, where we are assured
of you, and what we hoped for before; under that tree we left him, where he
vows to remain while he has life, and after, there to be buried, that being
his bed, and then shall be his Tomb. Liana modestly denied the knowledge of
any such matter, so with much affection, and such love, as I yet never saw the
Image of the like; they welcomed each other, hearts, eyes, tongues, all
striving to express their joys. Then did they return with me to the Court,
and were those two strangers, you dear brother, commended so in the Pastoral.
Menander I took to wait on me, who conf^ss'd, he had (as Liana told me)
left Pantaleria to find me, and now is he here attending in my Chamber. This
sweet discourse ended, they rose and went into the Court, the Princes liking
this which so kindly concluded with enjoying.

But that being so blessed a thing, as the name is a blessing without the
benefit, must be now in that kind, only bereft some, who deserves the richest
plenty of it. Ollorandus continuing in the Morean Court, news was brought unto
him of his Brothers death, by which he was now Prince of Bohemia, and besides
desired by his old Father to return, that he might see him, if possible,
before his death, which, both for age, and grief of his Sons death, was
likewise soon to befall him. The Prince met Amphilanthus just at his return
from the walks, having left the Ladies in their chamber, and was going to seek
him, to discourse some of his passions to him, but he prevented him thus.

Most dear, and only worthy friend, read this; I dare not beseech your
company from this place, but see my necessity, and so weigh my fortune; you
know that I have been enioynd not to leave you, you know likewise, what good I
must receive from you, when is that likely to come but now? Amphilanthus read a
letter which he gave him, and thereby saw he was to accompany his friend, and
leave his better friend (because more dear) behind. In great perplexity he
was, divided twixt two loves, and one to be dissembled, yet he answered thus.

The happiness befalne to Bohemia in you, I joy for, and yet in comparison of
you, it is but little, your merits being more then that Kingdom can pay, or
many answer; but are you resolved to go straight thither? What needs such a
journey, since passion is strongest at the first? and if it would have causd
your Fathers death, that before now happened; never be so doubtful of his
safety, but be confident he is well, or if other, you may (time enough) go
thither: the Country so much loves you, as they will never let your absence
wrong you; the same of your valor is such, as none dare go about to usurp
your right: your cares then, thus may be settled for home businesses, and you
resolve to hear once more from your Country, before you go thither. Your
promises here infinitely engage your stay. How will you answer the going your
self, and carrying me, (who I must not leave) from the succor, you formerly
promised Steriamus? The time grows on, and the Army will be together within
this month, ready to martch; besides, his confidence is as much in you, and
me, as in a good part of the Troop, how can we dispense with this? Put it
off I beseech you, if you will favor us so much, and yet, think not I speak
this to deny going with you, or to show unwillingness, but in truth, out of
these reasons.

And one more (dear friend) said Ollorandus, the Queen Pamphilia I hear, is
shortly to return into her own Kingdom, whither you promised to conduct her.
That is true, said Amphilanthus, yet I prefer my friendly respect to you
before such a service, and to such an one whose judgment is mixed with that
nobleness, as she will not bind one to another harm, to perform a
complement to her; yet I must confess it would grieve me to fail her, who on
my promise came hither from Cyprus, nor would I leave her unguarded, or guarded
by any but my self, if not to go with you; whose love, and company, I esteem
above all men's, or any fortune.

My love, said Ollorandus shall wait upon yours, equal it, I dare not say, my
self being so much inferior to you in all perfections, as all parts of me
must yield to you; but to my ability, mine shall approve it self, and ever be
faithful; but let me say this to you, that these reasons are nothing to hinder
me, your commands has more force, and ever shall be of power, to alter and
rule my courses. For Steriamus, I love him next to you, and above mine own
Kingdom, which else is most to me; if alone, that called upon me, I would
stay: but I am summoned by my Father, duty herein obliges me, nor is there
such present need of my going into Albania; it will be a month, you say,
before the Army be joined, it may be two, well then, How long will they be
martching? Besides, you have no certaine^y which way you must pass: through
Epirus, you shall not without fighting, the brave and fair Queen of that
Country has already refused it, Wherefore I say, by that time every thing be
ready, and the Army near Albania, we may meet it, and come time enough to
serve Steriamus. You said, answered Amphilanthus, I had one reason more then I
alleged to you, but I will swear you want not another cause to inuit you
that way; must not I be favored by you to see your Melysinda, this is the
kingdom you provide for, and this is the true end of your obedience. If you
have gessed right, I cannot blame you, said Ollorandus, having a sense of
parting in you. Well, let my going be for her sake, and your stay for the
other, here we must part then? Not so, said Amphilanthus, I will go with
you, especially if you entend to go into Hungaria. I intend that, said he, if
I live; then must I break all appointments, and attend you: they embraced, and
so parted, resolving with all speed to take their voyage. Ollorandus promising
himself much good in it, Amphilanthus heartily mourning; but the grave
Melissea had coniur'd them not to part, and therefore he must obey. When Supper
was done, Amphilanthus and Selarinus, (according to their custom) brought the
Queen of Pamphilia to her Chamber, with whom Urania lay by her entreaty, and
Selarina in the next room, being then likewise there. When they were thither
come, Amphilanthus countenance changed from the wonted manner of mirth, and
excellent discourse turned into silence, and sighs: It made the Ladies sadd to
see it, and desirous^ to know the ca^se, Urania therefore began to ask the
reason of this alteration. He casting his eyes with true sadness where his
heart was prisoner, ( Selarina standing just before him) only said, that till
that time he was never so afflicted. Whereby my Lord, said Pamphilia, if I may
ask the reason why, being with desire to serve you, if my service may avail
you? Alas Madam, said he, it is in you to make me happy. Then can you never
miss happiness, said she.

With that Urania and Selarinus, and his Sister, left them together sitting on
the bed, they walking to the window, and finding their discourse long, went
into the next room, which was a Cabinet of the Queens, where her books and
papers lay; so taking some of them, they passed a while in reading of them, and
longer they would have done so, but that they heard excellent music, which
called them to hearken to it. It did consiste of Lutes and Voices, and continued
till the end of the discourse between the matchless Princes; which being
finished, they came to them, and Amphilanthus told them, he was now at liberty
to go: To go, whi^her (said Urania)? a tedious, and unwilling voyage (said
he), but Destiny will have it so; yet shall I go better contented then I
feared I should have done, and yet with that more perplexed, because I go. Some
other speeches passed, Urania extremely bewailing his going, and more
grieuing, when she knew the resolution taken by Pamphilia also to depart. These
sorrows took away their attention from the song, and now being late,
Amphilanthus and Selarinus took their leaves for that night, going down a
back-way through a Garden where this music was; being to pass by them, and
unwilling to be seen, they threw their cloakes over their faces, and so
purposed to pass. But the Master of that company hating any man that received
favor from his Lady, when he wanted it (not imagining Amphilanthus had been
one) rudely pulled the cloak of Selarinus down. Amphilanthus instantly drew
his sword, and struck him on the head, the other likewise struck, but they were
parted quickly, and making no more noise, the offense giver knowing Selarinus
retird, they passing on without more hinderance into their chambers.
Amphilanthus come to his, endured the night with much impatiency, the day being
as he thought spiteful to him, and therefore would not appear; when she did, he
kindly forgave her stay, and instantly made himself ready to attend her. Into
the Garden walks he went, knowing the Ladies would not be long from thence;
but wandering up and down, as his thoughts were restless, he came to the
Willow tree, where Antissia found Pamphilia: under that he lay, where not being
long, he heard the voices of men, on that other side of the river, and
harkening a little, understood what they said, and by their voices who they
were. He marueld infinitely at the discourse, when he found it was Leandrus who^
he had struck, and was as sorry for it, as if he had willingly hurt his brother:
but remembering the manner, he knew he was not to be blamd, for the man who pulled
his friends cloak down, had drawn his own hat so low over his eyes, as
although he was able under it to see him, yet it hindered the discovery of
himself. Well Leandrus (said he) thank thy self for this; and though thou
did offer the injury, I am sorry for thee, and glad I did no more harm to
thee. But the other pursuing their discourse, he heard it resolved, that if
Pamphilia did refuse him, he would use all means possible to win her by her
friends, the last means he would use, should be by Amphilanthus, who he
would entreat to be a mediator for him, if he denied, he might take unkindness
to him for it, if Selarinus married her, he might have a just quarrel to him
for seeking her, when he was a professed suitor to her.

These things troubled the Prince, and most to see such ill nature in Leandrus,
for the other he knew he should have time enough to be revenged of him at his
pleasure. Having heard thus much (and soon is enough found, when ill is
discernd where goodness should be seen) he went back into the Woods, and
there met Pamphilia, Urania, Rosindi, Steriamus, and Selarinus, coming
together, and saying, they had sent Philarchos to seek him. Hereply'd, those
Woods and walks could give the only account of him since day. Pleasantly they
passed a while together, when Parselius and his Delinea also came unto them,
and passing down toward the river, Amphilanthus turned them back, they
wondering at it, but he entreating them, they obayd. Surely (said Rosindy) it
is because he will not see the place where he had so great an injury done him,
as to have me taken for him. Amphila^thus never having heard of that before,
would not be denied, till he had all the story, which the brother and sister
delivered to him.

And have you sufferd (said he) thus much for me? alas that I might live and be
worthy to deserve it. They then turned again toward the company, but the place
being divided into many several walks, the troop had divided it self, every
couple having taken a different walk: which Rosindy seeing, and besides
perceiving Orilena coming alone; I will not sure (said he) be out of fashion,
wherefore I will leave you two together, and take yonder Lady to walk with me;
then were they well placed; for Steriamus had Urania, Parselius his Dalinea,
Rosindy his sister, and Selarinus was before gone in, to ^all forth Selarina.

Thus they passed the morning, and then returned to dinner, where they found
Leandrus full of discontent, but this company made him dissemble it. After
dinner the King called his daughter Pamphilia to him, telling her what an
earnest suitor Leandrus was to him for his consent to have her in marriage,
which he liked very well of, considering his worth, and the fitness of his
estate, alleging all the reasons that a wise and careful father could make
unto himself, or persuade with, to a beloved daughter. To which she humbly
made this answer; That all those things his Majesty had said, she confessed to
be true, and that he was worthy of the greatest fortune the world had in a
wife: but his Majesty had once married her before, which was to the Kingdom
of Pamphilia, from which Husband she could not be divorced, nor ever would
have other, if it might please him to give her leave to enjoy that happiness;
and besides, besought his permission, for my Lord (said she) my people look
for me, and I must needs be with them.

Why, said the King, that is but as if it were a portion given you to your
marriage? Not to Leandrus my Lord (said she) I beseech you, for I cannot love
him; nor can I believe he loves in me ought besides my kingdom, and my honor
in being your daughter; Antissia better fitteth him, who was appointed for him.
The King knew she had reason for what she said, and so assuring her, that he
would not force her to any thing against her mind, though he should be glad of
the match, if it could content her, they fell into other discourse, and then
the King going in, the young Princes every one discoursed where they liked
best. Amphilanthus was gone forth with Ollorandus, the rest altogether;
Selarinus coming to Pamphilia, and telling her what an accident happened to
him the night before, when (said he) I was likely to have been well knocked (but
for Amphilanthus) for being honored in your presence so late. The Queen who
bore dislike enough before to Leandrus, was even enraged now against him, yet
her discretion told her, the less that were spoken of, the much better it
would be, wherefore she said little of it, but discoursed with Selarinus, as
she used to do finely and plainly, being the man she only trusted as a
friend, and who indeed ever proou'd so unto her, as in many actions she had
trial of. Now was Selarinus in love desperately with Philistella, the second
daughter to the King of Morea, a young princess so excelling in fairenes, as
snow and roses could but equal the white, and red in her face: never was seen
so excellent a beauty for whiteness, for though Pamphilia had the fame for the
only Princess living, yet was she not so white in the face as Philistella;
her beauty being in sweetness and loveliness, most excelling, and in the
richness of her mind, which beautified her person, and yet the pureness of
her skin (for as much as was seen as neck and hands) did far surpass her
sister, which yet was thought to be, but because the younger Ladies face, was
without all comparison so pure and fair, as made her other skin (though
excellent) show duller by it: her hair was whiter then the Queens, but hers
was brighter, having a glass upon it, matchless for rareness of color, and
shining. This Philistella had conquered the hearts of many, but Selarinus was
the man, that sought her with most hope, the others either not daring, or
knowing they were not fit for her, contented themselves with beholding her, and
knowing they fruitlesly did languish in that love.

Now had Selarinus broken this secret to Pamphilia, who at this time took
occasion to speak again of it, which was such content to him, as nothing
could be more; and moved that passion in him, as his face and eyes spoke for
his heart, that it was upon the rack of hope and fear. Leandrus seeing this,
believed it had been for Pamphilia, which moved him to greater hatred against
him, verily thinking it to be this Prince whom she affected, seeing how
willingly she did embrace his company. Amphilanthus then came in, whom
Leandrus straight went unto, desiring him, that he would give him one thing
that he would demand of him. Ask (said he) any thing of me whereto I am not
engaged, and I will grant it you. I know not how I may secure my self in that
(said he) for if you have a mind to refuse under this, you may deny me all.

Nay (said he) mistrust not me causelessly, nor touch me with such baseness,
for never yet dealt I but truly with all men. Pardon me my Lord (said he) and
I will take your word, if you will first except some number of things whereto
you are engaged. Only two (said he), and on my world I will grant any other.

Then said Leandrus; My suite to you is, that since I have been a long,
earnest, and passionate suitor to your fair (but cruel) Cousin, and now having
got the consent of her father, her mother, her brothers, and most of her
friends, that you will likewise join with them, and speak unto Pamphilia for
me; I know she respects you much, and will be as soon directed by you, as by
any friend she has: wherefore I beseech you grant me this favor, and by it
tie me perpetually to your service.

The King replied, that it was true, they had all seen his affection to her;
they confessed his worth and deserts to be equal with any Prince, and to
merit any wife, whose answering love might meet his: but for his Cousin, she
was of her self, and as far as he could understand by her, she purposed not
to marry: if he had gaind the consent of her parents and brothers, he had
purchased the surest to prevail with her: but for himself, although he
confessed in that his happiness, that she did so much esteem of him, and
fouud that she would hear him as soon as any other; yet it was his misfortune
in this, that he could not do him that service he desired to do, to make
manifest his love unto him, for he had now lighted on one of the excepted
things, since but this last night (said he) speaking of marriage, she said,
she was already bestowed upon her people, and had married her self to them. I
urging her youth, and the pity it would be she should die, without leaving
some pictures of her self, so excellent a piece. She said, her friends (she
hoped) would keep her memory, and that should be enough for her. But I
striving further to persuade her to the altering of that determination; My Lord
(said she) it is settled, and as you will ever make me see you love me, and
would have me confident of your well-wishings to me, let me beg this of you,
that you will never speak to me of any husband. I swore it, and sealed my
vows on her fair hand. Wherefore my Lord Leandrus, you see how I am bound,
otherwise believe it, I would not deny your noble request, but speak for you
(I protest truly) as soon, or sooner then for any other living. The Prince
Leandrus was contented with this answer, believing him, as justly he might
do, for he had said but only truth to him.

Then parted they, Leandrus giving him many thanks for his noble freedom,
going to Philistella, who with Selarina was passing the time, Pamphilia
bringing Selarinus to them, and so pretily did discourse, while Steriamus
earnestly did pursue his affection to Urania; which although she willingly
entertained, yet she meant to be as wary as she could (having been once
deceived), wherefore with much modesty and mildness, she denied; and yet with
her sweetness in denying, gave him hope and heart to proceed, which at that
time they being together, he gave witness of, having gaind the favor of her
standing alone with him in a window, protesting all the true and zealous
affection, that a man could bear unto a woman. She told him, that these
protestations he had so often before used to Pamphilia, as he was perfect in
them; for (said she, my brother has told me, and many other, what a power
her love had over you, though she never received it, or did more, if so much
as pity you.

It is most true (said he) that your brother found me a miserable piece of
mankind, made anew by love, to be less then any of my sex, and yet his
greatest slave: she rejected me; I now thank Heavens for it, since I was
kept for this happiness, she for a greater then my self, which I wish ^hee
may enjoy, and I be blessed with your favor; which as my only blessing I do
wish for, and ask as my only bliss. But what let can my former love be to
your receiving me? I am not the first that has lost my Love? What blame then
can that be to me, my choice being so good? did not (I pray you) Parselius
your Cousin, love before he married Dalin^a? and Urania (I think) liked, before
she was thrown from the Rock. Cast away then all former faults, and bury
them in the Deepes, where those loves were cured, and take a perfect one, newborn unto you, and with you.

She blushed, and told him, he grew bitterer then lovers use to be. He smild,
and told her, none that had a spot should find fault with another, unless
theirs were clean washed away, and the other remaining. But I fear (said
she) you will not now be true.

Nothing (said he) but that water could have cleansed my heart from that
ranckling wound, nor now shall any thing al^er my truth to you. Another charm
may cure you, said she? Never (said he) nor help if not your love. It grieves
me (said she) that I cannot then present you with my first affection; yet
truly may I in a kind; for I liked you before I loved the other. Give me this
second (said he), which as the first I will esteem, and cherish it; for a new
created one it is, and so shall live in me, never more blessed then now, never
truer shall any love be to one: nor more just then mine, said she.

Thus they giving these pretty assurances of eithers affections, he presented
her with a Bracelet of Diamonds. She the next day requiting it with a much more
precious one to his thoughts, being a bread of her hair. No day passed that
some sweet delightful passages passed not between them. The Court now filled
with love, Parselius perceived their loves, and was as well contented with it,
as Urania had been with his, and as freely did they before him show it.
Amphilanthus infinitely glad of it, and seeking all means for the continuance
of it, so as each day Pamphilia's chamber swarmd with lovers: Steriamus and
Urania, Selarinus and Philistella, Parselius and his wife, Philarchos and his
Orilena, the Queen her self beholding them, while her heart was as true a
patient, as any of theirs, but must not show it. Leandrus with the rest had
leave to visit her, but to see his passions, to one that were sure never to be
in such a snare, it were sport, else a terrible fear to fall into such a
Laborinth. The Queen graciously respected him, but when he spoke of love, she
then was deaf, and ever found occasion to discourse of something else, or to
some others. Amphilanthus graced Selarina most with his discourse, which made
the whole Court judge his affection was placed there, and in truth she did
deserve it, for she was an excellent fine Princess; but from al these amorous
delights the brave Prince must go, and betake himself to the field, and
adventure with Ollorandus; the next day was the time for their depart, and also
for Pamphilia's going, who over night took her leave of the court, not willing
(as she said) to be seen so much a woman, as to weep for parting. Yet Urania
was witness of it, both getting up early, and Amphilanthus, with Ollorandus
coming to them before they were ready, stayed with them till they went down,
Urania bringing her to her Coach, with the other two Princes, when with tears
they parted on some sides: Urania wept to part with her dear brother, and
cosen. Pamphilia's heart was pierced with like sorrow, or greater, but stopped
her tears, as having a stronger spirit, till beholding the water in
Amphilanthus eyes ready to fall, and wait upon the least summons her eyes
would give; she then let some few slide, and drop, and so saluted him, love
smiling in their tears, to see so kind, and affectionate parting, glorying in
his own work, as proud in such a conquest. Part they did, taking their leave
without saying, farewell, which their hearts and eyes did for them, making them
then, and as long as they could, attend and behold each other, which was not
long, for the ways being contrary, the sight was soon lost.

Pamphilia went alone, save for her own Train of Knights, which were come out
of Pamphilia, to attend her thither, and quickly, with the haste she made,
arrived at the Sea, where she shipped, and so passed to her Kingdom, where
with infinite joy, and troops of people, she was received, and conducted to
her chief City of Perga; where she remained in plenty of all things, but the
delicate conversation she used to have in Morea, which want, made her for a
while melancholy: but afterward she comforting her self, with hope, and
resolution, she came abroad, and followed those delights she was wont to
affect, which was, Hunting and Hawking, and such like.

The two brave Companions holding on their way, hating the land, chose the Sea,
and took Shpp at Sornesse, and so passing by Zants, and Setalonia, went up the
Gulf of Venice, and landed in Triale, from whence without any one adventure,
worthy the rehearsing, they came into the confines of Bohemia, when they met
two knights, of whom they demanded the news of that place; they resolved them,
that the King was dead, and that they (as many more) were going in search of
their Prince, and Lord Ollorandus. Then did he discover himself unto them,
which they infinitely rejoiced at; so passing on, they came unto a Castle, where
they would (as they said) lodge that night, but the two Knights told them,
that by no means they should do so, for their dwelt the cruelest man that was
in all those parts, his name Seuerus, and was next of the blood to Ollorandus,
wherefore by no means they would advise him, (none being left but himself of
the Stock) to adventure into his doors.

The new King imagining this a disgrace unto him, to let any such thing pass
for fear, would not be persuaded, saying, He was assured that he durst not
attempt any thing upon his person; but Amphilanthus dissuaded what he could,
yet all in vain, for he was resolved. When nothing could prevail against
staying him, yet they obtained of him, that he would hold himself unknown,
he replied they need not call him Ollorandus, but he would never leave that
happy name of the Knight of the Forest, with which he had passed through so
many adventures; thus rashly would he runn into danger, and which was worst,
hazad the brauest Prince. To the Gate they came, and presently were bid
welcome, with many servants who attended on them, and took their Horses, some
of them conducting them into the Hall, where the old Duke Seuerus sat in a
Chair, with a little staff in his hand, his thumb on his staff, and his
mouth on his thumb, which ever was his fashion, when his mind was set upon
any plots; Their coming in called his mind a little to him, and looking on
them, seeing such rareness in their persons, and loveliness in their
countenances, imagined them to be of great quality, especially Amphilanthus, to
whom he went, and welcomed him with the rest, desiring to know who they were,
that thus courteously had honored his house. Amphilanthus told him that he was
an Italian, and hearing of his bounty, by some of the Country, made him take
the boldness to visit him, hoping by him, also to understand the manners of that
place, to which as yet, he was a mere stranger. The old Duke told him, that
he had done him an especial favor in it, and that (wherein he could do him
courtesies) he should find him most ready, in requital of this honor. Then
he demanded who the others were, and their names.

Amphilanthus replied, that his friend, and himself, upon a certain vow to
their Mistresses, till they saw them again, were not to disclose their names,
but were only known by the titles, of the Knight of Love, which was himself;
and the other, the Knight of the Forest, and thus they had passed most parts
of the world.

Whence came you last, I beseech you, said he? From Morea, said the Knight of
Love. And what news there, I pray you, said the old Duke? have you not heard
of Ollorandus our Prince, and now our King, by his fathers, and brothers death?
I heard of him, said Amphilanthus, for no ears can (unless deaf) but have
notice of his valor, and excellent goodness, and much have I desired to be
honored with his sight, accounting it one of my misfortunes, that I am not
known to so famous a Prince. Has his Acts (replied the Duke) made his name so
well known? I am heartily glad of it, for now shall this Kingdom again
flourish, when it shall be governed by so brave a King. But what is become of
him, I pray, that you having such a desire to see him, could not compass it?
Truly (said the Knight of Love) I was going to find him, but an accident
unlooked for, called me from Morea, and so much against my heart, as never any
thing was more, when I could neither go, into Albania, where they say, he must
be shortly, nor stay where I most desired. With that ^ee sighed indeed, and so
passionatly, as they all pitied him. Then the Duke demanded who the others
were. He answered, strangers they encountered upon the way, but it seemed good
Knights; So the Duke took the Knight of Love on his right hand, and the
Forest Knight on his left, desiring the others likewise to sit: so sitting
down altogether, Amphilanthus besought him to let him know in what estate the
Country stood, for (said he) I desire to go to the Court, and see it; but
hearing the King is dead, I would most willingly be ordered by you, what I
should do. Truly (said he) Sir, I can direct you no better way, then to stay
here, till such time as we hear of our King, nothing to be seen, nor safety
much in this Country; for an Army is providing, men raising, and much
business toward. By whom, I pray Sir, said the Knight of the Forest, are
these men raised? The chief yet, replied he, has not declared himself, but
there are four Great men, that call these Troops together, yet none of them
having right or claim: it is thought they have some other, who yet will not
discover himself. Who is the next in blood, said he? Marry that am I, said he,
being the last Kings Uncle, Brother to his Father. Will not you Sir then be
pleased, said he to withstand these forces in the Kings right? Alas Sir, said
he, you see I am old, no^ ever was I a Soldier, borne deformed as you see, not
for Arms, but Carpets; these shoulders crooked, and misshapen, were not
ordaind, but to be kept from eyes, which would rather bring contempt, then
respect: my Stature low, my body weak, all framed to be a Chamber-keeper,
rather then a Knight at Arms: but I have a Son, who I hope, will be worthy of
his blood. Where is he, I pray, said he? Truly, now I am not certain, but I
think he will be here this night, answered the Duke. These things netled
Ollorandus, yet he covered his rage as well as he could; and thus they passed
the time till Supper, when the old Duke desir^d them to go to their lodgeings,
and unarm themselves, which they did, and returning, sat to meat. The Duke
all Supper time, curiously beholding the Knights, especially Ollorandus, who,
he imagined by his complexion, and the favor of his face, to be the King,
though it was long since he had seen him; but the ground he had in malice made
him discern that, which otherwise had lain hidden (envy having sharpn^sse in
discovering.) Thus the night grew on, and Supper ended, the Knights were
brought to their several lodgings.

Amphilanthus desired to lie with his friend, but the Duke, out of complement,
(as de^iring-they should see their welcome, by the respect done them) would not
permit them to lodge, but alone: the other two were carried to an other Tower
far from them; they being in their Chambers, Ollorandus safe, as he thought
from discovery, went to bed taking his rest very soundly, his Dwarf lying in
the next room to him. Amphilanthus, had not so much liberty, or freedom by
rest granted to him, wherefore he went not to bed, but walked up and down his
Camber in his old posture, arms acrosse, and breathing in sighs, wishing his
eyes might be once more blessed with seeing, what his soul ever beheld with
fervent love, that never dividing it self no more then heat from fire:
Passion grown such a commander over him, as he was an Imag^ of Loves torments,
curiously carved to the life of passionate distress. Measure some of his
thoughts he did, and delicately express his pain in Verse, but so dainty was
he, as few, save himself, (which was his Mistress) ever saw them, especially
those which were for his parting, and those he made that night. But his Muse
had no more then finished that conceit, when she, and he, were called to
attendance, summoned by a fearful and terrible noise, mixed with voices and
armor, at last he heard his friend say, O traitors, thus betraying a
stranger, and Villain to do it in thine own house; farewell dear friend,
let misfortune wholly be, and end in me.

Those words, and the knowledge of the speaker, quickly make the King prepare
for rescue, wherefore arming himself, he ran toward the Chamber where
Ollorandus lay, but by the way he saw him fettered, and leading to a Gate,
where it might appear, a Prison was. He quickly came to him, crying to those,
who led him, to stay; they refused, but he, who feared not many more t^e^ they
were, set upon them; they divided themselves, and some of them held him play,
while the rest went away with the King, taking the advantage of his busy
fighting: but his hands were not so imployd but his eyes also used their
office: and so well did he consider the traitors, as he never let them be, but
in his eyes, which made him soon perceive this villainy, and as readily prevent
it; for they thinking to steal him away, were stayed, and made in streams of
blood to deliver their confession, and lives to his victory. The Dwarf in this
time had so roared about the Castle, as the other two Knights awaked, and came
to the rescue ( Amphilanthus throwing a Sword and Shield of one of the
vanquished to Ollorandus), and in time they came, for he was then ready to
be slain; the old Duke and his son coming together, and encouraging their
servants by promises, and commanded by threatenings to kill him; but those Arms
protected him, and then furiously did he fly among them, the old monster
reuiling his people for letting them escape death, till Amphilanthus got to
him, and as he was opening his mouth to speak hatefully to them, he thrust his
Sword into it, hindering those villainous words which he had else delivered. The
other two also came, and saved the brave Prince from killing such a worm,
dispatching that ill naturd man out of the way, of molesting any more good
creatures. But his son revenged his fathers death, killing the elder of those
brothers, whose death Amphilanthus quickly paid, with the young man's end,
striking off his arm, whereof he died; then getting close to Ollorandus, they
set back to back, and so fought, till they gaind the stepps which went up to
the Hall, and getting even into it, they pressed to that door; but some who
continued fight with them, kept so near, as they got between Ollorandus and
the door, so as Amphilanthus hoping in the crowd, his friend was come in,
locked the door, but shut Ollorandus out, where he was ingirdled with his
enemies, and past hope; but the never daunted King espying his error, soon
amended it, yet was he forced to leap out at the window, which was but low, to
aid him, the door opening outward, was held so close by the enemy, but when he
was got among them again, he was like a thunderbolt, piercing and killing all
resisted him, who but like poor feeble dogs, that snarld for their best
defense could not bi^e him. Once more he rescued his friend from apparent
death, and thus performed the prophecy Mellissea had made, with double joy to
save him, and thus soon to be at liberty to return to his heart, for he found
that now he might be privileged to part. This business done, the old, and
young Dukes killed, the two honest brothers slain, having gaind the fame, to
die, and be laid in the bed of honor, allotted such as die in their Kings sight
and quarrel; they staid a while in the Castle, seeking for any such
unfortunate man, or creature, as had fallen into the cruel power of this man.
Many they found, and among them some of their acquaintance, then setting them
all at liberty, they departed toward Prage, the chief town of Bohemia,
attended by all those released prisoners; Ollorandus then openly discovering
himself, troops of his subjects came daily in to him, and so within few days
he was crowned, sending some forces against those scatterd troops were raised
by the dead traitor and his confedera^^s to oppose the Kings quiet possession:
who now settled, and all solemnities past, he sent his Dwarf into Hungary with
a letter to his love. The Dwarf knowing his Lords mind, as well he might (i^ by
nothing but that have guess it) performd his part, being feareles of al things
now but the Lord of Strombolly as he arrived in Hungary, and so by inquiry got
to Buda: thence he was directed to a Castle some ten leagues off in a Forest,
whither the Queen was gone to take her pleasure, the King staying at Buda: the
Dwarf being benighted, was glad to take his lodging in a poor house, and
happy so to find one in a wild place, having lost his way.

The next morning he had no sooner taken his horse, and rode half a league,
but he met some Knights, and others riding with great speed, and apparreld all
in green, demanding of him, if he met not the Stagge: he told them, he met
nothing except themselves, since he took horse. They passed on, and still he
met more, who made the same inquiry. At last he saw a Lady coming at full
speed, attended on by many more, whose riding, and horses showed, they could
more willingly have heard of the Staggs fall, then any other tidings. But this
Dwarf, witty, and careful of his charge, imagining this Lady (by herself,
more then her attendants, though many, and bravely clad) to be the Queen, he
stayed, and of one who came within some two or three of her person, desired to
know, if that were not Melisinda: he answered, it was: whereupon he stayed,
and so just in her way, as she must stay too. She offended, began to correct
him: but he kissing the letter, deliuerd it unto her. Soon she knew the hand,
and so commanded him to stay, and attend her answer.

Love, now express thy self; is the hunting pleasing, the sport she most
delights in, is it not now tedious and wearisome? was it feared but now the
Stagge would fall too soon? Is it not now required, and wished for? Rude Beast
(would she say to her self) that knows nothing but bruitishnesse, can not
thou finish thy days with my best wishes to thee, for favoring me? Feign she
would see what was in it, and sometimes a little slack her speed: but then
fearing the company would know why her stay was, guiltiness ouer-ruld her, and
she went on, sometimes meaning to mend her seat, and so counterfeit cause of
stay; then not liking that, again in fury against the beast, pursuing him.

Thus she rid, and traueld her thoughts irresolutely, till just before her, as
if to claim a pardon for the former offense, he fell, yielding himself, and
life into her power. Quickly she alighted, and performing those Rights
required by the Huntsmen, in honor of Victory and Funeral, she walked into
a little Groaue, while her horse was stirring up and down, being hot and sore
ridden.

When she was there, she kissed the letter, then opened it; but having read
it, kissed it often. O dear Paper (said she), welcome as heavenly blessings
to me: thou bring me word my Ollorandus lives; and more that he thinks
of his poor Melysinda: live still dearest love, and let honor glory in
honoring thee. Happy news to hear my Dear is a King, but most happy that
he crowns himself with constancy, the perfect laurel for lovers. Do thou
(most loved) remember wretched me? Nay, make me see thy mindfulnesse by
writing to me, and such sweet lines, where expressions rather want then love;
and yet such loving expressions, testifying nothing but absence makes the want.
Blessed be my Destenie, that brought me thus to hunt, mine eyes thrice happy
that have seen these words written by the best of men, and yet sighed she,
when al is done the fire must consume you, that is the cabinet must hold your
truths, and you most loved, must to my beloved and me, prove a sweet
sacrifice for our safeties. O jealousy that spreads it self so far, as
only memory can be safe, but no relics save ashes remain safe in keeping;
thy ashes yet shall be preserved, and as most sacred, still continued. Then came
she forth, and so returned unto the Castle, many examining the Dwarf from
whence he came, what he would have, and to whom he came, or whether he would
go. He had his errant well, and told them he was a wandering youth, once
servant to a knight, who now imprisond, he was free, but from joy bard for the
loss of him he loved. Many desired to have him, but he refused all, saying, he
would now return into his own Country, and there end his days, if so his
Master could not be set free.

Thus he put them all off, till a day past he was dispatched by the Queen,
whose letter was no sooner ended, but with tears with the same light she
sealed hers, she also gave the death to the other, or rather the safer life,
sacrificing it unto their loves, carefully putting the ashes up in a dainty
Cabinet, and enclosing them within; these Verses she then made, witnessing the
sorrow for the burning, and the vows she made to them burned.

YOu pure and hol^ fire
Which kindly now will not aspire
To hot performance of your Nature, turn
Cross to your self and never burn
These Relics of a blessed hand,
Joined with mutual holy band
Of love and dear desire.
Blame me not dearest lines,
That with loves flames your blackness twines,
My heart more mourning does for you express,
But grief^ for sorrow is no less.
Deepest groans can cover, not change woe,
Hearts the tomb, keeps in ^^e show,
Which worth from ill refines.
Alas yet as you burn,
My pity smarts, and groans to turn
Your pains away, and yet you must consume
Content in me, must bear no plume,
Dust-like Despair may with me live,
Yet shall your memory out-driue
These pains wherein I mourn.
You relics of pure love
To sacred keep with me remove,
Purged by this fire from harm, and jealous fear,
To live with me both chaste and clear:
The true preserueresse of pure truths,
Who to your grave gives a youth
In faith to live and move.
Famous body's still in flames,
Did anciently preserve their names,
Unto this funeral nobly you are come,
Honor giving you this tomb.
Tears and my love perform your rights,
To which constancy bears lights
To burn, and keep from blame.
This did not satisfy her, grieuing for the loss of those kind lines, but
each day did she say the Letter to her self, which so much she loved, as
she had learned by heart; then looking on the Ashes, wept, and kissing them,
put them up again; and thus continued she, till Ollorandus himself came, to
whom these daily offerings were made; for he, after he had settled his
Kingdom, longing as much to see her, as she desired his presence, put the
Government to the charge of a president, and his Counsel, assuring them, that
nothing should have so soon parted him from them, but that he must now
perform his part of friendship to Amphilanthus, which was required of him, who
had so lovingly, and bravely accomplished his.

None were against that, all honoring and loving him so much, as he had much
ado, but with kind quarrels to leave the Country, without some of them to
attend him; yet by his mild persuasions, and the new Kings commanding power,
they two took their journey, the Dwarf again returning the very day before
they left Prage.

Toward Hungary they then haste, passing through Morauia, where they met a
strange encounter, and a sad spectacle, which was a company of men all on
foot, being apparrel'd in long mourning Gowns; and after them a Chariot,
being drawn by six Horses, they being covered with black; and in the
Chariot was a body, being covered with a black Velvet covering; and at the
feet of this Body sat a Lady, her face being toward it, and most pitifully
weeping; many more in mourning likewise walking by the Chariot, round about it,
and behind it.

This lamentable and doleful spectacle moved the hearts of the Knights, who
being very passionate, quickly felt pity, and riding presently to one of the
followers, desiring to be resolved of this matter; the Gentleman courteously
answered, that the business was of so long a times discourse, as would demand
more leisure, then he thought their business would well allow them; therefore
he besought to be excused, unless they meant to succor that distressed
Lady, who most justly might claim assistance, and revenge, for a murdered
Knight, unjustly, and treacherously slain for love. Love their Master
commanded their service, so as they said, they would willingly do their best,
to redress such an injury.

Then the Gentleman going to the Lady, told her what the Knights said; she
casting up her eyes, which before she held on the Coarse, the body and soul of
her affections.

Alas Sirs (said she) what misfortune has brought you to engage your selves
to true misery, as in joining with me you must do, for a more wretched never
lived to die so.

Our fortunes (said Ollorandus, speaking in her own language) is the best we
could covet, if they may prove available to you, nor do we desire any more,
then to know how we may serve you.

Then Sir (said she) let me be so bold, as to demand first, who you are,
that I may discover my estate the more freely, and willingly to you.

My name (said he) is Ollorandus, King of Bohemia; and this is Amphilanthus,
King of the Romans.

Happiness beyond all hope (cried she). Alas my Lord, this is the King that
of all the World I have desired to meet, and now travel to seek in Italy:
then kneeled she unto him, beseeching him to grant her, what he had of
himself so nobly promised.

He vowed to perform any thing whatsoever that lay in his power to do: then
coming forth of the Chariot, and they lighting, they retired into a little
tuft of Thorns by the way side, she beginning her story thus.

Most brave and renowned of Kings, and you great King, be pleased to give ear
to the saddest story, that ever love, and lovers end has produced.

I am that miserable unfortunate woman Sydelia, passionately loving, and being
beloved of the excellent and ve^tuous Antonarus; long we loved, but a hate
between my brother, called Terichillus, and my love grown in their youth,
hindered our enioyings; my brother so curiously watching me, himself, or
others, never or seldom from me, as I was able only to see my afflictions
and wants, but not the Sun of my content: for my Brother being the Heir of
Morauia, and the other the Prince of Silesia, that kept him from venturing into
his Country, knowing the infinite malice he bare unto him, alas, no way
deserving it.

But at last, my brother was to marry Orguelea daughter to the Duke of Bauaria,
and going thither to perform it, left me guarded by his servants, whom in his
absence so well I wrought with, as I compassed the sight of my Dear, who in
the habit of a Hunts-man came unto me; we married privately, and so enjoyed the
time till my brothers return with his new Lady, as full of spite, and ill
nature, as a Spider with poison: to her he had disclosed this matter, with his
hate to Antonarus, and to her gave the charge of me, my Father having before
given over the world, and was retired into a religious house, having left me,
and all his estate to my brother, yet during his life, my brother would not
take the title upon him, but the authority of the County of Morauia. Now was my
Hunts man to return, small safety being where such hateful spies inhabited,
no more surety then a poor hare has in the hands of the hounds, who have long
hunted to prey upon it: so did they seek to ruin us, the extreme hate my
brother bare to Antonarus, rising from this cause.

When they were youths, and both in the Emperous Court, there lived at that
time, a young Lady of the house of Austria, ^xcellently fair, and as fairly
conditioned, whose virtues were such, as most prizing worth, for Virtues sake,
she made choice wholly of worthin^sse in conversation, choice of companions, and
the whole course of her life ran that way, which made her chooce Antonarus,
and so much to affect him, as nothing but death, could be ender of her
affection, and yet I know not how I can say so, since dying, she expressed her
affection to him she loved, and no question but his goodness requited it in
his wishes to serve her; but friendship wrought so in him, as he would not
seem to receive it, my brother being so passionately in love with her, as
Antonarus saw, if he accepted her love, he must with that, kill his friend,
rather then to do so foul an act, he would seem cruel, and wrong, and harm
himself, sooner then hurt him: yet often has he told me, that he has from his
soul, wished my brother had never discovered his affection to him, for then
ignorantly he might have made himself happy in her, whose happiness only
consisted in him, and yet was denied, because he loved his companion. O
friendship, excellent virtue to be embraced, and cheerished, yet herein would
such friendship had not been. Still did Terichillus tell Antonarus how he
loved, and how he saw she slighted him, and yet cried he, she loves; would I
were the Dog she so kindly treats, and plays with all, or that little bird,
which she still kisses, and carries in her breast, or any thing save wretched
me my self, so loathed, and hated by her. Then did he comfort him, telling
him, patience and constancy might solicit for him, and his still presenting
himself in her eyes, might win, if any thing could prevail by love. At last
my brother plainly discerned the love she bare to Antonarus, then he grew
furious, and for all these former passages mistrusted this firm friend; he
finding it, and no way to kill this Cancor, took leave of the Court, and my
brother, at his parting telling him, that whatsoever he imagined of him, he
should find him true to him. To the Lady he went not, but privately in the
morning he stole away, and passed many Countries with much honor, but now comes
the woeful part of this Story.

She seeing him gone, and Terichillus stay, quickly guessed the matter: then
grew rage in her, and whereas, before she would use him ciuilly, for Antonarus
sake, now she plainly showed the hate, she bare him, who she beleeud to be the
cause of his going; that belief told her she must not suffer such an injury,
that injury being above all, where love was by it barred: his sight grew odious
to her, when she remembered that with him Antonarus used to come, now she saw
nothing but the foul Copy of an excellent work, his presence, made her see
the absence of her sole content, as the bare shelfes do of the ebbed Tide: and
as bare without liking did he seem: yet could she not beware of the flowing
ill, which followed by his spite, nor did she strive to shun any thing but
his presence, he infinitely loving; she terribly hating, let her passion grow to
such violence, as it grew infectious, and he that but now sought, still
continued in search, but of what? Not of love, but means to be^ revenged of
her, whose love he could not compass, but whose overthrow he meant to gain.
Eyes which lately served to bring his comfort to him, in seeing her, are
employed to be curious spies over her affections: hours spent wholly in
examining her worth, and virtues, changed to plott her ruin; admiration of her
goodness, to admiring, why he could affect such a body of disdain;
alteration so beyond expectation, as understanding when this happened, was to
seek, yet did he dissemble still, and made love (the honor of noble hearts)
the color for his wickedness, making his malice spring and ouergrow his love,
as Nettles do Violets, or Hemlock Pincks: yet did his counterfeit affection
grow with it.

At last, he wrought so cunningly, as he intercepted a Letter which she sent
to Antonarus, which having opened, and read, he made the answer, counterfeiting
his hand so well, as none could discover it, or know it to be other then his;
the messenger he made safe for telling tales, making blood accompany his
Treason. Thus he continued, heaping more ills upon his soul, then shells in
number are upon the Seashore; alas that he were not my brother, since I must
thus speak of him, or rather I would his last act, had not made me the
unwilling, and unfit relater of his ill. The poor Lady, still loving him,
writ, and with all the zealous affection she could, persuaded his return,
with whom she would go and bring him to the famous Duke her father, where all
honor should be done him. He still answered with de^layes, at last, (or indeed,
his vnappointed Secratatary) made this answer, that good manners had made him
thus long answer respectively, but since he found, that nothing but his
company, and marriage would satisfy her, she must be contented to be plainly
told, that he despised her forwardness, and as much her self, his heart being
set already on one, far more deserving then her self, who deserved nothing
of him, to alter his former affection, nor could merit any thing of the world,
if not by marrying Terichillus, who affectionatly loved her, and thus she might
honor her self in requiting him, and that if she desired to have so much as a
good thought from him, she must perform this, or else to be assured of a
mortal hater of her self, and house.

She (alas) whose heart love had made tender, and tenderness, pitiful; could
not but so much pity it self, as to break with this unkindness; yet died
she not speedily, but which was worst (yet in a kind, happy for her) her woman
wrought such means, as a brother of hers found Antonarus, to whom he
discovered the pitiful estate of the Lady, and what complaints she endured the
absence, and cruelty of him, who sought to murder her, for faithfully loving
him. This discourse made him resolve to see her, and if it might be, to save
her, dying, or shame of it working more in him, then living love could
purchase; so as he went to the Court, where he found her ready to depart, yet
not past sense, but that she knew him; or rather having only sense of love,
took quick apprehension, so as she looked up, and spoke chearefully to him,
desiring all else to avoid the chamber, when that was done, she took him by the
hand, and weeping, thus spoke.

Antonarus what fault have I committed, that has brought this cruelty from
thee? If extreme, and loyal affection can offend, then have I infinitely
offended? But alas, blame your self, your virtues made me choose you, your
winning eyes, made me your subject; your worth, commanded my fidelity; you
only I loud, and you only murder me with unkindness; yet pardon me that I
speak thus boldly, since I fear my former boldness made you despise me.
Chide Love, alas, it was he offended, and I did but by directions, write those
Letters so rejected, and despised by you. He hearing her speak thus, and touch
upon Letters, desired to be resolved of that; she admiring at his seeming
ignorant of that, yet loath, even at the last to seem harsh to him, told him
of his cursed answer, and to satisfy him, showed him the Letters themselves,
with the Copies of hers, which (said she) I had burnt, had you not come as you
did. When he saw them, no man could manifest more furious sorrow, for he could
not speak, but wept, and sob'd, toare his hair, and remained like a
distracted creature, till she urging him, and he desiring to satisfy her,
swore they were none of his, nor that ever he received any from her; O
miserable man said he, thus to be betrayed, what have I done to be thus plagued,
and insufferably afflicted? Alas, my dearest, I never heard from thee, never
writ to thee, but if I had, sweetness, and love, should have been the subject,
and not this.

False Terichillus, this I fear, comes from thee, for this is thy hand, I know
it is the same in jest, that thou were wont to counterfeit, and have thou
practisd it for this? unkind, and cruel man. She seeing his sorrow and his
clearenesse, received much comfort, and taking him again by the hand, happy am
I, my Lord, (said she) that shall now end contented, blessed in your love,
and clear from the end, I feared, you had sent me; be happy my only dear,
and live with all content, let that Lady, whosoever you shall choose, love you
no less then I do; let her be as just, and loyal, but so much more
fortunate, for your sake, as to live to enjoy you longer. Had you been cruel,
as you were accused falsely, my love had pardoned it, and welcommer had my
death been to me (sent by you) then life, if in dislike of you. My soul loved
you, and loves you, nor ever suffered it show of dislike against you, I had
clearly passed into the other world without blameing you: yet am I happy to see
you, and your truth before I part. I must leave you, my only love I must go,
and yet this I will beseech you to keep of me the memory of your truest love,
and let that memory be put with love, and not moved with rage to revenge
these wrongs; he has done you a favor it may be, in keeping you for a
worthyer, but never can you have a truer. He weeping told her, he took that
last ill, that she would say, he could have a worthier. O no, said he, that
cannot be, thy worth cannot be equaled, no more then my wrongs revenged
sufficiently. They both wept, then spoke a little, and so took their leaves,
she seeing his sorrow, was afflicted for it, he finding it, sought to cover
it, so he kissed her, and went out of the chamber, with as dying a heart as she
had almost, no sooner was he gone, but she calling her woman to her, willed her
to burn those papers, the^ taking ^ ring from off her finger (which was a
pointed Diamo^d she ever wore, and had vowed to do so, till she died or
married) charged her to give it Antonarus, then turning her to the other side,
tell him (said she) I bequeath this my truest love, and last love to him, and
so I conjure him to keep these. She went to perform her command, he instantly
with the rest of the company came in, but there they found her dead. It was
(alas) too late to recover her, but not to give a more happy end: how he took
it, only such a love can express, which began but when she was dying, and
enjoyed but in death. He instantly left the Court and hearing Terichillus, had
stolen away upon his coming, guiltiness condemning him, he went in search of
him, putting on an armor, as black as his sorrows: and so he traveled,
clothed in sorrow, accompanied with remembrance of her chaste and loyal love,
her death, the treason that caused it, the injury done him, yet her spotless
affection. All these were motives, the more he ran from one to the other still
the first held him, and wrapped him fast in all.

Thus he went, caught in himself, till he met Terichillus in a plain
between two hills to whom he sent his Squire, who was all his company, not to
discourse with him, but to call him to answer the wrongs done to him and his
love; when the Squire came to him, he made no answer but this, he had cause to
call him to account, and he would satisfy him, so he prepared himself, and
they met, where they fought a cruel fight; but Antonarus having justice on his
side, got so much the better; as he had Terichillus under him, and at his
mercy, which when he had confessed, asked pardon of him for his fault, he took
him up with these words; Rise Terichillus, thy shame and conscience are
sufficient reuengers, I will not shed thy blood, which cannot cleanse so foul
a fault, or satisfy for loss of her so chaste and immaculate; make it more
clear, and purer if thou can with true repentance, while mine eyes, and
heart drops, fulfill and serve for her funeral.

Then leaped he upon his horse leaving my brother hurt, and wounded, more with
scorn, and hate of himself so to be saved, then kindly thanking him that had
done it. Away Antonarus posted, and came into Morauia, to visit me, who indeed
was only his servant, Infant Love on my side haueing made me so; he stayed not
long but told me all this story, for which I loved him better then before,
gratefulness having large command over my heart. He never by my words had
knowledge of my love to him, till two years after passing by that way, and
privately desiring to see me, (unfortunately for us both) I did confess it,
he embraced it, and so we loved, my brother still continuing his hate, but in
my Fathers time of life, did make no public show of it.

Upon the death of him he took the title, and first began with open
proclamations of his hate, and the first forbidding me his company, yet where
were these proclaimd, but in his house, and to his private friends? yet I went
further, and did warn my love of him; this was the cause he came not in his
sight, nor to his knowledge: and in hunts-mans habit was the last time I did
see him; for my brother returned with his wife, the watches were made new, and
stronger over me, yet love made them fruitles, for on a time appointed we met,
and meant to keep together; then boldly I writ to my brother, telling him what
I had done, and that I hoped he would excuse me, since I had taken him for my
husband, whom love and youth had chosen for me, and now was gone with him,
whom most I loved to live with, and whom I now was happily to obey. My brother
grew infinitely enraged with this, and straight sent out many horses to stay,
and interrupt our passage; but in vain, for we were passed, and had laid such
spies for them, as kept us free. Into Selesia we came, finding, and bringing
with me all content, in having my own hearts desire with me. Antonarus
welcomed me with gift of all his estate; I returned that to him again, taking
a far greater (as I esteemd it) which was himself and his true love, my best
and only fortune. Terichillus this while imagined himself highly injured,
wherefore he sent Antonarus word, that so ill he took this affront, as he
would with arms regaine his honor touched. He replied, that he had rather in
his opinion, done him honor to match with him, nor did he do it for other cause
then his affection, which begun in our youths, had grown to this perfection;
therefore he entreated him rather with love, then Arms to end the business;
if not, he would prepare to attend his coming, as he pleased. Within some
few months, Terichillus with an army entered Selesia, but only enterd it, when
an army led by Polisander brother to Antonarus, met him, giving him bat^aile,
and life also, for he in an encounter might have killed him, but mercy more
then judgment gouernd him, so as he spared him, on condition the wars should
cease, which he promised, and a firm league should be made between us, which
Polisander should have the glory of.

Thus agreed, he came with him where we were; Arms dismissed, and swords laid
down, he was nobly entertaind, and received by Antonarus, who meant truth; and
after some days were passed, an oath of friendship was taken of both sides.
Then Terichillus returned into his Country of Morauia, Polisander bringing him
to the confines thereof, there committing him to his own safety. Antonarus
was glad of this conclusion, because it ioyed me, and I for his quiet did
rejoice. One whole year this lasted, in which time we had a son, after whose
birth, and my recovery again, Terichillus invited us unto his Court with all
love (or better to say, show of it) we believing, went thither, trusting, as
not meaning to be false. Into Polisanders hands my Lord put the government of
the State, and also to him gave the charge of his son; and well might he do
it, for a more noble honest man lives not, then he is. Into Morauia we went,
met we were in the confines by noble men and Ladies, and still by more, and
greater, till we arrived at the Court, where at the gate my brother and his
wife met us; no state, nor welcome wanted, which outward testimony could
express, nor doubted we; but like the silly birds, who hearing the sweet
singing of other birds set for stales, thinking by that mirth they had no
imprisonment, fall by innocent belief into the nets: so did we, seeing smiles,
and hearing nothing but welcome and joy speak, grew confident and bold upon
our harms. Some days we staid there, Feasts, Tiltings, and all bravery that
the Court could yield, showed it self unto us.

After those sports were past, Terichillus would have us go a hunting, which
we did, for two days having excellent good, and great variety of sport; the
third day we also were to go and conclude our delights, which indeed we did:
for in a great Wood (and the same where my Antonarus was accustomed, when he
was a Huntsman to bide in, and from whence I heard his Horn, which was the
sign of his being there, and of call for me to him) this unnatural man
Terichillus (for longer I cannot call him brother) had laid traitors in ambush,
with command to execute his will, he in the mean time telling us, that a
mighty Stagge was within, harbored of purpose for us. Then carried he us into
the thickest of it, placing the train on the outside, far enough from help
or hinderance; with him we went to rouse the Dear, and so we did the too
costly beasts that murdered my content, for then they showed themselves,
suddenly rushing on Antonarus, who had only a little hunting sword by his
side, with which he killed one, but they many soon possessed themselves of his
sword and him. Then Terichillus reviled, and scoffed at him and me, telling us,
that here was a youth, had wont to walk those Woods, and call a Nymph unto him
by his Horn: but Satyrs found their wantonness, and so had vowed revenge, and
thus do we said he. Then those men, who were disguised in that shape (and the
fittest for so savage an act) murdered him, making me behold the cruelty for
the greater torture. When all was done (which ended with his life) they went
away, lifting the body only up upon a horse, and setting me upon mine own
again, gave me the bridle of the other to lead with me, as the substance and
demonstration of my misery. Out of the Wood I went with this pitiful, and yet
my beloved companion; excessive sorrow had so shut up my senses, as I wept not
at the instant, nor till I was to tell the Tragedy, which was presently after
my coming into the Plain, meeting some of the Selesians, who accompanied me
in mourning, little else we could do, for in the County, where the murderer
ruled (and alas our company a handful, in comparison of his people), what
could we do but weep and wish? Then got we our small troop together, and
with as much hafte, as our heaviness could allow us, we gained the Country of
Selesia; to Polisander we related this villainy, whose sorrow and sadness was
such, as he was not able to give or take counsel, sometimes he did purpose
to r^uenge this treachery himself, cursing himself for sparing the murderer,
when he might have killed him, blaming his Fortune that let him live to slay
his brother: lamenting the time he made the reconsiliation, accusing himself
as much as Terichillus, for having been the unfortunate instrument of this
mischief. Alas (said de) how happy had Selesia been, if I had been slain in
the battle, and how more blessed I, that had not lived to see this day: dear
Antonarus, has thy brother, beloved so much of thee, been cause of thy loss?
accursed creature that I am, yet pardon me dear brother, I lament thy death
as much as heart can do: Selesia, yours is the loss unrecoverable in loosing
such a Prince, punish me then, I am ready: and dearest Sister (cried he) take
this life from me, how can you see me, who brought your worthy Lord into this
misfortune? O Antonarus my soul dies for thee.

His infinite grief was such, as most were forced to watch him, lest he made
himself away; yet such was, and is his virtue, as I hope will protect him from
using violence on himself. Much ado we had to persuade him from going into
Morauia, to revenge his brother: but at last I gained thus much of him, to
leave the reueng to me^, whose lo^se was greatest, and cause demands most
pity, to gain some brave Prince to right me; upon counsel, and my petition
he granted it, whereupon I put on these robes, he providing this Chariot, and
all other things necessary for our journey, appoynting the mourning in this
kind. The same day that I took my journey, he proclaimed my son, heir and
Prince of Selesia, himself protector, and so have I traueled now two months,
Terichillus giving me leave to pass through this part of his Country, to go
to find a Knight, whose valor, and pity will assist me. To find you most
brave and excellent King, I took my way, with hope to beg such a favor of you,
whose compassion and worth all toungs speak of, and hearts admire; none but
magnifying Amphilanthus, for true nobleness, excellent goodness, perfect
virtue, and matchless valor; Wherefore I beseech you, as you may be, or are a
lover, in that regard, aid me, as a King, asist me against a murderer of a
Prince, and as the best of Knights, against such treachery. The cause is
strange, and the business, it may be, will to some seem nice, since a sister
urges revenge of a brother; but weigh with all, that my love, and husband is
murdered, and by my brother's own hands, that will wipe away all doubts, and
clear me to implore your aid. The King, and Amphilanthus much pitied, and
admired the Lady, who had related this story, with as much passion, and fine
expression of witty sorrow as could be; Amphilanthus moved so much with it, as
he presently consented, and gave his promise to asist her: so they passed to
the Court in the same manner as she before had trauel'd, for she had vowed,
never to leave the body, nor to bury it, till she had his death revenged. When
they came where Terichillus was, she sent unto him, to let him know she had
brought a Knight to defend her wrong, and to call him to account for his
Treason, he made his wonted slight answers: but the Lift, and all things were
prepared; then entered the Lady with the body, and the two Knights accompanied
with the mourners; the Princess of Morauia, because her husband was one, would
not be present, the other Ladies were placed to see the fight. Then was it
proclaimed, that if the Knight were overcome, he should loose his head, and
the Lady should be at Terichillus disposing, if the Knight overcame, then the
Prince, if vanquished and alive, should be disposed of by the Lady, and the
Knights, with all the troop, should have safe passage, without stay, or
disturbance in return.

Thus all agreed on, the Trumpets sounded; Terichillus furious, and ambitious
of victory and peace, encountered Amphilanthus with such strength, as he made
him bow backwards on his horse, but the King struck him flat on his back upon
the ground, having means by this, to ask pardon from heaven for his offense:
but he least thinking of so good a matter, quickly got up, and with his Sword
in his hand, did attend Amphilanthus, whose noble curte^ie was such, as not to
take advantage of him, lighted also to fight on foot. Terichillus was valiant,
strong, and now to fight for life, and honor, so as he held Amphilanthus
longer play, then many had done; yet at last he acknowledged with all others,
the King to be fittest to be yielded unto, and so perceiving his life at an
end, curstly set his sword on the ground, and brake it, desirous as it seemd to
die unarmed, rather then disarmd by Amphilanthus; which was to no purpose, he
making him openly make confession of his fault; ask pardon, direct, that al
should obey his sister as their Lady and Princess; weep and lament his fortune
without compulsion, and according to his ill life, he frowardly and peeuishly
concluded his days, leaving behind him this certainty, that such treasons are
never any more left unpunished, then Countries without Princes: for straight
was his Sister proclaimed, and he as soon forgot, as she speedily received.

The King of Bohemia, and the King of the Romans were carried into rich
chambers, but they since the last business in the Castle, would never lie alone,
so as they were lodged together, and as soon as Amphilanthus was recouerd of
some slight wounds, he received in this combat, they took their leaves,
following on their journey for Hungary. But as they were even ready to leave
Morauia (hard by a Wood, which grew from the bottom of a hill to the top, the
hill steepy, craggy, and full of rocks, and places where stones had been cut for
building of a stately Abbey, which was among meadows, not far from the foot
of this hill, between two dainty rivers, but then decayed by war) they met a
Lady running, her hair loose, covering her face, her cries loud and fearful,
her clothes half on, and half off, a strange disorder in her words, she
spoke as if danger pursued, and help requisitly demanded; a little from her
were some men, who hastily followed her, one especially from whom it seemd, she
sought to be delivered. Amphilanthus willing to aid, and she seeming to
beseech it, rid to her, to demand the cause; she fled, he pursued till they
came to the bottom of a great quarry, there in some thickness she offered to
cover her self; but he lighting, desired to know the cause of her flight and
danger. She, as if her enemy had been at hand, amazedly, and frightfully
answered; Alas Sir? what mean you? what injury have I done you, that you
should thus follow me? I never wronged you, why seek you my dishonor? He
replied, that she was deceived, and therefore entreated her to look up again
upon him, and she would see her error. Then beholding him wishly, as if she had
been till then in the wrong; Pardon me my Lord (said she) for I mistook you,
my misery being such, as has quite destracted me, I am a poor Lady dwelling
here, not far hence, in yonder old Abbey, Lady thereof by the death of my
Husband, since which time a young Lord has been an earnest suter to me; but my
love and fortune dying with my husband, or but living to his memory, I refused
him, as many other that have sought me, whereupon he vowed to have me by force,
since no other means would prevail, and this day to perform his vow; he
came, found me but slightly guarded, and newly out of my bed, took me out of
my house, bound my servants, and thus far on the way has brought me: but
when I saw this thick Wood, and being acquainted with the hidnest parts of it,
I slipped from behind his servant that carried me, and with all speed possible
ran (as I think you must needs see me) toward this wilderness, here I hope I
am secure, and shall assure my self of it, if it might please you, to take me
into your protection. He courteous beyond expression, promised to defend her. I
pray Sir (said she) let me yet ask some things more of you, which are, what
your name is, and how long you have been in this Country? My name (said he) is
Amphilanthus, my being here, has bin some time, being brought hither by the
Princess Sydelia. Let me be so bold, I beseech you, to demand one favor more,
which is, Whether you were one of those two that came with her, to revenge he^
quarrel? I am indeed (said he), and the same who fought with Terichillus.
Then am I blessed, said she, for I may assure my self of the valiantest man
alive.

While they were thus discoursing, an other Lady, with as fearful cries, and
shricks passed by, running from the Wood-ward, with such haste, as her fear
had made her so light, as she left no print, so much as pressing the grass
whereon she ran, the impression it seemed being in her, and no weight but
sweetness allowed her feet. Ollorandus followed her, she fledd still, till
she had lead him a good distance from his friend. Oh Ollorandus, what
misfortune now befalls thee? What Witchcraft made thee forget thy vow, and
Melissea's command? Thy friend was carefuller of thee, and with more constancy
accomplished thy desire, how have thou abandoned him in greatest need? For he
sitting by the Lady, as she had done speaking, out of the deep part of the
Quarry came many armed men, and all set upon the King. He thinking they had
been her enemies, defended himself, and willed her to take heed, take that
counsel thy self, cride she, thou hateful murderer of my Husband, and dye
for killing Terichillus. Then he found he was betrayed, wherefore taking the
best courage he could, (and that was the best of the world) he resolutely
withstood their fury; but at last their company still increasing, and his
wounds, and weakness growing with them, the place besides ill to fight in,
being uneven, full of bushes, and all disaduantages that might be to him, he
was brought into infinite danger, and so much, as giving himself lost, he
recommended his last love, and best wishes to his dear self, and so resolved,
bravely meant to end.

But what did Ollorandus all this while? He was held with discourse by a like
deceiuer, as his friend had met, till he heard the noise of the Dwarfes, who
called him to that place with fearful, and lamentable cries; where he found
Amphilanthus, now ready to fall among the bodies of those he had slain, as if
he had killed them, to lie the hansommer on their bodies, in that ill favored
place, and to have an easier bed in death. When he saw this sadd sight, how did
he curse himself? Then remembered he what he had been warned to do, then saw
he the fault committed in belief, and their treachery; all these together
made such a full consent of fury, as he flew amongst them with blows, like
shame for villainy, heavy, and thick, and such good did he, as what with his
valor, and the new courage his presence brought Amphilanthus, his weak lin^s,
they gave a little respite to him, who sat down within the clift of the
Quarry; but then an other mischief followed, for that devilish causer of all
this, beholding him, and having the power as she thought to hurt him, she
rolled a stone (which was loose, of great weight, and bigness, staying but
upon the edge of a clift) down upon him, which gave him (though falling not
directly, upon him, but a little part upon his shoulder) such a cruel stroke,
especially to his weakness; as he fell with it on his face. Ollorandus seeing
it, verily thought he had been dead, whereupon he cried out; damned Country,
that must be the death of that, which all the world envied Italy for, the
blessing of nursing brave Amphilanthus, farewell, and farewell all worth with
thee. Then did his fury increase, and to that height, as but two being left of
all the number, the Neapolitan Prince having brought them from many, to almost
none, yet few; too many then for him sore wounded, he dispatched the rest, one
only suruiuing who much molested him, and soarely handled him, going as he
thought to take up that unmatched King, he saw him stir, and rise: With
greater joy he then ran to him, who embraced him, and welcomd him as the
sauer of his life; but the other craved pardon of him even upon his knees,
acknowledging his unpardonable fault. Amphilanthus quickly forgave him, and
seeing the one suruiuing man again, set on them, finished that noble days
work, and killed him with his own hand.

Then did Ollorandus look about, and with wonder admire that exploit, wondering
that such a multitude set upon the King, and that his strength and courage had
withstood, and overthrown so many; this indeed being one of the greatest
victories, and without comparison, the most hazardous and dangerous that ever
he fell into. As they were thus beholding the slaughter and thinking how to go
thence to cure their wounds, they heard one speak these words; Accursed
fortune, that still has crossed my desires, now will I not be more crossed in
this wicked world; farewell cruel men, all mischiefs attend you both, and
cursed be your best wishes. With that she threw her self from the topp of that
huge Quarry, into the place where Amphilanthus sat, when she (for this was the
Princess) threw the stone upon him, and against the same stone, stid she
break her neck. Then did they strive to bring some of them that lay on the
ground to life, if but to tell the plot, but in vain for they were all dead,
yet for their better fortuue, the same woman who had lead Ollorandus away, they
saw again, wherefore he ridd unto her, and not purposing to be any more abused
by her, brought her to Amphilanthus, then did she confess all the villainy, but
yet not till she saw her Lady dead; the Treason was when the Princess saw her
Husband dead, killed by Amphilanthus, she one of the wickedest living, set some
to enquire what course these Knights would take, and so gaining notice that
they were to go into Hungary, she appointed one of her servants, (a fit
creature for such a mistress) to offer his service to them. They not knowing
the way, were very glad of such a conueniency, and so entertained him, who
brought them to this place, where they met this terrible encounter, the
Princess her self contented to act a part, for the getting of her deuillish
purpose, and as a perfect actor did perform the last act best of her Tragedy.
Then did she warn them of passing on that way, for (said she) an other ambush
is laid for you, but if you will credit me, though (I confess) I may be
ashamed to expect it, having been already one that deceiud you, yet as I have
any faith, I tell you now but truth, and will advise you to the best, go not
this plain way, for by yonder Abbey, is as dangerous a troop laid for you,
but cross this Hill, which though rough and uneasy, yet is the way secure and
safe. They thanked her, and for her punishment only appointed her to go to
the new Princess, and to her discourse all this business, and then if she
could turn good from so much ill, as she had been bred in, they^ should be
glad, and so they parted; the false and treacherous Princess having no other
Tomb then the Quarrey, nor rights but her own actions, nor monument but the
carcass of her wicked servants.

The Knights following the Gentlewomans directions, passed with much difficulty
the hill, and craggy rocks, getting on the other side, which was a fine and
pleasant Country, to a grave Knights house, where they continued, till they
were cured of their wounds. The Gentlewoman performing their command, arrived
at the Court, where she related the whole treason, danger and success of it,
telling withal, how that was the only punishment allotted her.

The kind Sedelia grieved in her soul for this mischance, yet was comforted
when she was assured of their safeties; then sent she some to visit them, but
they could not meet them, though they found the noble memories of them in the
slaughter, but heard by a Pastor that they were well, and gone from the old
Knights house perfectly whole, and recouerd. At their return, the Princess
rejoiced, and in rememberance of Amphilanthus, and his friend, set up a pillar
in that place, of excellent richness, and bigness, in which was curiously
engraven that famous victory: the Abbey being daintely seated, and having al
delights of pleasure, either solitary or otherwise, she built anew, and much
more glorious then before, wherein she made the tomb for Antonarus, laying his
body there, leaving a place for her self, and as soon as her Son came to
years, fit for government, she put the whole rule into his hands, retyring her
self to this place, where with loyal love, and sincere faith, she ended her
days, being after buried with him, from whom living, she would not be
parted, nor dead, severed.

The noble companions being recovered, took leave of their kind host, who
would not be contented, till Amphilanthus entertained his only Son for his
Squire, which he did, and so they passed toward Hungary; ryding by a fair and
pleasant rivers side, which Ollorandus knew, and welcomd each drop which passed
by him, knowing, the place where his Mistress most commonly lived at, was seated
on this stream, his thoughts were busied on her, and Amphilanthus as
passionately contemplated his love: thus they rid together, yet their thoughts
so far asunder, as might have made them strangers. As thus they passed among
some Osiers, which grew by the side of that River, some of them within it, or
the water in love with their roots, chastely embraced them, making pretty fine
ponds between each other, the arms, and bodies of the trees, lying so kindly
to each other, as with much ease, and fine coolness, one might pass from one
to the other. A dainty Maid among the trees, had taken up her abiding, having
made a kind of bed among them, upon their boughs, which twind within one
another arms made the lodging secure. She had an Angle in her hand, and lay
as if fishing, but her mind placed on a higher pleasure; she little regarded
the biting of the fish, being her self deceived with a cunninger bait, the
hook of love having caught her so fast, as nothing could release her, and as
she sat, she would make pretty, and neat comparisons, between her betraying
the poor silly fish, and her own being betrayed by the craft of love, which
some times she commended; and yet again would condemn. At this time she was
in a reasonable good conceit of love, and favorable enough to him, as appeard
by this song she sung, the voice being the cause of their seeking any body in
that place.

Love peruse me, seek, and find
How each corner of my mind
is a twine
wouen to shine.
Not a Webb ill made, foul framed,
Bastard not by Father named,
such in me
cannot be.
Dear behold me, you shall see
Faith the Hiue, and love the Be,
which do bring,
gain and string.
Pray desist me, sinews daines
Holds, and loves life in those gains;
lying bare
to despair,
When you thus annottomise
All my body, my heart prise;
being true
just to you.
Close the Truncke, embalme the Chest,
Where your power still shall rest,
joy entombe,
Jove's just doom.
The Song ended, they went toward her, desiring to discourse with her, she
courteous and excellently witty, gave them entertainment, her apparel was
such, as said for her, she was of the best sort of women: her Gown was of
green Satin, with long sleeves to the ground; they, and her gown buttoned to
the bottom, with buttons of Diamonds, so were her wearing sleeves; but by
reason the weather was warm, they were left open in spaces, through which her
cut work Smock appeared, and here and there; her delicate skin was seen; she
held her angle as neglectiuely, as love the ill causer of her pain held her,
when the poor little fish did play with the bait, or offer to swallow it,
too big for them, yet made the cork stir: so (would she say) does Love with
me, play with me, show me pleasures, but lets me enjoy nothing but the touch
of them, and the smart of the hook that hurts me without gain, and only gives
as light a good to me, as the hope this floting corck did give me of the fishes
prison. But these imaginations were laid aside by the two Princes coming, to
whom she presently rose up, and with fit and excellent respect she saluted
them, throwing down het rod, wherewith she had thretned, but executed little
hurt, and passing over her transparant bridge, went unto them, whom she used
according to their merits, when she understood who they were, conducting the^
along that river to a most curious garden, and so into another, and then into
as rare a place for building, as they in all their travels had euerseene, being
a house of white Marble. Variety of all delights were there, and she desirous
that they should enjoy them, giving all the free and noble welcome that could
be afforded.

After they had been a while in the house, she desired them to be pleased to
unarm themselves, which they did, being brought into a rich chamber, wherein
there were two marvelous fair beds, they having before entreated to lodge
together.

Then did she leave them till supper time, coming then again to attend them;
but when she beheld them, she could not but extremely admire the loveliness
of Amphilanthus, for no woman, were she never so passionately in love with
any, but confessed him fittest to be beloved, though such were his worth, as
few had the honor of his affection, and most of them gratefulness woed more
for, then his own choice. Thus they went together to the room where they were
to eat, the King of Bohemia using all respect unto the Lady, who he thought
did much resemble his Mistress: but as a true lover thought she came far
short of her perfections. At supper there were many Knights more that came to
visit this Lady, she being much honored, and beloved of all: her husband was
likewise there, but such a man to be her mate, as if he were made for a
punishment to her, for being so excellently perfect above the common rate of
her sex, her fashion such, as no stranger could but commend to be full of
modesty, and judgment toward him; but as it was discreet and observing, so
was it to be discernd distant enough from affection, yet as far from neglect
as fondness, his likewise to her, as if she gouernd both parts of love. He
entertaind these Princes with much kindness keeping them company, and showing
them all the rare delights he had about his house, which were many: but the
greatest rareness they saw, was the Lady, who so much Amphilanthus marked, as
he discouerd her to be one of their fellow prisoners in the Castle of love;
wherefore desirous to hear that discourse, especially loving to hear love
desc^ibed, and related by a woman, out of whose lips those sweet passions more
sweetly proceeded, he gave occasion for it, as they walked along a dainty
pleasant brook, the banks whereof were of such sweetness, as the plenty of
the most delicate smelling flowers could yield unto them, being shadowed from
the Suns parching by Myrtle, and that Myrtle preserved by high, and brave
trees, whose breadth and large boughs spread to give content to those, who
under them would submit to solitariness. This place (said Amphilanthus) were
fitter much for lovers, then such free Princes as live here. Is there any free
from that passion my Lord, said she? Only such (said he) as you are, whose
sense of love does rather from you command hearts to your service, then presume
to bring you into the fetters, being rather his commandres, then subject. An
untoward government (answered she) assuredly I have yet had, I never having
enjoyed quiet minut, since I knew this state, but that rebellious passions have
ever tormented me. Can that be, cried Amphilanthus?? I am sensible of them,
said she. Alas, said Amphilanthus, that I might be so fortunat to merit so
great a happiness, as to understand the way, that bold love takes to co^quer
such perfection.

That may soon be gaind (said she) for requite me with your story, and I will
truly discourse my fortunes to you. Never let me be rewarded for my pain
(said he) if I refuse this noble offer. Begin you Sir (said she). I will obey
in that also (said he): and then did he tell her the whole story of his
affection, only keeping her name secret, because Ollorandus knew her, and had
mistrust of it, but no assurance; after which she began thus.

My Lord, so ill it seems love has carried himself, as it is a kind of fault
in a woman to confess any such matter; yet I knowing my self innocent of ill,
and now engaged by your freedom to make a requital, I will venture to speak
of this Lord, Love. My father had a sister married to one of the noblest and
greatest Princes of this Country, as rich in possessions as any, yet possessed
he not so much treasures, as he did virtues, being richer in them, then any
other of this land, true nobleness and noble hospitality abounding in him. He
had to inherit his estate, two Sons and one Daughter, children fit for such a
father, truly and lawfully being heirs to both his estates of riches, and
virtuous qualities.

Many years this good Lord lived, but age claiming the due belonging to time,
and a sore disease taking him, he dyed, leaving his honors, virtues and
chief estate to his eldest son, called Laurimello, who had been much in my
fathers house, his father putting that trust in his brother in Law, as to leave
his dearest part of comfort with him: besides, my Fathers estate lay near to
the City of Buda, which was a conueniency, by reason of the Courts lying
there, for his seeing, and frequenting that: by reason whereof, after his
fathers death he brought his sister likewise thither, between whom and my
self, there grew an entire friendship. She being great, and her brother
beloved, and honored above any other Prince, many sought her for wife: but
she knowing her perfections and greatness, was nice in accepting any, nor
indeed had she much mind to marry, loving her liberty more then marriages
bondage.

Among others that offered their service to her, there was one called
Charimellus, who by his friends and parents, was sent to sue for her favor;
thither he came; but I coming with her into the room where her suitor was,
and her brother, with many more, he cast his eyes on me, which brought him
that misfortune, as to be so suddenly surprised, as he knew not scarce how to
salute her, which made her scorn him, laughing at his bashfulnesse, which
caused so much blushing and trembling in him. I regarded not his traunces,
beginning so much as to think from whence it proceeded, but out of good nature
was sorry for the man, who in troth deserved much pity, and merited great
respect: but my heart elsewhere placed, held mine eyes in their set way, not
marking any thing but mine own fortunes, no more then one star troubles it
self with another course: but my cousin, who would not keep her thoughts from
imparting them to her friends liberally used her wit on him, whose part I
took, ignorant of the cause I had, till some days being passed, in which she
gave him refusal; he discovered his love to me, and withal, protesting how he
was surprised at my first sight. I told him, I could not believe one fight on
such an instant could work such an alteration; nor if it were true, that I
would so soon accept of a refused suitor, since my fortunes I trusted would
not be such, as to bind me to take my cosins leauings.

This answer grieved him, yet did it no way allay his affection, but rather
like snow, which played with all, does make ones hands burn: so did the cold
despair of my words make his heart hot, and glow in love toward me, my friends
liked and loved him, he being of a sweet and mild disposition, valiant, and
accompanied with many brave, and noble conditions; and such a one, as none, I
think, could have disliked, that had been ordaind to marry with judgment
only, or had not their heart before settled as mine was. Long he pursued his
love, at last he gained my fathers consent, my mothers, and most of my friends,
the estate, and antiquity of his house, besides his person, meriting any
subject for wife. When I saw this, and the danger I was in to be bestowed; I
then wholly employed my time, in studying how I might gain mine own desires,
and finely put this off. While this was in my mind, a third business came in,
which was another match offered my father for me, whose estate was greater, and
nearer to our dwelling: to which my father (being more then ordinarily
affectionate to me) quickly harkned, and willingly embraced. Then was I in more
danger then before, my heart so perplexed, as I knew not what I did. Poor
Charimellus came unto me, wept to me, presented his affection to my memory and
eyes: I pitied him, and truly had as much compassion upon him, as I, or any
other (whose soul was in another keeping) could have of him; and so much
favor I did grant him, as to promise to speak with my Father, and directly to
refuse the new proffered match.

This contented him, hoping my refusal had been only for his good: I
performed my promise, and spoke with my father, telling him, how much he was
afflicted, how passionately he loved me, what reasons I had rather to accept of
him then any other, how the world had taken such notice already of his two
years suite, as it would be a disgrace to him, and a touch to me, to take this
new one; nor did I find that I could affect him, therefore I besought him to
grant me that blessing, that I might not be thus yielded to every great match,
but that the business might be carried more to my honor and content. My
father I confess was vexed with these words; yet being as kind as any man, he
moderated his fury something, more then I might expect, bringing forth at last
these words. The confidence I have had in you, I hope may still continue in
that strength, since I cannot think, you dare for goodness sake commit so
great a fault, as to deceive, especially your father; therefore I doubt not, but
your freedom is as ever sure; yet I must needs say, the suite of Charimellus
continued thus long, has given occasion of discourse, I dislike not your care
of that, nor be you afraid more, then reason wills of the worlds reports, which
are like the discharging of pieces of Ordinance, where fire, smoke, and noise,
are the companions, but one bullet hurts but in one place, and often times
misses: so may harm by loud talking people miss hurting you, although the
brute fly; yet do I not condemn, but prise your care, honor being as
necessary to a woman's happy life, as good Lungs to a healthful body: but yet I
trust you are not engaged by promise. I assured him I was not, though I could
not deny, but my affection was settled. My father imagined he knew the place,
thereupon proceeded in the former match; then was I to work my end, having no
means, save mine own industry, and strength of mind busied like a Spider,
which being to cross from one beam to another, must work by-waies, and go
far about, making more webs to catch her self into her own purpose, then if
she were to go an ordinary straight course: and so did I, out of my wit weaue
a web to deceive all, but mine own desires.

The last plot I had, was to make Charimellus entreat my Cousin, to be his
means to me for him, which he (good man) fulfilled; the discreet and brave
Laurimello speaking to me as earnestly, and affectionately, as if for himself:
I received his words, and accepted his counsel, as a patient does the advice
of his Physician: and so wrought it in me, for he was able to cure me^ and only
he, yet not weighing what, and whereto my answers were directed, he let them
pass, my accounted servant remaining secure, as it was imagined in my opinion
and love, but contrary it proved; for soon after he seeking to have assurance
from me of my grant to be his wife, I refused it, telling him I had privately
vowed unto my self, never to be betrothed, nor assured, until the time I
married. He was troubled with my refusal, yet so ciuilly I used him, as he was
reasonably contented there withal; never were Bees so busy in a Swarm, as my
thoughts were how to set my mind, and ends aright^ sometimes I resolved to
speak, but bashfulnes withheld me, casting before mine eyes the stain, that
justly might be laid on me, a maid, and of so tender years to woo a man: then
how often I had heard him say, that he hated forward woman, and could love
none but such an one, who he must win by suite and love, and who would love him
so, as though most earnestly, yet pretily to make him think, neglect did
govern her, which would be like Cordials to his heart, or a diet to increase
the stomach of his love. These hindered me, and I continued like a branch placed
to the wall of faithful affection, while the blasts of desire did move the
leaves to speak, or show so much, as might be called love. While these doubts
ruled, Charimellus fell sick, being then many miles distant from me. for his
estate lay in Austria. I hearing of it, sent to visit him, but so late, as my
messenger could only deliver, as to his last senses my message, and he for his
last words return me thanks, and so he died, sending me a token, which he
took from about his arm; with that, and the news, my servant came, in troth
I was sorry for him, and found that I could weep for him, and did so too; yet
was there no room left for any, but my first chose love to inhabit. After his
death, the second came again, and with his friends, and all apparent means,
did set his rest to win me; but I freed, meant so to hold my self, nor could
there be lest color for the^ so soon to move me; hope began then to flatter
me, and I saw (or that deceitful thing did see for me) that no bar now did lie
between my ioies, and the obtaining, save a little nice, and childish modesty,
which would a virtue prove in showing modest love. But so long did I feed my
self with baby fancy, till the truth was lost, for he not once imagining my
end, married another Lady, rich, and therefore worthy.

This misfortune past repair, and fallen on me, I privately lamented, moan'd
my state, grieved and still quarreled with my self, and then when all was lost,
and hope of joy quite dead, I yielded to my second suitors mind, with the
consent of all my friends, and public feasts, I married him, with whom I now
(thanked be Heaven) happily have lived these many years. But do you not some
times said Amphilanthus, see your best chosen friend? Often times said she, and
in that am I blessed, for here we have all pleasures we can wish, content,
and love, and happiness in that.

No happiness can be compared to that, said Ollorandus, where love meets, and
mutually is blessed with one, and the self kind. But how does the good man
like of this? so well said she, as if he made the choice, being secure in my
chastity, yet this I needs must say, I lived an ill, and froward life with him,
for some two years, while ignorance held me, and willfulnes lived in him; but
when we came to know, or better, to be clean deceived, we grew good
friends, and like kind mates, have lived these last three years. Humors he
had of iealosie, which I could not blame him for, my fashion being free, and
such as having still been bred in Court, I carried with me, but since he
discerned, that more innocence lies under a fair Canope, then in a close
chest, which locked, the inward part may be what it will. He accused himself,
and is now grown so free, as I do rather doubt my self then him, and in
truth I needs must say, I am so much a servant unto love, as I discover more in
outward show, then grave discretion can permit me with, yet always have I, and
still will rule my affection by virtue.

By this they were arrived at the wall of the garden, having still followed
that pleasant brook, which was an arm of the large and brave Danubia; being
entered the Garden, they met her Husband, and with him the sweet enioyer of
her free given joys, none need to tell the Princes who he was, for who but
he could hold her eyes so fast? so eagerly did they behold each other, as if
they feared one part of sight had failed to make a full conclusion of their
bliss, or as if they through them would look into their hearts, to see the
settled dwelling of each others faith: there was affection discovered at the
height, and as true love would wish, freely given and taken. Most blessed pair
said Amphilanthus, sighing in him self; alas, may I not live to see such good?
may not my dear behold me with such looks, such smiles, such loving blushes?
may not her virtue freely grant this to me? yes I have seen such, but accu^sed
man must not enjoy, but what cursed Desteny will allow my wants.

Then made he some excellent verses, the subject being desire, and absence, and
so much was he transported, as he stood not like a beholder, but as an Actor of
loves parts: Ollorandus talking this time with the husband, returning all into
the house, Amphilanthus passing in his accustomed manner, the brave Laurimello
leading his beloved Lady by the hand, after supper they walked abroad again,
and so till bed time, passed those hours in pleasant sweet discourse, the
Lady making her own words true, for never did any woman make such free, yet
modest show of love as she did, yet expressed with such fine judgment, and sweet
chastity, as that love, was in her deemed a virtue, and his wanton faults
commended by the wit, and dainty manner of her earnest love. The next day the
two Princes took there leaves, and so for Buda took their journey, Ollorandus
contenting himself, with the hoped for joys he should receive in the
conversation of Melisinda, and Amphilanthus thinking how to return unto his
deerer self, blaming, and condemning himself, for being so long absent, and
accusing fortune for such cruelty, as not only to make him loose the comfort
others had, but also to make him witness of their gain, and by that to behold
his perpetual harm, and vnbearable want. To Buda at last they came, where
they were entertained. Amphilanthus as his merit, and dignity required;
Ollarandus with such affection, as all the school of love, could instruct
Melysinda with: Rodolindus with triumph, and feast, giving them testimony of
their welcome. Many days the feasts continued, and still increased the banquet
of love, between the King and his Mistress, when Amphilanthus was entreated to
show is skill in arms, which he did in a just, wherein he encountered the King
^^dolindus then unknown for the manifesting of his valor, would disgui^^d
meet the incomparable Prince, who not understanding any reason why (...) spare
him, but to add to his honor, gave him such unkind greetings, that ^^though
he were as valiant, and strong as any in Hungary, yet at the fifth ^^urse, he
was thrown to the ground much bruised: which hurt he never ^ecouer'd, but
within some few months after deceased, leaving his delicate ^ife, as pefect and
excellent a widow.

These iusts being done, Amphilanthus desired liberty of Ollorandus to re^^rne,
who, though infinitely grieved to yield unto it, yet judging by himself the
causes that moved him, he consented, telling him he would also ac^ompany him,
but by no means would he consent to that, no more loving (...) part, then to be
parted from his love. Alone he resolved to go, but for ^is dwarf, who
attended him, sending his new Squire unto his Mistress, to ^duertise her of his
safty, and of his speedy repayring to her. The first days ^ourney, the Queen,
with the two Kings accompanied him, then parting, Amphilanthus took toward
Stiria, and so, that way to go into Italy, in which Country, he met a very
fine, and strange encounter, in a delicate ^^adow, (being newly entered Stiria)
there was a fountain, about which were many Ladies sitting, all apparrel'd
after that Country manner, ^ut in one color, which was willow color,
imbrodered with gold, neate^y, but not extraordinarily rich; they were, (as he
perceived being near them) some singing, some playing with the water, others
discoursing one to another, all busied; and yet none busy, but in play. They
hearing his horse, ^ook'd up, he saluted them, and alighting came to them,
with whom he had many pretty passages of wit; at last he disired to know who
they were? they ^nswer'd servants, as their livery might testify, and Ladies
of honor to the Princess of Stiria, who was absolute Lady of that Country,
being subject to none, and yet not free. Where is that Princess said
Amphilanthus? not far hence, answered one of them, being walked into yonder
wood, where she is the sadest, and most discontented of any Princes living. May
the cause be known said he? To such an one as will offer his help, said the
first of them. I will do my best said he, else shall I forswear arms, when I
am so unworthy a man, as not to serve brave Ladies. Then Sir, answered she, I
will tell you the matter as well as I can, but not so passionately, as my Lady
her self would do, if she were to relate it. Emilina (for so is the Princess
called) having been sought of most of these Princes, which are neighbors to
this Country, and many more neighbors to love, refused them all, some of them
so loving, as love might have pleaded, and won for them, others have conquered
by their valor, some have gaind pity by their afflicted passions, but all
were as one thing, a lover rejected: she having wholly resolved within her
self, to give her possessions, her heart, and all to the renowned Prince of
Naples, and lately King of the Romans, Amphilanthus, whose fame had won more in
her, though in person then to her never seen, then all they with their
continual petition. At last this Prince came, whose name had so souereignis'd,
as she stood not to behold, or examine what causes might in him move her
affection, but as Amphilanthus she loved him. He subtle above all men, and as
any, faulse, flattered her, and so much wrought with her, as he gained what he
desired, and what he most esteemed: for had she given him les, she had, as she
believed, wronged her fervent love: he seemed as passionate as she, and surely
was so, but unconstant creature, he did change, and so will all you do.

While he loved, none loved more earnestly, more fondly, none more carefully,
but how can loyalty be where varyety pleases? scarce cold he endure any to
look upon her, much less, suffer or permit her to use any but himself
familiarly; which he need not find fault withal, for so did she love, as
she never looked on other, with the eyes of more then civil courtesy. Some
while this continued, the marryage was expected, he gaind her promise, to have
only him; she never doubting, pressed not for his vows, more crediting his
word, which she assured her love of, then seeking by desire of stricter vows,
to make him think she did mistrust, least action of his, gave her steady
trust, and so she trusted, till she was deceived, for after he had gained
her firmest love, and so by vows obtained what he sought, most vildly he
began to change, and fell enamored of a Princes maid, who being near
allied unto my Lady, often came to visit her at Court; this Gentlewoman truly
was most fair, and I think good till then, if not then too; we saw it, and
were vexed with it, yet knowing that no curster cor'siue can be to a lover,
then to be despised, especially by him that once did love; at last she found
it, (miserable knowledge,) how then was she grieved? if I should offer to
discover, I must say I am a lover, and forsaken to, otherwise can none, or
ought any to presume to tell a farlorne creatur's woe. First, in silence she
did bear her pain, and with attendance, and continual kindness, strive to win
him back, or rather, that he might not think she did mistrust, she strove to
hold his love, But that ungrateful man, (which name is more then her gentle
affection will yet permit her to give him,) discerning her respect and love,
would seem to see neither, yet faild he not in all outward shows, to manifest
his change. She writ unto him, she wept before him, she complained, she
bewailed others that were forsaken; he heard, and not regarded, he answered but
slighted, he joined in pitying them, but neglected her that most wanted; she
lost her beauty with sorrow, with weeping whole nights, and sobbing, that I
have my self come in, uncalled but by those sorrows to her, the greatness of
her heart, though able in the day to cover them, yet was forced at night, to
borrow assistance of breathing out what her spleen was over charged withal,
and what, save tears, sobs, and silence would she trust for her associates?
Forgetful man that so abused her, who wronged her self alone in trusting him,
nay wrong himself in such a base unworthy change. I adventured to advise, when
I saw all misery over take her; she took my counsel, which was, to urge the
marriage. He slighted her, and told her she was grown old, and her beawty
altered, willed her to recover that, and when he returned from a journey that
he had in hand, he would be as he was.

Alas, what torment was this to her, who was only his? she took it to the
heart, though he smilingly delivered it, as if in jest, till all considered it
aprooued true; then faign'd he an excuse, that the King his father sent for
him, and that at his return he would not miss to perform what he had
promised, so he found her as he expected. His leave he took of her, which went
as near her heart, as marrow to the bones, yet staid he afterward with the
other wench some certain days. We used al means to hold her ignorant of that,
and many more his passages: but what more clear and perfect sighted, then true
love? She knew all, and yet knew her faith so clear to him, as she would blind
her sight, rather then touch his truth. O faithles Amphilanthus, accursed man,
that brought this hard insufferable wrong and harm unto the faithfullest and
the worthiest lover, that ever love did wound. But to proceed, he went and left
my Lady quite forsaken and forlorn, who since (unhappy woman) lives in
groans, and daily sorrowings. But where now is the Prince, said Amphilanthus?
Truly Sir (said she) where the falsest, ficklest, waueringst, and unworthiest
man does live, and there is he, and else where know I not. No such
unworthiness lives in that Prince, I know him well said he, and lately saw
him, but I will not say it is the same you speak of, for it may be, some such
creature has abused his name, and for these ends given out to be the man. Know
you the Prince then, said she? if you do, he is a fair false man, a
treacherous well shaped man, not tall, though high in mischievous ill nature,
slender, but full in wickedness, curld hair, and thick; yet bauld in virtue,
and this is Amphilanthus, as he called himself. The Prince knew straight it was
another man she meant, yet grieved to hear his name so much abused, and that a
Princess should bear wrong for him. This, besides his own interest in the
matter, made him vow revenge, wherefore he desired to see the Princess, the
first Lady told him, that if he would attend her coming forth of the Wood,
he should be admitted to her sight, he would not further urge, and so with
them sat down, while one of them sung this Song, telling him it was made by
her Lady, who was as perfect in all noble qualities, as subject to love, and so
to be for too much faith deceived.

FRom victory in love I now am come
Like a commander killed at the last blow:
In stead of Laurel, to obtain a tomb
With triumph that a steely faith I show.
Here must my grave be, which I thus will frame
Made of my stony heart to other name,
Then what I honor, scorn brings me my tomb,
Disdain the Priest to bury me, I come.
Clothed in the relics of a spotless love,
Embrace me you that let true lovers in;
Pure fires of truth do light me when I move,
Which lamp-like last, as if they did begin.
On you the sacred tomb of love, I lay
My life, neglect sends to the hellish way,
As offering of the chastest soul that knew
Love, and his blessing, till a change both slew.
Here do I sacrifice worlds time of truth,
Which only death can let me part with all,
Though in my dying, have perpetual youth
Buried alone in you, whereby I fall.
Open the graves where lovers Saints have lain,
See if they will not fill themselves with pain
Of my affliction, or strive for my place,
Who with a constant honor gain this grace.
Burn not my body yet, unless an Vrne
Be framed of equal virtue with my love
To hold the ashes, which though pale, will burn
In true loves embers, where he still will move;
And by no means, let my dust fall to earth,
Lest men do envy this my second birth,
Or learn by it to find a better state
Then I could do for love immaculate.
Thus here, O here is my resting place ordained,
Fate made it e're I was; I not complain,
Since had I kept, I had but bliss obtained,
And such for loyalty I sure shall gain.
Famebeares the torches for my last farewell
To life, but not to love, for there I dwell,
But to that place, neglect appoints for tomb
Of all my hopes; thus Death I come, I come.
Did Emilina (said the Prince) write this, sure Amphilanthus could never be
false to such a creature. He was, and is (said she), and truly does he make
good his name, that signifies the lover of two. That name (said he) was given
him, e're he knew what love was, or himself. The latter sure he knows not
yet, said she. You will I doubt not shortly have a better opinion of this
Prince. Neither of him, nor those that be his companions, said she, unless I
grow so unfortunate, as to be a lover of all variety, and so for that, I may
like changing men, or delight in Camelions. With this the Princess came, a
Lady not of highest stature, nor low; so hansome, as one well might see, there
had bin excellent beauty, but decayed, as love was withered to her, who now
resembled the ruins of a fair building; her countenance grave, but courteous,
showing rather retirednes, then much given to conversation; her pace, slow, and
her apparel careless: her clothes were of Tawny, cut with Willow color, and
embroidered with Willow garlands of that color, and gold to show the forsaken
part was noble. She came toward them, and with a modest gesture saluted the
Prince, who with his helmet off, presented the true Amphilanthus to her eyes;
she desired to know of whence he was, and what adventure brought him thither.
He told her, he was of Italy, and that his blessed fortune had brought him,
where he might repair an injury done to a wronged Prince, and serve her in the
business. Alas, said she, what service can I have in that, since none lives
wronged so much as I? nor can one of that country, or all that Nation, right
the injury received by one, and yet dear one ^o me. That one that wronged you
(answered he) shall right you, or my life shall pay for it; tell me where you
think he is. If I did know (said she) and with all understood a danger to him
by revealing him, for all the ha^me I have received, I would conceal him, and
thus hapless live, rather then be a means to harm his person, which still I
hold dear. How happy is that Prince (said he)^ and yet unfortunate to be so
injured, as to be defamed by a suborner, and a traitorous man, falsely assuming
thus a Princes name. Wrong him not with that tax (said she), for sure I could
not love a meaner man, not any but that Prince, and so the brauest
Amphilanthus. But you it seems, have heard of his light love, his change and
falsehood. Alas hear, with that; what man, nay, even your self has loved and
never changed? may not then Amphilanthus do the like? What a perplexity this
was to him, judge brauest lovers: but she did proceed; What shame then is it to
him? and to whom can harm ensue, save to us wretched trusting women. Madam
(said he) I seek to clear the Prince, and to let you discern the wrong he
bears, that one so base and so persidious, has taken his name on him. She was
speaking, when a Knight, who newly there arrived, kneeled to him, telling him
he was most glad to find him so near home, but sorry for the news he
brought, which was, he must repair with all the speed he could into his
Country, for otherwise he could not enjoy the blessing of his aged fathers
sight, who then was ready to yield unto death; withal he gave him letters
from the Lords, and from his brother. While he thus discoursed, the Prince
took them, and then the Lady asked of the stranger, who this Prince was, to
whom he had used such reverence. He answered; Amphilanthus of Naples, Prince,
and now he thought, the King. She then turning to him; My Lord (said she) I
must needs blame your name, that has brought me my discontent, yet honor your
person, though the love to that, was the sweet betrayer of my bliss. Then did
she freely confess, what the Lady before had related, which being heard by the
young Prince of Venice (for it was he that came unto him with the news), he
assured Amphilanthus, that he had met the Knight, and by him had been
overthrown; so as truly Sir (said he) he is valiant, and as strong as a man
need be, to maintain so bold a charge, as to counterfeit your strength; he
has also now got a companion, who calls himself Ollorandus; and thus they
pass, your fame makes few, except strangers, meddle with them. But I seeing
his face, and with that his falsehood, ventured to fight with him, having
justice on my ^ide, which I hoped would bring me victory; but I see, that a
good arm must hold the balance, else sometimes truth may fall (as I did) to
the ground. Amphilanthus confident of the truth of the deceit, took his leave
of the Lady, who earnestly desired his presence to her house, but he taking the
occasion of the Venetians coming, would excuse himself, and keep him free
from temptations, till he saw the perfect commandresse of his dearest love.
The Lady was troubled, yet at last, like other crosses, she did bear with
that, but in the night she thus lamented. Wretched woman, above all accursed,
must my affection first be placed on worth, and that worths name abuse me and
my trust? which were I better hope of, that I was betrayed and cousned by a
false and treacherous man, then by the Prince? No sure I was deceived, for none
but he that did betray me, spoke of him; here one calls him away unto his
country. O I was deceived, and am, and shall be, hapless Emilina, borne to
ill, nursed to misfortune, and must die by change. Alas Amphilanthus, I did
love thee most, best, and my youngest love, and most innocent was given to
thee. I knew not love, when I did find, that I loved thee; my heart was thine,
before I knew it was mine own to give: thou tookest it, I thought did prize it
too; thou calledst it thine, thine own bent heart, did cherish it, and
kindly made of it; said, I did arm the God of love himself, giving him sight
and power; and when in Verse I once did wail a little absence, which I was to
suffer by thy going for one week from me, in that small space thou did
repay my lines, calling me sweet more kind; and telling me, if I did harm mine
eyes, I should disarme love, and undo the throne of him and his; and yet all
this is falfe, and thou (O thou) untrue. Deceived I am; yet why did thou plot
for my ruin? If to gain by me, why did thou not make all the Country thine,
as well as me? No, I do see thy conquest was but me, and I was only for a prey
to ^atisfie thy will; variety of loves, not fair possessions, are thy aimd
at-games. Yet Amphilanthus true or false, I must still love thee best, and
though thou wrong me, I must love thee still. What torments have I alas for
thee indurd? How have I searched my heart, and found thy Image, as if lim'd in
each small corner of it; but all joined in that service, made it round, and
yours, yet are you false; O me that I must live and say, Amphilanthus is proved
false, and unto me; yet this brave Stranger says, he is abused; well, be it
so, I loved him as that Prince, and so my crosses came.

Is it not possible, O cruel man, Prince, or whatsoever else, that thou will
back return? Come home again, and be thy first sweet self, kind, loving;
and if not a Prince, I Will make thee one; and rather would I wish thou were not
one, but with that title throw thy fault away, and be a lover, just and
excellent; thou may be so, for where does lodge more ability of good, of
valor, virtue, and all else, but constancy, which I will pardon: come unto me, I
forget that ever I was left, that thou were false, unkind, and will remember
only our first joys, think all this other time was absence, or a dream,
which happiness likely contrary to what appears. O let this be so, my dear,
and (only dear) I do forgive thee: I inuit thee, come accept my state, a
gift laid at thy fee^, my self thy vassal, these are worthy thanks, and these
I will perform. Leave those enticing beauties, and great wits, that snare-like
catch, and hold for mere advantage to them, and their ends; ticing thee by
fine Brades of vowed locks, and plaited hair, a dainty show; nor did use
with me, my hair unworthy of the honor to be worn by thee: thou think I
know not this; yes, and do grieve for it, yet will be silent to thee. I am a
woman free, and freely offer, I not beg, but give, and ask but love for
principality, and rule of me: many I know do seek thee, and thy gentle
disposition (apt to be deceived, as I was when I loved) will be abused.
Beware, cast those dear eyes that won my freedom on my faith and zeal, and
then discover what a difference there is betwixt fervent love, whose ends are
love; and such, where only use and gain attends desire. But if thou will
continue thus, be yet still safe, let their loves to thee, be as firm as
mine; let dangers fly from thee, safety be near, and all ill shun thee,
blessings prosper with thee, and be thou blessed with them.

Then turned she fighingly within her bed; al night she thus did pass those
hours, with such distracted passions: and so full her mind was stored with
memory of him, as she did call all actions into mind, and as new done, did
lively make presentment to her eyes, and so of all past happiness she knew.
Then mixed she them with her new discontents, and so comparing them, make her
poor self the stage, where joy and sorrow acted diverse parts, her heart the
sad scene where the story lay; often did she call him false, then love
enraged, made her recall that, and complain of spite, concluding still, I
cannot yet but love, though thus forsaken, and forelorne I live.

Amphilanthus gone, he fell into discourse with the young Venetian, who related
unto him what he had heard of the counterfeit Prince, then did he proceed, how
he understood, he had taken his way by sea into Greece, and thence for Asia,
and there no question (said he) the dainty Pamphilia will be; the kingdom
he will first visit, and good welcome surely (said Amphilanthus) he will find there.

Thus they rid on, the King contemplating his Mistrisse, beholding her as
present, as if by; and the Venetian plotting how to gain the loving Emelina to
his wife, but that was difficulter to be gaind, then their arrival without
more adventures into Italy; so as being thither come, the King was met with
many, who were going, some to seek, and some from seeking him, were returned.

At last he came to Naples, where he found his father sick, and past recovery,
yet so much comforted to see his son, as life in the last power did express
it both with face and smile: but that as joyful news crossed by the next
unlucky messenger, is as a greater cross, then if at first time known: so did
his death more heavily encounter the good hope his son did then receive.

He dead, the Lords and Commons all with one consent (and that consent
accompanied with gladness in their good) received Amphilanthus for their King.
A marvelous brave funeral was then prepared, within which time the Princes
near and far, as fast as notice came, sent their Ambassadors to condole and
congratulate his happy beginning. The funeral once passed, straight followed
the Coronation, where the Ambassadors did assist of Morea, France, great
Brittany, Bohemia, Romania, and the sweet, and delicate Pamphilia; all being
done, the Ambassadors took their leaves, the King presenting them with
presents rich, and fit for him to give, and them to take: then the next
business was, to settle all his estate in good or quiet government, to which
end he did appoint the Prince his brother to be Regent, and settled such a grave
and honest Counecll, as he was secure (though absent) of his Kingdoms good.

Then went he with some forces he had raised, which were in number twenty
thousand Foot, and five thousand Horse to the place appointed, to ship them
for Epirus, directing them the time of putting forth, which way he resolved,
the rest would pass into Albania: the Princes of Florence, Milan, Ferrara,
Naples, Modina, Apulia, and many more officers of this Field in this brave army
went: but he trusting the army with these commanders, himself accompanied
only with the Prince of Venice, landed in Morea, from thence being able easily
to meet his men, and time enough, for any service. Being landed, he heard
nothing but Drums, and Trumpets, and such warlike music, which well pleased
his ears; much have he made, till he came to the Court, where he found great
sadness for an unhappy accident befalne Selarinus, which was this, going (as he
thought safe enough because disguised) into Epirus, the proud Queen of that
Country, who had denied passage for the Army, got notice of him, and that
notice gave dainger of his life; for her Mother being Daughter to one of the
Kings, or Lords of Albania, treachery, and falsehood, having divided it into
five parts, he and the other Towns, had made a combination, never to suffer
either to be harmed, but contrariwise to harm any should molest the other, and
to seek all means to ruin the two brothers, whose fame had, though with
honor, vnluckely come to their ears, virtue in them, having brought the worlds
companion, malice, with her.

This was not only agreed of among this wicked confederacy, but also taught as
a necessary lesson to their Children; this Daughter, having married her self
to the like vow, else a maid, and fair, but proud, insolent, and as those
creatures, are commonly ignorant enough. She first to give occasion of offense,
denied passage for the Armies, having so much foolish pride about her, as she
was blinded from knowledge, that th^se forces could pass with her loss of her
Realm, if they pleased; but she, who saw but as through a prospectiue glass,
brought all things nearer or farther, as she pleased to turn the ends to her
sight: so she drew danger to her, and put assurance with judgment, and goodness
from her, laying wait through all her Country for either of those Knights, or
any other who belonged to the united kings, that by chance, or hope of
disguises, surely might offer to pass that way. It was Selarinus his mishape,
first, and only at that time to adventure, and having rid two days journey
without let, or any kind of hazard, the third day, he unfortunately happened into
a house belonging to a Keeper, and standing in a great Forest: this Keeper,
had in his youth been an Esquire to an Epirian Knight, slain at Mantinia, at
a great just there held, after whose death he returned, and putting himself
unto the Queen, he gained the keeping of this Forest: this man fell into
discourse, being crafty, and so fit for so ill an employment, as he was used
in; by discourse he gained knowledge, that this was one, belonging either in
place, or affection to the Morean Court; then having enough to work upon, as
if he had eaten much poison, he must break, so brake he into the open way of
destroying Selarinus; for sending his boy to the Court, which was then but ten
miles off, by the next morning he had forty Knights to secure him, and conduct
the Prince, trecherously made a prisoner, to the Queen, who mistrusting no
Treason under green clothes, nor falsehood, where so fair language and welcome
dwelt, at night being weary, unarmed himself, and went to bed, where he
slept, till he was awaked with the pain, which hard cords cast about his
arms brought him, he did after confess he heard some noise, but thought it
had only been his Squire putting up his Armor, or making it ready, and fit
against the morning; but when he saw how he was deceived, and heard his poor
servant cry also out against them, he only with Princely patience said this;
suffer imprisonment with me, poor boy, said he, as well as thou have enjoyed
freedom, and content, witnessing that Fidelius can serve Infortunius in all
estates faithfully. By that the youth knew his Lord, would not be known by
other name then Infortunius, wherefore he resolved to dye, rather then betray
him. Till morning he was thus held, then delivered to to the Knights, who
straight carried him to their Queen; she hating all that had but seen Morea,
or any of those Countries belonging to them, she called enemies, went into her
Hall, and with all magnificent state sat to behold, and so to scorn the
unfortunate Knight, who was brought in chaind; the Queen sitting with a settled
resolution, to manifest hate, scorn and contempt, but seeing his sweetness,
and louelynesse, his tender youth, his modest countenance, tryumphing as it
were over his misery: with noble patience, only showing stoutnesse in bold
suffering, and giving way to Fortune, as subject in that tyranny, yet inwardly
his estate molested him, and shame to see those brave arms fetterd, and bound,
brought some blood into his face, which though showed upon such occasion, yet
it provoked an other conclusion, for he being naturally some what pale, this
made his beauty appear more delicate, as if of purpose to purchase his
liberty; thus was he forced to be beholding to that womanish part, to restore
his manly power to liberty, that working for him, which his worth held least
worthy in him, for the Queen (though most ambitiously, raised in conceit of
her self) now found there was a greater Prince, and a higher authority, which
might, and would command. She gazed on him, she blamed the small respect their
rudnesse had showed to a Knight, to bring him like a theife, chained, she
caused his bands to be taken off, and strictly corrected them, (who expected
thanks) telling them the disarming had been an honor, but their taking him
naked was a shame unto them, and to all brave spirits. Then called she the
Prince to her, desiring to know his name, and Country, kindly smiling on him,
holding him by the hand, the softness, and fairness, of which she grieved
should handle a sword, or be used in fights, fitter to be held by her
like-louing self; withal she assured him, his imprisonment should be no other
then content, if he would but yield to her desires. He answered, his name was
Infortunius, nephew to the Lord of Serigo, who was killed at the King of
Morea's Court, in his presence and many more, having thither brought a fair
Lady, whose love he was to winn by fight, but he was slain by Selarinus,
younger brother to Steriamus, for whom the great preparations were now made to
winn Albania. Are you of their party said she? Truly Madam said he, I wish
good to all just causes, otherwise, I being but one, am little able to asist
any, therefore dare I not venture to say I am of any side, but I did intend to
see the wars. If you did but intend that, you may said she still continue that
purpose, nor will I hinder you, yet I must enjoin you to some things for my
sake. He answered her, his life was in her hands to command. Not but to save,
and cherish it, replied she: therefore go with this Gentleman, who shall
direct you, and convey you to a chamber fit for you; then did one of her
chief officers conduct him to a marvelous rich room, which she had appointed
him to carry him unto, where he had all things necessary, and brave, save his
arms, then did he leave him there, and his own Squire to attend him, with
many more, whose respects, and officiousness was such, as moved trouble, and
proved such liberty, a true imprisonment, yet at night he had freedom, for by
the Queen's appointment they were not to lie in his Chamber, but in an other
room, where for his safety, and no way to trouble him, they might conveniently
remain. Supper was serud unto him, with all seruicable duty, infinite rich,
and sumptuous fare, glorious plate, and nothing wanting, that so proud a woman
could to satisfy that humor, think of; to gloryfie her self, and obleige
him. He fed, and after supper went to bed, the doors were shut, and he laid
down to rest, but what quiet could he enjoy? fearing all these fair
beginnings would turn to his greater harm, for no end could he see, but
dishonor to him, as himself, and certain danger, as Infortunius abuse; and
what was most as Philistella's servant, shame, and just reproach if he
falsified her trust, or his affection. Tormented thus, he did remain til
toward midnight, when a door opened at his beds head, out of which came six
Ladies, each carrying two white wax candles, which they set down upon a
cupbord, placed of purpose before the bed; then they returned, when the Queen,
as rich and glorious as Juno, came in, her mantle was Carnation sattine
embroder'd with gold, and round pearl, fastened with a fair Ruby; her
wastcoate of the most curious work could be made with needle, her petty coat
suitable to her mantle, her head dressed with a dressing framed of the same
work with her wastcoate, through which, her hair was delicately drawn in
many places; daintely she was apparrel'd, able to win any, but such a spirit
as Selarinus: for never did curious carelessness better adorn creature, then
it did this Queen, who with care sought to be neglectiue in her apparel; To
the bed side she came, and sitting down upon it, so as the light might serve
to show her beauty, she thus spoke.

Your name, and coming into my power, so nearely agreeing, cannon give you
other hope, then to follow them, who have before run into this danger of
breaking my commands, which are not without death to be satisfied, especially,
if you, like those wilful men, will not obey me: yet this favor you have to
lead you to happiness, that I never honored any before with thus much kindness,
which in an other (if not so great a Queen) might be called love. But I, that
scorn subjection, cannot allow such a power, only confess my liking you, has
made me pity you, and pity, brought me to offer you an unusual honor, for
till this time, did never any thought wherein ill might lurk inhabit, nor ever
was I moved to thus much show of immodesty; yet flatter not your self with
thought, of over much gain, since my attendants witness my truth, and such
boldness, as durst not be matched with loosenes. But indeed, I must say, I did
like you, when I saw you first, and so well, as I then resolved to be courteous
to you, that has made me willing to speak with you, and to be truly
resolved of you; the night time I chose by reason my spirit having hitherto
ever commanded, and not in the least, yielded to any authority, I should now be
ashamed to give occasion of the contrary conceit, either by my countenance, or
fashon, which I doubted would be so much more altered, as my desires to faor
you, might purchase me; yet hope not more then your duty, and respect to me,
may lawfully challeng, least you fall into as great a hazard, as a Lark does,
who to shun the Hobby lies down, till the nett be laid over her, and so is
caught by her own folly, or base yielding. But if you yield to me, it shall
be noble, if you refuse death: honor will not permit me to demand ought but
noble things, honor likewise ties you to obedience, you a Knight, I a Queen,
able to crown you with the title of a King, as it may be with the honor of
my love; fear not, nobleness dares adventure any thing that is noble. I come
not to you with threatening Arms or weapons to endanger you, only with love
armed fully, and so I would conquer. What needs Arms (replied the distressed
Prince), where such unmatched power reigns? weapons where beauty dwells: or
can refusal live, where such perfections authorize yielding? Command me great
Queen, I am your servant, your prisoner; what use of words when the heart
submits? or speech, when I am in your ^oyall hands a Vassal at command? She
was pleased, and well liked this an^were, her pride and power satisfied, yet
out of pride ordering her actions, so as calling her maids, she went away,
assuring her self, that his love must be ^nswerable to her ambitious coveting
it, and servile to her will: but her maids ^omming to her, they brought a
marvelous lovely banquet of several sorts of ^ruites, both preserues, and
other as that time afforded, and the delicatest ^ines Greece did know. Then
took she him by the hand, with a countenance of majesty and love mixed,
neither too high in state, nor with show of sub^isse affection. She was no
sooner gone, but Selarinus shut the door, grieved ^o the heart, that he should
be so tempted to iniure Philistella, whose love was ^o engraven by truth in his
breast, as he vowed to die, rather then consent to any greater kindness, then
that night he had yielded unto. The rest of which ^ime he spent in thinking of
his love, and weeping out compassion on his woes, that were remediles; yet such
were his tears, as they made prints in ^is soul, for every one shed seemed
like a drop thrown on fire, that makes (...) black, but quenches it not: so
did those spots of falsehood (as he tearmd them) disgrace, not disanull his
vowed faith. Dear Star (said he), which ^nely gives me light, how may
thou darken thy self from favoring me? and how justly may I condemned demand
no pardon? My dearer life, had ^hou heard my words, or seen my manner,
might not thou too justly cen^ure me? I am unworthy of thy smallest grace,
and unable to excuse my er^or; yet this consider, I must get liberty to serve
thee, and how but by deceit? ^f each one may use deceit, it will be surely
permitted, if not allowed, to enjoy their loves; then for that purpose bear
with me, but let me deceive her, to ^ee true to thee, and to be with thee.
Pardon then this ill, and give leave to use Art to be more plain with thee; my
bodies liberty lies in her to grant, my heart^s in thine to kill or save, sweet
now be like thy like, gentle, and sweet, and be assurd, I will not live to be
untrue unto thy loved self. Then turned he ^n his bed, sighed, and wept, and so
continued till the day appeared, then rose, and dressed himself, his Page, and
the attendants first appointed by the Queen waiting upon him. When he was
ready, he walked about the room, at last he ^ooked out at the window, not to
see, but to be unseen to lament, breathing his private sighs into the air;
the chief of his attendants, thinking he had ^tood admiring those sweet fine
delights, told him, if it pleased him, he might go into that Garden, for such
leave he had. He willing to have any sign of freedom, quickly gave consent,
so little a place as a Garden being like fresh water, comfortable to stenched
fish: so this to a pri^oner.

Down they went, the walks were extreme high, and no way to be climbed,
gave them certain assurance of his safety, wherefore they left him. When he
was alone, he threw himself upon the ground, beat his breast, and still cried
out; O me wretched of all men, why am I thus punished for ambitions choice?
Love, thou did choose, or say I did, why Love, I do the more deserve thy
favor, when choice and love are honored in the choice. Where he had cast
himself, it was under a fair shade of Oranges, a purling brook whispering
close by him, which still he ^hought, said; Philistella see, see; I see my
wrong, cried he, but better consider my true love to thee; avoid temptations
poor distressed Selarinus, and proud lascivious Queen, forbear thy shame, and
mine. Then came she in, for from her cabinet, she might behold that garden
plainly, and perceiving him, she said within her self, my love is there, my
love commands, my love inuites, the time allows, and all things with my
longings now agree. As she was thus resolud, she left her Cabinet, and hasted
toward the Garden, to win, assure, and so enjoy him, whom she found enjoying
as much grief, as absence, and imprisonment could bring a loyal lover. He saw
her not, till she threw her self down by him, he started up, and with
humility demanded pardon for his boldness, in not rising to her Majesty,
which fault might be excused, by not perceiving her, till she down was laid.

Your fault is greater (said she) in rising, since that witnesses your desire
of leaving me, no ill proceeding from kind love and stay. He then kneeled down,
and so they did discourse, she making love, he coldly answering it, yet
covering still his backwardness with fear, and his respect unto her greatness
not daring to have an aspiring thought to rise so high, till almost she was
forced plainly to woo, which hardly he did understand, wherefore ignorance,
and duty beg his pardon: which so liked her, being assured to hold him, till
she had what she desired, and then might dispose of him according to her mind
and will. She bravely wooed, he humbly entertained, and thus that day passed.

Night again was come, when he afraid of such a loving visitant, lay musing,
and beseeching love it self to keep her from him. This his prayer was heard,
for she came not, but in the morning sent to speak with him, who was
conducted to her chamber by many Gentlemen through brave Galleries, and stately
rooms. When he was arrived at the place where she was to give audience.

I sent (said she) for you about a business, which may bring good to you, and
which is more, liberty if you perform it. My life Madam (said he) is in your
power, command, I will obey. There is (said she) ^ proud vain man, so
ouer-esteeming himself, as he dares think himself a match for me, a
subject, and what more, is my Vassale: this arrogant creature has often sued
to me, now threatens (if I refuse) the winning me by force, how he will
bring the Army that is going to Albania through my Country, which I have
gain^said, and sent refusa^l to the ad^mired brothers, who^e part he boasts
that he will take, and by their help (...) shall be made his wife. These,
though only threatenings, yet are much unfit for me to suffer; wherefore I
desire that you will undertake the quarrel for me, and defend my state
against the insolent subject. Selarinus wa^ loath to fight with one, who he
found by her relation was his friend; yet liberty, the comfort of ones soul,
went beyond all other considerations, so as he undertook the business. She
comforted with that, answered the letter he had sent, which was this.

TErenius of the Castle, to Olixia, Queen of Epirus, sends this world, that if
my affection be thus still slighted, and forgetfulness rule, where fondness
once remaind, I will no longer endure wronged, but by force obtain^ right. I
have loved you, proud Queen, these many years; you loved me likewise, or
told me so, expressions some I had, as my chamber and yours can witness. I
honor you too much yet to defame you, if fair means may prevail, happiness
may succeed to both, if not, expect sudden shame, and cruel force.

OLixia of Epirus, to Terenius. Presumptius Vassal, abu^e not my cha^titie
with thy soul reports, which cannot be hid under the few touches you give me,
o^ your chamber and mine, where God can witness, no thought of my sid^ tended,
or looked toward ill; the only offense I have committed, being the good usage
I gave to so a base a deserving creature. Your threatenings I fear not, and
scorn your v^worthy self so much, as I almost hate my self for answering
you, which honor you never should receive, were it not to let you know, that I
will have men ready, to bring you, and your rebellious company captive to me,
as soon as I heat you dare moo^e in arms: or if your pride will let you
defend your honor alone without an army, I have a Knight here shall defend me
from you, and make you confess you were insolent, but by his might, and my
justice, again my vassal.


This letter was sent, whereupon Terenius conceived such disdain, as giving
order for his raised men to attend Steriamus (what ever became of him) he went
to the Court, where he found the Queen like her letter toward him, telling
him, that were it not for the honor she bore to Arms, he should have bolts,
and a hard prison, rather then liberty of combat, for his presumption; but
coming upon her summons to defend his unjust cause, he should have leisure to
fight. Then was Selarinus preparing for the business, his armor being brought
him, likewise his good sword, whereof he was infinitely glad: b^t coming down
into the lists, as soon as he saw Terenius, he knew him, having seen him do
very bravely in Morea, in a Just there held for the arrival of Amphilanthus,
and his friends after the enchantment. This, and besides the love he heard he
bore his brother, and himself, troubled him to fight against him, yet no
remedy there was as he could yet perceive, which afflicted him, ^ill Terenius
saying, that he for many years had not fought with any, b^t he spoke some few
words with him, upon a vow made after encountering his own father; he desired
therefore to see the Knights face, and to say something to him. The Judges gave
leave, so coming together, Terenius knew him, then wept he for grief, and
unkindness, that he should forget him, and fight for her, who hated him, and
true worth, especially against his friend and servant. Selarinus told him, he
was there a prisoner, not known, but would feign get liberty, for if he were
once d^scouerd, nothing could save him from death. Be ^uld by me (said he) in
the fight I will make show to run away, follow me close, and I will lead you
out of the lists, being content to be held a coward for your service and good,
what then shall hinder us, till we come to my men, which are but six leagues
hence, armd, and armd for you. He consented to it, but then speaking aloud;
Villain, said he, do thou think to make me betray my Queen, and Mistress?
With that the Queen smild, thinking her self secure, and assured of her
servant. They met with the sound of trumpets, but both missed breaking their
staves, though so fairly they ran, as had it not been meant to be in earnest,
they might have given content with great show of fury: they threw away their
Spears, and drew their swords, fighting most eagerly to show, but the blows
falling fl^t-long, did no harm, like clouds threatening storms, but in pity
breaks up again to clearenes. Then did Terenius retire a little, and
Selarinus press much on him, and so much, as being near ouer-comming (as the
people judged, and all laughing at Terenius) he turned his back to the Princes,
and fled, who with all speed, and loud cries willed him to stay; but he heard
not, the other still followed. The company attended the return of the Victor,
till he staying longer then the custom was, a certain place being limited for
one that fought on such terms, to return with honor from slavery, some ran
after him, to let him know the fashion, and the acknowledgement of the
victory, with entreaty to come, and receive thanks from the Queen, for the
honor he had done her: but all this needed not, for they that went, might see
the two late seeming enemies appeased, their swords put up, and riding
together, as fast as their horses could carry them toward Terenius Castle. The
messengers returned with this ill news, the Queen stormd, tore her hair for
mere anger and vexation, men were presenty raised to raze his Castle to the
ground, and sums of money offered by proclamation to any could bring in
Terenius, or Infortunius his head. Thus, was Selarinus deliuerd, by the virtue
of worth, from inticement, and by love from danger to be tempted, to wrong a
constanter lover of him. Philistella, how art thou engaged to praise Terenius,
and his fortune, to bring freedom to thy love? but how much more to honor
that chaste affection in him? which could not be wrought to wrong thee, nor to
give consent so much as to it. Thus he free, the Queen in her rage and fury
sent for the Youth his Squire, who she threatened to execute, if he did not
vow, and perform it, to deliver Infortunius into her hands again, dead or
alive; or if she had his head, it would be sufficient satisfaction. He swore
he would, and so took his leave, following his Lord, till he gaind the
Castle, where he remaind some days to consult upon the affairs of Albania,
where it was concluded, that the army should pass that way, and join with
them, and if they had resistance to begin there. Thus they concluded, by which
time infinite numbers of men came unto them. The Squire to perform his
promise, got a head made to the life for Selarinus, which so justly resembled
him, as none at first could think it was other then his fleshly, pale,
death-like was the complexion, the eyes settled, the mouth a little opener then
usually, the hair of the same color, but so much wanting the clear
brightness, as a dead man's hair will want of a living man's, the blood as
trickling down out of the veins, some spinning, and so naturally was all done
to the life, as cunning could not perform more. When this was ready, and the
army marching to the confines of that kingdom, to welcome the Moreans, the
Squire took this head, and wept to see it, being so like, though he knew the
contrary, and saw his Lord by. Into a coffer of Ciprus, of purpose made, he
shut it up, with some lines written by his Lords directions; then gave he
charge for the delivering of it, to a young desperate fellow, who cared not for
his life, or had so much wit, as to know how to save himself, withal, some
money he gave him, gold blinding all sight of danger from him. This mad man
went to the Court, when he arrived there, and demanded for the Queen, answer
was made, she could not be seen. She must be seen by me, cried he, and so
tell her, for I have brought her a token she will joy to see. This being told
her, she rosse, and sending for the man to her, he deliuerd the present, naild
and sealed as it was given him. She demanded what it was? The head you desird,
said he, sent by the Squire; then claimd he his reward, she granted it, and
having discharged him, he departed, glad of his good fortunes, and so hasted
away for ^eare of recall. She straight called the Court together, and being al
assembled in the hal, she came in, two of her greatest Lords carrying the
coffer before her; then made she a solemn speech, telling them what wrong ^he
had sustaind by the cosenage of the stranger, and yet that none of them would
(to right her) take so much pains, as a mere stranger had done for her,
faithfully discharging his word unto her, for here (said she) is Infortunius
his head, the head of that traitor, who betrayed my love and content. Then was
the coffer opened, one of the Ladies (who attended her that night of her loving
visit) holding a basin of pure gold to receive it in, framd of purpose to hold
it for ever, she determining to keep it, as a testimony of falsehood, to be
showed to all men, and the cruel example for it. All at the first sight
imagined it his, but handling it, found the deceit, which she did not so soon
as others (yet durst none be the discouerers, but her own eyes which proceeded
in cosening her) for she was busily reading some lines, which were laid upon
the face of him, which were to this purpose.

To witness faith is eternal, I perform this part, in part of your commands,
the head of Infortunius I send you, which may be called so, since he is dead, and
that brave body lives to the honor of the earth, and Albania's goood, famous
Selarinus. The first name as counterfeit, so is this head, the other true, will
let you and Epirus know, the wrong he suffered by imprisonment.

How now (cried she) nothing but treason and deceit? Infortunius turned to be
Selarinus, and my shame for rashly loving discouerd to mine enemy? then ^lung
she away into her chamber, vowed to make no show of revenge, since said she,
nothing can come to me but misfortune. Vexed and angry she remaind, fed on her
own curstnes and scorn, hated food, as being too mean a help for her to
receive after such an affront; in sum, she pind with mere ill nature and
disposition of body and mind, so as she fell into a fever, and wilfully would
not be ruld, who she said, was borne to rule, and so brought her self to the
last act: then beholding deaths vglines, she would not die, nor could she
hansomly, for she would have lived, if possibly; but 'twas too late; and so too
soon by her own desire, and yet unwillingly she ended her days, just as the
armies met; but Selarinus had in the mean time assured Philistella of his
safety, which was so welcome to her, as the other was contrary to Olixia. Now
had Epirus anciently belonged to the Kings of Albania, being annexed unto that
Crown by a match, which the good and honest Terenius alleging, and none
standing for the Crown, nor heir being left of those, who unjustly held it,
the Crown was by Steriamus consent, and the whole Army, set upon Selarinus
his head. Then went they to the chief City, and after marched toward Albania,
all wishing for Amphilanthus, and none being able to tell what was become of
him; most coniecturing, that he was gone to release Selarinus, but then he
must have been heard of in those parts; others that he was called away upon
some adventures, because the night before, a strange Squire delivered him a
letter, since which time he was not heard off.

Steriamus was loath to begin without him, the rest advised not to stay,
being assured he would make all have after them. Then met they with the
Italian Army, and so joined; then likewise came the Romanian Army, led by the
King himself, who told Parselius, that Antissias was gone to visit Pamphilia,
whereof he was very glad, since his sister might enjoy so good company. With
him came Dolorindus, for after he had beheld her picture which Polarchos
brought, he was never free from her affection, he being the yellow Knight,
that had the ill fortune to receive the worst in the Court of Morea; yet was
that service a means to bring him to Antissias favor, for he taking that
occasion to let her know his affection, she entertained him, being assured of
her first loves loss, yet vowed she to see him once again, or write to him,
before she would wedde Dolorindus. Besides, she had engaged him by oath, to
perform one service she would employ him in when sh^e demanded it, and that
done she would marry him. He contented himself with that hope, which proved
as empty as it self; without gain, so far as that prom^se did engage her,
yet he after enjoyed her.

All the famous Princes met, the question was, who should command in chief
over all. Parselius had the Moreans, Amphilanthus was to command his Italians,
which without comparison were the brauest, and best ordered, Rosindy the
Macedonians, Leandrus the Achaians, Selarinus the Eperians, Antissius his
Romanians, Dolo^^^dus those he brought from his Kingdom of Negropont, whereof
he now reigned King. Other troops there were, whereof the chief of their own
Country commanded, but over all, as it was then resolved, Steriamus, for whom
all these were joined, should have the power, and name of General. He was
loath to take it upon him, so many Kings there, and himself having no army of
his own. All his arguments were turned to his honor, and gain of that place,
which he with much respect, and care accepted. Imagine how brave a Prince he
now is, and what joy this would be to his Urania, to see her Steriamus command
five Kings, besides innumerable Princes, Dukes, Earls, and valiant Knights.
But the first and brauest King her brother, was not yet come, nor could there
be just guess where he was; yet on the Army marched, news being brought them
that Plamergus had taken a strong passage, to defend, and hinder their passing
further into the Country.

This Plamergus was one that enjoyed a part, and that part of Albania, having
in times past been a servant to the l^st true King: but ingratitude, of all
faults the greatest, being such as it reaches to a sin, he was infected,
and possessed with. The brave Steriamus called his magnanimious Council
together, where it was resolved that he should be fought withal, and that
Antissius with the Romanians should have the honor of the Vantguard, and so it
was agreed upon. The next days march brought them within sight of their enemy,
but together they could not com, a great River parting them, and he having
thrown down the bridge in spite. On the other side the Country was hilly,
(if not more properly to say mountaynous) and not one, but many straight ways,
so as judgment was here required to equal valor and direct it. Their first
resolution therefore was altered, and as there were five ways, so they divided
themselves into five deuisions. The Italians Steriamus took, joining
Dolorindus with him, and so determined to take the middle way. The King of
Macedon was to take the first way on the right hand, and Parselius on the left.
Antissius to go on that side with Parselius; and Selarinus with Leandrus, were
put to the last on the side with Rosindy. Much did Leandrus grudge at this,
that his rival (as he deemed him) should be matched with him, wherefore he
began to repine at it, till the rest told him, that he was joined with him, only
out of respect that he was one of those two, for whom all this quarrel was.
Hardly this could prevail with him; wherefore Steriamus discerning it, changed
the order, taking the forces which Selarinus had there of Epirus into his
division, and sent those of Negropont to Leandrus: but because Dolorindus was a
King, his Leiue^enant went with them, and himself stayed with the General.

The next care was how to pass the River, which might have been the first,
considering that was like the bar, let down at Barryers to stay the combat,
and such a bar was this, as all their judgments were called to council, how
to avoid the danger, and pass the water, on the other side whereof was the
desired fruit. At last Steriamus gave this advice, that they should cut down
part of a wood, along the side of which they had ma^ched, and lay those trees
close together, then fa^ten them with chains one to another, and so lastly all
together, and pass over some first in the night, who might both help to
fasten the trees on that side, and if they were discovered, hold some play with
them till the army passed. This was well liked, and his advice applauded, so
was the practice instantly put in hand, and by morning (many making quick
work) the Army passed. At break of day the Enemy discovered them, which
amazed them, for so many they went in front as they covered the trees and so
thick they came, as if they had walked on the water; the enemy apprehended
fear, which was as terrible to them, as if a wife went out confident to meet
her husband, to joy with him, and incounters him slain: so were they wedded to
assurance of safety, and unmarried by this stratageme.

But Plamergus gathered his spirits together, and so drew his men into the
heart of the straights, where he could compel them to fight, and most wrong
our men, not being able to go above three in front; besides his hor^e he
placed on the side of the hills, most aduantagiously for them, but ha^mefull to
us, had not fortune favored, and made Antissius the instrument; for he
something forwarder then the rest, having got his Army over, and put them in
battle, marched on, and coming to the entry of the passage, perceived the
place filled with the pla^ks, and posts of the bridge, which they had enuiously
pulled down, those he took up, and as a certain foretelling of their
success, made use of the benefit, commanding his soldiers to carry them to the
River, and laying them upon the tree-made-bridge, made a reasonable way for the
horse to go on; now was there noe want, horse, and foot being placed. Then
were the horse likewise divided, and the hills given them, so as on hills, and
in the valleys, the enemy was answered with forces. But now it is time to
leave these affairs to Mars, and let his Mistress have her part awhile who
always, and at all times has some share in businesses, Pamphiliia in her own
Country contented, because as she thought safe in the happiness of her love,
though tormented with the burden of absence, one day walked into a Park she
had adioyning^ to her Court; when she was within it, she commanded her
servants to attend her return, her self taking a path which brought her into
a delicate thick wood, a book she had with her, wherein she read a while, the
subject was Love, and the story she then was reading, the affection of a Lady
to a brave Gentleman, who equally loved, but being a man, it was necessary for
him to exceed a woman in all things, so much as inconstancy was found fit for
him to excel her in, he left her for a new. Poor love said the Queen, how
does all stories, and every writer use thee at their pleasure, apparrelling
thee according to their various fancies? can thou suffer thy self to be thus
put in clothes, ^ay rags instead of virtuous habits? punish such Traitors,
and cherrish me thy loyal subject who will not so much as keep thy injuries
near me; then threw she away the book, and walked up and down, her hand on
her heart, to feel if there were but the motion left in the place of that she
had so freely given, which she found, and as great, and brave an one in the
stead of it, her servants dwelling there, which more then hers she valued, and
dearly held in her best dearest breast, which still sent sweetest thoughts to
her imagination, ever seeing his love, and here is as perfectly, and curiously
twined, as Iuye, which grown into the wall it ascends, cannot but by breaking,
and so killing that part, be seuer'd: not like the small corn that yields
forth many staulks, and many ears of wheat out of one, making a glorious bunch
of diverse parts: this affection was but one in truth, and being as come from
one root, or gain of matchless worth, brought forth but one flower, whose
delicacy, and goodness was in it self. Many flowers shows as fair as a Rose
to the eye, but none so sweet: so were many loves as brave in show, but none
so sweetly chaste, and therefore rich in worth; this inhabited, and was
incorporat in them both, who as one, and as it were with one soul both did
breath and live.

Sweet wood said she bear record with me, never knew I but his love. Love,
answered the wood being graced with an Echo. Soft said she, shall I turn
blabb? no Echo, excuse me, my love and choice more precious, and more dear,
then thy proud youth must not be named by any but my self, none being able to
name him else, as none so just, nor yet has any ear (except his own) heard
me confess who gouerns me; thy vast, and hollow self shall not be first,
where fondest hopes must rest of secrecy in thee, who to each noise does yield
an equal grace. As none but we do truly love, so none but our own hearts
shall know we love. Then went she a little further, and on a stub, which was
between two trees, she sat down, letting the one serve as the back of a
chayer to rest upon: the other to hold her dainty feet against; Her arms she
folded on her breast, as embracing his brave heart, or rather wrapping it
within her arms. Dear heart said ^hee, when shall I live again, beholding his
loved eyes? can I in possibility deserve ought? he not here, am I alive? no, my
life is with him, a poor weak shadow of my self remains; but I am other
where. Poor people, how are you deceived, that think your Queen is here?
alas it is nothing so, she is far off, it may be in the field performing
famous acts, it may be on the Sea passing to fetch more fame, or indeed
speaking with thy self, as I discourse to him, his time employed in thoughts of
love like mine, and so he thinking of me, brings us both together in absence,
present when distance is, and absent often in greatest companies. But do thou
think on me dear love? thy heart does tell me so, and I believe it as it is
thine and mine. Sweet hope to see him flatter me, but pay for such an error,
and make good the joy I take in thee; bless my poor eyes with seeing his,
that make mine lowest slaves to his commands, yet greatest Princes since so
prised by him; Let these hands once be blessed again by touching his, and make
this Kingdom rich by bringing him, the truth of riches to her; let me enjoy
those loving looks, which in me force content beyond it self, smile in those
eyes, which sparkle in desire, to make me see, they strive to express, what
flames the heart does hold of love to me. Do I not answer them? let me then
straight be blind, deprived of that joy of sight, and happiness of joy, for
that alone in him, and from him can I have.

And thou most kind and welcome memory, add to my soul delight, the sweet
remembrance of our perfect loves, bring to the passionate eyes of my imaginary
sight those pleasures we have had, those best spent hours, when we each other
held in sweet discourse: what wanted then but length of dear enjoying, when
his dear breath deliuerd unto me, the only blessing I on earth did covet,
telling me he was mine, and bid me be assured when he was other, he must not be
living, death must only alter him from me, and me from him, for other can I
not, or will I be. Sweet memory it is true, he vowed this, nay took me in his
arms, and swear, that he embracing me, had all the earthly riches this world
could afford him; so thought I by him^ thus still you see one thought, one love
still gouerns him and me, are we not most properly one? and one love between
us, make us truly one?

Further she had proceeded and run on, to infiniteness of content in these
imaginations, but from them she must be taken, to be honored with the presence
of her brauest Cousin, for then came one of her servants (who knew, that breach
of obedience in such a kind would be pardoned) telling her, that the King of
Naples was come to visit her. She quickly rose, nor did she chide the man, who
surely had been sorely shent for troubling her, had any other cause brought
him, and so disturbd her amorous thoughts. As she returned, Amphilanthus met
her, their eyes saluted first, then followed all the other ceremonies that do
befit so sit a welcome.

To the Palace they came, where nothing wanted to manifest the certain
government that he held there, he being the Prince she most respected; but
whom she loved, she never would to any other once confess. With delicate
discourse they passed the time, she never satisfied with hearing of his acts,
yet never vngrieued when she heard of danger, although past, still curious of
his good. Some days they thus remained, when news was brought, Antissia was
arrived. My Lord (said she), are you not happy now, that in this place you
shall behold your love? The assurance of that happiness (said he) did bring me
hither from that royal Camp. She was no whit displeased with this reply; the
next morning Antissia came to the Court; the King holding the Queen by the
hand, met her at the gate. Antissia was so much joyed, as she was but that
cosening thing it self, ravished with false delight; she triumphed in the
blaze, while the true fire burnt more solidly, and in another place. She was
conducted to the Palace, Pamphilia with her left arm embracing her, holding
Amphilanthus with the right hand. Into the Hall they came, where choice of
music entertaind them: Antissia never more pleased, Pamphilia seldom so well
contented, and Amphilanthus e^ioying too his wish. Antissia gazed on him, and
happy was when she could catch one look cast on her, out of which she found
millions of sweet conceits, coniecturing, that by that look he told her, she
had still the whole command of him, as once she had. Dissembling enemy to
perfect rest, vain hope thou art, why did thou cosen her, and after thy
deludings, let her fall from that height to cruellest despair? As the variety
was great, and pleasing of the music, so were their thoughts every one moving
in their own Sphere. Antissia as her joy was most excessive, as more unruly
to be gouernd, by how much her strength of judgment was inferior to the other
two, she could least keep silence, but began discourse, and still continued
so, as she contented them exceedingly, who while she talked, discoursed with
eyes and hearts, her ouer-esteemd good fortune, taking most of her judging
senses from her. Amphilanthus with grateful respect carried himself to her
liking sufficiently, whose belief was such of him, as she took all to her
self, and so took the injuries for courresies.

Some days this continued, but now the time for the Kings departure drew
near, the day before which he spoke to Pamphilia for some Verses of hers,
which he had heard of. She granted them, and going into her Cabinet to fetch
them, he would needs accompany her; she that was the discreetest fashiond
woman, would not deny so small a favor. When they were there, she took a
deske, wherein her papers lay, and kissing them, delivered all she had saved
from the fire, being in her own hand unto him, yet blushing told him, she was
ashamed, so much of her folly should present her self unto his eyes.

He told her, that for any other, they might speak for their excellencies, yet
in comparison of her excelling virtues, they were but shadows to set the
others forth withal, and yet the best he had seen made by woman: but one
thing (said he) I must find fault with, that you counterfeit loving so well, as
if you were a lover, and as we are, yet you are free; pity it is you suffer
not, that can faigne so well. She smild, and blushed, and softly said (fearing
that he or her self should hear her say so much) Alas my Lord, you are
deceived in this for I do love. He caught her in his arms, she chid him not,
nor did so much as frown, which showed she was betrayed.

In the same box also he saw a little tablet lie, which, his unlooked for
discourse had so surpressed her, as she had forgot to lay aside. He took it
vp^ and looking in it, found her picture curiously drawn by the best hand of
that time; her hair was down, some part curld, some more plain, as naturally
it hung, of great length it seemd to be, some of it coming up again, she
held in her right hand, which also she held upon her heart, a wastcoate she
had of needle work, wrought with those flowers she loved best. He beheld it a
good space, at last shutting it up, told her, he must have that to carry with
him to the field. She said, it was made for her sister. She may have others
said he, let me have this. You may command, my Lord, said she. This done, they
came forth again, and so went to ^ind Antissia, who was gone into the Park,
they followed her, and ouertooke her in the Wood, where they sat down, every
one discoursing of poor Love, made poor by such perpetual using his name.
Amphilanthus began, but so sparingly he spoke, as one would do, who would
rather clear, then condemn a friend. Pamphilia followed, and much in the same
kind. Antissia was the last, and spoke enough for them both, b^ginning her
story thus.

I was till sixteen years of age so troubled, or busied with continual
misfortunes, as I was ingrafted into them; I saw no face that me thought
brought not new, or rather continuance of perplexity, how was liberty then
prized by me? envy almost creeping into me against such, as felt freedom; for
none was so slavish as I deemd my self; betrayed, sold, stolen, almost
dishonored, these adverse fortunes I ran, but from the last you rescued me,
and saved your servant Antissia, to live fit to be commanded by you; yet gave
you not so great a blessing alone, but mixed it, or suffered mixture in it: for
no sooner was I safe, but I was as with one breath pardoned, and condemned
again subject, and in a far stricter subjection: you brave King deliuerd me
from the hands of Villans, into the power of Love; whither imagine you, is the
greater bondage, the latter the nobler, but without question as full of
vexation.

But to leave these things, love possessed me, love tirannized, and does
command me; many of those passions I felt in Morea, and whereof you most
excellent Queen have been witness, but none so terrible, as absence has
since wrought in me, Romania being to me like the prison, appointed to contain
me, and my sorrows. One day among many other, I went to the sea side through a
Walk, which was private and delicate, leading from the Court at Constantinople
to the sea; there I used to walk, and pass much time upon the sands,
beholding ships that came in, and boats that came ashoare, and many times fine
passengers in them, with whom I would discourse as an indifferent woman, not
acknowledging my greatness, which brought me to the knowledge of many pretty
adventures, but one especially, which happened in this kind,

A ship coming into the Harbor, but being of too great burden to come ashoare,
in the long boat the passengers came, and landed on the sands; I beheld them,
among whom was one, whose face promised an excellent wit and spirit, but that
beauty she had had, was diminished, so much only left, as to show she had been
beautiful. Her fashion was brave, and confident; her countenance sweet, and
grave; her speech mild and discreet; the company with her were some twenty that
accompanied her, the number of servants answerable to their qualities. Thus
they came on toward us; I sent to know who they were, and of what Country (for
their habits said, they were not Greeks). The reply was they were of Great
Brittany, and that the chief Lady was a widow, and sister to the Ambassador
that lay Leigeir there for the King of that Country. I had heard much fame of
the Ladies of that Kingdom for all excellencies which made me the more desire
to be ac^quainted with her, yet for that time let it pass, till a fitter
opportunity, which was soon offered me, for within few days she desired to
be permitted to kiss my hands. I willingly granted it, longing to hear some
things of Brittany; when she came, I protest, she behaved her self so
excellently finely, as me thought, I envied that Country where such good
fashion was. After this, she desirous of the honor to be with me often, and I
embracing her desire, loving her conversation, we grew so near in affection,
as we were friends, the nearest degree that may be. Many times we walked
together, and down the same walk where first we met with our eyes; one day
we fell into discourse of the same subject we now are in, freely speaking as
we might, who so well knew each other, she related the story of her love thus.

I was (said she) sought of many, and beloved (as they said) by them, I was
apt enough to believe them, having none of the worst opinions of my self, yet
not so good an one as aspired to pride; and well enough I was pleased to see
their pains, and without pity to be pleased with them: but then love saw with
just eyes of judgment that I deserved punishment for so much guilty neglect,
wherefore in fury he gave me that cruel wound with a poisoned dart, which yet
is uncured in my heart; for being free, and bold in my freedom, I gloried like
a Mary gold in the Sun. but long this continued not, my end succeeding, like
the cloasing of that flower with the Suns setting. What shall I say, brave
Princess? I loved, and yet continue it, all the passions which they felt for
me, I grew to commiserat, and compare with mine; free I was in discourse with
my rejected suitors, but only because I desired to hear of it, which so much
ruled me, like a Soldier that joys in the trumpet which summons him to death.
Those hours I had alone, how spent I them? if otherwise then in dear thoughts
of love, I had deserved to have been forsaken. Sometimes I studied on my
present joys, then gloried in my absent: triumphed to think how I was sought,
how by himself invited, nay implored to pity him, I must confess not won,
as most of us by words, or dainty fashion, rich clothes, curiosity, in
curiousnes, these won me not; but a noble mind, a free disposition, a brave,
and manly countenance, excellent discourse, wit beyond compare, all these joined
with a sweet, and yet Courtier-like dainty Courtshippe, but a respective love
and neglectiue affection conquered me. He showed enough to make me see he would
rather ask then deny, yet did not, scorning refusal as well he might; free
gift was what he wished, and welcomed, daintynes had lost him, for none cold
win or hold him, that came not half way at the least to meet his love, I
came much more, and more I loved, I still was brought more to confirm his by
my obedience. I may boldly, and truly confess, that what with his liking, and
my observing, I lived as happy in his love as ever any did, and blessed with
blessings, as if with fasts, and prayers obtained.

This happiness set those poor wits I have to work, and so to set in some
brave manner forth my true-felt bliss, among the chiefest ways I found
expression in verse, a fine and principal one, that I followed, for he loved
verse, and any thing that worthy was or good, or goodness loved him so much as
she dwelt in him, and as from ancient Oracles the people took direction, so
gouernd he the rest by his example or precept, and from the continual flowing
of his virtues was the Country enriched, as Egypt by the flowing of Nile gains
plenty to her fields: But I a poor weak creature, like the Ant, that though
she know how to provide, yet does it so, as all discern her craft: so I,
although I sought the means to keep this treasure, and my self from
steruing, yet so foolishly I behaved my self, as indaingerd my loss, and
won all envy to me; I considered not, I might have kept, and saved, but I
would make provision before such, as might be certain of my riches. This undid
me, carrying a burden, which not weight^er then I might well bear, was too
much seen, an empty trunk is more troblesome then a bag of gold; so did my
empty wit lead me to the trouble of discovery, and changing the golden weight
of joy to the leaden, and heavy despair; but that came many years after my
happiness, for seven years I was blessed, but then, O me, pardon me great
Princess cried she, I must not proceed, for never shall these lips that spoke
his love, that kissed his love, discover what befell me. Speak then said I, of
these sweet days you knew, and touch not on his fault; mine dear Lady cried
she, it of force must be, he could not err, I did, he was and is true worth,
I folly, ill desert; he braveness mixed with sweetness, I ignorance, and
weakness; he wisdoms self, I follyes Mistress. Why what offense gave you said
I, speak of your own? I cannot name that, but it must (replid she) bring the
other on, for how can I say I saw the clowd, but I must feel the shower,
therefore O pardon me, I will not blame him, I alone did ill, and suffer
still, yet thus far I will satisfy you. Having searched with crurious, and
impartial judgment, what I did, and how I had offended him, I found I was to
busy, and did take a course to give offense, when most I hoped to keep, I
grew to doubt him to, if justly, yet I did amiss, and rather should have
suffered then disliked. I thought by often letting him behold the pain I did
endure for being blessd, took away all the blessing, wearying him, when that I
hoped should have indeered him: but that though sometimes is away, yet not
always to be practiced, too much business, and too many excuses, made me past
excuse. I thought, or feared, or foolishly mistrusted, he had got an other
love; I under other men's reports as I did faigne did speak my own mistrust,
whether he found it, or being not so hot in flames of young affection, (grown
now old to me) as once he was, gave not such satisfaction, as I hoped to have,
but coldly bid me be assured, he loved me still, and seemed to blame me,
said I slact my love, and told me I was not so fond.

This I did falsely take like a false fire, and did work on that, so as one
night he coming to my Chamber as he used, after a little talk he was to
go, and at his going stooped and kissed, me. I did answer that so foolishly,
(for modestly I cannot call it, since it was a favor I esteemed, and nere
refused to take:) he apprehended it for scorn, and started back, but from
that time, unfortunate I, lived but little happier then you see me now.
Pamphilia smild to hear her come to that; the King was forced to cover his
conceits, and wish her to proceed. She took her self, pray God said she, I
do not play the Britain Lady now. They both then did entreat to hear the
rest; that soon you may said she, for this was all, only in a finer manner,
and with greater passion she did then conclude.

They found she was not pleased, therefore they sought some other way to
please, and rising walked into an other wood, and so unto a pond, which they
did fish, and pass the time with all, while poor Antissia thought herself
each fish, and Amphilanthus still the net that caught her, in all shapes, or
fashions she could be framed in.

Then came his going, all the night before, his whole discourse, and manner was
to purchase still more love, greedy, as covetous of such gain; he wished not
any thing that he enjoyed not, all was as he wished. At supper poor Antissias
eyes were never off from him, she did lament his going, her heart wept; he
looked as glad to see she loved him still, (for what man lives, that glories
not in multitudes of women's loves?) so he, though now neither fond nor loving
to her, yet seemed to like her love, if only that his might be the more prized,
won from so brave and passionate a Lady; and thus she often caught his eyes,
which on what condition soever, yet being on her, were esteemed, and gave
content, as debtors do with fair words, to procure their Creditors to st^y a
longer time,: so did she, but prolonging the time in her torments to her
greater loss. Amphilanthus being to depart, offered to take his leave, but
Pamphillia refused it, telling him she would be ready the next morning before
his going, which she was, and with Antissia, brought him a mile or more from
the Court into a Forest, then took leave, he making all have to the Camp.

The Ladies to avoid idleness, the Queen especially to prevent frivolous
discourse, called for her hounds, and went to hunt a Stagg; it was a sport she
loved well, and now the better, presenting it self so fitly to her service.
The Rainger told her of a great Dear, which he saw in a wood as he came to
her; she followed him, and so vncoupling the Dogs, put them into the wood. The
Stagge came forth with as much scorn, and contempt in his face, and fashion as
a Prince, who should rather be attended then pursued, hating that such poor
things as hounds should meddle with him, as if he were rather to be attended
then hunted. But quickly he was made to acknowledge that he was Pamphilias
subject, and by yielding his life as a sacrifice for his presumption, showed if
he had not been a beast, he had sooner acknowledged it, both in duty to her,
and for his honor, which he could receive but by letting her delicate hand, cut
open his breast, there to see it written. But during the hunting he was yet
more unhappy, for the most excellent Queen after one round, scarce made him
happy with pursuing him, taking into a Grove, faigning an excuse, and there
lighting, passed most part of the time in calling her thoughts into strict
examination; which when she had done, she found them so true, as she could see
none to accuse the least of them, or the busiest, for being a thoughts time
seuer'd from her love.

When she found them so just, Dear companions in my solitarynes, said she,
furnish me with your excellency in constancy, and I will serve you with
thankful loyalty. Then took she a knife, and in the rine of an Oak insculped
a sypher, which contained the letters, or rather the Anagram of his name she
most and only loved. By that time the Stagge came by, grieved at her
unkindness, that she would not honor his death with her presence; which she
by his pitiful countenance perceiving, took her horse again, and came in to
his death. As she returned, Antissia told her she was much altered, for once
she knew her so fond of that sport, as she loved it more then any delight: she
desired her to have a more noble opinion of her, then to think she was subject
to change, which was a thing she so in finitly hated, as she would abhor her
own soul, when it left loving what it once had loved.

That was not hunting sure said Antissia, for you love not that so well as
first you did. Enter not into my love sweet Princess said she. I will never
offend you answered the other; so home they went each going to her Chamber,
Antissia in as great a rage as when she mistrusted Rosindy to be Amphilanthus,
but more discreetly she now carried it, Pamphilia to her lodgings where she
remained till they were called to dinner; the Queen with the greatest respect
in the world entertaning Antissia, whose heart now filled with envy, received
it with no more delight, then one would do a bitter potion, yet was her
fashion sweetened with discretion: for the time she stayed which was not long,
taking her way to Romania: whither being arrived, she called her sad but froward
thoughts together, thanking her Fate, that brought her to see Amphilanthus, but
cursing her Desteny that gave her assurance of his change. Oh my heart said
she, how can thou bear these torments, and yet hold, continually furnished
with new discontents? accursed eyes that made thee subject to so excellent
falsehood, and so pleasing deceit. Pamphilia, I confess that thou art most
excellent, and meriting all, but yet not comparable (were thy self only
virtue) to make up the loss, that Amphilanthus has lost, and broken in his
faith, and worth, Fair, and dear gaining eyes, why smile you still in your
disguising love, betrayers of my liberty? why join you hope together with your
selves not to be seen, much less beheld with freedom? only like the fauning
Crocadile to win, and kill? dear lips that seemed to open but to let the
hearts desirs to come unto mine ears, seuerd you deceitfully your selves to
ruin me? that only excellent, and loved breath, could it be thought it should
prove poison to my choycest bliss? far-well delights, the truest flatterers,
and thou despair infold me, I am thine. Then writ she certain verses, they
were these.

I Who do feel the highest part of grief,
shall I be left without relief?
I who for you, do cruel torments bear,
will you alas leave me in fear?
Know comfort never could more welcome be,
then in this needful time to me,
One drop of comfort will be higher prized
then seas of joys, if once despiz'd,
Turn not the tortures which for you I try
upon my heart, to make me dye.
Have I offended? 'twas at your desire,
when by your vows you felt loves fire.
What I did err in, was to please your will
can you get, and the offspring kill?
The greatest fault, which I committed have
is you did ask, I freely gave.
Kindly relent, let causlesse curstnes fly,
give but one sigh, I blessed shall dye.
But O you cannot, I have much displeased
striving to gain, I loss have seaz'd.
My state I see, and you your ends have gained
I Am lost since you have me obtained.
And since I cannot please your first desire
I Will blow, and nourish scorners fire
As Salimanders in the fire do live:
so shall those flames my being give.
And though against your will, I live and move,
forsaken creatures live and love
Do you proceed, and you may well confess
you wronged my care, while I care less.
With great spleen against him, and affection to her self for her braveness,
she read these lines over again; but then whether judgment of seeing them but
poor ones, or humble love telling her she had committed treason to that
throne, moved her, I cannot justly tell, but some thing there was that so much
molested her as she leaped from her stool, ran to the fire, threw in the
paper, cried out, pardon me great Queen of love I am guilty. I plead no other;
mercy take on me thy poorest vassal, I love still, I must love still, and him,
and only him, although I be forsaken. The sweet Rivers she visited and on
their banks continually did lie, and weep, and chid her eyes because they wept
no faster, seeing them but drop unto the stream. My heart said she yields more
plentiful and dear shed tears then you. Alas Antissia how do I pity thee?
how do I still lament thy hap, as if a stranger? for I am not she, but mere
disdain, yet then she stayed, soft fury, cried she, I must not permit your
harshnesse to creep into my heart; no I shall never hate, I loved too much,
and do to alter now. Then took she forth a picture he had given her
willingly when she did ask it; that she wept on, kissed it, wiped it, wept,
and wiped, and kissed again. Alas that thou alone said she the shadow should
be true, when the true substance is so false; cold Cristall, how well does thy
coldness suit his love to me, which once was hot, now colder then thy self;
but were it chaste like thee I yet were blessed, for it is not loss alone but
change that martyrs me. The picture she then shut, and put it where it was,
which was upon her heart, she there continually did cherish it, and that still
comfort her, when by it she did see he had loved her, and though now quite
bereaved of happiness in that, yet did that clear her from the folly, idle love
without reward had else condemned her in. Often would she read the papers she
had gaind from him in his own hand, and of his making, though not all to her,
yet being in that time she did not fear, she took them so, and so was
satisfied. Read them she did even many millions of times, then lay them up
again, and (as her greatest prized and only blessing left) kept them still
near, apt many times to flatter her poor self with hope he had not clean
left her, who did so kindly let her keep those things, contrary to his manner
with others, as he reported to her self, for from them he took at v^rying all
they had of his^ as from Lucenia, who he told, she could not esteem of his
shadow, so little prizing the substance; but the^ as many bold assurances told
her, she was deceived. The Meads she much frequented, walking in their plains,
especially she did affect one, more then all the rest, a Willow tree growing
in the midst, and plentifully spreading branches, witnessing forsakennes round
about, so as she might be held in that sad shade from the heat of Sun-hope-ioy.
Miserable Antissia (waild she her self), in how few years have thou made a
shift to see the whole world of misfortune? yet of the worst, and the only
worst, is disdain and loss in love. Then carved she in the trunk of that
tree, till she had imbroiderd it all over with characters of her sorrow: in the
crown of this tree she made a seat big enough for her self to sit in^ the
arms, and branches incompassing her, as if she were the hat to wear the
Crown of Willow, or they were but the flowers of it, and her self the
forsaken compass, out of which so large and flourishing a crown of despised
love proceeded, so as take it either way, she was either crowned, or did crown
that wretched estate of loss, a pitiful honor, and griefefull goue^^ment: but
this was the reward for her affection, and which most poor loving women
purchase. Melysinda was yet more fortunate, for within some two months after
Amphilanthus his departure, her husband by a bruise he received at the Iusts
held there, had an Impostume bred within him, which was not discouerd, till
help was past, so as he died, leaving her a brave and fair Widow. Good
nature made her sorry for him, but she took it not so heavily (though tears
she shed) as to give cause to the world to lament the marring of so excellent
beauty for the loss of a husband, who if he could have been by sorrow brought
again, there had been reason for it, but otherwise she must have run into the
danger of being thought unreasonable too much to sorrow, and as if dislike,
what heavenly powers willd: wherefore obediently to them, and discreetly to the
world, she grieved sufficiently for him, keeping as strict a course of
mourning, as the most curious could not think it in any place or manner too
little.

She saw no man in two months after his death, the first were the Counsel, in
which time they had gouernd; then came she forth to them into a private room,
where they only were, her face couerd below the eyes with a Scarf thrown
carelessely over (not a Veil, for so much finenesse had been much, and too
little mourning) another piece of mourning came, and covered her chinne to her
lips, and a little past: her Gown made with a wide long sle^ue to the
ground, was of black Cloth, a Mantle over it of the same, to which was a
Trai^ie, carried by two Ladies of her Bedchamber likewise in cloth, but their
faces bare; the whole Court hung with Cloth; no Room that mourned not, as if
each had a particular loss, no people of the Court, or that came to the Court,
but were in that doleful livery, Ambassadors from all kingdoms to condole.

And thus she lived, till Ollorandus came unto her six months after, which
hindered his going to the army in Albania, love ever having, or taking the
liberty to command, scorning then but to be obayd, which the fair cosins,
Urania, and Philistella made experience of, to whom the news of Selarinus his
imprisonment came, and presently after the happy delivery, and Coronation of
him to mitigate the ^ury of her sorrow, which was such as tormented Urania to
see, whose heart was perplexed especially for parting and absence, often
bursting into passions like these. Can you tell me, you poorest eyes where my
loyal heart remains? have you not perceived it in his loving, and still
answering looks; from which, and in which truest beauty smiles? did it not
there descry the joy it self, striving to let you know the place it happily
obtained; playing, and making baby pastimes as it lay closed in that shrine of
glory? but much more triumphed it, when you might know his breast embraced it,
surprising the runaway, as by sweet force made his, while greatest hearts for
pity cries, and wailes neglected^ nay, so dies. If thus you then be placed, no
marvel sure you leave my poor afflicted body desolate, where nothing but
distemper, or loves pains inhabit; yet cast your looks this way, see my
petition for your safe return, hear me make vows that none but you can
bring content, your absence mastring me, your presence bringing bliss; yet
absent, your loved Image, and your dearest self remains infigured in my
chastest breast, and myrrour-like presents you to my sight, yet coldly, like a
Statue made of stone: or as the picture, while loves sweetest race runs to the
warmth of sight. If then remembrance, or the perfect memory of you be but a
picture, whereof I am made the lively case, faithfully keeping that rich
portraict, still from change or thought that relic to displace, nourishing,
and with it living, as oil, and lamps do simpathise in life: each look
alluring wishings to our joys. Restore that life-peece now and make me
blessed, crown my souls longing with thy grant, and come to see m^e triumph
in thy dearest sight, my only self, my only love. These passions was she in
when Philistella found her in the walks, speaking unto her self, and walking
with so fast, and unused a fashion, differing from her grave, and discreet
manner, as if love had laid a wager with discretion, yet he would make her at
that time (to fulfill his will) forget her self and wholly serve him; he won
that, and judgment made her ashamed, when Philistella came unto her, and told
her she wondered to see her so. Love, love fair Philistella (cried she) can
do this, and more, but happy you can keep your pains more secret, and more
close; that is not, not ever yet has been my hap (said she) for no eye has
beheld me, but together saw my love.

No sweetest Cousin said Urania, wrong not your great wit with taxing it
unjustly, have I not seen how prettily and with an excellent disdain you did
refuse his humble suite in love? his eyes have been even ready to burst out in
tears, when you have smiled, and changed your first discourse, as if of
purpose to deny his plaints. Alas, would I think happy Philistella, how art
thou above thy sex most fortunate? poor me, had I but one such, or the like
content, it were for me eternal happiness while she rejects love; did
Steriamus love like as his brother does, were I not of all women blessed? but
his affections, are in an other seat enthronised; these thoughts, (while you
like Summer florish'd) nipp'd my days, yet now I praise my desteny nothing
except sad absence grieueth me, while you, whether not grieved, or not so
loving I cannot well judge, feel not, or show not that you have the sense,
which absence brings us lovers. Sweetest Urania answered she, my soul can tell
you I dissemble not, nor did my manner, or my face cover yet my flames, when I
did hear my dear and only Lord imprisoned was, did I not faint, and loose my
strength, as hating that, since not sufficient to release my love? Was not the
Court distempred, and my Parents grieved, fearing my coming danger, when the
harm was nearer to me, then they could imagine? Wept I not, when the mastring
grief was passed? sighed I not still, and cried against proud, and cursed
treacheries? how did I hide the boiling heat of sorrow I containd? Wau'd I not
with each passion up and down, as boughs blown with the wind, some times
resolved to die, other times to live for a revenge, and still distracted? more
I sought to turn, more fast tied still, my heart like lead in fire, melting
with the heat of fury call you this discreet, and wise behavior? could love
no better be dissembled, or the sparks no finelier raked up in discretion?
But now I see you smile at me, while you indeed do better, and more curiously,
like cunning workmen best beguile our eyes. Its well sweet, daintiest
Princess, you may flout your friends. But said Urania, when did you see me one
whole day, and not sigh, or weep, or steal away to do them? I here vow unto
Love, which vow I will not break, that never creature felt more pain, nor ever
any more discouerd it; I do confess it as a weakness in me, but I cannot
help it; if I did see him one poor instant space alone, me thought it was my
duty to go to him, if he spoke to another, was I not, nor am I not think I as
worthy, or as fit to talk with, as her self. Almost suspicion oft-times grew
in me, but absolute fondness never was away, I do not think in hours, while
I have stood at audiences, which the King has given, I have been one minute
altogether joined with my eyes held from him, I have looked off it is true, but
like a Dear at feed, start up for fear, but straight again returned unto the
food, which from his eyes I took, yet I am secret, and discreet in love. Never
credit me dear Cousin, if I speak not truth, I found not that you did requite
his love, till your own lips to honor me delivered it. I shall the better
credit this, and love my fashion so much more (said Philistella), since you
commend me, but in troth I spoke as guiltiness forced me: but now we are so
free, let me be bold to ask this question; In this heat of love, did not your
former passion never come glancing into your eyes? could you behold Parselius
with freedom, and Steriamus with affection?

I will, said Urania (as to my confessor) tell you the truth; it was me
thought a wonderful odd change, and passing different affection I did feel,
when I did alter: for though I were freed from my first love, and had a power
to choose again, yet was I not so amply cured from memory, but that I did
resemble one newly come out of a vision, distracted, scarce able to tell,
whether it were a fixion, or the truth; yet I resolved, and so by force of
heavenly providence lost the first, and live in second choice, and this dear
sovereign good received I from Leucadia.

But when I had thus far proceeded, then did fear accompany my change, lest
Steriamus should despise my second love, not having given him my first as the
best, which in troth in some sort he had obtaind, for I liked him, before I
loved the other. Often did I study, how I might compass my blessing, when for my
most, and future happiness, he was as much engaged unto me, and so was
Melisseas Prophecy performed, for we from death in show rose unto a new love;
he feared likewise, that I would scorn his gift, and after many vehement and
affectionate suings, he presented me with a little book of Verses, among
which were many to excuse himself, and to commend a second love, I remember
one Sonnet, being this.

BLame me not dearest, though grieved for your sake,
Love mild to you, on me triumphing sits,
Sifting the choysest ashes of my wits,
Burnt like a Phaenix, change but such could shake.
And a new heat, given by your eyes did make
Embers dead cold, call Spirits from the pits
Of dark despair, to favor new felt fits,
And as from death to this new choice to wake.
Love thus crowns you with power, scorn not the flames,
Though not the first, yet which as purely ries
As the best light, which sets unto our eyes,
And then again ascends free from all blames.
Pureness is not alone in one fixed place,
Who dies to live, finds change a happy grace.
These I did learn, for these did fit me best, and from that time contented
was to let him see, I entertaind his suit, which was his kingdom won in
sweet delight; then was that as an Empire to my gain, when I first saw him
rudely, yet innocently clad, like a Lamb in wool for color and softness to
the eye, or touch his face blushing like modesty, after his arm had showed
manly power, his delicacie asking pity, but his commanding absolutenes,
disdaining it as much, as the bright Moon, if we should say we were sorry in
a frostie night, to see her face in the water, least she might be cold: rather
might I say, I feared the Sun would burn him, when he enamourd of his dainty
skin, did but incloase him with his power from other ha^me, touching him not
to hurt, but to make difference twixt his favors, shind, and shielded him,
while others he did burn, kind in embracements, and soft in his force. The
language he did speak, was mild, so were his looks, love shaddowing all
himself within his eyes, or in his face, keeping his greatest Court, because
most gaining.

Ah sweet Philistella, had you seen the vn-relatable exquisiteness of hi^
youth, none could have blamed me, but even chid me, for not instantly yielding
my passions wholly to his will; but proud ambition, and gay flatteri^ made me
differ, and love your brother: thus if I changd, it was from sweet Steriamus to
Parselius, for his excellency won me first; so this can be no^ change, but
as a book laid by, new looked on, is more, and with greate^ judgment
understood. You need not (said Philistella) strive to make me se^ your love,
and cause thereof to Steriamus, since (I truly speak) I think none worthyer
to be truly loved (except my Lord) then I imagine him, nor can I much, or any
way defend my brother, who, (had you still continued loving,) I should have
blamed he proving so unjust, yet this only salve and good excuse is left,
Desteny did, and ever still must rule. Now for me dear Urania, all I aim is
love, if I discourse, what is it of but love? if I walk out, what travel in
but love? if I sit still, what muse I on but love? if I discoursed be withal,
what answer I but love? so as being made, maintaind by love, and in love
shaped, and squared only to his rule, what need excuses but plain truth? and
say if I do speak from purpose, or extrauogantly fly from the matter we were
talking of, if cleave to other ^ubiect ^diuert the proferd speech, say this,
and only this, Love who is Lord of all brave royal minds, has like the
heavens beheld my lowly breast, and in it taken lodging, gracing it with
humbling his great Godhead, to embrace a true, and yielding heart, in
comparison of his supreme authority most mean, should I not thus without
excuse be freed, nay even respected when love is adored? As if he spoke from
me, so hear me now, love dwells in me, he has made me his host; then if I
only do remain (as sure I shall) wholly affection, and his humblest slave,
scorn me not, but still reckon me a servant nearest waiting on great Love.
Others like Painters better can set him forth in his colors; Kings we see have
pictures drawn to be eternised by, but it is them selves for which the picture
is drawn, not for the workemans skill: so favor me for Love, nor blame me
though an ill piece, it is the best though by an ill hand drawn; it is to the
life, others may smoother be, and fairer, none more like, nor just unto the
perfect true resemblance of pure love; and thus see you before your royal
self, the humblest vassal Cupid cherishes.

Urania in her soul commended the pretty confession, fair Philistella made,
admiring her sweetness of disposition, as much as before she wo^dred at the
beauty of her person, embracing her, my dear companion in true love said she,
now shall we with more ease, and freedom serve our Master; days must not
pass without our service done to him; nor shall, my dear Urania said the
other, let our most private thoughts be to each other plain and open,
seacrysie to all others held, and only love, and we, know what we think, thus
they did live and love, and love, and live. Nerana still remaining in Cicely,
now grown as humble, as before proud, and ashamed as before scorning, living
in a Cave alone, and feeding on herbs, roots, and milk of Goats which fed on
those rocks: playing the milke-mayd better then before the Princess, extremity
forcing her, contented with patience, and patiently contented, nothing
troubling her but her love, which was, and is enough to vex the greatest, and
best gouernd Spirits, hers being none of those the exactliest ruld. To bring
her from her misery, (Love having sufficiently tyrannised) the King Perissus
came thither, who in love to his friends, the brave, and matchles Princes,
meant to assist them; iournying toward them, he happned to that place, where
he beheld the sportfull exercise of Fortune, a Princess without a Country,
clothes, or servants, a Lady that must tell her self to be one, else not to
be mistrusted, a miserable woman, and the more so because she felt it,
experience, and sufferance making her sencible of misfortune. She sought to
shun the King at first, but afterward considering her good might come from
him, her hurt likely if kept close to abide with her, she came unto him, and
with much humility made her aproach, who beheld her with a gracious, and
pitying eye, seeing in her more then ordenary behavior, and a countenance
that might carry greatness with it, and had it in it, though shadowed under
poverty. Perissus took her to him, and demanding some things of her, she
answered with these like words.

Said she, this estate may justly merit contempt, and scorn from you, or so
great a Prince as you appear to be. I am a creature living by ill chance able
to relate my misery, which if you please to give an ear unto I shall tell you.
I am called Neraena Princess of Stalamina, made in mine own Country, and in
the most perfect time of my rule, subject to a stranger, both to me, and I
fear good nature so far scorning me, as it brought me to this estate you see
me in; for after with cursed, and scornful words, he had refusd my love, and
loving petition for pity, left me, and with his friends as courteous, as he
was proud, and kind, as he cruel, the renowned Princes Amphilanthus and
Ollorandus took ship. I could not but pursue in folly, as in love, and so
took a troublesome, and tedious journey; to Morea I came of purpose to see her
who was my vndoer, for he loved Pamphilia, and she, would I behold, desiring
or so gayning my end, no more contented with hearing it, but like Procris,
would seek it, and gain it. There I had entertainment, like my search, smiles
in scorn, and loss in hope; for in that Princess I confess worth to conquer
hearts, and thus I yield his choice most perfect. But this could not hold me
from accusing my want of judgment in going thither to behold her, as if I would
wash mine eyes the cleerer to see my ill.

What folly said I, led me to this Rock of mischeife, to be cast down, and
ruined on the ground of scorn? yet did not this hinder my journey, for me
thought I was more deserving him, then the rare Princess, so partial are we
to our selves, that I could almost have believed she seemed excellent, because
mine eyes, like a flattring glass showed her so, yet again thought I, why
should I commend her, who undoes my bliss? My spleen then swelled against
her, and I was sick with anger, that I as abruptly left Morea, as Steriamus
did Stalamina; thence I was by the brave Amphilanthus directed to Saint Maura,
but a storm brought me hither, where with a greater tempest I was molested,
falling into the hands of a mad^man, who dressed me as you see, and with
diversity of frantic fits, perplexed me. I have since lived in these places,
and seen Winter in cold despaires, and Summers heat in flourishing misery: nor
saw I any, of whom to demand favor these many months, first shuning all, till
now; wherefore from your hands I implore it, let not my outward means hinder
your noble mind from pity, but rather show it where most want claims it. I
confess contempt is likelyer to be my reward, whose pride was such, as that
punishment best fitteth me, but I am humbled, and my former fault looks more
odious to me, then thought of this fortune would have done, in my height of
greatness. The King had before heard of her, and took compassion of her,
carrying her to the Town, where that night she was to lie, in his own
Chariot which was led spare, she rid thither, where he clothed her according
to her dignity. But when she had her greatness again in good clothes put about
her, she began to grow to her wonted accustomed humors, like a garden, never
so delicate when well kept under, will without keeping grow ruinous: So
ouer-running-weedy pride, in an ambitious creature proves troblesome to
govern, and rude to look on. Fear to see her poorenes, held her from looking
in either the face of a fountain, or River, but now her eyes tells her, she is
her self, which is enough to make her remember, she was, and must be again
as she was directly.

Shall I said she, change from lownes to noblenes, and not come to my noble
spirit? then were I more unfortunate to have such an alteration, then if held
in rags; the mind is above all but it self, and so must mine be. O^ght I not
to glory in my good, that I am redeemed from a private life? nay must I not
love my self, who I see Heaven has such care of, as not to let me be obleiged
to other then one of mine own rank for the favor, as esteeming none other
worthy to serve me? Steriamus, would thou did but see this, and thy
disdainefull Mistress behold my honor, it might work good upon you both, and
teach you, how to esteem of those, (or indeed her) who the highest powers
observe, and reverence. Alas, what a ^oole was I to be molested with my former
fortune; had I been able but to see what now I discern, I should have
rejoiced at it, since without question, it was done for my greater honor, and
of purpose to show me, how much the highest would express affection, nay
respect unto me. Mark but the whole carryage, did not all adore me? the
madman were his fits other then worshipping me, as Sheephardesse, Nymph, or
any thing? did he not humble himself most respectively unto me?

Then be thy self absolutely blessed Neraena, all creatures made to secure
thee, and of all kinds, command then, and show thou art worthy of such happy
authority; Soar like the Hobby, and scorn to stoop to so poor a prey as
Steriamus, who now looks before mine eyes, like a Dorr to a Faulcon; my mind
preserved for height, goes upward, none but the best shall have liberty to
join with me, none Master me. Ignorant Prince what glory did thou shun,
when thou did despise the most reverenced of women, the favorite of the
loving Gods, and Goddesses? Dull man to love any but Neraena, the most
loue-worthy of her sex, and her whom all may glory in for affecting, and that
judgment I discern in this King, who was even at first sight ravished with
beholding me; true love that only regards beauty, not apparel, and to that
end did love cloth me in rags to conquer a King. Poor Peris^us I pity
thee, that thy constancy must loose the strong power it had till now, and yield
to my victory, who cannot requite thee; yet feign would he cover his affection,
but t^s plainly seen, how does he steal looks on me? cast up his eyes, then
sigh? these tell me that his heart is my prisoner, and the contention is twixt
his difficulty to part from so long a fixed affection, and fear of my
refusal, which he must find, if he pursue in it. Alas, I feign would help
it if I could, but constancy (though a fruitless virtue) gouerns me.

With that the King came to her, whom she used after the same manner, as if he
had been in love (as she imagined) which was nothing so, but made him
conjecture that she had been with good feeding grown into her fury again,
and fulness had renewed her madness; he was sorry to see her so, that she
accounted passion, which was pity of her, he being the worthylest constant,
and who would not let one spot come to touch, or blemish that pureness which
remained in him: like the fixed Stars, shining with joy, and giving light of
purest content unto his excellent soul; but at last he found her false
imagination grow troublesome, to avoid which, he meant to be rid of her,
wherefore at the Port where he was to take Shipping, he appointed a Barque of
purpose for her, to carry her to her own Country, and some servants to attend
her, besides some of her own who came unto her, when her finding was noysed
abroad, and upon submission were received. When she saw her self thus
slighted, as she termed it, because the King he^ new servant as she called him,
did not attend her in his own person; she froun'd; He found she disliked it,
and therefore sought to excuse himself, the more he proceeded in that, the
greater grew her insolency, so as at the last she answered his complements,
with unmannerly replies, and in the end, flat reuilings.

He noble, and courteous, would not be seen to wrangle with her, nor suffer
her follies to offend him, wherefore he Shipped himself and his company,
commanding the Mariners to sail for Greece.

When she was with all her greatness thus left on the Shore with a train of
twenty, instead of a King, and five hundred Knights, which she flatterd her
self should have waighted on her, she stormed extremly within her self,
having such a tempest of rage, as it could not be told, whether pride, or scorn
blew highest in her fury; but time brought a little calm to her, so as cursing
Ceicili, Perissus, and all men, but such vassals as were to serve her, and
almost her self, for having need of such vassals, she shipped with resolution
to exercise her just anger upon her people, where she found a new business;
for being landed in Lemnos, and going to the City where she expected solemn
entertainment, bon-fires, and such hot triumphs for her welcome, contrariwise
she encounterd the cold face of neglect, and loss of her Country, being
possessed, and gouernd by a younger sister of hers, who she had so contemned in
times past, as she disdaind to let her appear before her presence, but held
her enclosed in a strong Tower, many times to molest her, making her prepare
her self to dye.

This had so temperd her, (who it may be had some sparks of the fire of pride
which flamed in Neraena) as she was as humble, and mild, as her sister excelld
in the opposite, and so had she won the hearts of the people, who after
Neraena was lost, quickly fetched out the other, and as soon acknowledged her
their Princess.

But now she is returned, what diversity of opinions were among them, some out
of honest dispositions, and good plain conscience would have their true Lady
restored; others for fear wished the same, but all joining together, and every
one having spoken, the chosen resolution was, she should no more govern;
pride could not gain obedience, nor scorn, command, but what most urged
against her, was the pollitique fear they apprehended of her revenge on them,
who had given them selves to an other Gouernesse in her absence, so as they
chose rather to commit a fault unpardonable, then to venture under her pardon,
as if one should burn all the furniture of a House, because one Room was
infected with the Plague.

Now Neraena, where is thy greatness, but in misery? where the so often named
title of Princess but in bondage? where all thy glory but in subjection? and
where thy subjection, but in thy brave Stalamina, and under thy despised
Sister? punishment justly allotted for such excessive ouer-weening: but how
she was imprisoned in the same place she had made her sisters abode, attended
on but by one Iaylor, fed neately, an^d ^oorely to keep down her fancy, told
still she was mad, and threatened ^o be used accordingly, if she raued,
accused of fury, and that made ^he cause to satisfy the people, who ignorant
enough, had sufficient ^ause to believe it, seeing her passions, which though
natural to her, yet ^ppeared to their capacities mere lunatic actions; how
these things pro^eeded and increased, after some time was expired, shall be
related.

The end of the second Book.
THE COUNTESS OF MOVNTGOMERIES URANIA. THE THIRD BOOK.
AMphilanthus being now to be spoken of, after he had left Pamphilia, past
along the sea, purposing to go to Morea, and so to Albania; but one in the
Ship advised him rather to take a nearer course, and undertook to be his
guide, so he resolved, knowing him to be of Macedon, and one who knew all those
parts perfectly well, besides, a servant to his Cousin, the King and Queen
thereof, gave credit and trust unto him, and so they sailed, directed by him:
yet Amphilanthus remembering the adventure in Cyprus, called to mind his
acquaintance and friend Polarchos, wherefore he would needs put into Rodes to
visit him, and take him along (if he could) with him. This was a happy thought
for that poor Prince, who all this while continued in the Iron Cage
weather-beaten, and almost starued by the cruelty and ingratitude, of his once
best, and only beloved. When the King landed, he demanded of one that he met,
where Polarchos was; he being of a good nature (though a Rodian) answered, Alas
Sir (said he) where he has been ever since his return from Greece, in an
Iron tower prisoner. The King admired at that, never having heard one touch of
it, so as desiring to be resolved, he particularly demanded the causes and
reasons; he as freely answered, so as the truth and manner being known, the
King altered his purpose of going like himself, and a Visitor, changing it to
go as a Knight of Ciprus, and one of purpose come (hearing of his
imprisonment) to release him upon any condition. Then changed he his Armor,
taking one of Azure color, his Plume Crimson, and one fall of Blew in it; the
furniture to his horse being of those colors, and his Device only a Cipher,
which was of all the letters of his Mistrisses name, delicately composed within
the compass of one, and so was called, the Knight of the Cipher. Being arrived
at the Court, and his coming made known to the Princess, she gave him
hearing, and after some words delivered with neglect enough, she told him, that
he should have the honor to encounter a Knight of her appointing, whom if he
could overcome Polarchos should be deliuerd him free out of prison; if not, he
should yield himself, if vanquished to her power, and that I rather believe
(said she) will happen, and that my Knight will make you as little, and of as
little account, as your Devise and name signifies. He made her answer, that
although a Cipher were nothing in it self, yet joined to the figures of her
worth, whose name was therein, it was made above the value of her self or
Country. She was mad to hear him so bold with her, yet having given license
before to his demand, she could not by the laws of that Country, do him any
affront: so as she was forced to content her self with hope of his overthrow,
and vow of the cruellest revenge, that might be inflicted on any (who had so
much offended a vain woman). The day come, which was the next that followed,
the night she had passed with so many frets, and distempers against the
stranger, as she thought him, who had been once so near of her acquaintance,
as she confessed only from him to have received her content, and happiness,
when he gaind her fathers liking to Polarchos, now her enemy, then her friend.
She came forth in all the magnificence that Country could afford to serve her
foolish pride with all; the Court as glorious, as if going to a wedding, not a
funeral, as that was likely to prove. Poor Polarchos was led forth in his
chains, and by them fastened to a Pillar, not having so much favor allowed
him, as to be permitted to sit or lie, to ease himself, grief only showed in
his face to be predominate. Amphilanthus beholding him; Alas brave Prince, said
he, must those excellent arms and hands be bound to her cruel ingratitude,
and inhumane unkindness? must thy worth be chained by her unworthiness? and
thy excelling self, a prisoner to her pride? Then hasted he the combat,
wherein he encountered a valiant and strong Gentleman, being one fit to defend
an ill cause, by reason that strength is most required, when weakness
governed by Justice will be strong enough; but his strength, though Justice had
been joined, would have faild against this King, who had so soon ended the
business, as it appeared rather a thought of a combat, then the executing of
one. The Princess in infinite fury flung from the window, commanding that the
strangers with their gain, quickly left her Country, least they obtained
Polarchos Cage. The King was offended with her arrogance, yet being slightly
attended to oppose a whole Country, went quickly thence, glad of his happy
adventure to have his friend with him, and in that manner redeemed by his hand
from such a bondage. On they pass toward Greece, determining to hold that
name, the Princess had been so bold with all, having had so great fortune with
it in the beginning, and so to go unknown toward the Army, where with some
pretty fine adventures, they arrived, one being this. Not far from Athos where
they landed by a delicate Woods side, they saw a Forest Nymph lie on the
ground, and hard by her a youth, who as he beheld her (with as much amorosnesse
as his young years could entertain, or love be pleased to enrich him with
all) sang this Song.

Love among the clouds did houer
Seeking where to spy a lover:
In the Court he none could find,
Towns too mean were in that kind,
At last as he was ripe to crying,
In Forest woods he found one lying
Underneath a tree fast sleeping,
Sprit of Love her body keeping,
Where the soul of Cupid lay
Though he higher then did stay,
When he himself in her discrying,
He hasted more then with his flying.
And his tender hand soft laying
On her breast his fires were playing,
Waked her with his baby game,
She who knew love was no shame
With his new sport; smild as delighted,
And homeward went by Cupid lighted.
See the shady Woods bestowing
That, which none can ask as owing
But in Courts where plenties flow,
Love does seldom pay, but owe,
Then still give me this Country pleasure,
Where sweet love chastely keeps his treasure.
She was fair, and he lovely, being apparreld in green made so neately, and
fit to him, as if he had been a Courtier, or one of those finer people had had
his clothes, might have been called curious; his legs straight, and of the
curiousest shape, were in white stockins, Garters he had none, his Hose being
fastened above his knee; under his Girdle stuck his Arrows, his Bow he held in
his left hand; in stead of a Scarf he had the line and collar, where with he
was to lead his hound baudrick-wise athwart his slender body, the Dog lay at
his feet, waiting on him, it appeared willingly he attended, for he needed no
bands to tie him to his service; his hair was thick, something long and curld,
the Sun had made it something yellower, then it naturally was, as if he would
have it nearer his own beams, so much he loved the Lad, and used to hold him
near, for he had kissed his cheeks too hard, leaving the remembrance of his
heat, which yet did well with him, manifesting the better his manner of life,
and the practice of hunting, wearing that liuerie. Such quickness he had in
his eyes, which were full, and black, as they looked like sparks of Diamonds
set in Iet; his lips red, his teeth white, and such an one, as might truly be
called a lovely youth. She every way meriting such an one, being as delicate,
as he hansom; she was partly in Green too, as her upper garment, white Buskins
she had, the short sleeves, which she woare upon her arms, and came in sight
from her shoulders were also white, and of a glistering stuff, a little ruff
she had about her neck, from which came stripps which were fastened to the edges
of her gown, cut down equally for length, and breadth to make it square; the
strips were of lace, so as the skin came stealinglie through, as if desirous,
but afraid to be seen, knowing that little joy would move desire to have
more, and so she might be wooed to show her neck more bare. She was as
curiously proportioned, as all the Artists could set down to make excellent.

Her hair was not so white or yellow as others, but of a dainty, and loue-like
brown, shining like gold, upon black, her eye brows thick, and of so brave a
compass, threatening, that the arrows which those bows would shoot, were not
to be resisted, but yielded to, as a Dear, shot to the heart, falls down, and
dies: so they must overthrow, and conquer; her eyes gray, and shi^ing like the
morning, in each of which a Venus Starr did rise, and dwell; her lips as
delicate, and redd, as if they were angry at him, and would have no other
satisfaction but by meeting, for she did love as much as he. So fine a couple
these were, as Love did glory in them, and they joy in him, happiness beyond all
others, loving, and blessedly being beloved again. When he had finished his
song, she smild upon him, asking him how he came to be acquainted so perfecty
with loves wants, or gains; My heart says he has so long served him, as that
tells me what my Master does, when he conquers, when he fails, as not being
able to subdue your breast, he cries for want of power, but martyrs me in
fierce revenge of his vnwinning force. Yield then dee^e Nymph, if but in pity,
and that pity will proceed to love. Love then did speak so lively in his
eyes, and made it self come forth of such dear lips, as she, (poor she)
could not, though armd with woman's greatest strength resist so good a charm;
she looked, and blushed, and was about to speake^ then cast her eyes upon the
ground, but straight looked up again, and feign would say, I must requite your
love, but loath she was to speak it, and yet kind pity moved, and so at
last with pity, love, and Maiden blushing modesty, she said. If you prove
just, I will yield to your love; but be so, since I leave this habit, and the
cha^test life to live with you, and in a forest sta^e. Those eyes that first
had won her, he cast up to heaven, before which he did vow truth, and pure
love then brought them to his bliss, beholding her as timorous, as loving, not
knowing what she had done, innocent and passionate, was between those two, a
delicate unknowing creature. Nature taught her to be careful, and yet kind;
thus she beheld him now with love, and such respect, as she must bear him,
whom she had made her Lord (for Lord the husband is in all estates from
Shepherds unto Kings). Then did the pleasing difference begin, each striving
how to show the most respect, she to maintain what she had gaind, he to
requite what she had given. Amphilanthus and Polarchos admiring them as much,
as either had in former times themselves, when first in love, calling their
passions round about them, wrapping themselves in them, as in their mantles,
but closer did they sit to them; Amphilanthus being so much love it self, as
he might be compared to be it self, as near as a round glass made of the
clearest temper, and filled full of the clearest water; turn it any way, you see
through it, yet both seem one color, and clearenesse in agreeing; so did the
clearenesse of his love show through him, or was it self only love, and
purely clear, no vacant place, least turning of the glass might make a bubble
to appear a change; no, he was round and true.

Poor Polarchos, he stood like a blasted tree, the blossom of his affect^on
killed, and withered; yet he called to mind how he had loved, and how she
used him. No more expression had this dainty Less given to her forest Lad,
then she had made to him, but now decayed, and all her favors dried, and
wrinckled like the last years fruit: poor Prince turned to the lowest
slavery, of Loves meanest cast-awayes, he wept, while the other smiled, the
Forrester joining in present gain. Amphilanthus feeding on the knowledge of
his absent loves affection: here did love play his part in diverse kinds, and
made himself this mirth, sporting like wantons with the babye, loves of these
poor prisoners. Amphilanthus pulled off his helm, and went unto them, who
with a fashion not rude, nor Courtly, but fine, and civil received him; the
like they did unto Polarchos; Amphila^thus giving them the welcome salutation
of the first wished joys, being (as he did tell them) witness of their
vows: they both seemd glad, that such brave witne^ses they had vn^nowne til
th^n obtained; the Forester replying thus.

Sir, never could a better or a richer gift be given me (except her self) then
this wish, which from you does bring the joy we hope to find and keep, and
which two years affection has ambitiously desired, now by her grant enjoyed;
but may it please you to grace us with this a second honor, we shall have
just reason to acknowledge our poor selves your servants, and our lives your
own to be commanded. It Is the manner here that when a Nymph does change from
that strict life, to be a happy wife, if she be such an one, as length of
time, or honor has engaged, she must by two brave Knights, be brought unto
the Temple of Diana, where she must remain that night alone in prayers, and
then cast off her weeds, and offer them: and leave them with the Priest; the
Knights then come unto the door, and call her, with whom she comes forth, they
then do give her to her chosen ma^e, and so conduct them to the Temple of
Venus, where they are received, and there by Himen's Priest are married.

This if we may obtain of you, so fitly come to us, brought by that Fortune
which has made me blessed, aptly to give conclusion to our woes, and fair
beginnings to our happiness, you shall make us the happiest to pray for your
enioyings that ever lovers had; and sure you must be one Sir, for love shines
in you. The King made answer he would do that kindness^, and any other to so
fine a pair; then took he the sweet Nymph, who now must change her name, and
gain the best, and blessedst estate. Unto the Temple they directly went, and
there without the gate a^tended, till the time of going in; till she must
return, which at the ringing of a little Bell, did summon them to call her;
her they took, and Amphilanthus gave her to her love, wishing even from his
soul the time were come, to have the dearest gift he most did long for, given
so freely to him.

Then to the other Temple straight they went, which was not far, but in a
dainty wood, this other standing in a plain, hard by a cool, and crystal
River, there she was received with joy by Venus Priests, and Hymen^ Priests
came, and clothed her in wives weeds, and so even laded with content they left
the Temple, and went to his Lodge, which was in a F^^^est, whereof he had the
charge under the King, who loved the deserts, and those sports most of any
thing, the first, and chief cause being hi^ affection to a Lady living in a
Forest, and wholly affecting that life: every man seek^ng to please him, took
the estates of Forresters on them, and so made a delightful kind of wildness
please them, and him, who thus enjoyed pleasures, and his ends, coveting to
appear like their living, but the true root of virtue, and good breeding
shunned sauagenes, and only made room for a little neglectiuenes to cover them
with all, so as the great men were but Cour^ly Forresters, and civil wild-men.
The Lodge was a fair house built on a Hill, at the foot whereof ran a River,
over which was a bridge; from thence they passed through a delicate walk made
by Art, and at the end of that, (which still ascended) was a garden, through
which they came unto the House, furnished with furniture fit for a Court, the
servants all in green, and in good number, showing fellowshippe in their
apparel, but obedience in their fashions. There the Knights were welcomed
like themselves, and then the brave young Forrester desired to be so much
graced, as to know their names, nor would I said he ask this ^auour until
now, that you might see your servant my self could entertain you for the
honors done, and to be worthier of them I Will first tell you who I am, although
appearing outwardly more mean.

I am the third son to an Earl, who is chief Forrester unto the Prince of
this Country; this Forest is the daintiest, and the best beloved of any by his
Majesty, being called by him self his garden: this has he given me as my
charge, and here I serve him, and do please him well, by leading of this
life; this Lady is the Daughter of a Lord, near neighbor to this place, but
being thought too worthy for me, as I must confess they erred not in that,
though did commit high treason unto love, seeking to bar us from our wished
joy, they gave her to Diana, being then under the years which they might rule
her in, she was constrained to do as they commanded, and was sworn a Nymph,
dedicated to the chaste Goddess by her friends, but when she came of years, by
the laws of this Country, she might choose whether she would continue so or
no. Two years she wanted of the age of freedom^, in which time they hoped she
would forget, and by example love fair chastity; but she never ordained for
such a dull concluding of her days, by the example which was showed of
stricktnes she loved freedom, for Chastity affection, and so we met, and
still increased our flames, till now that you were brought for our eternal
good to see us joined, and to knit our bliss. Now Sir I do beseech you tell me
who you are. My name (brave Sir) answered the King, is Amphilanthus, this
Knight Polarchos; my Lord said he, I humbly crave pardon for my rudeness, yet
may you the better pardon it, since but that, you could expect from wild men,
and Forresters: but I have not so lived, that your fame has not come, and
spread it self into each corner of these parts, as the sweet west-wind does
grace each flower with a kiss: so live you honored by each heart, and loved as
he, who glories mankind with his excellence. The King replid, those words did
show his inside still remaind most noble, and like so delicate a Prince he was;
then he did salute the Lady, who feasted them with all delicates, staying them
two days, in which time the marriage was diuulged, and all his neighbor
Forresters came in to joy with him; his friends, and hers now met, were forced
of all sides to show great content.

Then Amphilanthus left them, and passed on toward the Camp, the brave
Forrester bringing him through his command to the next town from whence he had
a guide. O love said Amphilanthus, how precious a Prince art thou, that thus
command'st over all, make Kings Forresters, Forresters Kings in happiness,
and leauest us to travel up and down neglected, roaming like Beggars, still
asking of thee: but thy gifts are slow, and sparing, one days sight, or one
poor hours discourse with much petition thou will grant me, and to others,
liues-time of comfort. Why did thou not make me a Forrester, or a Shepherd,
or any thing, so I might enjoy my love? What life would I despise to undergo,
or danger shun, so she might like, and ^ live in her eyes; for in her heart I
know I do, and thus am doubly grieved ^oth for my want, and her dear, yet
impatient suffering, my absence working in her, as upon my heart with sorrow
for both parts. Pi^ie us, great King of hearts, we will beseech and beg of
thee; if not, most cruel let me justly call thee.

Thus pe^plexed he rode, not speaking all that day to any of his compa^ie.
Polarchos was content, as well with silence as the King, so they rid, as if
they had vowed not to speak, or to try how they could perform such a ^ow,
yet still did they dispute with love, and all for loves dear sake. Many
^leasant adventures they passed, finding one evening a delicate Lady follow^ng
a Hawk, attended, or accompanied with many brave Gentlemen, and as gentle in
behavior, as blood, being the chief and principal of that Coun^rie; the Lady
affecting pleasures, they loving her for that, and her fashion, which was full
of spirit, sweet, and mild discourse^ temperat and respective: ^y her they
passed, and so by many more such meetings; they staying no where, till they
came to the skirts of Albania, where they encountered two Knights, of whom they
demanded news; they told them, that they could give them no certain notice of
any thing, since the last battle which was ^ought against Plamergus, wherein
he was slain, and his only son; Steria^us having behaved himself so
bravely, and iudicially, as he had gotten immortal praise; the other kings and
Princes deserving to be eternised for their valor and judgments.

Were you there (I pray Sir) said Amphilanthus? Yes indeed Sir, said the first,
we were both there, and hardly escaped the fury of that day. How was ^he
battle, I beseech you, said Amphilanthus? Marry Sir (said he) the place was
first troublesome, and very full of disaduan^age to the strangers, Hills and
little Bottoms between them, wherein Plamergus the king of those parts had
placed his men, a great River before him; the bridge he had pulled up, leaving
no possibility for the army to come to him; but they by means and advice of
Steriamus, passed the water, dividing themselves in five parts, as the passages
were in number.

It was Steriamus his fortune with the Italians, whose skill and valor was
matchless, and guided by such a Commander, who did well, and best in the
absence of their Lord, not to be resisted, he met Plamergus; Rosindy and the
Macedonians encountered his son, the rest the other troops; it was my hap
to be where the furious Italians met us, but they made quick work with us,
running through us, and over us, as Lightning, killing as they went so fast, as
I had but speed enough to run away, not resolution, or heart to stay, for it
seemed to be more then human force, or speed they came with all. Parselius
with his Moreans did as bravely, Antissius and Leandrus no less, and Selarinus
as well.

Then got we over a Hill, and joined with the kings son, who was fighting
with Rosindy, but soon saw we an end of him and his army; so as away again
we went, as if but to behold our party lost, which when I saw, and the battle
won, Trumpets sunding the retreit, we went away, resolved in my heart, never to
draw Sword against the rightful King. Steriamus was proclaimed King, and so by
that name now is called; but though I will not fight against him, yet I will not
take his part, till I see the next encounter past, which will be more terrible,
by how much the army is greater, led by brauer and stronger men, and the other
army something lessned by the last, and many of their best men hurt.

How shall we gain so much favor of you, brave Knights, said he, as to direct
us the nearest way to them? Truly Sir (said he) by this I believe they be met,
but if you will go and try your fortune, I will bring you within sight of
them. He gave him many thanks, and so he conducted them according to his
promise.

Steriamus after the battle, had called his Commanders together, and took a
certain note of the number lost, and hurt in the battle, which in comparison
was nothing to their gain and victory. Then marched they on toward the second
let, and King of the middle. Albania, called Pollidorus, and who was a brave
man for courage and force, Antissius gaining the honor to lead the Vantgard,
as it was at first granted him, but altered by reason of the place to fight in.
With great courage they march on, and with as much resolution the other attend
them; for except strengths were equal, no glory by victory can b^ esteemed.

The strange Knight performed his promise, and brought the King with his friend
to a great Lakes side, the armies being on the other side, he desired to pass
that, and to be able to assist (if need were), the Knight then guided him by
the banks of it, and brought him to a hedge, wherein were many high trees
which shadowed them well; they standing up to the bodies of them, there they
saw the charge given: but as he was beholding them, another Knight was seen by
him on the other side of the hedge, wearing his own Colors; whereupon
Amphilanthus demanded of him, who he was, and to what end he stood close in
that manner. To see the battle, replide he, and to do as you do, spare my
self from fighting. It may be, said Amphilanthus, we do the better, since
there is no jesting (as they say) with those Ladds. It Is not for fear I assure
you (said he) that I am not among them. I believe that (answered Amphilanthus)
nor is that the cause of my being here, but to see what service I may do my
friends if occasion serve, else stand as I do. The better and the nobler side
(said the other, will hardly want your company, or mine, unless we were able
to equal their valors, which I make doubt of.

It were modestly spoken of your self (said Amphilanthus), but if I be not
mistaken, you might have had better manners, then to compare those together
which you know not. Why? what chollerick Knight are you, said he, that takes
this exception, Parselius, Rosindy, Steriamus, Selarinus, Leandrus and
Dolorindus, besides the brave King of Romania being there: but since you now
know who I mean, I must be satisfied by you, who you are, that dare compare
with them. I make no comparisons with them, but only answer you, wherefore tell
me your name, and I will satisfy you with the like, and something else to make
you know, courteous answers better ^ir Knights. I am not said he, ashamed of my
name, therefore know, I am Philarchos of Metilin, newly from thence come to
serve my friends. I see (answered the King) that your extreme affection rather
moved your care and haste, then ill nature, therefore pardon me, and take this
satisfaction for the other, which I threatened, that Amphilanthus loves
Philarchos, and will be his servant. With that they both saluted with such
love, as Cosins ought to bear one to another, and such who were so like, as
they were. Then stood they ready to behold what happned, which was this.
Antissius with his troops charged the enemy, but they were led by a young man,
who rather rash then valiant, came with such violence against them, as he
disordered the rank, and brake Antissius order, whereupon their men were in
routs, and Antissius in some danger, whereupon the three Knights ran in, and
rescued him, Amphilanthus fighting, while Philarchos remounted Antissius.

Then came to them twenty thousand, led by Leandrus, which were encountered by
as many, led by the Kings favorite, who was Martial of his Kingdom. The two
Commanders met, and Leandrus was unhorsed, whom Amphilanthus (killing first the
Martial) again mounted, and told him, he was sorry Pamphilias servant had so
ill fortune. He knew his voice, and replide, that the honor was greater, to be
aided by him, then if he had kept his horse, and won the day; these men
shroudly set to, so as the brave Princes stood at last all on foot, like the
towers of a mighty Castle, the rest of the walls ruind, and thrown down: so
the dead bodies lay round about them in rude heaps. Then came up the rest of
the Albanian army in gross, which Steriamus perceiving, went down with all
the forces and Princes. The encounter was terrible between them. Rosindy came
with some horse, and helped the other five to fresh horse, and so together
charged in, but such was their force and cunning, compassing their enemy, and
charging on all sides, as they brake them, and put them in the like disorder,
they had brought that part, which Antissius had: all brave men, all equally
resolved to fight for victory, resolutely made proof of their wills and
powers, as had not the last three, come in happy time, the victory had been
doubtful.

Twice Amphilanthus was unhorsed, by the death of his horses, and once helped
by Rosindy, who^ he requited in a greater measure (though almost the same kind)
taking him from under his horses belly, ready to be smotherd by the multitude,
that were pressing on him; the other time he was furnished with a Horse, which
Selarinus brought him; he saved Parselius and Steriamus besides from death, one
having his Helm struck off, he covering him with his Shield, till a new one
was brought him. The other he rescued from many men's hands, having broke his
Sword. Antissius he horsed, and many brave acts he did, so as all attributed
the happiness of that days Victory (which then was gained) to him, who
unknown, they came to salute, but he not willing to hide himself from them,
besides wanting air quickly discovered himself; then, if any envy were in
them before to the deserving stranger, when Amphilanthus was the man, all was
rooted out, and supplanted by true affection to him.

The Princes of Italy, and his soldiers were ouer-ioyed at their Kings
arrival, and ravished with his magnanimous valor and courage: then the
Trumpets were sounded, and all retired to a Plain close by, keeping the field
that night to witness their Conquest. The King was taken alive, but hurt to
death, dying within five days after, but he heard Steriamus again proclaimed
by the Army, as a salve for his wounds. This was a sharp and terrible fight,
wherefore they went to the next Town, which was the chief, and yielded to
their force: there they rested their men and themselves, never an one having
escaped without some hurt or other: the Usurper died, and was buried.

When all were refre^hed, they began to think of marching forwards, and the
two Knights which had guided Amphilanthus, undertook to be the guides to the
Army, putting themselves dutifully and affectionately under Steriamus, serving
him with all loyalty. Amphilanthus and Selarinus with as much comfort, as
absence could afford them, got by themselves, to give account to each other of
their passions; for none else were made fortunate to know their sufferings, nor
did Amphilanthus for all his trust in him, impart his Mistrisses name, holding
that too dear, even for his friend to hear. Into a Garden they went, but
that, because the chief windows of the house were upon it, was thought not
private enough, they went into an Orchard beyond it, in which was a place
raised with three ascents like, a triple Crown, the trees being Orange and
Lemond trees, then in their pride, having blossoms, unripe, and ripe fruit
upon them. In the midst of this place was a stone, not unlike a Tomb of red
Marble, as high from the ground, as a large chest, and of that proportion;
round about it, or better to say, on three full sides encompassed with Ciprus;
on the other side was a Ring of Gold, as if to open the Tomb, like the Ring to
a Latch.

The amorous Kings sat down upon it, being so enriched with their passions, as
other thoughts were too mean for them to suffer. Amphilanthus relating the
blessed content he felt in his fortunate enjoying, truly and affectionately
discovering the express knowledge of her love, by the sincerest expression
made unto him, and such, as Selarinus grew to be jealous he should never
compass; for it seemd impossible, that any more then one woman could be so
excellent and perfect a lover. As he was ready to make reply in that kind,
they heard a voice (as if within the Tomb) bring forth some words, which made
them at the first hearing it, start up, afraid of discovery, or as if troubled
that they had hurt her; the speech betraying the heart to suffer excessiveness
in misery.

Unfortunate woman (said it) that cannot die, having such occasion. Is it
possible dear Tomb, that thou can hold, and enclose my woes, yet keep them
safe in thee, and with the multitudes of them? at last conclude my grief, let
my sorrows swell against themselves in iustest rage, and with their furies
choke my breath that serves to speak them, and to be drawn contrary to my
only desires, to save my weary and afflicted life; tedious, unpleasing time,
finish thy labor, and my woes, let this be my last minute of unquietness,
redeem me from the cruel slavery of living, and bring me to the excellent
liberty of dying; for how can life be pleasing, when Polidorus is not? My
dearest, and alone dear Lord, I know that thou art dead, else were I fetched
by thee, to joy with thee, where as now I remain in my living death. Would I
did know the truth, then might I give thee my last farewell, and with that
join my soul with thine, but twixt these violent despaires how am I tortured?

Then was she quiet a little space, while they perused the place: but long
continued she not so, like to women spinning, staid but to fasten the thread to
begin again to turn, and twine her sorrows: but now she had spun them into
Rhyme, like the Swan in a most weeping Verse: they hearing her, stayed from the
releasing her out of the Tomb, till she had said her Verses, being these.

Infernal Spirits listen to my moanes,
From Cauy depths, give hearing to my groans
Great Pluto, let thy sad abiding move
With Hellish fires, to flame for fires of love;
Let Charon pass my woes unto thine ears:
His boat if empty they shall load it well,
With tortures great, as are the pains of Hell,
And waightier then the Earth this body bears.
Take down my spirit, cloyd with grief and pain
Conjure the darkest Pits, to let me gain
Some corner for a rest; if not, let me
O Pluto wander, and complain to thee:
No corsiue can make wounds have torture more,
Nor this disfauor vex a forelorne soul;
(If all thy furys were put in a role)
Then Love gives me; ah bitter eating sore.
Call thy great Counsel, and afflicted Spirits,
Examine well their woes, with all their nights,
And you shall find none there that are not mine,
Nay, my least, with their greatest jointly twine.
Let saddest Echo from her hollow Cave,
Answer the horrid plaints my sorrow gives,
Which in like mournful, and vast cauerne lives;
Then judge the murdering passions which I have.
My Judge is deaf, then, O thy justice prove,
Mend thou the fault of proud forgetful love,
Release me from thy Court, and send me out
Unto thy Brother Jove, whose love and doubt
Has often transformed him from his heavenly kind:
So now from thee transform my killing care
To blessing, and from Hell into the Air,
Dark grief should not a loving fancy bind.
Yet love thus binds me even unto my death, and welcomest were^ that, might I
obtain it, but yet that must not be. What joy did I ever know? yes I did love
unknown, then known enjoyed; enjoyed, how long? the quarter of the time I
loved in vain, and that poor quarter how often crossed, afflicted, and
tormented with all varyeties of pains? yet my dear Lord thou ever were most
kind, and so true loving, as one death is too too little now to have for thee,
although a wasting lingering end. Would ten times more I might bear, so thou
were fafe; unfortunate, but brauest Prince to be embraced in such a business,
where not only honors, Crown, possessions, but thy life, must be a
sacrifice, unto the pleasure of two young men.

My sweetest love, thou must be the poor Lamb, offered for others faults. O
my dear Polidorus, thou did merit fame, and love, not trouble, and revenge;
thou did not err, but if thy Father did, must his sins lie on thee, and
thou be punished for his pride? yet dear thou have required my best love, and
made provision for thy other self, for after thee, none should ere have had my
love, since with thee it ought to have, as first creation, lasting burial, and
that assurance thou have given: but keep thy promise, which was, if with
victory thou did return to bring me unto thee, if thou were killd, to be
brought unto me, that in this vault we might have our graves, and that red
Marble serve for such a Tomb, as might best ^it^esse, blood did cause our
ends. Thou art ore-throwne, I find it dear, and hindered I am, confident else,
none could keep thee from remembering thy poor love; but if thou were so
hindered, cursed be the causers, and my Desteny, to bar my last enjoying of my
best loved Lord, and let those never joy in happiness of love that be the
parters of our bodies; a poor gift it had b^ene to give a chosen grave, alas
he must be buried, and if so, where easier, and with lesser pains, or fitter
then with her, that lives to dye, when she is certain what becomes of him?
D^ere Polidorus, here I live to thy dear memory, feed on the sweetest word
thou gave me when we parted, but will live no longer then thy end be known
to me. If thou be living quickly come to me, if dead, as soon the tidings,
then shall I witness my con^^ant woe, and pay to thee what thou deseruedst, and
only unto thee will I commend my love, and dying pains; others to others yield
their last made ^ows, my first, and last were dedicated, and so given to thee,
and thus a dying life do I continue in, till thou or thine release me unto
thee.

When she had ended these lamentable speeches, they tried to open the Chest,
which easily they did; she seeing it open, her heart even opened with it, as
embracing the joy her loved Lord should bring her, ready as it were to take, or
love, or death, equally fit for either; the place by opening, being fit to be
discovered, they found the stone to be like an upper box in a Cabinet lesser
then the other, but part of it as the light to the ancient Halls in Princes
houses: but this was dark; the lower part was a bed of gold, upon which she
lay; her apparel a Roabe of purple, imbrodered as the Kings Roabes use to be,
under that a petticoate, or round kirtle of Crimson; her arms, fingers, and
neck, adorned with the richest Jewels; her buskins were of white, laced up
with Rubies, her hair combed down, and a Crown of infinite value on her
head; a Scepter in her hand, which at the opening of the Tomb she cast down,
raising her self a little up, and throwing her arms abroad, ready to welcome
her heart unto her, as if before gone thence. The sudden light to so much
darkness, at the first daseled her eyes, but when she recouer'd and saw in
stead of Polidorus, two strangers, she crossed her arms, lay down again,
seeming so like a dead body, as they were afraid, they had but heard a voice
which caused their search, but that she had been dead, that spirit which she
once had, had guided them to her. But soon were they put beyond that amazednes
by her speech. If said she, you be of Polidorus servants, directed by him to
bring me his death, quickly give me mine likewise, and then most welcome, or
do but favor me so much, as to shut me up again; this is the Throne, and
Tomb which I must have, and only will enjoy.

The Kings, whose hearts were mollified with love, were so tempered to pity,
as they were not able to know what to do, but gazed on her, who appeard the
most peerless Tomb their eyes had ever beheld, and the strangest; they saw
she lay still, like her own monument curiously cut. Alas said Amphilanthus,
what comfort can a victory bring, that finds such a conclusion to accompany it
self with all: A victory cried she, then raised she her sweet saddest self a
little on one arm; I beseech you both, or either said she, be so charitable
to tell me the truth, they loath to tell her what must bring her death, yet
still besought, and that implored with tears, they looked on one another,
sighed, and with their eyes entreated each to speak; at last brave
Amphilanthus as kind, as excellent in all other virtues gave these words.

Madam said he, to obey you, whom we must after sue to for a favor, I will
discover that, which my soul, (as for you, does grieve for.) The Army is
overthrown, and your beloved Lord, who we have heard you so much speak of^
slain, said she, I see it in your face, though you will not in pity speak
it. Charitable Sir, how am I bound to you? but I beseech you, add one favor
more unto your first, and then an other as the last to that, where is his body?
Laid said he in the chief Church among the other Kings, by Steriamus own
command. It was an noble act of him said she, whom Heavens protect for it,
mercy in Conquerors being as excellent as their fortunes: the last request I Will
make Sir is this, that by your favors I may be laid by him, since I will not
ask to have him brought to me, I am^ and was his wife, dearly beloved of
him, and here for safety, and by mine own petition left by him. I was
Daughter to a King, the unfortunate Plamergus, but my greatest happiness I
ever gloryed in, was his true love, lay me then brave Sir, with my Lord, and
only dear Polidorus, and thus my dear, my soul to thine does fly.

Amphilanthus did beseech, Selarinus weept to her; all would not serve, she
stretched her self straight out, and by curious Art laid her self forth, fit
to be carried to her burial, dying as if the word dead had killed her; excellent
grief, and most excellent strength of passion, that can bring so resolute, and
brave an end. The Kings then changed their discourse from love to sorrow; they
stayed by her, seeking all means to recover her, but finding she was gone, and
so all hope of life in her, they went into the Court, where they found the King
new risen from Council, and all his Princes, and Lords about him. He went to
meet them, but seeing such sorrow in their faces, wondered, and a little feared,
but soon he was brought out of that, they telling him the cause, and sad
adventure. Then he sent for the Guard, who had kept the late King Polidorus, of
whom he understood, how he with tears entreated to be laid in a Tomb made by
himself in the Orchard; but they, though he besought them to go to the
Conqueror, (as he called Steriamus) and beseech that honor from hi^m, to
perform a vow which he had made, they unwilling to busy themselves, fearing
to distaste the King, had never let his last request be known; some said they
thought his wounds, and pains of them, had made him rave, others, that being
dead, what matter was it where his body lay? comparing him unto himself, who
being gone said he, what care I where my body is bestowed? But these things
Steriamus liked not, being so infinitely offended with them as had it been a
fault, they might have dyed for, they had surely paid their lives for such
neglect, but not ascending to that height, he banished them, hating neglect to
any creature dying, imagining his soul that dies unsatisfied, must part with
trouble from the body, and for that was grieved; and this Justice did he unto
love, for which, love must be just to him.

Then made he Proclamation for their banishment; and straight himself went
with the whole assembly of Kings, and Princes fetching her, and went as the
chief mourner with her, weeping to her grave; the other Kings did carry her,
and were as they thought, honored with the weight of such worth, and constancy,
she seeming on their shoulders like her Ef^gie, carried to her own Funeral.
The Tomb was graced that night with her lying on it, the next morning with
solemn state opened, and she laid by her Lord; this noble act did Steriamus as
the first in Albania, and the beginning to his famous life. This being past,
and a Commander left in that town, which was the chief seat of the Kings of
those parts, and from whence all the Auncesters took their claim, the new and
rightful King, marched again toward the third king, guided by his new
servants, and followed with many great men of Albania, who like the world ran
with the stream of Fortune, and left the overthrown party, as soon as it was
made miserable with that knowledge. Antissius had had his time for leading:
Lea^drus now desired to have the next; it was granted him, and so they marched;
Amphilanthus, now in the head of his own troops, Steriamus having a Guard of
them, next his person, as their Country woman guarded his heart safe from hurt,
or change: the Albanians next to them, which were in number that went forth
with him after the two victories as many as were lost, so the Army was of the
same bigness, as when it came into Albania. Perissus after he had left
Neraena in all her rages for his neglect, yet saluing it, as desirous to
deceive her self, with saying that the danger he found him self in of
change, to his first, and only love, made him for fear leave her, not being
able to withstand her power in love; but he in the contrary part pitying her,
and weary of her frantique discourse left her, and with flue hundred Knights
took Shipping, landing in Epirus, where he met the glad tidings of the
victoryes, and winning Princes: then hasted he, guided by many, every one
desirous to do service to him, or them that came to serve their King; he
passed on quietly, for there was no resistance, but desirous to be with them,
he commanded the rest of his train to come with more leisure after him, he
posting away only with his Squire, and two guids. As he rid, it was his chance
to meet two armed men, and two Squires, carrying each of them a great Sword,
and Spear, they came to him with these words.

Sir said they we be two young Princes, sons to the Duke of Corinthia, de^irous
we are of Knighthood, but such has our fortunes been, as not being able to
gain it as we desired, we resolved to take this course, and from the first
Knights hands we met, (that was fit to give it us) to demand it; you look like
such an one, wherefore from you we require it, yet we beseech you, tell us who
we shall have it from. My name said he, it may be, will rather make me seem
vuworthy of the honor you offer me, being scarce known in these parts, yet
because you so ciuilly desire the knowledge of it, you shall have it, I am
Perissus of Sicily; That name said they is come with wonder to our ears, and
happiness to us to gain this honor from so royal hands; then lighting all on
the ground Perissus took their swords, and girt them to them, putting on their
Spurrs, and so finishing their Knighthood, kissed them, being two delicate, and
lovely youths.

Now Sir said they, let us beseech one honor more from you, which is to ^un one
course with each of us, not that we will seem ungrateful for this favor, but
only to see what we may be able to do against you before we fall, since
that we are to encounter the brauest man of the World, as he is esteemed, and
for that cause we demanded Knighthood.

Truly (said Perissus) I should be wonderful loath to harm you, so much I
affect you; but first tell me who that brave man is, and if he be none of my
best friends, I will serve you against him. That we do not desire (said they)
for he having killed our father, we must revenge it our selves, or die in the
quarrel; therefore we beseech you first, let us be graced for our first
trial to run with you, and we shall esteem it a happiness, though thrown
by you: but to satisfy you, the Knight which we must fight with, is
Amphilanthus, who coming to my fathers house, used himself so insolently, as
he a grave man could not like it, boasting of what gain he had of the honors
of Ladies, in that dishonouring many, one amongst that number being the
Princess of Stiria, a Lady my father honored much, and was his Niece, whose
honor he could not leave touched unrevenged. But he ancient, the other strong
and young, got the better so much, as he slew my father: we being then too
young to carry arms (for is is three years since we were with poor and
miserable patience, forced to be at quiet). Now we have traveled, half a
year we have spent to find some worthy Prince, at last by storm were cast on
shore in this Country, where we heard of these brave wars, and now we were
going to receive the honor from one of those Kings, and straight to challenge
Amphilanthus, who we hear is there. Truly (said Perissus) you have undertaken
a very hard task, but I pray tell me what manner of man is that Prince you
speak of. He is, said he, much of your stature, fair, and curled hair he
has, and in troth such an one, as may well win Ladies, and such is his fame,
as we desire to die by his hand, for we cannot hope to overcome him. To this
end said Perissus, you shall excuse me from running with you, and assure your
selves, you are infinitely mistaken in him, for the true Amphilanthus is neither
of the stature nor complexion you speak of, but as excellent a creature, as
can, or has been framed by Nature, free from these things, he is accused of,
therefore be persuaded by me, go into the Army with me, if when you see him it
prove to be he, I will then not only fulfill your desire in this, but bring
you to call him unto account; yet trust me on my honor it is not he, for he is
as wise as valiant, and just as wise.

Thus satisfied they ridd together toward the Army, which then was marching,
and making have to the third encounter, which was to be had with Nicholarus,
an other partaker of Albania's misery, and Steriamus injury.

As they rode, Perissus thinking of his Limena, the two young Knights of
nothing more then how to attain to some encounter to try their valor, it was
one of their chances (being the elder, and riding nearer a wood side then the
others did) to hear two within discoursing in this manner.

I wonder said the one, that Amphilanthus, the worthyest, brauest Prince for
all noble virtues should let ingratitude live in him, (a thing I have so often
heard him despise) especially to a Lady, who (as by her letter you may see) for
his sake has refused all matches offered her, wholly reserving her self for
him, now to forsake her, and not only so, but in her sight striving to let her
see her loss, and to use her with such scorn, as her affection is forced to
change love to a friend, to an enemy; Yet to move me to revenge her, who am
most bound unto him, I more marvel at; for he only has set my Crown upon
my head.

Must I be made to fight with him, who fought for me? Shall I seek to take
that life from him, which was so willingly and bravely ventured to keep mine?
Or to make mine fortunate; from a Runaway and poor Fisher-boy he made me a
King, for one whose head was at sale, he brought a Crown unto it, and royal
dignity to the poorest Subject. Shall I (I say) turn against this man, as if
the longer I knew virtue, the more I should dislike it? No Antissia, love is
full of variety in Passions, and many false conceits will arise; which, when
discovered, sorrow is the period, but repentance may follow this.

Besides, Love tells me I must love these Kings, else how shall I obtain my
wished blessing to enjoy sweet Selarina; but indeed truth says, I must not be
unthankful. I would venture far for thy good sweet Antissia, and prefer
thy gain equal with mine own, but neither must make me ungrateful. From
Amphilanthus I have got my life, and fortune, to him they both belong, and they
shall be paid to serve him, not to offend him, my Sword to attend him, not to
hurt him. Shall this be requital for his last care of me in the battle
against Polidorus, where he rescued me, and horsed me again? That had been
enough to win respect, and truth in love, both together set as obligations
never to be broken, nor shall be touched by me. I love my Aunt well, but my
honor more; then must she pardon me, I will not fight with him for her.
Amphilanthus, replied the other, has been so blessed with fortune, as he
has obliged the best to be his servants by his favors done them; who lives
of all these Princes in the Army, that has not (at some one time or other)
directly taken their lives from him; the brauest he has saved, and the
valiantest rescued, my poor self released from cruel, close, and dangerous
imprisonment. These I consider and allow, but then comes love, and tells me, he
must be obeyed, my vow unto your Aunt commands me, and that I must observe;
she wills me to kill Amphilanthus, and then she will marry me. And this you
will attempt, said Antissius? Attempt, win or die in it, said Dolorindus. You
must first begin with me, said Antissius, if you be resolute in it, and will
suffer the canker, ingratitude, to rule: but think again; for rather had I do
any reasonable matter, then break friendship with you, yet rather that, then
where I am so infinitely bound, and more contentedly die thus, then live to
have a thought to hurt that Prince. I love Antissia, said he, yet must I
consent to withstand you, since you leave the due respect to Antissia, which
blood and her affection to you may claim, it frees me who loved you most for
her sake; nay it commands, and threatens me; wherefore I am ready to encounter
you first.

As they were going to venture an end to their lives, two Knights more arrived,
and seeing them ready to fight, stepped in between them. They furious, and
enraged with their let, demanded who they were. I am, said one of them,
Ollorandus: and I, said the other, Amphilanthus. With that Dolorindus turned on
him; And you (said he) are the man I looked for: with that they fell to blows,
his Companion did the like, but Antissius a little paused, and having asked a
question or two more of him, was assured by his voice and gesture, it was not
his friend Ollorandus. Dolorindus so furious, as his senses had left him to
ignorance of voice or knowledge. Then hoping the other was that counterfeit
Amphilanthus, he willingly entertained the combat, which was sharp. Dolorindus
did well, but had the worse; for how could it other be, that name being enough
to vanquish without force. He fell, and his enemy being ready to cut off his
head, the brave Perissus came to the young Knight, who had heard all this, and
stepped in; Nay Amphilanthus said he, hold your hands, here is another has as
much to say to you for ^illing his father, Prince of Carinthia.

He remembered that, and he turned unto him, and a new fight began, wherein the
young Knight did so well (helped too a little by his enemies weariness, the
which gave advantage to him, who had otherwise been too hard for him) as he
brought him to the like pass Dolorindus was in: but when he had him thus,
less favor was showed in more speed, for he had got off his Helm and Head,
before help could come in, although Perissus hearing the name, made all the
means he could to save his life for names sake only, he came to hear the
young Prince say, Farewell Amphilanthus, I am now revenged of thee; and I, said
Antissius for the abominable treason, in taking such Princes names upon you.
The Prince of Carinthia held the head in his hand, which when Perissus saw, he
was sorry, because it had c^rried that name, but could not but much praise
Fortune, who had so cunningly wrought the satisfaction to the Princes, the
punishment for falsehood, and the revenge of love. They took up Dolorindus,
who was wounded with shame, as much as with the Sword, weakness from fury
getting place; he wept, and petitioned for favor from Antissius, he confessed
his fault to be fouler then sin.

Antissius replied, he must first satisfy Amphilanthus, then he should answer
him. He vowed never to fight with him. The brave young King told him, he was
contented with that, so he submitted to the king of the Romans, and that should
be the satisfaction he would take. Perissus in the mean time had gotten the
slain Knights Squires to him, to be resolved of this cosenage; they had not
full knowledge of it, but the other Knight not being dead, he coniured him to
relate it, and why? to have as he told him the happiness to end in more quiet,
when he might with a clearer conscience depart. He yielded unto him, and made
a true and plain confession to him in this manner.

My friend (said he) being in love with the excellent Princess of Croatia,
neither having means by estate to gain her, nor hope to win her by his love
or service, she having resolved to love none but Amphilanthus, love having
conquered an unusual way on her, when only fame, not sight, or knowledge, but
by reports had grounded such an affection in her. He obtained to know where
that brave Prince remained, he was certified, that he was in a search for a
Sister of his, some time unheard of. In this unlucky season he took his name
upon him; after hearing of his Companion, Ollorandus, he enjoined me to take
his name likewise on me; truly I must confess it was an inexcusable fault, and
the greater, because those names, especially his, was so honored, as
wheresoever we passed, we had our own wills. Knights refused to combat with
us, Ladies soon yielded, believing they ought not to refuse what he demanded,
who commanded all hearts. I also had my share in this pleasure, as now in
death. He won the Princess of Croatia, left her afterward, keeping the same
name, finding such sweetness in it: but now being here, and the true
Amphilanthus his fame ^lourishing for his incomparable glory, we purposed not
to tarry, knowing it would prove too hot a business for us, if once it came to
his ears. Wherefore we made what haste we could to get to the Sea, and so
meant to leave these parts to his true light, and carry a few flashes with us
in farther remote places. Into great Brittany we meant to pass, but now are
stayed by your force, we were Gentlemen of noble houses, but such has been our
ill living, as I desire for him, and my self we may be privately buried here,
never more enquired after, nor if you please to favor your own worth so much
henceforth mentioned, letting our shames die, and be enclosed in the earth with
us.

Perissus promised to fulfill some of those requests, the rest were not in his
power, such a business depending upon their knowledge, as the reconciling of
such Princes. There they were buried, and the three Kings took their way to a
little house in the Wood, where they more freely discussed of the matter, which
was this.

Antissia after her return, filled with hate in stead of love, never left
plotting for revenge, till this came (as often it does in her sex) into her
mind; whereupon she writ to her Nephew; but if that failed, she trusted on her
servant, and therefore likewise did she write to him: a letter from her was a
comfort sufficient, but a command, his honor, and happiness. This was the
cause, and nothing but death would satisfy her, as at that time her fury was
nothing being so reuengefull as a forsaken woman, shame like love provoking
her; and that he freely granted her, though it had fallen out to be his own to
have paid her.

Antissius mistrusting as much by his distemper, led him forth of the Town to
this place: the same day the Army marched thence toward Nicolarus; there they
had remained till Perissus his finding them; Antissius striving to diswade
Dolorindus persisting in his resolution, which had end by this adventure. They
stayed there till he was something recovered, in which time the Sicilians
arrived with whom they all followed the Army, but Dolorindus afflicted doubly
left them to their will, he following a course to redeem his honor quenched.
They arriving found the Kings ready to give battle, the Army was ordered
before their coming, wherefore those troops stood by them selves to watch when
they might assist, and not trouble them.

Antissia after she had fed her self with this fury, was more then
satisfied, for Envy being a little appeased, she came to her good nature
again, or love, or fear, or, and indeed all passions, whirling about like a
wheel they draw wye^ out with all: so drew she painful thoughts, longer
then before, lengthned, with despair; for now said she, wretched Antissia,
what hope can be so flattering, as to show it self in any color like it self
to help thee? Amphilanthus must for ever hate thee, and all his friends
despise thee. Thou have engaged a loving King, who will (I am assured) be so
oreruled by thy commands as he will loose his life for thee.

How can N^gropont forgive me? but most I have offended mine own Country
dear Romania, in seeking to make thee a widow by loosing her King, who if he
meet Amphilanthus in the field, is sure to dye for it; if not, yet have I
sought to murder his honor, in desiring to make him ungrateful: either way I
am a Traitor to my Country, and deserve the sharpest punishment. Yet I hope
they will consider what unquiet passions may produce, and like men, have
stayder judgments about them, then on my request to endanger themselves, or let
their honors perish for my will. This hope pleases me, but now again, I doubt;
O fond Antissia, wicked Antissia, to let so vilde a thought inhabit in thee: it
had been too much to be nourished, and brought to the ripeness of so much
mischief.

Alas sweetest Pamphilia, how may thou curse me, for having a thought to hurt
thy love? much more to plot his ruin, and so thine in his; yet thou art the
cause; for had he not changed from me to thee, all had been safe, yet I may
wrong thee this way too: how know I that he loved me first, may it not be,
that he did love thee long before I saw Morea? His fashion at the first
encounter 'twixt you, when we came to Mantinea, expressed a dear respect, and
familiar love, then I wronged thee, to purchase him. If from thee he did
change, the blame is there, and I ask pardon for it; but pardon cannot be,
where so much ill remains.

What shall I do most miserable creature, wretched beyond all women, and not fit
to live? How ever businesses pass, thou art a mere shame to thy sex, and the
disgrace of lovers. Die cruel Antissia, and abuse not this place with thy vild
living in it. How can this earth bear without swallowing thee up? considering
that he brought quiet peace, the blessing of a Country unto it. But thy hate is
such to me, as thou will not let me lodge within thee, but rather does cast
me out, like the worst weeds, to ease thy self of the poison I am fild'd
withal, and to expose me to the end, wor^t serpents are brought to, which
ought to be destroyed, least they infect the earth; and should I be slain for
my venomous practice, and have no burial, I were justly used, who could not
bury a little loss without the grave were lined with murder.

A little loss said I, noe sure it is the greatest; yet love should still be
love, and not let malice be the Hyaena to so sweet a Prince. Perplexed wretch,
what shall I do? wander away? abide not here for shame, the air cannot
afford thee breath, the grownd rest, nor thine own lost self quiet. Cursed be
thy days, and thou the most accursed soul living; end, or be transformed to
misery it self, and be any thing rather then Antissia. Sought I to make
Antissius ungrateful? cursed was the act, and I accursed in it. Would I have
D^lorindus kill Amphilanthus? why did not that desire murder, or indeed justly
execute me? Hate is above all, and highlyest to be hated, and if that to be
misprized, what must the Nurse be that nourished it? As a mother of a brave
good son, is reverenced, and sought: so may I be hated, and shunned for this
birth. Romania I am a Traitor to thee, thou can not but abhor me. I am
guilty, accuse my self, and know what thou must do in Justice to be revenged
on me. I will fly from thee, and ever blame my self. Then went she down out
of her chamber, taking to the walk she had described to Amphilanthus, and
Pamphilia, there she walked like a hurt Dear, staying no where, vexed, and
tormented, thinking stirring, and running would help, but all proou'd
contrary, she must yield to her hurt, and lie down with her harm. There she
passed up and down till a boat came in: she asked of what place they were;
they said of Metelin: when they returned, they answered instantly when they had
vnladed. In conclusion, she agreed with them, and so returned better quieted,
because business employed her. She was now resolved to go, who to take with
her she must think of, what manner to go in, what provision to carry with
her. These employed her wits, so as she grew to be a little pacified, and these
things to put the other out of mind, at least the minds trouble with
perpetual vexation. But when she was ready to take her journey, many great
Ladies came to visit her, as if sent to hinder her; she took it so, and
although a Princess who loved noble conversation, yet coming vnwished for, it
now perplexed her; her judgment commanded, and she entertained them,
discharged her Bark, and staid with them. Her sorrow she covered, or masked,
with the absence of her Nephew; but Lucenia was one, and one bred in Loves
School, she knew her pain, and the cause of it, and wrought so well on it, as
she had what she came for, and left Antissia, a more unquiet woman then she
found her^ adding to the aptness of her amorous nature, correcting her
thoughts, and making dangerous additions to her passion; if one woman's hate be
harmefull, what must two be, and specially two such? for she had merited ^ll,
though Lucenia revenged not.

Amphilanthus I pity thee, who for all noble parts ought to be admired,
and a^t reverenced of all, being matchless in all virtues, except thy love;
for inconstancy, was, and is the only touch thou have, yet can I not say, but
thou art constant to love; for never art thou out of love, but variety is thy
stain, yet least is that blame of any, were not peril to ensue, plots laid to
destroy thee, yet will thou pass them all, and be thy self; Women are ominous
to thee, shun them, and love her firmly who only loves thee.

Her secret journey, or pilgrimage thus put by, she remained like a Nettle,
hardly scaping the weeders hand, but growing on, turns to seed, and from
thence springs hundreds as stinging: so did she, (scaping out of good Natures
corrections) ouergrowe by envious absence, to the seeding plenty of all
mischiefs growth, Now she commends her first action, prays for the
proceeding: loves Dolorindus if he performs her command, vows hatred to him
if he attempt it not, and so far it spread it self, as when she confessed
him too weak to encounter her Loue-growne-enemy, she suffered Treason to say
he ought to be employed, and that he should revenge her wrong, so as she was
so far from fearing his harm, as she ^tudied ways how to harm him, and
having found them, wished them al presenting themselves before Dolorindus, that
he might choose the most mischeuing, and most speeding hurt for him. Sometime
Lucenia staid with her, and so bewitched her with her witty person now, as she
would return with her; virtuous friendship never linked so fast, as those
conditions tied themselves together, and all employed against the worthiest man
the earth carried, the true sum for excellent light of his time, and for
whose sake the Sun would hide himself, in grief he could not shine so
bright as his glory did; Fame spreading like his beams about him, rich, fair,
clear, and hott equally, and surpassing him,

Lucenia and Antissia knew this, this increased love to breed envy, and malice,
because they enjoyed him not, and so in the end, all his virtues were but ways
for their ill to travel in, the more to hate him; for, the brauer they
confessed him, the greater worth to be in him, the fuller happiness she was
blessed with that held his love, made them to see their loss, and as from
twilight to Sun rising they increased in fury, and so built their ill, upon
his excellent deseruings; thus may goodness be a ground to ill, and thus
wrought they. They that before heard not his name without heart-leaping, now
with scorn to think that cruel thought of being left, his remembrance is
with cursings as with prayers, with blames as with joys, and all changed like
Snow to durty water, wherein they drowned their amorous thoughts, and brought
forth cutting Sedges of hatred against the exquisite Prince, springing out of
the foul mud of their deuilish dispositions. At last it was agreed on, that if
he escaped from their hands, he should be invited, or trained thither, (being
assured of the secret car^iage of their plo^s) and to some other place where
they might have their ends. Envy, what can thou bring forth more in
abundance, then the richest root of goodness? like a staulke on which diverse
colors, and several flowers grow: not like a pure Lilly of chaste, and
virtuous love. Pamphilia in this flourished, who longed for nothing but power,
or means to express her love by; She now in her Country, alone spent her time
as a faithful lover does, never but thinking of him, calling all delightful
times they had enjoyed, to mind, ioying in them, as in blessings, never
thinking of blessedness, but when she might think of seeing him; to which end,
and to cover her longing with some probable occasion of bringing her nearer to
him, she called her people, and after she had gained their consents for a
journey to visit her aged father, being moved unto it, both by reason of his
weakness, and the desire he had once to see all his children together, which
he should do, at their return from Albania; be^ides to meet her most honored
friend, the widow Queen of Naples, whom in many years she had not seen;
these were fair motives, had there not been a fayrer, and more dear one,
which darkened these with the greater light of love.

Well, she prepares for the journey in infinite pomp, she goes attended on by
the best of the Kingdom; a grave, and good Council she left behind her, to
govern in her absence. As she was ready to Ship, there arrived Orilena, of
purpose come to visit her, but finding her ready to leave Pamphilia, she
consented to accompany her into Morea. As they sailed, all their discourse was
of love, Orilena being as fit a companion as might be for the sad Queen: both
their loves absent, both extremely loving. While they were at Sea, they made
verses, comparing the evening to the coolness of absence, the day break, to
the hope of sight, and the warmth to the enjoying, the waves to the swelling
sorrows their breasts endured, and every thing they made to serve their turns,
to express their affections by. By the Sun they sent their hot passions to
their loves; in the cold Moons face writ Characters of their sorrows for
their absence, which she with pale wan visage delivered to their eyes, grieved
as to the death, she could not help those amorous Ladies; yet Pamphilia was
most to be pitied, because her love was most, and most painful to endure, as
being haunted with two hellish Spirits of keeping it secret, and bearing the
weight it self. The other Lady had more liberty, so more ease, for she might
boldly say she wanted Philarchos, and bewailed his absence, yet never did she
so, but Pamphilia sighed with her, and so sister-like condoled with her, as she
excelled her in passion, which made some eroniously say, that counterfeting was
more excellent then true suffering, because judgment gouerns where passions are
free, when fully possessed they master beyond, and so express not so well, as if
ruld with discretion; for an Actor knows when to speak, when to sigh, when to
end: a true feeler is as wrapped in distempers, and only can know how to bear.
Many of these passages there were in dispute, none scaping censure, how great,
or good soever.

These Ladies standing one day upon the Hatches, they saw a little Barque come
toward them; Pamphilia commanded the Boat to be called to them, which was
done, when out of her came a well known Squire from him, she most loved, he
kneeld, and presented her with letters, and in them a token from him; she took
them with such joy, as her heart, did like the waves, swell: her color came
into her face, and she was so surprised with content, as she could not tell
what to say unto him; at last she remembered that she was not alone, but that
she must consider all, eyes were not her servants, she corrected herself, yet
could not blame that passion for so deserving a cause. My dear said she, I
cannot hide my happiness, nor am I sorry for it, since it is for thee, I suffer
this, unless that holding it so dear, I may grudge any should partake of it.
Yet calling her senses more about her, to avoid suspicion, she demanded how
Parselius, Rosindy, and Philarchos did, and Amphilanthus said she, I hope also
does well. That came out so sweetly, and lovingly, as one might judge, she
asked for the rest for his sake, because she would name him, or named him last,
as more to stick in memory. Orilena was so desirous to know, how her
Philarchos did, as she nere heeded how Pamphilia carried her self. Surpassing
passion, excellent, still govern, how delicate is thy force? How happy thy
rule, that makes such excellent women thy subjects? made so by thy government,
instructed by thy skill, taught by thy learning, and indeed made by thee. Be
thou still, and worthily adored, and this Pamphilia does agree to; excellent
Queen, the true pattern of excellent affection, and affections truth. She
then called the Messenger, and having called her Spirits to her, asked
particularly of the estate of Albania.

He related the whole discourse, as instructed to set forth his Lord to his
own love; she needed not much inuiting to that banquet, this discourse fed
her day and night. They talked of the wars, and of the brave Champions, whose
honors were never greater, then when extolled by her. At last to Morea they
came, the King and Queen coming ^wo days journey to meet her, the most
perfect Queen her Cousin, ^oying in her sight, as in heavenly happiness, for
so she held her Dear. Great joy was made for her coming, and still
augmentations of that by ^he news from the Army ever bringing good. Urania
rejoiced, and Philistella was overcome with content: sweet Selarina was as
glad as any, but her passions were moderate, and discreetly held themselves
within, yet she would finely (though in show carelessely) inquire how
Antissius prospered. The other Ladies would smile at it, and some^imes to make
sport so pretily anger her, as was delightful pastime; eue^y one envious to
have each others passions known; not doubting but their own were equally
discovered, jealous only of each others power, ^or being better able to
conceal their flames then themselves; here did Love truly, and royally triumph.

Pamphilia gotten alone, looked as often on the token, as her hearts eyes
looked on the sender; it was his picture: she kissed it, she laid it and wore
it continually in her breast; careful she was, least her Chamber-maide might
see it, because it was more then her reservedness did warrant, yet rather had
she all should know and see it, then be one minute hindered from the enjoying
it so near; My dear self (would ^hee say) what happiness find I in thee?
how am I blessed alone in ^hee? and above all by thee? Deerer part of my soul,
take the other ^o thee, pure love calls thee to acceptance, and thou do, I
hope, take what I so firmly give thee. What shall I say? thou say thou will
not ^ee ungrateful, I assure my self of that, and blame my self extremely,
^f I said any thing might make thee think I doubted thee; thou know I never
urged so much, as by question to know, if thou did love me. I ^aw it, what
needed I to ask, much less to fear. No sweetest love, I love ^oo much to
mistrust, and love thee more then to demand assurance, which needs not, where
such confidence remains, nor is fit, since if man-like ^hou should once
live to change, thy change would grieve my heart, but kill my soul to know,
thou were both changing and forsworn, falsehood were double here, and single
even enough to murder me: but those dear eyes assure me, those lips swell
in anger I should thus dispute then, and now dearest, take mine unto thine,
which with whispering let my breath say, I do long only to see them move
again, and tell me of thy love, souls comfort; how I see in my soul
spirit-like clear, and bodilesse from corruption, govern and command like
love; a thing adored and reverenced, but not seen, except to lovers: so art
thou to me, my spirit, and my All.

While she was thus in loves best clothes apparreld, the brauest of Ladies of
her time came to her, finding her in her ancient lo^ing walk; she met her with
joy and respect, knowing her so worthy, as she was only fit to be mother to
such a son, who alone deserved so matchless a mother. To her she went, who
in her arms entertained her, that humbly took her favor with a low
reverence, which love made her yield her. No time was lost between them, for
each minute was filled with store of wit, which passed between them, as grounds
are with shadows where people walk: and the longer they discoursed still grew
as much more excellent, as they, to nightward seem longer.

Among other speech the Queen of Naples asked Pamphilia what she heard of the
wars in Albania. She discoursed it all unto her, but the last business seemd
the strangest, and vnusuallest, said she, although Polidorus his fortune in his
wives affection was rare, the discourse was this. Nicholarus (being one of the
Kings of Albania, as they falsely termed themselves) a Gentleman endued with
all virtuous parts of learning, courage, and in truth, all that could be
required in a brave man, yet was encountered with a stronger enemy then his
judgment could resist, which was love, and love of one, who for his misery
loved another. Nicholarus came often where she was, often showed his affection, the
other came with him, as if to glory in his mastery, or to enjoy with triumph
what was refused this King, as a prisoner led, is a more glorious spectacle,
then to know he is in a Tower: so are inioyings before refused more happy, and
prized, then if by stealth, or kept in pri^ate, though love can be held as
dear and best. The poor Prince having a Scarf by cunning love thrown over
his eyes, never misdoubted any thing, still loving, and cherishing him more
then any, because he saw she respected him. Once to her house he came, where
they were entertained, as their places and dignities required, but the lover as
love commanded. The Prince, or King, or what you will call him, because in his
Neighbors Country, watched as he thought an opportunity, and in the morning
when they were to meet the other Kings who were near to that place, assembled
about an especial business of hunting: her husband loving that sport well, was
soonest up, and called the King; he employed him in some other business,
while he went unto his wife, whom he found in her chamber in bed, attending
(not his Majesty) but the King of her heart. She rose up in her bed, and
opened the Curtain with love, and joy in her face and eyes. He took it meant
to him when he perceived it, for hard was such a joy as she expected, to be
drawn back on the sudden; but when, like violence followed, for her smile
was frowning, her joy displeasure, her rising to embrace him, to turning her
face from him, her speech to welcome him, to crying out, I wonder (said she)
m^ maids have thus betrayed me, leaving the Chamber open to my shame. Alas, my
Lord, I wonder what you mean to come this way, it is an ill one, and unfit for
you. I have not mistaken, said he, I come to visit you, and to entreat you.
What to do my Lord, said she? To pity me, said he. To dishonor my self,
cried she. Why? if you can but pity me, you may, answered he. Pity of my
self makes me refuse you, replied she. What can you pity in your self,
said he? to deny me for? The honor (answered she) which calls to me for
respect, and care, which borne with me, is my fathers, and my brothers, and my
houses, these claim my care and pitey.

None need know your favor to me, but your self and my self, who with all
affection ask it, and with all truth will keep it close. I cannot, nor will
not trust mine own soul with unworthiness, lest accusation justly merited,
fall on me, and inwardly afflict me; therefore my Lord I beseech you (said
she) be satisfied, and as you protest to love me, make demonstration of it,
and leave me pure from touch of any ill, but your discourse, which so far
has troubled me, as I truly swear, I never was more molested in my days.

He with that drew his sword, whether to threaten her with harm, if she
consented not, or to make her yield, by offering violence on himself, I know
not, but she was distemperd with the manner, and wished her love, or husband,
the worse of the two by much, had been present. The better happened, for her
servant came at the instant, hindered it seemed only by higher powers to stay,
to serve her, his affection else bringing him usually rather before, then
after time, and so soon some times, as he has been forced to use his best
wits for his excuse, yet now he came late, but in best time for her. His
coming in, made the King start, and straight put up his Sword, making some
faind, and so idle cause for drawing it. He straight left the room, and the
other attended him, till he saw him horsed; then returning to his love, came
to excuse, and to be certain; excuse himself for stay, and to be resolved
of his being there in that sort. She wept for both, t^lling him, that he had
betrayed her, he grieved to be taxed so, yet with much ado gaind the truth;
then was he ioyed, and tormented, ioyed with her loyalty, vexed that his
negligence had given such advantage to his Rival.

All or both causes of trouble at last were ended, and concluded with the sum
of blessedness, content in affection. The King yet left it not thus, but
pursues with fair words, and letters what he sought; She with as fair (but
not so kind) replies, gained that he troubled her not in some months with
such importunity.

At last he writ some Verses to her, wherein he commended variety in love,
as inuiting her unto it, being the most pleasing and fruitful, telling her
whom he could love, on all causes and reasons, as either beauty, greatness,
wit, or for varieties sake it self could move him. The coppie of his I have
not, but most excellent Madam (said she) by hers you may see what he has
said, and hers be these, and these your most excellent Son has sent me, for
Nicholarus is his prisoner, taken, and saved by him in the last Battle, that
Country wholly by the matchless King of Naples conquered, and won; for by his
coming, Polidorus was vanquished, and Nicholarus quite overthrown, now
remaining but one more to be subdued, and then Steriamus has all, and for
that, all must thank Amphilanthus. And he your love (said the Queen) who
thus commends him. She blushed to hear her judgment so free with her. She
kissed her, and willd her not to fear, though she discouerd her, but proceed
sweet Niece, said she. The Verses Madam (said she) were these.

THe joy yon say the Heavens in motion try
Is not for change, but for their constancy.
Should they stand still, their change you then might move,
And serve your turn in praise of fickle love.
That pleasure is not but diuersified,
Plainly makes proof your youth, not judgment tried.
The Suns renewing course, yet is not new,
Since it is but one set course he does pursue,
And though it feigned be, that he has changed,
It Was when he from his royal seat has raing'd:
His glorious splendour, free from such a stain,
Was forced to take new shapes, his end to gain.
And thus indeed the Sun may give you leave,
To take his worst part, your best to deceive.
And whereof he himself has been ashamd,
Your greatness praises, fitter to be blamd,
Nothing in greatness loves a strange delight,
Should we be gouernd then by appetite?
A hungry humor, surfeiting on ill,
Which Glutton-like with cramming will not fill.
No Serpent can bring forth so foul a birth,
As change in love, the hatefullst thing on earth.
Yet you do venture this vice to commend,
As if of it, you Patron were, or Friend.
Foster it still, and you shall true man be
Who first for change, lost his felicity.
Rivers (it is true) are clearest when they run,
But not because they have new places won;
For if the ground be muddy where they fall,
The clearenesse with their change, does change with all,
Lakes may be sweet, if so their bottoms be;
From roots, not from the leaves our fruit we see.
But love too rich a prize is for your share,
Some little idle liking he can spare
Your wit to play withal; but true love must
Have truer hearts to lodge in, and more just,
While this may be allowed you for loves might,
As for days glory framed was the night.
That you can outward fairness so affect,
Shows that the worthier part you still neglect.
Or else your many changings best appears;
For beauty changes faster then the years:
And that you can love greatness, makes it known,
The want of height in goodness of your own.
It Was not a happiness in ancient time
To hold plurality to be no crime,
But a mere ignorance, which they did mend,
When the true light did glorious lusture lend.
And much I wonder you will highly rate
The brutish love of Nature, from which state
Reason does guide us, and does difference make
From sensual will, true reasons laws to take.
Were not for Reason, we but brutish were,
Nor from the beasts did we at all differ;
Yet these you praise, the true style opinion,
By which truths government is shroudly gone.
Honor by you esteemd a title, true,
A title cannot claimd by change as due.
It is too high for such low worth to reach,
Heaven gifts bestow'th as to belong to each.
And this true love must in revenge bestow
On you, his sacred power, with pain to know:
A love to give you fickle, loose, and vain,
Yet you with ceaselesse grief, seek to obtain
Her fleeting favors, while you wayling prove,
Merely for punishment a steady love:
Let her be fair, but false, great, disdainefull,
Chaste, but to you, to all others, gainefull,
Then shall your liberty and choice be tide
To pain, repentance, and (the worst sin) pride.
But if this cannot teach you how to love,
Change still, till you can better counsel prove:
Yet be assured, while these conceits you have,
Love will not own one shot (you say) he gave.
His are all true, all worthy, yours unjust,
Then (changing you) what can you from him trust.
Repentance true felt, often the Gods does win,
Then in your Waine of love, leave this foul sin:
So shall you purchase favor, bannish shame,
And with some care obtain a lovers name.
These Verses being sent to Nicholarus, by the same messenger that brought his,
he ^ell into so violent a despair, and hate of himself, as being more subject
to passion, then strength of judgment, or power of virtue, he grew distracted,
or indeed stark mad, so as care was had of him, and governors set about him, as
over his estate; til at last by diligence, and faithful Physicians, and
servants, he recouerd; but how; only to be made more miserable, or to have
iuster cause to be mad, as if the other were not sufficient; for then succeeded
the invasion and he gaind his wits to see his Country lost, and feel his
weakness in estate, as before in sense, yet was he happier then, for that want,
made him not want it, this finds it. In his mad fits he once writ to her, and
would needs convey it by a Romanian, who then waited on him. He honestly
delivered it but more honestly wept, and bewailed his Lords misfortune. She
carried it bravely, and that is all can be said; for what should she, or could
she do loving an other? she was (no question) sorry in a noble sort, but not
in respect, that had he been other she must have run a greater danger in
hazard of her honor, and breach in faith to her beloved. This made her imagine
the other the less, and her fortune the better.

The same Lady, and her lover likewise, (but at several times) were brought to
the victorious King, whose pardons he gaind, being as merciful, as brave; and
this relation have I from the Prince of Sauoy, a Gentleman excellently bred,
and discreetely living, good as any, learned above ordinary Princes, and
delicatly skilled in Poetry. This discourse he has put in verse, which is
that I meant he sent me, and daintily expressed all the passions: The Queen
of Naples desired to see it, she promise the performance; then walked they a
little farther, still taulking of love, the brave Queen longing to hear the
young Queen confess, she willing enough if to any she would have spoken it,
but he, and she must only be rich in that knowledge.

In the evening the other Princess came unto them, and so all attended the
rare Lady into the Palace, who was as perfect in Poetry, and all other Princely
virtues as any woman that ever lived, to be esteemed excellent in any one,
she was stored with all, and so the more admirable. With in a short time after
the King of Morea intending to meet the Princes, who he imagined would be in
that time upon their return, determined to encounter them, (more clearly to
see his love) for he took a journey toward them, and so resolved to remove
his Court to Corinth, that famous, ancient, and fair City; there he
purposed to stay, and to have the fitter opportunity to entertain them: how
happy a resolution in show this was for the amorous Ladies, lovers can well,
and best conjecture.

Being arrived at that beautyfull place, the young loving Princesses must needs
see the Sea, and not only that, but go upon it; Pamphilia went to the shore
with them, but then considered her gravity was too much in the opinion of the
world to enter into so slight an action, wherefore desired pardon. They would
not allow it her^ but with sweet persuasions, and inticements got her a board
with them; they sailed some leagues from the shore with much pleasure, (and as
they called it) content, Pamphilia and Urania discoursing, Philistella, and
Selarina: Orilena was at that time with the Queen of Naples, whom they would
not call, least their journey might be hindered; thus they plotted to deceive
themselves, and ran from safety to apparent danger, for what is the Sea but
uncertainty.

Why should Pamphilia, (unless on necessity) venture her constant self in
such a hazard, as if to tempt her enemy? which surely she did, for she grew
angry to see she was made to serve her perfectio^s, and in fury waxed in raged,
the Ship grew kindly with bending her self to each wave to ask pity, and
bowing with reverence to demand safety, and return. But she the more sought
to, like a proud insolent woman, grew the more s^out, and haughty, regarding
nothing more then her own pride and striving to molest those beautyes. The
Ladies cried; the Sea unmercifully stubborn, was deaf to their laments. They
besought, she came up to the very sids of the Ship, as if to harken, but then
slid down, and smild at their fear, and rose again in glorious height to
behold more of their sorrows. O said Pamphilia, when did I ever play so
foolish a part? justly may I be condemned for this error, and blamd for so
much lightness; how she despisd her self, and complaind to her love, how she
accused all but him, how she wept, and as it were saw by the course, a coming
harm to her soul, which then, and after, for a long space best knew the hurt,
wayling in condemning her. The storm continued, the winds calling loud to the
Sea, to assist, or continue her fury. To the shore of either side they could
not get; Fortune would not permit ought but misfortune to govern; at last they
were quite carried out of the Gulf, and being in the Adriatike Sea, the Ship
was tossed as pleased Destiney, till at last she was cast upon a Rock, and
split, the brave Ladies saved, while she a while lay tumbling, and beating her
self, as hoping to make way into the hard stone, for those, who could pierce
the stoniest heart with the least of their looks.

When they were got upon the Rock, and seeing no place but it self, (which
appeared to be at first but small) they were in an excessive perplexity,
wishing rather in the storm to have been swallowed, then brought thither to
some hope, and then cast into the depth of Despair, except it were to be
famished there.

Pamphilia most patiently took it, at least most silently: She climbing the
Rock till at the top she discovered a fine Country, and discerned before her a
delicate plain, in the midst whereof was a most sumptuous building, of Marble,
she joyfully called to the other, who followed her, and viewing it, I fear
this storm, and adventure said Urania, ever since I was carried to Ciprus; if
it be an enchantment, woe be to us, who may be bewitched to the misery of never
seeing our desires fulfilled, once was I made wretched by such a mischeife. Let
it be what it will said Pamphilia, I will see the end of it, led as in a dream
by the leader, not with bewitching dull spirit but craft. You may said Urania,
having had such suc^esse in the last, yet take heed, all adventures were not
framed for you to finish. Nor for you to be enchanted in, answered she. So
they went on, the two other marking what they did, who sent some one, or two of
their servants to discover what this was. They found a round building like a
Theater, carved curiously, and in mighty pillars; light they might in many
places discern between the pillars of the upper row, but what was within,
they could not discover, nor find the gate to enter it. With this they returned,
the Ladies proceeded, and arriving there, found it just as the servants had
described; but more curiously beholding it, they found in one of the pillars, a
letter engraven, and on an other, another letter. They understood not the
meaning, while Pamphilia (more desirous of knowledge then the rest) went as far
behind that pillar as she could, and there perceived a space, as if half of
the pillar, and then a plain place, and so half of the other behind it had
left a passage through the^. She came back and finding her imagination likely,
she lookd' upon the middle plain which made the space, while the four pillars
making a square, and therein found a keyhole. She looked for the key, while
the other three did likewise busy them selves in such search, having found in
every plain such a place, Pamphilia at last found the key, at the foot of one
of the pillars. She took it, and tried to open it, which presently it did, as
if opening it self willingly to her power, or renting it self asunder, to let
her go into it. Instantly appeard as magnificent a Theater, as Art could
frame. The other Princes seeing it open came to Pamphilia and all of them stood
gazing on it; there was a Throne which nine steps ascended unto, on the top
were four rich chayers of Marble, in which were most delicate, and sumptuous
imbroider'd cushions, a Carpet of rich embrodery lying before, and under them.
Needs this richnes must be nearer beheld, and (like women) must see novelties;
nay even Pamphilia was enticed to vanity in this kind. In they go, and venture
to ascend the Throne, when instantly the sweetest music, and most enchanting
harmony of voices, so ouerruld their senses, as they thought no more of any
thing, but went up, and sat down in the chayers. The gate was instantly
locked again, and so was all thought in them shut up for their coming forth
thence, till the man most loving, and most beloved, used his force, who should
release them, but himself be enclosed till by the freeing of the sweetest and
loueliest creature, that poor hahits had disguised greatness in, he should be
redeemed, and then should all be finished. To say these brave princes were in
pain, I should say amiss, for all the comfort their own hearts could imagine
to them selves, they felt there, seeing before them, (as they thought) their
loves smiling, and ioying in them; thus flattering love deceived the true, and
brought contrary effects to the most good, and this those brave Princes felt,
when at the concluding of the last battle, just as they had taken possession of
the greater towns of that Kingdom, and settled all things in quiet, received
the people into subjection, taken their oaths to Steriamus, crowned him as their
manner was in the Army, and so returned to the chief City, resolving thence to
send news to Morea, and every one to their loves, of their brave and happy
success, there arrived a messenger with the heavy tidings of the loss of the
whole worlds beauty. Steriamus fell into such passion, as none thought he would
have enjoyed the Kingdom, longer then one does their love in a vision, crying
out, have I lo^t the Kingdom of my hearts content, to gain a poor Country of
earth, and dirt? have I gained to loose more then earth can give me? must I
be crowned King to dye a beggar? never was man in such perplexity; nor any so
molested as Amphilanthus, who wisely covered his passions, much condemning
their indiscretions that went with them to Sea, lamented, and heartily grieved
for the misaduenture, and so resolved to go instantly in search of them.
Olorandus had arrived there some weeks before, and well, for the last battle
was hard, and terrible, as being the last the Rebels could hope on, all but
this last overcome; He helpd well, and so had Perissus in the former, without
whose asistance, the business had not so clearly passed, yet did they not
fully end with their victory, but with the loss of almost as many men as the
other partly lost in that battle: so as only their gain was by the noble
valor of the peerless Kings, but now must they undergo a more dangerous
busines^ Amphilanthus and Ollorandus went together, Steriamus and Selarinus
parted, Antissius going with him, Steriamus would go alone, and by none could
be dissuaded; Leandrus with Parselius; Dolorindus was gone before, never
showing his face after his folly concerning Amphilanthus. Perissus and
Philarchos joined companions. Excellent care was taken in the choice of the
Lieutenants, the two first met Knights by Amphilanthus had the charge as
principal of the Counsel of Albania, being of great blood, and Tireneus of
Epirus, Philarchos, and Perissus went to Morea, to comfort the King and Queen,
and to see Orilena. Rosindy and Polarchos took together, but first went to
Macedon, to see Meriana. Thus all divided, Amphilanthus must first be attended,
who having the part allotted him to go to the Sea (as if the business most
concerned him, and the hopefullest) shipped in Epirus as soon as he could, and
came all along the Coa^t, visiting every Island, and searching in all ships for
tidings, complaining in himself, that such misfortune should be, and at so
much an unlooked for time, when all happiness appeared ready to embrace them.
As he passed, his heart on a sudden leaped within him, but straight again
tears followed, to see how he was void of all comfort, yet did it truly offer
him help, but he must not take nor give it, for by the fatal Rock, he
passed, when that joy was in him, and no sooner passed, but was possessed
again with sorrow. Alas Pamphilia his help was near thee, but thou must not
have it lent thee, but loose more. A ship at last came toward him, to demand
news, and if they came from Greece, of Amphilanthus.

He made answer himself, that he was the man they sought. My Lord said he,
your brother by me salutes you, and desires your speedy return, the cause you
shall by these letters understand. He took them, and found that a great war
was begun between two famous, and great houses in Italy, by reason that the
Duke of Milans younger son, had stolen away the Duke of Vrbins only
daughter; the business at first was but between themselves, then grew
further, all neighbors taking part with them, so as Italy was all on fi^e, and
the Regent no more respected, then as their kings brother, but power he had
none, or very little, so as he remained at Rome in the Castle, and thence sent
to his brother to return and govern, whose sight they all thought would
appease the fury. He was grieved to go from seeking her, and them he loved so
dearly, yet this was an occasion to be looked unto, nor could it be long
that it was likely to hold him; wherefore by Ollorandus his advise, and the
care he had of his poor Country, for her sake more then his own to prevent
the ruin, he bent his course that way.

Alas unfortunate Lady, what will become of you? this is the last time for some
months, he shall come so near, but years before his affection be so much.
Unluckily did Fortune provide for thee, when blessings only kiss like
strangers, but have their dwellings other where.

He arrived in Italy, presently letting his coming be known, all flocked
unto him, and as when a civil war in a Country has made parties, yet when a
common enemy comes, they all join against him: so did they flee now from the
partakings, but run to happiness and welcome. He examined the cause, found
matters ill on both sides, yet at last with power, love and judgment, appeased
them all, and settled Italy in as brave peace and quiet as ever it was,
flourishing now doubly, as in riches, and the joy of such a King. While he
remained there, much people frequented thither, and the fame of his acts,
brought most eyes to behold him, and as he returned, so flew the report of his
being there with them; whereupon the King of Dalmati^ sent Ambassadors to treat
of a marriage, twixt his daughter, and Amphilanthus, a thing long before spoken
of, and wished, but this father would never hear of it during his life, now
revived again, and with much earnestness pursued. The King made a courteous,
and civil answer to the Ambassador, but said, for marriage, he did desire to
be excused, till he knew by his own labor certainly what was become of his
Sister and Cousin, then he would come himself into Dalmatia, and satisfy the
King to his full content. This answer was sufficient for the time; thus
resolved he to go in the search appointed, and to that end (having called the
Princes together, who were all met, and those from Albania returned) gave charge
of his estate to the Couns^ll making an old grave man of much reverence in the
Country, and of the house of Florence, President of the Counsel; his brother
he would have settled again, but he desired to be excused, and to have the
order of Knighthood, that with the rest of the brave Princes, he might seek
his sister, and Cosins. The King refused him not, but himself gave him the
order, and then parted he one way with Ollorandus, the young Leonius another
way by himself, having none but an Esquire with him. Amphilanthus changed his
armor, and colors, making all tawny, as if forsaken, which was but the badge
of the Liuerie he gave her soon after, who best deserved from him, and
therefore least merited that reward; he also gave himself another name, and
was called the Lost Man. Ollorandus must likewise alter, else one would make the
other known, wherefore he contrariwise called himself, the Happy Knight,
carrying in his Shield Victory, crowned with Love. Thus they traveled
uncertainly where to stay, or land, letting the Mariners guide them as they
pleased, who were strangers to them, and of Dalmatia, whither they carried
them; they asked no more questions, but landed, and so went up into the
Country, coming into a Wood, which was great, and every way thick and
desert; they yet traueld, when they came to a way that parted in three, they
stood in question what to do, at last they resolved to take the middle way,
and by no means to divide themselves. The course they took, brought them to a
mighty Hill, whose curled sides were so thick with trees, as no possibility was
to go down, being so steep, as they must hope to do a miracle, and walk on
the crowns of trees, or else fall to their ruin, like Icarus, melted for
presumption: so they might be bruised for proud hope, and broken in their
fall. They lighted from their horses, to try if so they might go on, but all
was in vain, so as they kept the Hill, till they came to a place where trees
had bin cut; this was little better for their horses, yet some thing more easy
for them. Here with much difficulty and pain (which to aduenturous Knights is
called pleasure, their life being a mere vexation, wilfully disguised to
content) they got down, and then came into a most lovely Valley, which had been
the perswasiue part to their descending, loveliness being as attractiue, as
the Adamant, having a property in love to Iron: so loveliness has to
affection.

In this valley they rid a pretty space, but ^ot one word past between the^; to
a River they came, fierce, and violent in the stream; no way might be found
to pass it in many miles riding, till at last they came unto a Bridge, which
was defended by two Knights. They would pass; the Guarders refused, unless
they would fulfill the orders there. They desired but to know what they were,
and they as willingly would obey, as they demand. The orders (said they) are
these: you must just with us two, one after another; if you overcome the first,
you must proceed to the next, and if vanquish both, the passage is free, but
one must venture first: nor his companion help, but stay his turn, and so
fight with both. The unmatchable King would take that task on him, his
companion standing by, he began, and bravely concluded it with the Victory.
Then seeing no more to be done, he took the Swords of the vanquished, and hung
them on a Pillar hard by, commanding them not to touch them, but to go to the
King of that Country from him, and to ^ell, what had befallen them, and swear
to carry no swords for two years, nor ever more to defend so slight a cause.
They desired first to go to the Lady, who had set them there, and tell her,
then to do the rest; desiring to ^now who had overcome them. He answered, the
Lost Man; they found some thing was in that name, wherefore they would not
press, but left him, promising to observe his commands.

The two Companions rid, till they came again to a Wood, but not so ^hicke as
the other, but of great huge trees, and such a place it was, as offered
delights, to most hearts to stay, and receive it there. The bodies white as
snow, testifying innocence; and their tops so large, and thickly spread, as
expressed glory for their pureness. In this place they lighted, giving their
horses to their Squires, and the very content of that solitariness brake their
silence. Here (said Amphilanthus) is a place fit for such a creature as my
self to dwell in; here alone am I fit to inhabit, and leave all government to
him that can rule, shunning that, when I cannot rule my self. When did I ever
see you my dearest friend (said Ollorandus) in this tune? What have you done
with your spirit? where drowned your judgment? and how buried your self? What
if you live to be crossed in your desires? believe it, it is not to other end,
then to make you happier with the sweet meeting, of what the miss will make
dearer to you, when passed. Pamphilia cannot be lost Urania drowned,
Philistella cast away, or Selarina stolen. What vexes you, if they be carried
to a far place; if the worst, as those parts are full of enchantments?

Enchanted (cried Amphilanthus) dear friend, it is we that are enchanted from
finding the truth of their loss: they are lost, and weeled by the same Devil
in ignorance, the more to torture and scorn us. Ollorandus persuaded, and
spoke hours to him, but he was deaf, or speechless, for not a word could he
get of him; his sighs were his answers, his groans his speech, and thus they
walked, till they met a Lady (as she seemd to be) in mourning attire, her fair
eyes showing more grief, then her apparel sadness, yet had they red cirkles
about them, threatening revenge for their sorrow; her train was only one Page,
who showed as little mirth, as his Mistress did content^ they came one a little
before the other, as if sorrow could have most liberty in lonelines, and
therefore although but two, would go asunder. Amphilanthus sad, found, or
sadness found for him, that distress in her demanded his help; wherefore he
went to her, courteously demanding, if his service might avail her. Sir, said
she, your taw^y livery so well suits with my fortune, as if I saw, but that I
might from thence ask help; but alas Sir, my misery is but one way to be
redrest, my woe no way equald, nor can my afflictions see end, but by the end
of me. Miseries face, said he, is so perfectly (yet in delicacy unfortunately)
presented in you, as would make one wish, rather to be thus, miserable, then
free otherwise affected; but as in you excellently are these perfections, so in
me are as excelling crosses. I knowing these, can with more feeling understand
yours, and with a more reuengefull mind serve you, having that abounding in me;
for behold here before you, the man, who never saw mo^ning joy, that was not
nipt by cold euenings malice. Comparing griefs, said the Lady, are but to
augment sorrow, without help coming to extremity, but in your discourse I
find by you, that you want help as well as I. And help only of one like your
self, said he, can make me blessed. I will not touch o^ that, said she,
though thus I might, since if she were like me, she would be much more
pitiful. How can I know that, said he, but thus I may guess it, that none
being able to compare with her, except her own excellencies, they gouernd by
her self can suffer no comparisons. This shows you to be a lover said she,
and for that, I bewail likewise your fortune, for hell cannot inflict^ more
terrible torment on a heart, then loves power settles in him. Do you^ spring
from that ill, said he? I thought only my stars had directed me to suc^
distress. They spring and flow, cried she, increase and dwell in this subiect^
May I know the cause said he? Yes said the Lady, if you will promise me pardon
for my boldness, and tedious discourse which it will prove, and other assistance
I need not. Alas (cried he) that shall be most willingly lent you, thoug^ I may
fear as little to help you, or my patience being a poor, though nessary
virtue. Tell me who you are, said the Lady? I am (replied he) called the lost
Man, my name little famous here, not having done any thing, but against two
Knights at a Bridge, from whom I won passage. If you have done tha^ answered
she, the more assurance have I of your worth and valor, for they were two,
counted the strongest, and most valliant of this Kingdom, and part of my story
touches on them, but now have I cause to be ambitious o^ your knowledge, and
by the want of it, reason to distrust the continuance o^ mine own unblessed
destiny, which increase in harms, pursuing and following me. Alas, said the
lost Man, what hope is there left, where two such fortunes encounter. Only
this said she, that the extremity may change to good out of that confidence,
you shall know the unkind fortune that gouern^ me.

This image of grief, or rather true grief, my self am called Bellamira^ my
father was called Detareus, a great Lord in this Country, and Steward o^ the
Kings house, favored by him, but at last sent in an Embassage, wherei^ he was
lost, wherewith my misery ran on to this height. He had many chil^dren, but
most borne to misfortune, my self being his first, as sent the sooner t^ taste
of misery; for being much at the Court with my father, before I kne^ what love
was, I was his prisoner. I pined, sigh, wept, but knew not what the pain was,
till at last the Tyrant showed from whence the danger came, bu^ with it showed
the impossibility of obtaining, he having settled his affect^^ons in another
place, nor had I pride en^ough to think my self able to wi^ him from the
Princess, for she it was, he did affect, a Lady deserving the title of
excellent, had not her pride, and other defacing imperfections, thrown a
black Scarf over her outward fairenes. This Lady he loved, but (as
afterward I found) no more constantly then your sex uses, not meaning to be
a Phaenix among men-louers, for fear of envy. When I perceived his eyes
somewhat favorably to bend themselves to me (unhappy fool that I was) I held
and valued it, my certain coming fortune, giving me such hope, as persuaded
me without fear to see the end; which brought me to the ambition, to be at
a great marriage, which was at the Court, the King gracing a young Lord so
far, as to have his Nuptials performed there. Then did I more plainly see
his respect to me, his shifts and means to be near me (certain proofs of
love), his alluring eyes telmee, his heart appointed them the messengers, to
discover what he sought, which was, that I should understand, I believed them,
and blame me not brave Sir, for never was man Lord of so many women's souls,
as this my Lord had rule of, who without flattery, did deserve it, never being
unthankful for their loves.

Thus my belief gave my faith, I ever after constantly loving him, he showed
as much to me: thus we loved, or thought we loved, which no sooner had
possession, but freedom followed, as the second to love, and this brought me
to my only playing part of misery. For being young, and full of joy, enriched
with the treasure of his affection, I fell into a snare, closely covered, and
so more dangerous, being caught by the craft of one, whose wit was to strong
for me, being as plentiful in wickedness, as excess could make, or
execution demonstrate in fullness. I so true a lover, as I thought on nothing
else, if ought, it was how to indeare myself in his favor, by respecting and
loving those he loved (a way much used, and to some profitably practiced) this
yet threw me into the Gulf of mischief, giving welcome to that Wretch, who
under show of respect, spoild my only comfort, stealing like rust, and eating
my heart, with as marring, and harmefull deceits. The love I saw my Lord bare
him, was the chief cause that made me like him, trusting his choice above mine
own judgment, for I knew him once thanklesse enough to another, from whom my
Lord took him, to be his companion-like servant. His discourse was delicate,
and so unusual his wit, not lying the same way, that other good ordinary ones
did, and so excelling; for what pleasinger then variety, or sweeter then
flattery? which he was filled with all, and made me give, or credit to a
treacherous deceit^ which persuaded me, he was full of honest plainenes, so
pretty, and familiar his discourses were, as showed a pleasing innocence, yet
endued with admirable learning. This moved me to trust, considering that the
greater his knowledge was, the more he should know truth, but contrariwise, he
was the breach to my misery. My Lord imploid^ him in some occasions abroad,
whether by his own desire to see, or his will to be certain of some foreign
knowledge, he went away, leaving me secure, and happiest in my Lords affection.
Many letters I received from him, wherein he witnessed his truth, which indeed
did well, for only paper and ink said it, not being worthy, or honest enough to
blush for his shame; but in the time of his absence, my loved love, did (like
all men) alter: it may be caused by greater beauty, it may ^ee provoked to it
by my imperfections; but some thing it was, (I dare not say a natural
inconstancy, b^t rather tax my self with the blame, then touch him,) made me
unfortunate. This unworthy man found it; and as vildly pursued it, smoothing me
with flatteries, while he glos'd with him, and her, to whom he had changed, as
long as ever he discernd courtesy in him toward me, (which at last most
cruelly was likewise taken from me) he followed me, but then looked on me as
a rainy day does on the earth, after a flattering morning: I was deceived, and
indeed undone, but it was by him, and for him whom I loved, yet after some
respect I found, therefore I pardon, and forgive him? Sometime this lasted,
succeeding as I should have told you, the death of my husband, and son, by
him; for married I was, and having ambition enough to hold me from that, in
hope of obtaining him for my husband, while the King still favored me, and
(if I might with arrogance say) loved me. But my love to my chosen, refused all
others, and he at last refused me; which, when the crafty dishonest man directly
saw, he not only (as I told you) left observing me, but proudly sought my
love; if I scornd his baseness, a thing raised by my Father to be known, but
made by my Lord to show in light. Consider you, who needs must know, what can
be yielded by a spirit true to noble birth, and more noble love to a worm
boldly crawling before the best, and lifting up an unvalued head as if a brave
beast; but a beast indeed he was, and I the misfortune had to be a taster of
his Villainy, under color of visiting me after my loss, he gaind still in my
true heart a confidence of his renewing respect to me, which I prized him for,
confessing still, and purely all the flames I felt for his Lord, and soon
after this, he showed his dishonesty, and such neglect, as if I were a blab, or
one desirous to do ill, I might yet mischief him. But I am far from that,
and will do well, let all other ills succeed that can, for goodness and truth
shall govern me; yet because all his falsehood shall not remain hid, or be
unknown. I will tell you somewhat that he did, for something it concearns
this story. He came to me, and found me apt, or took occasion to think so,
for he spoke of love, and proceeded so far, as he brought it to my fortune. I
answered moderatly, yet so home to my own heart, as he saw, I was the same, how
ever he was changed, for whose change my affliction was, and so I discovered my
pains, and sorrows, as he said, I complained fitly to be commiserated, and
that he pitied me. Do not so said I, for I contemn pity; from thence he
grew to aspire to win me, and so boldly, and ^aucely at las^ carried
himself, as if my dearest knew it, (though he now shunns me) he much more
would scorn him, that durst attempt to win her, whom he had once loved, and
yet holds as his own, though in despised sort: And more to show his villainy,
he only serves, and seeks, and sues to have her grace, who he perceives
keeps my love from me, thinking himself (base villain) good enough for me,
who now do wear the wretched livery of loss, and what is ever shunned I have
in store, forsaken and forlorn in love. Yet be it as it is, and they continue
as they do, I am, and ever will be my self.

But what, (said Amphilanthus) is the cause of this extremity of grief? Have
I not told you Sir, said she, being forsaken and despised? and why? only for
loving. Dull I have been called, for constancy is now termed so, and his
assurance of my faith made him leave me, a thing he thinks soon won, or
rather held at pleasure, confident assurance of firmness, growing to contempt;
and this course do unfortunate poor constant lovers run. What is become, said
Amphilanthus of this man? He lives said she I hope to shame himself. Where is
your love said h^? Fixed truly in my heart, other where I can give a small
account of: but as I have heard, living with a new love, bewitched sure with
some charms, else could he not continue closed alone within her arms, while
arms, and all true noblenes is buried in his loss: for lost he is, since he
fell to her power.

Why did those Knights maintain the passage said he? To defend poor me cried
she, who since now left unguarded on that side, I beseech you will convey me to
my house, which when you see, you will find likewise cause of pity there. Then
brought she them unto her dwelling, which was in a Cave, of great bigness, and
large proportion, a Monument in the midst of it, of the most precious stone of
that time wherein she lived, being the Tomb of her sweet, and last dear
love, her son. Divided the Cave was into pretty rooms, finely furnished, but
such as seemed rather to affect delicate cleanlines, then sumptuous ornament,
yet were they rich enough. Her attendants few, but their service showed them
sufficient for that place; with a modest, and sad kindness she bad them
welcome thither, and instantly asking pardon that she must leave them for such
a time, as she might perform her vow of mourning over the Tomb, which having
finished with numbers of sigh's, groans, and tears, she returned to them
again. Amphilanthus, was not yet satisfied with the discourse, wherefore
again he urged her; Then Sir said she you shall have all: I was borne to be
betray^'d, for before this cunning ill man came, I was undone in former hops by
one, that had been with my Lord almost from his birth, who with flatterings
had sealed up my heart to his use, never hiding any thing, (not my love it
self) from his knowledge, he making the greatest show of oblig^tion to me for
my confidence, that might be expressed by so rare a wit: striving by sub^ill
means to make me think he vsd all ways he might to make me happy; still
urging me, who needed no inticement to think how worthy the love was, how fit
the match, and then showed me the liknesse of it, our loves being so perfectly,
and reciprocally embraced: the strong bond of friendship, twixt our fathers,
and the continuance of that, between him, and my father, as inheriting it from
him; lastly of our breeding together, which though in our infancies, yet the
more naturally bred love, and increased it, adding to love, as the smalest
sticks do with momber to the fi^rs of triumph: but what above all indeed was
the earnestest moouer, (as he treacherously protested) was the true, and even
consent of our dispositions, which seemed so near being one, as though by
birth made two, yet created so, as to be joined in one, for the more direct,
and impartial strength of perfectness; and thus were you made to be one said
he, in all fortunes and beings. Heaven I confess I held his lou^; Father,
Mother, friends, all were strangers to me, in respect of the nearness of my
affection to him, and next to that did I think my best spent time was with
those he most affected, in his absence, in that kind serving him. Fortunate I
thought my self and honored, when his companions accompanied me, and so much
I loved him, as being forsaken, I now the more am tortured with just cause of
co^playning. This Creature, (loath I am to name by other title, and yet grieved
to give him his due, and to call him spoyler of my bliss) too diligently
attended me, never left me, when any time might be permitted for man to see me
in, I embraced his conversation, but it changed to my affliction, and contents
destruction seeing often times my passions, which were too vehement for me to
hide, or my weakness cover, he advised, yet still enticed me on. At last a
match was offered me, many had been so before, but all refused, my conscience
being such, as never to marry any, that I could not love, especially knowing it
before, yet was this more earnestly pursued then any other before, the
Gentleman himself too much, and unhappily affecting me. My Parents (looked
without loves eyes) or rather saw, (while that child was blind) the goodness,
and greatness of his estate, the hopefullnesse of the man, his virtues, and
noble conditions, much persuaded me unto him, yet could not more move me,
then it is possible to stir the most renowned Albion Rocks: and in as much
chaste whiteness, remained my love to my Lord, while this Devil who promised
his help, aimed at a far fowler end, being gaind, (I will not say by
bribes) to the friends of a great Heir, whose estate might make one, how
unworthy soever before a covetous mind, seem beautiful. This was his fire,
and by this he wrought, destilling the offense of Villainy, through the
Limbeck of his wickedness, and this was the beginning. My only love being gone
a journey with the King, loved infinitely by Deterius my father, and he
staying had left his chamber, and servants to his dispose, and command; a
stranger came in, (the plot ordained so by this Villain) while my Lord was
dressing him, he desired to speak with the Traitor; he went unto him, coming
in again with a paper in his hand, and amazednes in his face, which made my
deerer self demand the cause, he te^derly loving the wretch, because he had
instructed him^ from, and in his tender youth. He counterfetted loathnes to
speak, as if unwelcome news would follow his words, the more he was troubled,
and silent, the more perplexed was my dear; wherefore he privately called the
messenger to him, of whom he demanded the news; he answered he knew none, but
that with much joy, and content, Bellamira was betrothed to her long loving
friend, though not till then beloved of her, he then loved, and so may you^ the
better judge of his pain.

When he heard I had given my self to another, yet thus discreetly he^ carried
it, that he spoke not any thing unto it, though some while after he^ demanded
of his favored servant, as if but by chance, if he heard any thing of
Bellamira, he would not answer but with a sigh, and these words; It is
impossible I now find for any woman to be true. Why said my Lord, is Bellamira
married? No answered he, but as ill, for she is betrothed. O women, O love,
how fickle and false are you both? My dear hearing the death of my love
confirmed in this (likely but untrue) manner, sai^ little, only turned himself
to a window, where some tears he shed; yet having the noblest spirit in the
world, would not suffer himself too long t^ be gouernd under sorrow, turned
again, and so walked into an Orchard^ where they conferred, and at last he
gained his consent to his desired end.

I ignorantly lived, not daring to make other expressions then by looks or
humble, and willing services offered him, which with as much affection were
embraced; yet was I grieved I heard not of him, which still, till then I did by
every one that saw him, he as willing to send, as I to receive kindness. The
earnest suitor, and falsely supposed betrothed man, still did pursue, and so
hotly, as at last I resolved to stretch the limits of modesty, and to acquaint
my Lord withal by letter, and so ambitiously hoped to gain one from him; but
considering many dangers, I fell into the greatest, fearing the delivery of my
letter, I sent it to him, who was the only bar of the delivering of it, or the^
I sent, as at his death I found in a Cabinet, delivered by his own hands unto
me with tears, and humble petition for pardon, that so he might die quietly,
which as he lamentably protested, he could not do, nor peaceably leave this
world, I forgave him, and in that Cabinet found three of my letters, which
close me in the misery I now suffer; thereby I saw manifestly I was betrayed,
loosing the enjoying of what the loss brought my utter ruin: for I assuredly
confident in him, sent my letters still to him, trusting him contrary to
judgment, never receiving answer of them, but excuses from him self, as
since I find were framed by him, sometime saying he could not then write, but
in short time he would send one of purpose to me. I remained as lovers enjoying
their like quiet. But many weeks having passed, I writ again, setting down,
how I was solicited by him he knew of, almost threatened by my parents, yet had
they, nor should they gain more then this, that he like all others should be
refused for his sake, if it would please him to accept of me, and my truest
affection, wholly dedicated to him. This unfortunately I sent, as the others,
and so kept, coming the same morning, before he was by his Villainy contracted
to the great Heir of the Forest. Twice I was sending it by a trusty servant
of my mothers, but Desteny prevailed and I destined to mischief could not
withstand my ills.

Perplexed I was with my fortune, when I saw, or thought I saw my faith
rejected: mad at my patience that forced me to bear such injuries, cursed the
harm, yet loved the harme^maker, till one night my father, and many of his
friends at supper, the procurer of my misery came in, who was beloved, and
respected by my father for his learning, and for his service to his friend, and
so was entertained by him, placing him next unto himself, while I with
uncertain looks, and doubtful blushings cast mine eyes on him, yet stayed
them not long there, lest they might be understood my heart guilty of the
love my soul bare to his Lord, causing such a mistrust of discovery in my
own conscience, as that modesty hindered me from discovering my harm, which
his countenance had else been ready to bewray (as since I understood by some
that marked him, as they sat at meat). My father asked how his most noble Lord
did fare.

Well, my Lord (said he) but grown of late too cunning for us al; for would
you think it? he has finely got a wife. This made me boldly to look up, for
what would not such a deadly wound cause in one, if it were but only to look
boldly on their end: life lasting in me, but to know certainly my death,
being so eager of it, as I my self had demanded it, had not my father soon
prevented me, asking who it was. Why, said he, the fly Youth has got the
mighty Heir of the Forest. I hearing it, discernd my have to be like theirs,
that run to the top of the highest Rock, to throw themselves from thence: and
so did I; for those words struck me dead, my spirits falling, and failing me,
encountered with the depth, and bruise of fortune adverse to me, I fell from the
table in a swound. All ran to me, or about me, none (because none thought I
loved) being able or willing to guess the reason, except the Serpent, whose
poison struck me. I was with care and diligence brought to my self again,
which when I had sense to know, I blamd that sense that brought that knowledge
to me, condemning fortune, who would not permit one of her own sex, so much
favor as to die, having such cause. Then came my speech again, which I only
employed to this purpose, to desire some of the servants to lead me to my
chamber, beseeching the company not to stir, assuring them that there was no
danger, for usually I had had such fits; my father and mother, especially whose
loves were most unto me, and dearest to me, would have gone with me, but I
preuaild; the moouer of my torment looking on me with as much pity, as the
Master of a good Dog does on him, when he is hurt by his own setting on, upon
either Bull or Bear. When I came to my Chamber, I pretended a desire to rest,
which made me abler to dwell in any unrest. Sir, if ever you have felt love so
perfectly, as to deserve your name, imagine to your self what I felt, seeing
scorn, disdain, presented to mine eyes, nay (what of all is cruelst)
unkindness.

Unkindness to a perfect loving heart, is indeed said he of all miseries, the
cruellest, and most murdering. Have you (alas Sir said she) felt that grief?
That only said he perplexeth me, I cannot say I was disdained, for I was
cherished, I was not scorned, but received, I loved, and was beloved, but now I
fear she is unkind. Let not fear without assurance said she molest you, lest
it make you indeed loose by mistrust, what is yet but mistrusted to be lost. I
beseech you (said he) proceed, and let my misfortunes remain in me, by none
else thought on. Yet (said she) being forsaken, is a greater misery, for such
a loss, is loss of all hope, or joy in life; the other may be helped again
with kindness, and this I find; for had I not enjoyed a heavenly happiness,
I never had complained.

But to go on, being come to my chamber, and having liberty by priuatnesse to
exercise my sorrow in the absence of all but it self, I thus began to mourn.
O love, cride I, was it not enough that thou did win me to thy power, and
that thou did possess me in those years, when first it was possible for
maiden thoughts to entertain thee, to make me choose, guiding mine eyes to the
choice of one, where perfections linked themselves to chain my powers, and
envy from all such, that thinking I loved thee, maliced my happiness, as if I
had enjoyed? Yet cruel you cannot think all that I suffered by passion,
hatred of others, envy, pain, torment, and all misery sufficient, but you
must turn cross, and find a greater to afflict me. Why did you grant me
Paradise of hope, to throw me down to bottoms of despair? Why did you glory
to inuit my heart, to yield unto the winning power of eyes? eyes which were
able to gain more^ then hearts thrice doubled could repay with love?

Fie intising eyes, why wan you me? only of set purpose to kill me with your
frowns? this was pretended murder, your sparkling conquest seemd to gain, by
irresistable darts, souls to your will; and their smiles promised irresistable
darts, souls to your will; and their smiles promised to save when won, but
trial proves, you win alone to spoil. Was it a victory sufficient to get, and
worthless of keeping? It seems so, since you leave me: leave me, smarting
affliction, scourge to loyal hearts, yet leave you hold me, being left by him,
who only holds my love.

Thus passed I part of the night, the rest in an exercise mine vndoer taught
me, putting my tho^ghts in some kind of measure, which else were measurelesse;
this was Poetry, a thing he was most excellent in. That night, and many more
were ended in that manner, till at last, taking a resolution, which was made by
necessity, I came abroad again, meeting at my fathers chamber one day with my
still de^re, though forsaken. He wished me much joy; I told him he might best
wi^h it, having caused so much sorrow to me: he told me, my chosen love (he
hoped) would bring content unto me. Then had you been more kind, and true,
said I. Treborius is the man must hold your affection, said he. The Forest
Heir (cried I) has made you change, and me forsaken, living thus unhappily,
made free. Free, said he, and betrothed? Pardon me my Lord, said I, I neither
am, nor will be till I wed.

Will you begin, said he, to use that vice you ever till now contemned,
dissembling a thing protested against by your virtue? It is that thing I most
abhor, answered I: but if I would use it, my faith should hinder it from you.
Heaven then bear witness of my wrong, cried he: and pity mine, said I. With
this the company came about us, so as for that time we said no more; then did
he seek means how to regaine my affection, which he feared was lost to him,
while alas my labor was how to cover that, which so truly was his, as I
doubted my self for being a safe keeper of it from him, determining all
chastity in love, not so much as entertaining his outwa^d complements, farther
then civility commanded.

Treborius followed his suit, my father urged me, and I, cast away by fortune,
threw my fortunes at his feet, to bestow them, truly then not worth the
accepting: yet love in the man, made him seek me, and with as much joy receive
me. The time was appointed, all our friends and kindred invited, and as a
principal guest my lost love was entreated to come: who obayed, but his sad
demeanor showed, it was no pleasure to him, to see me given to another: if he
were troubled, how was I afflicted? In the morning before I was quite dressed
(according to the manner of our Countries liberty) the chief strangers came
into my chamber, permitted by custom to see the Bride dressed; among the rest,
or before the rest, he came in, yet said nothing, only looks spoke for him. I
was to the soul perplexed, and being ready to enter into my miserable estate,
I went into a great window, which had a curtain over it. A Lady whom I most
respected (and so did all those, whose happiness was to know her worth, being
for all noble virtues, and excellent parts to be admird) would not be denied to
go with me. Before her I performd a vowed sacrifice, which was of a lock of
hair that I had worn constantly many years; this hair was his, though not
given to me by himself, but by an ancient servant of his, unknown to his Lord.
The vow was, that if ever I should be so unfortunate, as to marry any but
himself, that morning before my marriage to burn it to my loss and love.

This next my heart I ever carried, and with the loss of that, finished my vow
that fatal day before the perfectest of women, not without tears, as since
that noble Lady has told me, when with her favor she would give liberty to
her self, to speak with me unworthy of her judgment, making me often call
my self to mind, yet I think rather to be resolved, of what she could but
conjecture, then to renew my torment with memory of my distress. But this
finished, the marriage followed: what torture was it to me, standing between
my love, and Treborius, when I was to give my self from my love to him? How
willingly would I have turned to the other hand: but contrary to my soul I
gave my self to him, my heart to my first love. Thus more then equally did I
divide my self: within a short time after I went with my husband to his house,
wishing never more to see any light or company, which in some sort I enjoyed for
one whole year: but then the King going to see his Country in Progress, my
husbands house was found fit in his way, so as he lay there, and was by him
freely, and bravely entertained, he being as bountiful in his house, as any
man: but this brought further trouble, for such a liking the King had to the
place, as often in the year he visited it; much his Majesty was pleased to
grace me, I think for my friends respect, but howsoever, mine eyes ascended
no higher then a subjects love. Many times by the Kings command, I was after at
the Court, once I remember, being at the entertainment of the King of
Slauonia, brother to his Majesty, there was tilting, course of field, and many
such brave exercises; but so far short all the Gallants (and the King
himself being one) came of my loves perfectness, as they seemd but foyles
placed, to set forth the lusture of his excellence. The sports brake up, and
the King, Queen, and Court accompanied the Slauonian King to the Sea, who was
from thence to take a further voyage; with my husband I returned, my heart so
filled with love, as nothing but it self could find biding, or entrance there.

Treborius out of love to me, loved my friends, and those he saw I most
respected, which made me so willing to requite his affection, as I studied how
to content him, ever saving my first love perfect to the owner; and truly such
I found his kindness, as I have been sorry I had no love left for him, yet could
I not in the kindest humor spare him any from the other. By the way as we
returned, how would the good man praise his person, his fashion, speech,
horse-manship, conversation, pleasing mirth, concluding still, he was the only
exact piece of mankind, and framed alone without equal, and as if he were
made to honor all virtues, and they framed to serve him. I took such joy in
these, as still I bore him up in them, seeing in his words the picture of my
heart and thoughts lively drawn; he maintained them to content me, while I
best satisfied seemed to commend his witty descriptions, as if they, and not
the subject pleased me. Thus did I dissemble, and thus only for my love, and
with him that loved me, yet this may be pardoned (if pardon may be given for
such a fault) since love did warrant me, and I obayd my Lord. Other times
(though for it I blamd my self, because I wronged his kindness) I would commend
his ordinary talk, when he praised rude sports, or told the plain Jests of
his Hunts-men, yet the best their vocation could afford, laugh and be merry
with them, but why? because oft-times they brought discourse of my best love,
who delighted in those sports.

Thus I continued, firmly, and chastely loving, but then pleasure envying my
good, called misfortune into company, for my husband dyed, and not long after,
my only son slain in this unfortunate Grove, following those sports his
father loved. This was not all my loss, for afterward succeeded my last, and
greatest; for he, whom I so much esteemed proved false; all the pains I
suffered left unrewarded, not thought on. What hazards I had run for his
love, what dangers passed? and never shunned, to satisfy his mind, his own
soul shall demonstrate, my tongue never relate; but this he must give me leave
to say, that never man was more unjust, nor causlesly unkind; Into this Cave I
then confined my self, and hence I have not stirred, further then you find
me, nor will, here purposing to end, and with my dearest son be laid, who only
was to me constant in affection; and to him, daily do I perform those rights
belonging to the dead, after the manner of our country; In these parts you can
find no more then now you see, my miserable spectacle, and this Cave, but at
the end of the plain you shall find an other Bridge kept by two strong
Knights, as any this Kingdom yields, yet I think, to you, will be but like the
others, if they try them selves, which I desire they should not do, but that
you will for my sake pass them. So I may do that with honor answered the
King, I shall willingly do this, or any other service you shall please to
command: but in requital, I must beg one favor of you, which must not be
denied. She protested she would obey him in anything.

Then said he, leave this sad abiding for a while, and your dead love, to go
to a living friend; nor will I urge you to go from sadness quite, having such
cause of sorrow, but to a sad abiding, yet a joyful meeting. Your father
Detereus is not, (as you imagined) lost in his Embassage, though lost to all
content, but lives an Hermits life on a Rock, before Saint Maura; much he
desires to know of your safety, and enjoined me to enquire of you, if ever I
happened to this Country. I promised him I would, not being able to persuade him
from that place: go you then to him, and carry comfort with you to his age; if
you cannot bring him thence, you may abide with him, and thus not leave
sorrowing, having still so sad a subject before you, as to behold so worthy a
man's low state, but if true judgment rule in either, to over rule passion, I
hope to see you both, again your selves. She was struck with amazement to
hear this news; but so perfectly he discoursed of her fathers affairs, and
so truly described him, as she knew he spoke but truth^ whereupon she
resolved to go thither, and upon that, sent for her Knights that kept the
other Bridge, to attend her, while Amphilanthus again desired to hear more of
the sad story; then Sir said she, hear the last.

When I was a Widow, and suffered so many crosses, my poor beauty decayed, so
did his love? which though he often protested to be fixed on my worth, and love
to him, yet my face's alteration gave his eyes distaste, or liberty from former
bands, to look else where, and so he looked, as took his heart at last from
me, making that a poor servant to his false eyes, to follow still their
change. I grieved for it, yet never lessned my affection blaming such cruelty,
and cruelty for lodging in him, not himself for being cruel; so as my love
grew still, and in a strange manner, to affect where loss was, where
unkindness, ungratefulness, scorn, and forsaking dwelt, (odd motives to
love) yet loved I the keeper of these wrongs, lamented the sense of them, pined
in my misery; and yet Sir, truly can I not hate this man, but love him still so
well, as if he could look back on me with love, all former ills should be
forgotten, but that cannot be, such an unfortunate strangnes has been betwixt
us, as we never meete^ or if we did, what can this wrinckled face, and decayed
beauty hope for? yet were I blessed, if he did but thus much, speak kindly to
me, pity me, and use me courteously, who have suffered enough to merit this
respect: but I think self accusing falsehood makes him shun me. Alas do not
so, for I forgive all, and affect thee still, and dye will i^ this love. You
did (said Amphilanthus in your discourse) touch upon a quality rare in women,
and yet I have seen some excellent things of their writings, let me be so much
bound to you, as to hear some of your Verses. Truly Sir said she, so long it
is since I made any, and the subject grown so strange, as I can hardly call
them to memory which I made, having desired to forget all things but my love,
fearing that the ^ight, or thought of them, would bring on the joys then felt,
the sorrows soon succeeding. This is but an excuse said he; Truly Sir said
she, it is truth, yet I think I can say the last I made, which were upon this
occasion; one time after he had begun to change, he yet did visit me, and
use me sometimes well, and once so kindly, as I grew to hope a little,
whereupon I writ these lines lying in an Orchard, under a great Quince tree,
the weather being as if it did threaten my tears to follow, the drops then
following; they were these.

AS these drops fall: so Hope drops now on me
sparingly, cool, yet much more then of late,
as with Despair I changed had a state
yet not possessed, govern but modestly.
Dearest, let these dropps heavenly showers prove
and but the Sea fit to receive thy streams,
in multitudes compare but with Sun beams,
and make sweet mixture, twixt them, and thy love.
The Seas rich plenty joined to our delights,
the Sunn's kind warmth, unto thy pleasing smiles,
when wisest hearts thy loue-make-eyes beguiles,
and vassell brings to them the greatest Sprites.
Rain on me rather then be dry; I gain
nothing so much as by such harmeles tears,
which take away the pains of loving fears,
and finely winns an ever lasting reign.
But if like heat drops you do wast away
glad, as disburden'd of a hot desire;
let me be rather lost, perish in fire,
then by those hopeful signs brought to decay.
Sweet be a lover puer, and permanent,
cast off gay clothes of change, and such false slights:
love is not love, but where truth has her rights,
else like boughs from the perfect body rent.
And perfect are you sweet Bellamira, said the King in this Art, pity it is,
that you should hide, or darken so rare a gift. His commendations brought the
fruit of gayning more, and so they passed some two days, till she was ready
to take her journey; the Kings then parting from her, and following their
search, being discouerd to the Lady by an unlooked for means; for Amphilanthus
at his first coming into the Cave, being confident of not being known, pulld
off his Helm, while Bellamira was gone to the monument, at her return seeing
his face, she fell on her knees, blushing at her error: My Lord said she, the
afflictions which make me ignorant of all things but themselves, have caused my
forgetfullnes unto you, which I most humbly crave pardon for. He admired how
she knew him, desiring to be made certain of the cause, and means of her
knowledge, (being extremely sorry to be discovered.) Be not displeased great
Prince said she, that your servant (my poor self) knows your excellency,
since here you shall command, what it shall please you, and be known but as
you name your self; only give me leave to express what joy my afflicted heart
did little expect in beholding in this my sad dwelling, the most matchless
Prince the earth carries, and may glory in bearing. But Madame said he, how
do you I beseech you know me? My Lord said she, I attended on the Kings Niece,
in ^ journey she was pleased to make, out of too much pride, and conceit of her
beauty, being enough to be liked, but too little to be defended in field. Into
Italy (among other places) she went, and then it was my happiness to see you,
and the honor of chiualry in you, which the poor Prince my Ladies servant
found; for after you had cast him to the ground, she cast him out of her favor,
scorning any after but your self, yet not loving you, because you won the
prize from her beauty to your Mistress. The King did very well remember that
accident, and so discoursing a little more to that purpose they concluded, with
her promise not to disclose him, or to know him to be other then the Lost Man,
and that was the reason she so freely disclosed her passions to him. She took
her way toward Saint Maura, the two Kings higher into the Country, though no
way likely to find the Ladies, yet first for them who could lay those memories
apart, traveling through the delicate parts of Greece, till they came to
Romania, passing many aduentnres under the name of the Lost Man, one being
necessary to be remembered.

On the skirts of Romania they came into a place, Rockey, and hilley nothing
but Heath, and some small shrubs to shelter rain, Sun, or any thing from
one; the mighty Rocks which showed their swelling sides, appeard like Swannes
in their neasts, when breeding, and angry at passengers for troubling them:
white as they, and fringed with Holly trees, the ways stony, and troublesome,
so as they walked on foot, and their Squires led their Horses. Defirous to see
rarities, Olorandus went among them, Amphilanthus keeping on in a path. The
brave Bohemian seeking among them, at the last happened to one, which was
wonderful to behold, a Rock of great height, and bigness; the midst of
which, was cleft to the bottom, so even, and just, as if cut by hands, yet was
it impossible for hands to do it. Nature showing how near she can come to
Art, and how far excel it. Beyond this was an other Rock, in which was a
little Cave, and in that a man lying, it was so shallow in the body of it, as
he might discern him to lie on his left side, his face from the light, in
Pilgrims clothes, his staff and bag by him, and to add to this sad sight, his
voice agreed to make him known miserable^ breaking into these complaints.
Ungrateful wretch, monster of man^kinde, why live I still to poison the sweet
Air with my vild breathing? what wickedness is there, that I abound not in,
and have committed? false, treacherous, and ungrateful I have been; dye then
with shame, wrapped round about thee: dye Dolorindus, and never let thy unworthy
face be more beheld, nor thy false eyes behold the light; let darkness, (not
so black as thy sin) infold thee, and be as thou art, a creature unfit for
Heaven to look upon; Olorandus knew he had been lost strangly, the manner,
and cause was unknown, the other Kings keeping his council til they could
find means to work for his good; He stole away softly, and called
Amphilanthus, who presently came with him, where they heard him continue in his
moanes, crying out, O Villain that had a thought to wrong thy worthyest
friend, to be ungrateful to al-deseruing Amphilanthus, nay more, to plot his
ruin, and conspire his death. Antissia, thou art the cause of this, and I the
more miserable to be brought by a woman to be a Beast. Amphilanthus pardon me,
my soul begs it, and let the fault be where it is laid justly, on unjust
commands in love. But what excuse can I make? say Antissia bad me kill
Amphilanthus, is that enough? O noe, truth tells me that he saved me from
ruin, from staruing, from death; shall a woman then make me forget these
benefits, and only because I loved her? love should not extend to hurt, or
procure murder. I have offended beyond pardon, mercy must be showed if I
continue, but mercy cannot I ask, so far having forgone truth, as my offense
flies higher then any hope can asc^nd to. Antissia, I now hate thee more, then
once I loved thee, and more justly, for thy love has made me worth-lesse, and
spoiled my name, honor, and content; shame is the reward I have gained for my
love to thee, and the heavy weight of ungratefulness lies on my heart. They
were both amazed to hear these words, not being able to conjecture whence they
came; the voice they knew, and the name, but how this sorrow was, could not
imagine. In the end they concluded to speak to him, and Olorandus began:
Repentance said he merits pardon for the greatest ill; if you truly repent,
doubt not but you shall receive what you seek, and the nearest way to that, is
to confess freely your fault, and then pardon will follow. Pardon cried he, I
cannot be pardoned, I cannot hope, I cannot be forgiven. You may said he; And
for that, I will engage my honor, if you will be ruld said Amphilanthus. With
that he rose, and looking on them, knew them, which so much oppressed his
weak body, as he fell to the ground in a swound. Amphilanthus took him up, and
Ollorandus went to the next Spring for water, wherewith they rubd his temples,
and brought him to himself; but to what end? only to die again, for so was he
afflicted, as impossible it was for him to live, as they doubted: then
Amphilanthus vowed unto him (at his second coming to himself) that whatsoever
he had done, or thought against him, was then forgiven, desiring only to be
resolved of the griefs cause. My Lord (said he) how shall I dare to tell you
what I have done, when no shame is so great, so infinite, so ill, as my fault^^
I am a Traitor to you, take revenge, or let me give it you. Stay Dolorindus
(said he), fall not from one ill to a greater, speak to me, plainly tell me
what perplexeth you, and had you sought my life, I do forgive you. You have
(brave King, cried he) said, what I grieved to name, it was your life I aimed
at, commanded by Antissia to kill you, and then to take her for my wife: love
made me undertake this hateful practice, now you have it, use me as I merit,
and never pardon so foul an act. Love Antissius, and hate me, for he was
likewise solicited by her to murder you: but he refused, and would needs hinder
me, whereupon we should have fought, but then were stayed by two, who told us
they were Amphilanthus, and Ollorandus. Antissius more in sense then I, knew
they had taken your names upon them, and were not your selves; he undertook
the named Ollorandus, I the other, whose name had that power, as he over came
me, laying me as low, as my sin has pulled me. Wounded I was taken up, but saw
his death given him by a young Gentleman, whose father he had killed in a
quarrel concerning the Princess of Croatia, whom he had under your name
abused. With the sight of his death, shame straight possessed me, and
selfe-accusing infolded me: for then your noblenes came into my mind, your
clearenesse showing my foulenes, your worth my blame; my heart I cannot say
brake, but cloue in sunder: never lived any man to say, he was afflicted, that
more truly left affliction. Souls that condemned are, cannot be more tortured,
my soul feeling what can be felt of miserable torture. Antissius, with whom I
would but a little before have fought withal, I threw my self at his feet, I
petitioned Perissus never to think of me, nor name any name might sound like
mine, that you especially might not know my falsehood, left your condemning me
might prove worse, and a heavier punishment, then all other torments: for your
blaming me, and so justly would be more terrible, then condemnation from any
other. As he spoke those words he sunk again, and they again rerouered him;
but then Amphilanthus chid him, that he would not believe him. Why, said he,
can Dolorindus think that any wrong can be done Amphilanthus, which he cannot
forgive; and by Dolorindus whom he loves, and for loves sake: be patient dear
friend, and grieve not thus, for that is not to be grieved at. Love commanded
you, when you were his subject, twere treason to have disobeied, or refused to
kill a traitor to his Crown (as I was esteemed). Comfort your self I am free
from anger, or spleen; I will not say I forgive, I say you erred not, nor I
remember ought, but our first meeting, and our friendship, let all other (like
Phansies) pass, I am thy friend, and will cherish thee, and love thee as I
did; yet must I^ blame Antissias forgetfulness, and causelesfury. When did I
offend her so much, to be so irreconciliably displeased? how did I vex her, to
be unsatisfied with ought, but my life? or what could my death bring her?

Dolorindus as much ouer-waighed with joy, and kindness, as before pressed with
sorrow, could with as little power withstand the fury of the kind passion, so
as with tears, and dear love, he fell at Amphilanthus his feet, kissing them
with such affection, as he was forced to throw himself by him, to make him
leave, and in his arms hold him as fast, as his love tied him to him. O
Amphilanthus, cried he, why do you thus exceed all possibility for man, how
noble soever, to be a shadow to you, much less to equal you? will you gather
together all perfections in you to be admired, and envied by men? or indeed be
as you are, fit, and only deserving to be eternized for magnanimious, and
glorious spirit. Your kindness exceeds my act, said he, and such expressions of
love find I in you, as I am glad rather of this accident, whereby I enjoy them,
then of the want of this cause, should I have missed the truth and knowledge of
your love. Never was more kindness showed in offering and accepting, in
confessing and forgiving, then between these two. Ollorandus (when they had
for a while continued their discourse, and all former businesses razed like
Castles belonging to Traitors) desired to know who they were that had taken
their names upon them. Truly, said Dolorindus, I know not, for one killed, the
other dying, desired that he might be so much fauord, as never to be spoken of,
nor his companion, being something near me in shame: but as his fault was
less, the less sensible. Speak no more of this, said Amphilanthus. I have
done, said Dolorindus, for little joy can it be to me, if not by that to see
your gracious favor. But so he died, saying only they were Gentlemen, and had
taken those names for their honor, and his companions gaining the Princess of
Croatia, whom after he vildly left, and forsook. Then did Amphilanthus relate
his finding that Princess, her discourse to him and his conference with her
women; which much pleased Ollorandus, especially when he heard what gain they
had by those names, being glad to hear such reverence was done to them.
Amphilanthus was contrary, for though he loved best to do well, yet he cared
not how little he was told of it, hating flattery, as much as he loved worth,
and that was best of any man; nay so nice he was, as he would rather doubt
flattery, then let himself think he heard but truth of himself. He left not
till he had made Dolorindus leave his habits of a long Gown and Staff, to
change them (as come home again) to a sword and armor, his travail on foot
to horseback, and contrary to his expectation, or resolution to be once more
a warrior. But this he gaind, to be licensed to travel unknown with them,
which they also were resolved to do, and so from this rude Rockey place, as
from despair to comfort, they took toward Constantinople. Into the Town they
went privately, and furnished themselves according to their humors:
Amphilanthus in Tawny, embroidred with Black and Silver; Ollorandus in
Grasse-greene, and Gold; Dolorindus in Hair color, or a kind of dead leaf
color, and Gold, they happened there just at a time, which was solemnly kept
every year, which was the day of the Coronation of Antissius, and the restoring
of their Countries liberty. Here they saw their honors blazd, and remembered
fame to flourish: among the strange Knights they put themselves, and as
Macedonians, whereof there were some good number; they came to the Iusts,
having made their habits after their fashion.

The Presidents was present with all the Nobility; and the other brave men that
returned from Albania, the King himself having sent the^ home, when he took his
journey in the search: what Amphilanthus, and the other two did in these
exercises, may be imagined, by the knowing they were Actors, else his acts as
impossible to be expressed, as the stars numbered. Much inquiry was made
after him and his companions, but unknown they passed, and took their way from
the Court, after they had seen the fashion of it, and well understood, where,
and how Antissia lived in greatest distress, for the report of the false
Amphilanthus his death came to her ears, which attribute she imagined to be
given him for his falsehood to her, whereupon she put on mourning, and all her
servants were clad in that Livery, leaving the Court, and be taking her self
to a Castle, not far from the sea, where she beheld nothing but Rocks, hills
of Sand, as bare as her content: Waves raging like her sorrow, and indeed
little but companion-like Spectacles, she thinking her self those solitary
places, and looking on Antissia, as she in her sadness looked on them; and thus
had she continued from the time of the news coming.

Amphilanthus, and Ollorandus with Dolorindus passed farther into the count^ie,
and took their way by Amphilanthus direction toward Neapolis, where they were
to visit the fair Musalina, who by means made by Allimarlus was reconciled to
Amphilanthus, between whom an ancient quarrel ceased thus. With all delicasie
they were entertained, and feasted, she being so excellent a Lady for spirit,
wit, rare discourse, and the most unusual virtues for women, as she merited
affection from any man, and some years before had inioyed his, and such an one
indeed she was, as Pamphilia could not but confess, fit to be beloved, and
therefore never blamed her, but Amphilanthus for leaving her, not for again
loving Musalina. Hither it was appointed, that Antissia and Lucenia should
come, and give him satisfaction by repentance and submission; Musalinas husband
being Duke of Tenedos, and where Amphilanthus had spent much time, loving her;
but after leaving her, destiny so commanding, and his obeying to those powers
sometimes against himself. They came, and he as soon forgave, as they
heartily asked pardon, yet did he but conditionally forgive Antissia, being for
that to marry Dolorindus, who with her sight forgot his hate conceived before,
and with much love embraced the match, Musalina must not be questioned. The
marriage was performed at Constantinople. Amphilanthus coming thither then as
himself, her old Uncle gave her to Dolorindus with good content, who soon
after took their journey to Negropont, she discreetly loving him, but he
doting of her.

Amphilanthus was like the King, received and followed by all men,
acknowledging their peace, gain, and liberty to come from him. Then back
again to Neapolis he, and Ollorandus went to conduct Musalina, one of his
first Loves in his youthful travails, where some time they spent in all sweet
and studied for delights, the search being quite forgot, or left to them, whose
memories were better of the enchanted Ladies, Pamphilia being left to the times
deciding of her deserving, Ollorandus like his friend lived and loved. Rosindy
and his companion making what haste they could, arrived at Thesalonica, where
his dearest Meriana was, who with as much love, as he had affection, met him:
but when he told her of the misfortune, and loss of his Sisters and Cousin,
she grew sorry for it, and had been sad, if he had not been there, resolving
to go with him to Corinth, where the Kings and Queens had determined to stay,
till they got tidings of their children; but it being impossible for Knights
and Ladies to travel without adventures, this befell them.

A Lady of beauty sufficient, but of behavior insolent, they encountered in a
Chariot of blew Velvet, embroidred with Gold: six browne-bay horses drew this
Chariot, covered with clothes, and trappings suitable, set forth with feathers
for the greater state, and for bravery one each side went eight Foote-men in
those colors. She rid alone, as being beyond companions, having two Chariots
more following with her Women, a troop of knights and Gentlemen attending,
answerable in all points to this beginning of pomp, and meetenesse agreeable
to wait on such a Mistress. Bare face she rid, threatening all beholders, and
as if contemning the Sun, or being so well assured of his respect to her, as
she carelessly slighted his heat, as either not being able, or not daring to
harm her. Disdainefully she cast her eyes upon the other more excellent
company; her horses not so much for fast going, as with pride stamping, and
trampling, raised the dust in passing by, so as Meriana and Rosindy drew the
curtain, this proud woman seeing it; What (said she) is the nicenes of that
poor troop, such as our dust may not come near them? draw back the curtain
again, calling to one of her footmen, and let them see their error, with the
honor to behold me. Meriana started at the suddenness, Rosindy was angry at
that rudeness, that troubled his Love, but seeing it was a footeman, bad one
of his men knock him, which he did, whereupon the Troops began to bussell,
the Knights belonging to the other Company, being so peremptorily commanded by
their Lady, as they flew toward Rosindy, and from her, as if her words had
stung like Vipers; but Rosindy, quickly getting on his horse, made them know,
their haste was but to an ill end, and with as much speed, sent those that
escaped, back again to their Lady, who seeing their turning, began to revile
them; but they now fearing his blows, more then her tongue, stood round about
her Chariot. She infinitely perpl^xed with it, called to Rosindy, who coming a
little nearer to her, gave her ill manners the hearing of these words.

Pride and neglect being the beginners of this action, me thinks submissiue
satisfaction should ensue from you that caused it, to me, before whom you
presumed to attempt it; wherefore let me see that, and I shall favor you to
far, as to leave you, and account you a valiant and civil man.

Madam (said he), had that fault been mine, which proceeded from the rashness
of your servant, set on to (I believe) by your commands, I might have seen
more reason to yield to your demand, then now I find; howsoever having the
Victory, I am to give no satisfaction, but have it in my power to receive it,
or force it from you; yet I am content, so you acknowledge your error to this
Queen, that you shall pass, and withal I shall esteem you a discreet Lady.

Acknowledge my error, as if I can err, said she? Alas poor man, how has a
little gain made thee ouer-ualue thy self, and dis-esteeme her, whom thou art
not worthy to look on, if not, as the Ethiopians do the Moon whom they
worship. And such an uncertain thing is Pride said Rosindy, which it appears
gouerns so much in you, as will make with many Changes, the Waines of your
fortunes equal with your increasings, but take heed the conclusion happen not
in that quarter. She was infinitely offended with him, so as turning her face
from him, and swelling with anger, she bid her Chariot-man drive on, which
Rosindy forbad, and whether she would or no, brought her out of her seat, and
to the ground, Meriana beholding her at such alike distance, as her former
pride looked on her withal; then did she say (but terribly against her heart)
she was sorry she had given them that distaste; other Phrase she would not
use. Then did she take her Chariot again, but discharged all her Knights as
unworthy to attend her, and with her Women, and Footmen continued her journey
to the next town, where she entertained new servants, one of her old ones
traveling with Rosindy, telling him this story.

This Lady you saw, and once my Mistress is Queen of Bulgaria, but Empress of
Pride; she is married to a Prince, who only out of affection sought her, being
a discreet brave Gentleman, and for his virtues chosen King of Bulgaria: she
was daughter to a Duke in that Country, no less arrogant then she, so as it
is a successiue ill hanging over, and inheriting in that Family. She at first
loved the Prince she married very well, or seemed to do so, and she still
does use him kindly, but often have they quarrels, she no way yielding to him,
accounting her self far above him in birth, though his honor have gained
the precedence; he is infinitely fond of her, nothing being too dear for her,
but lately he has been abroad in Hungary, and other parts that way, going to
visit Ollorandus, when he came to the fair Melysinda, in which time she
carried her self far better, then in his presence, showing what she can
do, rather then what she would do; for we all know she loves the Prince of
Iambolly much better, then the King; and in troth for my part, I excuse her,
since no greater difference can be between men for outward beauty and
sweetness, then is twixt them; yet on my conscience she is untouched, and
just to her Husband, it may be Pride holding her honest, for much she is laid
unto. At the Kings going away, she got leave of him to go into Morea, to visit
an excellent Lady there, being her Cosen-german, and married to the Prince of
Elis, there she has been, till within a short time, and now is returning with
all speed to meet her Lord, and if she can persuade him to go with her, to
try the Enchantment of the Rockie Island, where all the beauties of this part
of the World (except her self) are said to be enchanted. Where is that Island I
pray Sir, said Meriana?

Madam (said he) in the Gulf of Venice, not far from the mouth of the Gulf
of Lepanto. Who are all there, said she? and how are you certain of their
being there? He names them; and the certainty of their being there (answered
he) was brought by some of their servants, who after they had seen them
enclosed, came stored with grief to the Sea side again, where they stayed til
a ship came by, and in the Cock-boat took them aboard, landing them at Corinth,
where the king of Morea is, and al his Court, attending the end, which he hopes
for as soon as his sons and cosins return from Albania, who he purposes to
entreat, and command to adventure for their delivery. Do you know the manner
of it, said the Queen? Truly Madam replied he, only, as I have heard my
Mistress speak it, it is a place by their relation of Marble, built like a
Theater, round and curiously wrought, at their coming thither they discerned
nothing on the gate, but now there is an inscription which shows it an
enchantment, and the end how to be gained, which must be by the man most
loving, and most beloved, he shall partly do it, for he shall release them
from their charms that holds their senses as it were sleeping, but cannot
bring them forth till the fairest creature in disguise come, and she shall
finnish all: many are gone thither, and some put on disguises of purpose, but
that will not serve, surely Fate has no deceit. My Lord said Merian^, surely
you may end the one part? I believe you think so said he, but shall I try it?
I cannot consent to that cried she, for so I may be (God knows how long) bard
from you, no my dear heart we must not so be parted, Charms shall not try our
loves, we are assured, what need we farther venture.

Thus they rid till they came to a plain where they found one piece of Armor,
then an other, so many, at last a shield which was presently known by
Polarchos, who took it up and cried out, alas said he here is Parselius his
shield, and armor, what is become of him? Rosindy was instantly called up with
that voice from the lips of his Meriana, and seeing it, also knew it, then
took he his horse, and kissing his dear wife galloped along the plain,
following the tract of horses and some blod which he fouund in the way: to a
wood he came, by the ^ide thereof were some horsemen, Polarchos demanded of
them if they could give them any notice of a wounded Knight, or of any combat
that lately had been fought in the place behind them.

They said they were not to yield account to any, but if they desired to try
them selves, they were Lads would show them sport. Rosindy replied that they
were strangers there, and engaged to attend some Ladies, therefore they were
not hasty of fight, only having found an armor which they knew, they desired
to know what was become of the Master of it. Why he Sir, said one of them is
hurt, and his companion likewise, both of them being carried into a Castle
within this wood, where they are likely to remain a while, for their wounds
are great and held dangerous. May we see them said they, at least hear of the
adventure? You may do both if you please Sir, said one of them, but know and
remember I told you so, for there is hazard in it.

I fear nothing said Rosindy to serve my friends; be they of your acquaintance
and friends said the Knights? yes indeed answered Rosindy; then said he you
shall hear the story first, and after you may the better resolve, so they
lighted, and sat under a Tree, the stranger Knight (the rest leaving them)
beginning thus. I do never use to tell a story to any, but I first know to
whom I discourse, wherefore I pray Sir let me be so much favored by you, as to
have your name, and you shall have the relation: Rosindy began to doubt,
therefore meant not to trust too much, wherefore he answered, his name was
Caudalus a Bulgarian, the other his companion Larchos. Then proceeded the
other, this wood is called the Forest Gulf, that plain you passed the
pleasant way, for there do all delight to ride, and yet none but are swallowed
up when past that plain, and arrived here within this devouring throat, a
Lady dwelling within here, who maintains her self and her pleasures, with
the overthrow and death of such miserable Creatures as pass this way, being
ambitious of the destruction of all that call themselves, or are called
virtuous, but she is my Mistress, and I am one of her unfortunate servants, held
in a manner a prisoner, a Guard still on me, yet I am appointed one to guard
her, I was of Morea, and the worse do I thrive for that, since she hates all
of that Country, for having been refused her desires by the brave Prince
thereof, on whom she will now be fully revenged, having got him in her
custody, and no hope is there of gayning him out alive, for she will hold him
close prisoner in such a place as no force can get him thence till she have
her ends, and at last his death; the Castle is impregnable, and she vnwinable,
and thus his misfortune fell; passing along this way, in search as it seemed of
his Sisters and Cosen, he met some of our troops who encountered him, having
demanded first who he was, then knowing him, and how acceptable a present he
might be to their Lady, set all upon him, and finding them selves too weak,
blew a Horn, at which came many more to their succor, and so at last with
numbers, and his faintness loosing blood he fell, and into their unmerciful
hands, his companion was taken before him, and both carried into the Castle;
with welcome they were received, because she was glad in her malicious heart
she had him, and there has he remained now some ten days; his Armor they
threw about they card not where, taking care only of his person to bring him
alive, which was all they could do, yet I hear since by a waiting woman of
hers, that he is yet living, and some (though little) hope is of him.

Is there no way said the King to come at him, or to purchase his delivery? me
thinks you being of his Country, and his fathers Subject, should study how to
do him service. Truly Sir said he I love him as my Prince, and admire him as
his worth meriteth, and could I but tell how to gain his liberty, were it with
the loss of mine own life, I would venture it.

Have you no power answered Rosindy, with that waiting woman you before named?
she might assist you. It is true said he, she may, and will, I assure my
self, but Sir said he, I am but one, and this Castle is full of strong men,
and so dangerous it is to acquaint any with such an enterprise, as death were
all we could expect, and shameful death, in such a sort as would be inflicted
without gain, but assured harm to him, if it were discouerd, it were plotted
for his release; besides, so weak the two Princes are, as they cannot perform
any thing in their own defense, and if we stay till they be strong, it may
be (for my Lady is extreme sudden) they may be dead before our help come.
For their assistance said Rosindy were they but able to travel I would ask no
more, nor I Sir said the other, were you two Amphilanthus and Steriamus. I am
neither of them said he, but if I may without boasting say I have tried my
self in their companies, and have come away without any shameful affront; and
for my companion he is little inferior to any living. The Knight began to
mistrust something, yet being indeed honest, and meaning what he said, desired
to see his face, He not once fearing any thing from him, who so freely had
discoursed to him, lifted up his Beuer, but instantly let it fall again,
whereat the Knights heart even leaping with joy, Ah my Lord said he, now shall
we release the Prince, but you must venture a great hazard for it, you must go
to the Castle, offer your service to my Lady, court her, refuse her nothing,
which fondnes will work infinitely on her, and so much as you may by that
means win the sight of them, and let me alone then for the rest. I cannot do
this answered he, being a harder matter for me then winning the Castle, for I
cannot be unjust to my own deerer self, but dearest friend you may, you are
not engaged but to hate all women, what need you care then what you do to
hinder their sex. Must I make love to her said Polarchos? Yes Sir said the
other. But if when this is done and I have played my part, we should fail, I
should hate my self, and vex incessantly at my fortune. Never doubt it Sir
replied the other, but be sure you make enough of her, and then prevail, for
although she be crafty and deuilish, yet so much she loves her pleasure, as she
will rather be made a fool in enjoying them, then miss of them, and so
passionate she will be, as you may have any thing of her, and but satisfy her
mind. Polarchos undertook the business, and Rosindy went but as his friend;
this agreed upon, they went to the Castle, the Knight being Nephew to the great
Marshall of Morea, held there as a prisoner to serve her, conducting them,
telling the rest that this was one of purpose come to serve their Lady hearing
of her rare beauty, and virtues.

Being arrived at the Castle, they went up into the Hall, every place seeming
stronger then other, and so the harder to win. In a withdrawing room above
stayres this Venus sat, dressed as an inuiter to those pleasures uses to be,
her neck all bare as low as her breasts could give her leave for too much
immodestie to show, her sleeves loose, and as she stirred her arms they would
rise up and discover their nakedness, and surely white, otherwise she showed
too much for an ill skin, although never so much delicasie, wanting chastity
will make men distract, for how ill soever men be in their discourse, or
living, yet they love modesty best, and most prize it in their breasts, though
their tongues say other. She had her hair curled, and dressed up with Jewels,
and Rings, and many pretty devises, as wantonly, and phantastically placed as
her eyes, which labored in twinkling to moistness, giving occasion for
belief, that that humor was most ruling in her. Unsteady she was in her
fashion, her head set upon so slight a neck, as it turned like a weather-cocke
to any vain conceit that blew her brains about: or like a staulke of Oats,
the ear being weighty: her feet never but moving, as not willing to stand,
or sit still; her gate wagling and wanton, business she had perpetually in her
self, and with her self, the looking-glass being most beholding to her for
stay; this woman (thought Polarchos) is fit to be the subject for this
enterprise, he saluted her, and most affectionately looked upon her, she
straight imagined she saw love in him, and felt as much in her self for she
never wanted that, amorously she entertained his his salutation, her servant
whispering to her that he was a fit servant to be employed by her, she knew
he knew her, and therefore gave credit to him, after she cast her eyes upon
Rosindy demanding who he was. They replyde his name was Cautu^us, and that he
was of Bulgaria coming only in company with Larchos; if ever love did
soueranize at first sight, here it was, for so passionat was she of the new
guest as she even almost hung upon him to beg pity

He refused no favor she asked, but so temperately carried himself as she
sought and he granted; when he had done sufficient to make her sure, and
finding himself so dear to her, he took occasion to demand many things of
that Country, and of her Castle. She to indeare her self to him told him of
her power, and at last, all her secrets concerning the Prisoners; he
counterfeited an admiration of her w^tt, and seemed so highly to esteem of it,
as if it rather were a miracle to be told then found in a woman, she to make
him assured of it, carried him into the Caves, and Prisons, where she showed
him many so miserable, as they appeared their own Ghosts, their bodies quite
consumed. In a Cave a little lightsommer, but no more pleasant was the worthy
Parselius, and his friend Leandrus, both chained together in chains, and in
each others arms, complaining and weeping their sorrows to those walls, and
di^mall rooms. O Parselius said he, how wretched art thou thus to be held,
not only in fetters, but from thy sweetest love, what will become of her, when
she shall hear that I am lost? What will my friends say of me? how will all
accuse me? yet, how can I right my self or they succor me? Brave Rosindy
would thou did but know my estate, I know thou would free me, or if not,
thou would yet certainly comfort my wife, thou art to succeed me, likewise
be mine heir in loving Dalinea, and cheerishing her dearest soul, my
affliction is nothing to me, must not she suffer too? I could bear all and
more if thou were not likewise to endure; pain insufferable, to know that
Dalinea must be afflicted, death were nothing, nor these dying pains, if I
could be sure she, dearest she, could but be patient, when I consider her
affection to me, the torments and violent passions she breathed in my first
absence, do not they make me see her death? Oh my sweet soul, I would rather
forgive thee for forgetting me, then for dying for me: yet the latter were the
worthier, and none indeed is worthy of thee, for none but I can so firmly love
thee, must this body so lovingly embraced, and kindly held within her purest
arms, be bound in yrons like a thief? must I cherished and daily tended by
her, lie here naked on the bare stones, and die like a va^lell? these arms
that have conquered, be shamed like a murderer? these eyes that have seen all
the world's beauty; nay, Dalinea, and have bin kissed by her, must these eyes
now gaze on dead walls, and expect sight but to see death instead of all my
former happiness? O Leandrus, had I died, and by it kept thee free, my soul
would have rejoiced, and Dalinea bin better contented; but to die here, and
thee with me, she can never absolve me. Dear brother said Leandrus comfort
your self, and if it be but to be the abler to die bravely, what need we
lament, our fortunes does that for us? be patient, and death, if not disliked
will seem enough pleasing; make it to us desired, it will then be welcome, and
believe it, the more we pity our selves, the more we shall hate that which we
shall go to, and therefore the more to be sought; think but how fine a thing
it is to be free from all vexation when we shall neither travel, nor fear
misaduentures, neither be taken by misfortune, nor shaken with the harms of
others, when neither love nor hate afflicts us, where all things are at one
stay, no fall to hurt us, nor rising to corrupt us, when friends shall neither
be disconte^td, nor contented, but in death Dalinea will be held from me cried
he, else I like all the other well. Could you wish her here with you said
Leandrus? No cursed were I then sighed he, but I would feign once more behold
her ere I died. To be more torture to her said. Leandrus, content your self
dearest Parselius said he, and be confident, the Heavens ordain all things for
the best, then do not repine, you have made your self already famous
sufficient to gain sorrow for your end and revenge; be then brave and
resolute, and make bold Death (by your constant suffering) quake to assail
you. O my Dalinea do thou think of me thy poor, but loyal Parselius said
he, thus did he wail, and Leandrus discreetly, comfort being in equal misery.
Polarchos and his Mistress harkning to them, she glorying in their distress, he
in soul lamenting them, but must counterfeit till fit opportunity was offered,
which in short time he gained, for so fond he had made her of him as she gave
him the keys of the Prison, and what else he demanded; Then did he provide
armours for them, and one night, in the dead time of the night, when all save
his careful eyes, and Rosidi's were shut, stole down into the vault, and
there discoursed with them, letting them see both hope and joy in them. Soon
did this work so with them as they recouer'd strength, and after some time
were fit to go with them; the night being come for their escape, the honest
Morean (who yet without his Wench would not go) and Rosindy went for them, and
carried them into an Orchard thick and close where they were to tarry his
coming, which was about some hour before day. She loath to part with him as
being the last time of enjoying, her soul foretelling some harm: but being so
ill, not able to tell her any good to her self, or to prevent hurt, was only
troubled; he as willing to stay for the same reason of being the last, for she
was pleasing; but when he ro^e and put on his mantle and other clothes, he
again sat down on the bed, and taking her hand kissed it, she took him in her
arms and kissed him, farewell de^re Lady said he; my better self cried she
farewell. He presently went down (having the keys) a back-way into the
Garden and Orchard where they stayed with his Armor, then arming himself he
took his way with them to their horses which attended them at the further gate.
A little sad he was to go, though glad considering the cause; but so long had
he dissembled, and so feelingly acted his part, as he was caught indeed, such
were her allurements, her sweetnesses, louingnesses, delicasies, and pleasures,
as she was fit for any servant, and yet such her changing she deserved none
that had worth in him, and yet had he played himself almost into love with her.
Being far enough, the rest made sport with their companion to see his
passions, and he truly confes^ed he could willingly have stayed with her, but
if ever said he one more be made such a stale as I have been, love will be
undone, for it will turn that way, more delight lodging by half in this sort
then in twenty marriages. They were glad he had his content, and they by that
their liberty, so they posted till they ouertooke Meriana, who was much
molested with Rosindi's stay, and well contented when she saw him, and happily
did esteem^ of her coming that way which brought such good as the delivery of
Parselius, who at her entreaty delivered the misfortune he ran into in this
manner, Most excellent Sister after we had divided our selves to follow in
search of the lost Ladies, it was our ill chance to take that way that led us
hither (into this country I mean) where first we met a pretty adventure, a
lively Shepherdess blaming a lusty Lad for falsehood, she chid him, he
answered for himself, and so cunningly, as though he surely were faulty, yet
he cleared himself so finely as she grew patient, but then he waxed surly, so
as introath some hours we were pleased with their discourse: especially to see
that when they had used their best wits, they concluded with kissing, and
friendship.

After that, we met a Lady extremely amorous, and of her we had a story,
whom afterward we conducted to the town, from thence we fell into the plain
where you found my Armor, and where we lost our selves, for nothing do I
remember after I fell, till I saw my self in the cave, where I was visited by
the chaste Lady of the Castle finding me so weak as she pitied me she said, for
me she knew, and after Leandrus. I had, I confess, once before merited her
displeasure, but now surely had died in it, had not your husband succored me,
the manner was this. I in my youth passed this country, and was brought with
much kindness to that place where as she dwells, entertained I was like any
King, and cherished like a Lover, she invited me to love by looks, and
always that an amorous woman can entice withal, but I requited not: she yet
more charitable to me then I merited, would persuade her self it was want of
experience made me so slack in not understanding her, wherefore at night she
came unto my chamber, the door I had made fast on the inside, she pulled hard
at it, and was no question angry to be deceived in her hopes. At last I waked,
and suddenly asked who was there, but in such a voice, as she coniectur'd some
other had also lain in her chamber, whereupon she went back, and the next day
told me of it. I answered, I was sorry for such a loss, but it ever was my
fashion to have one of my Squires to lie by me in the room where I slept.
Truly my Lord said she, had I imagined that I should not have attempted, but
love urged me, and the better may you think of that love which never before
was offered, nor till that time had I ever any ill thought. I said I trusted
she did not blame her self for that favor she had showed to me her servant,
but I had cause to curse the ill custom which caused my loss, she took that
well, and so kindly as I might have received recompense for the former miss;
but I was honest, and after kept my door fast for two nights more that I lay
there, brought thither by a Cosen of hers, with whom I got thence, but since I
heard how she ever railed at me, saying, I had dishonored her with telling the
story of her, and thereupon vowed revenge, which now she had taken. Meriana
smiled to hear Parselius tell the tale so hansomely, and all but Polarchos
liked, who cried out that for his part he liked her forwardnes nothing ill;
give me such a Lady still said he that needs no business to woe her, but merrily
yields love for love, and rather before then after it is asked. This love
matter held them all that day with talk, making good sport with Polarchos and
his opinion of loving, while the Lady was in all the disorder in the world; for
first she wanted her woman, then rising and going into her chamber finding her
bed made and vnus'd she grew somewhat troubled, sent another of her servants to
call her Morean Knight, his chamber door they found locked, then they thought
she might be there, for they had perceived love between them, they called, she
vowed to put them both to public shame if she found them together, the fault
consisting in not well ordering their affections from sight not in affecting,
but the door broke open there was only found on the table a letter to the
Lady, and in it nothing but this, live better, and speed better; search then
was every where for him, when it grew toward Noone she went her self to the
room where Polarchos had lain to tell him of this business (being loath to
awake him any sooner) there she found loss, and so in the Cave, and every
where missed what she ^ought, and found what she shunned, which was want:
then she tore her hair, called her Knights, sent them all abroad several
ways till they got knowledge which way they went, and with so brave a troop;
then all was discovered, the Bulgarian known and the other, she was as mad
as rage could make her, vowing nothing but death should satisfy her.

Meriana held on her journey and all happily arrived at Corinth, where they
were with as much joy as that sad time could afford entertained; the Queen
being so excellent a woman as she won all to love her, and strive to deserve
her favor. Dalinea grieved and ioyed, and all at once, as her passions present
and passed rann about the round of her thoughts. Orilena wished for Philarchos,
who with Perissus had taken likewise their way in search, but made some have to
Corinth, knowing it was bootlesse to travel in those further Countries to
seek them, who no question were either carried by Sea to some remote place, or
Kingdom far off, or else by shipwreck cast upon some Island near the Gulf.
As they came toward Corinth they met a Lady much distressed, complaining of a
Knight that had abused her, Philarchos was willing to aid her, and so
demanding what the matter was, she thus told it unto him, (demanding, and
being satisfied who he was) I am said she Wife to a Knight married against my
will unto him by my brothers command, whom I obayed having no father; he was a
man of great esttae, but no way hansome: neither was he deformed but in his
disposition which was crooked, with him I lived an unpleasing and discontented
life, suffering his jealousy and all other froward humors which took away
the little show of love I bare him. I fell then into the way that discontent^d,
(and so unfortunate women often do) for not able longer to abide his fury I
parted with him, he being forced in recompense of my portion to allow me a
certain stipend during my life, which he at last was brought to with
willingness as he said. Some years we passed in this manner, I going to a
friends house where I remained some time, and was kindly entreated by him, but
his courtesy was at last discovered, and finding to what end it tended, I
purposed to leave his house, and did so; yet like a woman did not so much
dislike his love making which was the cause I took against him, as I
flatteringly commended my self for being able to win a heart, he frequented
my company after vowing all respect, and begging liberty to see me which
should be without touch to me, or my honor. Under this civil demand I
perished, for then did his second Act please better then the first, and I
yielded though he asked not, and so I was made an unfortunate creature, for
what danger such love could procure I fell into; I need say no more, I Am sure
by this you understand me, I was careful of my reputation to the world, though
to my self I knew how it was wracked, all possible means to avoid reproach
I took, as I thought, safely and cunningly I carried the matter, yet walked I
in net, or like the foul, that when the head is hid thinks all is safe,
though his body lie open to ^ight: So did I blind my self, while my action
was brought to light, trusting an unworthy woman, who for covetousness undid
me^, leaving others unsatisfied, that for mere revenge spread my shame, which
came to my husbands ears, and to my brothers, who inquired the business and
found it so likely, or it may be true as he left me; yet I writ to him, and
so fair a letter for likelihood, and coming from a Sister as might have got
credit; but it prevailed not otherwise then to be forsaken of him. Then did my
husband take a disgraceful course against me, that Country being very strict
in punishment for such offenses, I was condemned, and censured, and endured my
punishment, but then I thought how this man for my pains fuff^red for his
sake, I should have found affection or continuance of his love. he also left
me, and in such case as I have no money or means, but to sterue for want, my
estate being again seized on by my husband and yielded him by censure.

I writ to Amphilanthus to assist me, which his nobleness I make no question,
in tenderness to Ladies, would have done, but he was called away, and I fear
informed of my fault, which now I am doubly ashamed of, and grieved for: Alas
Sir, I have made a free though a brief confession to you. I am the wofull'st
woman living, of a good house, but ill life, of noble parentage, but mean
disposition; yet, O Sir, for mercy sake pity me. Philarchos beheld her, of
personage tall and well shaped, fair of complexion, good eyes, sweet favor,
and of so modest a behavior, as if her own tongue had not accused her, she
had passed vnblam'd for any show of ill in her fashion, or lightness in her
countenance. He pitied her, and demanded what he might do to help her. She
told him that if he would ride with her to her brothers Castle, which was
within aleague, she doubted not but he might obtain her peace; yet dare not I
adventure within his gates said she, until you have prevailed: toward the
Castle they went, being within sight of it, Philarchos spoke to Perissus to go
first. Nay, said he, since you have undertaken the matter, I will not be so
hasty to take it out of your hands, therefore do what you think best: on he
went, and met the Lord of the Castle her brother, with whom he spoke a good
space, a civil fine Gentleman he seemed, learned and stored with noble
qualities, unmarried; but a Cosen germane lived in his house to govern as
Mistress: She was not so young nor beautiful, as one might imagine any other
cause then to order his household was the motive of her living there; yet she
was a brave Lady, more manly in her demeanor, and discourse, then the
modestest of her sex would venture to be, and so much that fashion affected
her, as she was a little too unlike a well governed Lady. Sh^e had been
hansomer, (a cruel word) but is true; and yet she might well be seem a fair
houses government: the Lord was courteous, and so kind, to his Sisters honor,
which likewise was his, as he tendered it above the rate his Cou^en would have
him, who out of care of all women's credits, as she pretended raild bitterly
against her, reuiling her for immodesty, for dishonouring her house, shaming
her blood; more ado sh^e kept, then he who it did more nearly concern, yet
at last so fairly Philarchos spoke, and Perissus so well wrought with him, as
they got his favor so far, that he was contented to see her; but by no
means in some time to have her abide with him: they satisfied themselves with
that for the first, and so brought her in to him; the next day they all parted,
some one way some another, the two companions together, till they came to the
nearest part of Achaia, to Corinth; then Philarchos meant to cross the Gulf,
but Perissus advised by no means to venture it, yet he preuaild; and so they
got a little Barque which was no sooner under sail, but with great speed made
way, till they were encountered by a Ship, which would needs take them as
prisoners. They were not made to yield as they thought, never having been bred
to any such thing, wherefore they bravely fought, and at the boarding got into
their ship, fighting with such valor, as they amazed all that saw them, and
made their party good a great space; at last they were so hardly laid unto, as
they found yielding must be their best defense, but contarily it happened, for
another Ship made toward them boarding them likewise, the fight now anew
begun, the strangers fierce, and the others a little wearied; yet what most
troubled them was that the two first encountered Knights got new heart again,
and fought as freshly as at first. Discouraged with that, and vexed with the
blows of the last succourers, they would have showed them a trick by suddden
falling off from them; but the device was discovered, and they for their
deceit punished with no less then death. The two last were known to be
Selarinus and Antissius, so the four took their course to Corinth, where they
were bravely entertained. Now were all the eight Champions together, none
missing but Amphilanthus, and Ollorandus, and Steriamus, who was alone, who
will in short time likewise arrive; Rosindy and Selarinus the two dear
friends, having been long (as their love made them think) asunder, renewed
their kindness, and manner of friendly conversation; into a walk private and
sweet they passd, where love possessed Selarinus so far, as he brake into
these passions. Alas Rosindy, said he, did ever heaven thus punish lovers? was
any soul tortured like mine, or so unjustly condemned to death? what did that
chaste dear soul merit, to be taken away and carried from his breast that held
it dearest? Why was sweet and dainty Philistella deprived mine eyes, and all my
sense of hearing of her, accursed Sea that brought this misfortune, dambn'd
Barque that betrayed her, and wicked vanity that enticed them to such harm. Was
ever beauty so treacherously handled? Did ever eyes see such mischief? or
ears have hearing to so woeful a misfortune? O Philistella, treasure of the
truest sweetness; why art thou lost, and I in thee? Why was ever cruel
fortune turned on thee, and why alone were thou made excellent to be fallen
into this misery? Dear love, can thou not yet send thy spirit to me, to
tell me where thou art? I fear thou have long since parted from it, and too
highly is it prized where it remains to be permitted me. I mourn for thy
loss, I dye for thy want, and assure thy self will indeed end, when I shall
know that thou art not, which yet, I trust I shall not do, nor live to that
heariug Why wail you thus, said Rosindy, since she is but inchaunted? But
enchanted, why call you that nothing? She is your Sister, and you should
think it a hard fortune for her to suffer such a mischance; but to me it is
death; but inchaunted, and but for ever for any thing we know what old fables
blind you, lest by enchauntments? when shall the best lover and best beloved be
found? till then which will be never, never being able to decide it, she must
live inclosd in dull walls. Were not my loving arms fitter to embrace her? Am
not I a more proper Keeper for such excellencies then a marble house? and is
not Epirus a more convenient place for her to pass her time in, then a stone
Theater? where should she play her part, but with her love; where live, but in
his breast? and yet you make nothing of this but an enchantment. When Meriana
was injured, it was something, when her head appeared, then there was cause of
mourning: but now that Philistella the earths star is lost, she is but
enchanted, This passion said Rosindy, so well fits your love, as I must commend
it, and be no way angry with your choler, your constant affection to my
sister, moves in me as much love as I desire to have from my best friend^ yet
I would have you temperate in your sufferings. Why should not the best lover be
found? Never was any such thing made (for I dare not name it again for fear
of displeasing) but to be ended: was not that at Cyprus concluded by
Amphilanthus and my Sister? Yes, said Selarinus, but there be now both your
Sisters in this, and Urania and my Sister, who shall fetch them out? never
think of it, there lives none now they are there that has worth enough to
venture to have a thought of gaining end to it. A disguised creature, I sure
disguised fortune has caused all this, let me not live if I believe this tale.
Will you for more certainty go and see it, said Rosindy? With all my heart,
said he, if I were sure to be shut up where I might but still behold
Philistella. That you may do if you please, and I will carry Meriana to
adventure it. Ah, said he, now does truth in friendship shine in thee most
brave Rosindi, when shall we go? as soon as I can provide said he, the^ went
they back into the court, where Rosindy acquainted the Queen Meriana with his
purpose. She, who would not refuse any thing he liked or moved, gave consent,
and so appointed habites of purpose, disguising her self into the shape of a
Forrest-Nymph; to Sea they went, and by the directions given by the servants,
arrived at the rocky Island, the Pylot knowing the place, being able to bring
them the safelier to it without danger. To the Palace they went, and round
ahout it, beholding it with all curiosity and care, at last came to the gate
again, which as soon as Meriana touched, opened to her, who no question, had
ended it for all points but the disguise which was forced. Rosindi and she
passd to the Throne and Selarinus with them, who would not be shut out, nor can
any be that will venture though alone, he strait ran to Philistella, who met
him, and together fold in each others arms, sat down upon one of the ascents
right before the other, Rosindi and Meriana in her new habits hard by them. No
content can be compared to these happy people, because they esteem themselves
so. Polarchos would not attempt alone for fear he should sit likewise alone
within, therefore he wished for his sweet Lady he last parted from, or any other
would be alike to him, so she were fair and kind, he walked up and down alone
in the Island til he saw another ship ariue, then he went toward her to see
what company she had in her, he found many, and all determined to try their
fortunes; glad he was of that, and they rejoiced to find one could direct
them, but among these, who should be one but his old love and late enemy the
Princess of Rhodes: she was ashamed and grieud to see him, he was angry and
as much displeased to see her, and therefore was leaving the company, almost
ready to forswear the adventure, because he should behold her too long if one
hour, for his hate. She sought by means of her self and friends there, to
purchase some discourse with him, he shunned it, and despised the humblest
entreaties she made; he saw her weep, and smiled at the falling of those
tears, she quaked for fear of his frowns, he said he shook so long time
in his iron Cage for cold: she sighed, and pitifully begged with eyes and
heart for pity. He scornefully said there was not a more foolish thing
breathing then a loving woman, nor less to be pitied; for, said he, their
sorrows are but like exhalations in a hot evening, odd to behold, but neither
hurt nor burn like lightening: no more should women's passions touch our hearts
to scorch them, or t^rne them to any pity. She confessed her fault to be
unpardonable. He answered, it was strange then her judgment would let her
ask impossibilities; he alone, she cryde, might absolve her; she alone, he
said, deserud no good from him. She offered to throw her self at his feet
for pardon. He said he would take her up, but to no commiseration from him.
She protested her heart had suffered innumerable storms of passionate sorrow
since his departure. He answered, his body and heart both had suffered by her
tyranny. She repented, and implored pity. He slighted and denied what ever
she petitioned for. Could there be such cruelty imagined against such a
Suitor? none but cruel man could do it, and yet was not he to be blamed, for
what punishment could be sufficient to be inflicted upon a woman, that not
only left loving, but hated to that extremity: none can be enough; and yet
surely she now bears the greatest this world can let her know. The other
Ladies that were with her, were the Princess of Samos, (the refused love to
Philarcos) and the Lady of Stalamina Sister to Nereana, all Island Ladies, and
of purpose joined to try their fortunes: the Princess of Rhodes was like a
Pilgrim, of Lemnos like a Pastora, and the other like a Shepherdess, they
had servants or lovers as you men call them, who by their mistresses favors
aspired to hope of winning; but the Rhodian Lady must try alone, Polarchos
flatly refusing her, who wished she might for ever be shut up, and from all
light, having such unhappiness. They aduentur'd and Polarchos sees them all
like the others enclosed. Now he begins to be desirous to see the manner of
it, and how they sit within; yet alone he fears to go, lest he must be
placed with the so much despised Lady. Days he stayed and none came, then he
resolved to try his fortune, and so coming to the gate, finds there a young
Lady in whose face he saw love, for he will that his government should be
seen, and little cause to doubt the refusing of it to one that kindly would
ask it, he taking the boldness of the long knowledge of that place, began to
discourse with her of it. She, free in discourse, and as willing to answer as
he to demand, they grew so well acquainted as they left the aduenturing the
adventure for that night, and the next day made themselves believe they loved
enough to try for the winning of it, which they did, and very lovingly were
together placed in the row below the other two pair; but so, as his forlorn
Lady still beheld their kindness to her heart-renting torment. Parselius,
having now long enough solaced himself, would needs bring his Dalinea to
adventure, and Antissius, who had drowned himself almost in sorrow, having
visited each place where he had been happy with seeing Selarina, and kissed
the windows with his eyes, where she had wont to grace his love with her
looking on it, would needs go with Parselius. Dalinea, she put on the habits
of a religious woman and so took her journey. Philarchos and his Orilena
likewise went, she in habit of a Country less; at the Rock they arrived, and
as the rest were received and shut up in the inchauntment; Antissius taking his
Selariua to him, Pamphilia and Urania sitting in the throne, beheld by the
rest, as fittest to be admired. Perissus went to Sicily to fetch his Limena,
resolving to try, and with as much cause he thought as any. Steriamus who was
alone in his travels, happened on a fine and unusual adventure; for he having
taken shipping, came down the Gulf, and passing by a Rock, casting up his
eyes, he saw, as he imagined, Urania sitting upon the top, in a Pastors
habit; whereupon he willed the Pylot to go to the Rock, which hee^ did, and
he landing at the foot of it, scrambled up till he came to the top, where he
found an excellent fine woman, her staff and bag lying by her side, and she
combing her hair, her thoughts busied so as she tended nothing but themselves,
and as she combed her hair, she sung this Song.

YOu, who ending never saw
Of pleasures best delighting,
You that cannot wish a thaw.
Who feels no frost of spighting,
Keeping Cupids hand in awe,
That sees but by your lighting.
Be not still too cruel bent
against a soul distressed,
Whose heart love long since has rent,
And pitiless oppressed:
But let malice now be spent,
And former ills redressed.
Grieve I do for what is past,
Let favor then be granted,
Thieves by judgment to dye cast,
Have not of mercy wanted;
But alone at feasts I fast,
As Thief of pleasure scanted:
You accuse me that I stole
From you your hearts directing,
All your thoughts at my control,
Yet passions still rejecting;
But you place me in the roll
Of left loves new electing.
Though I kinder was to it,
My heart in place bestowing,
To make room for yours more fit,
As just exchange truth flowing,
Till you fondly gained the bit,
And flying, left love owing.
Which debt resting still unpaid,
Let this at last be gained,
When your new loves have you staid,
With welcome choice obtained:
Let change on your breast be laid,
While I live still unstained.
By the voice he knew it was not his Urania, neither was her hair, though
fair, long and bright like hers, nor so delicately shining as it self once
had been, he was sorry and grieved his hopes were fruitless, yet he spoke to
her, and she putting her hair aside with her delicate fine soft hand
disconering a beauty fit to be beloved and pitied, that it was no more
cherished, as by her song it appeared by him on whom she had bestowed it,
mildly made this answer.

Sir, said she, this place so sad and desolate should not, me thinks, inuit
such a stranger unto it, which is only acquainted with sorrow, and distant
from all joy. My arrival, said he was caused by seeing you, a power able to
command all passengers to stay, and pay tribute to your deseruings: and this
you may because I speak for truth, since I was invited to land by a strange
belief, that you were a Princess whom I seek, once in Shepherds attire,
once lost before, and now again fallen into that ill fortune, I thought she
might again put on such disguised habits, and so excellent a creature she is,
as you must needs be so too, or could I not have mistaken. She looked upon him,
and seeing his tears run down his cheeks, when he spoke of loss she pitied
him and finely made this reply. Alas Sir, such is your sorrow, as I must
(were it but only for that) wish I were as you are pleased to say I am; for
then I should hope to have something in me to serve you: but so unfortunate a
woman I am, and a long time have been, as I can but lament with those I would
do service to, nor, except with my tears, assist those I most honor.

How came this fortune to you, said he, for no doubt but you were borne of
better rank then the estate you appear in shows you to be: Love, said she,
has tyrannized over me, as well as played with you. His sports, if but such as
I yet feel, cryde he, are rather racks and tortures then delights, unless you
will call them plays, as Dogs and Horses are taught by stripes and blows,
and such pastime I have in love, and so love plays with me: she that time
that he discoursed, wound up her hair in strings of tawny, to show her chance;
then as if to hide it a little, or rather her self from the Suune, she put a
dainty strawne hat on her head, appearing like Ceres crowned with her own
plenty. He was desirous to know the place, the name of it, and under whose
rule it was; but loath he was to trouble the sweet Pastora too much, who
understanding his mind, led him all about the Rock, which was some half a
mile in compass: in the midst was a pretty fine house, or rather a Tower
built round; she had therein three rooms one over another, the top was
covered with lead, and there she used to walk and view the Sea, she had two
maids that attended her, and a Heard of Goats, which she for her pleasure, or
rather to pass her time withal, bestowed looking to; it was for the quantity
very pleasant and sweet, flowers naturally growing there among the stones, as
Pancies and Violets, and others, what could be there showed him concerning the
place, she willingly let him see, and told him it did belong to the Lord of
Corsu, an Island not far off, but within sight of it, more it seemed she was
unwilling to tell, but this the truth of the story was; she was by birth a
great Lady in the before-named Island, beloved and wooed by many, but she loved
only one, who loved her as much for many years; she was married to a Knight,
but her affections were wedded to her own choice. He whom she loved was also
married; but, like her, to one he cared not for: Their love (for what love can
be kept secret where such bars be for enjoying) was seen and spoken of by
many, yet few blamed them, but wished they were free, and married together;
there was another Lady in the same Country, with whom she did much keep
company, and at her house had the happiness to meet her love; she being
acquainted with their affections, for what could she hold from this Lady, who
was her chosen friend? careful she was to keep their counsels, desirous to
aid them in their desires, and as kind a friend as a true one; but here began
the harm to smother like wet hay in fire, smokes, but the flame was longer in
breaking forth. This Lady called Siluarina had a cosen whom she did dearly
love, deserving from her what love could be expressed from one to such a
kinsman, who was both that, and a loyal friend to her, nothing so dear to him
as her love, nor of what did he take care in comparison of her: but being
young, (and young men be wanton) he fell in liking with a servant that
belonged to the Lady, where they lay, called Diania, she had others fairer; but
this was by him chosen for loveliness, she was of as passionate a
disposition, as he apt to receive, which was to the height of love, he gaining
as it seemed, what he required as it also was found he did not sparingly
demand. after this, he was persuaded by his friends to go see a Lady, a great
marriage, and to woo her; he consented to it, and brake with his Cosen about
it, she very well liked of it, and encouraged him in it: the spiteful woman
seeing that, thought she would have her time to act her part, and therefore
having got a false key, one night when the lovers had appointed a meeting, (as
many they had, though still chaste) she opened the door, and going into the
chamber, being certain by the watch she made that she was gone forth, took
the lamp which hung on the wall at the beds feet, and hung it in a chair
hard by the beds side, of purpose to give her at her return occasion to look
on the removing of it, and to take a paper which she had laid at the bottom of
it, wherein she had written the most vilanous letter for threatenings and
reuilings of her for her sin, as she called it, as it a little troubled
Siluarina, though she had a great spirit, but that told her she had a husband,
and so the knowledge would be dangerous, she had honor that would she be
overthrown: lastly, her love might suffer, which most grieved her; for if all
the harm had fallen on her, she had the less cared: to avoid this and keep
all safe, she resolved to speak with her the next morning, for the hand she
knew; but first her servant coming into the room to see her before he went a
iourny he was determined to make for some days, she showed him the paper. He
was vexed, withal being afflicted that she should be in hazard for him, and in
such a kind, as his pains and stirring in it, would be the worse for her
reputation. She was more grieved to see him perplexed then with the business,
wherefore she did comfort him, and assured him she would find a means to
salve all. He took his leave of her, enioyning her to send him word how
things passed; She promised that, and willingly would she do it, had it
been for no other cause then so to hear from him whom so dearly she loved.
He gone, she rose, and being ready sent for the Gentlewoman to her, to whom
she brake forth into these words. What offense did I ever give you? or what
cause of malice have you against me to work such a treacherous practice
seeking to ruin me and my honor? She replied that her Cosen was assured to
her, and therefore she did it, that you, said she, having such power with him,
should not seek to marry him to the Lady mentioned to him, or to any but my
self; which if you do, assure your self I will not spare you either to your
husband or any else, but the whole world shall be filled with your shame.
Threaten not base woman, said she, I fear not; nor think thou shall make me
so near thy self wicked, as to wrong my Kinsman or blood so much, as to let
him fall to such mischief as to be thy husband: I know you wrong him, for he
cannot have that little worth to be so fond of so vile a creature, or forget
himself so far as to think of marrying you, or were it so, never think
tricks can fright me; of any ill known by you that I have committed, I am as
clear as air, only suspicion you may urge, and that was brought to light by
you, and the cause known to be malice, who will believe you? my life has
gained a settled opinion in the world, not to be stirred by your ill tongue; my
husband is so just, as when he shall hear you and me, he will, I know, right me
so far, as you shall be punished and whipped for slandering me: What good
then can you hope for; if you do talk? which do if you have a mind to it,
and believe it you shall be no more spared then you threatened me; What
witness can be brought against me? an envious railing woman your self only:
What will that work against me, when differences will be justly made betwixt
you, and me, and malice ouerbalance the report?

She hearing her so fearelesse, and knowing those things she spoke to be true,
found she was deceived in her plot, and Diania in her invention, encountering
another manner of woman then she looked for: she therefore turned her speech,
protesting how much she had ever honored her, that there should be nothing to
the value of her life neglected to serve her withal, desiring pardon for what
she had said, excusing her self with madness that possessed her for fear her
Cosen would forsake her.

Thus they parted, she careless of her danger in outward show to her in whom
the danger lay; yet wished she for all her great spirit, that she were fairly
dead, and so her honor safe: it continued thus, her servant returning back
again, and meeting her at the same place, Siluarina having in the mean time
visited her husband, and her Kinsman the Lady he was to court, at her lovers
return, they discoursed of all the passed business: she contented because
he was pleased, and he to find her faith and affection best contented, the
Gentlewoman afraid, who thought to bring the brave Lady under her power, but
her spirit was only to submit to love; happy she accounted her self even to
blessedness in her loves requital, but within one year after, whether fully
satisfied with her love, or inamoured (which if I might speak what I think
was the truer cause) of another in that place led him astray from his first,
and fell into the other as violently, if not less discreetly. She sweet Lady
first condemned the choice, but when she saw she could not by strong hand hold
him, she fell to petitioning his return of love to her; she writ to him, she
spoke to him, she did all that a perplexed woman could do, but all prospered
alike. To her companion and friend she complained, she wept to her, she
comforted her, nor would she believe a long time that it was so, but chid her,
as if guilty of false accusing, but when she saw it as plainly as all others
did, she then pitied her, but could not help her; when she found no hope nor
help, she vowed to die a constant, though unfortunate lover: grief made her
loose all rest, that made her distempered and so sick, as none had hope of her
life, her husband was tender over her, and took such pains, as he himself
fell as sick or worse then she, who recovered, but he died; then did she
sorrow for him whom before she scarce cared for, but nobleness made her
grateful, and to have that virtue in herself, the want of which at that time
in her other self caused her torment. When she had performed those rights
belonging to her dead husband, and held her self according to the manner
unseen for such a time, she was visited, and by her friend and lover who came
together, bringing likewise his new love, and her Rival, who nevertheless she
used well though she loved her not in that respect, but as her self she held a
kind opinion of her, but her loss made her seem vnpleasinger in her eyes,
especially to see him, as if in cruelty so cherish her before her face, which
he continued in to the height of neglecting, and scorning her who best deserved
him before the other, as if to merit the more from her, but herein was his
fault, not for loving (that being a passion cannot be resisted) but for hating
where he was sought, beloved, and had loved, for if he had not, he could not
have used that fashion he did; some will say it was to make himself free from
her importunity; he might have sued from that, and have dealt more justly and
plainly, told her what he strove by fashion to express publicly, yet when
some time he came to visit her privately he used her better, showing hy that he
would not loose any thing though he did esteem of it as nothing, this more
then cruelty, and she suffered wi^h more then patience, a rare but ill example,
that a woman who could contemn all passions, must yet be such a slave to one,
and one that slauishly used her. What could be lost she parted from, content,
quiet, honor, rest, reputation, fortunes to succeed, for no match was offered
her that was not resolved of refusal, nor at last any, all agreeing her love
was so fixed, as it was but vanity to seek to remove it or gain it from the
place, She being in this estate settled, what means she had by friends, and her
own suite to the Lord of Corsu, this little Island or Rock was bestowed upon
her, whither she came, and there lived in solitariness once, and not long
before Steriamus his arriual, her still loved, though not loving Lord by a
storm was cast there, she not at first knowing it to be him, took him up
half dead, tumbled with the Sea and wrack, she restored him to life and
health again, bringing him home to her house, and with her wonted affection,
as forgetting all unkindness, or rather to make her virtue in constant loving
approved, she cherished him, and without show of discontent entertained him,
but nice she was to speak or touch of love. He used her with all respect, and
much kindness seeing her fashion to him, and having (as he might well do)
seen her tears for his harms which she with care repaied; he stayed there
till he was well, but thence was fetched by another Lady, who hearing of his
being there, and the danger he had escaped, came thither; she was kindly made
welcome to her, although that she knew she at that time was his Mistress, and
this knowledge she had from her traine-layer, who out of hate I imagine rather
then love told it her, but the storm of her torment was passed, and now loved
this Lady for loving him, her quarrel being but to her, that had won him
immediately from her, so as this Lady was embraced by her, and as a friend
received; for so she counts all that loves him, or that he loves, a strange
expression this is of a love, yet true it is, for this the Lady does; she
brought them to the Boat, bid them farewell, cheerfully he told her the
former strangeness should be no more, she said then should she forget it ever
had been, thus without passion, but with true friendship they parted, who
could not in times passed have said farewell but in tears, and such end has
likely so hot and passionate beginnings to end in ashes, what began in flames;
and therefore this last is the surest love which will hold while the truth of
friendship is esteemed. This Steriamus got knowledge of by pe^ces from her who
would not complain, nor tell the story her self for fear of misconstruction
of the hearers, least the relation so rare should have been taken for an
Allegory, and not a story wherein her virtue should be painted, and not found:
or indeed the true cause was, that although she had with all earnestness,
care, and study striuen to forget her love, and miserable fortunes, having at
last obtained all but hating him which her soul would never consent to, so well
she still loves him, as she will not let her tongue accuse him; nay, it is so
to be feared she will rather blame her self then him, were it not for making
her self by that unworthy, and so that way likewise wrong his judgment, the
ear she has is to preserve his worth, no revenge in her but what her own
heart endured, certainly she resolves to love and respect him most, she did
with excellent discourse, and respective fashion use him, who told her all the
adventures of the lost Ladies which he gained by the servant of Rosindy, who
was sent to tell him of it, and after as just as he landed also arrived to his
great comfort, persuading her so perfect a lover to go also and try it, but
she excused it with her vow to live and die in that place, concluding her
days with her former resolution.

He parted thence, and so left the Lady Pastora on the Rock as hard as her
fortune, and as white as her faith. Steriamus holds on his way, and at last is
within sight of the Rock whither he must go, being there arrived he came to
the house, and at the gate he found Leandrus fearful to attempt, least he
should not gain the honor of concluding, but he hartened him, and so together
adventure, Steriamus absolutely thinking it belonged to him, and Urania who had
been disguised, and therefore that might be enough to answer those things,
that like Oracles are never without antiquity: As soon as they entered
Steriamus like the other his Leaders ran to the Chair and took Urania, who
with him went to the others, a place being reserved for her; now were all
almost in couples as they wished, Rosindy and Meriana, Selarinus, and
Philistella, Antissius, and Selarina, the rest as they would, and came coupled,
Polarchos and his soon won Lady, Parselius and Dalinea, Philarchos and
Orilena, but still Pamphilia sits leaning her cheek on her hand, her eyes
lifted upwards as asking help, at her feet lay Leandrus gazing on her, and as
much imploring pity from her, as she begged it from another, with whom her
heart was, her eyes not in the absence of her heart turning to any other lower
then the top of the room, and there stayed by the roof, not with desire to
behold any thing but her love, and now his m^mory; all ioyed in others loves,
and a fine sight it was to see them in their various habits, yet all to one
purpose, imitating the world, which for all the changes and varieties she has,
must have but one conclusion, and one end. Perissus arriues in Sicely without
any adventure, and with as constant a love as he brought Limena met him, to
whom he related all his fortunes, and the accidents in the late war, there he
encountered the two young Princes of Corinthia, to whom they came of purpose to
show their thankfulness for the honor done unto them, both in Knighting them,
and bringing them to the knowledge of the wrong doer, and to be esteemed and
accounted friends to the true and excellent Amphilanthus; He f^asted them, and
with great kindness entreated their stay and company to the enchantment, which
they consented to, and before their going thence (which was not in three
months) were fit for the adventure, being both surprised by that secret serpent
Love; the elder falling in love with a sister to Limena, borne many years
after her, and by a second Wife whom her father took after the death of her
mother; she was a most delicate young Lady, and worthy of a brave servant which
he proved, both loyal, and for hi^ valor deserving fame. The other with a
Lady near of kin to the King who was an heir, and willingly bestowed upon him
with consent of all, especially liked by Perissus, who by this means held him
always there with him, giving him great preferments and offices about his
person, pro^ing a Gallant Gentlemen, and a faithful servant to him and his
Crown, fighting a hard and cruel combat in defense of the Kings honor
against a Traitor in that Country, whose head he brought and presented to the
King. This he did in the journey toward the Rock passing by the Castle where
the ill man lived, who came forth, and challenged the King, but the youth of
Corinthia begged the liberty of the combat, and bravely performed it; in the
end they came to the Island, and there with the rest were shut up, the places
being almost full, for daily some or other came. By this was news of the
enchantment come to Amphilanthus, who with Ollorandus were newly returned from
their journey going into Hungary to visit Melysinda; they had raised some
pretty adventures in their travels, and had a more pleasing time of it, then in
any they had made before; being free, and better disposed, and having got
again some of their old passions, or memories of them about them, which made
Amphilanthus willinger to try the adventure, and release Pamphilia, of whom he
had let in a more courteous opinion then he had when he first blamed her, or
thought she had done amiss, yet no further it passed. Musalina must needs see
this enchantment, with her went Lucenia to see this also, and to be an Actor in
it, so like an Amason Musalina attires her self, though unfit habits for her,
who was no hater of mankind; Lucenia like an Egyptian, and toward the place
they travel, Lucenia used among them like a country Lady in the progress
having on to see, but little respected, meeting with the proud Queen of
Bulgaria; but now Leonius must be spoken of, who going directly into Greece,
met nothing there for many days but the sorrow for the lost Ladies, he had no
disposition to sorrow, therefore meant not as yet to visit the Court, but as
others did, he being as much as many engaged in good nature to follow the
search, determined upon that, but then he came into a part of Arcadia, not
taking the directest, but pleasantest way to the Sea; at the entering into this
Paradise on Earth for sweetness, delicasies spring^ng there as pl^ntifully as
Primiroses in other poorer places, he liked, and wondered, not sufficiently as
he thought, being able to contemplate the fulness, and richnes of the bounty of
that Province, riding sometimes, sometimes walking, b^holding the rarenes of
it, yet when he had seen all the varieties increase in varying to pleasure, he
was yet set upon by a more admirable sight which was the most delightful
object for man to like, and this as well to be liked as any, being a fair and
dainty woman, appearing a Shepherdess, but such an one as AEnona was in her
time framed as if but to be remembered, and set as a foil to the excellency of
the perfections in this creature, so much surpassing description as conceit
does commonly excel expression. The young Knight beheld this shining Star
with amazednes, while she past not far off from him, her aparrell a gown of
gray, cut square, a fine ruff about her neck: a little before it was open, the
rest covered with pure white strips, but a more pure whiteness appeared when
the skin was seen as white and soft as Swannes down on the breast, her
hair carelessly thrown up, neither tiyde, nor vntyde, but cast into a
delightful neglectiuenes, some pretty flowers, and kno^ of ash color ribon,
being here and there placed between the loose fastenings of her hair; gloves
she wore none, showing the innocent virtue she was enriched withal, her legs
and feet so delicately shaped, as they would rather seem framed for show
then use; yet were they but fine enough to carry the body they were made to
serve. She went with a modest, but cheerful pace, and being a little passed
looked back again, with which he was (alas) struck, and all his senses
ra^ished, his love only a senseless passion, especially when so suddenly
surprising, and at best but a sportfull madness possessing, and taking the
place his better wits till that instant dwelt in, her bright and fair gray
eyes looking as if the Moon in all her glory of brightness could have a
companion, together her commanding beauty wrought so in the Prince, as he was a
new creature, yet part of the old man, which was boldness got so far into
him as he followed her, knowing that a man who men^ to follow adventures must
not fear any thing: especially a woman, and so sweet an one. They passed the
plain, and so entered into a little Grove, where he heard as at her coming
exquisite Music, drawing nearer he discerned a Fountain made in the fashion
of an Imperial Crown with a Globe on the top, out of which like a full
shower of rain the water came so plentifully, and showringly, as it resembled
such plenty, so finely was it counterfeited, and the trees grew so, as who
had stood in the wood would not suddenly have known whether it had rayned or
no, so powringly high, and sweetly it fell like an April shower, and so
far, as it came upon the boughs of the circkling trees, rattling among them to
second the music. Underneath was the place where many sat round, the water
falling beyond them, as if ordained for a cool Canopy to shelter them from
heat, and not to offend with one teare-like drop, lest that might make
sadness thought on: there did she with her companions in that life place
themselves, the Grove was much of Sicamore trees, the roots of which, and
between which were set with Roses, and other sweet Flowers, Violet, Pinck,
and many such; without this was a fine circle, paued with several colored
stones, into which the water fell, and made a pretty murmuring brook, the
waste of which divided itself into two lesser, running as with pain to part
from those excellencies, in tears kissing the banks for parting from them.
Myrtle and Laurel was also flourishing, to show them, that although Venus were
Lady there, yet Apollo was often called, and for his sake his tree was honored
among those beauties. Many fair Maids were sitting about her, and such as had
she been away, might have been commended highly; such possession had this sight
gaind on the Prince, as he gazed even to blindness, like one too long looking on
the Sun: he admired, till he lost sense to admire, yet went his senses but
round, for coming to the first place, he had sense again to love in wonder,
but out of that he was put, for the heat a little slacked, she rose, and the
rest attended her, she leading them, and one more then her wonted troop, the
Italian Prince prisoner. He durst not follow near, yet did his eyes kiss
every step she took, while he imboldned with love, yet a little withheld by
fear, went sadly and softly on, a pretty young Shepherd came smiling to him,
using these words.

If Sir (said he) this sight has any way displeased you, the same may make
you amends, for surely you see not such every day; or if a former cause
molesteth you, look on these Lasses, and assuredly you will be cured? There
can (said he) be little hope of cure from them, where such danger dwells. You
should not me thinks (answered the Lad) doubt, nor is it for a man of your
profession to fear, especially Beauties; yet indeed I cannot blame you since
al eyes that have seen these, have yielded their hearts as slaves to them.
Leonius made no answer, the Shepherd proceeded; But Sir be not afraid, for
believe me, they are not more fair then courteous. Alas (cried he) how can I
who am a Stranger, yet a possessor of a lost liberty, and imprisoned heart,
presume to come where such perfections rest? Who dares approach lightning, no
more dare I into her presence, nearer then to admire and behold her. I must
needs say, replide the Youth, it is the less strange that you are touched,
since all our hearts are subjected to the lowest of despair.

I would I were but touched cried he, then might I escape, but I am wounded unto
death, would I had been a Shepherd as you are, and tended flocks, so I had
not known the torment of lost joys, or so happy as to have been borne among
you, or destined to live for eternal good with you. Why may you not, said the
Shepherd; many good Knights have after great honors gained retird, and taken
our lives upon them. It is true, answered he, and had I done any thing yet to
answer my birth, or now taken order I would do so too. Here are (said he)
many occasions to exercise your strength in, we have games which when you
try, you will say, clear force must be found in the best performancers of
them; besides wild beasts that often spoil, and vex our flocks; nay, the last
day, that rare creature you (I am su^e) most and only admire was in danger of a
fierce Bear by misfortune let loose. This stirred up his thoughts, O said he,
why was I so vnfauoured by fortune, as not to be here, and being here, to
deserve by my service, at least one kind look from her, who holds my soul,
and it should seem yours: but if so, be not angry that I adventure to confess
my self your Rival, you have already a little encouraged me, in telling me,
all hearts yield, then I trust I shall not fall into your displeasure for being
one of the Company. In all true respect I confess I am (said the Lad) her
servant; but such are her perfections, as teach us not to aspire higher, then
to behold, and obey her, other thoughts we are not permitted, but banish as
treasons; and no more able are we to give birth to so high desires, then to
look on the Sun, without having our hearts thrown down condemned, as our
eyes cast wateringly for presumptuous gazing, begging pardon for such attempt.
Dare you not love her (said he)? can fear appear before bold love?

My hardiness (said the Lad) ascends to serve her with my life, my hopes, to
be accepted as her creature, and this will be far beyond my merit, if I gain
so much; and that I fear, as something makes you doubt. I doubt indeed (said
he) and fear to give offense, because I love; I likewise love (said he) and
love you for your love; for had I not been a lover, I could not so soon have
found your disease; I judged you straight by my self, I pitied you as I do my
self, who fell in love directly as you did, the first ^ight struck me, I was
wounded with the first dart her killing eyes did show toward me, alas, she
meant me as she vows, no harm; but what wretch could I do when I was hurt? I
durst not ask ought but pardon: she granted that, and weeks did pass, before
I sought her favor, and months ere I did venture for reward; but all this
makes you (I perceive) run further in your error, therfo^e not to hold you any
longer in this doubt, it is the Shepherdess that sat on the right hand of the
fairest that I seek to gain, and now I hope shall win, for she looks kindly
on me, takes my pres^nts, smiles upon my flocks, cherishes my Dog when he
fawnes on her, who as if he knew his Masters mind, still waights on her, lies at
her feet, when God knows I could be he, and often do envy his good luck, when
she does stroke him on the back, and plays with him; she takes my Songs, and
^ings them, happy lines that ever gaind such bliss, to kiss those sweet
lips passing into air, as scorning other place then her breast, when she
will expose them unto ears should harbor them; she sometimes likewise will
give me some of her making, and commends my voice, makes me sing to her, which
I do, and yield her own words to her best knowing judgment. She requires me
presently, and sings mine unto me; then I say they are only good, when she does
grace them so; she answers best our songs befits our mouths, and ears, these
are not only signs, but I do think, or much do flatter my poor self, they
are assurances, and thus Sir now I hope that you are satisfied.

I am (said he) doubly tide to you for your relation, which does speak just
truth, and for your love which in this shows to me. While they were thus
discoursing, they heard a pitiful cry, and as it were the shriks of women,
which made them hie to the Plain, where they saw the same fierce Bea^e hastily
pursue the glory of those parts, ready almost to close her in his jaws, the
rest of the women crying, and assisting her only with their lamentable voices,
the only help that sex can yield in such a danger, yet now came it well, for
the noise brought Leonius to her aid, who only sought to save her self by
flight, but cryde not like the women. No need there was to desire, or entreat
him to assist, for carried by the wings of love, he flew to her succor; she
seeing him run to help her, turned her course that way, as she ran, her
dainty legs were seen, discovering such excellency in shape, and swiftnes, as
that had bin enough alone to conquer; she passed by him, he standing still to
encounter her enemy, yet did his eyes cast amorous wishes after her, his spirit
raised in hope to meet the Beast, who gaped, as wanting breath to hold the joy
he had in expectation, to devour that sweet portion of excellent
daintiness; furious to be deceived, he sought to execute his fury on him,
from whom he got a sharp, and sower encounter, Leonius his sword passing into
his throat, wherewith he fell, then struck he off his head, for having let a
presumptuous thought enter to hurt the delicatest Shepherdess, now Urania had
left that habit. This blow being given, the before flying beauty returned, but
in a more quiet and soft pace, which let the Italian with more leisure behold
her, crying within himself; Oh that she had but as much affection, as I have
love, then would she with as sweet swiftnes run to me, as from the Bear, which
sight did in fear yet content so much, as he could have found in his heart
(but for her harm) to have endured the Beast, and have clasped her in his
arms as she ran by him, her danger hindered his attempting pleasure, and so
she was saved, taking her sight into his heart, in stead of her longed-for
self into his breast, passions were as full in him, as Motes in the air,
flying up and down like flies in a hot day; buzing and swarming like Bees,
that for all their profitable honey bring stings with them: or like a neast of
Waspes, that one time beset one with their fury, and give no profit if shund or
overcome, except their own poor bodies, worthless and gainelesse: those
thoughts he gathered together, as like a Fisherman, that in his net catches
all that comes within it, yet pickes he out the choicest, and appoints some to
keep, some to sell, some to give, and some to throw in again, as not fit for
keeping: so did he cull his several passions, some he chose to present her
withal, some to hold in himself, to please her withal, others not to be
seen by her, he cast away into the flood of his forgetfulness, whence none
should arise to give her distaste; a commendable virtue in Youth, to shun what
may by Youth shame to offend; he loved, and therefore was curious not to
displease his best beloved, his highest desire being to content her, by whom
he must only be contented, he shunnes all else, as she did the Bear, which
yet he loves, because he brought him means to do her service.

When he had killed the Beast, he took the Head, Paw, and Heart to present
her withal; Speeches he framed to deliver to her with those won relics,
Prose and Verse he summoned, doubtful which should please, he stood as if
musing what he might do to please her best; he feared one while the hideous
face of the Beast would fright her, therefore thought the heart fittest, and
enough to show her, as her prey, the Paw he thought fit, because it was lifted
up against her, and if that, the Head as necessary which hatched the treason,
of these three, and with these three he danced the Hay in discourse, and still
ended just as uncertain and apt to begin again, as to conclude; a fair
victory made him think a fairer acceptance must be yielded him, a bold
attempt to save her, boldness might be waranted in that respect to speak to
her, desert then claims reward, how should the claim be answered if not made?
he must then adventure, and as^e it, refusal cannot be, where knowledge, and
instant sight says, it is requisite. Valor must be adored, and love cherished.
Tremblingly he stood, as if afraid of that dead which he killed, his hands
shook that held the head, his other hand struck off, his eyes uncertainly rold,
that were ^ixt to his ruin, his legs shakes under him, that against his enemies
like pillars, uphold his strength and courage: and this is love that made him
seem so weak a piece, and it was love that made him so fierce against her
enemy, he looked toward her, and sighed within himself these lamentations.
Alas, said he, that that face the heaven of mildnes and sweetness, should
carry with it such cruel force, as with delicacy to destroy; why should those
eyes my souls only comforts look, and not with as much love as mine, since
they are fairer, mine more loving, they more beloved? those dearest lips, let
them not sever, if not to speak requital to me, let them not tell my bane, yet
rather then not suffer me to hear that voice speak any thing, but if possible
O speak but love; those feet and legs, the rich, and matchless supporters
of this our heaven, bring her not to murder me, lade your selves with pity
and compassion, then come apace, and give life to the most pe^plexed lover. All
this while she was coming, while he attended, as a passionate man does the
breaking of the day, when he is to visit at that time his love. Dawning and
leasurely she came, he thought she made small haste, yet came too fast if
love did not accompany her, and that love to him like a delicate young
Courtier, who is to make his estate by the marriage of a great heir; when he
comes before her, is at first timorous, loath to offend, yet dressed up in all
richnes and finenes: so was he, his Helm he took off, rubd up his Hair,
wiped his face, set on his most manly, yet amorous countenance, knowing women
love not childish men, how much soever they commonly like louelines, and the
choicest beauties. Poor man to see what a business he kept with himself were
strange, that he who but newly come to know passion, should be in so much
variety, and skillful manner of learned knowledge to win, as those who after
their natural inclination change, and woo daily, but to such it is pleasure
and delight, to this young man torture. He sighed, he looked, he prayed, he
wished, he did all, and yet nothing that might help him, for so long he was in
these distempers, as either ignorance, neglect, or ill manners were like to be
laid to his charge, who indeed was an exact fond lover taken, and spoild at
first sight; the loving Country of Italy could never make him thus passionate,
the beauties there were as ones own Country, esteemed nothing so pleasing to
one, as the thought of others, till they be tried, Arcadia is the place can
only captiuate his heart, and there must he taste the pains, makes him wish to
be in Italy with freedom. O sweet place, heavenly Paradise (said he) what
delights be in thee, but what serpents keep them from enjoying? stories I have
heard of waters; and trees kept by Monsters, but what rarenes was ever thus
kept, as love keeps her, and me from asking pity, while he stood letting his
imagination twine out the time, which he might, if acquainted with love, or
bred in his cunning School, have used to far more gainefull purpose. She
past fear of danger, secured by the death of the Bear, her before threatner,
turned back, and came to thank him; but what with her sight and words, he
stood in as still a Posture, as if the Beast in death had also wounded him,
which made that excellent Shepherdess take him by the hand, and kindly demand
how he felt himself; but the touch of her dainty skin, with the rare softnes,
gave a more cruel hurt to his heart, then the hard sword had given (though
death) unto the Beast. He could not answer but with sighs, his eyes raining
showers of tears, and yet as through a wet cloud gazed on her: She was sorry
for his sorrow, and wished her help might pleasure him, it was she alone that
could do it, but he du^st not hope for it, nor adventure to demand it; then
were the rest come unto them, who stirred not, but looked like metamorphosed
creatures, their hands fast in one another, she pitying, and he that had
what he could wish, yet fearing it, enjoyed it not, which the Shepherd Youth
perceiving, loving Leonius as much, as man could love another with no more
acquaintance, stepped to him, Sir, said he, it appears that the sudden joy of
this brave victory, with the releasing of this rare beauty before you from such
danger, does too much possess you, or else the same fit which this day I found
you in, has again overcome you. He now who shame instructed to be careful,
starting as children do at Bugbeares, told him, that it was true, his fit had
taken him, and held him worse then it had done before, which had caused that
stillness in him, for which he asked pardon of the most fair Shepherdess, and
kissing her hand, assured her, that nothing was more comfort to him, then the
rescuing of her; nor any thing more grievous, then that he had been so rude, as
not to acknowl^dge the favor she did in coming back to thank him for that,
wherein he did but the due of any one to serve, and preserve such beauty,
thinking himself most fortunately borne, and brought thither at that time so
to do her service. She mildly and modestly blushing told him, the good fortune
was hers, which had gained not only safety, but that from the noblest hand and
heart; so taking away her hand (which was a death-like blow to him) courteously
bid him farewell, with millions of kind thanks, and sweet words unto him, every
one of which were wounds unto his soul, because with them she left him.

They gone, he alone but for the Shepherd, began his complaints, partly to
himself, partly to his new friend in this manner. Is it possible O Arcadia,
the most sweet and delicate of all these Provinces, that in thee there should
live so dangerous a creature, as at first sight should wound, and kill with the
first touch? alas my friend, what peril does abide in these most dainty
dwellings? were these places ordained excellent, and alluring to draw men to
their ends? are you made happy with seeing delicasies only to see them, but to
taste none other then sharp murders? O my father, how have thou left thy son in
thine own friends dominions to be slain, and by a woman? how will you
brauest brother, disdain my blood vanquished by a look? O Arcadia in your
sweetness I am martyrd, and one of your Kings blood thus you kill, are you not
then guilty of treason?

The Shepherd who now perceived this Knight to be a Prince, and by his words
an Aliance of that Country, he kneeled down, and thus spoke, My Lord said
he, blame not this place for that, for which I doubt not but you shall have
cause to love it, accuse not your friends, since if they saw your valor and
brave destroying that fierce Beast, they would without question glory in your
virtue, nor be displeased with your fortune, or love, since fortune has
brought you to love one the most loue-worthy, and I beseech you what cause have
you thus to complain, not knowing whether you may be favored, or disgraced, I
see no reason you should be discontented if not, that you would not receive
kindness, she so mildly, and sweetly affording it. Love; Love it was, and is
cried he, makes me thus wretched, what can I do when my senses in her sight
fail me? how can I have comfort when deadly despair makes me not dare to
hope? what shall I joy in, when I scarce may venture to look on her, who must
deliver me from this bondage? noe I see no remedy when I am not able to ask,
or take it. I am lost and only found by despair, and desperate love. Then did
his tears follow those words, and groans those tears, till the Sheephard
began again.

My Lord said he yet hear me, there is a way whereby you may let her see your
love, and yet not speak it, your tears thus continually shed, your sigh's
still breathing out your passions, your groans foretelling death, will all
truly witness your affliction, and sue for you; pull off these habits unfit
for these passions, and put on such as I will provide for you, so well agreeing
to your humor as the clothes, and the action shall make her unable to
withstand so much pity as must breed love, and that love if you then
discreetly govern it, will procure your happiness. Direct me dear friend
said he, and let me enjoy her love, and be assured I will make thee see I am
not ungrateful. Then my Lord said he, you shall put on the habit I will
tomorrow morning bring to yonder Grove, but be sure you be there before the
Sun appear, least they be there before us, and after follow my advice, so
shall you I fear not come to your wishes end, but withal you must promise,
and perform assistance to me. Leonius could but with kind tears, and
straightly embracing him, give him thanks, and promise; thus they resolved,
the youth went to the next town to buy things fit for the Prince, while he
with sad thoughts, uncertain wishes, and wrestlesse passions spent the time
till his return.

The Sheepheardesse who (poor soul) before knew but her own beauty, now
found another to master her, I would said she the Bear had devoured me,
rather then this torment should perplexe me. Why did this Stranger succor me?
of purpose was he sent to torture me, must I be made a subject to one I know
not? and suffer afflictions for one I shall no more behold? fie upon this
strange love, which makes me so strangly love as to affect impossibilities, but
I see I am but justly punished for disdaining all the Youths of these parts,
thinking none worthy of me, now I must love one that knows me not, will no
more see me, and surely loves an other. Pride, it is you have undone me, I
confess my fault, I sorrow for it, yet Venus help me, Pan our Sheapheard-God
assist me, let not one of your servants, nay poor me your servant thus
distressed live; I recall my former scornings, I repent my disdaines, I accuse
my self more then you can blame me; O aid me then. Thus she passed the night
in millions of such like complaints, till morning being come she rose, and
hastily dressing her, raised her flocks before their usual time, as she was
raised by this unusual passion; to the plain she went, there awhile she
stayed, yet rested no where, sometimes she walked a pace as if she would leave
that pain behind her, but seeing it so closely follow her lay down embracing
it, yet blushing would turn her face on the ground, and seem ashamed of her
own thoughts. O Chastity said she, why do you wholly possess me? dear
Diana take me to thee, but then did Venus as in rage increase her flames,
making her forget all but her affections. Then rising, to the next tree she
went which was a Willow, and of those branches she pulled, and with them crowned
her self, casting off her strawne hatte, her Sun-beame hair falling down at
the full length, which with a little fine, and natural curling reched to the
small of her leg, and the rich thickness spread it self over her shoulders;
there awhile she stayed, grauing some few words in the Barque of the tree,
agreeing to the pains she felt, and condition of that tree, whose softness
concurred with the yielding hearts of lo^ers, but the Fate given it to be
forsaken, and made it to be the Garland for such hapless creatures. Well poor
Willow said she, thou shall yet be my companion: and I will honor thee, though
happier folks despise thee; then went she into the Grove, but as little stayed
she there, flying the company she saw there assembled, seeking new places, as
all do that seek ease, and hope for it by travel; so she passed along the
side of one of the little Brooks, her eyes still fixed upon it, speaking
sometimes, at last she said these words. Poor Brook said she, how like my
pains are yours, I seek to fly from the Spring of my sorrows, so fall you
from your head: how fast sweet Brook you run in hope of eafe, so fast do
my poor hopes fly from my heart: stay, turn your course, and I shall hope to
live, notwill not be, you run, and I continue in my pains. As she went on
sadly bemoning her solitary thoughts, she heard as pitiful a voice utter
these imperfect joined words, Leonia poor Nymph said it, where is thy vow?
must Venus make thee change? O love, coward love to steal thus to my heart,
could thou not have come bravely, and contended with me in the Chase, or
taken me in the time when I did revile thee, and scorn thy power, but to set
upon me when I was quiet, and safe as I thought, treacherously to lie in wait
and betray me when I was unarmed, naked, and without power to resist, and more
for my shame when I had sworn to Diana, what punnishment will that chaste
Goddess lay upon me for this offense? But fool why talk I of these poor
things which in comparison of my woe are but blossoms. I love, and must love,
what then? I will love, and die in love, then shall that Cruel see written in
my heart that murder thus committed, unkind, alas my soul melts as these
tears, and yet to thee my pains are no more waighed then bubbles, my heart
weeps blood, pity me then, say you do pity and save me, pity said the
Sheepheardes is that I want; what new companion in my woe have I found here?
with that she went toward the place from whence as she imagined that sad
voice did proceed, when as a little from the bank under the shade of myrtle
trees, which made as it were a Cabine of them selves, lay a Forest Nymph, her
apparel of color and fashion like Diana, buskins upon her legs of white,
her hair tyd up, only some of the shortest, and about the temples curled,
crowned with Roses, Hyacinths, she lay with her head toward her, who with a
soft pace went on till she came just behind her, then viewing her earnestly,
her eyes being so full of love, as all loving creatures found a power in them
to draw them to her call, especially those eyes which were so much hers as they
could not stir but to her will, commanding them so, as she could with her
looking on them with loving force, bring them to her own; and so it now
proved, for those eyes which full of tears were seeing themselves in the
stream, showing their watery pictures to each other, her earnest viewing the
Nymph with a natural humbleness to hers, drew her looks to her, joy then
appeared in the Nymphs face, yet straight was that clowded with sorrow; She
rose, and with a timorous (though she imagined bashefull) countenance and
fashion, saluted her.

I did think fair Nymph, said the loving Shepherdess, that it had been
impossible for me to find any so like my self unhappily wounded. Why are you
hurt fair Shepherdess, said she? alas I am sorry for you, and wish your
remedy, for none knows the torment of despair like to my self, and therefore
in charity would have none else afflicted with it, but it is very strange that
such beauty should complain. Alas said she, often times perfection is turned to
the contrary, and so is it in me, if in me be that you spoke of: but I pray
sweet Nymph, let me take boldness to demand of you, of whence you are and what
has brought you hither. Love said she, for this must be the first, and last of
my discourse, all other matters how great soever, being but dependances of
this. My name (said she) is Leonia, my profession was what my habits tell me
to be, but love has altered me, no more must I abuse my Mistress who I served,
since I have left her and an new one now have gained, a poor change, (yet the
fruit of change) when for liberty and pleasure I get beggary and slavery: Then
this passion, rare Shepherdess, for nothing but misery follows it. Alas it is
too late, said she, you give this couusell out of time, for I am in the prison
too fast locked, by any means, but by love to be freed. Are you in love then
said Leonia? Oh haples m^, why, said the Shepherdess, does that grieve you?
It grieves me that such sweetness should be vexed. It grieves me more (crid
she) that I love in despair. Thus both afflict me, said Leonia, and on these
do I plain, and in them die. Let us sit down and tell our woes said she?
Mine are all endless said the Nymph, yet I will not refuse to do what you
command, for you may help me if you will but pity me. I pity you, said
she, and love you, for in you I see (O dear remembrance) many things which
report sent my love unto mine eyes; with that the Nymph did blush, the
Shepherdess went on: Be not offended sweetest Nymph, said she, for he was
excellent whom I did love, and do love, rare for true beauty and valor, and
O, too brave for me; none can be so (sighed she) fair Shepherdess, for the
fairest, and brauest must sue to you for grace: but I did blush to hear that I
should seem so favorably blessed in your all-conquering eyes, as to be
thought but to resemble him that happy man whom your great goodness loves. But
to go on, I was by my own suit to my parents chosen a Nymph, and accepted
into the number and service of Dianas servants, being given to all those sports
that Goddess did affect, but especially, to throwing my Dart at marks, and
shooting in my bow at beasts, or any thing, so cunning I was in that exercise
as I could hit a bird at great distance; often times I would take my Grayhounds,
and course the Dear, or Hair, being so nimble, as I could follow them where
ere they went; these, and many other harmless delights I lived in, till one
day sacrifising to Diana, unhappily for me, there came a Youth, who having
killed a terrible Beast, offered it to the Goddess, as the Princess of the
Woods and Deserts, this offering proved strange, making my heart the Victim
bleeding, and lying on the Altar, dedicated to his love, thus doubly had he
conquered, I fainted, fearing the chaste Goddess, yet I was rescued by Venus,
who promisd her assistance, but not so well armd by her, as not afraid of
Diana, I fled from those parts, and since have I roamed about, directed by mine
own despair, for never since have I se^ne my love; the forgetful Goddess
having enough in winning, but scorning too much care has I fear forgotten me,
contented with my yielding, but careless of my proceeding; I seek still, but
I know not with what hope, I have wept, and grieved, and so I fear still must,
and thus lives, and perpetually laments the poor unblessed Leonia. The
Shepherdess catching her in her arms, Ah my companion in my woes (said she),
let us still live together fittest for our fortunes, let our tears be shed
together, our sighs breathed together, and let us never part, but always keep
together. This was what the Nymph desired, being so glad of that embracement,
as she could have found in her heart to have forgot her habits, but danger of
loosing all, if not gouernd with modesty, till apter time gain fitter
opportunity of discovery, she only with an affectionate kiss, and that she
would not suffer her self to miss, being such an one, as liked Veralinda (for
so the Shepherdess was called) better then any of her fellows kisses, for this
seemd more passionatly kind, gave liberty to that, and then began her own
discourse thus. My name is Veralinda, daughter I am to the Kings Shepherd, who
dwells upon yonder Hill, his place, estate in goods, and some kind of thing in
me, which these people here call beauty, has made me to be sought by many, but
I have still refused all, truly I must say with some neglectiuenesse; for which
I am punished, and if I flatter not my self above my merit, the pain being
more then the offense, for I am made to love in despair, to hope in loss, and
affect one I know not, or can aspire to thought of ever seeing him again,
Destiny prevailing in this, and I am left a poor example of the Fates tyranny:
for how can I hope, that if I meet him, he could fancy me: he a Knight, I a
poor Maid; he a Prince it may be, and surely is, for Princely virtues dwell
in him, beauty inexpressible, and such as but in you I never saw any like him,
and so like are you, as I love you for his sake so much, as love can command
love to the Image of their Dear.

Valiant he is above expression, and mild, and courteous; but what does grieve
my soul most, is, he^ surely loves. And surely would love you (said the Nymph)
if he could be but happy with the knowledge, in the mean space grace me
with your favor, which I will strive like him to merit, let me enjoy those
sweet embracements you would yield to him and think I am your love, which I
will do by you, and in that thought till we be blessed with perfecter
enioyings, we shall have some ^ase.

She condescended, and so they kissed again, wishing and loving, they
remained, passing many such pleasant times, till at last the wonder of such
affection twixt women was discovered, and it may be, had then bin brought to
light, had not the Shepherdesses arrived to his grief, and no way to her
content, who truly loved the sweet conversation and discourse of this Nymph:
to the Fountain they then altogether took their way, the Nymph setting
herself so, as she might both see and touch the loved Shepherds, all the rest
beholding this stranger with as much admiration, as she did their Mistress,
thinking no difference between them in beauty, save that the new guests
fairness seemed more masculine, as fitted with her estate, yet full of grave,
modest, and seemly bashfulnesse. Thus they beheld each other, the Shepherds
passionately beholding Leonia in memory of her love, and the Nymph amorously
gazing on her in her own passions, till the music a little awaked them,
making their ears prove traitors to their hearts, for letting in any thing to
them but love. Love is a subject so delightful, and alluring, as it not only
winns, but commands the very soul to the hearing, or writing of it, so wholly
possessing, as it caused this amorous accident, and yet will not permit a
resting here, but proceeds to Amphilanthus, and his company, who lived in all
pleasure outwardly, yet fed sometimes with a bare hope, as others were, and
this often they felt, and after learned to know; they passing along a pretty time
without adventure, it was their chance to meet the same proud Queen of
Bulgaria, whom Rosindy had encountered, but upon fairer terms, for she knew
Lucenia, and she did (as she was an excellently well fashioned woman) give her
respect answerable to her heart. Amphilanthus beheld her, and thought her as
fair as she was, yet not a woman (at least as he protested) to work wonders
on him; yet she doubted not, nor was afraid, to show, that she thought, he
was her servant, if she pleased: but wrong has been done to that famous and
excellent Prince in that kind, many times by a noble free fashion he had,
which gave ignorant or bold people liberty to speak of him: but to our purpose.

After they had discoursed some days together, much entreaty having preuaild,
they obtained her company to the Enchantment, the noble Amphilanthus assuring
her, that the King would not be offended, when he should be told, with her
journey, that she had taken it upon his request; they came down still, till
they were near the Gulf of Lepanto, where they meant to ship, and so to go
for the Rock: but as they were one hot afternoon sitting in a shade, a lovely
sweet creature as those parts yielded, apparelled as that Country fashion was,
for the better sort to wear, passed by them.

Musalina would not let her go so, but walked to her, who with much civility
staid, and attended her commands. She demanded some questions of her, she
answered them with sweet and pleasing truth, at last good breeding made her
know, that courtesy was not to be contemned by the greatest, wherefore she
invited her, and her company to rest them in her house, which she said was hard
by; and though not worthy of them, yet better then that place.

She took her inuitation, and went for the rest, who straight came, and
accompanied her to her abiding, which was a fair house moated about, but
strong and hansome, Gardens and Orchards within the moate delicate and
pleasant, a Boat to go over it into dainty Meades, Woods, and Groves, so
pleasant this place was, and so kind her entertainment, as quickly they agreed
to her civil request, which she seeing the day far passed, made to them, for
lying there that night, Music they had of diverse kinds, and such mirth
possessed them, that place having ever been blessed with that fortune, as few
or none could be melancholy in it, except the Mistress, whom commanding all
there, appointed that passion wholly to attend her, who not naturally, but
accidentally was the saddest noble Lady in those parts. Dance they did, and al
other things that orderly mirth would permit; yet still the Lady walked up and
down, as if her soul were absent, and the body guided but by a Deputy, who
did not so well govern. Musalina marked it, for the brave Queen marked little
but her self, and the glory she took in that, she asked the cause; but with
much fine and cunning respect, not so finely insinuating her self into her,
but that she found her, yet meant not to be too curious, wherefore she answered
her thus.

Madam, if the cause of my sadness were worthy to be heard, or known by you so
perfect a Lady, I would not be the delayer of the happiness to that, and my
self in holding it from you; yet some part, as all, is too long to tire you
with all, I will say I loved, and was beloved; I chose, and am forsaken; I
love, and I think shall dying say so, and do so: I lived a while nourished
with the bewitching food of hope, but that has now left me to the opposite
party, Despair; despair, the spring of all loue-lost tears, and the Tomb
of constant lovers, whither I haste as fast, as my ill fortunes can carry me.

By this they were got a pretty way from them, and hard by the Moate side where
Musalina would lie down, and hear more of her plaining: then said she; Madam
you shall hear some more, by that judge the rest, for my lips shall not
speak all, though truth of him; I dare not call him any thing, for his name
makes me still love him, and ready to forget all injuries, and that love will
not let me give him any cursed title; but I went one day a journey from his
house, with a Cousin of his, he not being able to go with me, his eyes then
filled with water, mine as full, hearts being equally stored with love; words we
had few, his being these; Farewell my Dear (said he) speaking this on my
lips, and carry my heart with thee in thy journey. I will (said I) both keep
i^, and cherish it, do the like for mine that I leave with you: his eyes ^old
me he would; I thanked them with mine, and so parted, not fearing that, which
now too strictly holds me, but since I never will trust man, that when he
will can weep; my soul did at the parting strangely misgiue me, that some ill
would follow, but I guessed not what, though I confess a little while before,
I had somewhat been touched with care, I will not call it Jealousy, though
'twas as violent a pain, but how did he seek to clear himself, and satisfy
me? I came in once, when they two all alone were sitting on a bed, she looked
angerly, as having hindered her, and red with fury, he I think with shame, that
so I found him, yet I went away, nor did I challenge him for that, though he
did seek to make me think no hu^t was meant, or harm unto our loves; this
made me more suspect, s^spition bred more grief, the noblier he strove to
give me satisfaction, the more I was engaged to believe, and did at last truly
repenting, as if I had erred, and as clearly loved as at first, and as
fervently.

Oh what eyes could with freedom look on him? could any heart hold out
against the siege of his alluring sweet beguiling love? no 'twas impossible,
all were created to be made his prey, and he too pitiful, and so by pity to
receive, and then to ruin, and such chance befell me, come now remembrance
help to molest me in thine own distress, and please this Lady with my
misery, tell her the sweet, and amorous words he gave me, and won me with,
when he did meet me in that sad fine Grove, the third time my sad eyes were
blessed with seeing him, with what finenesse, and yet subtlety did he express
sorrow for me, and my passions, yet comfort me because they were for him? how
did he conquer me with love, and his respect which I saw so curiously sought
for my yielding love, yet still preserved mine honor; this made me so
willingly his prisoner, as I took care how to express it.

What witchcraft lay hidden in those smiles that so enchanted me? and what
power had those instruments sweet speech, more sweet and vnrefusing
conversation over my heart? tell me poor heart, did I take joy in ought else
but his love? did I not despise all other things campared with the high rate of
his sight? thought I of any happiness if distant from his presence? did I not
think the Court a Iayle, whither we were committed, till his sight gave me
liberty, with blessedness in his return, whose absence if but for the space
of one days hunting, did shut up all delight in that time from poor me? did
I apparel my self but with neglect, if he were not with me? none but
himself though a full Court I did behold, (for Madame I have been a
Courtier,) and if he missed I saw none there, and thus much has he sworn to
me; such was my love, and is, and being such, far bitterer is the loss.

More the fair Musalina would have heard, but she was unwilling to say more,
and therefore she urged no more, then went they to the others who were
pleasantly talking; Amphilanthus welcomed Musalina, taking her by the hand, and
so they sat, the Lady beholding them, thus said she, have I sat too, once
blessed with such like kindness, now cast into a hellisher distress, Musalina
took occasion again to hear her speak, she granted it, and proceeded.

Madame said she, you neither now have, nor ever had such happiness that mine
equalld not, it is I confess bouldly, but I think truly said; What did a Lover
in passion ever vow, and swear, and after break, that he has not done the
like? none ^uer more amorous, none more unkind.

Have you not seen him lately said Musalina? yes said she, I see him often,
but his scorned has so long ruld, and I have with such care, and pains
sought to put his neglect, and disdain (because it was a fault in him) from
me, as now I am in a kind free, I confess not altogether, but indifferently,
for I can with less violent grief suffer his loving, and courting others
before my face then at first I could, but yet I had rather me thinks still
have those favors; the beginning of my misery had truly almost killd me,
and the more grievous it was when I perceived he gloried in my pains, I have
bin about then to call him ungrateful, but my love stayed my tongue, and yet
but like an intermitting Pulce, beat doubly on my heart.

One night especially I was afflicted with it, when I was (^ith his beloved
Mistress, who was a greater Lady, though not a more true Lover then I was, (and
himself) invited to a supper; there all he could do, was to express his
affection to her, and his scorn to me, I was in an Agony to see it, my blood
rise, and all my senses were sensible, but of disorder; I sweat with very
vexation, and for all this at our parting, this cruel man smild, and bid me
take heed, I caught no cold. It vexed me to hear that slighting, and before
mine enemy, yet my hate turned more on her, whom I was content rather to
accuse in mine own heart for bewitching him, then consent to truth, or
confess him vugratefull, for I had deserved, and that he begins to profess.

What if he should sue again to you (said Musalina) would you not receive
him? That were unlikely surely Madam, said she, and I have studdied so long to
be out of love, and gain liberty by forgetting, as I think it would be as
hard a thing for me to love, or rather trust (for indeed I dare scarce trust
my self with loving him) as it was to hate, yet so near I was once to it,
that there was scarce the breadth of the finest spunne hair between me and
that cursed humor, but good, fond ignorant, kind disposition came cro^se the
way, and so I came no further, then to leave loving in show, but never could
attain to hate, or to leave truth in love; this was, and is my state, take
heed brave Lady, trust not too much; for believe it, the kindest, louingst,
passionatest, worthiest, loueliest, valiantest, sweetest, and best man, will,
and must change, not that he, it may be, does it purposely, but it is their
natural infirmity, and cannot be helped. It was laid to our charge in times
passed to be false, and changing, but they who excel us in all perfections,
would not for their honors sake, let us surpa^se them in any one thing, though
that, and now are much more perfect, and excellent in that then we, so there
is nothing left us, that they excel us not in, although in our greatest fault.

Amphilanthus heard her, but answered not to it, thinking an ill matter better
left then stirred. ^ucenia was touched to the quick with this, yet dissembled
it, and so they rose, resolving to go thence, the Lady bringing them through
the walks, and over the Mote, being the pleasanter way to their Horses and
Chariots; but by the way, Musalina again moved her to discourse, asking her,
if it were possible for her to hold any correspondency with that Lady her
servant loved, and left her for. Yes truly Madam, said she, I have brought my
self to it; we do often meet now adays together, and hunt together, and
eat, and converse. Does she know you loved him, said Musalina.

The whole Country did (said she) and therefore she could not be ignorant; she
knew it Madam, and knew a bracelet of hair she saw once about mine arm
(against my will) to be his, though would have excused it, by saying, it was my
husbands, whose was something of that color, but as much difference between
them, as between silk and woollen.

What satisfaction can she give you for entertaining him? Embracing and
cherishing his affection (answered the Lady) for which I can love her. Did she
never urge any discourse concerning it?

Yes (said she), and lately took occasion to speak, I am sure she meant of
that, but covered it with the third person, an ordinary course in such
businesses, and this she said, that so much she could love a woman friend as if
she should be in love with the same man that she loved, and had no other
means to obtain, but by her leaving him, she would to do her a pleasure, and
ease her torments yield him to her, at least leave him at liberty to take her:
I found what she aimed at, and told her it was a new and an excellent manner of
expressing friendship but I should think she seemd a very ignorant woman that
would trust in that kind, and should show more indiscretion then perfect
friendship in trying it, thus she could not catch me; by this they came to
their Chariotts, and so they parted. Musalina asking her, if she had a husband,
I had Madam, said she, which was none of my least afflictions or molestations,
then kissing her, the rest likewise took leave and so went on their journey,
the Lady returning to her house, they directing their Voyage toward the Gulf,
where they shipped, and sailed toward the Island Rock, the Ladies in their
disguises. Musalina an Amazon, the Queen a Persian, but they were hindered a
while by an other Ship, the manner was this.

One standing upon the Hatches, saw and knew Amphilanthus, who was discoursing
with the two brave Ladies, and commending the Queen of Bulgaria for her choice
of habit, becoming her so well, as it was a great pity, he said, she was not
sole Lady of those parts, that dressing so well befitting her; she took it
like her own conceit, and so as she loud him better for commending her, then
for his own worth, pri^ing her self above any worldly treasure, which he as
finely made sport withal; but this Gentleman causd his ship to lie aboard of
the other; kneeling down to the King he presented him with letters, then
standing up delivered these words.

The earths glory, and Italys blessing, famous Amphilanthus, receive these from
your friends, and Allies in Germany, it has pleased Time to give period to the
Emperors days, since whose decease many have made themselus competitors for
the Crown, but Ollorandus your worthy friend, having the greatest stroke in
the election, making all the assembly remember your right has chosen you, and
truly Sir not only he, but all, as soon as you were named gave an equal
consent, as if borne and made of one temper to serve you, having justly chose
you to it. Olorandus called me, who have the honor to be his kins-man, and in
my youth his companion, but more honored me in the Embassage to bring this
news unto you, with all inioyns you by the love between you two, not to
refuse this gift, and Crown; he told me where I should find you, and
according to his directious I have ordered my course, he fears the former made
vow will carry you to the performance of that; if so, he assures you he will
hold the Empire safe for you till you come, and therefore himself will not
adventure the enchantment, but if love do not overrule, he could wish you to
leave all vain attempts, and come to Prague where he will attend you, and so
wait on you to your Coronation, if otherwise, you shall be secure, and he
your humble servant, and loyal friend; my self Sir, am fortunate to be
commanded in this service to you, whom above all men, I most honor, your own
true virtue causd that respect in me.

Then did the King with much kindness use the Prince of Transiluania, who he
understood this Ambassador to be, by the letters he brought, he accepted the
Crown, but with a little niceness, professing himself not to be capable of
such a dignity; but in conclusion, his answers being but complements, he took
the title given him, and gloried in nothing more, then that he was so
contentedly, and without one opposite voice chosen, only he desired to be
permitted to conclude his first vow, which finished, he would repair into
Germany, and to that end dispatched the Prince of Transiluania again, telling
him, that love it was true did force him to this attempt, but what love was it,
except the desire he had to constant truth in holding vows, and besides, to
have those famous Princes his friends, and Allies that were there enclosed, to
accompany him in his journey, for his greater honor, and the glory to the
Empire. This satisfied the Prince, and so with letters of credence,
acceptance, and promise of his presence, he returned a happy man; and so had
those parts reason to esteem the like happiness, when the excellent
Amphilanthus was to rule ouerthem, who proceeded in his enterprise, and landed
on the Rock, passing directly to the Theater, which opened to them, and as he
was the man most loving, and best beloved, so was part of the Charm ended, al
at his coming receiving their best senses, like their own clothes about them,
they ran to welcome him, and begann to be ashamd of their follies for being
in disguise: but she, whose mind knew only truth, rose likewise to salute
him, and with such loyal love as joy of his sight sprang like spring time in
her face, before pale and Winter-like in sorrow. He complementally saluted her,
heeding none, but with ciuility used all, and her little kindlier, though more
respectively then the rest; then again they took their places being brought
into a worse Charm then the first, beca^se now they perfectly saw and knew,
misery to them that were subjects to it, and such did Pamphilia feel, who
returning to the seat, she had before sat in, not only as she did alone, but
viewed by all to be so. They infinitely wished for the final end, and she for
hers; directly before her sat Musalina, and the half fulfiller of the
Adventure, a sad spectacle, but she must and did endure it, though how, with
such unquietness, affliction, and multitudes of tears as what succeeded?
loss of so much beauty, as made many have cause (I mean slight lovers) to see
her less amiable, then less loue-worthy, and so she was left, and this is the
truth of man's affection, yet did he not imagine, or rather would not consider
this was caused by his leaving her, she poor Lady beholding nothing but
affliction, and making her self the true subject to it, yet did she not, nor
would accuse him, who was altogether so faulty as condemnd to be, though more
then she deserved unkind. Next to Amphilanthus sat the Queen of Bulgaria, and
by her, her husband who arrived there just at their landing, glad without
expression to see her, her servant likewise of Iamboli came thither the next
day, and according to the manner sat down on her other side between
Amphilanthus and her self, she would not, or might not, it may be, show too
much kindness to her beloved in his presence, who though he were as loving a
Husband as any, yet his love was mixed with discreet care over her actions,
and the more discretion she was bound to use; she was not displeased to have
her servant sit by her, and because he should have no reason to remove, she
still itcht nearer her husband, holding him by the hand, which he took to be
done out of p^rperfect or fond love, while her head was prettily tossed first
to one side, then to an other, as if she were choosing a looking-glass,
between two, which to have, wherein she might see her fair follies best, yet
if ever pride were to be commended, it was there to be esteemed, for certainly
that held her virtuous, and so by that means one of the greatest sins grew
like a virtue, but no nearer being one, then the shadow of the purest Lilley in
the water, is one; neither having color or sweetness of the Lilley, only
shape but black, and nothing of it self: no more good is in pride, but as it
is sometimes, and here, especially used, for a shadowed virtue. Ollorandus when
Amphilanthus resolud to adventure this place, did likewise think to do so
too, for such a friend he was, as he imployd himself wholly to be his
imitator, and then did he best in his own opinion, when he did any thing, or
said any thing, like Amphilanthus; but yet he kept an unviolable affection to
his Melysinda, who^ he went to fetch to the adventure, but as he went, he met
the news of the Emperors death, which hastened him home faster if it could be,
or if wings can be given of more speed then those of love with which he flew,
yet he had the fortune that traveling Princes have, for this chanced to him.

A Gentleman he met all in mourning, his face more expressing it then his
clothes, though in the exactest fashion for shape, and blacknes: arms he had
none, but his own arms foulded within each other, his hat down in his eyes,
his pace slow, his sighs many, his tears had spent themselves so liberally
before, as now he had none left to shed, the spring dry, and stopped with heavy
sorrow, his speech when urged by Ollorandus to speak, was as if frozen, and
only melted, or thawed by good manners to give answer, though but no deeper
the thawe peirced then to make a little moistnes to freeze the harder on it,
for so few was his words, and so long before gained, as it was almost like a
hope of great content a lover promises himself when he thinks, after a long
absence he shall enjoy his loves sight a whole day, when that day comes his fed
imagination, in conceit is so soon made to sterue again with the speedy
passing of that time, as it is worse then if not had, and indeed scarce is it
had, because the expectation so much excells the enjoying: so did the King in
this, for when he had got him to answer once, he provoked him with such
discourse, as he thought should procure a large scope of replye, but he only
looked on him, sighed, and cried; I am the perfect scorn of fortune, what
need I, or can I say more? The Bohemian would not thus be satisfied, but still
urged, the Gentleman stood still bare-headed in respect to him, but more words
he got not of him for a great space, at last fearing that too great inciuility
would be laid to his charge, he thus spoke. Sir said he, what offense have
I given you, that you should seek this revenge on me, to make me wound my
self with my own miseries relation? Alas, consider when misfortune is
befalne on, how does every one that loves him strive to keep his discourse
from his friends ears, if hearing be painful? what is the telling it when
the soul every word that is spoken feels torment? insencible tasting the
harm, knowing every corner of it, as an Architecture does in the framed
building his imagination casts: yet seeing their satisfaction can be obtained
but by this, I will speak what I am loath any but my own heart should know,
out of two reasons being so dear to me; one, because my dearest dear was the
Actor; the other, that the fullness of the grief stored up, might choke and
kill my heart, and so send me to her; but your importunity has preuaild, and I
have now set open the two gates of my silence to the ruin, the enemy speech
will bring to my soul.

I was borne to honor and dignity; wealth, and what men most esteem, I had
plenty of; I was favored by the King, employed by his Majesty in office and
command; but what did I govern, when I was ouerrul'd by love? A Lady I
affected, she loved me, and spared not to give me all testimonies of it;
another sought me, I grew proud of it, and accepted her affection likewise; the
former saw it, wept to me, and taxed me for it, I protested against it, and yet
was guilty: she at last (by my unpardonable offense) being certain of it, for
I neglected her; this second I doted on, bewitched by her charms, she only
had power over me, she could only make me do any thing: I left the Court
almost for her, never thinking my self at rest, but when I was with her;
businesses were tedious to me, sought before by me, for I did love employment
till I employed my self so ill, as to be her seruant^ she, as I thought, as
fond of me, I ioyed in that, and to satisfy her, left all the world
unsatisfied of me, and as many to scorn my weakness, as in former time
admired and loved my readiness; my poor true love lived this while disdaind,
forsaken, and almost contemned, more wretched creature I, who was ordained to
do that ill to spoil my self with all. In this time of my blindness another
got my place in my masters breast growing so powerful and dangerous, as I was
forced to oppose him; for he spared none to work his own ends on: I was
unfortunate in that likewise; for then was he so mighty, and besides so ill,
as he forgetting all but himself brought many into the Kings displeasure. I
repined at that, and seeing at last no remedy, took arms with many other, my
friends, but too weak we were, and I taken by composition in mine own
Castle, yielding on condition all the rest should be spard, that was granted,
and I alone carried to the Prison the greatest Traitors are carried unto, being
called the Kings Prison, there I lay ten days till every thing was ready for
my arraignment, then was I brought forth, and after by the great men condemned.
I could not say they did unjustly; for a subject ought not upon any terms to
wear arms against his rightful King: I was contented with the censure,
settled my self to dye, and was grieved for nothing but that I should not kiss
my love before my death. The night before my appointed execution, when I was
meditating on my end, my Keeper came unto me, and with tears told me the
compassion he had of my estate; I desired him to forbear putting me into
thoughts that might withdraw me from those more necessary and befitting me at
that time. He would not (as having a further purpose) give over, but proceeded
till at last I found by him he had some plot for my delivery: then I was more
troubled between two doubts, one of the truth of this thing, whether it were
for my good, or only a trap to take me in, and so to make my death more
terrible and ignoble, when ioyed with fear and basestealing a life, or if he
meant really, how it might be effected. These co^trarieties put me into a great
perplexity; yet I still held convenient discourse with him, who finding me
uncertain in my answers, and suspicious of my self, brake out in these
termes^ I see, my Lord, my fortune to be so ill, as you (whom I most desire to
serve) mistrust me; alas, if love moved me not, what plot should I have to
put my self into so eminent a danger? it is only that has wrought me to
this, and yet I am mistrusted by you. I sought to appease his passion, he then
went on: I have, my Lord said he, laid the way, and a youth of my acquaintance
stays below with the cords, shall (if you please) deliver you from death and
this place, it is more then time we were about it, therefore resolve what you
will do, and that speedily.

I, hearing this, and looking on a clock was in my chamber, found it past
midnight, straight led by a bold belief, gave consent to go up and down at
all hours, went forth, telling the watch he was sent for a Gown for me to
wear the next day at my death; under color of this, within a long robe he
brought the ropes, which he fastened to the bars of the windows, which were
not so thick placed, but one might easily get out; the reason was the height
made the fear of getting thence nothing: At the bottom stood the youth he
spoke of, and made the lower ends fast; out he went, first to show me the way
and try if the cords were fast, then came up again and helpd me forth,
staying till I was safely on the ground, then untied the cords, and the youth
loosed them below, so he drew them up, and in a fire in my chamber burned
them, shutting the window, and himself coming down the ordinary way again
without suspicion: to any Gate he du^st not bring me, for they were all so
strongly guarded, as no safety would be there; but, knowing all the passages,
brought me to a little Garden then upon the wall, and there was a Posterne
door low, and little, but big enough; but then another danger was how to go
down on the outside, the Castle standing on a maine Rock; but the danger we
soon passed, for with some scrambling we got down holding by one another;
the youth, though weak, yet having a strong heart to save me, helped beyond
expectation: this man, my keeper, had a brother dwelt hard by this place,
thither he led us, and telling his brother he was sent of earnest business
concerning the State, got horses of him, and so we posted, the youth riding
behind me, holding me with so much affection as I imagined it had been his
care for fear of slipping, but I injured him in that, for his worthy self
could never slip.

We rid thus, till we arrived at a Castle of mine; but that not being of
strength sufficient, we left it, and our wearied horses, furnishing our selves
better: the youth rid well, and I was careful, though he still besought me
to heed my safety, he weary, as weak, his horse being little less, they
fell, wherein he was hurt; but at last he sure wounded and tired, I pitied
him, and more, when I saw his tears, which were not for his approaching end, as
after I saw, letting some from me to accompany his: he seeing them, my Lord,
said he, weep not for me, nor shed those dear tears for one who once might
have had a life given by one of them; but those days are passed, and now my
ending as fast as may be, the bruise and death this fall brings me, not being
yet so cruel to me as the fall of your favor was; nor unwelcome, since
chanced to me in your succor, I am to tell now the cause of my service: Love
(my Lord) has brought me to this, and all other miseries, your scorn never
having had power sufficient to make me leave loving you which procured this
action, censure me then a lover and not immodest, no disguise could ever
disguise me, but still I loved you, nor put I any on but for your good, and so
forced to alter my habits, what have I taken but habits of the much worthier
Sex? the noblier to serve you, not out of any wantonness, which heaven can
witnesse^ for had I ecaped this harm and you once safe, you should not have
known me but as a poor youth affectionate to your safety, I would again
have returned after the time of your imprisonment; I took this resolution,
putting my self to wait on one of the guard, and never left prying up and
down to find how I might assist you, till happy fortune brought me to this
man, whose affection I saw such toward you, as I ventured, and he likewise to
attempt what now I joy to see performed; and more, that my end is brought by so
loving an occasion: farewell my Lord, and I beseech you mourn not for me,
whom you thought so little worthy of your love; cover any fault in this I have
committed, with the veil of fervent affection; then shall I be secure, and
you noble. Weep not (dear Lord) for me, I must be gone, and in going shall
be molested to see you sorrow for me; bury me, I beseech you, not here, but
in some of your own commands, that as I am yours, my dust may be also held in
your ground; and then, lest you shall grieve for me, I can now give you leave
to forget me; then did she faint, for this was my first and truest Love.

I got her with much pain again to life; she blamed me for it, yet told
me, such kindness had preserved us both if timely given: then with many
prayers for my safety, wishing all the blessing that heaven granted to any, to
be powered on me, she dyed in mine arms, breathing her last into my breast;
for I kissed her when her breath left her.

I buried her, as she desired, at a Castle of mine, whither we rid that night,
and there remained till my peace was made with the King, which he was willing
to, and honored me so much, as I had satisfaction o^ my enemy; but what was
this to my loss, having lost the wonder of her Sex for loyalty? Besides, my
second Lady, for whom I had left the fair pattern of virtuous love, did show
me my ill by requiting me according to my merit; but not from her, for of her I
had deserved well, she never sent to me, never seemed, as I heard by all, sorry
for me, but superficially, quickly chose another, and like the worst of her
Sex, thought sorrow would hurt her complexion, and so she might live vnlou'd,
grew merry, and thought no more of me, though at the first she wept; but why?
only to show how sweetly she could look in tears, not shedding more then
became her, and were safe from hurting her; though every one, because they were
hers, had, if seen, wounded me. When I came abroad again with my pardon and
the Kings favor, I met her; she, as not guilty, cheerfully and smilingly
saluted me: but I that could leave the worthiest for her without a cause,
could justly be offended; so as I spoke not to her, nor since have looked on
her, truly hating her very sight, and in these habits have I continued, in
this place do I live this life, if a life you will call it; yonder is the
Castle she lies buried in, with whom I have buried all content, and with whom
I will also lie, the Court I have left, and all company, ioying in nothing but
my misery, and this I never related before, nor have I spoken so many words
since I first suffered this unhappiness, nor will any more: therefore Sir now I
beseech you permit me to be silent, and to pass to my dying living. The
King, who was a perfect lover, could not but lament with him, and sorrow that
so they should part; but necessity compelled, and he granted his demand: the
sad man going in his wonted mauer, and the King holding his journey, still
thinking and musing of this adventure, till another put him out of it and
brought him to a little more mirth: A dainty young wench came led between two
hansome young men, one brown and lovely, the other fair and beautiful, many
Lads and Lasses attending them, some carrying flowers, others Garlands, some
fruit, some wine, every one having something to do, and extreme busy in
that business, because it was love.

When they saw Ollorandus they ran to him and desired him to alight; for he
was by the agreement to give judgment and end to this adventure: he wondered
why they had chosen him, they said it was to be finished by the next Knight
they met, and that was himself; then they set a kind of Chair up, which they
carried with them, having joints, and with engines to be placed any where,
over his head they hung the flowers and garlands, except one that was held for
him to whom the prize was given; the grownd they also strewed with flowers.
Ollorandus sat still, admiring what they would do with him, smiling within
himself to think what Amphilanthus would judge of him, if he should find
him thus attended and set up so like a May Game Lord; but patiently he suffered
them: When they had done, the Speaker appointed, which was he that held the
Garland, began thus.

Excellent Judge may it please you to understand, this business consists of
diverse matters, yet all the matter is love; a thing possessing all, a vain
passion afflicting most; and yet this Gentleman M. Love has no abiding, but a
mere run away when he has done mischief, and if followed, where is he
found but i^ hearts? and there such straying harbors he has, as he is
fortified even with strength against the masters of them. This youth who will
never be old, has wounded these two youths with one arrow, for they love this
Less: her he has wounded; but it seems loving women better then men has
taken more pains with her, and bestowed two of her, for she loves them both;
not being able to say whether she affects most: it is no strange thing for a
woman to love two or many; but the rareness is that one of that nimble loving
kind, cannot take both and use them after her own fantasy: to say women can
love often is no wrong to them; for who would not please themselves? and what
greater pleasure then variety? Is it possible for one to be contented to live
his whole life in one room, to hear but one speak, to converse but with one,
to feed but on one thought: if this be hard, where is women's fault that
delights her self with change of Lovers? being but for that whereto we were
borne to seek our own happiness, and surely in that are they most happy; for
variety is their servant, waiting on them so diligently, and so cherished by
them, as they are the excellent Mistrisses of that excelling pleasure: To prove
this Sir, here is a dainty example in a dainty subject; rare in all parts,
because rarest in it self, here is a woman loves so equally, as she cannot
choose between these, if beauty want in one, loveliness chalengeth her liking;
if beauty abound in the one, sweetness speaks for the other, she loves both,
and so much as she wishes (if it were not for extreme loss) they were but
one, and then she could satisfy her self, and that one; here is yet a greater
wonder, these two Riuals are friends, not to say friends as not being enemies,
but affectionate friends, and such as it is almost hard for either of them to
tell whether he loves her or his friend better, yet both are enamoured of her;
This has continued two years: now it is agreed on that the matter shall be
judged by the f^rst Knight, you Sir are the man, and to whom you give her she
shall be contented with him, and leave the other. Ollorandus made answer that
the matter was nice, and a business he no way desired to meddle in lest he
might offend, not being able to judge to please all parties, but he thought
that such mutual affections were better held s^^ll as they were, lest division
might divide the perfect love between those friends; for said he, a wound
giu^n in the arm, or body will heal, and grow together if the sides be kept
close, but kept open, it will (though heal) yet be in sundry parts; So if she
be gi^en to one, and from the other, it will breed a division in love, if not
still to be as at first enjoyed, They all then spoke and desired judgment,
being resolute to stand to his censure, Then must I said Ollorandus require one
thing more for my perfecter ability, you must each of you speak for your
selves, and tell what you can claim to merit her, and what proofs you can
allege of her affections to you, and she must likewise tell her opinion, they
consented, and the fairer youth began thus. As I was one day after hunting
somewhat hott, and weary, having laid my self upon the grass under a larger
Oak, this beloved soul came tripping with such daintines and sweet
carelesnes, as I was surprised with her finenes; she cast her eyes on me, but
so, as if chance, not purpose of favor had procured me that grace, but
howsoever, as dearly was her look prized by me, and my eyes as gladly met
hers, as in old time the Gentiles held, the Sun did kiss the lips of
Osiris; she held her course, I rose, and followed her, she turned, and started
a little like a fearful dainty Dear, and my dear she proved, I took
occasion to offer her my service seeing her alone least any rudenes might be
offered, she accepted it, and so I attended her home, she thanked me, I took
those thanks so kindly, as they bound me I told her to wait on her aft^r to
deserve the favor, not then having merited so much. She disliked not of it,
but welcomed me till she robbed me wholly of my, heart, and then was I forced
in good nature to go still to visit that which I had kept close, and untouched
till that time in my breast, cherished I think of purpose to make the
perfecter, and purer sacrifice of it unto her love. Then grew we much more
familiar, till at last I found I was her friend, for she trusted me, and I was
not curious to give her means to let her see I had confidence in her; then
would she ride, and sometimes as the seasons were, go a hunting, and made me
believe she loved that sport for me. I was apt enough to credit any thing that
pleased me, and so I turned a very Nouice in love, and a blab to my fortunes,
for I could not he contented with my happiness, being nothing me thought, if
only by my self enjoyed, and that it were not likewise known to some friend
of mine, who with me might likewise rejoice. What were the stolen and sweet
delights we had, if a third did not also hear of them, and the discourse make
the memory as dear as the sweet obtaining? joy for enjoying at the instant is
so full as wraps up all sense in content, but absent a little the consideration
comes, and presents these blessings so perfectly before our eyes, as then is
the enjoying of what with bliss was before gained; to give my self likewise
this contentment I discovered all these passages to this my friend, he at
first smiled at my follies as he called them, being free from passion. I was
tormented to see his dulnes, and could have chid my self for bestowing so many
passionate expressions, and pleasing discourses on him, at last he desired to
see the Tree from whence these loving branches grew. I brought him into a
grove, where I entreated him to lie close and not stir upon any occasion, he
did so, then came my Mistress, and my self alone together, and properly may I
say alone, for we were but ^ne, though like two staulkes, or flowers of one
root. We sat down, we kissed, and he beheld us so well contented, as he did
wish himself the like, and I think the same fortune, which wish he after
gained; when he saw me take her hand and play with it, Oh said he that I might
but do so while he may have her lips to do him a pleasure, I was as
familiar with her as modestly I might, I entreated to see her leg, she
refused not, he being just before us saw it too, then did his love increase,
while I ignorantly and foolishly strove to make him see excellencies to robb my
self of them, yet he very discreetly covered his passion a pretty while, still
commending her, and so cunningly working into me, as I brought him like mine
heir to see my possessions; she beholding him lovely, and so winning, as he
failed not to win her, she as crafty as a woman ought to be that will deceive,
made much of him for my sake, and as my friend did make show of kindness to him,
I took it so, and this tide me doubly to her. What I thought would please her
I studied and obtained, she commended Songs, I am no Poet, but my friend is
excellent, said I, then did I desire him to say some of his own Verses, he did
so, she desired to hear more, he still did please her so, and at last made
some to her, telling me he made them as from me, and I most innocently gave
them to her, and still did make him say them, sounding sure far sweeter in
his mouth then any others. Her heart being changed, or changing, but craftily
she grew more fond of me, and so as I was me thought then too happy; strangely
her love grew to him, and so violent, as he must either yield or be unkind, an
odd occasion offered to try friendship, but love above all must have rule or
wrong ever, he loved as much as she, she loved as much as I, we both loved
her, she loved us both, yet long acquaintance, and conversation having rooted
affection twixt us two, would not allow so foul a treason in a friend,
wherefore he told me of it, and withal confessed how much he loved her, yet
said he I will leave what I love, and may obtain, rather then my truth to
you. I loved his faith so much, and prized his worth so far beyond my own
particular, as I did freely condescend to his enjoying her if she would yield;
alas, she had done so in her heart long before, and now with gladness did
embrace his love, but still she held me on, and with as much delight accepted
me as ever. We had both what we desired, and she was free to both, at last we
spoke but in the third person before her of such a woman, she discoursed as we
did, and concluded as we did, that one woman might love two men lawfully, and
constantlier then one, and that it were much safer for a man to have his friend
his Rival then to be alone. From this we came to particulars, and so we were
agreed, and then most friendly did continue loving, but lately we desired to
have our loves each only to himself, for a little suspicion is fallen between
us that she does not so equally carry her love as heretofore, yet we will not
fall out, but have put it to judgment, both resolved to stand to the doom
shall be given us, and the other to leave her for ever to his friend if he can
keep her so, he that has her given to him shall have this Garland with her as
the triumph gained, she cannot her self decide the business, her equal
affection she says is the cause, but I believe she is still willing to hold
both, now Sir you see what my love was, and the beginning, the middle, and
almost the end, the other then with a pretty sweetness began. Sir, said he, my
friend and Riual has truly related to you most part of our loves, he was the
cause of my affection, and my loue-tye continues as firm to him as ever; it is
true I fell in love after him, and by his bringing me, but 'twas his fault, for
he told me his blessing with such feeling as me thought he took pains to teach
me to seek the like, and how nearer could I come to the liken^s, then to the
same, like might fail therefore because my friend should see no error in my
choice, or carriage of my love, but to appear as clear unto his eyes of
judgment as before when he made me his friend, I chose as he did loved as he
did, and with her consent and his, enjoyed as he did, the wonder of this
business consisting in this, but herein is no strangenes as I conjecture, for
we were so directly one in friendship, as we were but one, and therefore though
she had us both, she had but one, so excellent a woman lover she also is, as
she can bring her eyes, and heart to look on both as one, and one as both. I
was against this I confess in other times, but now think no such love as when
we may discourse of it, and in our discourse know how she behaues her self,
and so be able to discover which she most affects, and so strive to gain the
others part: but she most loving, most discreet, iudicially carried her hand
euenly, when he kissed one, I had the other, she fa^e between us still, and
ever gave us even and indifferent graces, but now being cloyde I think with
this blessing we must divide, and she take one which she cannot do, therefore
Sir, you must decide the question, she says she will take either with equal
love, we will with equal content take or miss. She then was to say something
for her self, who thus did speak. My Lord said she, you hear by these two
the story related of my love. I cannot but confess it is true, only I beseech
you not to think any lightness was more in these a^^ections then in the
indifference of my choice, I loved this fair man I confess first, I had not
then seen the other, but when I perceived his louelines, beauty me thought was
more ordinary, and therefore I prized him dearer, but when the fair youth came
again, brownnes appeared nothing so pleasing, both together me thought they
were both fit to be beloved, and the rather both, because different complexions
would hold one still to love one of them; when affection to sw^etnesse and
delicateness possessed me I looked on him, when love to fairenes, and whitenes
claymed place, I turned to the other, thus me thinks I loved equally, and so
it was but one love being still to one end, content and to be contented with
those had made themselves one in all things, even love to me. It is most true,
I am now brought to choose one, for my father will have me marry, I cannot find
in my heart to refuse either, or have power to choose whether, I hope this
freedom which has continued with us will not be a cause now to make me less
esteemed, my love is the same it was, and therefore Sir, which you will allot
me to I must take.

The first then spoke again, do not (great Judge) I beseech you favor me,
although I first did tell my tale, and first did love, to wrong my friend, he
more deserves her then my self, and him she chose, I did choose her, therefore
bestow her Sir on him. No said the other, I loved her for your sake, and love
to you made my affection grow to her; therefore Sir, as he first did love, and
chose for loves sake only of her self, be not so cruel to bestow her from
him, he most, and best deserves her, let him have her. This while she cast her
eyes between them as they spoke so amorously, as it seemed she cried within her
self, sweet Judge, adiudge me both; he sat a while still, at last, he
brought forth this judgment.

Both loving, both beloved, treason it were to part such blessedness, nor am I
able to cut so euenly by a thread, as to go just in the middle way between
these affections: to give her to either, I can hardly do it, since they beg
for either; You fair indifferent creatures, are not it seems to be
displeased, nor will I offend either, therefore this shall be my judgment.
Take the Garland, and you who hold it now, tie her scarf over her eyes, then
both shall come at once to you, and to which you give the Garland he shall be
your husband, blind Love made this equality, blind fortune is only fit to
decide it. She took the Garland, when the other two both at once kneeld to the
Judge, and at once spoke these words all one, and so justly delivered, as
showed their hearts one, beseeching him, that since the Garland did so well in
her hand, she might keep it still, and crown her self as Lady of the oddest
passion, they would as before passionatly loving, equally leave her, and now
fair Maid said they, to avoid your trouble in choice, or after choosing, we
will both leave you; seek and take a third, and crown him with a single love
if you can.

Ollorandus liked the oddnes of this best of all, she blushed and feign would
have spoken, but they went away, and left her like all-changing women to glory
in her own folly, or to cover her self with her own shame, yet she ^ooke a
changers boldness on her. My Lord, said she, I humbly thank you for your
judgment, and your noble care of me, I am no more troubled with their leaving,
then I should have ioyed in having them; only I am sorry that you must be a
witness, that the fault lies on your sex, when you come (if ever) again to
censure Lovers, be more pitiful to us, and this is all, I lived before I
loved them, and shall (I trust) live, and love again without them: So they
parted, Ollorandus having had sport for his pains in sitting so long, and the
standers by satisfied with uncertainty, and so all part^d: The King toward
Prague, he met his Melysinda three days journey nearer, having knowledge of
his coming, by the messenger that brought him the news of the Emperors death.

Then they together went to that ancient brave City, thence to a place where
all the Princes by a general consent met, and chose Amphilanthus their
Emperor, who by being King of the Romans might claim it; not one voice was
against him, but all like one crack of Thunder sounded his name.

Then was the Prince of Transiluania dispatched to him, who met him as is
before said, and returned with the answer, whereupon Ollorandus was his Deputy
till his arrival, which was not long after: the fine Nymph, and delicate
Veralinda lived together this time, passing the heat of the day at the
Fountain, and in the shadow, the rest abroad, never weary of any time but
night, which they accused of too great cruelty in holding the^ asunder, which
fair Veralinda often would have helped in her wish, but her Father would not
permit it. One day as she was sitting alone, expecting her dear companion,
the grave Shepherd, her Father, came unto her, and looking steedily on her,
wept; she was amazed, and sweetest soul weept too, to see his tears; he then
embracing her, my dearer heart (said he) I must leave thee, and this makes my
tears.

Alas Sir (said she) let me never see that day, or hear those bitter words
again. It is most true, said he, I am commanded and I must obey, the God that
gave me thee, appoints this, grieve not for this, it will (I hope) be for
eternal joy to you. I am warned in my sleep to send you hence unto an Island,
where you shall be blessed with happiest success, go then and take this
Cabinet with you, but open not the Box until the adventure you shall see be
ended, then open it, and remember me. She was amazd but he did comfort her. How
shall I go, said she, alone unguided? Will you cast me out? Have I deserved
so ill, thus to be thrown away? O Father, keep me with you, or else let me
stay but by you, that I may but see your face, and therein shall I be most
blessed. Alas sweet, and dear Veralinda, I must not agree to thy demand, but
yet believe me, you will not repent, alone you need not go, you shall have
servants who you will, besides, the Nymph will go with you, she met me now,
and I acquainted her, and she is gone a little hence, to send the Shepherd,
her dear friend, to provide horses for you; now lament no more, nor grieve to
see my tears which are to part with you, not that they can fortell least harm
to you, but loss to me of your loved sight. Veralinda w^pt again, other fair
Shepherdesses came, but none of them she would so far grace as to tell her
fortune to, save only to Melantha the same Less the Shepherd loved. She
straight resolved to leave Archadia and all else, to go with her, so this
concluded, they staid in the Grove till fine Leonia, and the Shepherd came,
with whom they went away, and strait to Corinth took their journey, there
they Shipped, and passd unto the Rock, where landing, she went to the Theater,
and looking up she read the words, Leonia reading in her eyes, at that instant
the Gate opened, but with such Music as amazed them all, as well those at the
entering, as the troops within, all they at that time falling into a sweet
slumber with the delicacie of the charming Music. Leonia went in with her,
and passed along viewing each one, and knowing most, pitying some, and
grieuing for their Fates, not knowing what should come when Apollo appeared,
commanding Veralinda to touch them with a rod he threw her down; she did so
when they all awaked, and held each one his lover by the hand, then stood they
up, and as amazed gazed on the Shepherdess, and Nymph. Amphilanthus at his
waking took Musalinas hand, but quickly let it go again. Pamphilia rose, and
Leandrus from her feet, but touched her not, though gazed on her face,
Musalina did the like on Amphilanthus. When this was done, and all the couples
stood round as the room was, suddenly the Chaires were vanished, and a Pillar
of Gold stood in their stead, on which hung a Book, every one there strove to
take that down, but none could gain it; Pamphilia and Urania came, they both
resolved to try, but the first place was given by their consents unto Urania,
who took it down, wherewith the enchantment partly ended as the Music and
charm, but the house remaining and the Pillar of Gold, as memory of the
brauest enchantment that enclosed the number of the worthiest the world did
ever know. The Book Amphilanthus took and tried to open, but though Urania
had got it, she must have Veralindas help to open it, which being lent her she
got, the house then vanished, and they found in the Book the whole story of
Urania, and how that after she was stolen by the Duke as before was confessed
by himself, and then from him by robbers.

This wise man who had made this enchantment preserved her, took her from
those robbers, left the purse and mantle with her to be the means for those
that took her up to cherish her, and then being Lord of this Island, framed
this enchantment, whither he knew she should come and give part of the
conclusion to it, and so appear fit to deserve his care, which she might
thank him for; the next story was of Veralinda, which was this. The King of
Frigia had many children by his first wife, then married he again, and by his
second only had one daughter, whose nativity being cast, it was found she
should rule a great people, and wear a Crown; this made doubt that she should
govern over that Kingdom, that bred jealousy, and jealousy hate, so as her
brothers when she sucked, laid a plot to destroy her, and bribed a servant of
theirs to kill the Infant. He undertook it, but was prevented likewise by the
same divine power Urania was protected by, for he that should have murdered
her, only took her from her Nurse, whom he had enticed forth into a wood to
walk, there he left her bound and muffl'd that she could not speak, and so
fled with the Babe unto the Sea shipping himself, and with the reward he had
for the supposed act, he desyring to have it before hand, that he need not
tarry after the execution, he got into Morea, and so into Arcadia, warned in a
dream to do so; for the Kings Shepherd he inquired, and to him gave the
child, which he (having no child) willingly took, all things agreeing so
well, as plainly showed the divine providence ordained it. He bred her up
until that time that he was also in his ^leepe appointed to send her thence
to the Island, the Lord of this Island a learned man knew all this, and made
the delicate adventure for her discovery, and the trial of love. When this was
discovered, all they that before envied, and almost hated her, who appearing
mean, had the power they wanted, came and saluted her; the Nymph knowing her
to be a Princess likewise came, and with a pretty blush discovered himself,
showing that he was ashamed of his habit, and yet that habit became that
blush. Amphilanthus was glad to hear that his brother had showed his valor
upon so cruel a Beast, and in the defenses of so excellent a creature, but
could have chid him else for disguising himself, had not Love, and as he saw
Destiny appointed it so; but Leonius in his man's habits, again came with more
fear to Veralinda then before, to whom he spoke in this manner.

Fairest Princess, I hope your estate will not make you forget the estate you
lived in love, I am the Knight you loved as a Knight, I am the man, who for
fear you loved me not, to move your love made my self a woman, and the same
man that loves if you cheerish, ^lse dies if you forsake. I am (my Lord) said
she, the woman that loves you as much, or more, if possible, then I did,
having so many more bonds to tie me unto it; my life I owe you, I will pay it
you, by spending it in being yours, and now I know my self to be a Princess,
the freelyer will I say this, being the fitter for you; then opened she the
Cabinet wherein she found a writing in the Shepherds hand, made between him
and the other who should have killed her, therein had she conditioned, that he
should bring her up most carefully, call her Veralinda, not to discover this
secret to her, but when she was to l^aue the place, not to suffer her to marry
any but a Prince. Th^se conditions he kept, and so gave her the Cabinet, the
Nymph he knew made to confess himself to him, out of care of her, and then he
consented to the journey, thus was she preserved and in her true love had a
fair dwelling.

Pamphilia was glad of her being her neighbor by Pamphilia, and glader her
Cosen should have such a fortune, for now they knew her to be heir, for her
brothers having envy more abounding then good nature, fell out, first with
their mother in law, then with one another, lastly with their Father, took
arms against him, imprisoned him, then in two battles one against another,
some taking part with the Father, they were all killed, the old man outliuing
them, and shame him, grieuing that he was their Father, though their faults
were nothing a kin to him, for he was virtuous.

The Lord of the Island, a grave old man, came to the royal company, to every
one he gave his blessing at their parting, and to Pamphilia, he promised to
assist her when she should have most need, so they parted, she thinking she
had already need enough of him, but most of another aid. All returned to
Corinth where triumphs were made for their coming, Amphilanthus presently
after taking his journey toward Italy, and so to Germany, accompanied with all
the men Princes, the Ladies appointed to stay there with the King of Morea till
their return, when as all the lovers should be made happy with their long
desired loves in marriage, for the Parents and friends of all were agreed,
only Pamphilia was vnpromised, for she was her own, but as she had
unfortunately given her self. They being all departed, the Queen of Naples,
and her Cosen the Pamphilian Queen walked abroad, she sad, her noble friend
comforting her, not being able on such a sudden to mistrust the cause of her
grief which she only attributed to parting, and so wholly touched on that
string she was loath to satisfy her, because her spirit disdained to say she
was lost, but most because she could not say so, but the saying blemished his
worth; this made her more careful then any other respect. Much the excellent
Queen admired at her sadness, and uncertain answers, often she was about to
urge her, but again she let it pass, purposing by circumstance rather then
plain dealing to work it out of her, or by some other to gain the knowledge,
which at last by the Queen of Bulgaria who but newly was come amongst them,
and only had hard of Pamphilia, but never seen her till the conclusion of the
Charms, speaking of many things came out with Amphilanthus his especial
respect to Musalina. This judicial Queen had enough then, and too much,
having a wound, for she loved Pamphilia, who, poor Lady went up and down
like the shadow of her self; into saddest walks which were there she often
went, and with her own thoughts discoursed, What have I done, said she, that
makes me thus unfortunate? Dearer then my self to me deal yet but thus
kindly, or if it be too much for me, all kindness being bereft me, do justly,
and therein like your self, and let me know my fault. Alas, is it I, by you
once made blessed, was not, or am not fit to enjoy it? if so, slake, but not
deprive me (wretched me) quite of your favor, and in so cursed a sort as gives
folks leave to say, I am abandoned, and shunned. I have been more esteemed.
Cruel remembrance will you also add to my misery: fly me, or if you stay,
serve then to vex me while I accuse only you; then she cast some Verses
Sonnet-waies in her thoughts, which were these.

Cruel Remembrance alas now be still,
Put me not on the Rack to torture me:
I do confess my greatest misery
Lives in your plenty, my last harm your skill.
Poison, and Venom only once do kill,
While you perpetually new mischiefs fee,
To vex my soul with endless memory,
Leauiug no thought that may increase my ill.
Else have you need to tell me I was blessed,
Rich in the treasure of content, and love,
When I like him, or her had sweetest rest
But passd like days, you stay and vexings prove.
Changed from all favors you add unto despair
Who under these waights groan, most wretched are.
Most wretched indeed, cried she, and such an one am I; cruellest (yet worthy
still for all your scorn) What have I deserved to be thus tormented, and
forsaken? Tell me, and use me crueller if that may be, so you then make an
end, and again receive me into favor: my soul vows I am ignorant of any
offense willingly committed: did my slight going to to the Sea offend you?
Alas, I went but with others, and drawn against my will, my heart still
remaining clear: no, it was not that, but thither I was carried to be absent
for wicked change to work in that time in your heart, and so to ruin me.
Urania then came to her when she seemed to cease her complaints, but she
found her sorrows, and strove to advise her. She still put it off, and would
not (unto her) confess, but dissembled; Urania would many times give occasion,
as then she did, to discover her melancholy. I would (said Pamphilia) we were
gone from hence I hate this Corinth, and long to see Arcadia again. Soon said
Urania, you will be there as I hear; but will your sadness end then? No, said
she, I should hate my self as ill as I do this place, if I should do so,
change cannot nor must not aspire to work such effect in me. Change (said
Urania) deserves no honor; but discretion may make you discern when you
should be constant, and when discreet, and thus you do not change but
continue, judicial as always you have been. Were you so discreet, said
Pamphilia? when time was, as I remember, you were forced to be washed before
you could manifest your judgment in leaving: but (sweet Urania) do not you
prove an enemy to me, though mine own eyes and heart have turned to my
destruction, be still a noble friend, and make proof of it by pitying, not
by striving to make me more unhappy, which I shall be, if I let in that
worthless humor change, which I can never do till I can change my self, and
have new creation and another soul; for this is true and loyal.

Urania did grant her request in her heart before she asked it; for she did,
and had pittyed her ever since she saw her misfortune grow upon her, but fear
lest it would too deeply root in her, made her (though against her own mind)
advise, for that thing her excellent self ever hated, love made this in her to
strive to prefer a servant she would not entertain; but several bodies must
have several cures, yet this is no cure; for Pamphilia will not change.

As they were thus discoursing, came Musa^ina and the selfe-louing Q^eene.
Urania was glad, because she hoped company would assist her desire in her
Cousens good; but she was deceived, for Pamphilia was in company, and alone
much one, she could be in greatest assemblies as private with her own
thoughts, as if in her Cabinet, and there have as much discourse with her
imagination and cruel memory, as if in the presence. Musalina with great
respect and show of love, did put her self often into her company; she, after
her sad fashion, did entertain her, few words served her turn, and yet
because she would not be thought too covetous, she gave them store of sighs
to counterpoise the want of speech. The Q^eene of Bulgaria one day would needs
tell Musalina, Pamphilia of so much an admired Lady, was the dullest she ever
saw. Musalina desired her for her own sake to speak that but to her, for
(said she) the world will doubt much of that judgment, that taxes her for
dullness; so she again urged discourse to the sad Lady, she answered short
but smartly enough: at last Musalina asked her what was become of the Rhodian
Lady? returned, said she, with sorrow and sufficient shame, if there can be
sufficient for such a fault. Then did Musalina desire to know the story, which
so daint^ly and sharply Pamyhilia related to her, as in it she made her see,
she understood love in all fortunes perfectly; this discourse might have made
the Queen see her error, but she never went so far as to weigh the
excellency of the discourse, but heeded only the tale fitter for her capacity.
Then came Meriana, who but newly acquainted with Pamphilia, yet had given so
full a love to her, as if growing many years, and with her best lovers pitied
her: with her Pamphilia often discoursed, and with a younger and half Sister
of hers, who was a Lady of that sweetness and delicacie, as she was indeed the
most delicatest of that time for admirable beauty, having a mind answerable
for excellency to that body, which was without compare for exquisite
perfection. They two were the only Ladies (except Urania) that she would keep
company withal; for these were so discreet, and free from the vanities of
other women, as were only ^it to accompany so much worth in sadness. Musalina
would come in for one; but Pamphilia would seek them if absent. One night
after supper, Meriana and Pamphilia went from the company by themselves into
the Garden, the Moon shined, and the evening was sweet and pleasing, both were
(if pleasure could be to either one of them, troubled with absence, the other
with loss) pleased with that time, and walk, Meriana entreated Pamphilia to
favor her so much as to say some verses to her; for, said she, I hear dear
Sister, you are excell^nt in Poetry: I have written something, said Pamphilia;
but so sad they are, as only fit me to hear, and keep: Not so dear
Pamphilia, said she; for, believe it your Sister has no joyful heart, what
face soever I show, therefore saddest verses will please me best: you shall
have such said she, but I seldom make any but Sonnets, and they are not so
sweet in rehearsing as others that come more roundly off; but if you will hear
some, I that can deny you nothing, will say one to you which I made not long
since, and so is the freshest in my mind.

Unquiet grief, search further in my heart,
If place be found which thou have not possessed;
Or so much space can build hopes smallest rest:
Take it, it is thine, mine is the lodge of smart.
Despair, despair has used the skilfulst art,
To ruin hope, and murder easefull rest:
O me, despair, my Vine of hope has pressed,
Ra^ish'd the grapes, the leaves left for my part.
Yet Ruler grief, nor thou Despair deny,
This last request proclaims 'twas not suspect
Graffed this bud of sorrow in my breast:
But knowledge daily does my loss descry.
Cold love's now matched with care, change with respect,
When true flames liud, these false fires were suppressed.
Meriana liked them extremely well commending them above measure, and earnestly
desiring the Copy, the other promised her it and many more; so they walkd on a
while, when the delicate Ladies Pers^lina and Philistella came unto them, and
telling them it grew late, they went in for that night, the two Sisters
together, and Pamphilia with her Sister to her lodging^ where likewise they
parted, Philistella to rest, but the distempered Pamphilia to her nightly
complaints, to tears, sobbes and groans, and this was her quiet: Seldom
would these brave Ladies let her be alone in the day time, and Veralinda would
be much with her, all indeed seeking her contentment, but she must not have
it; the Queen of Naples as earnestly as any, or above any wishing it. Dancings
and all Court sports were daily in action among them, while she sat with much
ado beholding them, but her self none of the number, she that before was
excelling in her apparel more delicate then any, and none coming near her
for daintiness in that kind, now wore only black, and in wearing that as
careless, as before extreme curious, her hair that was before, but with
greatest care dressed, she only kept clean, and neglectiuely wore it, no
jewels came about her; so as she was a mourner in stead of the most sumptuous
habits she was won^ to honor the Court withal: with her trusty servant the
Duke of Pergam^s she did only converse, for the men kind, and would sometimes
let him s^e her weep, who did heartily pity her and best might; for he had
seen her blessed, and known the time she was as much happy as now
distressed. When she did sigh and grieve, he would also mourn; never (would he
say) could I have imagined to ^ee this change, had beauty won him, worth
invited him, beyond either in you, more tolerable had this been; but pray
th^e torment me not, cried she, with this; she is (I confess) as worthy as
any, and deserves as much as woman can do to be beloved, and so much, as were
I a man, I should love her: no fault is in the choice, but in his unkindness to
me, unkindness, which is the only murderer of my bliss; had he done a^y thing
but so unkindly leave me, I had been satisfied; had he by degrees given me my
death, more easily I had gained it; or, had he plainly told me his
determination to love no longer, it had more justly come; but suddenly and
undeservedly to cast me off; in stead of love, to give me frowns; for smiles,
scorns; for respect, contempt; and all unlooked for, or, vnmistrusted; it
wounds my very ^oule. I innocently like my love went toward him, smiled with
the same true joy I always felt in his sight; he held his countenance grave,
and saluted me like a Queen, but not as a friend or lover: this was strange,
as I at first thought, it struck me to the heart, yet would I not see it, but
spoke as I was used, telling him I hoped that poor Pamphilia should be
honored with his presence once again. He soberly, I am loath to say, curstly,
r^plyed, it was too late, my ^oule shook with those words, and too soon did
they show my misery. Who did, or could ever think to see him thus cruell^ what
did he seem to delight in more then me, or in comparison of me? did he take
comfort in any thing else? this is the crueller to me now he is changed, and
like given to the heart, strikes sure for curing; yet is this, though most
true, vanity in me to remember I have done. Thus she would complain, but only
to him who knew the continuance of her love, and had seen her once to be
couerd; but like flames, the more pressed to rise the higher, and now blown
elsewhere by a wavering wind. The Ladies had every day letters from the
traveling Court, Pamphilia had some from her brothers and Cosen Leonius, but
else she heard no news. Amphilanthus had forgot to write; but she at last
gained one letter from him, by one from her which was respective, and yet sad;
his answer was short, but complementall; this, said she, was not wont to be his
style, but I must be content: nothing did she see or hear, but still of his
glory and his love. This was once, said she, belonging unto me^ but I was not
worthy of them, sure else he had not altered. Meriana likewise to make her
discourse, and pass away the time, would often tell her stori^s she had known
of his affection. Alas, would she say, would some good body would tell her he
was once, and but lately as kindly mine; for it grieves me more to hear her
speak of it (since each word wounds my soul) then if all should only talk of
it, because I know she loves me, and unwillingly will hurt me: she is deceived
and betrayed in this course, she would not be a means to cut my life-strings
with this cruelty; some noble body tell her how he loved me, how I still love
him, and then she will no more molest me, nor abase our loves. Sweet Meriana,
those days now are passed of my best delights, be not you an increaser of my
woe, but cursed remembrance, for no new act of his in this change presents it
self, but gives a deaths blow to our ancient loves. I could almost be brought
to tell it her my self, and would, were it not to discover his forgetfulness
and cruelty; but rather then my lips shall give the least way to discover any
fault in him, I will conceal all though they break my heart; and if I only
could be saved by accusing him, I sooner would be secret and so dye: no, my
love will not let me use thee ill; then be it as it is, I Will live forsaken and
forlorn, yet silently I will endure this wrong, nor once blame him to any
others ear, for dear (alas) he is to me, dear to my eyes, dear to my
thoughts, and dearest to my heart; since he will ravish that poor part of all
the joy and sweet content it ever had, converting it to bitter lasting pain.
Cruelly she thus remained perplexed, and cloathd in the woful^'st robe of
grief: what a miserable spectacle was this, to see her, once the comfort of
the Court, the star that guided all the sweet delights, now the poor
testimony of another creature, grief having so decayed her, as she seemed
scarce so like her self as an ill picture to the life, her chamber and her
thoughts were only bound to her, or rather she to them, and thus did she
remain the sad example of forsaken love. The other Ladies loving in mirth and
happiness, wanton with it like Kids in the Sun, for blessing shined on them,
and that, this afflicted Lady did (she said) once know. The Emperor and all
his Kings and Princes held their way for Italy; at last ariuing at Rome, where
the Pope sent the whole Clergy, and Nobility to meet him without the Town,
and with great pomp and joy conducted him to the chief Church to give thanks,
and then unto the Castle. Triumphs began that night, and the next day
continued, and many days, to express the content of the Emperors arrival;
but by his command, all dangerous sports of the field were forbidden, because
he would have no blood mixed with his entering. Just they did, but their
spears had burs at the points for fear of piercing: after Supper they had
Barriers, and all imitation of that brave war they had lately bravely been
in, and the Concluders of it.

To Naples he went to see his own Country and People, where he was
affectionately and sumptuously entertained, surpassing all other places in
magnificence, as in affection to their own Prince: thence he went to most
parts of Italy that were in his way, or not much out of it, till he came to the
nearest part of Germany, and so passd without any adventure, carrying the keys
as one may say, of all those places to open his passage which way he pleased,
never so pleasant a journey, all hearts contented, leaving discontent as an
unprofitable thing at home; Buda, Prague, Vienna, all places he saw that were
of worth, and traueld over the most part of Germany to see the strengths, and
sometime for pleasure visited others. At Franckford he was crowned with the
greatest applause and content that ever Emperor was, and with the best reason,
for he was the most worthy, and famous that ever reigned over them; but to all
this joy, a little sorrow, would needs come in, for Leandrus after the
Coronation, whether with heat, or ouer-exercising himself at these triumphs,
striving to excel all in show of love, fell sick of a Plurisie, a disease
little known then, which not being seen time enough, or then taken, he died
thereof, before his death writing a letter to Pamphilia, and enclosing an
infinite rich Ring within it, which he besought her, although he believed, she
cared not for it; yet to keep in memory of him, who most affectionately and
loyally loved her; so as though her love should not suffer in his death, but as
he loved her, yet she might, when she looked on that, say, ^he Master of this
loved me. These he gave in charge to Leonius to send her, which he did,
coming to ger one morning, after she had endured a sad and unquiet night; for
she having got away from the company, shut her door, pretending to sleep; but
poor Lady little rest did she enjoy, carrying the enemy within her self,
that held her eyes unclosed: her heart oppressed, and be friended her in
nothing, except furnishing her with tears, and new cause still to shed them. O
Pamphilia (cride she) was thy creation for thy ruin? was thy birth given thee,
to have a life wholly in affliction? were all contrarieties to pleasure joined
together for thee to possess, and virtues given thee to be undone by? else why
was this rare excellent quality of constancy allotted thee? was judgment given
me, to make the worthiest choice, wholly to discern; I chose well, but to be
rewarded with that lean benefit, and loss to be my gain. Did I reject the
firm, and spotles love of that excellent Prince Steriamus, the humble suites
of all the greatest subjects, and neighbor Princes, slighted the earnestness
of the noble Prince Leandrus, refused all, and made my self a Vassell in
affection to him, that weighes neither me, nor these expressions of love? I
have done all this, and I yet have not done enough; for, O how worthy is he?
though unkind to me, you might yet most cruel man have showed more
gratefulness, and I had been contented, no color you have to excuse that with
all, for you knew my love, you seemed to cherish it, all eyes saw it too, for
my face showed it, I strove for nothing more then mean^s to declare it, mine
eyes did look but for means, to show how they and I were won by you, my lips
have parted from themselves to let my tongue make true confession of that you
then seemd with expressefull joy, and content to entertain. Where is that love
now gone? where is that content you embraced, departed, and with that instant
forgotten? the Heavens will yet for me witness my unchanged heart, and unstained
affection: the air has been, and is so filled with my complaints and
protestations, as I wonder it does not like Ordinance rattle in your ears: the
Sun has blushed for you, the Moon been pale, and wan, nay hid her face from
my tears which I have shed for your inconstancy. All things heavenly and
earthly pity me, except your self, from whom only good by pity may arise.
Why did I open my heart alone to your love, shutting it to all other motions to
be thus carelessely thrown off? but I am well enough requited, since had I
fortunatly held these passions in me, the fiercenes of them might by this have
rid me of these during torments, and have left this poor body a loyal
sacrifice to love, and the love of the most ungrateful. Ungrateful, why do I
call him so? pardon me dearest, though despising dear, I wrong you more in this
title, which is the worst that can be given to man, then you have injured me
though with vnmerrited deceit; it was a certain and too great confidence,
joined with assurance, of what I most desired, that betrayed me, and my joys
with it, else I might sooner have seen, if not maskt with innocent belief, and
abusd with trust, or am I punished for aspiring to the joy, souls on earth can
bent, and chiefliest covet, as blessed with inioying, in having your fixed love.
Oh confidence, I fear it is you that I must curse, you are the honest, though
unfortunate chanced-ill that have untied my hope. Was it good nature made him so
refrain my sight and presence, nay, unless by force my words, and that
because you cannot love still, nor will say so in charity, you will avoid all,
if so be yet more merciful, and multiply your pity with this free increase,
kill me at once for all, torture me not with sorrows, I will truly and
religiously confess, I am not worthy of you; but it is not my fault, I wish I
were so fit, as you might ever love, and such an one as all the world might
think fit for you, then I know you would be just: nor wish I this for any
benefit, but for your love; for else in the comparison of other gain unto my
self, or any other then your loved self, I rather would wish to be a
Black-moore, or any thing more dreadful, then allure affection to me, if not
from you; thus would I be to merit your loved favor, the other to show my
self purer, then either purest White or Black: but faith will not prevail, I
am forsaken and despised, why dye I not? it is not fit, no, it is not fit, I
still must live, and feel more cause of woe, or better to say, to see my cause
of woe.

Cruel forsaker, look but once on me, or rather on my love, there you shall
find if unremovable affection, and zealous truth can seem deserts, I will,
and do deserve you in them better then any, and more then any, if not not, my
self again shall do; my c^aselesse plaints may some way claim reward, my
nights spent wholly in salt floods of tears, eyes turned to swelling Rivers,
may lament that they and I should thus regardlesse pass: some other motives,
which your self best knows, might tie you in a bond more kind and grateful:
but these I urge not, be your own best self, and as once you were, then will
you still be free from cruelty, if not accused by Justice self, and then too
large a punishment will second the offense. Offense, alas I cannot call it one,
for I am yours, and may not you dispose of yours, as best does like your self?
Yet is there means to help, if you please to assist, if not condemned, I will
remain, till I may have my end, which most I wish, and speedily I trust to
gain, then if your once most vallued, virtuous gratefulness be sent, twill be
too late, only this good I may receive, or my cold ashes for me, that when my
death shall come unto your ears, your matchless heart may be content to let a
sad thought hold you for a while, and if so, too too much for me, who still do
wish your blessedness.

In this manner unlucky Princess, she passed that night, till day appeared;
Ay me sad night, said she, have you now left me too? shall light afresh
perplex me? my waylings ^itter were to bide in you, afflictions sounded best
in you, dark, black and terrible, as you were; is my state, uncomfortable,
and affrighred hours, suited better with my woes, my fortune like your face, my
hopes blacker then your saddest Mantle, whose dullness changes them into
despair, yet liked I you far better, then this flattering approaching day:
you truly showed my self unto my self, you were mine eyes to make me see my
self, and how far distant I remaind from comfort in my want. Then turned she
in her bed, and put her sad afflicted face into the pillow to hide day from
her, which she needed not, her eyes laboring so fast to deliver themselves of
her tears, as their shewers were sufficient clouds, to dim all sight with them.

As she thus lay, her Maid that waited next unto her, came in, but not daring
(though so bold as to come into the chamber, being more then without
extraordinary business she durst do) to speak to her, a little opened the
curtain, and laid a letter by her, she started at it, and asked from whom it
came: from the Prince Leonius, said she. With that she instantly went out
again. Pamphilia opened it, and finding another within, her heart rise a
little in deluding hope; but by the little day that was (her bed standing to
the window) she saw quickly what it was. And is it come to this (said she) most
true Leandrus? I could (methinks) for thy sake blame my self, for being cruel
to thee; yet may thou rather thank me, who would not dissemble with thee,
not having any love for thee, that I would not deceive thee. This token of thy
earnest faith and love I Will keep for thee, and wear it for thee, nor ever part
with it, until I die, and then bequeath it to that Person I shall most affect,
and make my choicest friend, these tears I shed for thee, and pay them as the
off^rings to thy death. O love, O cruelty; see how you govern me.

Then came the King and Queen, and all the brave Ladies, some to comfort, some
to advise, some and many to gaze; most verily believing, her sadness before
had been for absence, now expressed for his death, but that
death-sorrowing-cause was before happened, that molested her, yet she took this
upon her, though in respect of his faith to her, she was sorry to set a color
of deceit upon any thing that concerned him, but this business never concerned
her self, and yet her noble gratefulness chid her for it. She wept, they
comforted, they counseled, she lay silent, and grieved beyond their help;
her parents most lovingly and kindly advised, she showed both humility in the
suffering, and humble thankfulness for their cares; yet did modestly, and
respectively let them see, it was lonelines she desired, which they granted her.

No sooner were they out of the door, but they were called again by a shrike
her woman gave, for she with violence of passion held in before them, having no
vent, would burst, overcame her: they strove to recover her; Father, Mother,
Friend, Sisters, Urania, al did their best, at last they brought her out of her
swound, when she sighed, groaned, and cried, O cruel; then again fainted, and
thus did she thrice; but at last coming to her self, she was saying more;
but her senses coming apace to her, she found it unfit, and too many
Counselors by; wherefore she again desired to be alone, and that was all she
required of them, which for her satisfaction was allowed her, and being alone
she thus began, or rather continued her complaints which could have no new
beginning never having end.

What have I done but sorrow? nay, what shall I ever else do? salues I can
have none to ease me, nor so much as give me show of it. O Urania, how may
thou in thy heart chide the murderer of thy affectionate, but miserable Cousin?
Parselius how will thou deny acquaintance, and friendship with so wavering a
creature? did not he say, and write he loved me? did not his still winning eyes
assure me, and his sweet charming speech confirm me in this belief? I am not
then deceived; deceived, O yes, but not in judgment, but by faulshood. O
faulshood, what pity is it that thou should inuest thy self in so sweet,
and delicate attire? once I remember I told him of his change when he lelft
Antissia, he denied it not, but excused it with having chosen better, and so to
choose was no fault, but it seems the best is not found, unhappy I, must behold
these days, and be left, who most unchangeably love him. Then came Urania
again unto her, whose hand Pamphilia took, and wringing it, wept, and sighed,
having scarce breath left her to breath her sighs with; Urania seeing her
passion, and the assurance of her end if thus she continued, whom as her self
she loved, like such a friend, and a discreet, Counselor joined in commission
with her friendship, she thus spoke.

My dearest Cosen said she, let neither my presence (having put my self
contrary to your seeming desires of lonelynes into your company) nor my speech
wholly proceeding from affection be displeasing to you: Stop these tears
which else will find no stay but in your end, give not occasion for love to see
so much his victory, and to triumph over your brave, and matchless spirit, or
for Man to glory, that our weakness meeting their faulshood can submit so low as
to their tyranny.

Where is that judgment, and discreet governed spirit, for which this and all
other places that have been happy with the knowledge of your name, has made
you famous? will you now fall under the low groans of the meanest esteemed
passion? Where is that resolution, which full of brave knowledge, despised the
greatest Princes when they wore loves livery; must this sink, while his
tossing follies swim? shall your excellent virtues be drowned in the Sea of
weakness? call your powers together, you that have been admired for a
Masculine spirit, will you descend below the poorest Femenine in love? If he be
dead you loved, love his memory discreetly: how would he grieve, if he could
into that joyful place where he is, see you torment your self; nay, sorrow
infinitely to see such inability in her, whom he had chosen to rule himself
and his? if your people knew this, how can they hope of your government, that
can no better govern one poor passion? how can you command others, that
cannot master your self; or make laws, that cannot counsel, or soueraignise
over a poor thought? yet it may be you are not in some kind faulty altogether
in this, since it may be a living love perplexeth you, if so, it is worse, for
will you lie here wasting your days and hopeful time in this tormenting
fashion, keeping that secret, which told, it may be would help you? let
passion since possessing you, breathe it self forth; and though you will not
demand help; yet if the blessing of your affection were known to him, who it
may be, lives ignorant of the happiness, all content without question would be
offered you: speak then, and as to your self if you will not trust me, and I
will but by chance ouer-heare you, I am sure you cannot affect impossibilities.
If he be false, will you vex your self, when you may rather be glad you
discover it before too far misfortune assailed you, as longer engagement would
produce? if cruel, were it not better he matched elsewhere, then that you had
fallen into that unhappiness? if unconstant (which is a thing familiar with
men) take a good heart, and hate that humor by your own worthy constancy, and
seek to preserve your excellent beauty, and let not so uncertain a quality
hurt you: beauty is besides a virtue counted among men of that excellent
worth, as it will draw their hearts as Adamants do Iron: yet in this the
comparison is not so proper, their hearts too tender to resist an easier
inuitement, but I say beauty will sooner compass ones desires in love, then
any other virtue, since that is the attractiue power, though worth is often
made the gloss of their change, which they are in many places forced to take
such pains to find, and found is scarce enough to be called so, not being more
then just will serve turn to be termed worth, not worth the travel of
seeking, yet if some, better then no shadow for their fault. Preserve your
health, then that must continue your beauty, let not the world blame you with
just cause, you have grieved enough for men everlastingly to curse themselves,
that one of their kind should give occasion of sorrow to the most deserving
woman; all is yet well, you may with care, recover what is something touched,
and in time see his repentance which you may pity, or be more wise, and
respect in stead of loving him, who how worthy in all else, deserves not one of
these tears, if false to you, let him go and rejoice, you see his
imperfections before you were tied to them, yet be sure you mistake him not,
or vnmeritingly condemn him, for then the falsehood will be laid to your
charge, and his clearenes will make you more blame worthy. This I advise as my
self would be advised if in such extremity, and this I say to you my dearest
Cousin, and would say, though I knew it were mine own brother had caused this
mischief. Your brother (said Pamphilia) if faulty, might yet challenge more
care from you, and testimony of love, who ought as a sister rather to hide, or
cover his imperfections.

So I would to any, but to you (said Urania) who suffer I perceive so
extremely for him. Pardon me, said she, I accuse him not, far is it from my
heart to blame him, which causelessly I should do. You therefore conclude too
briefly on my words, but for me my only friend and dearest Cousin, this world
has no help left for me in store, but a speedy end, which all that love me,
with me should soon wish it to me; yet I must say some thing in loves defense,
whom you so much condemn that I have read in all stories, and at all times,
that the wisest, brauest, and most excellent men have been lovers, and are
subject to this passion. I grant you that (said Urania) but have you not
withal found by just observation, that it was a blemish to their other
excelling virtues? Why sweet Urania (said she) what has love done to you, to
make you thus bitter against him? do you not happily enjoy what you desire? are
you ambitious to any thing within his authority, which he brings not to your
wishes end, yet you revile and despise him, who but played with you in hurts,
and cloyes you with his favors, while I tormented with his fury, prove not
ungrateful. I am not ungrateful, said Urania, but fortunate, I am not his
slave. I love Love, as he should be loved, and so dear Lady do you, and then
you will plainly see, he is not such a Deity, as your Idolatry makes him, but a
good child well use flattred, an insolent thing coming over our hearts, as
children over the poor birds they catch before they can fly, thinking they
master them, when indeed it is their want of wings makes their bondage; and so
dear Cousin it is our want of courage and judgment makes us his slaves: take
heart to your noble, and knowing self, and let him be as he is now a proud,
then puling Babe. Alas my friend said she, how sorry am I your excellent
counsel is bestowed on one so little deserving it, as not being able to right
it by following it, which I am not able to do, but some answer I must make to
you, I am so wholly his as it is past mistaking, the wound being given me
deeply by his unkindness which martyrs me, not that I am forsaken do I
lament, but my true loyal forlorn heart within me, bewailes the misfortune it
undergoes, by being displaced from that most loved, being which was in his
breast, once cheri^ht, or flattered there; now to return to this miserable
prison my body, which is nothing but despair.

Thus you see it is truth, and such truth as only shall have end by my
miserable days conclusion. To leave him for being false, would show my love
was not for his sake, but mine own, that because he loved me, I therefore
loved him, but when he leaves I can do so to. O no dear Cosen I loved him
for himself, and would have loved him had he not loved me, and will love
though he despise me; this is true love, and if not this the contrary, should I
rejoice for miss of any ill might from trusting, or being true to his amiss,
in such bond had my blessing been, and my cu^se the failing of them, or had
they hapned^ Pamphilia must be of a new composition before she can let such
thoughts fall into her constant breast, which is a Sanctuary of zealous
affection, and so well has love instructed me, as I can never leave my master
nor his precepts, but still maintain a virtuous constancy. It Is pity said
Urania, that ever that fruitless thing Constancy was taught you as a virtue,
since for virtues sake you will love it, as having true possession of your
soul, but understand, this virtue has limits to hold it in, being a virtue,
but thus that it is a vice in them that break it, but those with whom it is
broken, are by the breach free to leave or choose again where more staidnes
may be found; besides it is a dangerous thing to hold that opinion, which in time
will prove flat heresy. Rise now dear Cousine, and if not to receive, yet to
give comfort to the King and Queen who are afflicted excessiuely with your
sorrow; dissemble not with me, for you may see by my discourse I know the root
of your distemper, yet this satisfaction I will give your mind, that so secret
I will be in my knowledge, as I will not speak of it to your self if not to
serve you with all, yet I will ever accuse, and blame unworthy inconstancy. To
fulfill your desire, and obey your counsel as much as I can, I will rise,
answered Pamphilia, but only to content my Parents, and please you, else little
joy or pleasure can I take in this world, but when you have me with you, you
must permit me to complain unto my self, I will never trouble any ears but
those of mine own soul with my sorrows, otherwise should I deal unkindly
with mine own heart, come abroad and do what you will said Urania, nor will I
hinder, or seek to alter you from grief so it be moderated with judgment,
expressing in some sorrowing your matchles goodness, and noble disposition. Thus
did the divine Urania again by her excellent wit conquer, having brought
Perissus from a desolate and sad life, to a fortunate, and now Pamphilia to let
the Court be happy with seeing her though in sadness, yet a joy to all hearts.
The Emperor being at Prage, L^onius desired leave to return to Corinth, and
thence to carry his beautyfull, and beloved Veralinda to her father, not
doubting but to gain his consent for their hoped-for marriage, and so to bring
her bake into Morea against the other marriages, where his might make up one of
the blessed number. His request was granted, and so he took his leave,
desiring to travel alone, trusting to do something sit for his birth and
blood, to make his meeting more welcome to his friends. He parted as he
desired, only one Squire attending him, he passed the rest of Germany without
adventure, those parts so wrapped in joy, and content, as an adventure durst not
appear, for fear of beating; but in Bulgaria he had one sufficient to answer,
for all the rest of his quiet passage.

Riding through a great Forest, for many days he met no man, or creature, but
heard wild beasts roar, and make hideous noyses; his Squire and he passed on,
he thinking of his Love, the other how to avoid the danger of that place if
suddenly surprised by those fierce inhabitants. As thus they traveled, a
Gentlewoman came riding very fast toward them, her countenance showed
distress, her apparel good, and comely, but her face sad, and perplexed,
^hewing frightfulness so perfectly, as she was (one might say truly)
disturbed, or a very exact dissembler. When she came nere Leonius, she cast her
eyes upon him, O cried she, that courtesy were lodging equal to beauty in
this Knight; he hearing her, Fair Gentlewoman, said he, what reason have I
given you to doubt my desire to serve you, should not answer any outward
person? Truly Sir, said she, my own misfortune makes me doubt, which has
been such hitherunto, as never any could so justly say, lived forlorn of
happiness, and this makes me suspicious of any, but misery. Alas said he, how
can it be, that you should be made fair, to fall into so foul mischance? I
am (said she) the most afflicted living, and will let you see it, although you
assist me not, for you shall hear my story, and if that may move, I may be
blessed; but first, I beseech you tell me your name. I am called (said he)
Leonius, Son to the King of Naples, and brother said she, I hope to the
famous Emperor. Yes indeed (said he) it is my happiness to have that honor.
You are most happy in that, said she, and now have I a little share, me
thinks, of content, that I have mine eyes blessed with the sight of his
brother, who wants no hearts, but tongues sufficient to set out his praise,
having all that are created already to the full that blessing can enjoy.

My fortune Sir (said she) is this, I had a Father, and he many children, but
in the number had, as Merchauts have among their wares, some good, some bad,
mixed as the mothers were of disposition, which being many had several heirs:
for four wives he had, my mother the last, by whom he had my self, and one
brother, who lines and is all (if any) comfort I have; this youth and I bredd
together increased affection and love most between us, so as we loved more
then any other two: the elder scorning us, what for our young years, and so
want of discretion fit to accompany them, or for being but half in blood, had
but half affection showed toward us. I know not the truth, but sure I am, I
feel the hurt and want. At last my father died, leaving us to the eldest
son, who used us well and kindly, but he died soon after, leaving the
second to succeed him; which he did for the estate, but not for goodness, he
being as unkind and cursed, as the other was affable and loving; he kept us, it is
true, but how? only from staruing; for plenty we were scanted both of means
and content, while frowardnes and ill natures was in abundance. Then did this
brother marry, and wed more ill humors, for she was richer in ill nature, then
he that was like a sack of woole, stuffed with wickedness. A third, and then
second Brother lived, whose ill out-sprung (though an after plant) the elder;
he went so far as he left no ill unpracticed, not so much as that he ventured
not once to attempt the stain of my chastity, and his shame in me. This
indeed made my hate incurable, and like a fire happened, where Oil, pitch,
rosin, flax, and all such cumbustable matters are together, can be quenched
with nothing till the ruin shows the triumph: so my wrong can be healed by
nothing but the deadliest reueng. This I was not able to obtain my self, but
I was forced to demand help, and acquaint my dear brother withal, who twice
met him in the field, but both brought home hurt alike, and like resembling
death, none knowing the quarrel but my self, or had all been assured of it,
none like me could have grieved; now perceiving that thus no end would be of
the injury, we alone but for our selves traveled from that place to a Castle
not far hence, the desertnes of it, and this place only furnished with wild
beasts, making it abandoned of them, and most that love pleasure. We were
suffered to be quiet here, whether out of love to themselves, or hate to us,
hoping to hear daily of our ruin; but contrary to their wish we have
continued here three years unhurt, yet not vnharmd, because I have been the
cause of hurt too many brave Gentleman like your self who have honored me,
and truth with aduenturing cheering yet have perished, my brothers being
infinite strong, and lucky in their adventures. This I confess has so much
perplexed me, as I have almost resolved never to entreat any more to favor me
rather then that they should dye to revenge me so worthles a creature; yet Sir
you are of so brave a Stock, and brother to so happy a King, as I may me
thinks hope on you, yet as you are bound most for these, besides the hopes
your own person may give, I will not urge you least I should be so luckles as
to procure least harm to you, for Sir there is no pity, nor good to be
expected f^o^ them if you fall into their hands, wherefore I will sooner, and
more willingly cousent to remain thus wronged, dishonored, and overthrown,
then se^ke to be aided by your harm; Leonius the more cunningly, and finely
she insinuated by entreating, and denying, won more on him, so as he told her
if it pleased her to put that confidence in him, he would lay that life at her
feet, and the feet of Justice which she seemed so much to respect, and that
he would encounter her brother to right her honor touched by him. She humbly
thanked him, and so led him toward a Castle standing in the midst of the
wood, where he was received with much respect by him who was her Lord, and
brother to her as she said; into the Castle they went, the gate shut again,
and a Mote being about the Castle, a Bridge was drawn up, Leonius liked it not
extremely well, yet she telling him it was for their safety, he passed on
satisfied with her answer; the Lord with all respect, and kindness in a friends
part acted, welcomed him: at supper delicate, and fine fare was set before him,
no truth in affection, nor exact counterfetting could better be acted; sad
Leonius was, whether foretelling his danger, or the hideous noyses and roaring
of the Beasts, made as melancholy a passion on his mind, as their voices were
to the ears of the hearers. After supper he walked up and down, seeming just
the picture of his brave brother, who seldom was other then a noble retired
spirit to it self, demanded. To his chamber he then was carried by the Lord
and Lady, there found he a brave room furnished with stuff, and Plate fit for
a Prince his lodging, he weary, and willing to see the time when he might
again be blessed with Veralindas sight, he went to bed, folding his arms,
wishing his Mistrisse instead of her imagined self, had been between them; he
sighed, and turned as if from vain hopes, and put himself within the clothes
to cover his folly, as impossible wishes ever are. Long he had not rested, when
from that he was called, as a little being too much for him, many men came in,
the first carrying Candles, the rest a Banquet; he sat up in his bed admiring
the manner, when the Lady came to him, and drank to him, willing him to be
merry, and (said she) rejoice, for now you are fallen into the hands, with that
making a sign, and his eyes being fixed on her, besides a little heavy, so
quickly discernd not the treason, as otherwise he had; cords were thrown over
his arms, and he made prisoner. Vilanous treason, cried he, of any, and most
destable of any other, what is the cause, what is the meaning of this? I am
indeed fallen, but how? by treachery and falsehood in a fair Counterfetter, but
foulest in the being fal^e. She laughed to see him tide, and told him, she
never saw chains better become a Knights arms, then his, especially they
ought to sit best on the Emperors brother next himself, whom she wished in
his place, though he were on that condition free. He said no more, but was
tormented inwardly as much, as so noble a spirit could be, but he with all
careful and desirous to free himself, if he could catch opportunity. They
careless desird him to rise and go with them, heedles of his watch, which they
repented; for he rising, found the chains so loose, as he slipped out of them,
and getting his sword which lay ever with him drawn, such a business he made
among the^, as many were hurt, and some killed, the Lady he kicked over, and with all contempt told her, that he would die like a Prince, hating her abominable
treachery, and scorning more her falsehood, then plot. Some of the servants ran
to their Lord, to let him know the accident, and to know what should be done;
he in his Gown and only his shirt under it, his sword in his hand following
the servants, who when they came to the chamber, let him (as being their
Master) have the place to enter, they indeed not daring to venture again into
the room. He went in, finding Leonius then upon one of his men, and him he
best loved, ready to strike off his head; Hold your hand, said he, brave
Prince, and end your quarrel on me more meriting the blow. All of you, said
he, equally merit punishment for disloialty, but you indeed most, being the
greatest, and therefore most unfit to be ill, but ill being most punish-worthy,
still holding his sword over the man. What may I do (said the Lord) to satisfy
you? To give me liberty (said Leonius) although it be my due, being brought
hither to serve your faithless Sister: I will not be so poor to ask; yet if
I must make my choice, I will be content with this, let us two as we are in our
shirts fight for liberty or imprisonment, if you overcome, I will remain
willingly your gain, if I vanquish, let me have liberty to depart, and on
these conditions I will save the life of this creature. I am content, said the
Lord. With that he threw his Gown off.

Nay stay (said the favored man, my safty shall not prove harm any more to him
that gives me life, call your son, and your other servants, conjure him and
them to perform this condition; well was this liked, and so performed. Then
did Leonius, and the Castle Lord ^ight so daintily and valiantly, as never was
any combat like it, naked men bravely performing, what discourses or Romancies
strive with excellentest witty descriptions, to express in Knights armed,
curious in their arming, and careful. Here is no defense but valor, and good
fortune; armor, but delicate shirts, and more delicate skins; sheilds, but
noble breasts of steel sufficient, being strong in worth: yet the noblest must
overcome, so did Leonius, who having killed the Lord, having himself received
some wounds, but none very dangerous, stood still looking on the young Lord,
who with tears beheld his father dead, and casting his eyes like a noble
Gentleman on Leonius, Sir (said he) you have now the conquest, and shall have
the conditions kept with you, which were made by my father. In weeping he called
for a Surgeon, who dressed his wounds, seeking first for help for his
father, but there was no hope; he nobly deliuerd the Arms again belonging to
Leonius, to him: when he had received them, and saw all things justly
performed, which was by the mankind promised, he desired one thing more of the
Gentleman, whose harm brought his good, which was, to know the truth of the
business. My Lord (said he) the truth is this, there is nothing true which she
related unto you but feigned, as diverse others have been to work her end: She
is not sister, nor any thing that good is to my dead Lord, but a creature kept
by him, this my young Lord being son by his virtuous and worthy wife, whose
heart was broken by his immoderate affection to this woman; she hated all
worth, and now surely was cloyd with him, striving by all means to put him
into dangerous adventures, not caring what she did, so she had her pleasure.
No week has passed, that she has not had one, or two of such like
businesses, faigning falsehoods, and discourses as she found their Persons she
met withal, especially hating the Emperor for his, and your fathers sake, who
gave offense to her, by having in his youth a while liked her mother, and for
necessity of the place surely more then affection having enjoyed, after left
her. This (as leaving is a hateful thing to women upon what terms soever) and
she doubting her end would grow unto it, vowed all hurt to your illustrious
family, and to that end she laid this trap for you. Leonius took his leave of
the young Lord, who brought him out of the Castle to see him safe, permitting
his Surgeon to go with him, turning the vild creature out of his gates
alone, and unprovided of any thing but her wickedness, wherewith she was
plentifully furnished, and all that with her self enjoyed by the wild beasts.
Noble was this act, for a brave enemy gains equal fame by nobly using his
enemy as by cherishing his friend. Leonius took his journey, and way still, as
he pretended to his Mistrisse; he passed Bulgaria, hating it for this
mischief, and without any save neat adventure, which was this, gaind right
against Corinth. A passionate man walked up and down the Sands, being upon the
Strand of the Gulf of Lepanto, sometimes viewing Heaven, craving aid from
thence, then the earth blaming her cruelty; alas, cried he pitiles Heaven that
could view, and permit such extremity, to suffer so chastely loyal a Love to
end in so sad a sort. Who could (but you) have beheld her dying, and not
succor her? With that the Prince went to him, desiring to hear the whole
discourse, who having vrgd, the passionate Man spoke thus. I am not tied (said
he) to make the relation; but I must know one thing before I speak, which is,
whether you be a lover or not, if you be, I shall the more willingly speak,
because you will understand me, else I shall be loath to bestow much passionate
breath so much in vain, to one that will no more esteem of it, then of an old
tale. The Prince gave him full satisfaction of h^s being a lover, when the Man
said thus. This unfortunate piece of mankind you see here, is called Cilandrus.
I am of Corinth borne^ and bred a Merchant; a Knight in that City had a
daughter called Lendrina, of admirable beauty, and such as by the just admiring
it brought many, and most to be her servants, all gazing on her, as on a
Meteor, she knew her perfections, otherwise she had not deserved them; but
being too exact in knowledge was proud of their rareness, and so far as she
thought them not fit to be bestowed on any, none being worthy of them. Men of
all sorts sued unto her, she had answers of all kinds answerable to their
estates to bestow on them; but the Prince he saw her, and liked her, she
thought he must not for her own honor being an assured credit, as she
esteemed it, or be sought by him, who she falsely imagined might command all,
entertained him, but how? not fondly, nor so kindly, but as she used him
respectively, yet she made him sue, and labor for his ends. She would meet
him at places appointed, but as if she were without him to have gone to them,
and by chance met him. Out of the Town she would go to a house of her
fathers, thither would he go to visit her, and to see how the air (the
pretended cause of her going) agreed with her. She accepted of his visits, and
took them as graces to her, and would favor him so far, as to come to the
Town with him, so as he attended her to her house, for she loved the noise of
love, as well as love it self, thinking it a brave thing to hear it said, the
Prince visits Lendrina, the Prince seeks, and sues to her, the Prince is in
love with Lendrina. This folly puffed her up, so as she in time grew like a Rose
ouer-blowne, loosing her more in youth exquisite beauty, yet her mind was as
full of ambition, and pride. I yet reverenced her, for surely she was honest,
folly and vanity rather working, then want of virtue, though stoor'd with those
vices. A Nobleman also of that Town fell enamoured of her, although he would
not have had it, said so, beca^se a brave, but unfortunate Lady loved him to
that height of expression, and length of time, as gratefulness boldly
challenged love, but that she scarce had being forced to be contented with a
few good words seldom visits, and cold promises, she poor Lady loving so
fervently, as if nothing else did move. That made Lendrina proud to have his
love from her, but when her beauty began to fade, the Prince his affection grew
like a cool evening after a hot day, yet still showing love; this discouerd,
how did she rumble up her wits, and not only hers, but also the best brains
of her friends, or helps in her affections business? What poasting was there up
an down? what consultations, plots for meetings, but with whom? with the other
Lord, and he (brave Gentleman abused by their crafts) made believe her
affection was such to him, as for him she would leave the Prince, and in
comparison of her love to him, hated all else. He began to believe it, and
some reason he had, because she made her high mind stoop to come to places
where she might encounter him; his true lover heard of it, and so far it
wrought in her kind heart, as she fell sick almost to death: but something he
did comfort her, although so faint his words were, and weak his protestations,
as but that she willing to cosen her self with good opinion of him, she might
have thought them dissemblings, which for the good I bear her, and deserved
honor she meriteth, God grant she find not so, and this should all Lovers
wish, for when she dies, love will never find so certain an habitation, and
that want he will shortly have, for the noble Lady cannot long sustain with
this enduring, and this grieves me, for I honor, and love her most of any
woman, except her for whom these my sorrows are; deep, and remediless are the
wounds unkindness brings in love, grievous the cruelty ingratitude brings
forth, but these are as usual now among us, as fair seasons in Summer: He
came one day into a room where she remained, and woare a color which she had
procured him once for her sake (hating it) to leave, and never more to wear,
she looked on it as he does on the Axe, whose head is to be taken off with it:
her heart smarted, and she was perplexed, yet durst she not find falt, but
sadly told him, she had not seen him wear that color in many years before.
No quoth he, nor now but a little, it is in great request (said she) at this
time; is it, said he? Why, who does love it? She feared to tell him whom she
doubted, and was well assured affected it, but put it off, and laid it on
another. Alas, poor and pure love, what governors have thou, and fond
commanders, that thou can not be just unto thy self for fear of overseers?
and yet what overseers fear you? but those that ouersee their true respect,
and makes you blind to truth? I saw her another time (for being a lover like
her, I loved solitariness) alone laid by a River side the most pleasant place
that my eyes ever saw, and fittest for passion to gain liberty in, having all
such delicasies in sight, and variety, as these her speeches will let you
understand to be sweet, but silent hearers of her pains. O Heavens, Earth
Plains, Mountains, Hills, Forests, Rivers, Springs, Caves, Feilds, Herbs,
Vines, Woods, Groves, Flowers, Mass, Rocks, Trees, witness my faith and love,
and say for me that you grew not, spring not, run not, flow not, sencibly
increase, nourish, graze, prosper, and enrich but these, and they often told have
bin in me, and my estate; I have been happy like your best rich year, I have
despaird, and do like dearth I have flowed, and swom in pleasure, I am dried in
sorrow and despair, I have bin all, and now am nothing but a poor sad thing
to say I was; force me not dear remembrance to these harms, if you help not
I shall waste enough, and do. These took I to my self, and paraleld my
fortunes with her woes: but what auaild? she cried, and grieved remedilesly, so
do I too. My thinks, said Leonius, you rather, or as willingly set forth her
sorrows, as your own, the strangen^sse of her worthiness in truth makes me to
speak so much of hers, mine being but as shadows to them, though true
substances of miseries, and the more perfect in being like hers, who is the
perfectest lover, she I say (said he) who never yet saw storm to stir her
thoughts, though Shipwrackt in his scorn; no wind blew her to change, nor
change had gliding near her, much less stay, but to my pains, Sir this it
is. The Lady beloved and sought, had a Gentlewoman attending on her, who had,
and has full rule of me, she fair and delicate, knew she might be, or
ought to be beloved, looked like a Princess secure in her estate, where all
hearts were hers, so she smiled on me, as on a subject, I took it more
kindly, and so wrapped my self willingly into the Snare; for when I came to
her, and out of hope imboldned craved her favor, she told me she was not
Merchandise, nor to be gaind that way, but her love was free, and freely
should be given. I quaked at that instant like a child before the rod; but
after I took courage, and again persued, but yet prevailed not, for her
affections were placed on a Gentleman Steward of the house, a fine man, and
such an one as meriteth the title, delicate in his apparel, Courtly in his
discourse, and as a young man passionate in show, and curious in his behavior
like a Courtier, these prevailed with her, his perfumes ascended above my
desearts, his neatnes beyond my estate, and his fairenes exceeded my merits,
but I envy not his fortune, nor did I hate any thing but my misfortune, nor
have I reason, for he enjoyed her not so much as to marriage, which would he
had though I had ever lost, and gaind but only sight of her, deerer to me then
millions of inioyings of Kingdoms were they offered me, while I must still
want her, who being too too rich a prize for man, or Earth, is called away, and
only Heaven fit for her, she does enjoy that place, Hells tormenting furyes
lying still in me, she is dead, dear love and perfect beauty ending with her.
But by your favor said Leonius, I should less lament her loss since she was
an others, then had she been mine own in part, what is an others treasure to
me? but more, what is the grief to see that which my self most loves and
coueteth, to be possessed by an other? the possession would so much afflict me,
as the second loss would never trouble me. You assuredly Sir (said he) are no
lover, if one, but a faint one, and such an affecter as gain is your love, nor
can loss trouble you, for you being a self lover, love but for your own
ends, if they be denied the love remoues to an other place, as we of our
profession, if our Trade fail in one Country, we transport, and transplant to
an other; but love can have on such liberty, remoues are not suffered there,
one place contains the scope of one man's love, and my heart is the staple of
fruitless Constancy. Thus he lamented, telling Leonius that that place pleased
him best, because he could from thence view Corinth, or part of that where his
affection lived in life, and death. The Prince then took his leave of him, and
taking Shipping arrived on the other side, and shortly at the Court, which was
held at Corinth; great content was showed generally in all men's eyes, and their
hearts did answer it, the Ladies were glad because they all loue'd him as a
brave young Prince, and received from him the assurance of their servants
welfare, but long he stayed not, carrying Veralinda his dearest self to her
father into Frigia; this gave fit opportunity to Pamphilia to desire leave also
to visit her Country, which with much importunity was granted her, but first
she resolved to go^ into Arcadia to find Siluiana, drink the water with her,
and then visit Pamphilia. These delicate, and matchles Ladies took their way
leaving the Court like the Sky when the Stars only shine, and the nights
fairest light appears not: in this voyage they shall be left, being time for
Bellamiras iourny to be spoken off. After she had provided her self of all
necessaries fit for her, she traveled towars Saint Maura, arriving there
within short time being neither hindered by wind not adventure; her Father she
found, and her finding him gave such joy to the aged Lord, as he thought all
those passed years renewed again in youth in him. Quickly she got him thence
leaving that place only possessed with the richness of well wishes, both of
his and all that know it, especially those who had received the excellent
benefit of forgetfulness in it. At their return into Dalmatia, the King hearing
of his arrival sent unto him, entreating his presence, which he obayed, his
Daughter going with him, and both receiving all honor from his Majesty; he
looking on her, as one would do on a fair field after the Corn is reaped, so
was the harvest of his affection to her passed. There she met a Gentleman in
good place then under the King, who had formerly served and been Gentleman of
the horse to her yet loved love; this Gentleman out of old acquaintance and
beloved familiarity, brake somewhat boldly with her concerning her affection,
the continuance of it, and lastly whether she would be so kind as to accept of
his love again if he^ offered it, assuring her that he was in far better
estate for his affections returning to her, then she seemed to credit. Much
she marvelled at this discourse, and his new boldness, who had never before
adventured to speak of it in all his time of happiness; fear she might have
done but that she weighed his honesty, never in any thing touched, being
alwai^s held, and found a sinceere man, and just; yet so finely she carried her
self as she found by him he had commission to say what he did, yet not to let
it be known, she would not be too busy, but answered them as she thought
fittest, concluding upon much urging, that no earthly blessing could be such
to her as his love, and the return of it. He only smild, and bid her take heed
she was not the loss of it. She was so wary, and her former beloved, and
loving Lord so passionate, as quickly they were as once they were, no injuries
passed remembered, no recounting of passed unkindness, but as if only absence
had held them assunder, so meeting made their loves as at the beginning,
happiness above it self, and this she felt, going soon after to her own
house, whither her father went, and her love, with many others, no joy nor
content like theirs. Her Father was called again to serve the King, and made
Marshall of Dalmatia; thus Dettareus is again a Knight, and Bellamira once
more contented, which she shall continue, but Dettareus must be yet punnished
for his former fault and offense. Pamphilia being in Arcadia went to seek her
friend and companion as she called her in her sorrows, but as she passed along
those pleasant plains, remembering that she had seen them in her flourishing
time of fortune, and when she was richer in blessings then they in plenty,
fuller of happiness then they of sweetness, more joyful, and hopeful then they
delightful or green, O Playnes cried she, how does constancy protect, and
guard you in delicasie? how do miseries change, and wither me? dear Arcadia I
love you yet because my constancy suits with yours, pity me then that pines in
that virtue, and if ever I see you decaying I will wail with you.

A less, here have I breathed my blessings among you, now must I reveal my
losses, yet continue as you were, and I shall think misfortune only reserved
for me as best, or fittest to deserve mischeife; yet dear, I love thee still,
though feign would blame (as justly) thy unkindness, but love forbids me, and I
must for truths sake in love suffer all without condemning; cruel yet I may
call thee, and thou have no cause to blame me for that, for thine own soul
tells thee I speak truth, mend then or kindly with more violence end me. The
grove she then arrived at, where sitting down hard by, where first she met
Siluiana, here said she once lived a poor true forsaken lover to, her I come
to find, and with her conclude my days, then behoulding those places, and her
thoughts more perfectly setting them selves before her eyes, which as the
streme she made her glass, she with many sorrowful sighs, and deep groans
uttered this Sonnet.

Loss my molester at last patient be,
And satisfied with thy cursed self, or move
Thy mournful force thus often on periurd love,
To wast a life which lives by mischeifes fee.
Who will behold true misery, ve^w me,
And find what wit has feigned, I fully prove;
A heauen-like blessing changed thrown from above,
Into Despair, whose worst ill I do see.
Had I not happy been, I had not known
So great a loss, a ^ing deposed, feels most
The torment of a Throne-like-want, when lost,
And up must look to what late was his own.
Lucifer down cast, his loss does grieve,
My Paradise of joy gone, do I live?
Yes I do live, cried she, but to what end? only to mourn, lament, and m^ane
a state all pity wants, since musing in that place from whence it claymed is
by due. Would I could not accuse thee, yet my love is such, as I would rather
blame my self then thee, dear, this I must not do, for then my merit so
small could not ask reward, I still am just, and purely love thee. O werr thou
but unstained for thine own worths sake, my soul does wish it thee, though
thou were cruel still. Among the trees and bushes then she walked^ plucking of
flowers which adorned their roots, and then as a little higher thoughts did
rise, she saw inscriptions in the bark, and under them left some of hers, to
witness her distress, where she found the letters intwined of Alatina, and
her love, she under them set hers, and her dear love: thus spent she some
hours till a pleasant tune, and joyful voices called her a little from her
sadness; going to the edge of the Grove, she perceived a great troop of
Shepherds of all ages, the young men with flowers on their heads, the old with
Iuy, then came a dainty creature she might think to be Siluiana, but loathe
she was to imagine, she, or any worthy woman would change, nor indeed was
willing to think her the same, but some other delicate Less, but at last she
was forced to confess it was Alarina, and so she thought Siluianas vow was
still vnviolated. This woman came crowned with Roses, led between two fine
Shepherd youths, after her followed all the Shepherdesses apparelld neatly, and
finely after their custom. She admired them, and gazed like men on a miracle,
yet resolved not to stir, nor discover her self, commanding only one of her
trusty servants, to watch what the conclusion would be, who brought her word
that they were all entered the Temple, and that it was for the solemnizing of
A^arinas wedding. Alas said she, can there not live two canstant women all at
one time? yet Pamphilia be thou still just, and though but thy self, and so
alone to suffer glory in such martyrdom. Home she then went, thinking Alarina
no companion for her, when she was in her Chamber looking out of her window
upon the Gardens she had used to breath her passions of joy, as often as of
pain in, alas cried she, why do all my old friends as it were turn the
hand of my wretched Dyall, to make me see my unfortunate hours by? I will said
she, leave these enemy-turnd-friends, and go into my own Country, where at
least I may find new, and unknown places, though perhaps no more easefull,
yet before I go, I will see Alarina, and so what change that change has
wrought in her. Then gave she order to the officers to provide for her journey
to Pamphilia, and commanded the same servant of hers, to find out Alarina, and
desire her to attend her in the Garden walks. This was performed, and the sweet
Shepherdess attended the Queen, who taxing her for her lightness in change,
thus answered her. Brave Queen said she, I confess this most true that you
have said, if only truth in steadfastnes lived here, but if you will
vouc^safe me the hearing, you shall see I am not faulty, though the appearance
to your judging eyes may judge me so; had I broke my vow, and my vow to truth
in leaving Diana, and loving a new love, I had vnpardonably erred, but Madam I
am free from touch of fault in this, and only Fortune is guilty of all, I was
beloved, and loved again devoutly, I was forsaken, and for it grieved
vnmeasurably; I changed my state in despair, it is true, here was I faulty to
change at all, but you imagine my fault is this alteration, no Madam, this is
no changing, but a happy return to my first blessed estate, for had I taken a
new love, I could not have been pardoned any more then for refusing my old one
when he offered his affection again: thus am I free, and once more fortunate,
for now I have my love tied by his own, and marriage vows, never such content
as requital of love brings forth, but yet returning love exceeds it, and so
you will say when you shall find this happiness, of which I make no question.
Would your promises would prove true said Pamphilia, though I then were taxed
as I did you with change, but I expect it not, yet sweet Alarina, how did he
prevail against your resolution? By strong force of love said she, for Madam,
let us flatter our selves never so much with thought of power, to resist, and
set determinations to refuse while we are alone, or absent from the sight of
him, whose charms bewitcheth us, his sight again gives life to our first
passions, and turns the strength of our imaginations to powerful servants of
his will; as the strength of ones body in a hot disease works against it self:
thus experience, the truth of knowledge teaches us. I once thought what a
fool am I to seek, where I am rejected, to sue where I am scornd, and
petition where I am disdaind; shall I sink to this baseness? shall I forget my
own merits, and beg of an ungrateful creature, who triumphs in my wrongs? no, I
will let him see, scorn can have children as truly borne as love, and those are
bred in me. I will make him see my sencible disliks, and his false eyes by my
despising them, shall find his error in my truth, and resolutenesse. These
brave conceits I liked, and meant to practice: but when I saw him, O me, I was
like a thief caught in the act, I hung down my head, ashamed of mine own
thoughts; I hated my self, and pleaded guilty, ready standing to be condemned,
as I was in his opinion: we are fine creatures alone in our own imaginations;
but otherwise poor miserable captives to love. Flatter not your self dear
Princess, for believe it, the greater your mind is, and the brauer your
spirit, the more, and stronger are your passions, the violence of which though
diversely cast, and determined, will turn still to the government of love; and
the truer your subects are to you, the firmer will your loyalty be to him. I
grant all this, said Pamphilia, but these things concern not me further then
the gladness I have for your good; since I protest truly that no scorn, nor
any cruel course whatsoever he can use, or has used, though to the extremity
of ill, could, or shall alter my heart from being his, or from fullness of
content with all true and affectionate acceptance of his love, if he would
bless me again with it. But I cannot hope, my despair out-weighs all such
thoughts, and makes me dryer in loss then blasts do trees, though they kill
them. Alarina strove to comfort her, assuring her that she could not have more
cause to sorrow and lament then she had had, nor be further from hope or color
of it then she once was; yet said she, now I have passed all those sad
misaduentures, and am arrived at the happy harbor of enjoying. Long may you so
be blessed, said Pamphilia, and soon may like blessings befall you, said
Alarina: from this they grew to discourse of Poetry, the Shepherdess saying
merry songs of her making, since the turn of fortune, the Queens continued in
the same strains they were of lamentation.

Some days were thus passed, till her journey called her thence, when taking
leave of Alarina, the Queen went toward the Shipping all the next Port, and
soon after arrived in Pamphilia, where no ^ooner the news of her arrival was
spread; but the people from all parts came to see her, and joy in her presence,
while she ioyed in nothing, nor communed with any but her own sad self, which
she called her loss, and passions for it: the saddest places were the most
pleasing to her, the solitariest Caves or Rocks her chief abiding places, yet
she lost not her self; for her government continued just and brave, like that
Lady she was, wherein she showed her heart was not to be stirred, though her
private fortunes shook round about her. Leonius this while with his fair
Veralinda trauel'd toward Phrygia; where being arrived, they sent unto the
King as strangers, to beseech liberty to see him, and to present some things
that they knew would be most acceptable to him. He was an excellent wise
Prince, and as any, courteous: wherefore he soon consented, and they apparel'd
her after the manner of Italy as his Country, and she according to the Greek
fashion for Shepheardesses as having had her breeding there, and from those
habits would not be altered, till she was received as a Princess. They entered
the Hall where the King was, being a brave old man, holding as maiesticke a
countenance as his state required: Leonius beheld him curiously, the^ made this
speech unto him, holding his eyes fixed on him, and the Lady of his soul by
the hand. Great K. of Phrigia, whose renown has spread it self unto all
ears, give your servant leave to say this unto you. I am stranger borne far
hence, son unto the King of Naples, and brother to Amphilanthus, Emperor of
the Romans, of whom after I had received Knighthood, I gained leave to go
abroad to try my fortune. Into Morea I went to visit the King thereof, who for
my honor, I have the grace to be his near Cousin, but in Arcadia, it was my
happiness (as I hope) to meet this Shepherdess whose true and loyal servant
I vowed to be, for her sake I changed my habits, and from a Knight became a
Nymph, with her I conceald, lived, she nor any other mistrusting me, for other
then my outward show gave them cause to think me to be. Still my affection
increased, and the daily conversation made this beautiful creature affect my
company, at last she was by the Kings Shepherd, (whom she had till then taken
for her father) sent thence, my self discovered to him only went with her into
an Island in the Gulf of Venice wherein were enchanted the greatest, brauest,
valiantest men, and the excellentest Ladies of the whole world, by this divine
creature they were released, and the charms finished. At the conclusion of
the^, a book of gold upon a Pillar of the same appeared, which being taken down
and read, therein was found the whole story of this rare Shepherdess, which
brought her to the knowledge that she is your daughter, and I am hither come
as hers, and your humblest servant to conduct her to your presence. The King
rose and with moderate joy kissed them both, joyful of the news; yet having
had so much misfortune, could not but doubt the truth of what was so much
desird. She then on her knees delivered the Book unto him, wherein he found
what Leonius had related to be true: the Prince delivered likewise unto him
letters from his brother the Emperor, to desire the marriage. The grave old
King heartily rejoiced at this blessing, but bore it, as he had done his
afflictions, with equal temper; then took he Leonius by the one hand, and his
daughter by the other, calling his Lords round about him, to whom he delivered
these glad news, withal, the Emperors desire, concludiug, that his consent
was gained, and therefore demanded their allowance to the marriage. They
consented, and ratified it with full joy and contentment; then joined he their
hands in that assembly, contracting them, and promising himself to accompany
them back to Morea, where they should be married as Amphilanthus had entreated,
for the honor of the other great Kings and Princesses. Robes of state were
soon brought to Veralinda, in which she appeared like Venus when she won the
Apple from the other two Goddesses. Triumphs were presently made, and she
proclaimed heir apparent to the Crown. Thus was Leonius and Veralinda made
happy with that they most on earth required. A brave Fleet of Ships were
straight prepared for their Voyage; feasts continuing till that time in all the
Kingdom, joy now like the Summer flourishing bravely among them. Amphilanthus
having bin long enough in Germany, and so lawful an occasion offered him for
his return into Morea, established Ollorandus, who^ he made his Deputy with the
Princess to govern in his absence, which he promised should be but short,
and his return speedy, his way he took of purpose through Dalmatia, to see
the King and the Lady had been offered him for wife, being after many
adventures arrived, there he was entertained like himself, which is
expression enough for the rarest entertainments. Dancing there was among the
Ladies, one appearing as much excelling, as she deserved admiration for her
beauty and that quality. All the Kings and Princes beheld her with one
favorable opinion; but Amphilanthus did enquire who she was, and how bestowed
in marriage. He was informd that she was Daughter to the Master of the horse,
married to a great man, but wedded in affection to a young nobleman in the
Court, who also had a brother that liked her, they both loved her, she used
them both so indifferently, as they could not in two years tell whether she
loved: The elder doubted the younger, he feared his brother, both were afraid
to offend her, and so remained unsatisfied: till at last whether more boldness,
or truer, and cleerer affection grew in the elder, having been beloved, and
likewise loving one another, though desiring this Lady out of a covetous humor
of enjoying all that worthy was in love, he found it was himself she
affected: he embraced it, she then liberally declared her self, and so they
were both happy. The younger from the first doubting could not be more then
formerly, since now he saw but what he feared, and by this might the better
avoid a fur^^er danger, which he did choosing an other leaving this couple most
contented in themselves, though discontented with many others; for his other
Mistress grew spiteful, his wife froward, and suspicious, her husband jealous
and troublesome; yet what were all these? only means to make them love the
better, and their loves to be the more pleasing, like stolen fruit, which is
always sweetest. In this estate they then were, but the question may be asked,
how these secrets were known? it may be easily answered, and not unjustly
said, that surely it came from the happy lover, who with fullness of joy and
content could not be so near miserableness, as to keep such a treasure hid
to kimselfe, and thus do many times such discoueries come. The Emperor
commended them all, and especially the Lady, whose part he was apt to take: the
news of his being there brought Dettareus to kiss his hands, and to see his
fellow-Hermite Parselius, with the other two his good companions; but one of
them he missed, for Dolorindus was gone to Antissia again. He had not been
long there; when one day the royal assembly being in the Hall, and ready to
see dancing, there came in a grave old man of good fashion and birth, as he
after proved, his beard and hair white, his face something with sorrow and age
wrincled, resembling a fair tree in frost: he kneeled unto the King beseeching
justice; he promised it, and bound it with an oath, being urged unto it by
this Gentleman; then rising, Sir (said he) he that has done me injury, and
the man I seek revenge of, is Dettareus, who I know will not, nor can forget
the wrong he did me, which although I will not particularly name, not loving to
take up the ashes of the dead, or stain a long quiet grave with guilt or
infamy: I will only touch thus far as to remember him of the breach of
hospitality, and the noblest band of friendship, in trust; this is that I call
revenge for, and these I must be satisfied in. The King called Dettareus
forth, who covered with shameful sorrow, appeared like the son had robbed his
father of his greatest treasure holding his eyes on the ground, as justly
condemned: The King was sorry to see him so dejected, but his word was engaged;
wherefore he demanded of him what he wo^ld answer to this. He replied, that is
life was not sufficient to satisfy so foul a fault as he confessed himself
guilty in; yet he was to answer none for that business, since the wronged was
dead. Dead indeed cried the other to all content, and yet saw his honor dye
before him, otherwise Dettareus I am the man injured by you, not killed, as you
imagined, but recovered again by skillful Chirurgions from all your blows,
but one which cannot be cured, but by the balm of your heart blood or mine: I
therefore desire that you will in the presence of these brave Princes (then
before whom none can have a noblier end) fight with me, and honor me with
death, which I assure you shall be as welcome to me as your overthrow; we are
neither so young as to undertake a rash business, our age has made us perfect
and free from that, nor are we so old, that death should claim our sudden
yeeldings; let then the life and strength we have be spent before this royal
company, and let Justice at last have sway. Dettareus casting his eyes up,
beholding him, knew him and wept; yet would not deny what the other demanded;
so they went forth and armed themselves: the King and all the Court did greatly
pity them, and especially. Dettareus, who appeared already dead to their eyes,
killed by his own foretelling ill. Instead of dancing they went into the lists
where the strangest Comba^ was fought that ever in Dalmatia was seen; yet did
they seem but like brave old arms of trees, whose fruit was yet fair and
good: so was their strength, and the manner of their fight so exact and perfect,
as young men had more cause to admire and learn then scorn their skill or
courage: but Dettareus though in sight and fight continued a good space with
the better; yet a conscience he had gnawed within him, and made his outward
powers like an inward taken poison, shake and faint, so as the other got the
victory and life of Dettarreus. This had been hard and much to be lamented, if
Justice came not in to tell us 'twas her act, and right, which made the Court
satisfied, yet did they lament and mourn for his loss, the Emperor, and the
other Princes his old friends going with his body to the grave. The other with
as much content as could be for such an accident, where honor was gained from
the death of an once loved friend, returned with liberty from the Court; but
soon after in Apulia, from whence he strayed, after the certain tidings of
Dettareus living was discovered, and never stayed any where till he learned
where he remained, hearing his religious life he would not molest him, nor call
him out of charity from his Beads to the sword, but like him lived in that
manner in S. Maura on a mountain till he was advertised by the people who
dwelled at the foot thereof, and whence he fetched his food, of his going
thence with his daughter, and of his taking arms again. Then did he again
prove his imitator, and like him use steel, and so followed his tract, tracing
him as men do^ hares in the snow, till he found him at the Court, the end of
which journey is related, and his own end soon followed, having got enough as
he thought, in having honor restored, and satisfaction to his mind. From
Dalmatia Amphilanthus and his friends took their way toward Morea, where
being happily arrived, they found the King and his beautiful Court at Corinth,
from whence they took their journey to Mattinea, sending to Pamphilia to meet
them; but she humbly excused it to her father, and for the rest, they must
bear with her absence. What joy Meriana, whose heart was only her husbands,
felt for his coming, such another, if such there be can only express?
Urania, as a mere lover, Philistella, Selarina, Musalina and Lucenia, was also
come from the enchantment to accompany Musalina home (who was the best knowing
and practiced servant in passions court) did make testimony of their
affections, though severally, yet all amorously and conte^tedly to their
servants, longing only now for the day of happiness which soon followed: Leonius
and his new father with the beautiful Veralinda coming soon to them. All now
but Musalina and Lucenia married women must have matches by lawful vows; but
an unfortunate match held her from a more blessed one, and so she must live.
Amphilanthus thought Morea was also the Empire of Germany, such a Court he
found, and so brave company, as nothing was missing that might yield, or nurse
content; but except Musalina, the Ladies had little conversation with him,
sometimes his Sister who was as much, and willingly entertained by Steriamus,
yet would he, and all of them, speak often of Pamphilia, most wishing her
there, while she only spent her days in sorrows, which was the Court she
gloried in, her delights, were sad thoughts, her companions, tears, and
groans, and these lived, and yet still decayed the unblessed Pamphilia. Haste
was made of the marriages, which were performed with all joy, and content, such
trymuphs being there, as never had before been seen in Morea. Perselina
carrying away the honor for the delicatest, sweetest, and brauest Lady of her
time; the others, though excellent above relation, yet had their times before
her, she being but a blossom sprung late, but as rare, and exquisite as ever
any had been.

The Queen of Bulgaria grew a little better, as company works on all
creatures, and makes the wildest endure men's sight, as Staggs will be tamed,
and Lions abide handling: yet her own nature remained with her, and that was an
honor to her, for in nothing, nor for any thing one ought to leave their old
familiar acquaintance, till they leave them, and yet not then neither, for
worthynesse is only on^s own, and as nearly touches one, as the bone does
the marrow that lies within it: so this assures her virtue. She used all
ciuilly, but Amphilanthus respectively, and the Prince her servant, who
excceeded all the other of his rank in dancing, kindly, and generally all
friendly.

But now comes the time for their depart, the Queen of Naples stayed to be
conducted home by her Son, who first with the Romanian Ladies, Lucenia having
her old mind to Amphilanthus, went to Negropont to see Antisia, Steriamus, and
his most dear Urania went toward Albania, Selarinus and his most beloved
Philistella to Epirus, Antissius and Selarina to Constantinople, Rosindy and
his chastely loving, and truly beloved Meriaua, with Perselina to Macedon,
Parselius with Dalinea to their new Kingdom of Achaia, which (by Leandrus his
death, and after his Fathers, who with his loss ended his days) was fallen to
them: Philarchos and Orilena to Mytelin, Perissus and Limena stayed with the
Queen of Naples by her entrety, till she went to her Country. Polarchos was
made Chamberlain of the House to the Emperor, and so attended him, the King
of Bulgaria and his great Queen also took for Bulgaria, the rest, every one
as their occasions called them, so as Morea remained bare like a room after a
great feast, the guests being gone, looking as unfurnished, the brave rich
furniture gone out of it: and thus was poor Morea. The Queens of Naples and
Cicely kept always together, and never failed walking in the sweet woods, once
enriched with Pamphilia, and her love; there they passed the time together,
telling stories of themselves, and others, mixed many times with pretty fine
fictions, both being excellently witty, and the Queen of Naples rare in
Poetry, which Limena loved though she were none of the writing number her
self. But one day they would needs have Perissus with them into the Forest
to hunt after their manner which was but in a Chariot, while sometimes with
crossing they met the Dear. In this days sport it happened to them that they
lighted on the same Grove, and place, where Pamphilia had first found Siluiana,
the place invited them to stay in it, the stay procured dainty imaginations,
they as delicate expressions, which made, and gave birth to these Verses framed
by the most incomparable Queen, or Lady of her time, a Nightingale most
sweetly singing, upon which she grounded her subject.

O That I might but now as senseless be
Of my felt pains, as is that pleasant Tree,
Of the sweet music, thou dear Byrd do make,
Who I imagine does my woes partake.
Yet contrary we do our passions move,
Since in sweet notes thou do thy sorrows prove.
I but in sighs, and tears, can show I grieve,
And those best spent, if worth do them believe.
Yet thy sweet pleasures makes me ever find
That happiness to me, as Love is blind,
And these thy wrongs in sweetness to attire,
Throws down my hopes to make my woes aspire.
Besides, of me the advantage thou have got,
Thy grief thou vtter'st, mine I utter not.
Yet thus at last we may agree in one,
I moure for what still is, thou, what is gone.
Perissus protested that he never had heard any like them, and in so saying, he
did right to them, and her who knew when she did well, and would be unwilling
to lose the due unto her self, which he gave her, swearing he never heard any
thing finelier worded, nor wittilier written on the sudden. Limena would only
desire to have them, for she yielded in that, as in all other things to her
Lords judgment. Up and down they walked, the Grove being so delightful as
gave content to all, and all sorts of Lovers. Going along the Spring they found
many knots, and names engraven upon the trees, which they understood not
perfectly, because when they had deciphered some of them, they then found they
were names fained and so knew them not. But Perissus remembered one of the
Ciphers, yet because it was Pamphilias he would not know it. As they passed
they saw a handsome, and well clothed woman, neither walking, running, or
staying, but as if she had made a motion of them all, and imployd them to her
vanity; she one while cried, another chafed, smiled, scratched her head,
stamped, railed, and all at Love; blind foolish thing, said she, be thou for
ever hated and abandoned, have I not better deserved of thee then thus to be
handled? Must I be a miserable Testimony of thy cruelty, when I merited thy
best favors? I hate thee froward Child, and will never leave reuiling thee,
till thou do requite me, if never shame light on thee, and thy Baby
government. Have I been a quiet patient of all thy follies^ Suffered my self
to fall under thy Tyranny to serve thy wilfulness, and obey thy vain
employments? Are these tolerable, or am I not fit to be rewarded? Peevish Boy,
either speedily requite and pacify me, or be sure to be set forth in thy
colors; no Bird bears so various, or several calourd a Plume as thou do in
changeableness, which shall not be neglected but set forth to the life; then
Sir it may, you will say I am bitter, but the world shall see that you are
unjust. Waiward Babe, I admire thou have a face to do all this withal; 'twas
well faign'd at first, that thou had no eyes, which indeed is the true face,
for thou can neither see truth, nor be seen truly by it. Unworthy creature,
an invention framed, a thought lighter then thought, a Bubble made by breath in
a Shell, blown by a straw, fired with a frown, revived by a smile, and ruined
by an neglect, a stately and constant building that breath can destroy, that
look can establish, or the least of dislike sack.

In this fury she would have persisted, but this Troop had been, and were
Lovers, wherefore they went to her, who seemed like a moving, or stirring
water-worke: she turned to them, and from them again, she cried, and groaned,
then scornfully seemed to defy passion, and with a faint forged countenance
would have appeared sociable. No greater diversity is there in women's
dispositions, (who are richer in that vanity then men) then she had in her
self, so as good women might hope all the superfluous vanity of that sex had
been collected, and settled by uncertainty in her. The Queen of Naples
entreated Perissus to speak to her, he did so, she answr'ed just like her
demeanor, at last the Queens drew nearer to her, and demanding some questions
of her, she answered them thus. I am said she a Gentlewoman, though ungently
used by Love, my name not worthy of Knowledge, my estate overthrown by
mifortune, my friends not to be named as being unfit to consanguinate with
misery, and indeed, such a wretched forlorn soul as I am, only the shadow
of that, kind men most contemn, but for their own sakes, and necescities
sometimes respect. I have most of my time been among those of highest rank,
but meanest requital, else I had not thus suffered; I am a cast-downe-wretch,
not worthy of life, or your presence, let me then on these reasons petition
departure, you shall be noble in granting, and I happy in being permitted my
own course.

Limena well liked this odd manner in her, and would not license her to be
freed from them, but desired to hear more; for, said she, I have been as you
are afflicted, and never felt more felicity then in discoursing my woes,
besides, I see you are apt to discover your passions to these places, why not
then as well to us, who are, and ever will be sensible of passion? She lookd
upon her, and with a noise between sighing, and long breathing scorning
directly to sigh, she answered her, that she should have what she sought.
Then said the Queen, I desire to know your loss, your despiser, and yet
dislike. It is this said she, I loved a Gentleman, who was brother to the
Duchess I served, he loved me, and swore it, (perfidious man) I believed him,
and granted what he asked; he made of me as we do of the best fortunes, and
was contented with nothing so much as with my Love, nor did I joy, or indeed
glory, in any thing but his affection: this undid me, and I a poor yielded
creature, and spoiled by him, remaind the poor Trophy of his victory, and my
loss. I sought yet long time, after I writ to him both in Verse and prose, but
alike to his understanding, and alike taken and received. He remembered my
kindnesses and thanked me, but yet rewarded them no further, like a King that
takes a Present and likes it, but thinks it was his Subjects due to present it,
and so means not to reward the bringer, scarce the giver: no more did he, for
I was both giver, and bringer, and yet as one cast off, and forlorn. I vrg^d
Faith, and constancy, he confessed it with fair words, but alas, his rewards
were miserable and dry. I then after a long and most laborious suit and toil
to win, or rather keep but part what I once had had, recouer'd not so much
as damages, but all lay still on me. I then writ some Verses to him, which I
have in memory, having made them upon the subject of many unhappy Women, but
bringing them all to my sadd estate, the Verses are long and teadious,
therefore if you please, I will let them pass, and continue my discourse. Nay
I pray (said the Queen) let us have them, and the story too, we have time
enough for both, and no time being able to be better spent, we can afford the
evening into the bargain, rather then miss such a relation. Then Madam, said
she, when I saw no merit, no love, no remembrance, nor any thing could work
against a new choice which he had made, I framd these lines as my last piece,
resolving if they prevailed not to let all go, and fall to the resolution, or
indeed, more properly, distraction I am now in, the Lines be these.

Dear, though unconstant, these I send to you
As witnesses, that still my Love is true.
Receive these Lines as Images of Death,
That bear the Infants of my latest breath,
And to my triumph, though I dye in woe,
With welcome glory, since you will it so,
Especially, my ending is the less,
When I Examples see of my distress.
As Dido, one whose misery was had
By Love, for which she in Deaths robes was clad;
Yet lost she less then I, for I possessed
And love enjoyed, she liked, what was professed
Most cruel, and the death-lik'st kind of ill,
To lose the blessing of contentments will.
Fair Ariadne never took more care,
Then I did how you might in safety fare,
Her third my life was to draw you from harm,
My study wholly how I might all charm
That dangerous were, while pleasures you optain'd,
And I the hazard with the labor gained:
Yet she this his life saved, he her honor lost,
That false Prince Theseus flying, left her crossed
With his abandoning her truth, and love
Leaning her desolate, alone to prove
His Love, or ^^ded, or but given for need,
Caused her with misery to gain that meed.
I Ariadne am alike oppressed,
Alike deseruiug, and alike distressed:
Ungrateful Demophon, to Phillis fair
A Thracian Lady, causs'd by like despair,
Or greater far, for after fervent love,
In which blessed time he freely still did prove:
What is desired, or loved, he left this Queen
And bliss, for a less Kingdom which had been
Before his fathers, and by reason right,
For Theseus was his Sire that King of spite.
Thus did he both inherit state, and ill,
While Phillis self, her lovely self did kill,
Making a Tree her Throne, a Cord the end
Of her affections, which his shame did send.
I strangled am, with your unkindness choked
While cruelty is with occassions cloak'd.
Medea Witch, with her enchanting skill
Did purchas^ what was craved by her will,
Yet was by Jason left at last, which shows
Love only free from all bewitching blows.
But his own witchcraft, which is worst of ills,
Never absenting till all joy it spills.
Charms it may be, withheld you now from me,
Break through them, leave that Circes so often free,
The Syr^ns song, Calypso^s sweet delights
And look on faith, which light is of true lights.
Turn back the eyes of your changed heart, and see
How much you sought, how fo^dly once sought me,
What travel did you take to win my love?
How did you sue that I as kind would prove?
This is forgot as yesterdayes liked sport,
Love winning lasting long, once won proves short.
I like Penelope have all this time
Of your absenting, let no thought to clime
In me of change, though courted, and pursued
By love, persuasions, and even fashons rude
Almost to force extending, yet still she
Continued constant, and as I am free.
Ten years a cause was for Ulysses stay
While Troy bes^iged was, but then away
Was homeward bent by all, save him who stayed,
And ten years more on foreign beautyes prayed.
Against his will, he often his will enjoyed.
And with variety at last was cloyed.
Chainge wearyed him, when weary he returned,
And from his wandering then to staydnes turned.
Come you now back, I thus inuit you home,
And love you, as if you did never roame:
I have forgot it as if never done,
And do but think me a new to be wone.
I shall appear, it may be, as I did,
And all passd falts shall in my breast be hid,
Try me again, and you shall truly find,
Where fairness wants, clearenes of a mind;
Fairer, and richer then the mass of all
Their persons, which from me have made you fall,
If joined together, and from thence to frame
A mind of beauteous faith, fit for the name
Of worthy Constancy enriched with truth,
Which gave me to you, and so held my youth
In young desires, still growing to your love,
Nourish them now, and let me your love prove.
Leave the new powerful charms of strangers tongus,
Which always truth with their fair falsehood wrongs.
Come back to me, who never knew the plot
To cross your mind, or to thy will an not:
Come, I say, come again, and with Ulysses
Enjoy the blessings of your best blisses;
Happy the comfort of a chaste loves bed,
Blessed the pillow that vpholds the head
Of loyal loving, shame's the others due,
Leave those for me who cannot be but true.
Come, and give life, or in your stay send death
To her that lives in you, else draws no breath.
What bands had you to tie you thus much, said the Queen of Naples? bands of
faith in me, and vows from him of zealous truth said she, privately made to
me, and for greater satisfaction given before witnesses for marriage, which
made me (foolish, and confident) trust, and yield, and now wander, lament, and
pine. The Queens pitied her, and promised their helps to assist her. She
thanked them, but answered, none but love had injured her, and ^on^ else could,
or should help her: so she as strangely went on, and from them as wildly she
had come to them, they returning home, she walking and breathing in distembers.
At last resolving to go to Pamphilia, offer her service to the Queen, who ever
from her iufancy loved and trusted her, and was hindered from her company, and
attendance; by reason, or rather this folly in affection which had power to
make her dissist from all resolutions how fit or worthy, to please that, the
most vain, and troublesome of any. Now she could discern her error, but how?
as if she looked into a glass, and behind her saw her misery, which to her
face abusd her: so her passed time had wrong^d her, never to be righted or
cleared, if not by death, forgetfulness, or charity. The Queen Pamphilia
received her with all kindness, and with her she liud as in her former days in
much respect, and used with all courtesy, the better being joined, and more
acceptable, because nearest agreeing with her passions, and miseries, as she
called them, and indeed were, for none can be compared to forsaken love.

Nerena was left in miserable state, imprisoned in a Tower, locked up in
conceit of madness, and made a poor, imagined distracted creature where she
was absolute Princess; little Justice was in this, yet she as a woman must
suffer, although in time be released, as she at last was, and now is the hour
come for her safety. Her Sister, as you heard, went to try the Enchantment, in
her absence, desire of change, and so hope of liberty (as most times is gained
in absence of the Prince) grew among the people, but most lay in the breast of
a noble man, whose conscience, one may well say, slept quietly from troubling
his business till now he had awaked it, protesting that the wrong done to
Nerena concerned them all, and lay alike, to his imagination, in their hearts
as in his, which moved him to urge restitution, and submission, with
establishing her in her former government, their latter Princess being but to
succeed her Sister, and the injury done to her who ought to reign, besides,
what follies did live in her, more, and not as amply abounding as in the elder,
and their rightful Lady; besides, as a woman, why should she not be permitted
both her vanity, and the nature of her Sex, their fidelity to their late
Master was lost, their loyalty to Succession forgot, the oath to truth broken,
and they guilty to all foul. Treasons, having deposd their Princess, and
established another, whose merit were not far beyond their own Mistrisses, nor
whose staid worth ought to claim too strickt an obedience, where right
challenged the contrary. He was a great man well-beloved, infinitely followed,
feared, and therefore cheerish'd, he swayed much, and so far proceeded, as he
with the rest of the Counsel, fetched Nerena forth, solemnly again established
her had pardons for all things past, and all was made up with a kind and
gracious conclusion, she by her poor living, and neglect being now invested in
so staid an habitation of gravity, as she was fit for the honor they recalld
her to; her sister she provided for, but she returned no more, but with a young
Prince she grew so enamourd of, although a married man, stole away and ended,
so as her friends did desire all good people should forget her, or that she
never had bin; thus may you see that none can run so far that shall not have
some time to return, nor any how much soever condemned but may live to be fit
of commiseration, and respect; this was verified in her, and she deserud their
due restoring her proouing an excellent Gouerness, and brave Lady, being able
to ouerrule her old passions, and by the^ to judge how to favor, license, and
curb others, and this exp^rience, though late, is most profitable to Princes.
Amphilanthus with the brave, and once hating, now loving Ladies, coming to
Negropont, were by Dolorindus and Antissia infinitely welcomed and feasted, yet
Antissia was not wellplesed, for although she had directly lost the love she
most prized, yet so much she loved him stll, as she was sorry he should do
amiss, which she did co^fes he did in leaving Pamphilia sor Musalina. Alas,
said she, most excellent Lady did not I fortell your harm; yet I protest I am
truly sorry for this, and wish I had said false, so you had still been
blessed, it was not my fortune to be happy in what I most sought, yet wish I
you had inioyed what your worth and constancy had merited; no envy I bear to
you, nor ever did, but to my dest^ny which would not favor me. Of purpose she
would urge discourse of her, which the Empe^or took well enough, and was
contented so far with it, as to think of her, and at last resolved to see her;
but one day walking alone in a delicate walk of Birches, set by art upon the
top of a hill, both sides being sowed with wheat. Harvest not yet being come,
though the corn ripe for it, he beheld the even and perfect growing of them.
Can we (said he) possibly be as even in our own breasts to truth as these
things which are sowed, or set by our hands? No, and for our shame our own
works, must witness against us; for, I confess, I have done amiss, and
against her, deserved best of me for love, and constancy, and yet none have I
paid with so much neglect, I am faulty, but I will mend, and she I hope will
pardon. Sweet Corn (said he) when the wind stirrs, how do your heads bend
humbly that way you are blown? how euenly, equally, and patiently has she
borne my neglects? I will give satisfaction, and she shall be requited. As he
walked thus, he heard a Ladd pipe meerily, on a Pipe he had made of one of the
stalks of Oats, not far off growing; he stayed to hear him, and when he
thought he had done, went toward him, desiring to hear some thing; which,
though low in respect of his understanding, yet would now be pleasing to his
passions, as he drew nearer to him, he heard him use these words. Love, since
thou art thus grateful, be thou ever blessed, I now am sorry I did call thee
ill, I do repent that I did think thou had been wayward or ungrateful:
all is passd, and I do pardon crave. I Will sing unto thy praise, as I did cry
agaiust thee; I Will make songs, in thy honor, as I did in reuiling thee; I Will
swear thou art alone worthy, and fit to be honour^d, as I lately vowed thou
were the only Serpent, and hateful humor to be cheerished: If humble
submission can merit favor, I will gain it of thee; if not punish me and
spare not, for I must, and do confess I am guilty, and deserve more ill then
thy nobleness will inflict on any, give me my freedom from thy favors, and I
will ever be thy vassell for it. Then took he up his sling and walked a little
farther, that being his weapon to defend himself, and to molest the Birds or
other enemies to his charge in that delicat Corn. Amphilanthus thus followed a
far off, as hope does despairing Lovers: when he saw him sit down again,
and take up his Pipe, then again proceed in his commendations of Love, and
then sing. The Emperor liked that humor well, wishing he might have the like
cause to praise that passion; upon which he was pleased to make most
excellent^ Verses, and then returned to the Court. Musalina and Lucenia whose
humble submission had gained pardon and love in some kind had them, as they
had most he had written, but still his mind ran on his journey, not doubting
of his welcome, yet knowing his fault wished the first encounter passed.
Musalina took her leave to return into Romania, much sorrow was for parting,
but those things are so usual, as the relation were like telling a tale so
often till all ears were tired with it. Musalina in her journey had as many
several thoughts as love could bring forth; sometimes suspicion came, then
anger, and revenge followed, yet these were salued again with hope, and trust;
She was grown likewise a Poet as being a necessary thing, and as inseperable
from a witty lover as love from youth: When she arrived at home, the poor
trees felt the cruelty which she said was inflicted on her; sad rimes came
often into her thoughts, some of her own, others of Amphilanthus his making on
parting, and of diverse others, contenting her self, or rather forcing content
to be showed, when no remedy was, her love being gone, and which was worse in a
kind never to return, which gave form to these lines following a great
drought being in that Country, and every one wishing for rain.

Why do you so much wish for rain, when I,
Whose eyes still showring are, stand you so nig^?
Think you that my poor eyes now cannot lend
You store enough? alas, but rightly bend
Your looks on me, and you shall see a store
Able to moisten Earth, and ten earths more:
Sighs to make Heaven as soft as tender wool,
And grief sufficient to make up the full
Of all despaires, then wish not, since in me
Contained are tears, grief, and misery.
Many times she would go to the solitary woods, and grieve there freely crying
out her woes; but all returned alike to her for gain or reward; for how can
help be now expected? only absence will assist, and that at last in this
distressed Lady prevailed, wherein she was happy, though many sad days and
nights passed before the cure could be wrought, Time being for this disease the
best Physician. Amphilanthus took his way toward Pamphilia, taking with him
only twelve Knights, whom he chose, and his and their Squires; them he
enjoined not to disclose him, nor call him any other then the Just in hope:
Pamphilia, not hoping for any redress, was one day in certain walks with her
ancient friend, and servant the Lady, who the Queens met in such di^order for
love, and was the same Lady that was so pleasant with Steriamus when he was
passionate for Pamphilia, she was called Dorilina, then who there was not a
discreeter, though a true lover. As they walked, discoursing of their loves and
torments for it, Dorolina besought the Queen to honor her with the repeating
of some of her verses. She answered, she was grown weary of rhyme, and all
things but that which wearied her life; and yet for cruelties sake would not
take it. She would not be answered so, but urged her again, hoping to take
her this way something from her conrinuall passions, which not vtter'd did
wear her spirits and waste them, as rich imbroyderies will spoil one another,
if laid without papers between them, fretting each other, as her thoughts and
imaginations did her rich and incomprable mind: but as yet Dorolina could not
prevail for the part of Poetry; yet she gained so much, as Pamphilia sat
down and told her this tale, faigning it to be written in a French Story.

There was, said she, in France for many years, many Kings, that Country being
divided into several Kingdoms; several Nations there were likewise which
spoke different languages, some of these had Kings, the others only Princes;
but in success of time, all came happily under the rule and government of one
King, care only had then by marriages to make a perpetual union, which only
length of time could do: among these marriages there was one, from which grew
both good, and ill, a brave young Lord of the I Will of France, second son to a
famous Nobleman, and one who had great employment under the King, being counted
the brauest man of the Kingdom, was by the means of a brother in Law of his,
married to a great Heir in little Brittany, of rich possessions. This Lady was
wooed and sought by many, one she affected and so much loved, as she was
contented to think him worthy to be her husband, and so for worth, he was.
Miserably hard her father kept her, and close; yet so much liberty she gained,
as she had almost tied her self never but by death to be released; yet her
fortunes were not meant thus to be disposed of; for her father dying, and she
thinking she was a little, or much neglected by her first servant, who came not
according to appointment to attend her, she changed her mind, and gave her
self to valiant and lovely Bersindor the Frenchman, leaving the other, as he
had her at home to learn better breeding. Into France she came, where she was
by Bersindors father and mother cherished with all affection, and love; her
husband kind, and as respective as she merited, many fair and sweet children
they had to their comforts and their friends, and so bred they were, as all
companies coueted their presence, being like sweet delights to sad eyes. The
eldest daughter was called Lindamira, she was so much favored by the Queen
of France, as by no means she must be absent from the Court, which indeed was
the fittest place for her, being a Lady of great spirit, excellent qualities,
and beautiful enough to make many in love with her; but she loved only one,
and that one she had loved many years before any mistrusted it, or himself
knew it. He was likewise favored by the Queen Mother, whose husband dead,
had leisure to bestow her eyes upon the loueliest object, and this Lord was
well enough contented, spending his time after his own desire. Lindamira
served the Queen faithfully, and so affectionately, as she had no love but
them two of either Sex; yet was she careful to give no dislike to her
mistress, whom she would not iniure, or indeed at that time her self, for she
was married, he not thinking that it was himself she loved, though he knew she
was somewhere bound in those fetters. A careful eye he carried over her, not
that it appeared he loved her much more then as her deserts, which her noble
and free carriage deserved; yet he was desirous to find her love. Once he
thought it was the husband of a Lady, she had made her chosen friend; but after
he found the contrary, to his own comfort; for the Queen, how well assured
soever she was, or rather might have been of her fidelity; yet love she knew
had commanded her, who borne a Princess, and matched to a King, yet could not
resist his power, might with greater ease soueraignize over a subject: but in
Loves Court all are fellow-subiects; and thus her Majesty was deceived in her
greatness, which could not, as she thought, be subject: and therefore, though
others must be Vassals when they are all companions and serve alike. This
suspicion was first put into her mind by a malicious Lady, who enuyed sweet
Lindamira; but so was it believed and followed by the Queen, as all her favor
was withdrawn as suddenly and directly, as if never had: Lindamira remaining
like one in a gay Masque, the night passed, they are in their old clothes
again, and no appearance of what was; she yet was grieved to the heart because
she truly loved her mistress, as her disgrace went further then only discontent
for the loss, or the note the world might take of it, which must like their
reports be wiped away, or washed like linen, which would be as white again
as ever. But these pierced her heart, and she was inly afflicted, at all times
she nevertheless attended, never failing her duty, yet desirous to know the
cause of this her misfortune: She employed many to move the Queen, only to
know why she was offend^d, that if she were guilty she might ask forgiuensse,
and make humble submission, but this would not serve, she poor Lady ignorant
of the cause, desired the Lord for whom she suffered to do the like for her;
he did, but returned as the others did to her, telling her the Queens answer
was, that she should not know the cause, therefore willed her to be satisfied
with that, and with knowledge that she was, and had just cause to be off^nded.
Lindamira then asked leave to retire, she had permission, and withal her
Majesty, when she gave her her hand to kiss (which favor she was contented to
allow her) she told her she should do well to stay till she was sent for. She
humbly, and with tears in her eyes answered she would obey, and so she
departed going home, and soon after with a husband like her last fortune, went
to live with him, whither soon came all her friends to visit her, and by him
were nobly entertained. The Lord, whom she so much lo^ed, and was accused for,
likewise came with that Lady her dear friend: among many discourses they fell
upon this of her disgrace; Lindamira saying, that the thing it self did not
now so much afflict her, as the ignorance of it: None (said he) that dares tell
you the cause, knows it, and some that do, dare not. What should fear them
said she? if mistrust of my secrecy, I will give them cause to take away that
suspicion of weakness in me, other reason I cannot guess^: if I should go
further, said he, you might imagine me one could tell. I am verily p^rswaded of
that, said she. But I fear your displeasure, said he. Why (said Lindamira)
concerning none but poor me, how can any thing trouble you? It may be, said
he, it touches others, and so much as yo^ will hate them for suffering for
them. I have no reason for that, said she, though it may be I shall be angry
with my self for giving cause. Then (said he) with your pardon, I will tell
you that, I am enjoined not to let you of any know, to secrecy I will not
bind you, for the business it self has power to do that, wherewith the
friend Lady rose, and he proceeding told her all that had passed, but now (said
he) I fear you will hate me for this. Pardon me my Lord, answered she, I am
only sorry that you should suffer for me, so unworthy of your favor, but for
being offended, I protest I love her displeasure, since she has honored me
with this worthy opinion, rather then I loved her greatest grace, and more
noble is my fall, then my time of favor was, he did not it seemed lose that
opportunity, nor was she nice to let him know her long love, expressions of it,
and embracing affections wanted of neither side; what happiness this was to
sweet Lindamira that constant woman, if such an other there be who loved five
years vndiscouer'd, and then on such an unlooked for occasion revealed so great
a secret, may judge, this showed a strange happiness to befall them, that a
jealous woman whose doubt of loss brought her losing and Lindamira's gain:
thus you may see the effects of that base humor: but alas, what succeeded all
this? your fortune, dear Dorilena, and mine, for after she had lost the Queens
favor, endured an unquiet life, and miserable crosses from her husband
possessed with like, or more furious madness in jealousy, her honor not
touched, but cast down, and laid open to all men's toungs and ears, to be used
as they pleased. Lastly, after fou^teen years unchanged affection, she cast her
off contemptuously and scornfully, she complained, which complaint, because I
liked it, or rather found her estate so near agree with mine, I put into
Sonnets, this course I might call ungratefulness in him, and give all ill
names to it; but I will with the story conclude my rage against him; for thus
the Book leaves her, the complaint is this divided into seven Sonnets.

Lindamira's Complaint.
1.
Dear eyes farewell, my Sun once, now my end,
While your kind willing grace I felt, all joy
In soul I knew withdrawn, you now destroy.
The house that being gave to loves best friend.
You now alas to other objects bend
That warmth of bliss which best delights enjoy,
Striving to win an often won idle toy,
By falsehood nursed, such creatures seldom mend.
Try your new loves, affect the choice of store,
And be assured they likewise will choose more,
Which I yet grieve; for though the loss I bear.
I would have none with you to challenge right;
But bear you must for making choice so light:
Yet still your beams I Will love, shine you elsewhere.
2.
O Deadly rancour to a constant heart,
Frownes^ and neglect, my only favors be:
Sometimes a cold respect is granted me;
But hot flames to those eyes joy in my smart.
Once yet for Justice sake weigh my hard part,
In gratefulness I should kind usage see;
For being tied alone to you, else free,
Till by your wrongs now joined with heart-broke s^ar^.
A glorious triumph you no doubt shall have,
To crown your victory on murders grave,
While falsehood bears the arms my life has won.
I only for twice seven years love shall gain
Change, worse then absence, or death's cruelst pain:
The last yet got, you have your labor done.
3.
A Surgeon I would ask, but it is too late,
To stay the bleeding wound of my hurt heart:
The root is touched, and the last drops depart
As weeping for succeeding others fate.
Alas that my killed heart should wail my state,
Or leisure have to think on ought but smart,
Nor does it, but with pity bear a part,
With her` embraced yours like a loving mate.
But now unmarried by a new disdain
Cold death must take the body from her love
And thou poor heart must end for my unworth.
Conscience is lost, and outward fairenes gains
The place where worth did, or else seemd to move,
Thus world like change new trial still brings forth.
4.
O Memory, could I but loose thee now,
At least learn to forget as I did move
My best, and only thoughts to wait on love,
And be as Registers of my made vow.
Could I but let my mind to reason bow,
Or see plain wrongs, neglects, and slightings prove
In that dear Sphere, which as the Heavens above
I prizd, and homage to it did allow.
Can thou not turn as well a Traitor too
Since Heauen-like powers teach thee what to do?
Can not thou quite forget thy pleasures past;
Those blessed hours, the only time of bliss,
When we feared nothing but we time might miss^
Long enough to enjoy what is now off cast.
5.
Leave me vain Hope, too long thou have possessed
My mind, made subject to thy flattring skill,
While April mornings did my pleasures fill,
But cloudy days soon changd me from that rest;
And weeping afternoones to me adrest,
My utter ruin framd by Fortunes will,
When knowledge said Hope did but breed, and kill,
Producing only shadows at the best.
Yet Hope it is true, thy faults did fair appear
And therefore loath to think thou counseldst me
Or wilfully thy errors would not see
But catch at Sun moates which I held most dear
Till now alas with true felt loss I know,
Thy self a Bubble each fair face can blow.
6
THough you forsake me, yet alas permit
I may have sorrow, for my poysn'd cross;
Think not, though dead, to joy I cannot hit
Upon a torture, for my soule-pierc'd loss.
Or if by chance I smile, I hopes ingrosse,
Nor for I die not, I do bliss admit,
Most grief will often give leave for show to toss
Upon the waves, where Shipwra^k'd comfort split.
Think then your will, and left, leave me yet more
Vex not my loathed life, to ruin bent;
Be satisfied with glut of your bad change:
Lay me unthought on, in the loue-kill'd store,
My griefe's my own, or since for you it is sent,
Let me have that part from you while you range.
7
SOme do, perhapts, both wrong my love, and care,
Taxing me with mistrust, and Jealousy,
From both which sins in love like freedom, free
I live, these slanders but new raised are.
What though from grief, my soul I do not spare,
When I perceive neglect's slight face on me?
While unto some the loving smiles I see,
I am not Jealous, they so well do fare.
But doubt my self lest Nesse worthy am,
Or that it was but flashes, no true flame,
Dazzled my eyes, and so my humor fed.
If this be jealousy, then do I yield,
And do confess I thus go armed to field,
For by such Jealousy my love is led:
Dorelina admired these Sonnets, and the story, which she thought was some
thing more exactly related then a fixion, yet her discretion taught her to be
no Inquisitor, so home again they went, the Queen giving order the next day
to hunt a Stag, but she was hindered from that by unlooked for news, which was,
that the young and proud King of Celicia, being her neighbor, her Wooer, and
refused by her, would not as it seemd endure the scorn, or go without her,
wherefore he with an invincible Army, was come near the confines of her
Country, by force to win, what he could not by love, or fair means gain. But
how much was he deceived in this? for force must not prevail against such a
spirit, if not to bring death for hate, but no affection or submission, threats
can work with her no more, then to command men to give resistance. Into a
strong Fort by the Seaside she put her self, one Army attending her, another
sent to encounter him, led by Melysander. Her Counsel admired her magnamity,
she was no more troubled, then if no such thing were, nor could any thing but
unkindness, nor from any but him much molest her. She dispatched a Messenger
to her father for aid, another to Mitelin, and all her friends that were
within compass of helping suddenly; for sudden was the matter, thoughts of
love for all this had their place, as wishes that Amphilanthus would come, but
as much was that wish to see him as for help, though she was confident to have
had victory by his presence.

The end of the third Book.
THE COUNTESS OF MOVNTGOMERIES URANIA. THE FOVRTH BOOK.
ONE of the Messengers lighted upon his ship as he came from Negropont,
relating the news; haste was then made to the succor, but still he must be
unknown. At his landing he met some people sad, and their countenances
telling some misfortune; he was loath to ask, till one of his company desirous
to know, and perceiving the Emperor wished the knowledge, yet would not ask,
demanded the business; answer was made, that the first Army was overcome, the
Duke Melisander taken prisoner, and the King marched with all speed toward the
other Army, and Pamphilia: Alas Sir (said he) if you saw how our poor Country
is already spoiled, defaced, and ruined, where the Army passes, it would
grieve your hearts, and most, that the wofullest end of war is likely to
happen; for the other Army are all young men, who though bold and valiant, yet
raw and unexperienced; it is to be doubted, the Queen will fall by this ill
fortune into the Kings hands, wanting all foreign aid: for could her
Brothers, or Cosins know of it, and but some of them here, we should not fear.
Why is the war, said Amphilanthus? Because our Queen will not marry the
King. What is her reason, said the Emperor? Want of love in her, replide he;
and as it is believed by most, and is the general opinion, her affections
being placed on some other, but who it is, we are ignorant of, yet would he
were here; for surely she cannot love but worthily, and so like her most worthy
self. Amphilanthus was glad of this, and so got him to guide them to the Army,
where they were well received, as all shall be on such a necessity in time of
war, if they come to help and succor.

The King of Celicia puffed up with pride for this Victory, came on with speed
and joy, till he came within sight of the Army: Amphilanthus perceiving that,
and having discouerd himself only to the Counsel and Commanders, sent forth
a Drum to desire a parley: it was granted, then went forth one of purpose chosen
by the Emperor to deliver this message, that since the King had already
obtained the Victory over one Army, to the great hurt of that Country, he
desired to have as his own, out of that respect, and no other it was fit as
they held it to of^er him this (not challenge) but humble entreaty to encounter
in person one single man of the Qu. side, who should be in birth, honor, and al
other dignities, fit to wait upon him, and bravely before the wall to fight
with him, who if he overcame, he should have the Queen deliuerd to him; if not,
he and his army should depart as they came, having had enough in the bloods of
so many brave men, and true subjects, al which might have bin his, if this
offer had bin time enough made, the rest now spared if accepted. The king,
whose own pride could not wish a more respective challenge, answered, that he
desird to know the man should meet him. The messenger answered, that his name
was conseald from most, and was known by no other, then the Just in Hope. The
king replied, that he must know more, or he might, and would be excusd from
ventring his roial person against one nameles man: the messenger then ^ist a
little paper, and deliuerd it, wherein he found a plainer challenge, but as nobly
courteous, and thereto the Emperors own most honored and feared name. The king
took it well, and was glad he should (as he told the messenger) co^bat with him
in the sight of his Lady, both for the honor he should gain in ouercomming
Amphilanthus, and that he was assured he was the only obstacle in his way; for
these two reasons he would fight with him with hope of conquest; the hour
should be left to him, if he pleased, or as being his due to choose. In the
morning following, about nine of the clock, the messenger returned with much
comfort to Amphilanthus, who now had another, and the best part of the business
to do, which was, whether she would consent, that her giving or freeing should
be left to his fortune in the combat, how to compass this, he doubted the
accomplishing, and feared infinitely how she would take the bold offer, which
had bin made without her knowledge; at last he did resolve, that he would
adventure, and so with the Counsel entered the Castle where she was; but thus
he orderd it, that they should move it to her, and have her resolution, as if
yet it had not bin determined. Amphilanthus this while should stand where he
might hear al, and when he pleased, to show himself. Thus it happened, they
came to the Queen, where she was in the Gallery under a Cloth of Estate,
sitting as sadly, as her fortunes told her it was fit for her; yet of all
fortunes, his loss was the greatest. When she saw them, she smild, and asked
how matters went: they told her the worst, because she should agree to their
desire. If that happen, said she, I shall be sorry to leave you in danger, to
whose loves and respects I am so much bound, nor is there need of that, since
peace may be made for you, but none for me, on such conditions as he offers;
for never will I be unjust unto my former vow, nor to my self, and such as will
go with me, shall be vsd no worse then my self. They humbly thankt her, but
protested, that no other fortunes should satisfy them, then her service and
attendance; yet was there a way, they said, how she might save her self, free
her realm and them from ruin. She replied, such a course she would with all
willingness undertake; then they told her their opinion, naming the Champion
only by his framed name: if (said she) my brothers were here, or either of the
kings of Albania, I might put my fortunes in any of their hands: but alas what
speak I of that, I merit such a happiness. Could no other please you, said they?
with that she sighed, Yes God knows, said she, blushing, and turning her self
from them. They went on; how if Amphilanthus, said they, were here? If he, said
she, were here, there were no question, but life, estate, and al might be put
into his hands: but this I protest truly and sincerely, that I had rather
perish, then be the cause of the loss, or danger of the loss of one drop of
his blood, or of my brothers, so much I love, and respect them. With that
Amphilanthus stepped out, and presenting him self to her, told her that while
he had blood, and life they should serve her. She was amazed, surprised, with
joy and fear, blushed, and looked pale, passion working so in her as she could
not tell how to look, how to speak, or express the blessed comfort possessed
her. Heauen-like joy to her it was to see him, Death-like smart so to see him
to his danger, her heart bled to think that he might bleed in her quarrel,
and yet his quarrel caused in love, had withered hers with sorrow, till now
refreshed with this balm, like a body furnished by the perfectnes of a sound
Liver with blood, and so life; He was troubled with her countenance, least it
had been out of offense taken against him, when God knows it was but the
violence of her passion, which when happy or crossed, could never suffer her to
utter it self. She could imagine what to say, and resolve of it, but never
could when time was offered to perform it, timorousnes ruling in her toward
him, when over all others she could soueraignize: diverse the sorts, diverse the
passages, and geuernments of love. He took her by the hand, she
affectionately beheld him, at last telling him that she would rather petition
him to let any end befall her, (but yielding to As^rusius) rather then he should
venture his life for her delivery.

He said there was not in the world, next her self that he respected more,
or in any degree of comparison with her liberty, and pleasure, therefore she
might assure her self, that her honor, and safety should command his life,
which could never be so well employed as in serving her. They then together
sat under the cloth of State, she beholding him with as greedy eyes, as one
at the last does the Haven in a terrible storm, driving from that whither they
desired to go, and well could she in her mind have consented to have dyed in
that blessedness. He as lovingly beheld her, and thought he saw her former
beauty lately decayed renewing as his favor was to, and in her again. Thus
they were till supper, which being past she conducted him to a delicate
chamber, where he lodged all night, resting well till time was for his going to
the field; the excellent Lady lay all that dark time like one wrapd into the
third Heaven, her soul only working, she knew not how to bear her joy
accusing prosperity, for being more unsupportable then affliction, a Fever of
contentment held her in a fit without intermission, and thus she remained till
day, or her care of him, or thoughts, or joy, or altogether called her up, and
so she appareld her self to be ready to bless her eyes with his sight before
he went forth, for no suite, persuasion, or any petition of hers could diswade
him from the combat, telling her at last that he must doubt by her
importunity, and fear she seemed to have of him, that her opinion of his
worth or valor was deminished. She was then forced to be patient, and all her
refuge was to her tears and prayers for his delivery, and safety, he is
determined to vanquish, the other opinionated to have the victory, the honor,
and the Queen, both are now ready to try it out, Pamphilia attending her
Knight to his horse, her soul waiting on him with all her strengrh of spirit,
and good to assist him, so as thus he that needed no help, had two spirits
joined together in and against one, and one of them maliciously bent against
him and perfect love, bound to his ruin; Urania, Philistella, Steriamus and
Selarinus, on their way in Epirus met a dainty troop of Ladies, and Knights in
a Meddow, the Knights to pass away time till they met the Kings, and Queens
which was the cause of their journey, had found out a pretty pastime to please
their Mistrisses withal; unarmed, only with the Lance they were to take a
ring of gold which was hung to a staff, and which side (having divided
themselves into the number of twelve, and twelve) did oftnest take the ring,
was to win a Jewel which the Ladies was to give, and then the whole side that
had won the prize must run six courses a piece, and which Knight of^nest
took it, was to have the Jewel free to himself, the Ladies to draw lots who
should pay for it, and she that lost it was to accept the winning Knight for
her Servant.

It was agreed on by all, as contented, till the lots being to be drawn, and
the chance lighted, the Lady who was to loose or win, grew into an infinite
rage, cursing Desteny, reuiling the blind Lady Fortune, crying out against
unjust lucke^ and railing at all men, and mankind: in that chafing at her self
as furiously as at any other thing; Urania was desirous to know the cause of
this her dislike and fury. May it please your Majesty said she, I should hold
it, an undeserved favor received from you, to be let alone to my passions, and
not forced to relate that which must be most displeasing to mine own ears,
and as harsh as my luck has been cruel, yet if there be no remedy, I will
not disobay you, although I desire that my story may be rehearsed but to your
self, and our Queen your sister. This was agreed on while the Kings went to
see horses ridden, and to ride themselves, the Lady then told her discontents
thus.

This Knight whom I have now by Fortune given me, I have many years since
given my self, I mean my best, and truest affections unto; he did so
amorously, and with such just, and even love receive me, as I cannot tell
whither of us loved most though I knew I love as much, and fervently as any
woman; expressions I could make of his deernesse to me, and mine to him, were
it not for fear of seeming too vain, and boasting of my happiness, therefore I
will with your permission ouerpasse them, and follow the high way to my
misfortune. He loved a far greater Lady then my self, when I aspired to
win him, I prevailed, and she grew infinitely despised, but I was blessed,
and with little pity at last compassion beheld her, though with much respect,
ioying to think I had co^pass'd my desires, and crossed my Rival, after this
had continued some time, and I thought I saw my self chief, how was I ioyed,
and how triumphed I in my victory? but then as a brave Hawk having seized the
prey after a delicate flight is taken off from it, as if she gained but for
another: so did I but get him from another, and to another must leave him; yet
held I chief a while, and thought I had got a preferment in being the Lady,
his respects were showed unto, the rest but as I had been second, and to
receive favors by stealth, which are surest, and heartilest given from the
soul, as I too well know, which grieved me to see any other have; but I was
to be patient, and obedient, love taught me observance, this was an affliction,
but nothing to that which followed, for then he fell in love again with one,
to whom either his affection so subjected him, or her peremtorie power abased
him, as he quite left me, and looked upon me, if by chance I came in his way
like a Judge on a Thief, or offender, sternly and curstly: I melted with
sorrow, I pined and starued with unkindness; but all this prevailed not, I
then gave Hope quite over, and embraced Despair, and with much ado got quiet
in vnq^ietnesse. Into the Country I retyrd, leaving the brave City, resolving
never to see Court or company more: but one time a near Kinsman of his, and
one most inward with him came to my house where I dwelt, I bid him welcome
after my old manner, but he found sadness in me suitable to my state, he
disliked it not, yet after supper sought to persuade me from such melancholy,
and retiredness, which (he said) was not only hurtful to me, but to my
honor, the world speaking, and guessing strangely about it. What is that to
me, said I? Is it not as fit the world should see my sorrow for my loss, as my
content for enjoying? I never was sparing to manifest the one, I will not be
ashamed, or afraid to suffer for the other with as much confidence as sorrow
(which truly felt) will license me. He said refraining the Town and my Parents
would be too mean a part for me, therefore it were much better and nobler to
show it, if I desired that, then to sit at home, as if I would cover it, for
thus my bravery in bearing appeared not.

I finding him press me so far, began to draw so near to hope, as to think
it might be he was set on; then my thought I saw he had commission, and heard
directly the words of my love deliuerd by him as a Bird taught, repeating his
lesson; yet I dissembled a while, till so long we had discoursed, as I was
forced to discover my conceit, which thus I did. If (said I) these speeches
have proceeded only from your well-wishes to me, I must be sorry for them,
since they tie me in a stricter band, then I willingly would be obliged in my
merits, or power, being so small, as I shall always be forced to remain
indebted for it, and so much, as I shall not hope to be able to pay the due;
but if they come from another, favor me so much to let me understand whence
they are, that I may make my resolutions according. He that had not bin nice to
declare what concerned me, especially if good, plainly told me, that he could
not be just in this to us both; yet because he would begin, as he wished the
succeeding might be happy; therefore Madam (said he) I was commanded by my
friend, and Cousin to persuade you to come up, and he will if you please, to
accept of his service deserve by love to be yours again. May I believe this,
cried I? as you will believe any thing spoken by your truest friend and servant.
I gave credit to him, and with him as only to visit my Parents, and taking the
opportunity of having his company went to the City; as soon as I came to my
fathers house, I saw a well known servant of the Knights I loved, I felt
instantly my blood even spring in my breast, as warming me with hope, and
almost joy, soon after he came, and supped there, carrying so fine, and
courteous a fashion to me as might have won a new heart, but mine was his
before, and if ever I was sorry it was bestowed, it was at that time when my
thought he deserved the noblest, and best heart to be given him for that
gentle return of love, which as my only content and hoped for blessing I most
willingly embraced; then did I forget not only all my ^orrowes before, and my
pain, but was an new creature made of joy. All perceived the alteration, and
ioyed with me, some seeing the caus^, others that knew not the first chance
admired me, and grew merry at my pleasures, but long had not they this cause of
mirth, nor I the happiness, for after a confident and settled belief of his
constancy, not then ever to remove, he grew a little slack again, and by
degrees, as one that dies with bleeding, loses the outward sense of sight,
and so by little and little grows to death: so did his favors to my death of
parting with the^. I finding this, grew to my late estate again and sorrowed,
at last fell sick, in which sickness he came unto me, I then spoke some thing to
him, not so freely I confess, as I thought to have done, but so much as he I
saw understood me sufficiently, but so coldly he answered me, his fashion being
so different from love, as if he had but heard a tale, not the truth, nor so
much as looking on me like the complainer, or suter. At last he said, that I
should have no cause to doubt him. I made my self (for all mine own eyes and
judgment strove against me) believe he meant justly, which indeed I cannot say
he then did, but after proved it true, for he took away all doubt, and gave me
certain knowledge, but of what? alas my perpetual misery; for such a stranger
he grew, as he seemd either ashamd to know me, or disdaind the knowledge of
me. One day I found him with his love, I coming to visit her, Lord what a
poor salutation he gave me, yet at last as I was going away he spoke to me,
taking occasion of doing something near the place, where I stood. I answered
him, but thought I to my self, am I, or must I ever be the Vicar of the Empire
to his love, never enjoying but in a second place, unless the first be gone,
and then in the interim reign, but by a new creation fall to my old place
again? These and some other open disgraces truly changed my heart, or wrought
so much in me, as I grew to love less, then not to love, and now am come to be
more careless of him, and feign almost would shun him, yet I cannot directly do
that, though I hate the fortune I am fallen into, and this is the cause I am
vexed with having this Lot. Urania and Philistella pitied her, especially when
she cried; Alas, said she, why was love so cruel, or rather to clothe love in
such cruelty, as to give hope of purpose to ruin? as if one would give a
delicate banquet, and poison the Guests when he had done; else might he have
left me despair for charities sake, and not luld me with hope to martyr me
again. The Queens persuaded much with her, and so at last she was pacified so
far, as to give him the Jewel, and accept the name of his Mistrisse, as other
fair Ladies do the like name; further, their friendships increased not so
long as this story lasted.

Philistella was left here with her dear Selarinus, she being crowned with
all solemnity, as he had been before. Steriamus and his Urania iournied on to
their Kingdom, where likewise she was crowned, and lived the rest of their
days in all happiness and joy: the like did Selarinus and Philistella.

Antissius and Selarina in their voyage by Sea, meta fine Adventure in a sweet
and dainty Island, where they staid, the Queeue not well brooking the S^a, in
which time they walked up into the land, coming into a delicate Palace, built
curiously of white stone, a brave River, or arm of the Sea running a little on
the other side of it, Gardens were round about it, or walks, which made it
appear the Palace of delight and much perfecter had it bin but the Lord of it
was called by life's concluder to obedience, dying, and leaving two sons, and
one most fair Daughter, with his noble Lady, whose virtues were such as
shinned in her for the honor of all other women, and examples to Maids to live
Virgins, and wives, and widows as she had done, and did. She met the King and
Queen at the first Gate, being informed who they were, and with all reverent
respect welcomed them, attending them into the Gardens, showing them the
pleasures of them, and giving them such fruits as that time yielded, then
waited on them into the house, which they admired for curiosity, sitting down
to rest them in a brave Gallery, which delighted them infinitely, by reason of
the sweet prospect, which though not so far as others, yet was it as pleasing
being able to judge of what they beheld, which was one way delicate meadows,
and that great River, beyond it fields, and hills, down the River an ancient,
and famous City, well built, and of many miles compass; up the River pasture
grounds and fine enclosures, thus were all sorts of delights round about, and
in sight of this place, but the richest, and finest sight was the grave Widow,
the sweet youths, and the excellent young Lady, whose perfections were such as
no description can come near, or any thing but admiration tell, whose fullness
will not permit expression. Her stature was of the brauest, and best chosen
height, her skin (although her hair was brown) white as milk, soft as
down, and fine as silk: her eyes black, as if mourning for the murders they
would commit, yet so spritefull, as gave comfort, and blessed content to him
should be honored with their favors, and hope of life to the dying, if they
repented their ambition. She was sixteen years of age, but of such beauty as
if each minute had bi^ employed to fetch excellencies to her; a grave and brave
fashion she had, which to strangers seemd pride, but to them that knew her true
noblenes abounded in her, which they published, else she had bin vndeseruingly
condemned. With the King there was a brave Lord, but somewhat in years
exceeding her, he yet had a young and new desire to obtain her, his worth
would not seek her, but as her worth warranted him, a strangers name he
feared would be distasteful, yet he was so near a home borne man in affection,
as that might speak for him; he was an experienced man, and therefore knew time
the most precious of any thing, wherefore he applyd himself unto her.

Her fashion was discreet like herself, respective according to his own heart,
which was not the meanest, but such an one as might have dwelt for noblenes in
a king, but being in him, made him a king for bounty. A Cosin-german she had,
who traveling with this Lord, was so imped into the quills of his love, as he
was himself, and so wooed for him; she was confident of her Cosins love, and
trusted his judgment, and so received the Romanian, as on trust from him; he
was in great favor with the King, who spoke for him, and of purpose stayed in
that Island (belonging unto his Crown) till his servant had gaind his desire,
the weather so temperat and pleasing, as his Majesty resolved to stay there,
and lodge in tents for pleasure, and the more commodiously to let his Favorite
court his Mistress, although the Lady most earnestly besought his gracing her
house with lodging in it; but the delightful Island carried him about to view
it, and so left him to woe, and win if he could. In his Progres he met many
fine adventures, the Island being large, and plentiful of all delicacies, but
the king fell to sports, the Queen affected only pretty delights, and none so
violent as hunting; the house where they then kept court was a large and
ancient house belonging to an Nobleman, built square of stone, standing
rather upon a flat then a Hill, for the highest of the ascents was scarce
sencible. There ran behind the Garden, and Orchard wall, a sweet Brook, on
each side whereof fine and enamiled Meadows lay, showing their finesses to
each eye, in this place Selarina took delight, and here walked, but she was
with-drawne a little from the Brook, and plain, to a little hill, which had
some few trees to grace it self withal, and help others from the scorching
heat; a voice to this place invited her, whither being arrived, she found two
men in Shepherds weeds, their countenances spoke for them, that they were not
borne to that estate, yet their complexions showed that they had not been
curious to preserve them selves from the Sun, but followed their fortunes, or
choice, as men ought to do any profession they take: they were not so young as
it might be said, they had want only taken that life, the ripnes of their
years took away that suspicion, for they were toward forty, so as judgment
to content them selves, or discontent one might see had brought them to it;
they were together when the Queen first saw them, but they seeing her soon
parted, one as if flying company, the other remaining to yield account of his
going. Selarina drew near to the Shepherd, who with low reverence welcomed
her. She demanded many things of him, he gave her true, and witty satisfaction,
at last she desired to know the cause of the Shepherds shunning her, he
answered that he did the like, when he discerned any company, being urged unto
it by a violent melancholy, which would not permit him time for recreation, if
any but himself came near him. She asked the reason. He replied that secret
was his friends, and therefore besought pardon, if mine own said he, I should
be happy in having such royal ears to give hearing to my story; she still
urged, and so much, as he was forced to obey. Then Madame said he, since your
Majesty will have it, I must yield, one's Princess having power to search all
Subjects hearts. This man my companion, and my self, were sonns to two of the
best men in this Island, he was called Sirelius, my self Procatus, we were
bred together at School first, after we went to the Court of your Lords
Grandfather, where we lived, and in good reputation, he meri^ing all men's good
oppinions by his own noblenes, and excellent parts, my self I think for his
sake was respected, expecting something in me, who was friend to so much
worthiness. At last he fell in love with a young Lady, the only daughter of her
father, and mother, a great marryage she was likely to be, but the true riches
he sought, was her love, answerable to his affections. She was very young,
having so few years as her Parents were loath she should hear of a husband,
yet at last his deserts, and store of friends brought the marriage about, and
some honors were given to the father in requital of his consent. The Lady
grew on, and the time of marryage came, which was solemnized by the Kings
command at the Court, where great tryumphs were, Masks and banquets, and such
Court delights, never man with greater joy received a wife, nor any woman
expressed more comfort in a match; but where such violence is, seldom is their
love lasting, for within less then two years after the marryage, whether his
fondnes ran to Icalousy, or her youth, and love to change gave occasion I dare
not judge, but disco^tents grew, and disliks of all sides spread them selves,
the father took part with the Son in law, the Mother with the Daughter; to
that extremity this ^lew, as no fire flamed or sparkled higher. Most men's eyes
were upon them, to see whither this would come, and for whom all this storm
was raised; it was discouerd, that this stir was about a young Lord, who
deserved alas not the least suspicion for any goodness, that for himself could
inuit love from any above a common creature, such an one he might purchase, or
she, because he was a Lord take upon trust to find more then promised, his
pride was such, as he would loose rather then beg, his ignorance such, as none
that had understanding of worth would or could accept, his uncertainty such, as
he was always making love, and his fortune such, as he was still refused, and
his insolency requited with scorn; yet of this fine Gentleman my noble friend
was mistrustfull, his wife I must confess carrying a little too much respect
to the other, and yet on my conscience it was more out of her spirit, that
disdaind to be curbd, then extraordinary liking of him, and that often is
seen, and proves the way to make truth of mistrust. He forbad him his house,
and her his company, she refused to obey, if by chance she might meet him.
Her Cabinets he broke open, threatened her servants to make them confess;
letters he found, but only such as between friends might pass in complement,
yet they appeared to jealousy to be amorous. He was so distemperd, as he used
her ill; her father a fantastical thing, vain as Courtiers, rash as madmen,
and ignorant as women, would needs (out of folly, ill nature, and way
wardnesse, which he called care of his honor, and his friends quiet) kill his
daughter, and so cut off the blame, or spot, this her offense might lay upon
his noble blood, as he termed it, which by any other men must with much
curiosity have been sought for, and as rarely found, as Pearls in ordinary
Oysters: but what time chose he to execute his fury in, but before her husband?
whose love though cracked, was not quite broken, nor so much crushed, but that
he held his hand, which with a Dagger was giving her a cruel and untimely end,
yet a little scratch he gave her just on her heart, which otherwise had lain
open to the disgrace of an unmerciful and unworthy father. She cried out, the
husband held his wife, who poor Lady was ready to fall under the weight of
unkindness and danger. It was a strange sight to behold a father incensed for a
husbands sake against an only child, and that husband to be the shield of her
defense, from whom, if at all the wrong was to rise. This at last with much ado
was appeased, and a seeming content sprung out of these blusters among the^,
the Lord left to his pride, wherewith he pufft himself up, and was filled with it
like a dropsy, or a blader blown with wind: the quarrel was taken up too
between them, and easily might it be, for my friend could not by any means
provoke him to fight, chosing rather to give satisfaction by oath, and promise
never of seeing her more, and to be tide to any conditions, then drawing his
sword. Matters thus pacified, God blessed them with a son and daughter, after
which she died, leaving them as witnesses of her love, and to speak for
remembrance of her after her death. A widdower he continued long, his children
bred with much care and affection with the Grandfather; travel he did both out
of his own love to it, and employment from the State, but all this could not
root out the aptness of his disposition to love, so as he fell enamoured of
a beautiful young Lady, daughter to a great Duke in Romania, whose perfections
and years called at eyes to admire her, and his to be her Vassels. With much
suit and means he Courted her, employing all his friends to his assistance of
gayning her, she was not allowed the greatest liberty, but affected it as much
as any, she saw how brave his former wife had lived, and in what liberal
fashion she might also with him continue, these were sweet motives to a great
mind, and a low estate of means, where honor called for plenty to supply
what she was endued with. Her father was against it vehemently, and shut her
up; but these courses prevail no more with a lover, then to increase loves
force in fetters, as any Creature for keeping close, grows the more furious
when liberty comes: and so did her love grow to that heat, as whereas mild
persuasions might at first have been acceptable, now nothing but marryage will
content her, which so much gained in my friends breast, as he vowed she should
have what his fortune would allow her, and himself a loyal and affectionate
servant and husband to her. This was agreed on, and they married with such joy
as none can express but lovers, who meet with equal affections, and so lived
sometime; but now three years being passed, the heat resonably cooled, other
passions have crept in like Mothes into good stuff: and discontents have
risen, so as he has left her attended on like her self, means to the height
of his estate, and all things according to her own mind, himself only
retyring to lament his misfortune, living to out live her love as he fears,
although I am confident of the contrary, and took his life likewise on me to
divert him if I could from this course, which I trust I shall do, and have
prevailed thus far as he has promised to wear this Summer out only in his
sorrows, and then to return, but company he will not yet admit of, so as I
fear when he come abroad again, he that before was the most absolute fine
Courtier will be a new learner in that Art, but let it be as it will, so he
come forth of these woods, and plains, put on Court apparel instead of this
Sheephards coat, a scarf for this Scrip, and a sword for this hook, and I
trust we shall be gallant once more, for my part I am tired with rural mirth,
and passionate ditties, I had rather hear a horse neigh, then all the
Sheephardesses in this Island sing; quarr^lls have also risen in our absence as
I hear, all which will breed ill blood if we stay out, wherefore I pray for
return. The Queen smiled at this Story, thinking how fit it was to be
compared to the grave Suter they had left at the Widows house, and how likely
such a conclusion was to happen, which some says did afterward fall out of
their great discontents, but again concluded with love, and more love then
ever had been before, at least in outward show, so as these stories may be
called one. Selerina left the Sheephard entreating him to use his best means
to comfort his friend, and to carry him back to his wife, which she de^ired as
a woman, and he premised to perform. To the Court she returned, meeting the
King as he came from hunting, to whom she related this discourse, Antissius
knew them both, and resolved to call them to the Court as soon as he returned,
for he had ever loved them, and then had employment for them. The Progress
ended he returned again to his first welcome, where he did find his amorous
servant a fortunate man, wanting nothing but his Majesty's presence for the
whole consummation of his blessing, which was concluded by his marryage before
the Kings going thence, he assisting at the wedding, and thus was he happy in
having what he most coueted. To Constantinople the King and Queen soon after
went, where Selarina was with all joy, and ceremony by her dearest loving
Antissius crowned Queen, living as happily as ever Queen did. Antissia, and
L^cenia came, only to visit her, the other stayed, and attended her daily in
the Court, being chief of the Chamber. Parselius with his Dalinea, being got
into their own Country of Achaia, once more remembered the sweet, and pleasant
time they at first inioyed, when Parselius grew a lover, and she as passionate
a receiver of his affection; they called to mind many more passages, as his
sadness, and parting, yet neither of them they stuck long upon; the cause, one
not desiring the remembrance since for that occasion, the other for fear of
offending let it pass, nothing appeered before them but content, he striving
for nothing more then to please her, nor she ambitious of any thing more then
his affection: both thus equally bent to love, and satisfaction, happiness must
needs be the end. If she had a mind to go abroad, he could never know cause to
stay him from accompaning her; if he liked any sport, or pleasure abroad that
she chose to please her self withal, his desire was her will, and her will
desire to serve him. Thus was love observed, and served by these, who one day
going into a great Desert, after their manner in that Country to take delight,
carrying Tents where places so desolate would not afford conueniencie or civil
lodging, in a fair plain the Pauillions were placed, hard by a wood, a
dellicate brook running before them, over which was only a ford but no bridge;
there the Queen fished, while the King hunted. As she was at her sport, an
ancient fine woman appeared on the other side smiling, and calling her by
signs unto her, the Queen was at first carlesse of her, but she still
following right against her, calling as she went with her Angle fit for the
stream, she at last marked her, and was so intised as she resolved to go
with her, sending straight for her Horse, and so with some few in her train,
one of her servants taking the old woman behind him, rod into the wood, and a
great while in the Desart-like wilderness, till coming within a place thick,
and scratching, full of bushes and thorns, catching as longing to hold her,
and so into a little round place, green as fresh grass could make it, and as
circular as those places feigned to be made by the Fairy company to dance in,
she leaped from behind her guide, and coming to the Queen besought her to
do so likewise; she obeyed as led by Fortune; then alone, save with the old
woman, she went into the thick, from thence into such another little round, in
the midst whereof was a Stone, white as white could be, a Ring of silver on the
top whereby it seemed to be lifted up; the Queen looked on it, and admired it,
when the old woman bad her lift it, she seeing the bigness thought it
impossible, yet as come by her desire she would not disobay her will, wherefore
lifting at it, she easily took it up, and then appeared a rich, sumptuous, and
brave Staire of stone, carved and guilt with gold. Those Stairs she was to
descend, which she did, entering then into a delicate fine Gallery, as curious
and costly all on Pillars of Gold; out of this into a Garden, such as the
perfectest was described to be, thence into a Tarras, the railes, pillars, and
all of the same continued richnes, out of that into a large, and spacious Hall,
the inside for ingrauing, and curiosity like, or surpassing the others, the
very Benches, and Thresholds being pure Gold, the walls enriched, and adorned
with pre^ious Stones. In the mid^st of this, or rather at the upper end, was an
Altar, or the proportion of one, six Candlesticks with wax lights in them upon
it but not burning; a Book in the midst lay open which she took up, and
reading in it, instantly a delicate sound of Music was heard, and then
appeared an ancient grauefull old man speaking these words.

Great and rightful Queen of Achaia, blessed be your days, and happy may
your issue be; know from me, that you were here foretold us many years ^ince,
to witness which: this book shall give you understanding, (taking that on the
Altar, in his hand) but till your own, and by your self chosen Lord come, I
must not discover the secrets unto you. As thus they were in discourse, a
strange noise of several sorts of Trumpets, and other wind Instruments were
heard, whereat entered the king Parselius, who hunting was brought by a like
train into that place. He beheld her, and she him, but as two Statues, set
with their eyes one upon the other without power to speak: so stood they,
admiration filling them as they were but wonder. The old man thus said, since
my Lord the King is now likewise present, I may lawfully go forward, and
fulfill the charge left unto me, which has lain in my hands these many
years. Your Grandfather brave Queen, had a Brother named Distantes, he was a
brave, and valliant Gentelman, as this Kingdom ever knew, but his misfortune
was to fall in love with a Lady, wife to another man, whose deserts especially
for love and truth to him, (worthynes above all to be prized) merrited what? so
much love as was in him, (and that was as much as ever man carried, or suffered
for woman) could demand, and she had such requital from him: he had loved her
before her marryage, she had likewise dearly loved him, and gave so lively
proofs of it, as he was made possessor of what was most desired by him, and
the other only made a color for their loves, losing what was by marriage his
due, but the others by the right of love, so as he was the right Husband, the
other the servant that had but by stealth, Distantes possessing freely.

This proceeded, and she was with child, the good man rejoiced at it, she was
heartily glad, and the Prince thought himself blessed, who at the same time
also had his wife with child, who dyed in childbed, leaving a fair and
delicate daughter as years after manifested^ his Mistress had a son who were
brought up together, the Prince desiring her as a friend to bring up his
daughter, having by that a fair occasion to visit her whom he loved more then
any other, or himself which is easily to be beloved, since himself, he, nor
any lover will spare in comparison of love to the beloved. These children
continually nourished, fed, and conuersing together, did breed, feed, and
discourse affections by this means, growing like trees incensible yet to
perfection, and flourishing: such roots they had planted, as could not without
perishing both branches be decayed, yet time made them fearful, by reason
that she was so much greater, and above him; in her it made her love the
stronger, thinking it an honor to her, to advance by her favor a man fit in
worth, though below her in dignity, the other being above all degrees. One day
she was in the Garden by a delicate Fountain, combing her hair, and braiding
it into seueall breads, tying at each end a delicate rich pearl, he came
near her enough to behold her, but not so near (for his own happiness) to
hinder her, or make delays from so delicate work, with which she knotted,
and tied up his heart in as many bonds as her fingers made plats, and wound
them at last all round to crown her victory, and his bondage.

When she had done, he went to her, she with smiles and pleasant discourse
welcomed him, with such sweet and familiar affection, as had him boldly sit by
her, take her hand, ki^se it, and so discourse of love: so far he proceeded,
and so willingly she embraced his desires, as she yielded as far as chaste
love did warrant, promise of marriage passing between them. This continued
till the Prince having provided a fit marriage, for her, came and propounded it
unto her, little imagining what had passed between his children: glad he was
to see their loves, which nature told him was necessary; but not (alas) the
least misdoubting the mischief committed, til she seemed so nice, and
unwilling to be persuaded, as he grew offended, yet feared not such a
misaduenture: then did he set his Mistress, her husband, and the youth their
son to work with her; they all promised their helps, except the young man,
who modestly excused it as well as he could, confessing his want of power with
her, and unwillingness to offend her^ This did not dislike the Prince, who
went away hoping for all that, to win her in time, which he was resolved not
by force to purchase; but if by persuasions not else to compass.

The love increased between the two young ones, as warmth in the Spring: but
the misery at last grew to their loss; yet gain in this kind by sad
discourse making them know the ill they had run into, and the sin they had
committed, which by this chance happened unto them. The Lady, Mother to the
youth, and Gouernesse to the Princess, began to discern they loved, then
doubted where, then guessed, and so grieved, and more was perplexed, not being
able to find a way out of this maze of trouble, nor an end to wind the skeine
upon any bottom, but destruction and ruin: she could not find a friend to
trust with it, to reveal her suspicion to her beloved, not being sure of the
ill, she thought it not fit, since a just tax might be laid upon her
judgment, and an incurable wound given to him to think of the offense, and
deep, though deserved punishment on him and her, whose sins had bred flowers
to poison themselves with all, and brought forth joys to be their overthrows.

In these perplexities she remained till a night or two before the Prince was
to come again, in the evening, or rather so late as might ^e called night;
she went into the Garden to breath her complaints in the sweet and silent
ayre^ but what hour can be so late or early, that (if profitable) Lovers will
not find convenient?

She had not walked done Alley, but in a close delicate covered walk, she
heard a whispring which made her stand still, and not unmannerly, but only for
knowledge sake listen who they were, when against her will, (as often that
happens) she heard these words. My dear, said one of them, what strange
mistrust is this, that lately is fallen into my mothers breast, to make her so
curiously watch, and as it were strive to deprive us of our loved meetings? Can
she be unkind to her own son? or thinks she that I am not worthy of
thee? Can she which cherished me with such hearty love, enny, or seek
undeservedly to bar my chiefest blessing? the earth holds not that treasure I
prize like thee, the Heavens but in themselves can give me such content as thy
presence fills me withal: joy is not but in thy sight, nor am I ought if not
with thee, bar me thy conversation and imprison me; let me be banished
thee, and murder me; let me not enjoy thee, and let me perish in perpetual
accursednesse. What shall I say? I cannot say I am worthy of thee; then should
I flatter my self, and wrong thee. I cannot think I merit speech for me; yet
since thou gracest me, why should any else envy or grudge my fortune? As thou
art matchless, so are thy favors; and I am blessed, enriched, and enobled
with them: why then should purblind chance or fond policy hinder me? tricks of
state, as being tricks, are to be condemned; I am true, thou excellent; I
loyal, thou affectionate: what Crocodile treason should howl to bewray, and
destroy our contents; weep not dear eyes, with that he kissed the tears,
and like Nectar drank them, corsiues to see her shed them, but cordials as
shed for him, and he permitted to take them. O my dear life, cried he, tear
not my soul with thy sorrow, let me not see thee mourn unless I may with
that dye: he still kissed her, I know not whether more molested with her
pain, or ioyed with that liberty of kissing, she at last kissing his eyes
which likewise accompanied hers in showers. My joy, said she, why make you
these questions? may there be any accident that can hinder our loves? our wills
and desires, it is true there may, but be confident no further then absenting
can gain; for never shall I be in heart and soul but yours: the least thing
that belongs to you is dear to me, how infinitely dear then is your self;
mine eyes are not so dear, my heart so well beloved (but that you cherish it)
as is your sight and dearest self to me. I think not of a fortune which is
not with you and for you, I dream not but of you, I joy not but in you, nor am
I ought else but your self metamorphosed wholly into you, and your love.

Then sat they down by a delicate Fountain at the side of that walk, there
they wailed again, there testified their woes in sighs, and tears: at last
(cried she) but if my Father take me hence, will not you forget me? shall
not absence work in you? Yes (said he) in admiration of thee, to think how
chaste, how excellent thou art, how happy I was in thy loved sight, and so by
that, see more and more cause always to lament: other effects when absence
brings to me, let ruin follow, or come jointly with it; if room be found for
foul forgetfulness, let me of Heaven be vuremembred; thy beauty printed in
my heart, shall still before my soul call thoughts of love: mistrust not me
sweet life unless thou mean to martyr me, I can love none, I nere loved any,
or ere will live to think so shameful and detestable a thought, as change in
love procures: no, I was borne just, I am just, and will dye just. She wrung
his hand, and these am I, cried she, they then embraced, with which the Mother
came unto them, who seemed like a great shower in harvest, grievous to their
covetous desires of being by themselves: the Moon shined so as all things
appeared as clear as in the day. They were in innocence ashamed to be heard
and found alone, yet love made them only desire that, affection in a Mother
made tears to fall for fear, and love for him; respect unto the other, as
child of him she most loved, made her weep also for her; both brought
passions, as for both she suffered, she could not speak, her breath was
stopped, and she was choked with kindness, she fell upon their necks as
they together kneeled unto her, their eyes did say they feign would speak, and
they begged for them, hers promised will to grant, and sorrow to deny; all
three were in an ecstasy, not knowing what to do, speech failed, senses lost
their use, and they were like the Images, that in resemblance of the substances
implored good, but dumb as they were, gained little, and thus did they remain
till he spoke. Madam (said he) the bringer of me forth, the kind nourisher
of me in youth, and till this time; undo not your first work, nor make me
wish I never had been borne, which I must do if I be hindered from inioying
this sweet Lady, Mistress of my life. You have tenderly bred me with affection,
and can be as tender over me still, then let my sufferings in love be as the
dangers you sought to prevent, and so protect me still; I did amiss in
beginniug without your knowledge, but she loves me (Madam) that speaks for me,
and therein am I richer then in Kingdoms, if else where; she wishes what I
seek, and desires what I wish; you have charity to strangers, let not your
son be a greater stranger to yo^; his life lies on it, and so yours; if you
do hold me but as dear as yo^ did lately protest I was: you have power and
means to effect this. What can you desire of my Lord that he will not consent
to? what entreat of her father that he will refuse? we both petition, both
beseech your aid, you may assist and save us, else let us faint and perish in
dismay. The Lady then grew more passionate at his speeches, then before the
plain suit, and confession being delivered by his own tongue, desirous she was
to help, and succor him; but assured she was it lay not in her power; nor had
she use of speech, only tears freely served her, so as if one would dream of
the ancient changes, one might think she had been instantly ready to be
transformed into a Fountain; her silence gave the young Lady opportunity, who
thus discoursed her passions. Mother, said she, to my perfecter self,
disdain, no nor refuse the petition of my heart thus made, while that is
prostrate to you, hear and grant my suit, use the power of love that no
question you have employed by your own sufferings judge mine, and for them both
command redress; Love dares not deny you, who can, and have in my hearing
given proofs of his respects due unto you, let him now show what is your ^ure;
and allow it you, but employ it to our profits; seeing thus before you, the two
purest Lovers his power ever touched, or^ brought under his obedience; behold
our pains as yours, for so they are since jointly his, and pity mine as hers,
bred by your hand, like a Lamb, till seized by the wolf of Love, which
(though fierce) yet kind and sweet are those claws that hold me fast to him;
he has told you your power, I can but beseech your favor, and beg it for
love, and your own Love's sake; think how miserable the death of Lovers will
be, and how unfortunate when caused by a mother, and a friend to love? A friend
to love, cried the old woman, and a mother? It Is true I am both, and they baue
brought my misery. O my children how miserable am I in this? I might (did not
my own guiltines condemn me) think my self, and call my self your mother,
but my shame makes my sorrow, and your loss must proceed from my infamy;
grieved I am in soul to tell the truth, for you must and cannot choose but
hate me, when I shall say, what yet my heart, loath to let me speak? my eyes
will waste themselves in streams before I can v^ter it, and my soul rend when
I must say, you cannot be blessed in love, your woeful and sinful mother
being the cause, and root of all this mischief. I blush in soul guiltiness,
I mourn in the knowledge of my sin, I am more faulty then ever woman was,
and a mere stain to my sex: you cannot, my dearest heart, enjoy this Lady,
nor you (sweet Lady) have your love: I am the Monster that keeps the gates
against you, and the Serpent that deserves death from you for double injury.
Then kneeled she down; pardon me, cryde she, you perfectest and best,
though most unfortunate Lovers, I am the wretch that has undone you and my
self; your love's unlawful, I am the shameful cause thereof; your loves
cannot embrace, I am the Diuorcer; your wishes, if granted, would be
wickedness, and I am the ground brought forth this poison; wonder not, but
shun me as the Pestilence. I am not to be nearer suffered then the Plague; for
such I am to you, to you (dear two) the life of my poor life: the reason of
all this was love, and your love by this sinful love is crossed; you are,
poor souls, deceived and couzened; turn your affections now to chaste and
just desires, for you are (ah that I must say so) Brother and Sister, children
to one man. They, miserable souls, could not look upon each other, the ground
was their highest object, swell and almost burst they did with grief, their
senses shut up as in an Apoplexy: at last, all rose from the earth, into which
they rather would have gone, the old woman to her chamber, where falling into
passions her weakness could not sustain: but she with heart afflicted, oppressed
with shame and insufferable woe, dyed, being found in the morning in her bed a
pitiful corpse of an afflicted mind. The youth and his Sister wept, and sat
that night together wringing their hands, as their hearts and souls smarted
for this harm: In the morning, for fear of spies, they parted their misery,
being to show themselves as careful as before, their honors and the Parents
lying on it, though their woeful fortunes might have given liberty, which was
their greatest Prison, liberty they before did covet, now had, is only hated.
Sobs and groans were the words they said farewell withal, their eyes so
filled with clouds of tears, as if yet pity were had, not to let them see
their extremest misery, but through a scarf of love shed water. The noise of
the Ladies death was soon spread abroad the house, coming to the young Lords
ears, who with much sorrow, which he dissembled not (his supposed father
being absent) took order for her burial, himself soon after went thence
privately, like Caunus from Biblis; yet the comparison holds not clearly,
because these Lovers were chaste and pure after the secret was disclosed.
Wandering about, he happened on this Desert, and into a little round place in
proportion, like this you came from, where you descended the stayres: She
followed him, or fortune whither she would guide her, who was so kind as to
bring her to this place where they continued some short space, life not
allowing too much sorrow, to such unfortunate though worthy creatures, but
would, to assist them, loose it self, parting with them, leaving their bodies
clear relics of spotless truth, and crossed affections malice. They saw
each other, and bewailed their chance, but to favor each other, came no nearer
then through those bushes to behold their woeful selves, as in Mooneshine
glimmering, and as cold: At last, as they had justly at once begun their
loves, they justly at one instant died a little before meeting, pity not
letting the one outliue the other; or love covetous, would receive both parts
at once again into possession loath to spare any part of such perfection. The
bodies by divine providence kept safe, the woeful Prince, Father to them, by
destiny brought to them, having searched, and all his servants for them. Under
a great Cyprus Tree which grew where the stone is now, they lay intwined in
each others arms, dying with as chaste, and in as chaste embracements as they
had lived; her groans of death called him, who had as little life, yet some
thing more strength, finding her end coming, he kissed her hand, and dying
lips, then tore some of those branches down, honoring again poor
Caparissus, wearing his Funeral memory, making two Coronets, one for her,
another for him self, and so Crowned, but most with loyal spotles love, they
ended, leaving no stain but misfortune to touch them withal, and much honor
to be rendered to their loves.

The Prince finding them thus, fell down on them, and as it were breathing his
last likewise into them, but he was to out live them, and to grace their
Funerals: he therefore rose commanding that stately Tree to be cut down,
whose pride had been such, as not to let any tree grow within the compass of
his arms; of the body he made a Coffin, into which with precious balmes he
laid the bodies as one; then did he get the rarest workman, and by his
directions make this place, the coming to it he would have this way, as most
unusual, and strange as their lives, the place else on the other side would
have suffered another, and finer coming to it, though painful, the ascent
being so high, for indeed, it was a place as cut out of the maine Rock, and
wrought into the heart of it, all of one side having light in abundance, but
he had, as it were, made his way in the midst thereof, as if to pierce the
Center, as that part in their hearts had been sealed.

When this stately and sumptuous building was finished, he went into Chios,
where dwelt an ancient and rare Magitian, this man he made his instrument to
fulfill his intent, who did so well perform it, as he accomplished what Art
could frame; my self, my Wife, the old woman that conducted your Majesty and
my Son that brought you hither, were here established by them; this book
he gave me to deliver to you when you came, and the time appointed when a
woman should reign here, loving as well, as much deserving, but more happily
enjoying to her comfort, which is your self. I was commanded to tell this
story to none else, nor deliver this Book, wherein this is more exactly
expressed, and yet all this in the presence of the King your chosen mate

These I have observed, and now have but two things more to do, which are
these, to show you the Tomb; then opened he that place which seemed like an
Altar, wherein lay the two Lovers adorned as they dyed, with the same Garlands
whose honor was to continue green still, as hopeful of their memory. The
candles he then lighted, telling them that he and his we^e ordained to do
that office, while any of them remained alive. The King and Queen lamented the
Lovers, pitying their miserable estates, and unfortunate adventures, giving
large allowance to the place to maintain lights for ever over them, and the
keeping of the place to them and their heirs. All charms were now finished,
and yet the memory of the charm of such a love never could be but extant.

Thus Parselius and his Queen were made happy with the rarest accident of
love, and the richest Tomb Love in the world had, they returned with all
content, honoring above all other places the Tomb of Love, returning soon
after to their settled Court. Rosindy, Meriana and Perselina having left the
Court, and returning with their best and conuenientest speed, passing through a
part of Achaia, which was pleasant, but slightly inhabited.

Perselina by reason of the heat, entreated them to stay a while in those
places; they agreed to her demand: Rosindy and Meriana like two new married
people for fondness and affectionate kindness, walking in the woods which
were but of small height, though thick, being like Copsies all of Birch, save
here and there an Oak would show himself in pride, and peremptorily tell
them he commanded; in this place the King took great delight, so as they sat
down where fearnes grew, as if of purpose to be their cushions, and then with
sweet and loving discourse they let the time steal away, delight increasing
while that little addition of age grew on them unfelt or thought on.

The delicate young Lady went by her self, her thoughts far higher then that
solitariness, could have raised them, had she not carried a more aspiring and
brave mind continually about her then ordinary women, or the most
extraordinary had, her fortunes were so far short of her spirit, as she
suffered that to descend, to wish an increase, and sufficiency of estate though
she bought it with her marriage, and so grow subject to an Hnsband, which,
though loath she was to do, yet rather then want means, she would venture
her limits of absolute freedom; yet such her conceit of her own judgment
was, in which she erred not much, as she thought she should do well enough
with such a Husband as she would choose for free living; many had been named,
but one only she liked, who had but one bar to hinder his desires, which
was that he was a stranger, and no Macedonian; besides, of that Nation which
in former times had been enemies, though neighbors; and this was the chief
obstacle, her Father a man of infinite spirit, and having had her by the widow
Queen of Macedon, after whose birth she soon dyed, he thought none worthy
of her, especially, an Achayan, but acquaintance with Rosindy, and seru^ce to
Parselius had brought him so near, as she resolved in her self, if he
remained constant, what ever came of it to be his wife.

In this resolution she walked up and down the Cops, plotting as many
several ways to compass her desires as plentiful love could furnish her
withal, at last an highway being through the Cops, and she heard by that way,
heard some coming down toward her, and one to sing this Song.

FRom a long way, and Pilgrimage for Love,
I am returned wearied with Travels pain,
Not finding ease, or those vexations move:
First, to my soul they are, where to remain
They vow to setle; then alas, can I
Think of a rest, but travel till I die.
When she had finished her song, Perselina standing among the bu^hes by the way
side saluted her, who was a delicate, but distressed creature, in habits of a
Pilgrim, but carrying a countenance that said for her, she was noble, her
train half a dozen servants of all kinds, two Gentlewomen, and four men,
all on foot with staves in their hands, bare footed and carrying their own
provision in baggs at their backs, she only had hers carried for her. When she
saw the Princess (who in apparel Green, and among the bushes appeard like
Diana when in greatest perfection) she stayed, and with a modest salutation,
according to her estate, answered the honor she had received, by her saluting
her. The Princess desired her to rest her self a while with her. Madam said
she, then should I hope for that which yet I have been denied, rest never
knew I any, one stop or other crossing me in it. I would not said she, have you
stand upon the word, but agree to my desire and meaning, which is, that you
should stay with me, and so a little desist from travel. She humbly gave
thanks, but said, her habits admitted but iourneys. Eat and drink said she,
you must, let me but have that time, and lawfully may I demand it, since your
song tells me your Pilgrimage is finished. Madam said she, in a kind it is
indeed, but not perfectly, for till I find my self in mine own home, I shall
not think it done. Are you far from that^ No indeed, answered the Stranger,
within a league, and this my ground. Perselina again urged, and ciuillity made
her consent, so as thus she proceeded.

Madam, said she, to whose commands can be no refusal, say what you will have
your servant, my self, perform for satisfaction to your will, I must and will
observe you; come in said she into this thick, and there let us confer. She
obeyed, and willed her servants to attend for her in that place, she attending
Perselina. Both in the thickest part as close as their sufferings were to
themselves, they sat down, the Princess desiring to know the cause of her
trauell^ She with as much desire of keeping that s^^ret, which must be known,
answered thus: Alas Madam, cried she, what torture do you put me, a poor
vassell to your authority, and love, to rehearse that, which every word
strickes to my heart like daggers; has my first sight given you such, dislike
as you purpose to molest me? O^ my little conversation such distaste, as you
resolve to afflict me? Otherwise, why should you lay this weighty Cross upon
me? Not to bring any of these, fair Pilgrim, (said the Princess) but to know
exactly what I already mistrust; led to it by your exellent speech, and manner;
then said she, like a woman I will be pleased with your commendations, and as
fond of them, follow your requests, I will yet by your favor reserve some
things to my self, and they are these, my name and Parentage, only I beseech
you let me call my self as I appear.

Poor Pelarina your creature lived in this Country when it was in that
happiness, and innocence, as those days were, when Satir^, Nimphs, and
Shepherds lived free with one another, fearelesse of harm^s; Wolves, Foxes,
Sheep, and Lambs, fed, lived, and were as one Flock, nearer in familiarity
then Goats are with the tamest now. Plenty grew for men to reap, and they
reaped but what grew for them. In this time I found my self made, me
thought, unto love, and I did love, accursed be this Grove for it; for here,
O here, I lost my liberty, here I walked, and discoursed with my self how
happy I was, and all these parts that lived in that liberty where none felt
straitness from the best man to the lowest flower, not so much as that the
Cowslip looked one whitt yellower in suspicion; that the Rose, Violet, or
Lilly, were sweeter, delicater, or beautifuller then themselves: all were good
companions, and strove but for society without suspicion, the true and perfect
golden age was then, when riches consisted in truth, since skipt to the hard
cold Iron where rusty disq^iets eat, and spoil, devouring like Vipers their
own kind, and now does love imitate that ill.

New come from hunting, in a Castle not far hence, I first saw my first, and
last love; he was tall and slender, not so curiously shaped, as extreme
lovely, and amiable, his hair brown he wore in good length, his apparel
hansome, not to curious, nor so neat, that discouerd not, he rather affected
ease, then fond Courtly vanities; he was neither forward to discourse, nor
sparing, when he was acquainted to honor the company where he was with his
wit, which was incomparable, and so pleasing a way he had in conversation as
made all hearts and ears his own; what perfection was in all that sex he
had united in him, and yet to this excellency as necessary to make him perfect
man, he had the most usual humous of change, and falsehood; woe is me that I
must say so, but it is truth, and that can neither blush nor look pale.

He came thither with a Lady he seemd much to respect, and so much, as I was
angry, and envied her, before I knew I loved him, but that gave me cause to
think it, and that thought to believe, and belief served to condemn me, to
the chains. I was young, and some said hansome, but that was not it I hoped
upon, desert I meant should be my means, and on that ground would I lay my
foundations, which proud so good, as I gaind his love; and truly may I say so,
for he did affectionatly love me, and cheerish me as his eyes, which never
were so well pleased, as when looking on me, where he said, and ioyed for it,
that he saw as pretty expressions of love, as women could discover.
Visitations he caused to be between his brothers wife and my self, and why
but to the end of our meetings? Were I not forced to tell this, the more to
show his disloyalty I would not mention it; both to avoid doubt of vanity,
and austentation, and my own torment to say this was, and should I leave it
out, how should you know what you desire, which is truth, and my story? This
conversation wrought a love, and untied affection between us two; so as we
were, and are called the true loving women friends, a rare matter (as men say)
to be found amongst us.

Iourneyes to our several kindred and friends we made together, when feasts
were made, we three were invited as not to be separated, and so much his love
and mine was noted, as none would at any time in Coaches, or at the Table
divide us, love being a thing so beloved, as every one loves it for it self,
in what place soever it be found to be settled: so much I saw it marked, as had
not my entire affection been so violently reigning, I might my self have
been nice to have it so public; but what did I heed save his love, the
embracing of it in equal flames as given to me, and so we gave the world
cause to admire us, rather then after their fashion, to accuse, or scorn us.
If he were missing from Court, or any place where he had occasion to be, to
me they would come for him, and then was I best able indeed to yield accoumpt
of him; but what shall I say? All things grow, and live to change, not my
self, but am changed from youth to years, from beauty to decay, from blessing
to all misery: what I or the World held strange but yesterday, this day makes
us know, and taste; Plains are where Woods were, Sand only, and barrenness
in the fruitfullest places. Asia is barren that flowed in much plenty, Cities
wasted, ruined, and lie desolate that were the Earths glory, and for mine own
particular, I am undone that once was highest in Fortunes Paradise.

What shifts would he make to hold us together, or if a day absent to meet
again? How unkindly would he take the least look of mine, if sadd, lest it
had been to him? And how kind was he to me, never quarelling, if not, that I
was not as he thought fond enough, or some time less fond of him then I was,
which I never knew, nor could, unless I would, or were able to leave loving my
own soul, for little less dearer was he to me, or yet is. One night he came
unlooked for to our house, but not unthought on by me, nor vnd^sired by him:
How did he joy in his countenance to see me, an^ I rejoice to have his sight? I
was struck with so much content as I was spee^hlesse, he blushed with kind
affection, I with agreeing love, all Supper our eyes fed on one another
looks, writing our minds in them as with Diamonds in Glass, and no more
permanet did his prove. After Supper he would needs (only to have me with
him nearer then he thought he could in the room) go walk into a Garden to
hear the Nightingale, I obeyed with as much willingness as he desired, and so
calling the Lady, my friend, with us, we passed away the time till night called
us to rest, but a little rest took we, for our Chambers being near, we sat
and discoursed all night in a little Gallery between the Lodgings; the morning
coming we parted, but like the first part of it with dewye tears, though but
for some hours as we thought, yet it proved longer in a kind, for ma^y weeks
passed, before we could enjoy so much happiness as that night we had, yet
were our eyes blessed with each others sight, and our hands made happy with
being linked within each others sweet, and softest prison, loving so much the
bands, as they would almost in kindness hurt, with hard, but kindest
holdings. O me, how blessed was I then, and now how hapless? Hunt we did
together, and Hawke with such pleasure as drew envy on us ^oth, but what did we
except our own contentments value? He delighted in my company, I would have
dyed but he should have had it, nothing thought I on but to please him, my
study only bent that way, nor took he liking to any thing more then how to
delight me; thus agreede, what happiness did we live in? Favorites in their
Princes eyes are not so great, nor happy as we were. This continued (alas, why
use I that word continue, having experience of the contrary?) but this blessing
was for four years space; then, I know not what Devil, but the great one
himself, Change, put in a spell, and wicked power against me, bringing Beauty
and Youth in excellency before his eyes, to make me excellingly unfortunate;
he was caught with those fair allurements, and I tied to mischief by that
taking.

Woe is me, I lost all my comfort, all my joy by that; but at last a greater
ill took me, for another got him from us both, who had long sought it, but
while he held fast to me, she could not gain him, beauty was the untying of my
bliss, and wit her loss, yet I had the fairer share in loosing that, a fair
creature was my vndoer, like the fortune of Paris, she a terrible harm to have
her joy, and hopes bereft her by a wit, which gaining discovered her want. But
I pitied her, though she had robbed me, as if I should have compassion of a
Thief that another causes to be executed, who he had before stolen from me,
and was forgiven: so I forgave her, and was sorry for her, who long outliued
not her loss.

Was she a married woman, said Perselina, when she dyed? She was answered
Pelarina. Did she much love, said the beautiful Princess? Like Women that
love the ordinary way of love said the other, whose affection, greatness,
gifts, or such ends entice, not the virtue of love it self; after her death
he used me a little better then before, as if again casting his eyes on me,
for love, or use. Why, said Perselina, could you have patience to endure him
after he had used you so vildly, as to change? Patience Madam said she, yes,
and a greater wonder, in me affection continued strong toward him, and does,
though his Mistress called it dullness, when I told her, good natures would
have given it the title of patience, but I excusd her for it; to witness my
patience, I have been with her in companies abroad, nay at her own house, and
seen all what I had once enjoyed given to her, my eyes looked not on as if
blear'd, my hand untouched as if poisonous, hers kissed, babies looked in her
eyes, smiles flowing to her, frowns plentifully showing themselves on me. I
have hunted with them, I have gone (as one day I must needs remember above the
rest) a Fouling with them, where so much favor I received from him who was
once mine, as she being a little parted from us to shoot at a Foul, he went
as fast from me as he could without running, while his scorn rann to me. An
other Gentleman was there, and none else, he was of his Family and kindred, and
as true lover of me, as I was of his cousens, but him I as much shunned, and
rather then go softly with him. I went apace after my flyer, the way of
necessity leading me to follow my disdainer. When they met, with what love did
he take her hand and kiss it? I following vnmarkt, but weary, and dabled like
a hunted Hare in Winter, tired with my disgrace, and weary of my wrongs,
sweeting with passionate pain, and durted in despair, yet loved I still. A
bracelet he wore of her hair braided and tied about his left arm, a piece of
it one day hung out, I saw it, and grief with it, and yet a little joy took
me when I discerned he knew it should not be seen by me, and that he had so
much shame, or pity as he turned from me, blushd, and put it up out of sight,
I would feign have said, your new favors too much discover themselves, but I
feared, or rather was loath to displease him; at first, he was a little, or much
more strange, but after he grew sociable, and I continued humble, finding fault
with nothing, but embracing all small courtesies, or the looks like them as
welcome, and so used them; yet so much it was marked, and I discerned my loss
publicly noted, as I grew sensible of it, and so a small deal wiser, for
needs I would be free.

I tried all means possible, but what force can peruaile against an
impregnable strength, or steely heart of Faith, and love? Yet I used all
isntrumental means that could be thought on, I looked off as often as my heart
could let me, I looked then when I could not choose, with resolution to
dislike, saying in my self, have I suffered this for you that scorn me? I
would feign have found fault with his shape, his fashion, or any thing, blaming
my self for doting on snch an one, but these would not serve, for the more I
looked, I saw more cause of Love, gazing though to death; willingly I absented
my self, and in absence, had got so much heart, as warranted me to see him
again, and have my desire of carelessenesse; I ventured, assured as I thought,
but couzened I was merely; for though I came in like a Giant swollen with pride
of my own power, and assurance of my conquest, the true Knight Love came armed
against me in arms of fire, and truth, I yielded, and could but like a poor
miserable Poet confess my self in Rhyme, thus finding my error, with the
bliss (I confess) of seeing him who I found I could not but love for all
other resolutions.

DI^ I boast of liberty?
'Twas an insolency vain:
I do only look on thee,
and I captive am again.
And so indeed I was, for I never knew love stronger in me, as then of
necessity it ought to be, contending with judgment; multitudes I could
rehearse of his favors, and disgraces to me, of his mistresses fears, and
smiles, but to what end? All can but show I was blessed, and am unfortunate,
my face and life say that for me, only this appertains to the Story.

I at last was again made believe he loved me, and I was (ever in that a
wavering religious) glad of it, proud of it, ioyed with it, and utterly ruined
by it.^ He was in show as he was wont to be, I saw it, gladed at heart for it,
others told me of it, I was like a Bird nice, and blushed, yet received it
willingly; ad so, as I had cause, after finding his neglect again, to grow
with shame, and tears to repent my credulity, and to manifest it with my true
penitence. I therefore took this Pilgrimage upon me, which now I have in a
kind ended: I have seen Hiersalem, confessed my sins, asked forgiveness, and
remission, which I hope my desire of pardon, though not my merits, has
purchased me, and thus I am returned?

But are you free from love, said Perselina? In troth no Madam, said the other,
I love him still, but I hope it is now but charitably, yet I am afraid to try my
self left I should find my spirit like my self, frail. The Princess smiled
at her pretty innocent confession, thinking that she had learned so truly to
consesse as she could do no other, yet in that she was deceived, for unless
she would, she could be silent. But was your journey and vow wholly made
upon this, wherein you were faulty but in virtue, or belief to it? Mixed Madam,
said she, I profess, and mixture made it, I did so far believe, as I
granted what I may lawfully repent, and necessarily also, but Love my ruler
commanded, and I obeyed. I could in my self say, why should I yield, I must
deny; but when I saw him, my soul flew to him, he but asked, and I yielded,
yet this I repent not, but a vanity I had about me, which because once liked
by him, and admired by our Sex, or those, of them that I durst make my follies
seen unto, a fond humor of writing, I had set down some things in an idle
Book I had written, which when he saw, he thought touched, or came too
near, or I imagine so, because in some places he had turned down leaves, and
only at such as he might if he would dislike, and were those I thought he
would take notice of, yet he neither did by word nor writing, not honoring me
so much, who was his slave, as to find fault, or to seem pleased. I was me
thought left to conjecture, and the further I went in such conjecture I run
into fear and sorrow that I had offended, yet I can clear my self if I might
come to answer, but I cannot, not could, so as finding my self thus
miserable, I took my Pilgrymage willingly.

What could you say to offend? In troth Madam, said she, I discovered how
near I was to be an ordinary lover after loss, which is to grow neighbor if
not inhabiter with hate; and some two Poetical and neat expressions I made of
it, yet I came off, though hurt as it seems in the action; but let him make
the case his own, and I doubt he will rather cut the cord then untie the
knots: but I have done, I forgive all, and wish he will also do so with me;
I pray for him, and truly without faigning I love him for all this, firmly,
and shall do; let him use his worst in scorn, which he has prettily
practiced: I think he can neither show, nor, assure my self, study that
cruelty which can make me hate him; nay, in earnest leave loving, though it may
be I have erred in saying so, boasting rather then having such strength; for
which, great love and you dearest beloved, pardon me, I ask it with a
repentant and cleansed heart, and (if it please you) remember what cause you
gave; if not, nobly forgive. Perselina found in her self she should never come
to that excellency of constancy; wherefore she admired, though scarce commended
her richnes, in that plenty, and fullness, and being called by Rosindy, left
the constant Lady to her virtuous vows, and religious truth, who lived the
rest as she had begun her days in fervent zeal and affection.

The King and Queen with the delicate Princess arriu^ng soon after in
Macedon, where they ruled both with power and love, loved with fear, because
they feared they could not love enough; the young Princess soon after took
her mind and former resolution, marrying her self with her chosen love: some
business there was before it could be effected; but the effect came happily to
their own resolutions conclusion, and peace, the Nurse of love was among them.
Philarchos with Orilena going for Mytelin, met a Ship riding, or rather
floating, for unguided she was, vnrul'd, and vnman'd, tumbling up and down,
like the Boats boys make of paper, and play withal upon little brooks:
only a Dog, to show some live creature was in her, came on the hatches, and
walked with much gravity, like an officer or kind of watchful servant, he
bark't not, nor fawningly sought aid, by leaping, whining, shaking his head,
or wagging his tail, or other such dog-like expressions, but looked soberly,
and entertainingly, like a steward on the strangers: the Prince came and laid
the Ship aboard; when Philarchos saw none but this guardian, he leaped into
her, and some of his Knights with him, the Dog looked on them, and as one
might say, discreetly went before them, (as their guide) into a Cabin where a
Lady lay on the ground weeping and wringing her hands, all in mourning, and
more sorrowful yet in her illustrious expression then the mourning could show
mournful, and therefore she more then their habits mourned. She only looked
up, and cast her eyes down again, and her face against the ground, crying,
Alas, have I not been miserable enough? must I in this assured quiet be
molested? can I not have a restfull dying time allowed me? shall not the Sea
nor a castaway Barque have power to let me dye in peace? then yet endure
more, and know thou must (poor woman) dye, as live in perturbation. Philarchos
went to her, took her by the arm, and gently lifted her up a little, using
these words: none he^re purposes to molest you, we are, and will be rather
your servants then disquieters, by chance we came to succor you, and now by
resolution will, if you please to accept of it. Sir (said she) your noble
disposition appears in this, and God (I hope) will reward you for it, I am so
lamentable a soul, and so unable to think of ability (though gratefulness
rules me) as I am only able to pray for you, and that I will not fail to
do; but Sir, you must leave me, for I am appointed to dye, and by him that
has power to do it, if he had but only commanded me, without leaving me to
this assurance. There is no necessity (says Philarchos) in obeying you in
this, who though condemned (as it seems) by a power over you, gouernes not us,
nor can, though soueraiguize over you, subject us to his law: therefore I will
not obey him nor you in this; fortune brought me fortunately to the finding
you, she shall likewise bring you to life, for we will save you, you are our
prey, we will not in complement let you destroy your self, it seems you are
dead to those condemned you, you may yet lawfully live to us that redeem you,
howsoever, be confident we will conduct you hence and place you somewhere
where you shall be safe from a certain ruin. That will more ruin me (cried
she) when I shall be barred from obeying him whom I must ever observe. What
obligation binds you, said he: Sovereignty of Love, said she, and loyal
subjection to his will. Ties, said Philarchos, fit to be durable, and
affection endure, but else a bargain is not to be made only of one side, you
are free when he breaks: to dye, said she, never to live disobedient to him
who is my Lord.

The Prince knew such things as love and loyalty were or had been, yet he was
willing to divert her from those courses because running to peril, and
therefore he replied, these were the expressions of purest zeal in love: but
love was never ordained to be such a monster as to destroy, if hurt by change,
trial iudicially should help, not harm directly pursue. She sighed and
lamented. He comforted and disputed, at last took her up, partly by will,
partly by force from the ground, and carried her to his dearest Orilena, who
kindly, like a brave noble Lady, welcomed her: her Dog would not part from
her, but still attended her, lying when she sat or lay on the ground at her
feet; when she stirred, he followed (seruant-like) her motions.

When she was out of her Prison, which should have been after her death, and
burial, like one come forth of a fainting fit; she looked about and star'd
like a Hawk that had been hooded when she comes first to sight again: a
decent and yet Princely salutation she gave to Orilena, which was repayed her
with the like, and much courtesy. Philarchos commanded to put off from the
other Barque. Two of his Knights that were brothers begged her, and went away
in her upon an adventure with his consent, while they sailing toward Mytelin,
gained so much of the sad true Lady, as she brake silence so long as to
deliver this discourse. My native Land (though unnatural, because such cruelty
was in the Country) is the sweet Island of Nycaria, my parentage of the best
blood, next the chief Lord and his child^en, and of his house I am, though not
of the same name. I fell in love with a young Nobleman, much esteemed, and as
any, honored for his bravery and courage; no spirit in the Island excelling
his, if equalling, no wit comparable to his; nor no Nobleman endued with more
virtues, as learning, horsemanship, and what else can be required in such an
one, whose noble descent answered or demanded these excellencies.

He loved me like wise as passionately, and fondly, which at last was and is
my overthrow. I lived with my father most commonly, but oftentimes I went to
the Court, more (I confess) to see him and joy in his presence, then to see
any vanity there; yet I both saw those sports the Court affects, and are
necessary follies for that place, as Masks and Dauncings, and was an Actor
likewise my self amongst them, though never affecting them further then to
content him I loved, who I saw well pleased with all: many banquets I was the
cause of when we met, and to my Fathers he ordinarily did come, a strict
friendship between them: never was he, if absent quiet, if still one or other
of my servants were not with him, nor was I without some of his perpetually with
me; not that I thought or could let so wronging a concipt come into me that
he mistrusted me; but out of sincere affection to have ever some of his
followers with me, to give occasion when I durst not else to speak of him:
none need be kept to make me think of him; for my thoughts never strayed
from him, or staid one minutes space.

At my Fathers, (which was as fine pleasant and sweet a seat as any in that
Country, there ran a delicate wanton River, twining it self into every dainty
meadows arms; not deep but fit for Dianaes Nymphs to have used: in
imitation of whom, my self and Sisters often went into it^ this River came
favorably to grace the place, close under the Orchard wall: A back way we
had through the Gardeus, out of which we went, and there bathed our selves: an
old Gentleman, a servant to my Lord, watched us, and so neatly carried his
business, as we never doubted him: but not being able to continue truer to
himself then to us, he told me of it, describing so truly all our fashions
(being eight of us) manner, words, and actions, as I knew he spoke truth, and
(said he) had it not been for one thing, I could have wished my master in my
place. I asked him what that was? He said because one of us kept her smock on
them, he would, he was sure most have wished to see, I knew her whom he meant;
for none but my self did so, and privately I said in my heart I did believe
him, and wished it too, so it had been by the like chance.

This old man whose thoughts were young, and toung-nimble in such a kind,
loving the remembrance of what he was then past, at his Lords next coming told
him of it: He straight wished his fortune. So did I, said he, wish it for
you, and told my Lady (for so he called me.) What, said she, answered my
Lord? Nothing, replied he, but smiled, and walked on. He came imediatly to
me, telling me what he had heard, and urging me to know what I thought when
I smiled. I truly confessed, and he as truly lovingly took it, loving joyful
thankfulness shining in his eyes. Twenty of these passages we had, and as
many several Ladies, and of as several complections and dispositions almost
fell in love with him, in that time he loved me: thousands of curses I had
among them; but as long as I prosper'd in his love I cared for none of them,
but sped (me thought) the better, rather wishing so still to be prayed for,
so I enjoyed the righter way. Such pretty testimonies he gave me, as I must
have been (unless I had been unreasonable) forced to be assured of his
love, showing almost contempt to all others.

I was so, and with all faith embraced and cherished it; so modest he was
besides, as I loved that in him, and saw it there a greater virtue then it is
ordinarily esteemed. Proofs I had of it, for being alone, he never was
uncivil, nor did offer what I as willingly consented not unto; yet at last my
father finding (as easily he might of any, having been a great Lover) that I
was entirely his; he coniecturd, that I could deny nothing, therefore would
rather seem to trust him, or else it was to bind him to him, if any such bonds
can serve, or prevail where true love is. As one day when he was to go a
journey leaving him with me, farewell daughter, said he, and the like to you my
Lord, and I pray you be honest. He blushed, what did I then? conjecture noble
Lord and Lady, truly I was heartily ashamed; and yet soon got courage again,
when I remembered we were not guilty: but the word honest made me think of
the contrary, that thought moved my blood in^o my cheeks, and stirred occasion
in him to discourse with me of it; so as I fear that did more harm, which
should have prevented, if but in thought then before was thought on; for
believe it, it is a dangerous matter to be forbidden a sweet in love, as I
have heard it credibly said, and know it in some kind exercised; but we did
fulfill his desire, and he found us as he left us, chaste, but affectionately
loving, which all forbiddings could never have hindered or lessened, my father
himself even envying us, for his love, (though to many) had never brought him
so true an one as I was.

This lasted as long as it was possible for a man to be just, and longer then
(except few) any have been; and yet I think truly he had slipped sometimes,
but I knew it not, or had no cause, out of want, to me to find fault: But
this fault came on his side, how easy was it for him then to take exceptions,
who before would be readier to answer for me, or my friends, then our selves;
yet he did not absolutely in two years give over his former fashion, though
(alas) his love was dried, and like Roses by me kept for the color they
had, and sweetness, the remembrance still held, but withered, and not
themselves to be known by sight.

At last such a quarrel he had against himself (as if for ever loving me)
as he grew discontented in my company; snapt me up, if I aduentur'd to
speak; frowned, if he caught mine eyes on him, and withal plotted disgrace,
carried himself to me, that his brother and his own friends said it was too
much. I bore it, and truly for all that left not loving nor grieuing for it;
yet at last I got so far, as my sorrow expressed it self, not so openly in
show, though as near in acquaintance; for it was an household guest with me.

But so it happened at last, that this Lady he had taken, and cast me off
for, loved another, which was to him discovered; he liked it not, yet made no
show of it, because he had said, when ever he mistrusted his love he should
hate her, and that might he, for here he was assured, or might be: but
other reasons held them together, yet it gave him leave to look on me a little
again, and to me those looks were like the sweet euenings wherein the Lark
delights her self so much, as she flies into it, never satisfied with the
delicacie, till at the height she is forced to retire, bidding that farewell:
So did I, for I was forced to part again from that; but in that half day of
bliss he took occasion to speak of old matters.

I was as willing to that as he, and so we discoursed temperately, in the
end, he said, for that cause, said he, (speaking of a frivolous and vnwaighty
business God knows) I lost you all, You had left us, said I, before that
time, with that he sat a little nearer to me, and (it seemed) would have
proceeded, which I wished, for I made no question then of satisfying him if
ever we came to speak: but one of the wicked Ministers of my overthrow, as
destined to spoil me, had such a spell, as in absence she had a spirit able
to ruin me, sent for him, he went, but promised to come again. I attended,
as resolved never to give cause of dislike; but he was stayed, and I in a
mighty fret returned to my lodging. Another time he took occasion being
invited, (which then he must have been, if he were desired at my fathers,
which before had been his ordinary table) to a dinner my father made to many of
his friends, and he esteemd by him so, he was solemnly invited. He came, and
at dinner sitting by me, fell into discourse of love, and of women's
inconstancy, as if I had been guilty: I, knowing my innocence, spoke like
that, and so understood him not in show.

Then he fell to other kinds, yet on the same theme, and at last he came to
say, how poor Paris was used for choosing well; for (said he) Juno because a
Queen wonld be beloved. Pallas, a boystrous woman would fight, if not chosen,
poor Venus only loved, and for Louessake wan the Aple, thus was he punished
for love. I think not for that so much (replied I, by your Lordships favor)
that he was distress, but for being false before to Enona. He said no more,
and by that I saw he understood me; yet after again he had another Ierke at
it, but in another sort speaking of love, and returning to their former loves.
There may be hope then, said I. In Troth little, said he: for if ever, I shall
come tatterd and torn, not worth looking on. Yet then said I, if to me you
come, I will welcome, and cloth you. He looked pleased with me for yet, it
opportunity gained by the other, lost by me, held him as ships tossing in a
Haven, but winde-bound. Well, I grew desperate and indeed heeded nothing that
befell me; in the conclusion I spoke something, or something was said for me,
which brought me under the compass of the law, as far as life came to. I was
condemned, but he though an Officer, sat not on my Judgment: some thought out
of pity, yet I took it not so, for his presence (in such a cause, wherein I
protest I was altogether wronged) might have aided me, at least his sight would
have comforted me in the condemnation, so much I loved him; but he was absent,
and my misfortune so present, as I was adjudged to death; yet the Prince of
Nicaria being merciful, would not take my life according to the Country Law,
but after another fashion would have it as he meant; for he censured me to
this, from whence you have relieved me.

When I was to be put into this Tomb, as was meant me, the chief Lords and
Officers came to see me (according to the Prince his order) committed to the
Sea, into the Ship they put me with meat for three days, no man nor creature
with me but my Dog, which would not forsake me, and they allowed with me, not
for love, but hope of harm to me; for my Victuals they imagined he would have
share of, and at last devour me, being one of the fiercest in all the
Country. But in this they deceived themselves, for since we came aboard, which
is now eight days, he has satisfied himself with very little, and never
troubled me. A Fisherman came by, and would have had the Dog, he entised him,
but his faith to me (more then I ever found in man) his distressed Mistress,
held him with me; he threw him then a large piece of meat, which though
stale, was good enough for a Dog, he took that, and fed a little on it, but as
if weighing his estate, left part for other times; the man also gave me
something, pitying my case, but not daring to help me, left me.

Among the Officers that came to my living execution, my Lord was one, though
he stayed not to see it performed, but came among us hastily, stepped to me,
whispered, and bad me farewell, and be like your self (said he) resolute, die
confidently, and cherfully, this will comfort you, and honor your end. I heard
him, but could not answer him, only I looked upon him, and with tears told
him, his censure was harder, then the Prince his, for I loved him, the cause of
all my misery: but he scarce looking on me, as hastily went away again,
leaving me to the favor of the Winds his constant Rulers, to the Seas fury,
and Fortunes hazard, yet all kinder then he, have joined for my good: and I am
saved by you brave Princesses, yet would I beseech you again to let me obey his
commands, which because his, I would do.

They refused that, yet so near they came to fulfilling it, as they left her
on a Rock in a little Island with an old religious father, there she remained,
and spent the rest of her days in prayer, her Dog still garding her, which at
her death brought her (who out-liued the old man) to have a Christian burial
by his howling and crying, calling passengers in, and buried her, but could not
win the Dog from the grave, but there he died.

Philarchos and his dear held on their way for Mytelin, where with joy, and
feasts they were welcomed, and lived ever, till their ends happily, but
Philarchos thought his end the crueller, because fair Orilena was taken from
him, desiring to die together. The King of Bulgaria with his brave Queen, as
sumptuously as their own minds required, and their minds were no lower then
such Princesses should be, but as much higher as ambition, and all the
dependances of that folly could carry them, and that was high enough to make
them above judgment proud; such Coaches, Liueries, furnitures for horses were
never seen before, yet they but poor as her Majesty esteemed them, who
surely would have been contented to be starued, so all she had touched had
been Gold and Diamonds. In this magnificence they took leave of the King and
Queens in Morea, and so took their iourny toward Bulgaria, they only riding
in one Coach, two other went spare, one for each, the train so richly provided
for, as ordinary Kings and Queens, would have been well contented with that
furniture, but yet these were scarce good enough for their servants.

Out of Morea they went without adventure, and so passed, till in Liuadia this
fine accident befell them. A young Gentleman attended on by six Pages,
apparreld in coats of Grasse-greene Velvet, laid with gold Lace, and twelve
footmen in the same colors, all with Plumes of green and yellow in their
Hatts, the young Gentleman in a suit of those colors imbroidred with Gold, the
trappings for his Horse, and all furniture answerable, came toward the most
glistering troop of Bulgaria, then being instructed accordingly, he presently
allighted, and on foot presented himself to the Queen, humbly making a
reverence to her liking, the like he did to the King, then he delivered these
words.

Great, and most happy King enjoying such a treasure, as having the worlds
riches composed in this inestimable Jewel, the Earths admired Star, and man's
wonder, your Queen, I am sent unto you both; but if I fail in performance of
my message, blame your own glorious aspects, that take from me the true
ability of speech and boldness, a Messenger should be armed with all; but who
can without trembling speak to the Gods, or touch the Sun, if he descend
within reach? no more can I speak to you, whose Majesty's strike me dumb, or
make me (to say better) faulter like an imperfect Schoole-Boy saying his
lesson. They heartned him wi^h joy, flattering pride nourishing their proud
hearts, when he proceeded. Pardon and grace (said he) from you so heauen-like
creatures gives life with speech to me again. I am sent from the Prince of
Liuadia my Master, who hearing of your coming this way, does desire the
blessing I his Vassaile have already enjoyed, humbly beseeching you to honor
him with your royal presence in his fathers Court, an old Prince, but good,
where he is within two days to have a Triumph, by means of many strangers,
and happy he is to have such an occasion at this time to be the fitter to give
entertainment to such persons, he earnestly desires not to be refused, and I
pray I may not be sent, but with the soules-like-comfort of bliss, which is
your grant. The King was the finest speaker in Court language of the World, and
so complemented, as the youth had enough to do to return half his good
language to his Lord; for the Queen, she soon had granted to show her
beauty, and scarce could hold within the bounds of expressing what she felt of
joy, knowing she must be admired, but at last said, she would obey her Lord,
and accompany him to wait on his Prince; thanks she returned none, for she
esteemed this honor but due to her, and knew it should be offered her.
Forwards they pass, (...) within the ^ight of the Court, where the Prince, and
many Noblemen attending him, met them in arming suites, and conducted them to
the Court: but yet there wanted, though all this honor was done, that whereto
her Pilgrimage was made, her Saint was not among them, and yet improperly that
is said, for she respected him but for ado^ing her; it was but early in the
day, being scarce four in the af^ernoone, wherefore the Prince asked her, if
she pleased to go first into a rich Pauillion, raised from the ground at one
end of the Lists, and see them practice, for that was their hour. She was very
willing, yet stayed till her husband with curious words and phrases had
consented; so they went in, from whence at the other end they discernd the old
Prince and Princess, with the grave Lords with them; then did the Prince arm
himself, and the Prince of Iambolly, as not thinking of the good fortune to
see her, but as if by chance led thither, came into that place to arm. She
would needs go forth, and leave the room to him, but so she did it, as al
eyes might see, good manners, no^ will to leave him, made her offer it. He as
courteous would rather (he said) arm in the field, then be so rude. She blushed,
and smiled and ^imperd, and all to avoid expression, expressed what he
desired, and she granted. Her husband was gone with the Prince, and so saw not
this encounter. Well, he at last got another room, right over against that,
and armed, came down into the lists his Beauer open; but to see how he stood
gazing on her, and she in what perplexity she was, to the window she would
come, and a while stand still, look on him, he stare on her, then retire; red
with content, and yet finding fault with the hea^e as that the cause of her
distemper. Many Ladies were there likewise to see the sport, who lost not that
better pastime in marking her, yet took no notice of it, lest offense might
follow, but shrewd wits there were, that after made pretty mirth at it. To the
place again she would come, and look though over them, and see in spite of
seeing, and as if whether she would or no take content. The Prince came also,
and stood there beholding as the rest did, while some others ran; at last
came a great man of that Country, and desired one of the Ladies there to bestow
a favor on him. She did so; Now you are engaged (said the Prince) to run
well, else your favor will be shamed, and you for not better maintaining it. I
will do gallantly, replied he. The Iambollian then cast his eyes crauingly
toward her, she only lickt her lips, that when they returned to sight, they
might look like cherries after rain, red, and plumpe, and totterd her head,
which made a feather shake she had on it. He with that it seemed understood
her, and lifting up his Bases a little of one side, as if to take out his
Handkercheif, showed her his points were of same the color. Then she smiled,
and he most joyfully put down his Beauer, and prepared to run, casting up his
eyes first to her, from whom he hoped to have gained strength; but she was so
weak in bearing passion, as again she had retired, and so often she did it,
and so tumble her self up and down, wallowing in pleasure, and insufferable
content, as she was in such a heat, as that angered her, because she thought
she looked not well, having too much color; then did that heat her with
chafing, so as between those two fires of love and pride, she burnt so much,
as all the Ladies warmd themselves at her fire, and rubd up the remembrance of
their old passions, so as it might have been dangerous, and the heat so great,
and spreading, as might have fired many hearts not to be quenched again.
Fairly he ran, and fairly and friendly she beheld him, which made him never
weary, nor would he have given over, but that the Prince went in, and night
grew on. Then came he up to her, and kissed her hand, which she told him by
her love bestowing eyes, she willingly yielded him. Stay she did as long as
was fit, and after most in that place, wishing I think to have been his
Armorour to unarm him, else she might have gone with the rest: at last away
she went, and was by Lords, appointed by the Prince, conducted to her
lodgings, where she was visited by him, and her servant.

The next day the Iusts in earnest was to be, against which, how gloriously
was she attired? Lyuadia never saw such a star for brightness. In that place
she would needs again sit, and there she was placed, where she might best
see, and be seen, the windows being so framed, as the Knights heads on
horseback were as high as they, so as conveniently they might behold and
speak, as if together, a brave advantage for Lovers. But how did the neat
King of Bulgaria take this? truly discreetly, as he was a most discreet
Gentleman, setting aside a little vanity of self love, which it may be so
well concurred with his Ladies disposition, as that tempred him, being as it
were of one nature to suffer, and agree with her. Fault it was certain he
found none with her publicly, how they privately did, let them speak that
know; fondness appeared to open show, why should any inquire further? But be
it so, such a passion well acted again, and by such delicate creatures, for
the excellency of it would get liking, even of her Husband sure, who loved
curiosities so well, as he must like that, though curiously he might discern
he was touched in it. But what then? he might joy in it thus, it was his own,
as she was.

Many great Ladies, and indeed the greatest of that Kingdom sat with her in
the same place, but not so much as looked upon by her, nor why should they
expect it? she was a stranger, a Queen; more, a beautiful Queen, and most,
a most proud Queen, she therefore claimed it as their parts to observe, and
mark her, who had business enough in her self upon such a day, in such a
place, and such a presence, to heed, and study her self. How if any part of
her hair had been out of order, her gown rumpled with turning to them, her
ruffes and delicate inventions disorderd with stirring? had not the least of
these been a terrible disaster? Yes, and to her a heart grief; who would wish
so sweet a soul as she to be sad or troubled? especially since trouble as such
a conceit of any displacing, or disordering her finenesse might move in her,
would stir her blood, and make her complexion not so exact, rather sure
should all civility be laid aside, and the contrary excused, then beauty
should suffer; and this, if the cause, who will that loves their faces, that
regards their habits, and their servants love, blame her, who neglects for
these all others. This I take the Queens case to be, and thus I think I
excuse her, especially being known to love nothing but her self, her Glass,
and for recreation, or glory (as some accounts it) to have a servant, the
Prince of Iambolly, whose greatness and finenesse made al well, especially to
lovers eyes. The old Prince invited her and the King to a feast, where roially
they were feasted, and she as magnificently carried, and showed her self, her
servant ioyed in it, and then looked on her, as poor people do on pranckt up
Images: she sometimes casting a look on him, but not too many, lest such
favors might make him surfeite, and so be harmefull to him, an excellent care
in a careless Mistress.

The King of Bulgaria, and the Prince of Iambolly were very great and familiar,
in so much as they would whisper, and embrace one another, the Iambollian
assuredly more, because those arms had intwined hers, then for any affection
to him, wishing sure he might as freely have done the like with his wife, who
how kind soever she might be to him in private, had he offered to touch her
publicly, that touch had burnt his fingers, so commandingly, and peremptorily
did she order, and rule his love, as adoration showed to be all his ambition
and gain, her graces being but still to hold, and draw him on in hope, rather
then to consent, and satisfy him, for he once satisfied, she was sure to be
left, men desiring but their ends, and with them conclude that love flying to
another, as from one work done to begin in another place.

Stayed creatures, and luckie they that put confidence in them, and of any this
Prince was one that least troubled himself with constancy, all women were
pleasing to him, after a tall woman, a little one was most pleasing, after
fair, brown, white, black, all came to his staidness welcomly, and variety
he had sufficient, for many refused not, nor was he nice to demand of more, so
as he had plenty, and was plentiful in love to them; yet here he stayed a
pretty while, because it was thought hard to win her, or impossible to gain her
love, for her so excellent beauty and greatness, but most, because as yet he
had not surely compassed his desires. At dancing, because he would not give
offense, he seldom took her out, but his eyes still attended on her, and when
he danced, she more heeded that dance then any; she was good her self in that
exercise, and gained great commendations in Lyuadia. The time being come for
the breaking up of the company, the King and Queen took their leaves of the
old Prince, and so did all the other Princes, many being there assembled, as a
place much honored, and he a Prince admired over the World, for judgment,
learning and goodness; beside at that time many came near him from the
Enchantment. The Prince of Iambolly would needs attend the King of Bulgaria
(being his neighbor) home to his Court, but his dainty wife was the
Attraction; his company was embraced and also the Prince of Thiques, who was to
return to his own Country, a fine young Gentleman, and who had in courtesy
conducted the Lady of Rodes after her cruel fortune in the refusal of
Polarchos, and being entreated by the soueraignizing Queen to make relation of
her end, having heard part before by Pamphilia; he did it in this sort. Love,
or rather the ill flower of Love, which you most incomperable Queen can know,
neither being so much in power above the highest reach of his passions, which
are rather your Subjects then molesters, so ouer-ruled in that miserable Lady,
as after Polarchos was with all his curstnes gone, she took her way also, but
whither she much cared not, nor looked she for any company to attend her,
those that came with her, dispearsed some one way, some another, leaving her,
as her fortune had done, in all dispaires, for who ever alone indures one
mischeife? I took pity on her, and although my way was contrary, and I then
almost at home, yet rather then she should be distressed in such a kind of
want, I offered my self, and she, though not very willing to company, accepted
of my service; most I think, because she would have some body to discourse
withal, and well had she happened on me, for she could say nothing against
men, that I had not as much, or more to speak against women. She could not say
Polarchos had been cursed, or unkind, but I cold have said my Mistress had been
false, and so most cruel: if Polarchos left her upon cause, mine forsook me
causlesly. She could not complain, but I was near railing, so as with all the
wranglings, and dislikes of both Sexes we trauel'd, yet the better I ever had
of her, (though in loss) for she was forced to confess here is was the fault,
and with that so often done penitently, at last agreed with me, that Man was
the constanter of the two uncertainties.

When we had pass^d the Gulf of Lepanto, and the neck of land between
Morea, and Achaia, that we were got again to Sea, into the Archepelago, in one
of those little Islands we were forced to stay, for she grew so weak, what
with travel, want of food, (for she would take no sustenance,) and her
perpetual sorrow which wrought incessantly in her, so as she could no longer
without rest sustain, nor so, but to her eternal rest, for there she dyed
desiring me to bury her there, and then to let Polarchos know her end for his
unkindness, to whom she gave her Country for due she said to him, beseeching him
to accept of it, as the gift of his repentant Love, making so loving an end, as
Cupid was surely forced upon that to pardon all things past, and place her in
one of his highest ranckes of his Court. Just as she dyed came thither an other
Lady discontented likewise, but in a marvelous strange sort; my ears were now
open to all complaints, and complayners, wherefore I gave her the hearing, who
discoursed in this manner.

I was borne said she, in Pantaleria, bred in the service of Urania, now Queen
of Albania, the most excellent, and famous of women, I was with her enchanted
in Ciprus, and in her service, being Daughter to her supposed Father; I fell in
love with one Allimarlus of Romania, a man fit for a greater woman's love, but
my fortune it was to win it, and surely if I flatter not my self too grossly,
I deserved it; but indeed I did commit some faults, but what were they? only
out of Love, and fear of loss from whence they proceeded, such errors were
rather to be commended then condemned, but where love fails, a little matter
is made great, and nothing pleases when distaste is taken. I cannot truly for
all this, tax him of much inconstancy, yet so far he was faulty in it, as I
know he had a Lady in chase, whether his love to her, or gratefulnes in him to
her had been the cause of it, I cannot guess; I was tormented in soul
withal, I cried to him about it; He mildly, and coldly enough told me my
suspicions made my disquiets, and bad me be satisfied for he loved me still,
and thus I could gain no more of him, nor durst I urge, for intruth besides
love I was in awe of him, fearing his very frown, though on others; no Lover
ever longed more for the sight of his love then I did still to see him if absent
but one day, yet when I saw him I was in pain, and knew not scarce what I did,
I was so desirous to please, as I was amazed, and distempered not being able
resolutly to call for any thing, to eat any thing, to speak any sense, blush,
and then look pale, and be in such a case, as many days after scarce
recouer'd me. Lord, how have I accused my self for it? but what remedy?
passion ouerruled my judgment, and when I should have been best, and looked
best, the very extremity of my love, made me worse then ordenarily I was; then
that troubled me, and trouble made me worse, so as I was often times in a
straight, whither I were best be a means to see him often, or let his
visitations, and meetings be by chance. But when I considered he might take
that amiss, and so I should run into just dislike, for our parts (as women
Lovers) are to observe, so as I continued like one ready still to go to
execution, condemned, but repriu'd; more then I studied how I might gain his
love sure to me, of purpose I went, and made my self so dear with the Lady,
who had sure testimony of his liberal affections, as I was made of her
Counsel, and used in carrying the business so, as her honor might be saved,
(for she was in that kind in danger,) I took such a course, as she was
delivered of that care: this I did, conveyed away by diligence all suspicion, I
know not what name this service merited me, but all things were as they should
be, and so secretly as no mistrust at all was of her.

The Lady in troth I could not but so much love, as I was sorry, as she
likewise was at any time to part with me: in the face of parting, me thought I
saw my Allimarlus his leaving me, whom he loved, and after I accused for
slighting her, as much as I did before for being restrained in this manner to
me, for desert should ever merit reward in what place soever, but men care no
longer then their desires be answered, said she, otherwise I had bin better
rewarded; I have had cause to give trial of my faith, and he has found it, yet
am but more and more wretched.

When I felt my self with such neglect coupled, (as after I did) I told him
of it, he sat upon my bed side, but awhile gave me not a word, at last he
spoke some few, as drawn by necessity from him, and bid me be careful of my
self, and not bring more harm. I told him I would be so, were it but for that
command's sake, which must be (as his) above all things else most dear to me.

This moved him no farther, not so much as to look on me, but sat still as
if he repented I had ever received such lies from him, although his betrothed
Wife. Some men would kiss their wives when they heard such patient replies,
and almost all joy in it: but he temperately heard me, as not much concerning
him. I was afflicted at it, and did stomach it as much as my love would permit
me, but what auailed it? I carried it with infinite pain secret from
knowledge, suffering what Beasts never do, yet Christian like, I ever strove
to turn my self from violent hurt, but being so great with rage as no longer
able to conceal it, I retired to some land of an Uncles of his given him for
his attendance; there I remained, but being near the Town, I was so often
visited, as it was troblesome to me, and dangerous for my griefs discovery
(for he would have it concealed) I was sometimes forced to keep my chamber, he
desirous not to have it known I was any way his wife, I obeyed, and made many
excuses while he ioyed in my pain, thinking it a brave, and dainty thing to be
such a sole Lord, and free from encombrance, for I durst not meddle, nor find
fault with any his actions. He came also, and would be as ready to jest, as
any to clear himself, for he thought the contrary discovered; I was forced
to be contented, yet with a full resolution to speak with him about it, and to
know why his grave looks, and countenance was used to me. I went to him one
night, but rightly was I served for such boldness, and presumption, for back
I came with so much scorn, neglect, and contempt, as I was almost mad withal,
yet I strove to make no show of it, nor I think did, although I truly
confess I was much disquieted withal, and so netled, as I slept not all the
night after. Could he not said she have kissed me, bad me welcome, and kindly
have used me, but thus? thus to let me return? never more shall he be visited
by me, nor did I come then to inuit him want only, or to crave Lovers reward,
but chastely to discourse of things I could not at other times speak of; yet
chastely or other, all was one, I was coldly sent home, to warm my self in
choler for disdain, nothing so much fretting me as that I staid so long, and
waited on his cruelty, as to practice obedience; Not to offer but when I
should, nor to come vncall'd I was taught, and these things I think I shall
put in use now; I have been here these two Months with some trusty friends,
landed here for fresh victuals as I pretended, though neither confined by his
command, but sent the ship then away; he likewise has been with his Master
the King Antissius, but by this time he will be upon return, and I will not
fail attendance as soon as I can; in Romania, again relieved by his power,
and will. Then did she as one distracted, fall from one passion into another,
leaving complaining, and chafing, and from crying fell to singing, and twenty
of of those passions had she, having profited but little in her Mistrisses
service for loving exactly well, so as little pity needed to grow for her,
unless that one should not long enough enjoy such follies to pass away time
withal, yet in her case she moved more compassion, because greatly
distressed. Songs said the Queen, do often times discover sadness. Not such
said he, for I have been acquainted with passions as well as any, and know of
those kinds of passages. Was she not married to Allimarlus said the Queen?
In Troth said the Prince I cannot directly tell, she spoke not of it much, but
by her words I found she was assured, yet how did she come then to be trusted
by his Mistress? It may be said the Queen, that was before they were married,
or know to be assured, or such a respect there was to be used to her, as she
might serve her for all she was his wife. I know not said he, but that went
very far. No way (though endless replide she) but will be adventured, by a
firm lover, as I have learned lately by discourse with some, and of some,
though I confess I should never be such an one, but scorn and contemn, such
humility. None can expect from you such a harm said he, where benefit is
sufficient, if you grace him with accepting his service, in which his life
should be spent, rather then you in the least feel smart. She liked his
flattery, and he knew it, but very seldom used it, because he was virtuous;
then she urged extremely to know his discourse; he seemd not able to refuse at
last, and therefore told it thus. When I was a very young man, I was likewise
very foolish in being passionate; Love was such a Lord over me, as I did as he
pleased, looked as he did guide me, sighed when he compelled me, wept when
he let me fall into despaires, sonnetted when he inspired me with it, woare
colors for sakes, if he privately told me, I ought so to do, for fond women
loved vain expressions. I could sit a day but to see her pass by me, and
think that time happily bestowed if she then cast a look on me, if she passed
carelessly by, or worse, accompanied with others she showed more favor to, then
to me, I returned molested, and presently put my thoughts into sad Verse,
presented them to her, and if thanks came, I was blessed, and most fortunate.
Thus I lived, spoild good paper with vild Rimes, lost my time, and wits almost,
till I was happily disinchanted by this means. The Lady whom I loved being
told by me of her neglect, counterfeited that she looked strangely upon me, out
of no other end then policy, and afterward privately sent for me many times,
where I enjoyed what I desired, and with that reward Nouice like returned so
contented, as if I had gained a kingdom, and gave her by that means liberty
more freely to abuse me in my confidence, which she did. Another Lady that was
daily with he, and a kind of servant of hers (for she I loved was great
enough, had she been as good) loved me exceedingly well, and (whether out of
that only, or a little malice mixed with it, I know not) discovered to me, that
I was wronged: You (said ^he) keep a business, and make all men see your
passions, bring your self in danger, if her husband hear of it, sigh, and
keep a quoile, while others gain your due, blinding your self with blind
Love against all reason, thinking you are blessed, when you are abused; as
yesterday I saw what an happy man you took your self to be, because while
Music was, she leaned on you: alas, she did that to color and deceive you,
for all that while her eyes were fixed so amorously on another, as would have,
I fear, made you mad to have seen it, and truly it distemperd me, because I
wish you well: she talked, it is true, to a third, who was as well cousoned as
your self, for he thought she favored you with leaning, to have the freer
liberty unsuspected to speak to him, and so smild at you, while he that indeed
had the affection laughed at you both. Leave your fond love, but not loving
her, if you find she requite you, but be not a stale for others gain; open
your eyes, and see her beauty fit to be admired, her person loved; but if her
mind be not answerably white, be not caught like Birds in a green net: I
have truly seen you so much injured, as I cannot hold from telling you, take
it as you please, but one day you will say, I was your friend. When she had
said this, she went again to wait, and I remained pensive, doubting what to
do, till I was sent for by one of my Ladies Chamber to her; there how did she
cherish me, and make of me? my picture she must needs have, because continually
she could not have me, Verses I must needs make to a tune she then had heard,
and loved, for no writer pleased her but my self, so prity, so fine, so
passionat my lines were, and so truly from my heart, that she most truly loved
them.

Then she wrung my hand, hung upon me, I embraced her with the other arm, she
even yielding her self into my breast; Alas, thought I, is it possible this
woman should dissemble, her eyes ouerflowed with love, laboring to show
suffering, for what I should believe. I was amassed, and so perplexed, as she
swore I loved her not, began to lament her self, wept, and cried; O unconstant
men, faulty above expression; then fainted she, and seemed to swound. I
bestirred my self then, being in a room I durst not call for help, lest her
husband should come in, who was suspicious enough: I kissed her, and with my
breath fetched her again. She again fainted, I again revived her. At last,
Ah my heart, said she, can thou be cruel? I vowed I was not; with oaths and
protestations I satisfied her, coming away after some hours a fine deluded
Fool. The other Lady I went to find, to whom I meant to speak my mind, and
chide her for such tricks to abuse her Mistress, with full intent so to revile
her, as to be f^ee ever afterward from her aduising. As I went along the priny
Garden, I saw a man come muffled in his Cloak, stealing as it were along the
wall. I knew the fashion (said he) would not be seen, and the place none came
into but her Favorites, therefore to her he must go, none having keys but by
her permission; there was in that Garden a large Mulberry tree, under which I
closely clapped my self, with my back to it, but face so, as I might see which
way he took; he slunke along still, till he came to a door which opened to a
staire led up to her chamber; there he stood a while, at last a window opened
above, then he hemd, presently came down her excellent unchaste self, opened
the door, and took him in, locking it fast again. I seeing this had the
Spleen, and sweld, yet held on my determination to seek the Lady, though the
discourse must now be altered. Quietly for any noise (except that in my heart,
where there were storms, and all manner of disquiets) I went out of the Garden,
Alas, said I, could not she be satisfied for a little time, but must make me
see my misery? this is double vexation. I passed on, and to my chamber I went
first, there I fell to complaints, and grievously took on, but all auailed
not; I called my self unfortunate, her ungrateful; I accursed, she unnatural;
I bewitched, she the Sorceres: I cried out against my birth, mine eyes, mine
own life, my judgment, my belief, wished I had bin borne an Heritick to
love; all these, and what of these? they made me but still a greater Fool, and
less to be pitied. Then I rose in a chafe, vowed to love her no more, to tell
her so, to let her know her offense and breach in love. This I liked, and
instantly would put it in practice, and if I found him there to kill him in her
presence. These were brave resolutions to dream on, and as well contented me,
as if executed, like him that dreams he has his Mistress in his arms, and
wakes with such pleasure, as he is merry all the day after: so these alike
pleased me, as I was ioyed at heart, and thought all effected, while the time
it should have been effected in, slipped away; which when I found, as by the
evening I gessed, I went up again into the Lodgings, where I met the just Lady
my friend, she had discerned the trick, being wise, and as careful as a Lover
will be, she came to me, I took her by the hand, which was more then I had ever
(till then) done, fearing such a thing might have offended my Mistress, who I
knew something given to that suspicion, makes men see women's love by, else if
careless, what should be thought they esteemed. My Lord said she, you have
been wonderously made on this Afternoon; What think you, was not I extreme
faulty to put any such thing into your head, considering how true she is to
you, and how kind? Can you ever look on me that have thus deceived you? Take
pity on me, sighed I, I am alas ab^sd, and injured, let not your true tongue
be sullied by your self, you are and were most just in telling me, what I
could not else believe; then did we discourse a little longer of it, at last
forth came the great wicked woman, with as bold a countenance as ill could set
upon one, smild on me, saluted all the rest, and came to me, laying her hand on
mine, and after her manner talking to us, I seemd neither fond, nor neglectiue
of her favors. This is well acted, said she, then called she for Music, which
came, and indeed was exceeding rare, songs there were of all kinds, and in
several languages, an hour this continued, or more, then she retird again to
supper, saying, she would come afterward abroad again. We every one took our
own ways, I to my chamber, purposing soon after to depart for my own country
again, my Youth in travel having led me to such folly, which nothing but woeful
experience could bring me to know, or shun; yet me thought I was bound to let
her know her ill before my going, le^t she with continual practice ran too
far in it, and so might at last be dangerous unto her. As I resolved on this,
and was going to her, I met her Lord in a mighty fur^, his sword in his hand,
and bloody; I started at it, my Lord (said I) what is the business? can my sword
or life serve you in any thing? No, said he, I have done already, only sir if
you please call my Guard to me. I went forth and called the Guard, who straight
went as he directed, bringing forth the dead bodies of my Rival, and the Lady;
in truth I was sorry for her, because she had been friendly and kind to
strangers, and whose blood I would have revenged, but mine told me, her husband
had but righted himself. Then came her women, crying and tearing their hair,
them he took and sent to prison, only I got liberty for my friend; and when all
this stir was over, I took my leave, and left the Country, and loving also, for
the good man telling me how he was wronged, made me see her damnable falsehood,
so as he was but the chief of many abused by her, we al his followers, and
alike used; for in the very abusing him, he seized on them, and killed them both.
This (great Queen) is a story scarce fit for your Excellency to hear; but
this is the truth which you desired, and thus you have it; now if men be
faulty, you see women can be so likewise; if we err, your sex will not let us
pass unrequited. The Queen said little to it, but on they went in their
iourny, much kindesse, affection, and respect used, and increasing among them;
at last in Bulgaria they arrived, where at the first entry they were entertaind
with multituds of people to welcome them, the King liked it well, so did the
Queen for the part of humility, but she could not endure their rudenes in
pressing, which she said made her hot, and the smell of the folks troubled
her, whose daintines could not brook any savor but perfumes; with little
patience therefore she sufferd this hearty welcome.

To their great city they came, there they were again met with the chief, and
people, but she was now used to it, and so a little the easelier boar it. Then
the King feasted the Prince of Iambolly, and triumphs were made, which lasted
sixteen days, in which time the servant and proud Mistress had many pretty fine
passages. A hunting they went, he attending her, who sometimes would be fierce
upon it, another while rid softly, as if only to make him learn to ride fast,
or slow, as her pleasure was, but still to be her attendant, it was his
principal lesson to observe. At her coming back to see her ride between her
husband and her servant, what a sight it was? but what a glory to her? only
her imaginations which were above any height of pride could tell; but he must
go now to his own command, a pitiful thing, yet necessary, he could not
dissemble, but showed with a sad or dull countenance he was sorry; she with
Majesty and greatness, but no mirth, gave testimony she rejoiced not, if in
this time he had no strickt assurance of her love, none will pity his
parting: howsoever, she carried her self like a brave and commanding Queen
over her own and his passions. The King brought him some part of his way, then
parting lovingly, and some thought most willingly on the Kings side. The
Prince, with the Prince of Thiques going together, who after, never, or seldom
parted: the King returned, and with his wife lived as such a couple could do.

Leonius and his beautiful Veralinda returning toward Frigia, first going to
Argos by the Kings directions, wherein they met a delicate Adventure, as they
were within some few leagues of the Sea, a Lady on horseback, attended on with
many other Ladies, and as many Knights, but by her side rode one, who seemed to
be the chief, and yet his countenance sad, and melancholy said for him, that
he commanded not himself, how ever he did the rest, his Hat off, freely left
to view a delicate curld head of hair, brown, but bright in delicacy, a fair
forehead; amorous, though then sad eyes, which yet in sadness soueraignized: his
mouth not needing to speak, but only seen allured unto it what hearts it
pleased, to take and refuse; enough he had of each sort, his lips being so
lovely, and lovingly joined, as one may believe, would not willingly part from
their mutual kissing. The Lady was great, and therefore fair, full of spirit,
and intising, pleasing and richly she was attired, and bravely served, an
excellent hors-woman, and hunts-woman she was, though these be no properer
commendations, as some have said, then to say, a man is a fine Semster, or
Needle-man, yet qualities that were, and are commended at this day, allowed of,
and admired.

When they came nearer to them, they sent to know, if they might be so bold to
present themselves unto them, whom by inquiry they had obtained knowledge of.
The new loving couple admitted them, Veralinda kissing the Lady, and Leonius
embracing the Knight. Veralinda then soon after asked the Lady, what those many
Dogs and Bows were for, which she perceived amongst them. She answered, they
were her Hounds, and that she was going to hunt, when her better fortunes
brought her to her presence; the Bows were either if a Stag came fairly to
her, to shoot at him, or to save the Dogs from death at a bay, by giving his
death to him. Veralinda had never seen hunting, and therefore was desirous to
enjoy that sport. Leonius was as well pleased, because he was best pleased
when giving her content; the old King traveled on, the young folks promising
soon after to overtake him. The Lady then brought these dainty Princes to a
large Wood, about the sides they placed themselves, the Dogs and Hunts men
were put into it to beat, and bring forth the Dear, which in short time the
Hounds came forth with a mighty Stagge, the Hunts-men following, encouraging
their Dogs with Voice and Horn, that Veralinda thought, this Consort was the
delightfulst that ever her ears had heard; and such life it put into her, as
she spared neither horse nor way, but followed with great affection the sport
through Woods, over Plains; through Thicks, Brakes, over Hills, no place staid
her. The Lady kept with her, and commending her even unto a fury for riding: at
last by a Pond side, where the Stagge had taken soil, he gave a bay to the
Dogs, then came in the sweet sad Gentleman, and with so temperate a bravery,
shot the Beast, as even his hurt reioiced him, turning his face to him fully
beholding him, and as his last piece offered himself a sacrifice unto him,
falling by degrees as a great house will do, but yet runs to the place it
came from: so to the earth fell he, Veralinda was then called to take the say,
she was ignorant of those ceremonies, yet apt to learn, and willing to
instruction, she did as she was directed. Then the Hounds must be rewarded,
and the Hunts-men give him a peale of Horns melody, in stead of Bells harmony,
for his funeral.

All which ended, the Lady besought the Prince and Princess to honor her so
much, as to go with her to her house, which, not far off, was ^it to lodge
in, night being grown upon them. They consented, and rode thither, where they
found an ancient house hansome, great, and where it seemd good hospitality was
kept, but little curiosity observed, for all rooms appeared, as still visited
with company, and gave by the favors testimony of quantity of victuals, which
well ordered, had been noble, now a little troublesome; but it pleased
reasonably well this company, who free, and having rid hard, had gaind good
appetites, it appearing to them like a Garden full of fruit, when the hot
weather troubles them, they sat down, the Lady most kindly, freely and busily
bestirring her self, entertaining them the fine Gentleman ciuilly discoursing
with them; Leonius at last growing so far in with him, as he got him to tell
this story.

I am great Prince (said he) called Curardinus, borne of a good Family in this
Country, beloved and served; but as all things must see conclusions, so did
Fate appoint our greatness to conclude thus. My father lived after his fathers
death many years, will esteemed of by the King o^ these Countries, emploid in
office by him, and held among the best in rank of his favor, but matching
himself (after the death of his first wife) with a young Lady of a great and
noble family, but too great as the King imagined, or was persuaded by his
enemies, suspicion grew into his heart, or rather showed it self (for few
Kings are without that servant to attend them) against my father, who to avoid
all cause giving left the Court, and retird himself to his own home, where he
lived pleasantly, and was for an addition of his happiness blessed with
children, a blessing to a father, what ever the being borne, prove after to the
children. I was his first, and after some years before I came to
perfectablenesse to govern his estate, at least according to the laws of this
place; he died, leaving me heir to his fortunes, honors, and dislikes of the
King: I then desired leave to travail, that was refused me, and all things as
offices, commands and places soever my father held of the Crown, given away to
others. This was a disgrace, and truly a vexation unto me, and most, that he
would not permit me the favor granted to every subject, but obedience taught
me patience, and I was contented by necessity.

In this forced pleasure, I went up and down among my friends where I was
desird, and so lived a solitary and private traveling life, where removing
imitated travel; and each odd accident an Adventure. By my mothers side I
had, and have many noble, and brave friends as any man can have, the men
equally, or above any valiant, and wise, the woman in that height of excellency
for beauty and wit; among them I have much lived, who have found the like
favor, so as we are not only near it in blood, but allied in thwart fortune,
kept back by all means from any advancement, or honor, unless the employment
were such as might give a blow, if not a certain ruin to any of us, (a
comfortable estate when Subjects live in such dislike with their Prince:) yet
did he use us openly well; let us come to wait upon him, we shall be
welcomed, and smiled upon sometimes, but ask any thing, and be surely denied,
and after, not for a good space looked on: this has cast us much down, and
grieved us more then hurt us. Are you a single man said Leonius? No Sir,
replied the dainty melancholy, I am married, and have been long, the more my
misfortune in some kind, because I have with that marryage lost one, loved me
more then I could aspire to hope of requital, and love's me still; I was not
altogether to blame indeed, for I knew not her affection so great to me, she
not aduenturing to speak it, I not thinking my self so happy, daring to
imagine it, but after some time she told me of it. How did I then curse all my
fortunes, and yet at last chid my self for it? since said I, I was borne to be
wretched, and all other crosses have been but as forerunners of my misery;
this the only Master piece of affliction, we met, and wept many times
together, and yet those tears produced pleasure, because so shed, and then we
could be merry, and never but in the highest grief contented, because
together, for therein our last happiness consisted. But her father married her
(whose judgment told her, obedience was requisite) to a rich, but worthless
fellow; this was an other vexation to her, and doubly by that means it wrought
in me, to see her grieved, and such a Clown to posses what I most loved, and
held dear, he no more esteeming her, nor indeed understanding her worth then
a Beast, or one of his Goats. Miserable Lady, but most miserable I, that saw,
and could but grieve for it; besides this, he grew yet more brutish, and used
her ill, growing so entirely jealous, as none went away unsuspected, her worth,
beauty, and noblenes, invited all eyes, and hearts to her service, but so
chaste, and just she was, as but with courteous requital any prevailed; but her
worthless Mate thought so ill of himself, as that made him think well enough
of any to wrong her withal, Iealousie's root being self knowledge of
unworthiness.

Thus most sweet Creature she lived, discontents brought her to many harms,
bringing diseases, and (the worst) sickness of mind, finding still additions to
her first disquiet, and miserable loss, as her affection was pleased to call
the missing of me, which surely she could never have know, had I but guessed
her thoughts. A good space I held in with him, but at last fell like the rest,
and most dangerously; in that time I met her, my hearts joy, and souls
delight; at her fathers, she was sad, but most loving to me, I sad to see her
so, but most glad to see her love, holding her (I remember) by the hand, if
said I thou were unmarried, would thou not marry again? No I protest said
she, but live wholly to be directed by you, which I had ever don, had I known
how to live with honor, and fit to be your servant. Yet should you be free,
you would not do so much. Yes I vow said I, and bound it with a kiss upon her
fairest hand; dearest remembrance, how do thou yet please me, to bring before
me these passed, yet sweet delights? to make trial of her faith, and word
keeping, she was by heavenly assistance untied from her bond, and freed from
her clog, the rude and brutish Thing, her Husband, being taken from her, no
hand, but the hand of the best, and highest parting her; as from above seeing,
and commiserating her estate; all that were unmarried in the whole Country,
came and sought her, she refused all; Widdowers, Batchelers, all were alike to
be denied; old, young, middle-aged run one race of being refused. Her father
much disliked it, her friends, and kindred, and such persuaded, but endlesly
her resolution, was like the Earth fixed, and her constancy like the Sun
certain, and richly fair: some also came to me, (seeing the grace I had with
her) to get me to prefer them; alas how far they went astray? yet I
answered all of them alike, that she had resolved to marry (if ever) one of her
own affections choosing, so what with my slight answers, and her direct
refusalls, she, and I were left quiet, and so in truth we were, for her Husband
left her happliy, both by his loss, and a fair estate he gave her at his
end, to make amends partly for the ill she had endured.

To her I often went, and stayed as long as I could, and never found her
displeased but for my parting, what blessing can any on Earth wish to equal
such a bliss? and this I inioyed, and might still have done, but; With that he
sighed, and looked so deadly pale, as if that But had been the Axe to take
away his life. Leonius desired him to proceed. He turned his face (they before
both leaning against a Table) to the Board, and hung down his head over it,
groaning as if his breath had been in contention with his body to go, or to
be stayed; at last Leonius likewise leaning downe^ and earnestly persuading
with him, he lifted up his eyes on him, (eyes that would conquer in what looks
so ever they pleased to attire themselves,) and putting his hands together, Oh
my Lord said he, be contented with this you have. As they were thus in
intreatyes, and excusings, Veralinda came, and the Lady, so as they were now
brought to a conclusion, and for that night parted, the Lady with much Ceremony
(as excellent she was at it) bringing the Princes to their Chamber, then all
parted to their rests, but the swe^est sadness, who remained all night as his
expressions of his fortunes showed he had been troubled. When day came he
rose, and went down into a Garden, there he walked, and let the hour slip
away unthought on as his steps, Leonius longing for the end, sought him out,
and finding him, would needs have him go on.

Then Sir said he, I must begin again with But such was my misery, as I fell
into a great, and strict acquaintance with this Lady, which she did dislike,
though not me, as since I understand, but then did believe, by reason of some
slight carriages she showed me, but causlesly I did mistrust her, and openly
leave her. She that had none of the lowest, but rather highest spirit of the
World, yet humbled it self to seek me, ungrateful I, accepted it not; a
Journey I was then to go, in which she writ to me affectionately, and kindly
as ever, which I took well, and writ to her a letter that she liked, upon
which she made a perfect answer, and as amorousan one as she had ever written,
and they were excellent as any in that kind could be: but this came not to my
hands till ten Months after, and then by the meerest accident in the world.
When I read it, I saw her love, and the cross fort^ne still that attended it,
I was sorry I had abused such noblenes, and resolved if she would receive me
to offer my self again. In this resolution I went where she was with a
friend, and kinswoman of hers, I met her abroad walking, and striving to make
my self acceptable, looked with my old looks upon her, she with the same I
had bin blessed with, received me; then I told her I had received a Letter from
her, but it boar a long date, she said she was sorry I had not had the
means by that, sooner to have known her mind, I smild as glad of her love,
she even rejoiced at it, but yet such habit I had got of strangnes as I could
hardly get my self out of it. But to assist me in this business, a Fever
took me, what kindness did she then express? leaving all businesses, her own
house, and all, suffering where she was (though most welcome) many
inconveniences, and all for me, tending me her self, and being so loving a
Nurse to me, as I recovered within short time; since we have been good
friends, and she so perfectly good, as she let all passed faults on my side
dye, and unremembered pass; taking the new return in the place of it, and
satisfaction in that for the other, without questioning of it.

Thus it continued, and does, but I have been lately with her, and lef^ her
not so well as I desire she should be, but such accidents have befallen us
both, as I am forced not to show how much I love her, nor she how willing to
embrace it; counterfeit awhile we must, though I cannot in my countenance but
show what my heart feels. Discover said the Prince likewise that, and you will
be better eased. I will sooner dye said he, leaving my self a pure offering to
her trust, then betray her, she has commanded and I will obey, and in that
merit some favor justly from her, shortly I hope to hear what most I covet
from her, and if I be happy, most brave Prince you shall know it, for I will
attend you at your own Court, and if the contrary happen, I hope yet you will
permit ^y sadness a receite, the one shall be an honor, the other a charity.

The Prince would not urge any more, having so ^oble, and free a promise from
him unasked, but told him he trusted he should find those sad looks turned
into as much joy, which heartily he wished, and the time came when he should be
freed from sorrow, and himself made happy with the story'es end, which he
much, and infinitely desired the knowledge of. The two Ladies came into the
Garden also, to recreate themselves a little bebefore dinner, the delicate
Princess having liberty, granted to the Lady her demand, in her story of her
passed Adventures, the Lady being to requite her, told her thus. I a^ said she
that unhappy Lisia, who was by birth, and greatness of estate, sought before I
had knowledge, and given before discretion was appearing in me, to a great
Lord; I thought it (as most women do) a gay matter to be great, a Duches me
thought was a rare thing, and a brave business: but all that while I marked not
the Duke, who was, and is, as dull a piece of flesh, as this, or any Country
need know; besides he has had such insufferable passions, and passages with
me, as truly if I had not given my self to hunting, and such delights abroad,
to take away the trouble I had at home, I must have suffered like a Martyr
under his churlishnes, but I relolued to alter him likewise if I could, and so
I wrought my self to work with him, as I got the hand with much a do over
his Sycofants, all of them I turned away, having liberty to use my will, for I
had gained him by persuasions, oaths, and iustifications sufficient for his
capacity^ to right my self against those had injured me, and so to continue a
kind wife, as he would be an husband to me: these conditions gave me such
liberty, as twenty four servants in one day I put away, and placed such of
mine own, or friends as I best liked, and knew, would and must be just to me,
their friends being engaged for them. Then I reclaimed him from ill company, I
mean inferior to him, which he naturally had best loved; and as if a new
molded him, so as in troth he deserved (and does) respect from me, and that he
shall have; the Court I confess I loved well, I brought him (though not to
like it himself) to let me be there when I would, and privately he would come
unto me; the Princess I served, a Lady fair and loving, but something
variable and changing, as her favor was to me; for I being of her chamber, in
great favor and grace, fell into the most bitter dislike, and disgrace, that
ever any did.

Causes she alleged, but an easy thing it is to frame such; yet the worst
thing she did to me, and which I took indeed to the heart, was, she
mistrusted I loved a brother of hers, who she neither much cared for, nor
esteemed my honor; she made a young brave Lady likewise acquainted with all,
whom she did command to attend on her, and in the last part of the evening, or
rather in the night they came into the Garden, where if I had been gone to his
chamber, as she imagined^ I must needs to my own lodging pass through in my
return. All the doors they locked double, and bolted the others that had not
such locks on them, walking up and down to catch me, who surely they imagined
a very kind woman, to go so far to a servant, whose part it had rather been
to come to me; but they watched, and the truth is, I was in another garden on
the other side, but not with him, yet being that way, suspicion said, I was
guilty, so upon likelihoods I was condemnd. To the door I came, and thinking
to find the place as I left it, I boldly put my key to unlock it, but it would
not do, mine was but single, my enemies double. I at first found it not, but
seeing I could not open it, I tried again, and then plainly discernd, some had
been there after me, yet I did not dream of the Princess. Presently (my
tampering having given them the allarum) I might hear them whisper, the Lady
spoke a little louder, as of purpose that I should speak to her. I did just as
she desired, and fell into the trap as they wished, for I cried, Who is there?
It Is I, said she. I pray open the door, said I. I will do you more service then
that, said she: where with she opened it, the Princess of this plot and place
standing close by her. I started when I saw her. How does my Brother, said she?
I told her, her Highness was deceived in me. I am not, answered she, but I have
been; for I took you to have been good and virtuous, the contrary this action
shows you to be. I protest (cried I) I am innocent of ill, and free from this
wrong you accuse me of. The way, time, and your attire condemns you (said
she), why should you undressed in night habits, at this late hour, and alone
walk abroad, and just this way toward his lodgings, none else lying in those
parts, were it not to him? the world besides had such a conceit, and you
knowing it, your part had bin to avoid al cause, or shadow of cause to mistrust
you, rather then to run into the open mouth of danger, and plain discovery.
I saw her so violent, I besought her yet in mercy and pity of women's honor,
which could be no fame to her to ruin, whatsoever she conceited of me, yet to
spare me to the world.

She smild scornefully, and said, she was not of the trade of my
counsell-keepers, who knew of ^y going to him in man's apparel before that
time, and so flung away. I was in truth troubled exstreamely with it, and spoke
to the Lady to be my friend in it. She protested freely, and bravely she
would do me any service in that, or any other thing, and that it was first
unknown to her what the pretense was, ^onely duty taught her to obey, after
utterly against her will to proceed in it. But what mends had I? the Princess
told it to every one, and which madded me most to this brave Gentleman you saw
with me, who at that time, and by her means wholly, had not so good an opinion
of me, as now he has, nor had I so much respect to him, yet I loved him ever,
she I think did so too, and in no better a kind, then she thought I did her
brother. But I am charitable, and I think no ill was done, for I am sure he is
noble and good. Upon this I left the Court, and with me, or presently after me
fearing tricks (for who how virtuous soever can prevent so odd, and deuillish
a plot as this was) all, or the greatest part of the Ladies went from thence,
even she, who then was so dear unto her in little more grace, then my self,
leaving her attended on with her chamber, and those enough to be used ill. She
then grew melancholy, and at last sought company, some she got together, but
of what sort? those that were of the age before, who having young minds rumbled
up their old carcases, and rubd over their wrinckling faces like old wainscot
new varnished: and little sweeter was some of their beauties. But these served
to fill up places, and adorn a chamber of state, like ill Pictures, yet
bravely guilt and set forth make as good a show, though but glassed, as the
cunningst. piece of work, if not to judging eyes: an noise they also made of
mirth, banqueting and inuiting company, but all would not serve, the glaringst
sign, or greatest bush, draws not in the best company: no more did they make
the Court much the fairer. Dance they did, and all ridiculous things that
ancient, but young made women could invent to do. I came again, having liberty
to behold the^, but never any more to serve in ordinary. Lord how I admird the
alteration, and the place, being changd from what it was, as much as from a
Court to a Playhouse: She vsd me indifferently well, and I took it so, envying
none but the Lady whom I was a little in aw of, but not for that I did grudge
at her, but repined to see her blessed, as I imagind, since I have gaind what I
feared she had, or if she had, I have gaind it from her; yet always brave
Princess be confident I am chaste, and untouched of ill action, how ever they
have laid my reputation low, but I forgive them now, nor judge amiss of my
liberal discourse, your freedom having invited me to it My Lord (good man)
was glad of my disgrace, because it brought me home as he thought, yet I so
tampred with him, as he thought at last it was not in earnest, but a plot
between us; so to the Court I went when I pleased, or told him I would go,
though sometime another way I went, yet lately I have lived most at home, and
still resolve to do, though with little content in him; and because you shall
see I have not too much cause to be fond of him, when you come into the house,
seem earnest to see him (for that he loves) and then shall your highness on my
word behold a man fit only to make a good husband of, and so far to be beloved,
as not contemnd.

They went in, the Princess having her lesson, desiring earnestly to see the
Master of the Horse before her going. He came, but such a creature it was, his
pace so uncertain going toward her, but looking back, as if asking his men
if he did well, or no; a wide smile he had, which if a little noise had been
added to it, might have been a plain laugh. When he was close by her, he took
her hand, and put it to his mouth, but his teeth instead of lips met it; she
gave him many thanks for her entertainment, he took her thanks it seemd
well, but replied only with his former girning^ at last with a great business
and champing^ as if on the Bit, he brought out as many words, as he asked her,
how she liked Hunting. She answered, very well, and best of any sport; he was
so ioyed with that, as he laughed right out, and with gladness driueld, that
none could blame the Lady, if she liked not much to kiss that Ganimead. As
thus they were, some beholding him, the Princess admiring his foolish
ignorance, and ill-fauordnesse, some others marking the power she had over her
self, to hold from so little scorn, as to smile at him, a great noise was
heard below in the Hall, and an Esquire of the old Frigian King came in, crying
out for help, his Lord was taken prisoner, and carried toward the Sea.
Leonius called to arm, Veralinda for her horses, the delicat disquieted would
a^tend them, till they saw freedom on al parts flourishing again; the Lady of
the house took her leave of them there, and so they past, Leonius poasting
after the King, the Princess accompanied with her Knights, and the Noble
Disco^tent held on toward the sea to gain her ships: but being to pass a
thickest wood, it was their fortunes first to light upon the Adventure, for in
the thick of that place they heard voices, and Veralinda led by perfect
knowledge, or natural affection, knew her fathers tongue, when upon the
telling her fine sad companion, he with some five or six of her Knights rushed
in, they found the King bound, a great ring of armed men about him, and some
six or seven women (for Gentlewomen I cannot call those, used such cruelty)
with great rods whipping him, having stripped his upper part; he complaining,
and pitifully crying, the strips being sore, and painful to his royal body.
This timely rescue flew in among them, who were much amassed at the surprise,
yet being many, and bolder on their number, then any other cause they had to
hope of their victory, encountered our dainty distressed so rudely, as he was
put to his best in arms; but then so bravely did he behave himself, as he had
with his own hands disarmd and overcome three, but his five assistants were
ouerth^owne, he then himself fought against the rest, not without great
hazard, but such were the blows, and fury among them, as they called help,
assisted with the Kings cries, who all this while the fight lasted, was
tormented excessiuely with those Furies, as meaning to take their full revenge,
or as much as they could. Leonius was brought in to the place, but what fury
came he possessed with all? those women altogether could not imitate, much less
equal (yet women enraged they say are Devils. Happy this arrival was to the
valiant as exquisite Solitary, both being joined, the rest fainted, and so the
victory came on their side. Then Leonius and his to be admired companion went
to the King, taking away his Baiters and Chains, clothing him again, and
dressing the stripes he had received, which had wept blood for unkindness,
both pulling off their Helmets to take air the sad Knight showing so delicate
a hand, as if his blows had not been witnesses of his strength, one would have
feared, so Ladi-like, a beautiful, and dainty shapt hand could not have
sufferd such stresse; but the wonder was taken away then, when conclusion was
made, that the noblest heart commanded the fairest, and fiercest hand; he had
such a heart, and so valiant and happy a hand to execute his commands with all.
Veralinda came in also, and with tears manifested the sorrow she had for her
fathers mishap, covering his stripes with soueraign ointments she never went
without: then they examind the cause of this outrage. One of them (the chief
it seemd among them) telling her story thus. I am (said she) of this Country,
and have a Castle hard by, whither this ungrateful King should have gone, had
not your accursed succor, and my too rash beginning of his justly merited
punishment hindered me; he knows my name and quarrel; yet some part I will tell
you to avoid thought of unreasonableness in me. I loved this king (not I do
protest for his being a king, but mearely out of affection) my love growing to
him, at my being in his Court at a great triumph there, whither the Princes of
this country went, and I waited on. He cast his eyes vnluckly on me also, and
gave me such inuitations to his love, as I could not but accept and yield;
opportunity yet served not, I being to wait so near my Lady, and she who liked
the king as well, but not so truly as I did, watching me, fea^ing that, she
desird to have her self. Thus unfortunately I was again to part, and so without
any more then amorous looks, and such manifestings as outward show could give,
we were divided; when I came back, how did I curse my fortune? for my love was
run beyond the tie of chastity, and I was a mere lover; I accusd my self, for
thus thought I, I might have enjoyed him, by this means I could (if I had not
bin a natural fool) have compast my desires, none could have prevented this
plot, had I not bin a rank coward; the night was left me, why did I loose so
many, and gain nothing but restles times, tossing and tumbling in my own
fancies? and so many did I then get together, as made a man of vanity, calling
infinites of conceits together. In all these vnquiets, a match was offered me, I
was mad, and knew nothing but mine own passions; in that distemper I gave
consent, and was married, but still my affection was tied, and wedded to this
king, this king of ungratefulness and cruelty. A wife I lived, and yet a maid,
my husband sometimes chafing, sometimes telling me, he thought I kept that Iuell
for another: many suspicions this bred in him, and furnished as many crosses
for me, at last at the end of three years, this unconstant, and unworthy king
came hither, he was feasted and welcomd by the Prince and Princess, who saw
not me with strait looks; doubting me still; but I refrained not the Court for all that, my heart telling me a dram of joy in his sight was more cordial, then
vialls full of her disgraces could be hurtful to me. He liked my sight as well,
and then being resolud to loose no opportunity, but rather make and find
means, we met, and I did freely let him have knowledge of my constancy. He
was (it seemd) ravished with joy, and beyond al others, love fond of me, never
being at rest, but when with me. A Gentleman there was in his company who had
liked me well, and as far as he durst had sought me, for he was bashful, and I
must confess I was proud, besides loving another. To this man the king (not
being able to hide or conceal his happiness) tells al. When he had it (guessing
as I believe it was, and am confident he knew it to be me) he came to me, and
after discourse of him, and how good, and firm a Lover he was, besides his
earnest, and passionate pursuing, he brake out into how happy and fortunate a
man he was in his choice, telling me my whole story, and all that had passed;
with all (said he) when he told it me, O (cried I) that I might but know such a
Love to me, though presently I had died; and surely so I should, for I were
not able to enjoy such a full blessing. Did he tell you this story (said I) sure
there is no such thing? Yes certainly, answered he; and he is so wrapped in the
heaven of it, as he cannot contain himself: but who it is, I know not; for he
only termd her a wench he loved, and who so dearly loved him, as for his sake
she had lived a Maiden-wife, and would have ever, had she not enjoyed him. I was
angry at it, yet then so much I loved him, as though resolved to let him know,
how ill I took his discovering my secrets to any, though in a third person;
yet when I saw him-I forgave it, and pitied him for loving me so much, I not
being able, as I imagind, and undervalued my poor self, to deserve such an
affection, nor truly should I have altered my mind for any thing, had he not
cruelly, vildly, and scornfully vsd me; that changd me indeed, and has turned
my heart so much against him, as ever since I have fully assured of his
disdain, vowed revenge, and plotted for it, though I had gone into his country
to execute it, which I was prevented of by notice of his coming hither, where
I waylaid him at his coming, but I grew tender again, and let him pass; yet
when he was past, I repented, and as love increases love, so the hate I had,
conceiud, and grew increasing in me with every touch of memory of those
passages, and now without al purpose of kindness I took him, and with all
cruelty meant to have continued tormenting him, privately keeping as I purposed
his Majesty for my recreation to see him torturd, who so uncharitably cast me
off, defamd, and forsook me; the last, being to us indeed the sharpst blow but
telling, with that she flew at him again to scratch him, other hurt she could
not do him, To tell, cried she, and forsake me to? They held her, and with much
ado after by the kings permission, but earnestly coniuring Veralinda to pardon
her, she had her liberty, and so returned to her Castle. The King like al men,
at sometimes, or other for such injuries whipped, though inwardly with as bitter
strips held on his journey for Frigia, where he most safely arrived, and with
all content and happiness he with his daughter, and son in law passed their
days together. The valliant, and discreet Gentleman returned to the Lady
again, with whom he spent most of his precious time attending what he desired,
which was accomplished to his mind, and left to him to make his own use of,
so as he might be pleased if he pleased. Amphilanthus being in the morning up,
and ready to go to his longed for business, to add by that, new, and more
honor, as kingdoms to his crown, the Qu. Pamphilia with her counsel, and Noble
men came unto him, whom she found attended on by his Princes, who were all, or
most known to her, the rest made her servants by his respect unto her; there
she saw provision for the fight, while she had as cruel a combat within her,
and more terrible, because her fear proceeding from her love made more dangers
then blows could be stricken between them. She saw not one piece of his armor
that was not cut through in tenderness of her heart, and that bleeding for it.
The Prince of Transiluania was looking on his shield, which she casting her
eyes upon. O said she that that were as true, and firm in mettle, as my heart
is in truth, then would it nere be pierced. Polarchos was curiously ouerlooking
the armor, to see it secure; every piece she blessed with her souls wishes,
and every pinn had a prayer for the strength of it so much goodness wishing it
well, danger must n^eds be far off.

The Emperor marking her, had inwardly new power, and might given him by her
constancy, and strong affection, forth they went, excellent, and rich Barges
being ready to convey them over the Lake, being on the other side: they parted,
the Queen back again to her Castle, where she might (if deerenes in love
would permit her) see the combat, which was not doubted, but assured she could
not suffer her eyes though loving them best when they saw him, at this time
given them liberty to do; but certainly her souls eyes in prayer beheld him
more profitable surely at this time, for he had no child to play withal.

The Emperor took his horse, the State and Counsel of Pamphilia waiting on
him, as he mounted on horseback, whether by chance, or of purpose the horse
trampled, and turned up, and down so, as his face toward the Lake, and
Castle, he sent kind looks after her, which that while (her eyes waiting on
him) with comfort brought unto her, and made hers melt, because they parted so;
he rode into the field unarmed, his twelve Princes carrying his arms.
Polarchos being his Chamberlain, came next his Person, and the Prince of
Transiluania carried his Crown, the Duke of Branswike, Bauaria, Lorraine,
Sauoy, Sax, Millan, the Prince of Venice, and the rest carried the Armor,
Lance, and led the spare horse.

Into the head of the Army he rode, which stood in battle, he saluted them,
they expressed there joy to see him in all Souldier-like fashion, before them he
stood ready to arm, when they discerned from the other side the King, with as
much magnificence as was possible for him to show; when they were thus in the
head of each Army, he sent to entreat some speech of the Emperor, he
courteous, and yet bold as any, granted it, and so they came toward each
other, taking one a piece with them, the Emperor, Polarchos; the King, the
Master of his Horse. They beheld each other like Lions, stirring no way, but
their eyes followed as part of their Arms, and then the most curious part. The
King of Celicia first put up his hand to his hat, but that motion was enough to
make the noble Amphilanthus ready as soon as he, to give, and take
salutation. The King said it was not unknown unto him, he was sure why he came,
and in that sort, but the desire, and reason of this meeting was, that he might
see his Person before the fight, who was held the brauest Prince living, and
his Rival, but with greater happiness because beloved by her. If this be true
replide the Emperor, your cause is the more unjust, since you would force so
excellent a Queen to take you contrary to her own affection as you confess,
and mine must needs be more irreconciliable, since here you pronounce a
quarrel never to be taken up, seeking to take my Mistress from me, therefore if
this be your end of meeting, let us part to meet on surer terms.

The King gave consent, having now said, he seen the man so much admired, I am
satisfied till I have conquered him. With that they turned, and armed them
selves, the Drums, and Trumpets making such harmony, as were enough to lift the
hearts of Cowards up to spirit, this little needing to the Emperor, whose
heart and body was all worth, and valor: the King was likewise soon armed,
and the Armies by order commanded to unarm, being left only as Court
beholders, no show of war, except in the fashion of their clothes, and bands.
The King of Celicia was in Oring color, the Emperor in crimson, Spite on the
one side, Revenge on the other. The encounter was fair, and terrible, both
their horses at the breaking shrinking under them, but the Celician after
falter'd, and reeled, so as he leaped from him. Amphilanthus lighted, and so
they met on foot, when no Art, or valor procured by just disdain, and rage
was wanting. The King had with a blow cloven the Emperor's shield, so as
vnvsefull he threw it from him, in requital, making such a breach in his
armor on the right side, as there sparng out so much blood, as might wash away
the others loss. Both fearelesly, and furiously fighting, for themselves, not
fearing, only tending the cause that brought them thither.

At last Amphilanthus found an advantage by the Kings lifting up of his right
arm, to give him a deadly blow, which though he failed of, the Emperor missed
not the opportunity, but ran his Sword into him crosse-wayes through his body;
the King stood still with the blow, the Emperor beheld him, sorry he had
killed him, as his sword goar'd he perceived he had, then suddenly, and
reelingly he ran with his last fury upon him. Amphilanthus could have avoided
him, but he only struck down the thrust, and caught him in his arms, casting
him self down with him, in the falling, yield said Asdrusius; thou art
deceived poor man said Amphilanthus, with that Asdrusius lifted his arm up,
as to have one blow more, but death then ceased on him, so as embraced with an
enemies courtesy he dyed. Amphilanthus rising, and putting the body from him,
the Princes of both sides came in, and the victory easily judged, the body was
delivered to the Celicians, with liberty to depart, Melisander being delivered,
the Emperor with all honor conducted toward the Queen, who with more then
joy, or gladness, met him where she parted from him with delicate music, and
tryumphant glory, bringing him into the Castle, and so to the Galleryes, where
he was unarmed, and his wounds most gently, tenderly, and affectionately looked
on by her self; they were some in number, non^ either dangerous, or troblesome
to his liberty of walking abroad.

When they were dressed, the Council standing all before them, and his Princes
with her Nobility, they two sat down under a cloth of estate, love
expressing it self, not only lively but perfectly in their eyes: he took her
hand, kissed it, beheld her earnestly, as amorously ready to make expression of
what was expected and hoped for, she as yielding sat ready to grant, while he
still holding her hand in his, and as passionately gazing in her affectionately
requi^ing eyes, and such were his excellent expressions, and her loving
entertayning those passions, as command needed not to his followers, who by
outward sight, (knowledge by long acquaintance growing in the degree with
experience) knew their masters mind, and so left him to express what his eyes
promised, leaving the place as free as their souls desired to be, which would
be granted only by rest, and what rest on earth like the quiet enjoying them
selves, which but with them selves they could do, her servants by her respect
to the Emperor learnt obedience, and so to their own happyest wishes left
them.

They all gone, Amphilanthus Master of the greatest part of the Western World,
and once as he assured him self, Monarch of her heart before she knew Asia,
or much more, or scarce so much as her self, much less her power over him,
would like a confident man, and commanding lover, never showing as if an
account were to be had from him for former faults, use the time, and take the
opportunity offered him so as his eyes fixed as they were, and she observing
his, he most lovingly, or rather passionately caught, (like a man drowning,
catching at the next thing to him to save himself) the Queen in his arms,
and as no offender, (except in boldness) embraced her. She would have
violently, refused any other, nay his neglect in an other person had forced the
curstest punishment, but here she only blushd, and received his love, as at
first without expostulation: discourse they also familarly did, and the wonted
phrases of kindness in sweet familiarnesse were as free, as if never laid
aside.

Thus that day passed, night being come, and all retyrd to rest, the Queen
most happy and blessed being again enriched with his love, or the show it had
before, although the true fire was clearer, and warmer; this now suffised, and
was instead of the truth filld up to the like heat by the vnexpectednes of it.
Being in her bed, what Pamphilia said she? Is it possible that thou have
lived to see Amphilanthus kind again? Can he smile on these wrincles, and be
loving in my decay? When he told me I was alterd for the worse, and slightly
regarded me, I feared, but when he quite forsook me, wretch what did I, yet
is he returning? Truly I must confess this to be as strange as his other
change, which I could not but like a blind man be ledd to believe, it was sung
in my ears, and blazed in mine eyes, ere I could take off the Scarf of
credulity, and vnblinde my hopes to see plainly my despair, and just cause
thereof, when I have sat sighing, nay weeping for his disdain, wishing he
might but see my tears, which from strangers have gained compassion: He has
come in, then how have I cheerd up my heart, or rather my love to him done it
for me? Wiped my eyes, and from him hid my sorrows, to whom for my redress
they should have been discovered; policy it was not that bred this in me, but
pure love, and unfortunate subjection, yet I love my self for it, and will
still strive to continue it, and more now, since I see that pleades for me, and
pity, or favor shines again to me. It is impossible to be Lone, but reward
that now he goes about to give me, that yet shall be welcome, and what else
soever comes from him, except frowns, nay they two if he allot them me, so
heartily I am his. The next morning they went to hunt, and after noone in the
evening, walked forth along a Rivers side till they came to a little rising;
at the bottom the water continued the wanton course it had begun, upon the top
of this rising there was a Rock, and on the top of that a young shepherd
playing upon a Rebecke^, the Air playing with his curled locks, and he
singing this Song.

Love farewell I now discover
Thee a Tyrant over a lover,
All thy promised sweets prove crosses,
Thy rewards are only losses.
A pretty thing I did deem thee,
Innocent, and mild esteem thee,
But I find thee as cursed matter
As a swelling high wrought water.
Cupids name a pleasant folly
Has beguiled hearts most holly,
Even to sacrifize in homage,
Life and soul unto their damage.
Mine an offering once I profferd,
Happily refusd when offered,
I Will keep now but to revile thee,
From the craft which did beguile me.
The wiser man, said Amphilanthus. The liker to your mind, said Pamphilia, if
he love varities: he looked upon her, but seeing she smild, when she spoke
it, he did so likewise, and so she went to the shepherd, who was coming
down from the Rock, and seeing them, was amassed, yet with a good civil
country manner saluted them, which they graciously requited. The Queen then
demanded, of what place he was; he replied, he was servant to the Queens
Shepherd. Do you know the Queen (said she). No indeed, replide he. What
hear you of her, said Amphilanthus? Much joy for her safety, and that she is
a brave and a good woman, said he. Nothing else, said she? Yes, answered he, I
have heard more, but we must not speak all least we hear of it again to our
cost. I dare assure thee (said she) the Queen shall never hear of any thing
thou say to us any more, then now she does, nor be any more offended with
thee. But if I come in question, where is your assurance, I may be assuredly
hanged, and you never the wiser. Trust me (said she) I have such power with her
Majesty, as thou shall be secure. Why then (said he) I Will tell you; but first
let me see your face. Wherefore, said the Queen? I Will tell you if you be a
maid, said he. With that she pulled off a Mask she wore: the Shepherd looked
wishly on her, and cried out. O heavens what a sweet face is there, and what
pity it is you should be so long a Maid?

The Lovers both blushed, and smild, then the Shepherd proceeded. I can guess
by the face indifferently well at the disposition, and I lea^nt this experience
by marking my sheep, and seldom now do I fail in choosing the sweetest
natured and mildest to breed on, I can see by the countenance whether they will
be tractable, or not, and so I cull the best from the other. But this is
nothing of the Queen, said she. Why, she is (said he) a Lady loved, and well
thought on by all that ever I heard speak of her, courteous, affable, no pride
dwells in her, to the meanest she will speak; yet the greatest fear her,
which is her judgment and goodness that breeds that respect to her; she is
upright and just, in her government mild, and loving to her subjects, she
loves all good exercises as well abroad, as at home; she has indeed they say,
a brave and manlike spirit, and wondrous wise she is; yet for all these good
parts, she could not keep out of Cupids claws, but was mightily in love, and
is still as it is mutterd about with a gallant man, a brave fighting man, for
whose sake she refused all others, and lately the King of Celicia her next
neighbor; but for all her wisdom, there I believe she was ill advised to
refuse him, for he came with such an Army against her, to have her by force, as
had like to have marrd all; I am sure they frighted us (no sword men) and our
sheep likewise, yet at last hither came that brave man her love, though some
say he had before forsaken her, whereupon she grew melancholy, and came seldom
abroad, she might by that have seen how foolish a thing love was, and have
left it, and looked to her own business, but now they say, she is lively
again, and jolly, and well she may, for he did gallantly to release her, yet
he dwells so far off, and having as it is said, a pretty humor of changing,
we do not wish him to her, least we should loose her.

What do you call him, said the Emperor? Amphilanthus, answered the Shepherd,
Emperor of the West, a mighty man assuredly he is, and has but that fault as
ever I heard, and yet for mine own part I would the Queen were of our mind
(whereat they both laughed); for I protest (said he) I think variety the
sweetest pleasure under Heaven, and constancy the foolishest unprofitable
whining virtue.

Thou art an honest fellow, said Amphilanthus, I warrant thee. Pray God you
prove so (said he) else I may be in a wise case. Fear nothing, said the
Queen, I will protect thee from any harm, but now you have spoken thus freely
of the Queen, tell us as particularly of your loves, for it appears you have
been a lover.

In a kind (said he) and you shall hear what I have done since my infancy,
for since ten, I have looked after Wenches, and loved them since fourteen,
and now am I six and twenty. The first unruly flames that bred in me, were at
fourteen, toward a pretty Maid of my mothers, much about that age, who, what
with my importunity, pretty presents of fruits and flowers, quaint words,
the love she bore her Mistress, whom she might fear would be angry, if she
crossed me to make me sick, or it may be wanton, and young, found as much
aptness in her felfe as in me, or what other cause or power it was, I know
not, she would not refuse long, nor was I long in accepting, but kindly and
amorously we lived a whole year, and I pray was not that a long time to be
in love with one woman? I think by that I merrited never to be by other
denied.

Then came a fine Brownetta, an neighbors daughter of ours crossed my sight, and
so my former love, she daily came to milk in the next grounds to us: I then
thought on nothing but how to win her; the other followed me, and
perpetually watched me, that I durst not go near her: but love is never
without invention, I would steal out in the night, and make bracks and holes
in the Hedges that parted our grounds, and then when my Sheep being drouen, as
of purpose I would drive them that way, would for change (loving it as well as
their Master) get into her Fathers fields, I must go fetch them forth again,
and so I saw her, and spoke to her, telling her she should advise her father
to keep his fences better, this was my introduction, and at last wan her by
discourse and conversation as wrangling at first wrangled our selves one. But
when I had enjoyed her, I thought the other like stale bread: she told me of
it, I truly confessed I was weary of her; she said we were well met to part on
equal terms, and so she quickly after chose another, and another, for
already I have seen he^ have three besides my self, and I commend her for it.

Some months, which were the Spring and Summer, and as long as fair weather
lasted, I loved this second; but when cold came on, my blood grew chill, and so
my heart grew faint, only to be recovered with the next Spring, which it was,
and sprang unto another love, who was as fair as Diana her self at the full,
but for my contentment not so cold nor chaste. She was a Neatresse, and in
truth an neat one; her I gaind by courtesy, fetching, and driving her cattle
to her, and for her, the sweet and secret Woods could only accuse us, none
else mistrusted, and so sweetly and kindly did we pass our times; but she
after a while being but as the former were, and no variety in her, I began to
think how I might purchase some creature more like my disposition which I
gained; for walking in the Woods, I found a dainty Forest Nymph hunting, I
forsook her, le^t home, father, and all betaking me to the Woods: sh^e was
long before she could be won to like, longer to love; but at last for my joy,
she liked, loved, and yielded, then was I a blessed man, for in this delicate
Creature I was fully happy, she ^o well incountred my humor with her
fashion, and diverse, and several expressions of love she gave, which as still
being new, she was an new woman to me, and so I continued with the variety on
her side, and I so contented with all, as I loved her five year without
change, yet not wholly so constant, but I think I slipped aside in that time.
Sometimes it may be she thought so, and would be sad; but when I came, and saw
her so, how did I think that did become her, and idleness, or mirth
misbeseeme others; then I grew sad to imitate her, learnt her fashions, walked
cross armd, sighed, cast up mine eyes, spoke little, looked much on her, else
on nothing to say, I looked on any thing but as unmarked.

This passion pleased me as different from the other, then so well I pleased
her in this kind, as she the next time would be merry. I liked that beyond the
other, for then me thought I saw life, spirit, and mettle in her; I then
embraced that with joy and delight, finding that ^he did all these to make me
hers, by still contenting me; I was contented to be hers, as much as it was
possible for me to be anyes, and this brought me into such reputation, as I
had the good looks, nay, thoughts of many fair maids (without pride I speak
it, though I confess I love to tell it), among the rest there was another
Nymph, who hearing of me, or seeing how my Mistress made of me, thought it a
fine thing to love, but a finer to be loved, yet did ^hee not consider how to
choose without offense to others, and gain to her self, for her ill fortune
was to choose me, who though so naturally kind to women, as I would hardly let
one of that sweet sex sigh, much less weep for me, but that I would
requite her; yet ^hee had not that winning power to make me differ, nor
indeed did she take me right, for she mistook both in the time and place,
happening to be at the Nimphs house, whither I often resorted with other
Forresters, she welcomming me as a friend, that had done her service in a
hunting which she had, the house was little, and therefore the rooms were
near together, my Mistress lodged this other, her riual companion, in a room
within her self, mistrusting nothing, but bolting the door between them,
sure for her coming to her, secretly went to bed, and when all was quiet
according to our agreement, she came to me; as we were together embracing, and
lovingly discoursing, we heard a noise somet^ing nearer us, as in the next
room; love at first made us heedl^sse, till coming near, and continuing with
increase of lumbring, and as if wood falling or slipping from those rows, or
the order it was laid up, as in ranks, in we startled, and I feared, because
of my Mistress; but she knowing the place, which was not above five foot
broad, and always filled with cleft wood for the chambers, stepped out and shut
a door, which was to go in, or to come out of that place.

When she had made it safe for opening on the other side, she softly returned
to me, and then with much delight we stayed a while together, till day being
ready to break, she parted from me to be in her own bed, when her maids
came to seek her, which soon after they did, and she being ready, called
me, and sent for Orileda, for so the other was called, but she having (as she
told me afterward, to make me know her love, the violence whereof had made a
more unchaste thought in her, then ever before she had) broken her shin with
climing over the wood, cursing it yet more for the hindrance, then the harm,
barring her from letting me see what power I had to make her, other then ever
her modesty till then would permit. She was unable to follow Dianaes sports,
as well in person, as her chaste courses in thought.

I seemed to pity my own ill fortune in missing of her, and to lament her
hurt, which more hurt me, for after she perplexed me with haunting of me,
Lord what a life led I? she troubled me, my Mistress grew a little suspicious
of me, that grieved me, both strove for me; but such difference there was
between them, as I had been blind and accursed, if I had left one fortother.
But then came the Queen into those Woods to delight her self, being at her
first coming into this Country, in her Train she had many brave and fine
women, among the rest, one pretty little Less, who for her pretinesse, me
thought, commanded largely over hearts, I am s^re she made mine faint and
fail, when it had been strong; then did I think a Forest life the
toylesomst, and wearisomest in the world: I plotted how to be released of it,
and why? only to be where I might see her I most loved.

Long I studied, at last I fell upon a resolution, which was, to put my self
into the Court, to serve some Officer or Courtier, the Queen affecting
hunting, I was soon accepted, and taken by the chief Huntsman to be one of
her Majesty's servants, being excellent in blowing a Horn, and in the chase,
and so loving infinitely, and hoping as much, for I never loved without that
especial comfort about me, to spoil me, and to cross my old companion Hope,
the Queen went to try Enchantments, I never having seen her but one
horseback, and still masked: I know not how her Majesty carried her self, or
what she did, but as reports are by all, to her most meriting honor that
might be, though likewise to her loss, for she returned after some years,
the most discontented woman in the world, and has continued so, till now
within few days, when (God be thanked) she has recovered her spirits, which
long may they be (I beseech Heaven co)ntinued to her, and al hapines attend
her, yet I was angry with her going for she carried (...) love with her, yet
farr^ she could not carry it, it was either so heavy as it (...), or so light,
as the first contrary wind brought it me again, and then I forswore hunting,
court, and al, betaking me to be a Shepherd, and here I live under the Queens
Shepherd quiet, love for my pleasure, never to pain, have a Less now that
will have me love, or serve her, whether I will or no, her violence making me
truer, or rather more obseruant then any others wor^h could do; and thus I
live (I must ^ay truly) fondly, ignorantly, and condemned by all men; yet it
pleases me, because I avoid by this means, importunities, and businesses. I
am here served and observed, nothing to vex me, i^ not what I like well
enough, which is her overmuch fondness: her fairness troubles me not, for
she is no Helena, her virtue denies me little, for I command that, and her,
her humble and busy love mix^ with fine discourse likes me well enough, or I
suffer my self to think so; yet O me the Nymph was a dainty Less.

Ah (said Pamphilia), it seems you have some relics of that love. In truth
(said he) I have, and my conscience moves me that way many times, ^nowing she
undid her self for me, and yet firmly loves me still, and unchangeably ever
did.

Return then (said Amphilanthus) and be now again more happy then ever
enjoying so long loved, and loving a Creature, the first passions were but
flashes, the^e pure and true fie^s.

I feel them so (said he), and I will do so, and yet in so doing justly, and
continue my old affection to variety too, for now she will be new again to me.

The Lovers smiled upon each other, and taking the fine Shepherds offer, which
was to drink of his poor drink, they each drank of his bottle, and
returned, pleased much with his discourse, but most with his resolution to
return to his old Love.

The next Morning she went to Fish, and so after dinner to Hawk, and every
day had new delights, till they had past invention, and then like the
Shepherd returned to what they had had: so one morning to hunt they went,
when after one hours chase the hounds running merrily, the stag coming near
them, the Emperor with the rest had his spirits moved with the pleasure, and
not sparing his horse followed with such speed into a great and desert wood, as
he had in the thickness lost the Stagge, hounds, all the company, and
himself; the Que^^e having a guide, and coasting came in to the death, for the
Hou^es soore brought the Dear out of the wood, but at the fall of him the
Emperor was missed, the Queen missing in that miss all joy and content, her
heart being so much his, as still partooke of his fortunes, and that faithfully
told her he would not quickly be heard of again, she grew sad, and instead
of honoring her Dogs, or Dear with their last rights, took her horse again
and went her self to seek him, sending all her train several ways in the
same quest, taking only with her two Ladies that had held out the chase with
her, and ten Knights. She continued the search till night, then came she to a
house in the midst of the wood, where she resolud to rest her that night, and
the next day betimes pursue her search. When she came into the house she found
servants ready, and willing to entertain her, but their Mistress was not as
then come from hunting; the Queen weary and sad, s^te down on a bed, or
rather neglectiuely threw her self upon one, her Ladi^s in the mean space
taulking with the servants concerning their Mistress, ^ill she returned in a
garment of black Damask, which reached to her knees, and another below that,
that came to the small of her leg, of Satin, buskins she had of the finest
leather laced and tied with pretty knots of ribbin, but al black, and so had
she gone ever since her love left her. On her head she wore a hat, but her
hair under it, tied and braded so finely, as she might throw off her hat at
pleasure, and remain finer then before. She seemed to have been excellent^
and yet she appeared lovely, though her face said she was not in the youth
fullest time of her years, yet her Summer was not quite done; she had
strength, and spirit in place of delicasie and sins, and wholesome
healthfulnes for dainty beauty, altogether she was far from being
contemptible, though not merriting to be admired, if not for constancy and
patient suffering which she had brought her self unto, and to so perfect a
kind of them, as she no way wanted her former happiness

An excellent Creature she was without question in her kind, and as such are
often times abused with excelling change; She understanding the Queen was in her
house, was much ioyed withal, but not so ravished with it, as it made her any
whit forget her duty, as others have done, rashly overcome with joy, to grow
unmannerly withal, but stayed attending the good fortune when she might see,
and welcome her Majesty which should be done when she called, that tim came
soon after, for the Q. having tumbled awhile, and cast her thoughts into
millions of various conceits, she with wearynes fell asleep, and so continued
an hour, which space the sweet Nymph stayed for her.

As soon as the Ladies had told the Queen of her being without, she was
admitted in to her, who with as much humillity, as the Queen with kindness
saluted her, using her best language (as she had as good as any of her sort,)
to express her gladness in seeing, and having her Majesty in her house.
Pamphilia hearing her speak, and beholding her manner and fashion, besides the
furniture of the room being of delicate and rich silk, both hangings and bed,
which till then she regarded not, did believe she was of noble kind, and so
used her, taking her gently from the ground, and telling her she was not to
kneel to her guest.

To my Sovereign Lady (^^id she) I am bound, and your worth claims this, and
more respect from all ^^^angers, then kissed she the Queens hands, and rose,
beholding the Queen with admiration of her beauty and sadness; her eyes having
been employed to other use then sleeping, as by the red circles did appear.
Delicate discourse passed between them a good space, till the Queen found she
might be bolder with her, then she yet had, and so began to ask her some
questions, the first, why she woare Black, being a Huntresse? She replied,
she had lost her Dear, and mourned for it. Then must I wear Black also
(said she) for I am parted unfortunately from my dearest Dear, for which my
heart already is in mourning. The sweet Nymph with a low reverence and a
sigh, seemd to lament for her; the Queen then proceeded, as longing to know
the end, which the other perceiving, to give her all content, yielded unto it,
and proceeded thus.

Since I see the desire you have to know all my story, may it please your
Majesty to understand, I am called Mirasilua, a Forest Nymph by my manner of
life, but not professed to Diana, though a servant to her delights; unmarried I
live, but wedded to a vow I made to one, whose breach of his, like-made-one to
me cannot yet vnmarry me; he was called Sildurino, as fair, but as false as
any, his life was wholly in the Country, and after that manner though he was
nobly descended, but his Grandfather falling into an unfortunate action
overthrew their house, his father and his children, ever after living privately,
and but plentifully, yet is there no reason to use them with the less respect,
or to contemue them, or think basely of them, who suffer for others offenses,
not their own; yet such was the greatness of their spirits, as of four sonns
the Grandfather left none, but his father did marry who was betrothed before
his fall, and she nobly would after continue her love to her Spouse, living
happily together, and as contented as if they had all the possessions, and
honors they were borne unto, which was as much as most, or any in this
Kingdom.

The other three brothers lived with them, but so vexed, and stomacking their
pouertyes, yet having virtuous hearts would not consent to think of ill
courses, they perplexedly lived, and at last dyed, their hearts broken with
their own swellings, and rent with their own furious passions, their
overthrow came in this manner. The King who unquietly reigned next before your
most worthy Uncle, was a mighty Tyrant, and had purchased the Kingdom by
treachery, and bloodshedding of many, lastly of the right King, his children
and kinsmen, to the last he could find that durst say he had one drop of
Royal blood in him, and many suffered for this, having so much royal virtue
as to strive to overthrow such a beast. When he had done this, and none left
to withstand him, he yet thought himself not secure, unless he ruined those
that knew his villainy, least they bloodded in ill would practice on him: all
those he likewise made away, nay those dear friends of his that had set the
Crown upon his head, truly, and worthily requi^ed them for so Deuilish an
act: with the same they fed the poor King his predesessor, who had no falt
but that he was too good, too honest, too just, and two religious, showed
faults in Princes in these days. When the king had thus gained his mind, and
freed himself from the danger of being betrayed, who had been treacherous to
so many, and none left that he could fear, or say that man knows my ill, so
as now he might surely walk if not for his own conscience; yet what good got
he by this? he had not only rid himself of those he might mistrust or dislike,
to see if any remorse were in him, but of friends, so as he stood alone, and
like a Tree in the midst of a plain his branches cut off, every wind has
power on him; So stood he apt to be shaken with every storm which was seen,
and considered by many, and at last resolved upon that he should reele or
fall. A plot was laid, and most of the remaining Nobility, and especially all
the ancient Lords by desent, though many were young men among them agreed
together; but the King as he was wicked, so he was very wise, or politic,
quickly discernd there was something more then was for his good, wherefore like
an old Fox when he means to get a dwelling which he will not take pains to
make himself, lays baits, and wiles to gain his neighbors house, and
deceiues the poor Badger; so did this Devil, laying such ^inns for them, as
he caught them when they lest thought of it, thrusting into their counsels,
and companyes, instruments of his, who were content to swear and forswear any
thing, nay their own souls to win his favor, such a Tyrant is ambition
over man to get the grace of Kings, who being king it is enough, and no matter
what Kings they are. These men did not only join with the rest in what they
advised, but added of their own inventions, leading them on by trains into
the snare.

When time was ripe for the action, and the discovery, the King called an
assembly of all his Lords, and as it were to rectify some things that were
amiss, and to give satisfaction to his people, if any thing troubled them,
besides to propound war against Celicia, their ancient and new grown enemy.
These friends (for too honest the maine part were to be called conspirators)
came with the rest, and so obeyed the orders and commands of the King who
helped some things, but their chief grieuances were not brought in, at last
these poor betrayed Lords were, when earnestest for their Country, crossed and
cut short by the King, which moved them so much, as rather then suffer
dishonor they flew out; many of the Commons took part with them, but such is
the bacenes of common people, as they left them as soon as they heard one
Proclamation against them; they were soon taken, some killed that would
withstand, but Sildurino his Grandfather was taken, and not denying the
determination held among them, was executed, his sonns not being of the
confederacy were degraded, their houses razed, and their name utterly forgotten
by command of never being mentioned more then by their Christian names, their
goods confis^ated, and lands forfited to the King, themselves confined to one
house the poorest their father had, where they were bound to live without
titles, or means, but from staruing, and if they broke the command, death
ensued. Many other noble families fell also, my Grandfather likewise sufferd
for this business, but so great a fall it was, not to us, since there was none
left but my self to inherit his estate, and I so unblessed a woman as merit
no other then a most unfortunate being.

We two as borne to ill, and misfortune, fell as unluckily to love each other,
love I think I may say we did, I am sure he liked, at least much dissembled,
and I dare swear I loved, yet as a conclusion must come to all things, so did
there one fall, and a desperate one for me, for he left me, alas unkindly left
me, who entirely loved him, and mourn in heart and soul still for him, and my
loss. Alas (said I to my self) what made him leave me? he told me, I was
grown an old Wench, he has chosen an elder whom he adores, and worships like
a Saint, and well may he do so, for she seems rather an Image then a fleshly
body, or rather a relic of what had been to be reverenced, then a substance
to be beloved.

But if I speak much in this kind, your Majesty may think, envy speaks in
me, though this is but truth, and most true, that she has the advantage of
winning, and keeping a love above all other women, for so powerful she is in
the gaining, sparing neither estate, honor, nor travel to accomplish her
desires; then so diligent, and careful in the preserving her gain, as it is
impossible to get one back again that she has gotten. She will not neglect
occasions, services, duties, that servants were fitter to do; nay, so busy
she will be in her house to have any thing she imagines will please, as she
appears to strangers, rather an Hostess, then a Mistress: but such a Mistress
she has ever been, for he is but one of a great sum of servants which she
has past her time with all, but now decayed and grown old as I and others are,
she holds only him, (at least as he thinks, though God forgive me if I believe
it not, or that he is alone) and him by Enchantment surely; for she is now at
this present the most contrary woman to his former choyces that can be
invented, nay, to his opinions, as his own hand can witness; but he has
forgotten them as me, and we must suffer to satisfy his variety and love to
it. But how if he return to your love, will he be received or slighted, said
the Queen? me thinks these weeds promise pardon, since none would mourn for
that they care not for. The care of him and for him made me first wear them,
answered Myrasilua, but now I mourn for mine own misfortune, and I assure my
self may still for any hope of his alteration; no alas Madam, he is left, and
I undone may see it. I confess he did many times about the the time of his
change, speak in a kind, as if it had been my fault and neglect, that made the
alterations, but my soul and his know the contrary: I saw him going, I sought
to prevent it, but when I found such private meetings, such plots to cosen
himself by deceiving me, and my trust in him, I could not sue for
impossibilities, nor seek where I was refused and wronged. Some said (as I
remember one that followed, or haunted him I think) that surely it was my
lasinesse, and her actiuenesse that won him; Ah (said I) if he were to be
won, I could not loose him, now I know I cannot keep him, nor could I almost
keep my wits for the affliction of it, since I find he was, and is but a man
that I so much reverenced, no God but in my Idolatry; a Devil to my rest and
quiet content, of which I have not tasted since his leaving me, but so well, or
much acquainted with these, as I think joy, or they would be distastefull to
me. Be not of that opinion (said Pamphilia), but think how to embrace him with
the former affection, and love as you were wont; love him and forget what is
past, remember it not so much as to question it, wrap up the former crosses and
misfortunes all in a sheet of forgiveness, and drown them in the Sea of your
patience, and renewed love, smile on him and his repentance as on his love, and
first suit, welcome his return as his first profession, and embrace his second
love in the arms of your truest and dearest thoughts, as you did his vows,
and loving protestations; be resolute to forget, and in forgiving, receive him
a new man yet the same lover he was when perfectest. If his perfections were
not blotted with change (said the Nymph) I could do them, for in troth Madam,
my heart and soul rejoices when I think, or hear of him; therefore I fear
I cannot refuse, which is the cause I pray daily to hold me out of his sight,
since I cannot see him, but to my deadly torment in another possession, then
how may I hope to see him return, I find no possibility to enjoy, or hope for
it.

Trust me (said the Queen) he is recanting, and ere long you will see it, but
be careful in accepting, lest the others importunity, and your slacknesse
mar not all again. Then did the Queen tell her all that had passed between
her, the Emperor and the Shepherd, which made her a most joyful woman, and
glad besides for his sake, that the Queen took his talk so well, touching
her Majesty's self so nearely. Their discourse ended, and Myrasilua having
given her word to be kind again, or rather to coutinue so as well in
expression to him, as in her heart she still had been, entreated Pamphilia to
sup, and accept of such fare, as Forresters had in those Deserts. She gave her
many thanks, and went out with her, so they eat, and after the Queen went to
bed, desiring to be alone, the freelier to think of her other self; and
though she enjoyed not his sight, to see him lively in her soul, where he was
engraven by faithful memory.

O Amphilanthus (said she) why have thou left thy poor Pamphilia thus, newly
raised from death of despair, to the life of hope and happiness, to be cast
down lower, then before in misery? My better and dearer self, I know it was
not thy meaning to leave me thus soon, nor in this manner. What Devil is
risen now to undo, and murder my content? Accursed be this Wood, the Day we
went an hunting, the motion to that rude savage exercise, and all appurtenances
that brought, or aided to my loss. My sweetest life, how do I perpetually dye
in thy absence? My dearest heart, return and restore me, else come to see me
die^ and close my dying eyes with thy all^ conquering, and beloved hands; or if
it would grieve thee, yet be content to spare me wishes in thy absence, and
live thou as happy, as thou art most worthy. Let these eyes be blessed (if
possibly I may ask and obtain such a blessing) with seeing thee again: let
me be the fortunate finder of thee, and let me find thy favor still to me,
then most luckely and eternally happy search. With these, and many more such
passionate words, she spent most time of the night, till being tired, sleep
would have his share of the royal Queen, and so she slept, but not long
before she started, cried out, O stay, and live with me, follow not her, that
loves thee not like me, forsake me not again; Oh stay, with that she stayed her
speech, for then she came out of her dream, and seeing it was but a dream,
was a little better satisfied, yet so it stuck in her, as the abiding of it so
fresh in her thoughts, foretold an extraordinary matter in it. She dreamt,
that she had him in her arms, discoursing with him; but he sad, and not
speaking, of a sudden rose, and went to the door, where she thought she saw
Lucenia calling to him, to whom he went, and down the stairs with her, then
took Coach and fled away with her, which made her cry with that haste and
loudness, but he went still with Lucenia, never looking toward her, and so
she lost sight of them, Coach and all; an odd Omen, considering all that
happned afterward.

Well, she rose as soon, as day appeared, and taking her leave of that kind
Nymph, she took her horse, and went into the Wood, traveling till she came
into the Desartest place, and most obscure of that part, riding up and down as
well as she could for the thickness of it, she perceived at last upon a
white Bone that lay there (which had been of some beast that had been killed,
or died there, and the rest consumed, or then away) one drop of blood fresh,
and then a little from that more, and so following it, came to a place where
there was a pretty quantity, and only the tract of one horse to be seen, she
feared, and tracking the blood till she came to a place made round like a
Crown of mighty stones, in the midst one greater then all the rest, and on
that the Armor of Amphilanthus, his Shield, and Sword, but that was stroke
with such force and strength into the stone, and as if run half way in it,
as none could stir it, that, and the armor was hacked, and cut in many
places, besides all bloody, and the blood as fresh, as if but newly shed, on
the other side his horse lay dead, and hard by an infinite and huge Boar
slain, yet so terrible to behold, as it almost amassed the beholders, a little
from thence a Gentleman of excellent proportion dead also; but the Queen
looked on nothing but her Deares Armor and Sword; after she saw the Knight,
and knew him not being unarmed, standing as still as the stone, and as
immovable, till at last she sunk to the ground in a swound; her women helped
to unlace her, and her Knights fetched water and such things to bring her to
life again, as they could get there. In the mean time came a Knight in gilt
armor, and seeing this miserable spectacle, he kneeled dowue by the Queen,
and assisted her poor Ladies, whose grief and amasement was such, as they
were scarce able to do the service required at their hands. At last she
breathed, and then sighed, looked up, cried, O my dear Amphilanthus, I come, I
come, then fainted again, and again they fetched her. When she saw she had
not power to die, as she hoped, and found her self in the arms of an armed
Knight, she said; Sir, I beseech you what authority have you over me in my
misery, that you venture to hold me from my resolution? either I pray leave me
presently to my own will, or more kindly send me to him, after whom I will not
live. What account can I give the world of his loss, whom all the world
admired and loved? What will Germany, Italy, and all say of me? what curses lay
upon me, and my Country, when they shall know that with me, and in this place
they have lost him? Accursed Country, but more accursed woman, for whose sake
the Earths glory and happiness came into it, and here, Oh here is? More she
would have said, but her speech and voice faltred. The Knight had pulled off his
Helm, and then as passionatly weeping and lamenting as they did, he spoke,
being known to be Polarchos. Alas Madam (said he) how comes this misfortune,
be like your self, and tell me, that I may, and your other servants redress
this wrong as near as we can, and know what is become of that royal man. O
Polarchos (said she) how can I look on thee, and say, thy Lord is dead, and
so my heart departed. Never let me hear those words, cried he: but where is
his body, or how know you he is dead? What can be hoped, for else, said she?
see you not his sword that made so many bow, and yield? his arms that served
him in so many conflicts, his horse that never failed, while he had life, how
can it be otherwise, but he is dead since, what else could s^perate him from
these Jewels. Then afresh they lamented and cried; but Pamphilia at last
remembered (calling his sweetness, and love as freshly, and affectionately to
her sight as if present, but most grievously, because parted) that he was not
armed, when he par^ed from her, that gave a Spring to hope, and made her stay
her tears, till she was resolved, which soon she was by Polarchos, who told
her, that he having romed up and down the Forest, at last returned to the
Tents, where he with the rest of the Officers stayed with their provisions,
expecting them to come to rest, and feed on those things they had provided,
and so return to the City. But as he came, and lighted, instantly a young
fellow like a Forrester, came crying, That your Majesty was taken away by
Thieves, and carried into the thickest part of the Wood, whereupon he armed
himself, and speedily took the way he directed him; we with as much speed as
we could followed him, but in the Woods we lost sight of him, and all (as if
led by several Spirits) are scattred and lost. Lost indeed, said she, we all
are, since he is lost, more worth then the whole Earth, and lost by treason, as
now it plainly appears; then they fell to their lamentations again, but
Polarchos took the Arms, and would have put them up. No, said she, these
shall here remain, none being worthy to touch, much less to wear them after
him. Then they hung them up, putting in pinnes of Gold into the great stones,
and on every stone hung a piece, enriching that Crown with more rich ornaments
(having then the Arms of the most magnanimious Prince of the World) then if
the costliest Diamonds had been inchased in them; the Sword they also thought
to hang up with his Shield, but Polarchos could no more move that, then
Pamphilia; the Scaberd they hung with the Shield, and vnder-writ some lines,
Pamphilia both making them, and ingrauing them, as shall be told hereafter.
Polarchos began to be a little better in hope, when he saw the Sword in that
order, trusting it was but some Enchantment, from which he might be deliuerd,
though held some time from them, which was a new grief to think upon. When
they were going away, the Queen to lament and mourn, which she vowed during
her life to do, and Polarchos to live in some remote place, never to see man
nor creature more, the excellentest being gone, they saw out of holes in the
stones, smoke, and fire suddenly to fly out with it. Pamphilia adventured,
and pulling hard at a ring of iron which appeared, opned the great stone, when
a door showed entrance, but within she might see a place like a Hell of
flames, and fire, and as if many walking and throwing pieces of men and women
up and down the flames, partly burnt, and they still stirring the fire, and
more brought in, and the longer she looked, the more she discernd, yet all as
in the hell of deceit, at last she saw Musalina sitting in a Chair of Gold, a
Crown on her head, and Lucenia holding a sword, which Musalina took in her
hand, and before them Amphilanthus was standing, with his heart ripped open, and
Pamphilia written in it, Musalina ready with the point of the sword to conclude
all, by razing that name out, and so his heart as the wound to perish. Feign
she would, nay there was no remedy, but she would go in to help him, flames,
fire, Hell it self not being frightfull enough to keep her from passing
through to him; so with as firm, and as hot flames as those she saw, and more
bravely and truly burning, she ran into the fire, but presently she was thrown
out again in a swound, and the door shut; when she came to her self, cursing
her destiny, meaning to attempt again, she saw the stone whole, and where
the way into it was, there were these words written.

Faithful lovers keep from hence
None but false ones here can enter:
This conclusion has from whence
Falsehood flows: and such may venture.
Polarchos attempted likewise, but could only (for being unconstant) pass the
flames, but not come within reach of the Emperor, but then was cast out also.
The Queen then perceived what this was, and so as sadly as before resolved,
she returned to the Court, where more like a religious, then a Court life, she
lived some years. Polarchos presently provided long gray Roabes, like a
Hermit, and on the outside of the Armes-crowned Crown he made a Cell, where he
lived daily beholding the Arms, and lamenting for his Lord, kissing the stone
wherein he thought he was enclosed, and thus lived he, guarding the Arms of
his Lord, till the adventure was concluded.

The other eleven Princes that came with Amphilanthus into Pamphilia, and were
as Polarchos has told you scatterd, and divided in the Desert, it was the
fortune of the Prince of Transiluania to come within two days after to the
same Lodge, where the Queen had lain with the dainty sad Nymph; but hearing
of Pamphilias being well and safe, only perplexed for the want of
Amphilanthus, stayed not, but followed the search of them both, till he came
to the seaside, where beholding the waves, and comparing men's fortune to the
rising, falling, and breaking of them, he saw a little Bote come toward the
land, and in it a fair Damsel, weeping and pitifully complaining. The Prince
took great compassion of her, demanding the cause of her sorrow.

Alas Sir (said she) shall I tell you, and you prove like other Knights, I may
well then accuse my forwardness, and pain; but if you will promise to succor
my Lady, who is so fair, worthy and great, as will take away the show of my
imperfections, perfect in nothing but duty to her, I will then tell you what
you ask. Speak fair, and sad Lady (said he) and I vow to serve your Lady,
and your self with my best endeavors, although I must tell you, I am in
search of such, as unwillingly I would be diuerted, but compassion compells me
to serve you. She thanked him, and thus proceeded. Blessed may you, and all
your enterprises be, who for a distressed Ladies sake will lay aside your own
occasions, and let me know I beseech you, to whom she is thus much engaged. I
am (said he) Prince of Transiluania, servant to the Emperor Amphilanthus, from
whom I was parted in yonder Desert, and have since sought him, and was yet in
the quest of him, and the Queen of this Country, with eleven Princes more his
servants, all severed from one another, and seeking each other; God send they
may happily meet said she; and you brave, and courteous Prince be for ever
happy for your noblen^sse. The business which urges me to demand your help
is this, my Lady and Mistress is the Princess of Lycia, only daughter to the
King of that Country, next neighbor to this place, so as your stay shall not
be very long from your search; with this Lady the Lord of the Mountains
called Taurus (an unworthy man, rude, proud, ill-fauourd, savage and rough as
well in person, as in manners, but wonderful powerful, and mighty of body,
means and people) fell in love; she being as delicate, as he abominable,
which made her hate him as much, as he sought her, but her father a good
Prince, loving peace, would not provoke war, but rather yield her to him.

This brought the sweet Princess into desperate melancholy, and despair,
but a Noble man as well in truth of virtue, as descent and honor to defend her
from so much harm, took her into his protection the same day she should have
been given to the Mountain Lord, venturing life, honors, and estate to keep
her free. This being discerned by the cruel proud man, and her father, the
good old King troubled withal, utterly disclayming any knowledge of it; they
raised men to take her back by force, and catch him, who should certainly
suffer for such an attempt: but the place is strong, the cause good, and the
defense just, and honest, so as none I hope will do other then pity her, and
seek to redress her wrongs; this has continued eight months, and now the
King has sent directly to her, to yield her self into his hands to be
bestowed on the feirce Montaltanus, or to be forsaken for ever of him, and
disinherited.

This message was heavily received by the poor Princess, yet she resolved to
dye disinherited, and be the poorest in estate, rather then the unhappiest by
marryage; wherefore after an humble answer, and dutiful refusal of yielding
to be wife to Montaltanus; she demanded one request of her father, which was to
let it be lawful for her to send forth in search of some Knight, who would
defend her quarrel against him, whom if he overcame, she should be yeeded unto
his Majesty, if her Knight got the victory, then she should be free, and
inherit what she was borne unto, and this to be performed in two months, and
peace in the interim.

These things were agreed on, and granted with much vainglory on the assured
Champions side; then did the Lady send four Damsells abroad, of which number I
am one, three are returned without finding any, and now are but three days
left of the perfixed time, the Nobleman has also his pardon granted on the
conditions of conquest by the strange Knight, else at the Kings dispose. Now
Sir, if you please to undertake the quarrel, you shall make an noble brave
(but unfortunate) Princess bound unto you, and hers, all your servants. Is the
Noble man said the Prince, in whose hands she is, married, or ambitious by his
service to obtain her? He is married truly Sir said she, and has a virtuous
Lady to his wife, as forward, and ever was as himself to serve the Princess,
and only pitiful respect brought him to venturne upon this danger; I will be
their servant answered the Prince, and venture my life to release her and save
him: Together they went, she the happiest woman living, in that she thus
should serve her Mistress, and the Camp they gained, the night before the
expecting time of Combat, he passed by the Camp, and through some part of it,
having license as it was appointed, and agreed on, those that saw him,
commended him much, for a brave and personable man, likely, and promising much
in him: but when he came to the Castle, the pleasure the Princess, and her
friends felt, cannot be expressed, especially in the Lady her self, who
imagined at first sight it had been Amphilanthus, and indeed she might easily
be deceived, for he some what (and much for his honor) resembled him, but he
wanted much of well marked, for he was short of him in stature, more in shape,
and color being blacker, and most in sweetenes, and perfect louelynes, yet
this was a very brave Gentleman, his greatest faults being to high an opinion
of his own worth, which was lessned by his over valuing of that, which
otherwise had been more valued; but this business he undertook, and bravely
performed the next day, ^ncountering his enemy in a List, made of purpose
between the Camp, and Castle, the Lady being placed by her Kingly Father, in
a Throne raised of purpose for them.

Then entered the great arrogant Mountain Lord, to meet no less a self
esteeming Prince, who was mounted on a brave stirring horse, the colors he
wore were straw color, and hair color: the Caparisons were cut into the
shape of leaves, dead the color showed them, and being set on straw color
cloth of Gold, they seemd as if fallen on sand, and moving with the Air
which the horses motions made likely, and so pretty: On his shield he had a
dead Tree painted, save in the midst of the naked body, there was as it were
one little knot of leaves budding forth, and seeming greenish with a word in
his language, which interpreted, was understood that there yet was some hope.
These Arms, and furniture were new, which might have distasted the young Lady,
but the loss of his Imperial Master coulered that sufficiently.

The feirce Montaltanus was in blood red, like his cruel disposition: Plume he
had none, nor devise, saying those were only things propper to Feasts, and
young men, who thought more on fashion then business; a great, and much
stirring Horse he also had, which well he governed, for a very good Horse man
he was, and full of valliant courage. The place, spectators, Judges, and
themselves ready, the Trumpets sounding, they encountered, in which encounter
they showed all that could be required of strength, skill, and rage, yet the
last so much governed, as made the best judging eyes say, that showed it self
more then dainty, and exquisite cunning would have permitted, running something
to the conceit of boisterousnes, but they meant to fight, not to play: Then
drew they their swords, after the breaking their staves, without any advantage
on either side, and fiercely fought while one hour lasted, and past before any
advantage was seen, till the Transiluanian casting his eyes on his hope, and
Lady, gained so much force, as he struck the proud Mountaner such a blow on
his Helm, as he made him stoop to the Earth, and then struck off his head,
taking off the Helm, he by the hair which was long, carried it to the
Princess, presenting it unto her, which she received with thanks, and so much
gratefulnes, as in requital, and with consent of her Father, and friends she
gave her self to the Conqueror, as the best part of his Conquest, and what he
as affectionatly, as fortunately embraced; yet love to his Master made him stay
but a small time there, though he might thus have been excused, but he was
forced to be accompanied in some part of his journey, for he going into the
Kingdom of Pamphilia, his new wife and dearest love, would not be denied to
go thither with him, most for company, but much to see the admired Queen, so
as soon as the King had ma^e the People swear faith unto them, as his
successors they departed for Pamphilia,

Ten yet are left in search of the Emperor, but it was the Bauarian Duk's
fortune to meet the next Adventure, which was this; having traveled long in
the Desert, weary with pain, and fruitless search, he came unto the skirts
thereof, which were high Hills toward Lycia, at the bottoms he beheld fair,
and pleasant Meadows, and delicate streams running through them, he descended,
and coming into them, he found many folks there mowing the grass, and some
making it up for their winter provision, showing thriftyer People they were
then those that prodigally spent the present time without care of the future.
He spoke unto them kindly, and they respectively gave him answer. He demanded
if they knew of any strange Knights passing that way; they answered that two in
fair Armours, the one blew, flowred with Gold, the other russet and silver,
(by which he knew them to be of his companions, the one the Duke of
Wirtenberg, the other of Brunswicke) passed by in great have, inquiring after
an old man and a young Damsel, who it seemed had done some ill Act, or
pretended some against them.

The Duke courteously thanked them, and so ha^ted after them, being directed
the way they took, he passed till he came to the head of a River, whose
sweetness at the beginning could not content it self, but it must wilfully run
in Pride, so far till it loses it self in the Lycian Sea; like such
ambitious men as never think they have the full of preferment, by honors,
riches, or any other benefit, till they swallow themselves up in the Gulf of
merrited Death. From this not far off he espied a Town, and a brave Country
about, sweet, rich, and every way delicate, called Myra; he rode still toward
it, coming among dainty Meadows, and fruitful plains, admyring this place,
he had a greater cause given him of admiration, for he saw a Pyramede justly
before him curiously made, and as richly adorned with rare Trophies belonging
to Love, which showed that it was dedicated to that God, but one thing seemed
strangest to him, which was a Garland hanging on the one side of it, of flowers
dead, and withered, some fallen off, others decayed, following them that were
gone before, and under it these lines graven in a piece of Brass.

EGypts Pyramid's enclose their Kings,
But this far brauer, nobler things;
Virtue, Beauty, Love, Faith, all here lie
Kept in Myras Tomb, shut from eye:
The Phoenix dies to raise another fair,
Borne of her ashes, to be heir;
So this sweet Place may claim that right in w^e,
Since here she lies, Heaven willing so.
The brave Knight beheld it very wishly, coniecturing by it, that it was the
Tomb of some famous woman, and that Monument made for her by her servant,
which made him lament (though a stranger) for them both; for her, as a loss to
those parts, never to be repaired; for him, as never to be relieved having such
a loss. Then he called to mind his own fortune which made him light, and
laying, or rather throwing himself upon the grass, at the foot of the
Pyramede, letting his horse go at his own pleasure, while his Master felt
none of that part, groaning out these words, and weeping he delivered them. How
fit is this Adventure befallen me to be brought to this place where I may
freely, and sadly without interruption breath out my myseries? Unfortunate
Peryneus, what is Bauaria, or all the world to thee, having lost thy only
delight, and for that which thou did love them? O thou Mirror of thy time and
sex: Dearest Ely^^, was thy Spring and young Summer too sweet, and pleasing
for us; nay, such as we did not, or could not be worthy of it? was thy
tenderness too delicate, or thy delicacie too tender to suffer it self with
us: thy exquisite sweetness, such as we like Bees would greedily have sucked,
thy daintines to enrich our pleasures; and therefore fearing we should surfeit,
would take away all, lest part might hurt.

Dearest Elyna, yet though thy goodness was beyond our merit, why would
thou for ever leave thy faithful Peryneus, who dies in thy loss, and lives
but in thy memory: Then turned he himself on his back, crying out, O
Heavens, why did you behold her end without fatall-killing thunder, and all
storms that could be thought on, or executed by you? never let such cruelty
again be endured, plagues being their companions, noisome smells and
dangerous infections; but the greatest plague could come depriving the Earth of
her, has yet brought but this, that with her last breath she sweetened for
ever the air, and left the most delicate odor of her most sweet breath to
bless the Country, as if of purpose, that all may say, this was Elyna's
breath, and we must breathe to her memory.

My only companion Memory, a^^ist me now, and let me to thee, and with thy
help, relate again our loves.

Thou know when, young, wanton and idle, I lived at the Emperors Court,
courting, and often times received of the not refusing Ladies: Elyna appeard like
the happy sign of no more destruction in that kind, for I had before felt
pain and pangs of love, but she took away all, giving me life and comfort;
for she requited me, nay deserved more then I could give her, so as I remaind
wanting, but not in want of love faulty. Thou can with me remember how I
loved a Maid belonging to the Empress, fair and fond she was, and so her
fortune continued with the latter; but her I left. Thou can call to mind
that a Widow loved me, and I received her affection; for who would deny
beauty and kindness? But she was not for me, though for the satisfaction of
her fondness I fondly ventured danger.

Thou will (it may be) say I was led astray with the liking of a Duchess,
wife to a great Duke, I cannot deny that: but both of us must join, and
truly say, Elyna came like a fair chaste cloud, and wrapped up my heat in her
snowy arms, keeping it only to warm her requiting breast, but hid the bright
hot beam from harming her, or making others either warm with delight, or hot
with fury for it.

Sweetest Elyna, my souls joy is thinking of thee, were thou not yet unkind a
little in leaving me, yet did thou leave me the worthiest way, and
noblest; nothing but death took thee from me, no other thread broke; nor any
but that cruel fatal Sister, could have disseuered our twiued loves; nor has
death done that, for dying thou did bequeathe thy love to me, and met and
equaled by mine own, it remains jointly mixed; not two, but one, and such an
one since compounded with them, as now I may boldly say, I hold enclosed in me
the richest treasure of love and faith that ever man's breast had, being the
glory of both Sexes, hers for worth, mine for humility and loyalty.

I remember kind Memory, when she told me she feared our loves were
discovered to the suspicious Empress, how sweetly and carefully she spoke
unto me, wishing my care of my self, but expressing her love in the height of
kindness to me, fearing she could not enough let me know both, or fear
both without a less love then passion would permit; yet thus she was cleared
from suspicion that passion never had more force, nor yet more regular power
then in her, She as passionately loving as any, yet with that discretion
tempered it, as none so discre^tly showed passion.

She forbad me not speaking to her, coming to her chamber, looking on her,
writing to her, (as idle humorous Lovers do) startling at every motion, Love
being in them but like Hunny kept in the Hiues, many stings of trouble to hold
one from inioying: but in her love and care were real, and so used; no less
was her fashion noble, kind, and free, then when no suspicion was, not
although the Empress took her about the neck, led her to a window which
looked on a Tarras, bad her look forth, and tell her who that was who walked
with his back toward them; she answering, it was Peryneus. Is he not (said
she) the hansomest man you ever saw? Truly (said she) Madam, his mind
joined to his person, makes him appear excellent, and such I dare presume your
Majesty thinks him to be; she answered nothing, but frownd. Elyna retired,
yet never stirred from her former brave carriage to me, love in her (indeed)
being most excellent.

O Elyna, Elyna, what shall I say more, or can say less, and speak truth, but
that thou were living, and dead art the worthiest example of thy Sex. That is
enough, and too much said one, who lay on the other side of the Pyramide; for
Myra was and is beyond her, take life or death which you will: I will venture
both and take the worser, answered he, rather then hear Elyna wronged.

They both were angry, both vexed: but hasty in choler, took not the
hurtfullest, though the readiest way to hurt; for they flew one upon the other
with great fierceness, but small harm could ensue, for no weapons they used
but their hands, the one having none, the other at first for haste using none,
and after finding the others want in honor to his Mistress, would not contend
with an unarmed man, not (as he deemed him) worthy to be meddled withal in so
noble a quarrel, unless he came like a man to maintain such a business of
so great weight; wherefore stepping from him, he thus resolutely spoke to him.

Unfortunate man (said he) see thy error in double kind made plain unto
thee; tell not me of plain showing errors, but rather plainly confess your
presumptuous fault, or let us try it out with the sword: Thou art (said
Peryneus) unarmed, and yet armed with the greatest insolency in the world, to
use these speeches, and venture to call me to account for a truth, while thou
must maintain a falsehood in defending thy first foolishly bold words. A sword I
have said he, and for other Arms, I have forsworn wearing any; therefore if
thou will keep on thine do, and I make no doubt but to overthrow thee and thy
armed pride together. With that he took down a sword which hung on the same
side of the Pyramide, over the place where he lay: the brave Duke would not
take any advantage of him; besides, assured that his cause was just, unarmed
himself, and so they were going about to conclude the difference with the end
of their lives, to sacrifice their bloods to their dearest and only Loves
memories.

But happier for them and the honor of Lovers it fell out; for three delicate
Nymphs came by coming from hunting with their bows in their hands, and
Quiuers at their backs, their apparel green, white buskins and delicate
Garlands on their heads; to these two angry Lovers they came, and with sweet
perswations (mixed with threatenings to shoot him that first struck a blow)
pacified them, desiring to know the ground of the quarrel, and withal the
discourse of their fortunes. They consented to the one, but would not promise
the other, which was to be friends till the Stories were ended, lest new
dislike in the relations might arise, if none, they would then obey them; if
any, the first was the fittest to be answered.

The Nymphs then to be no cause of dislike commanded them to draw lottes who
should begin, lest the pre-eminence might be a new stirring. They liked that
well, for therein they thought their Mistresses had honor; the chance fell on
the defender of the Pyramide, for so he called himself, who began thus.

Sweet Nymphs, and you Sir, will you be plas'd to know I am called Alarinus
of this Country, this accursed Country, poor beggared Country, having lost
all that rich was, worthy or good in it: I was the chief of command herein,
but Myra, who commanded all, and all of me; but she gone, I am no more but
less then any thing, and now the most miserably overthrown and ruined: She
(I say) was sole Lady of this place, which is honored with her name, and the
holding those sacred relics her bones and ashes in her bosom where she is
interred. A Lady she was of infinite parts, wanting in nothing but good
fortune, which showed much neglectiuenesse to her, envying surely her worth,
and jealous she should have had her place and ruled the wheel whereon she
turned her to the lowest part, and thus it was.

O thus: can I say thus, and not just then depart? I can and must; yet O
unjustly she was thus punished surely for my too great offense. Dear, nay,
diuinest Myra, thus thy end and my succeeding end did happen, then wrung he
his hands, wept and tumbled on the earth, as weary of all life, she being
gone, then sitting a little up, his hands upon his knees, and his head hanging
down dejected, eyes on the ground, and his tears falling from them, as from
two stilles, she was, groned, he, most fair, lovely, and winning, yet won
to her self a stayed constancy, which made all but my self lose, or rather
want what they sought. She loved (in that all-happy man) my self; to say I
loved her, it is too little, all loved her, but I served her: many then enuyed
me. I ioyed in her favor (which was my blessing,) and regarded nothing else,
poor men; said I, that trouble themselves, laboring for the harmefull
knowledge of the disdain allotted them, or to hear of me the man that
enriched with this hauenly treasure, scorns all other wealth: But the King of
Lycia had a Nephew, who would have her whether she would or no; dislike him she
did, refuse him with ciuility and fair language she often did, at last, flatly
deny him she did; upon this he laid baits for her, betray her he sought to
do, bribe her servants he did, corrupt her counsel he did, gain her women
by gifts and promises to work his ends he sought, and did; in conclusion,
nothing that was ill, false, and harmefull to her, he left undone; but all
treachery and wickedness he plotted and did against her, the innocent Dove of
virtue: what she propounded to her counsel, he knew by them, what she
trusted to her servants, they delivered to him, what she confidently put into
her women's hands, they instantly gave him intelligence of, so as she was
betrayed like Pigeons, by a flattering Glass enticing them to believe all was
for their good, and so she was betrayed. The King of Lycia then came to visit
her, taking the occasion as he pretended of being so near her country, which
a Progress had brought him to; he was entertained answerable to his mind,
and for her estate to give; he brought also with him a delicate fine young
Lady his only daughter, whom he put upon Myra, to persuade for her Cosen;
but she was young and her judgment though good, and great for her years,
which were but small and came short of hers, to whom she was to speak, and
whom she should work by her wit aad sweetness: but Myras wit was without
compare, her judgment sollid, and infinite her knowledge, her experience
having settled the Monarchy of her excellent parts, so as the Princess did
well, but Myra much better. She persuaded prettily, but Myra iudicially
refused. The King then returned troubled, but not expressing it, his
disposition being naturally gentle, and mild, soft and not so much as the
hardness of contradiction in him; grieve he would sooner then quarrel, and
so went home, his Nephew with him puffed up with malice, scorn, and treachery,
that sweld as poison in his breast: but soon did he come again with all his
ill about him (wherewith he was fill^d like a nut with the kernel, no place
void so much in him, as where air of virtue might pierce, or be:) She seeing
him return vowed to forbid him boldly; but this, as she thought to have done,
was before the act came abroad, pri^ately delivered him by his instruments, but
her servants, which infinitely harmed her; for he to prevent his banishment,
and equal her disgracing him, raised a most detestable slander on her, and
how? or by whom? but alas, by me saying she had: Rather (I beseech you)
imagine, if you can let any ill imagination enter into your thoughts of so
excellent a creature, then put me to rehearse it, or boldly think any ill
with this consideration, that it was the root of it self, that the Devil
invented it, and then pity her and me, who unjustly suffered, or indeed only
her, since she alone deserves pity, being injured, and for one so unworthy,
yet to her just: This was none of my least aflictions, since it was the course
whereby her fate was governed, leading her to her end, and making me part of
the mischief. The State on this imprisoned me, shut her up in her lodgings,
suffering no access to her but such as they permitted; he might and would
against her will have liberty, this so galled her sweet nature, a stain in
reputation, being so terrible to her, as shame to another was not near it,
besides knowing my imprisonment: And lastly, seeing how she was and had been
betrayed, none being near her that she had not found far from faith to her,
ouerpressed with grief, and grieved with oppression, she writ unto the State,
finding means to have it delivered safely, looking often to that end out of
her window, and at last seeing a Gentleman, whose faith she thought untouched,
threw the letter to him, not commanding but beseeching him to deliver it the
nxet Sunday, when the Counsel sat, and not to give it to any one, but to them
all, nor to nominate the person so unfortunate that sent it, lest the knowledge
of the sender might hinder the reading of it. The Gentleman promised to do it,
and with honest care and careful honesty performed it, as she could have
wished.

Much dispute there was about it, the Counsel were divided and several
opinions held; the i^solent wooer (who would, he said, for all the knowledge
of her ill, take her to wife if she would be good and true to him afterward)
was much against the granting her request: but most voices carried it, and her
desire was consented to in part, which was, that being accus^d, and as she
protested, falsely and shamefully wronged by slander, none being able to accuse
her but by wicked surmises, she might have the law that no ordinary subject
was denied, which was that she might be cleared by Combat, that he whosoever
it were who would maintain that she was guilty, might be encountered by one
whom she should nominate, which was my self: but that was refused, for they
said, so it might be but a too honorable concluding of my days who had so
injured the State in her dishononr, as no punishment could be sufficient for
me; but if she could find one who would defend her, she should have leave
to send in search of one, whom, if by the Champion overcome, she should be
left to his disposing, and I should be delivered to him, to have what severe
punishment he should in^lict on me: these were hard conditions; yet she
yielded unto them, rather then still remain in the ill opinion of the world,
and both of us as prison^rs.

Three Gentle-women were then sent forth to seek a Knight that would venture in
her defense, none in the Country would, either so frighted they were with the
strength of the Prince, or doubtful of the cause, he having made it so foul
on her side, so as abandoned of her servants, strang^rs must relieve her, and
from such must her good as her hope proceed. The time grew on, half being
expired, when one of the women fortunately met the v^l^ant (but proud) King of
Celicia, a young man, haughty and ambitious of honor. And who lately dyed for
his ambitions, (said Perineus if I be not deceived) seeking the Star of
women, the Queen of Pamphilia for w^fe.

It may be so (said Alarinus;) but this was some years before that misfo^tune
could befall him being in the spring of his adventures, the blossoms but
appearing, scarce blown, of his valor; or the discovering of it, this being
the first great trial of his strength: But is he then dead (said he?) Yes
truly said Peryneus, I saw him slain by my Master the Emperor Amphilanthus
being in Pamphilia, and in the sight of the Queen whom he much loved, or
seemd to do so, but I pray go on. This King coming, and hearing the truth
still spread by every good tongue undertook the business, partly for Justice,
partly for gain of honor. Being arrived at the Court, the insolent wretch,
the robber of my Ladies honor, and my bliss; made little account openly of
him, though I understood afterward he wished any other of those parts had
undertaken the quarrel, and indeed he had reason, for he was a brave
Gentleman for strength, valor, and all things required in a Prince, no fault
in him but that he had too much, for his pride might have been spared.

The day was appointed, and the two Combatants came forth, my Lady and Mistress
was in a strong Tower placed only to see, my self right over against her,
able to see, but not discern her perfectly, though such were our loves, as our
eyes pierced further then any others could have done, so as we saw each
other, and clearly discerned our miseries with open eyes to misfortune; the
Combat began between them, while imprisonments, our eyes beheld each other
as greedily, and earnestly the continual Combat endured in our hearts against
our unjust as those did, who contended for victory: we striving but to give
expression her due. I saw me thought in her imprisonment, Injustice, Wrong,
Injury, Slander; nay, all wickedness, and so I called them all by their
names, and reviled them, but what answer had I? Wickedness is strong, and
has a more powerful command in this age, then honesty, or worth.

O me cried I, must I live, and only hope that this man shall give us life, or
shameful death? her honor already is dead, killed by that, yet living,
Villain, whose death can never re-giue life or recovery to that murdered
honor.

O dear Honor, how nice art thou, and precious, yet how soon harmd? Like the
daintiest skinns soonest Sunne-burnd: Shall these Locks, cryde I, combat for
such a Jewel? Can she not, or may she not live without these rude helps?
Must her sacred virtue be tried like other questionable, or, she be named as
if in a Romancy, that relates of Knights, and distressed Damosells, the sad
Adventures? O Myra, thou art, and were ever without compare, wherefore should
thy honor be called on, but for Honors sake, thy dear breast being the
richest tabernacle for it? but what auailed this? Alas nothing, I might sigh,
and grieve, they fight, and bleed, but what of all? all came at last to one
end, the Villain was killed by the brave King, but my Lady dyed also, for
such a device they had, as the battle being hard and questionable who should
have the victory: the King fell, but soon recovered, at which instant it
seemed that I threw my self out of the window, which was high, and the Ditch
infinite deep into which I was to fall, so as no hope could be of escaping for
any that fell there.

Myra might, and did see it, but as most it concernd her, so did it work in
her, for she instantly withdrew her self from the window, threw her self
upon her bed, ctyed out only against misfortune, and so brake her heart, and
dyed, her last words being, yet though honor, and life be lost, I dye just,
and truly thine, my only dear Ala-: and this Ala: was all, for all my name
she spoke, death either then wholly possessing her, or she desirous still to
hold me near her, kept that last part in her, for her to end with, and me
to live by; yet truly had I like to have gone with her, with her (though
asunder) I may say, for our souls united had gone together: but alas, I was
not so happy, though had I had a spirit like hers, or weapons suffered me, I
had soon overtaken her, or came to her as her soul parted, but I was hindered,
and ^he had all my powerful spirit, the show of my falling, and the truth of
her death, was thus.

The Villain had dressed me, and a stuff'd-man-like^thing in suits alike, his
intent being this, (and such was the performance in some kind though too hasty
they were) that if the King overcame, I should be thrown down, if the other,
the counterfeit piece should be cast forth, that all hope being taken from
her she might the sooner yield to him: but the Executioners seeing the King
down, threw out the framd Alarinus, which brought as much mischief as all ill
could do, for she seeing it, imagining it to be me, dyed, and left all
misery to dwell with us, especially in me. I fell from the window in ^ swound,
thinking the day lost, they heeded not any thing more, but confident of the
Champions victory, tended me, striving to save me to this misery.

The doors within a little while after were opened, and I fetched forth to
death, I thought, but so it happened not, nor near so much good befell me,
for I no sooner saw liberty with the King who came for me, but I met the
cruellest of deaths encountering her death. O Myra, my best, and last Love, thy
memory lives in me, and I live but to remember thee; now let me know, if so
much love, so much misfortune, chastity, and dear true Love rested in your
Mistress, else I must not yield?

He then twined his hands one in another, wrung them, and sighing wept, then
lay down on his side, leaning his elbow on the ground, and his face on his
hand, when the Bauarian followed thus. Love (I confess) you have had
plentifully showed unto you; yet as grie^e is felt but by one's self, none
being able to compare with the knowledge, unless he felt the equal weight:
no more can I yet see, but that my loss is the greater.

My self am called Peryneus Duke of Bauaria, but vassell to misfortune, my
Lady was called Elina daughter to the Duke of Saxony that now is, brother in
law to the Emperor that then was, she was brought up with the Empress, and
there I fell in love with her, she as much did affect me, although at that time
there were three of us fiercely wooing her, the other two were the Dukes of
Brunswicke, and Wertenberge, the one infinite rich, but as poor in natural
perfections, for he is weak in judgment and discourse, else fair and white.

The other as lovely as a man can be, or indeed, a woman for delicate
clearenesse, and sweetness, but wanting in estate as the other in wisdom. My
self the third, and such as you see gained the love from the other two, and
the hate of the one while she was living, now he uses me well, but so she
had been still, would I had still been hated. My ill fortune it was also that
the Empress liked me, she was not so true a wise as Ulysses had, but yet
she was, and had a brave Woman, and beloved of many, she nobly requiting
most, for gratitude is a great matter in Lovers.

This sweet Bird of beauty, and virtue, Elyna, saw the Empress Love, as
clearly as her own could make it transparent, through which she saw likewise
sorrow, and was sad, as dispayring; I having that countenance as carefully
beholding her, as her love cared for me; I feared she loved I saw she
loved, and grieved because she loved; For O me, I durst not think it was my
self: the King of the Romans then, now my Lord the Emperor, (after his
receiving that Title, for overthrowing the usurping Duke of Sax; in whose place
and to whose honor, and estate, my Ladies Father, by the Emperors and Princes
favors succeeded) came to Prage where the Court was; to entertain him all
triumps were provided, none thought enough to welcome him who had saved the
Empire from ruin. Sports of Field were most in use, the King most affecting
them, at those excercises I was one, and then called the servant to the
Duchess, she pleased to honor me with a favor, but the greatest honor was,
that she sent it by Elina, who coming into the Chamber of Presence, having
laid it on her Fardingale, I approached like the rest, but above all others in
affection, to her, she that day honored me more then usually, we was wont,
turning from the rest and looking on me, bashfully for fear of them, sadly
because employed against her self as for another, sweetly, but slowly bring^ng
forth these words.

I am said she (O dearest she) entreated by many to give favors this day,
but my Lord I am determined to deny all, because not able to con^tent all, yet
to you who have not asked, I must present this Scarf, giving me a marvelous
rich one of Crimson Tafaty, embrodered with gold, silver, and dainty colored
Silks, even to the height of richness, and delicacy, but the delicatest
delicacie was, that she presented it me. I kissed my hand to take it, and
kissed that part where she had touched it, blush I did, and tremble with joy,
and wonder, till she looking on me; my Lord (said she) are you amazed, me
thinks you should know the Sender, this she spoke so low, as none but I heard
it, and I was sorry I then had hearing, rather would I have been deceived, and
thought graced by her, then assuredly honored by the Duchess, I bowed low
unto her, saying, I had been richer in content if she had given me a
Shooe-string of hers. She star^ed, smiled, and with her eyes kindly showed,
she liked my words, but gave no answer; so I departed, and with the rest of
the Court performed what was expected of us: often times, I confess, I looked up
to to the window were she stood, and thence took spirit, an^ hope grew then,
and still increased when I saw she entertained, and not rejected my humble
affection.

Thus were we fortunate, but how much longer can that word last then it is
spoken? Alas, no longer, for no sooner were we truly assured of what our
souls called bliss, enjoying hearts wishes in loves happy remembrance, that
yet said, this is, and was, when (miserable Fate) her Aunt discerned it,
wearing quickly then glass eyes to make every mote seem thousands, and so in
a sol^id body appear beams to her mistrust, stumbling on all occasions that
might be harmefull to us. Elyna then grew sickly, what with grief, and this
iealosie, faint and weak, unable to suffer both the weights of love and
suspicion; the former the Empress took to be the cause, and so told her
walking in a Garden, and through a hedge spying me, told her, who was saying,
she must take physic, There is the Physician (said she) that best can cure
you. The sweetest soul blushed, guiltiness and fear (seeing her stearne
looks) moving her blood.

Her Majesty seeing that, still built upon the first ground, and so suddenly
in a fret flung out of the Garden. I attented Elyna into her Lodgings, where
she related this. I was sorry, and glad at one instant, for still this
increased assurance of my happiness, b^t being for her trouble, I was grieved.
The Empress then disgraced her; and used her with that scorn, as her heart,
greatness, and freeness could not suffer: But what could she do? remedy she
had none, her Father demand^d the cause, troubled that she had lost her
Mistrisses rauour, she could not give him account without infinite wrong to
both; the Empress being besought by her friends, who all took notice of her
fall, could gain but what the rest had that she was offended, and justly, but
the cause none should know. At last to some Ladies, who were mortal enemies to
Elyna, and her house, she said, that the cause was such, as out of love to the
honor of her Family and Bl^od, she was sorry, and unwilling to tell it,
although her own bacenesse merited no other, then publishing for it; for would
you think it (said she) all her pride, ha^tinesse, scorn of Lovers, disdain
of Dukes and Princes, despising any estate of a less man then a King, thinking
her self worthy of the Emperors successor; all these (I say) are fallen, and
how fallen? not slipped, or leant aside, or cracked, that hope might be of
mending, but quite s^nke under the bace burden of love, or lust rather; and of
whom? no better, nor other, then Tolmulundus my Gentleman Usher.

They (though hating Elyna) not loving the Empress, believed her not nor could
have so mean a conceit of her, whose worth had increased their dislike, io^ned
with the succession of their Spleenitike passions, answered (as after we came
to knowledge) prettily well for her: but this madded the Empress, when she
saw that friends and enemies, and all were for Elyna, who when she heard by
these Ladies, who instantly acquainted her with all, either for hate to her,
or her Mistrisse, she was afflicted with this more, then with any thing, crying
out, O devilish fortune, cannot my misery be sufficient to glut her withal,
but my honor must be her prey? Well, yet your Majesty is happy that I know
the true reason, and that so much I love the Bauarian Duke, whose safety I
pref^rre above all other fortunes, as I will perish thus in silence rather then
to speak to your ruin, which is in my hands to draw on yo^, since so I might
harm him. Was not this an expression of true love? What greater, since what
greater wrong can be, then for a great Lady to be Slandred, and by so bace a
vilany, and so much untruth? honor is to noble hea^^es esteemd beyond life, so
it was by her, who dearest of all to me held that so precious, as the touch of
it struck so deep into her, as the biting of a Viper, taking away all hope of
recovery by present fainting, or safety to return to her: for women's honors
especially theirs most admired (the admiration working against it self) are so
nice to be touched, as they are like little Sluses, that but opened, let in
Rivers, and Oc^^ns of discourses, and so blots never to be salued any more then
a Flood can be withstood, or turned back. This she apprehended, and this
molested her; yet (said she to me) my Lord, all these in this kind are comforts
and joys to me, since for you I suffer, rather choosing, as she protested,
injury for me, then fame without me; and that which only vexed her was, that
she did not rightly accuse her, and say, it was I she loved; that (said she)
had been honor, this shame.

At last she obtained leave to leave the Court, and so retired; but then
though free, and bravely living, yet this was a corsiue to her: many came to
her at first, but the report blown abroad of her love to me, made all give
over suing; yet a young Count of Germany (and a true German he was in face
and fashion) would needs make himself believe he loved her, and her, that he
desired her, but he s^ake not, and she would not understand his signs. He
would gaze on her, have fits of sighings, and almost swoundings before her,
she would like a charitable creature gave him Cordials, but the true Cordial
Love she only gave to me. Poor man, would she say, what does make him cosen
and hurt himself, to trouble me? At last she told a tale before him of
himself, his wooing so dully, her scorn, and affection to another, all in the
third parsons, but so plainly and finely, as he left her to her pleasures.

The Empress, whose malice grew as her heart, filled with rancor for being
left by me, for her, who was more loathsome then plagues to her, then to think
upon, since the robber of her choice, hearing how finely she lived, envied
that, because she was contented, plotted al she could; and at last she told the
Duke her father of the love between us: he enraged, knowing we could not
marry, I being contracted in my youth to another, flew into such fury, as he
made the whole Court ring of the noise of his dislike, and the injury he
thought he received, and his whole Family, by her dishonoring her self and
him; this which he called dishonor being his own indeed, because he blazed
that, which was not but by his own bawling thought on, never committed. A
foul bustle he kept, and shrewdly threatened me behind my back: but I went to
him, and satisfied him so far, as we parted friends, and he grew to his old
good opinion of her; yet he advised, playing then the Counselor, as before the
Champion, that I should refrain my often coming to her; which to please him I
did, because I saw my Elyna desired, her father should be pleas^d, but alas not
in that kind, for my absence grieved her, and molested me; she pined with
love and grief, grew pale and weak, I lamented for it; but s^ far it grew,
as she fell sick: I cherished her, she took it so; I watched with her, she
was glad of it, as loving to enjoy me; ^ never left her, till li^e left her,
which by a cruel Fever deprived her dainty body of her daintier breath, which
was the richest treasure, and which for my joy then; but eternal sorrow now
she breathed into me, I kissing her as she departed, giving me that, and her
love for the most incomparable Legacy that any man can or could receive; thus,
thus she died, and thus yet does she live in me, I breathe her breath, I love
her love, I live but for her sake, and I hope shall ere long die to serve her,
and go to her. Then he threw himself flat on the ground, the other looking
on him, rose, and lay down by him, took him in his arms, and said, Never let
strife be between us, whose fortunes so near concur, none can be nearer,
nor none so like, unless it could be that Elyna and Myra were but one woman,
and you and I one man: we are both equally unfortunate in loss, they equal in
perfections, yours only something more happy in a quieter death, and dying in
your arms, mine in a speedier end; thus the difference none, let no difference
be betwixt us. I am as ready to embrace this, as you have been to urge it (said
Peryneus), none liker Patience of misfortune, none fitter to agree together;
wayle you your worthy chaste Myra, I will lament my chaste and worthy Elyna;
sigh you, I Will do so, complain, I Will answer you, and both conclude as the
Period, Never lived worthier creatures, never vnhappier souls out-liued worth.
Thus they embraced, thus twined, past some time, and after lived together,
attending the Piramede, where twice every year funeral solemnities were done
by them: after the first year the Bauarian returned home, and there lived in
sorrow, never marrying, but still loving his loved Loves memory.

The Nimphs returned, glad of the peace and agreement, while the two Knights
(the people spoke of in fair armours) went on in the search, being (as
Peryneus guessed) the Dukes of Wert^berg, and Brunswicke, who had this accident
to bring them into that Country and inquiry. They, as the other Princes, did
seek the Emperor, and the Queen, and fortunately for the one, the Duke of
Brunswick, such a youth as Peryneus described him, in a Castle in the Desert,
being there received ciuilly by the Lord and Lady of that place, the Lord a
very old man, the Lady of middle age; he having married her when he was aged,
and she young, had one daughter then about fourteen years, able to hear of
Cupid, though not (it may be) experienced by wound of his force. This young
innocent Maid never having understood any thing in that kind of making love
offered her, nor knowing how to deny, when so kind an offer was made, as
profession of being a servant, and but desiring her favor, not understanding
what such a favor as a Lover asks, meant, when the Duke courted her, kissed
her hands, vowed his service, flattred her innocent ears with fair beguiling
words, when his face could not but inuit liking, his smiles won yielding, his
body though low and thick, his speech was sweet, and being little, like it
self, little troublesome but more pleasing, then the more kinder Youths she
had ever heard: want of wit was covered with being a Duke, greatness being
much with many women; his face it is certain was blush-burnt, but his words
delightful, his countenance mild, his fashion, protestations, amorous
entertainment, gentle, dainty, winning; so as one may say in him, the want in
his brains were repayed, by the goodness and gentleness of his fashion, and
spirit. Pretty honest he was, something valiant, above most merry, and the
pleasingest company that might be, true in a kind to his friend (a reasonable
virtue), loyal to his Prince, courtious to his Blood, and beloved for these
little parts of all that knew him, so as his outward beauty and these
qualities, being enriched with a smooth flattering way of loving women, made
him gain well.

These I cannot say out of judgment in her, wunne her, but by fate it fell on
her at first, and after she used his virtues but for a mask for her liking him,
or an excuse for her choice, when it should have been a commendations to her
understanding, to find so much in the inward part, as to ouersee the ordinary
way for women's love, which is outward beauty, and that in some measure he had,
that being joined with delicate apparel, being the most usual attractiue
powers to their affections, as if rather they would love Pictures, then the
wisest or worthiest man in old clothes, or ill made; Ruffes and Bands being
more to a fair Lady, then valor or learning, the one accounted poor and
heavy, the other boisterous and troublesome, neat suites better then hacked
(though by that) rich armours. O the ignorance of women, or rather the
misfortune of such misunderstanding women; for of that delicate sex there are
excellent creatures, and among those, many Pictures, good Pieces, and in truth
this was a pretty one, who willingly, and (alas) gladly received the Dukes
suit, smiled on his blushing looks, yet as fair as he could make them: for
borne bashful, he could not find love powerful enough to warrant his face
with boldness, though to crown it with obedience.

He finding her coming, how did he leap like a wanton into the River of joy,
swimming, and so embracing comfort in his arms, yet wanting the chief part,
let slip the flattering hope; again yet taking the streams in his arms, and
striking forward to his ends. Alas what needed this? she was won, he only
wanted opportunity, will and consent failed not, which he finding also, found
this means to compass it. The Duke of Wertenberg was lodged so, as his
chamber looked into the Garden, which was betwixt his Chamber and hers, the
windows opposite, and so cross, as they were so far asunder, as they could
not do any more, then see one another, neither perfectly discern looks or
smiles, nor let speech make their ears beneficial to them; but lovers will
make benefit of small things, so did they of this: for here (he gaining the
help of his friend to the good he sought) he brought this profit to his love.

The Duke of Wertenberg was a brave Gentleman, but sometimes sickly, so as he
used to lie warmer in his bed, and wear such things as appeared a little
woman-like, and withal, something curious he was in his Chamber, which not
exceeding the limits that became himself, he was never blamed for it, but now
it brought him praise, because it served his friend, who thus procured his
ends. The weather hot, euenings fair, and nights light by the Moons aid, he
persuaded his companion to put on his Wastcoate, and night-wearing, and walk
into the garden, having a fair Mantle on his body, he not so much higher then
the Page which waited on the Duke, who was a young man, or great boy, took his
garment, which was a Horsemans coat of cloth, guarded with Velvet, that those
who might by chance else see them, might think they meant not to be seen,
but walked there to pass the evening. Admirably he played on the Lute, and
carried one of purpose with him, his Cap he wore low over his face, and came
softly and passionately as lovers do, and might appear, because otherwise
they must have been discovered: the Duke of Wertenberge acted his part
extremely well, for going, playing, and singing: and well he might, for often
he had loved; being cross the Garden, and almost under her window, he spoke
in great passion these words.

Unhappy man, loving vnlou'd^ serving unregarded, affecting without help,
honoring without esteem, and smarting vnpittied: Turn your favorable eyes O
Heavens on me, and you fair Moon, who it is said govern women, and persuade,
command not (for she must ever rule) my cruel Mistress to think on me, requite
me I seek not, but chastely as you do, and as fairly, and kindly smile on me:
I beg this of you, nor ask but what your cold brightness, and chaste coldness
may grant me; alas you frown, and pull a scarfie Clowd over your divine face
to hide your favor from me, and show your displeasure to me, What shall I do
wretch that I am? all powers earthly have denied me succor, and now the
Heavens refuse me countenance? nothing is left me but despair, and thou poor
Lute, touched on then speak unto me, and let thy music speak to her, and
hold me if possible, so long in quiet, as attention may make a respite from
sorrow, as admiring a change of times, not fortune, for to that I must return.

The Louer-boy-like Duke, gave him again his Lute, for he carried it when he
played not, and being close under the window that he could not be seen, but
perfectly heard, he played, and so rarely as might justly have brought ears,
and they loving ears unto the player, but here there did want little drawing
her, who was run before to the window, having heard the door open, and her
heart withal, which told her he was coming, for none else could come but
themselves, or other, but her soul told who; some were with her, else she had
come down; impatient she was, yet a little doubtful, and therefore a little
more troubled, but the rest young as she was, made the good motion to open the
windows and see who these were, she soon yielded to to that, and not only
opened them, but threw them from her: upon that noise the Lord and his supposed
servant appeared; the Duke of Wertenberge demanding pardon, the other only
coming so far as to see her, who put her self so clean out of the casement
as she might easily see him, and be sure of him, and none else descry them.

She then graciously granted the Dukes demand of pardon, but on these
conditions, that he or his servant should play again, and sing said she if
please you. She desired but what was granted, an other Lady standing lower, and
looking out of the other Casement, so much liked, and looked on Dorrileus of
Wertenberge, as she was surprised with his Love: the Lady loved not her servant
so much, as she did equal in fierceness, or exceed in her flames, so as he
stood as but the train to fire, and blew up the strength of her heart with
every look, or word he gave. The other amorous Duke seeing this came well on,
able to play and sing also, like a Duke helped by Art, sung these verses in
manner or imitation of Saphiks.

IF a clear fountain still keeping a sad course,
Weep out her sorrows in drops, which like tears fall;
Marvel not if I lament my misfortune,
brought to the same call.
Who thought such fair eyes could shine, and dissemble?
Who thought such sweet breath could poison loves shame?
Who thought those chaste ears could so be defiled?
hers be the sole blame.
While love deserved love, of mine ctill she failed not,
Fool I to love still where mine was neglected,
Yet faith, and honor, both of me claimed it,
although rejected.
Often have I heard her vow, never sweet quiet
Could once possess her while that I was else where,
But words were breath then, and as breath they wasted
into a lost Air.
So soon is love lost, not in heart imprinted,
Silly I, knew not the false power of changing,
Love I expected, yet (ah) was deceived,
more her fond ranging.
Infant Love tied me not to mistrust change,
Vows kept me fearelesse, yet all those were broken:
Love, faith, and friendship by her are dissolved,
suffered unspoken.
The young Lady was now directly lost, and so gone as she hated her patience,
for not throwing her self out of the winddow to him. They finding this, lost
not the means offered them, wherefore the Duke of Wertenberge moved to her
the sweetness of the air, the delicasie of the place, the temperatnes of the
weather, the brightness of the night, and all, and more then needed to entice
her down, so as willing of her self, and annimated by her companion she went
with her, none else offering to stir, but promising to attend their return.
Being come into the Garden they saluted the Duke of Wertenberg, he talking a
little while with her, then falling into discourse of Music, she turned to
the youth who they said by reason of a sickness he lately had, was forced to
keep on his Cap, commonly for fear of cold, yet he stirred it a little before
his face, she on a less matter might have blinded her friend, who was already
struck blind with love, so as she let her assosiate and Cousine (as she was)
do what she would, and use her discretion, she would take her time, and no
sooner did her love turn toward her, but she took that turn as to her, and
as powder takes fire, burnt, and flashed wtih have unto his receuing: skipping,
to his looks, and words like the Iacks in Virginalls touched with the keys;
and such sudden and ready sound did she give, answe^ing so soon, as some would
have thought they had agreed before of their speech, and repeated but too
hastily. After some such passages, he said that they had commended his servant
so much, as he wished he could play, and sing like him, since so we^l pleasing.
Alas my Lord said she, I liked you best, and yet what need you wish for more
winning powers, since thus you conquer where you come? He understood her, and
his friends, so as he took her hand, and walked with her into a fair A^bour:
not unwillingly she went with him, who though a Lover, he was not so d^lly
constant, but in absence he could gratefie fair Ladies whose kindness demanded
it, yet retain himself firm in his choice to love, and to be kind again if
she pleased; and thus he was the perfectest lover, who loved love, and for
love's sake served and saved love from hur^, thus truly was he a true lover,
reserving still thus much for his only Mistress, as when he was most contented
with them he still thought on her, and wished her in their place, so was he
mindful of her without exception, affectionate without measure and kind to
them for her remembrance sake.

What the other two did I leave to consideration, for to express two such
passages would tire you, but this I may say, they were till morning almost
together, they met the next night again, and all were well pleased, and sighed
no more but for parting which soon happened, for what happy estate in love has
any abiding? As the first night seemed bright, and delicate, this alas had
all the clouds of dislike upon it; That gave not their hearts so much pleasure;
as this did dolorous complaints, That had not sweet disguise in it to give
testimony of love; but this had open show of blackest, and grieuousest sorrow;
They embraced not with such greedines, as now with terror of never meeting
more; They met not the sharp edges of desire with more delight, then now with
affectionated torment; and these alas were their fortunes, and this their
sufferings. Dorileus yet bare it like such a lover as he was, not more loving
then he needs must, nor caring more then would please himself, nor greuing in
all his life so much, or little as might hurt him, yet as one of that number he
sighed, and said, he wished to stay still there, but his there, was every
where, if he found handsome women, and kind entertainment, he removed not, but
to such like pastures, so as he but (as one might say) dined, and supped at
several places, but lay still at his own home of change, a pleasant bed no
question where several delights embraced, and lulled his wanton appetite in
the soft Cradle, or arms of variety; his friend was so much more troubled then
he, by that he used to do all things seriously, love seriously, grieve as
seriously, and change as often, and seriously; earnest in that he was doing,
and no more constant then others, and in his inconstancy none so serious. At
his parting (disguises after the first night laid aside) he presented his Lady
with a Sonnet of his own, he said, but the truth is his friend made it for
him, and so was his Secretary justly; She liked it, and admired it, after his
going, singing it continually to please her self, it was thus.

THat which to some their wishes ends present,
Is counted day, which former crosses mend,
Yet night-like day my blessings do prevent,
And brings that loss, whereto my mischeifs tend.
By days approach, alas, that light does end,
Which is the only light of my content,
And more I see, day strive her light to lend
The darker am I, by sad parting rent.
Like one long kept in prison, brought to light;
But for his end, condemned nere to be
Freed from his Dungeon, till that wretched he,
Conclude his living with his latest sight.
So now with grief, does day appear to me,
And Oh! too early since we parting see.
This she sange, and even ware it out of breath with singing, kis'd the
original Copy because in his own hand, and never thought it near enough,
nor ever deerer was a paper to a Lover: great pity it was not his own work,
but as it was, it was liker a Lovers present, counterfeite as his vows, and
protestatio^s, yet true beguilers of welbeleeuing women, who were happier to be
Heretics, then such believers. Thus wit, and well followed courting, gained
his desires, who with his friend having taken leave of the Lord, and all the
house traveled their way on in their search, till one day in a small valley
between two little Hills, they met an old man, and and a young Damsel (as she
seemed) together, he ryding on a Mule, she on a fine Palfrey, but so fine her
Beast was, and so disloyal his Mule to their have, as they both tired, and
went no faster then as he beat one, and the other for fear of that example,
(a curious, at least profitable observation) nodded on, so as with the most
melancholy, but discreet pace that Creatures, not rasionall, could use, they
came (like one against the wind) toward these Princes; who beholding them were
pleased, yet troubled like courteous Knights, for their ill haps were purposed
to demand of them when they met, the cause of their mischances, but in the
mean time he might hear them sing, though like Swanns before their ends, for
so was this end of their journey, or there horses ends, being they could go no
farther; the manner of their Song was as odd as their adventure, singing
Dialogue-wise as if agreed, yet contrary to the ones wishes, the Woman began,
at lest to their hearings thus.

Woe. FOnd aged man, why do you on me gaze,
Knowing my answer? resolution take
Follow not fondly in an vnusd Maze
As if impossibilities to shake.
For know I hate you still, and your poor love
Can me as soon as Rocks to pity move.
Man. Alas my dearest soul, too long I knew
I loved in vain, your scorn I felt likewise,
Your hate I saw; yet must I still pursue
Your fairest sight, though you do me despise;
For love is blind, and though I aged be,
I can nor part from it, nor it from me.
Woe. What blame do thou deserve, if thou will still
Follow my hate, who will not breath to change,
And strive to gain as if from scorn, or ill
Loving disdain as Iuels rich, and strange:
Or can thou vainly hope thy wailing cries
Can move a pity? no let this suffice.
Man. Piti^, alas I nere could look to see
So much good hap; yet Dear be not to cruel,
Though you thus young hate aged love in me,
My love has youth, or you shall see loves fuel
Deserving your reward, then not deny,
Let me now see those eyes kind, or I die.
Woe. These eyes of mine thou never shall behold,
If clouds of true disdain may dim desire,
They shall as black be as thy faults are bold,
Demanding what is unfit: a poor old fire
Wasted like Triumphs, sparcles only live,
And troubled rise from embers which outliue.
Man. I do confess a boldness it is in me
Ought to resist, if your sweet self command;
Yet blind me needs you must, for if I see,
Mine eyes must rest on you, and gazing stand:
Heaven not forbids the bacest worm her way,
Hide that dear beauty, I must needs decay.
Woe. My beauty I will hide, mine eyes put out,
Rather then be perplexed with thy sight,
A mischief certain worse is, then a doubt,
Such is thy sight, thy absence my delight;
Yet mine the ill, since now with thee I stay.
Tired with all misfortune cannot stray.
Man. Thy beauty hide? O no, still cruel live
To me most hapless; dim not that bright light
Which to this Earth all lights and beauties give.
Let me not cause for ever darkest night,
No, no, blessed be those eyes and fairest face,
Lights of my soul, and guides to all true grace.
My sweet commanderesse shall I yet obey
And leave you here alas unguarded? shall
I not then for sorrow ever stray
From quiet peace, or hope, and with cursed thrall
Sit down and end? yet if you say I must
Here will I bide in banishment accursed:
While you pass on as cruel, happy still
That none else triumph may upon mine ill.
When they had concluded, she fell into an extreme laughter, saying, we have
indeed need to neglect, and I take the authority of banishing you, while our
beasts are so beastly natural, as to love one another conversation so well,
as not to be willing to part, so as though tired with your suite, and wearied
with the noise of your love, yet I must by a tired beasts fault, longer remain
to weary my self withal.

I know not (said he) whether I shall thank your beast now, or no, since
against your will I have this favor; but I see, I may chide, and blame mine
justly, whose lasie or unfortunate body keeps me here to offend you. I see not
(said the young Duke of Wirtenberg) why you should be vncontent with being
still together, since I never saw in contrariety so much agreement.

We have these two years lived thus (said the old man, and for all I see,
must wear out more time in wrangling. The Lady seemd wondrous strange, and
would scarce look on them outwardly; yet she leared vildly under her Hat at
the smug Youth, she thought his dainty round, pretty mouth deserved kisses;
and when he spoke, imagined they parted but to procure kisses, and so they did,
for they kissed kindly at return to meeting. She was fair, and as wanton as
beautiful, and as beautif^ll as would entice most to her wantonness; she was
in fashion as chaste, as in mind and body lascivious, and lascivious as a
wicked soul could be in a damnable body, so as a rare example, she was of
the worst kind of an ill woman: dissembling excellent in, crafty beyond
measure, false beyond expression, and what not, that might make a woman change
nature with a beast: Another man's wife she was, yet a wife, or w^rse to all
men that would, hunting after them as Nimrod did after Dear, and more dear
were they to her, and indeed, to many of them, when they paid for their
courtesies, or ambition to meddle with such a creature, who was not only great
in birth, but as great in ill. This disguise she had put on to try
Adventures, not being any otherways known, then to be a frank Gentlewoman:
this old man she had with her, had been her servant, made elder by her service
then his years called him unto, and so much hers, as she made him an
instrument to bring in others to her service. Natious she had known many^ yet
not so many as she desired, wherefore she would yet travel a little farther,
and learn, though not by experience, yet familiar knowledge, her worst ends.
Lord how she smircked on the young sweet Youth, but he in whom before belief
of favor sprang, would yet not show to love if not moved handsomely to it, so
he saw it not, or regarded it not, but Clauterino more heeded her eyes, and as
them his own fickle mind, which soon thought she was worth winning to his
purpose which was but for discourse, and never held Constancy in absence worth
observation, wherefore he began to complement with her.

She (rather then miss both, would take either,) acccepted of his favor, and
after some business of his entreaty, and her modest-like bashfulnes, she told
her story thus: shaking her head like a bowgh in a storm of wind, or nodding
like and old wife sleeping in an afternoon, licking her lips, and glaring like
a Cat in the dark: Sir said she, alas what shall I say? I am as you see a
woman, but as I know an unfortunate one; I was married by my own consent,
though little knowledge of my friends, to a young Gentleman I chose for love,
but little I found in him since, so as I fear he had only the face of Venus,
but not the affections, much business I had to get him, and great ones used in
it for my sake, and some whom I could for all my love to him, have wished they
would a while have kept me, rather then given me away, yet willingly for one
end or other I studied to gain, and got him, but alas it proved the
beginning of the marryage between Ifis, and Inath.

He was a Youth, it is true, and not a man (for which I married him) but this was
my Destiny: which finding, and the want of what I hoped for, I complained, and
justly I think; some of my own Sex spoke loudly of me for it^ but were it
their cases, I assure my self they would do as I did, but this was my ill,
and heerevpon I seeing my friends (what with matching without their consents,
and since taking this course) leave me. I undertook a journey into Pamphilia,
where it is said, there is a water, that will recover all diseases, ease all
griefs, especially take away all melanchollies; I chose a Troop fit for me;
but I met some few days, since an unruly consort, who moved with my beauty,
as they pleased to call this poor part of me, would needs have that, and all;
but my men defended me so well, as they left me not but for death, and in
death, so as I could not blame, but only pity them; there remained none of
them neither but this old man, who loving more then having reason for,
undertook to ride with me to the next City, where I mean to provide my
self of company; and in truth I must needs say of the poor man, he has
carried himself honestly, but foolishly loves me, who cannot requi^e him.

So it seemed by your Dialogue (answered the Dukes: but (said the Brunswick
Duke) though you love not him, you may in time, and by desert, like another.
That is not forbid me (said she.)

While they were thus discoursing, came another Damsel riding fast, and
looking with as much haste, who indeed needed succor. The Duke of Wirtenberg
seeing her, demanded what she so earnestly and speedily sought.

Help Sir (said she) a thing we may all want, and I at this present stand in
great need of. What troubles you, said he? The life of a Villain that seeks
my dishonor. How, said he? He has long sued to me, but refused (replide
the Damsel) sought to betray me, and this day laid an Ambush for me, but with
the speed of my horse and the assistance God gave me out of his mercy, I fled
hither, more spirit then being in me, then I could ever have thought I should
have found in my self; and pray Sir even now for honors sake assist me, at
least keep me from the danger of those Creatures. You are I see by your
habits a Stranger here, yet let not justice or pity be set as strangers from
you: you seem a brave worthy Gentleman, I can appear but a miserable
creature, that I hope or beseech to gain compassion.

Fair Damsel (said he), guide me to these men, and I will loose my life, or
save you. Nay Sir (said she) that needs not; for let me by your favor be
safely at home, and I desire no more, nor so much as that you should meet
them, or I ever see them again.

Direct me, and I will cond^ct you (said he): so together they went, she
telling part of her tale to him, while the other three took another way to
this deluding woman's House, who was called Lycencia: with much pleasure the
wanton Duke went with her, amorous as any love, but at last used by her like an
Ape fed, and knocked by her wit.

The true worthy couple held on, till they came to a Wood side, there she told
him was the danger. In the midst was her house, but between were the Traitors,
that the nearest way to the house, but as so to peril, wherefore she desired
to go more about.

Nay (cried he) never let us shun the true way, for fear or what we see
not, that harm may with self knowledge be fled hence, of if not, though you
may very well misdoubt my valor, having had no trial of it; yet I dare
warrant to carry you to your house, if there were more then you have named;
this you may think a bravery to speak, but I hope to let you see it; so they
went on, she still proceeding in her story, till coming into a part of the
Wood, whence they might see, as through a walk the house, which stood though
below, that Hill whereon they were, on a Hill also, and she lifting up her eyes
to see, and show the place, first telling him, Now (said she) I shall soon
show you my poor habitation; then looking that way, Poor indeed (cryde she)
alas my Lord I am ruined, my Castle burns, and I chill with cold despair.

He looking up, saw it true, whereupon he was a little amazed, yet not
willing to show it to her, spoke bravely, and advisedly to go on, which she
consented unto, and coming nearer, they discerned only the first Gate on
fire, and the assalliants with their Master being twenty gathering fago^, and
other provisions together to fire the rest. They laboring had put of^ their
Arms, only the chief had his armor on; the Duke did never use to loose
opportunities in any sort, especially fairly offered; wherefore he entreated
the Damsel to stay in the Wood, so as she might see what past, while he went
down to them. She obayed, and he spurring toward them, demanded, why they
were so cruel to burn so delicate a place. Twere much more delicate (replied
they) if the Mistrisse were in it, and you, as faggots to burn to our triumph.
That were too hot work (said he): but honest men, I hope you are but in jest
wi^h me^ and that you seek rather to help, then destroy this place. We seek
to preserve it^ Yes sure, said they (scornefully laughing at him) we desire
that, and so you shall find if we catch you meddling, or ayding the Lady
thereof.

If she demand aid (said he) I cannot refuse a Lady. No, then take this, said
one, and this, said another, throwing stones, cudgles, and other heavy, and
unhappy harmefull things at him, some of them lighting on him, and making him
smart; he liking not that, took up a strong Pole, and feld many, but some
killed. Then came their Master, and he enraged like a hunted Bull, drue his
sword, reuiling the Prince, and threatening more, then after he gained though
death. Dorileus brave and good, heeded not his words, but flang away his Pole
drawing his sword; thou art armd, said he, doubly with sin and iron; therefore
my sword shall now be used to cut them both from thee, and thee from the world,
though it scornd to show it self to thy seruants^ so they fought, and to the
cost of the Traitor, whose head Dorileus cut off, and presented it to the Lady,
who staying behind a tree in the Wood beholding the issue, and praying for the
success.

Some of the servants fearing when the sword glistered (joyfully shining for
her truth) fled away into the Wood, and came near where she was, but she
quickly considering her danger, staid not to discourse, but with raines let
loose, ran down toward the Combatants, the one for her welcome, presenting
her with the head of her enemy, which he then cut off, and gave unto her, who
like Tomeris of Sithia, held it by the hair, but gave it quickly another
conclusion, for she threw it into the midst of the flaming Tower, which then as
being in it self enemy to good, because wasting good, yet hotly desiring to
embrace as much ill, and so headlongly and hastily fell on it, either to grace
it with the quickest and hottest kisses, or to conceal such a villainous, and
treacherous head from more, and just punishments: the fire proceeded no
farther, the bodies for sweetness sake were all thrown into it, and together
there consumed, too honorable a burial for such creatures, but thus it was.
Then past they that place, and entered the Palace, which was of Alabaster,
white as it self can be, and pure as the Mistrisse, whose heart never had spot
of ill, nor her body of disproportion: chaste as the Goddess, true as truth,
for she never loved but once, and so ever, milder then the sweetest calm, and
sweeter then the sweetest Violet: constanter then that virtue, and purer then
her complexion, which never was for excellency equald, or could be
counterfeited, that would not show like it self vile, and unworthy to presume
to immitate such excellency. Free and noble was her affection, discreet and
brave her conversation, excellent her discourse, and so the Duke witnessed, who
after his return related her story given to him by her self, both in words,
and in one kind in verse. He remained there but two nights^ going to his
Companion who had bin courting the little, or never refusing Lady, and had
conducted her by her appointment to a Castle near at hand. Welcome, nay most
welcome was this Duke unto them, she one as a friend glading in his presence,
the other as a longing and desiring louer^ good countenance she showed the
Suter, but her heart, and eyes sued to the other, happy she seemed to be in his
presence, and rather then to be out of it, or bard his sight, she would endure
to hear him tell of his Loves, and his being beloved, when he said a Lady had
honored him so much as to like him, to love him, and take him as hers; could
she otherwise choose said she in her self, would not I run to such a fortune?
When he told how kindly a Lady had granted her love to him, would she not
rather flee to him, then refuse cried she? I blame her ^ot, but curse my
fortune that cannot embrace him as my wishes lead me.

When he told his own ties to a Lady inimitable, beyond commendations, and
expressions, faith in him only being able to come near that worth in her;
alas, sighed she, this only touched me, that he loves, otherwise I might
hope, but love grounded in any place, fair, or other, carries the power with
it. Out of this discourse she was willing to put him, so as although contrary
to her best wishes, she put him to speak the story of the Lady that fetched
him to her aid, which in the same verse she delivered to him, he thus delivered
it reading it to her, but for the perticulars they were entrusted to him, and
he would not for loves sake break a trust, but as passionatly for his Lady, as
this for her love, read the pretty Pastoral thus, in Sheapardesse names, to
cover her own ill fortune the better.

1
A Sheephard who no care did take.
of ought but of his flock,
Whose thoughts no pride could higher make,
Then to maintain his stock,
Whose sheep his love was, and his care,
Their good, his best delight:
The Lambs his joy, their sport his fare,
His pleasure was their sight.
2
Till Love (an enuier of man's bliss)
Did turn this merry life
To tears, to wishes which nere miss
Incombrances with strife.
For whereas he was best content,
With looking on his sheep:
His time in woes, must now be spent,
And broken is his sleep.
3
Thus first his woeful change began,
A Lamb he chanced to miss,
Which to find out, about he ran.
Yet finds not where it is.
But as he past (O fate unkind)
his ill led him that way,
Whereas a willow Tree behind,
A fair young Maiden lay.
4
Her bed was on the humble ground,
her head upon her hand,
While sighs di'd show, her heart was bound
In Love's untying band.
Clear tears her cleerest eyes let fall,
Upon her Loue-borne face:
Which Heavenly drops did sorrow call,
proud witness of disgrace.
5
The Shephard stayed, and fed his eyes,
no farther might he pass,
But there his freedom to sight ties,
His bondage, his joy was.
His Lamb he deemes not half so fair,
Though it were very white:
And liberty he thinks a care,
Nor breath's but by her sight.
6
His former life is altered quite,
His Sheep feed in her eyes,
Her face his field is of delight,
And flocks he does despise.
The rule of them he leaves to none,
His Scrip he threw away:
And many ^e forsakes for one,
One, he must now obey.
7
Unhappy man whose loosing found,
What better had bin lost:
Whose gain does spring from such a ground,
Whereby he must be crossed.
The worldly care he now neglects,
for Cupids service ties,
Care only to his fond respects,
where waue-like treasure lies.
8
As this lost man still gazing stood,
Amazed at such a sight:
Imagining no heavenly food
To feed on but her sight;
Wishing but her beams to behold,
Yet gr^iu'd he for her grief,
When mournfully he did unfold
Her woes without relief.
9
His new Sun rose, and rising said,
Farewell fair Willow tree,
The root of my estate decayed,
The fruit for hapless me:
What though thy branch, a sign be made,
Of labor lost in love?
Thy beauty does no sooner vade,
Then those best fortunes prove.
10
My songs shall end with willow still,
Thy branches I will wear:
Thou will accompany my ill,
And with me sorrow bear.
True friend said she, then sighed, and turned,
Leaving that restless place,
And Sheephard, who in pas^ions burned
lamenting his sad case.
11
Ths Maid now gone, alone he left,
Still on her footsteps gazed,
And heartlesse grown, by love bereft
of mirth, in spirit raised,
To satisfy his restless thought,
He after her will hye,
His ruin to be sooner brought,
And sooner harm to try.
12
Then thus his latest leave he took,
My Sheep (said he) farewell,
Let some new Shepherd to you look
Whose care may mine excel.
I leave you to your freedom now,
Loues-lawes so fast me bind,
As no time I can you allow,
Or go poor flock, and find
13
The Maid whom I so dearly love,
Say it was her dear sight,
Which from your keep does me remove,
And kills my first delight.
Go you my Dog, who careful were
To guard my Sheep from harm,
Look to them still, no care forbear,
Though love my senses charm.
14
But you my Pipe that music gave,
And pleased my silent rest,
Of you I company will crave,
Our states now suteth best.
For if that Fair no pity give,
My dying breath shall cry,
Through thee the pains, wherein I live,
Whereby I breath to dye.
15
Madly he ran from ease to pain
Not sick, yet far from well,
Heart robbed by two fair eyes, his gain^
Must prove his worldly Hell.
After his heart he fast does hie,
His heart to her did fly,
And for a biding place did cry,
Within her breast to lie.
16
She that refusd, when he her spide,
Her whom he held most dear,
Lie weeping by a Rivers side
Beholding papers near.
Her ruling eyes must yet be dimbd,
While pearl like tears she shed,
Like shadows on a Picture limbd;
At last these words she read.
17
When I unconstant am to thee
Or false do ever prove,
Let happiness be banished me,
Nor have least taste of love.
But this alas too soon, cried she,
Is O by thee forgot,
My hopes and joys now murtherd be,
And falsehood is my lot.
18
Too late I find what it is to trust
To words, or oaths, or tears,
Since they that use them prove unjust
And color but our fears.
Poor fools ordaind to be deceived
And trust to be betrayed,
Scornd when our hearts are us bereaved
Sought to, a while delayed.
19
Yet though that thou so false have been,
I still will faithful be;
And though thou think to leave no sin,
I Will make my loyalty
To shine so clear, as thy foul fault
To all men shall be known,
Thy change to thy changd heart be brought,
My faith abroad be blown.
20
This having said, again she rose
The papers putting by,
And once again a new way chose
Striving from grief to fly:
But as she going was along
That pleasant running stream,
She saw the Sallow trees among,
The Shepherd Aradeame.
21
For so this woeful Lad was called,
But when she him beheld,
What witchcraft has thee now inthral'd,
And brought thee to this field?
What can the cause, or reason be,
That thou art hither come:
Where all must taste of misery,
And mirth with grief intombe?
22
If mirth must here intombed be,
Fair Sheephardesse, said he?
This place the fittest is for me,
If you use cruelty:
For know I hither come, to see
Your self, wherein now lies
My life, whose absence martir'd me,
Whose sight my power ties.
23
Give me but leave to live with you,
It is the life I crave:
To you I bound am to be true,
My life to you I gave;
When first I did behold you lie,
In shade of willow tree:
That time my soul did to you tie,
Those eyes did murder me.
24
Is this the reason (ah cried she?)
The more I wail your case,
Who thus partaker, needs will be
In grief, and in disgrace,
I pity you, but cannot aid
You, nor redress your ill,
Since joy and pain together paid,
Scarce satisfies the will.
25
If I do tie you, I release
The bond wherein you are,
Your freedom shall not find decrease,
Nor you accuse my care.
The pain I have is all my own,
None can of it bear part,
Sorrow my strength has overthrown,
Disdain has killd my heart.
26
And Shepherd if that you do love,
This counsel take of me,
This humor fond in time remove,
Which can but torture thee;
Take it from her who too too well
Can witness it is so:
Whos^ hope seemed Heaven, yet proved a Hell,
And comfort changed to woe.
27
For I was loved, or so I thought,
And for it loved again,
But soon those thoughts my ruin brought,
And nourished all my pain,
They gave the milk that fed be'eife
Till weaned, they proved dry:
Their latter nourishment was grief,
So famish't I must dye.
28
Then see your chance, I cannot change,
Nor my affection turn,
Disdain which others moves to range,
Makes me more constant burn,
My sighs I Am sure cannot you please,
My grief no Music prove,
My flowing tears your passions ease,
Nor woes delight your Love.
29
If my sight have your freedom wonn,
Receive it back again;
So much my self I find undone,
By gifts which prove no gain.
As I lament with them that love,
So true in Love I am,
And liberty wish all to prove,
Whose hearts waste in this flame.
30
Yet give me leave (sighed he with tears)
To live but where you are,
My woes shall wait upon your fears,
My sighs attend your care:
I Will weep when ever you shall wail,
If you sigh, I will cry,
When you complain, I Will never fail
To wail my misery.
31
I will you guard, and safely keep
From danger, and from fear,
Still will I watch when you do sleep,
And for both, sorrows bear.
Make me not free, I bondage crave,
Nor seek else but to serve,
This freedom will procure my grave,
These bonds my life preserve.
32
For life, and joy, and ease, and all
Alas lies in your hands:
Then do not cause my only fall,
I tied am in such bands.
Part hence I cannot, nor love leave,
But here must ever bide:
Then pity let my pain receive,
Do not from mercy slide.
33
If that (said she) you constant are,
Unto your coming ill,
I Will leave this place, yet let all care
Accompany me still:
And Shepherd live, and happy be,
Let judgment rule your will,
Seek one whose heart from love is free,
And who your joy may fill.
34
For I love's bond-slaue am, and tied
In fet^ers of Disdain:
My hopes are frozen, my Spring dried,
My Summer drowned with pain:
I loved, and worse, I said I loved,
Free truth my ruin brought,
And so your speech the like has moved
and loss for gayning bought.
35
With that away she hasted fast,
Left him his cares to hold,
Who now to sorrow make all have,
Woes drive his hopes to fould:
Now he can see, and weeping say
His fortune blind he finds,
A heart to harbor his decay,
A state which mischeife binds.
39
This now he feels, and woefully
His birth, and life he blames,
Yet passions rules, when reasons lie
in dark, or quenched flames:
That place he first beheld her in,
his byding he does make:
The Tree his liberty did win,
He calls his Martyr stake.
37
And pleasingly does take his fall,
his grief accoumpts delight:
Freedom, and joy this bitter thrall,
His food her absent sight.
In contraryes his pleasures be,
While mourning gives him ease,
His Tomb shall be that hapless Tree,
Where sorrow did him ceaze.
38
And thus did live, though daily died,
The Sheephard Arideame,
Whose causlesse tears which never dried
were turned into a stream,
Himself the head, his eyes the spring
Which f^d that River clear,
Which to true hearts this good does bring
When they approach it near,
39
And drink of it, to banish quite
All fickell thoughts of change,
But still in one choice to delight,
And never think to range:
Of this sweet water I did drink,
Which did such faith infuse,
As since to change, I cannot think,
Love will death sooner choose.
She that was before won, what wrought this in her, seeing love, seeking
love, expression moving admmiration, and that so much as to admire him in her
choice at first sight, so well to choose, but the truest work, or weft of her
Loome was to do, which was to win him, win she would, and at last as
nothing, or very little is hard to purchase in a man's breast a kind pity or
rewarding love, as if but exchanging, and the latter part of that their
merchandise. She compassed her desires like her self the worst way, for she
made the poor loving Cauterino be the means to his loss; urging very much
and earnestly, she replied that if he loved so much as he said, he should
express it by bringing Dorileus to speak with her, framing the cause to be
concerning a Sister of hers in the house whom she said was far gone in love
with him.

He gladdest of this, that thus he might serve her several ways, went
strait to his friend, and most friendly brought him unto her, into a Garden
appointed for it, going away as kindly as she wished, leaving them together,
who then private, she began.

My Lord said she, you may well tax me of boldness, but impudence I beseech you
clear me off, since Love the powrefull god of hearts commands me to this
adventure, in which yet I blush, least you should otherwise judge of me, then
of fervent affection, which has stirred this unusual manner, contrary to a
woman's modesty in seeking you; but my Lord my love is so violent to you, as
that blinds me to any course but this, which is to beg pity of you, and
compassion for my pain.

The hardest heart could hardly deny such a request, much less his, which was
never in that kind cruel; wherefore he went the nearest way to content her,
granting her request, and appointing that night to wait upon her, what a
business she kept then? her Chamber was so perfumed, and sweetly furnished,
her self so delicate to entertain, as when he came he thought it a brave
Journey, and dainty conquest of himself, for she wooed, and he had now the
labor saved of Courting, loving, and all other troubles, but yielding, which
is easy on such conditions for the best of that Sex to do. The night is
come, and he prepared went to his Mistress; the other amorous Duke being
extremely molested with his passion, could not sleep, but vexed with doubt and
love, rose from his bed, and went to his friends chamber to discourse, and so
ease his burdned burning breast, but thither arrived, he found only a light
burning, his Page asleep in the chair at the beds feet, and the Duke absent;
this struck him into a jealous passion, as thinking none so worthy as his
Mistress, none so likely there. fore to be served, and so concluded none other
then this wrong to him.

Then he complained against his friend for breach of friendship, since he knew
how much he loved, but strait came this again, that that tie without breach
might be broken, for love cannot be resisted, and none can command that power,
so as force, not will, did here offend; but all women for this trick he
reviled, and cursed himself for being the means, and help for thus betraying
him, making him the instrument (as in scorn) for her satisfaction in love, and
contempt.

This being entered into his thought, he ran into the Garden, meaning to go to
her Chamber, find them and revenge himself with railing at her, but the doors
which went to that way were shut, so as he called to her, scoulded as no man
ever did like him in that kind, and many women, (though most are perfect in
that loud faculty) could not equal him, few surpass him. No answer being
made him, he threw stones at the windows, beat down the glass and made such
a coil, as would have distempered any but lovers, on all sides to have heard
it. But they would not be moved for all his bawlings, nor he long endure this
lonely, but violent roaring passion, so as he returned with as much fury, and
shame, as Vulcan did when he saw his Rival Mars: Much this nights work stuck
in his stomach, but what remedy? patience got a little room, and she (as he
after said) gave him all satisfaction so as he gayning too, and then commanded
to silence, he had his desire every way satisfied also, cousening him who had
bin before hand with him, and thought he had her to himself, while she laughed
at both to see them so finely dealt with all, and she having full content; but
here they must not now stay, so as telling her they must go in search of the
Emperor, she gaind one day more of them which they granted. The night before
the morning for their parting, having at several hours taken leave of them,
both they in their lodgings should have been surprised, and made prisone^s, by
men let into their cha^bers armed, but they valorous, never sleeping though
they were in bed, quickly rose, and bravely defended themselves, escaped their
hands, and arming themselves, came out of their chamber to seek the Devil,
and head of this action^ but she (hearing how the business went) with her old
wicked companion were fled.

They followed in search of them, so as now in two Quests they traveled, till
they met an noble, and brave Lady, to whom telling their fortunes, she assured
them of the wickedness of that woman, being the most notorious for ill, of any
of her Sex, and how that in her flight with her old Squire, she met a man
equal to her, (if two such pieces could be squared to equal proportion in
ill,) who having been treacherous, and beyond mischeif's skill abused by her,
finding the advantage, took her from her old Guard, tied him to a Tree fast
for helping himself, where he starued, and dyed, being but within two days
found, and for her, he carried her to the top of a mighty, steep, and craggy
Rock, there took his wicked revenge of her, for thence he threw her down,
but as she fell loving all mankind, she held him so fast as he went unwillingly
with her, breaking their necks, and so past the same way of unfortunate end,
yet fittest for ill so to go together. This was seen by some, who took up the
bodies too late to be helped, but he being known to them, the cause was soon
known to us, who had understood both their li^es, and could but hardly sorrow
for their ends, only in that they were Christians. This heard, and hauiug past
a little time with this noble Lady, they took their leaves, taking their way
to their own Countries, having searched, but in vain, for their Lord,
returned; they lamented for him, and remained in souls afflicted. The Prince
of Venice is the next to be spoken of, who having done as his other companions
did, at last met with the Duke of Sauoy, and the Duke of Florence, all sad,
distressed, and beyond measure grieved; yet some kind of joy or touch of it
they felt in meeting each other: then seeing all hope lost, they resolved
together to return into their Count^ies perpetually to mourn and lament their
loss, giving over Arms, Trauells and all, living sad and retired lives,
wayling that, they and all Christians were bereaved of, which was happiness; now
seeing, feeling, tast^ng nothing but distress: to the Sea they took, and
shipping themselves, hoysed sail for Italy, cursing Asia, and all in it save
the poor afflicted Pamphilia, whom they left in all desperate sorrow; for
having missed finding of him, they returned to her Court, and with unspeakable
grief found her possessed; with sorrowful and lamentable demeanours they parted
from her, words they had but few, but tears, sighs, and groans in full
plenty; now spoke they one to another, but scarcely till they had been some
two days at Sea, their eyes only acting speeches part, and assuring each other
of their true loves to their Prince and themselves. At Sea the Florentine saw a
Ship lying near the Greek shore, as at Anchor, many men and some women upon
the hatches; drawing nearer, they might discern mourners, and among all, none
armed: ah (said he) that company surely are of our as^otiates, their livery
tells them at least so to be. Their outsides indeed, said the Venetian,
counterfeits our inward grief. The Sauoyan looking steadfastly on them, said,
he was of their opinion, and the rather because he thought he saw Selarinus
among them; they then haled to her, which she answered, and as they were
sending some to her to know the new^s^ they perceived a Squire to put out the
loug Boat and make toward them; they then attended his coming: now did the
wind rise, (a calm having been before) and the waves begin to swell,
answering the boiling in their br^sts. The Squire could but be at their ship
when it was so rough, as without perishing he could not board her, especially
being under sail as she was; so as he only called to them, who said, his Lord
Selarinus desired to know if they were of Asia, and if they knew how Pamphilia
did, if rescued, and by whom. They could not answer more, then that she was set
free by Amphilanthus, but now he was lost, as with grief for the remembrance of
him, and the word lost, so filling them, and partly for the noise the Sailors
made, and for the distance that the Boat was by the tempest in that time
carried from them. The Ship likewise was grown a Traitor to them, and their
governors, taking new Commanders, the wind and the Sea, yet they contending
ma^ea rough dispute and d^stempered government, so as soon they lost sight of
Selarinus, Greece, Italy and all being carried into the Bri^tain Sea; long they
roamed at Hul, for advice or Art now helped not till the storm so soon ceased
as it had begun, and they perceived for their comforts, (as beauty is
comfortable to all good eyes) the fair Rocks of Brittany, anciently called
Albion; but by happiness after many misfortunes again called Brittany. The
winds and Seas appeased, they landed near a Cliffe of infinite height and
danger if not known: when they were a shore and armed, two purposed to travel
and alter their names, but the third ouerrul'd them, and by any means would
not consent to go, but as their own selves, and in their own persons, not
seeking to hide the nobleness of their search and truth of their duties. At
the place where they landed they got horses to the next Town, which was twelve
miles off, according to the reckoning of that Country: then came they to a
very fair Town, large, but not any way curiously built, though the houses
were of stone, but they low and ill covered made them seem poor. There were
women of marvelous beauty; for Brittany had the name to have the fairest
Creatures in her of all women, and that part the honor to have the fairest of
Brittany; many they saw as they past by, but as variety they passed them,
gazing as on wonders; but a wonder it had been to have staid them, whose
thoughts flew on still to the finding the happiness of their Masters recovery,
beauty was not now the Shrine they offered to, yet at other times that would
willingly have stayed them, now love and affection were two things, or one so
mixed, as no other thing, or part could enter, but the finding of Amphilanthus,
to be either, and so both. On in the Country they passed till they came to a
Desert that proved only rich in Air, and that in greatest bounty, in few
places it was inhabited, the rest all Desert, and as wild as any civil
Country could be. Many places, they passed, stony, woody, rocky, and as odd
as could be, lamentable traveling in it, the people rude and churlish, so as
with much dif^iculty, but to them good fortune, they happened on a Noblemans
house: antiquity they saw in all things there, in house, age of furniture, of
servants, building, and situation, which was such, as certainly were not, nor
could be under hundreds of years; the Master of the house was not there then,
trauel'd upon occasion into another Country, but the Mistress there, and she
the most ignorant proud woman living, caring for, nor respecting any but her
self and hers, as rude and ill manner'd a company, and as vain as her self
were about her, though much opinionated to be well-bahaued creatures, and so
they seemed to be bred no other then such which were of her own being, and
who could have that only way of good fashion, as she said, to be admired, and
to all other eyes the worst of fashions. Of her blood, she had some who
equaled, nay exceeded her, so as she may be excused thus, that she woman-like
had ambition to be chief of her blood, which she said was the best, and
would rather excel in ill, then not be the most excelling: neglect she did all
people but her chosen assotiats, so as one might justly say they were strangers
that came to her house; for none were familiar with her but her private (and
sometime too foolishly exprest^ humors. The friends her husband best loved in
his absence were used like others, it may be sometimes sooner had the ill
fortune to s^^ her proud person, else no more priuiledged^ when in his presence,
she would like his Dog fawn on him, and them: then there came thither a
wondrous brave Lady, who was a Kins-woman of her La: to whom as much respect as
she could let slide from her self was used, and who yet looked for as much as
either, or both had, nay as well could have been expressed to such like Ladies,
and near of blood to all vanity and proud folly. These Ladies the Princes met
one field from the house, by good fortune to them, else they might have stayed
for admittance longer then their haste would permit them; sad they were and
penfiue, proud they were and insolent, the Knights did them Princely respect,
they gave unmannerly acceptance, with much humble manner they presented
themselves to them, they fleering one on the other most rudely entertained
them, looking on them carelessly, as who would say, we honor you with this,
but who would rather do well, would do otherwise. The Florentine was haughty,
and where he found neglect he could repay it, else most noble; but not knowing
the nature of the Britains, was so discreet as not to be rash, therefore
he rather to bear then provoke ill entertainment, spoke with his hat in his
hand, in this manner. We are Travelers and strangers; yet more strangers to
the sight of such beauty, as till this instant I never did behold; and which
does so amaze me with content, as I am rapt into the clouds of pleasure, not
being able to express your excellencies but by my infinite admiration;
beholding you like so many Suns contented to distribute your equal beams to
let us be the abler to behold you: here I see the excellentest excellency of
the rarest perfections; excuse them most excellent Ladies, if my Companions, or
my self have ouerslip'd any due respect unto you, since the fault wholly lies
in your ouer-ruling powers, and we must excuse our selves by that fault, if you
close up all powers in amazement, you must pardon the amazed, and if you show
beauties beyond expression or ability to be suffered, no more then flames can
be to a naked person: how should one, especially my strooken self, be able to
do what I am called unto by respect unto such divine souls? Hide your
conquering beauties, and then our great weaknesses will get some strength to
speak, if but in a manner of admiration; but so short of your deserts, as I
shall still remain a poor, and an ashamed speaker for my self and
companions, who cannot speak thus much for themselves as I do. The Ladies left
him in his speech, and taking hands walked away, as who would say, by that
time the Oration is done, we will come again, smiling on themselves and their
vnciuilnesse. The other two Princes laughed at the Florentine, who was so angry
and ashamed, as he (being very black) looked between fury and blushing like a
Night-piece: what to do he could not resolve; but the other two did for him,
which was to go to the Town and rest them till the next day morning, and so
proceed in their journey, in this uncomfortable Country where their first
entertainment was so strange.

When they came to the Inn, there they found a second or rather a perfect
Hell, there were Knights and Squires, but all fellows, and most fellow-like
drunk: some were singing, some dancing, some quarrelling, others fidling, some
calling for more drink, in which they all like the burden of a Song agreed,
and called more. These Princes fell into this second misaduenture, the first
had too little courtesy, this as far exceeding in too much abundance; for
every one had a several humor, and they must endure them all: but an
advantage they had in this kind, though to their loss of sleep, for they
being well on their way before their coming, a very little more satisfied
them, and sent them to rest, some to bed, some under the tables, some on
benches, one in the Garden on a Lauender bed, while the Princes again took
their horses and rid some miles further, and in the Desert in a most poor (but
for quiet, rich) house, they spent the rest of the night, the next day taking
their way toward the Court, where then lived the King, but they not destined
to see so much happiness met this Adventure.

Passing along a most craggy and stony Lane, they came at the end of it, to a
tripartite divided way, a stone in the midst, and the way so justly parted, as
it made them imagine it was a place fit to be accepted and to part themselves
equally to take their offered favors: Upon the stone they laid their hands,
swear there within three Months to meet again, without strange accidents
befell them, to declare their loss, and search to all, their names never to
conceal, and so at the conclusion, to return every one to his own Country,
to lament their Lord and friend. It was the Florentines fortune to encounter
the first adventure, which was, after he had rid in that stony way sometime,
he came to a large Commune, spreading it self broader still unto his sight,
as coming out of a River, the Sea appears boundless: So did this Land extend
it self, having no bound to comprehend, or limit sight; sheep there were in
abundance, and some Cattle, people he saw none, so as it appeared there was
little danger of losing them, or that the trust was great in those parts.

At last a Countreyman he met driving a Cart which had carried wood, (a
commodity in those parts) of him he demanded what that place was, and the name
of that part of the Country. He replied, the place he was on was called the
Forest Champion, that part of Brittany being full of Forests and Chaces,
anciently called the deserts of Brittany; a little way from thence he told him
was a fair house, where a noble Knight and his Lady lived within a part of the
same Forest, which they had enclosed, and made like an orderly civil place,
from the others wildness, and shut themselves within a Pale; woods were within
this place, the rest all Heath and Rocks, scarce a Bush, but no tree that could
shelter one from a small shower.

The Prince desired to be directed to that place, which the honest man did,
waiting on him till he came within sight of it; now Sir, said he, you cannot
loose your way, except you will of purpose; so he took leave of him, who
arrived within a short time there; the Knight had at that time much company
with him, and one Lady who in her younger time had the fame for one of the
fairest, (if not the fairest) of that Country. But Love (the Ruiner of beauty
when cursed had decayed her beams of outward perf^ction, though her inside by
the virtue of constancy shined the cleerer. Black had her fortunes beene^ so
were her habits, sad her face^, and her countenance not heavy, but grave: the
Knight was a brave Gentleman, for his inward parts learned and honest, but lame
by blows in his youth when he trauel'd, as he had in most parts of
Christendom; his Lady a young woman, cheerful and pleasant, the daughter of
a great Lord, and Sister to as fine a Gentleman as was in that Kingdom: but
the Prince most marked the sad Lady, of whom he enquired, after some
complements and a little acquaintance of the Knight, who would needs stay the
Prince there that night, the Lady went away, having not above some six or
seven miles to ride to her fathers.

After her going, there came to the same place a Knight, not a youth, nor a
stayed man, forward in speech, and so valiant and bountiful of it, as he would
(where ever he came) have all the talk; some being angry at him for it, who
thought they could speak as well, and it may be better, but he carried it
with his boldness, and unless any would fight with him he would do so
still. Some laughed at him, and said he rung such peales of discourse, as were
sufficient to be reckoned among those rung for triumph, or joys for
Nuptials; others pitied him, as fearing it a disease, or Palsy in his
tongue, but all admired he held out so long with matter, unless he had as
strange a faculty in his brains of perpetual working, and so made that motion
in his tongue to rid her burden. The Prince much wondered at him, thinking he
was led thither to see the Prince of contrarieties, the first Lady as sil^nt,
as he talkatiue, the others in a reasonable good mean like himself, thinking
them both strange; at last, as the round of this most discoursing Knights
thoughts, came to the height, he began to speak of the Lady. Did you ever,
said he, see a sweet Lady so much changed as she is? I knew her, and so did
you, a fair, dainty, sweet woman, noble and freely disposed, a delicate
Courtier, curious in her habites, danced, rid, did all things fit for a Court,
as well as any brave Lady could do? what can change her thus? they say she is
in love: would that man were hanged would suffer such sweetness to decay by
his curstness: but I think and believe it is so; for I have made love to her
my self, and she refused me, who never before heard the word of denial. I
offered her Horses, though she wanted good ones at that time, yet she would
not take mine, nor presents from any for fear of offending him, who presented
her with nothing but scorn. I made Verses to her, said them to her, who
commended them faintly, and instead of thanks, said some of his to me, as to
let me see, that as he was most dear to her; so was all that he did or
belonged to him. I have a Brother was in my case for her love, but more
grieved; for she vsd him scarce ciuilly, me she ever did respectively, and
that wrought so much with me, as I hate the woman he loves, and is the cause
of her trouble for her sake; but for mine own part, I can bear her denying
me well, by reason I can love as often as I see cause, and stay no longer on
it; nor staid he there, but with this last word took his leave, only saying,
he would follow the Lady, if but to v^xe her, as easily he might do, or any
other discreet person, if h^e continued his talking travel, which was more
wearisome then travel it self to a quiet Spirit.

When he was gone, the Room was like a calm after a storm, or as after
foul weather the Air is silent, and sweet: so all being quiet, they pleased
themselves as Birds in the Spring, wi^h their own tunes: but then did the
Florentine desire to hear more of the Lady, which the Knight with much respect
to him, and honor for her, d^liuerd thus. Noble Prince, said he, if I go
about to tell you her Story, I must undertake to tell you the most unfortunate,
of the most deserving woman that ever was, and venture to relate a business
which I shall be unable to deliver to her worth, or the excellency of the
matter; but this I may say for her, she was the vertuousest and fairest Maid
in this Kingdom, the vnfortunateliest married, and unhappiest wife this
Country had, the most desolate and grieved Widow; for in all estates that
ever she was in, if she had a show of good, she had substances of ill and
mischief to succeed. In her youth, or (indeed) infancy, she loved a brave
Knight, who deserved all love and respect: but yet he had a fault, as most men
have. I was his companion, and knew as much of him for some time as any did;
yet that was a secret, and I never (intruth) mistrusted it, till I was gone
into a retired life, and a change grown among us all, being divided several
ways, and scattered like Hayle: She called to the Court, continued her begun
love, he fell in love with her, and so much as he raged almost with passion
till he discovered it, being for a while (as he vowed himself near madness;
but as passions are hot, and in youth more flaming, then afterward mature
judgment will permit, he grew slacker, she grieved, lost her content, and
yet thinking to please him, as that being her only end, refrained (fearing as
seeing his dislike and scorn to her) his presence, hoping to content him with
giving liberty to his new choice.

This, whether offending, or (as he took the matter) making it seem an
offense, she lost his love; and not only that, but he made it appear that
he loathed her: She (sweet Creature) whose heart to him, was but as the
softest part of his to his new Mistress, so grievously took this cursed hap, as
she melted into grief, as Virgins wax with the heat of fire will into
water, and yet thereby the coldness of that Element grow hard, as frozen by
coldness: So was she closed in cold despair; yet not hardened, but with
that, not with hate, or dislike, suffering as patiently, as a dead body permits
handling, by any rude standers by; she only felt pain of love, and into that
was metamorphosed. All delights she cast from her, all exercises left, covered
her misfortune with the loss of her Husband, when as, if her love had
continued true, she had in the other loss been happy; but as it fell out, a
most unhappy creature she was, and is. An ancient Lord, old in age and
antiquity of honor, made love unto her; she was not only perplexed with him,
but with her friends and Parents, he being infinitely rich; but she finding
that her heart (as she called him, and as that was subject to him called it
self his) would not consent, she refused, and with great joy that he loved
her so well, as he could not think of imparting her to any other, though sure
enough, that he could not hold her long, Death being gaping for him.

After she denied men of all sorts for age, and fortune, who durst take the
boldness to sue to her; Lately a young Duke of this Country made profer of
Love to her, but she not willing to entertain him, would not believe he
meant it, and so persuaded him out of it; yet he looks after her, follows her
when he may, meets her where he can have opportunity, smiles on her, seeks
to please her in all he may, and in some things does, for he never speaks to
her (but by looks) of Love; his company she allows of out of nobleness, and
out of true love will not hear of his love.

An ancient Lord also, and a mighty rich man for estate, (but in years) seeks
her, she will not understand it; He sends to her, inuites her to his
dwellings, She finds still excuses, and neglects ciuilly. He vows to find
her out, and court her. She flies, and takes iourneys unthought on to shun him,
and all this is for love, that so she flies Love, willing to warm her hands at
the fire of honor, but dares not come near the loue-fire for fear of
scorching, while she burns in her own flames; never any more beloved woman
breathed, nor ever will or can breath so true a loving woman. What has she
left vnexprest to manifest her affection in all kinds? life she has
ventured, honor lost, beauty and all happiness dead, while she grows old in
her truth of love, and has but that for her own satisfaction to content her
self withal, and that is riches unspeakable, when in her own soul she can
say, I am just; yet suffer for it, as if a fault, what is then a virtue, when
such perfections are errors? One pretty tale she now, as you came, told me,
her still beloved friend came into her company by Adventure, having with him a
dear companion of his, newly grown into that league of friendship, and
brought by him into the same with all his friends. This Gentleman, seeing her
discreet, grew into discourse with her, she loving all that loved her; loved,
even his Mistress for his sake, was well pleased with his conversation, and so
ne^re they grew, as he spoke freely to her, and she coufidently to him: so much
she saw in him, as she knew he knew most of her fortune; she grudged not his
knowledge, for a nobler man breathes not, as she says, except her own
friend, and he must before her have no Competitor named, for worth or any
goodness, though she suffer for his ill, so excellent he yet appears to
her. But this brave Gentleman at last with fr^edome began to persuade her to
leave her constancy, which would but hurt her, and continue no other way^s
true then truly to say she had loved longer, and iustlier then he: but
seeing no return nor hope, no longer to be a slave, when she might be^ free,
nor to him who deserved so ill from her, as if she loved ill so well as to be
bound to it; yet did he never name his friend, though by discourse said, he
knew him, ever protesting to name none in such kinds. She only answered this,
that so much she loved and honored truth, as she desired she might live in
that (if a fault) and grow old with such a virtue, whose worthiness would give
her youth, and eternity in comfort, and honor to the world, her wrincles by
truth would be closed, and she seem as fair as ever; her palenesse and
loss of complexion restored by the rareness of such a virtue; and her Age, as
by Medeas charms turned to infancy in the cleerenesse and ableness of such
worth. He lamented her misfortune, she smiled to hear him so much mistake,
and told him 'twas her perfection: this is the error, said he, of women, and
yet not generally do they err in this kind; so as I may only say of a woman,
and of one of the best, and therefore the more to be pitied. The Florentine
did naturally love strange things, and such as could hardly be compassed,
wherefore he had a great desire to see this Lady again, and to court her, and
so resolved to try his fortune, having as he thought, as much boldness and
winning power as any man. To help him on, the same talking Knight came again
the next day, being the most absolute endless Visitor in Brittany; he
confidently promised to bring him thither where she was, and to p^t them
together, and then said he if thou do win her, thou have better luck th^n all
the br^^e bold Britains have yet attaind unto. This familiarity seemed ^d,
yet the Florentine had his end also, and bore with his (as he heard it in his
language) rudenes; so they took their leaves of the lame Knight, and went the
nearest way to her abiding; but before they arrived there, the Florentine had
so much of his companions tongu, as he would have given a great part of his
hopes to have been rid of him. At the last they came to the Castle, she was
not at home, but rid forth to take the Air; they being Knights never were out
of the way; so they followed her and found her sitting in a great wood reading
some papers, which were Verses her love (in the time of his affection to her)
had made, and given unto her: she read them, wept, kissed them, wrapped them up,
put them into her breast, to print the stamp on the outside, as they were
engraven in the inside, sighed, wiped her eyes, and yet some bold tears had
kissed her quaking lips, ready, but afraid to part, and say he was unjust; for
the very vniustnes matyr'd her, and the saltness of those drops made her taste
her cursed fortune. They approached, she changing her countenance and now almost
ashamed to seem so good, he proving so contrary, whom she thought the best,
almost doubting if it were not ill to be good among so many ill, and such as
contemned goodness; yet bold in her self, armed with the rarest virtue, and
knowing that enough to justify her, and defend her, she met them; they with
reverence fit to give and to be taken by her, saluted her, then the everlasting
Speaker, who never ceased talking, no more then Brooks on Pebbles leave
murmurring, told her the desire they had to kiss her hands. She said they had
much honored her with that visit; the Florentiue with delicate language spoke,
she with much modesty and respective fashion entertained him: much he admir^d
her grave and yet courteous manner, the eloqnence she spoke such, as made him
think she was the best spoken woman he had ever heard, and the great^st part
of her eloquence was the plainnes, but excellently well placed words she
deliuerd, her speech was as rare and winning, as the Knight troublesome, and
most times idle; yet such he esteemed his wit, and the continuance of his
babbling was so usual, as he could not hold, but interrupted them, and fell
into his old fit of gabling. The afflicted Lady looked sadly on him; but when
she saw how grievously the Prince took his interrupting of them, she smiled,
and to her self said; would my pains could be thus partaken, then would my
suffering be the less; but oh, none are fit to know mine but my self, none
then to suffer them. The Florentine he chafed so much, as he could not frame
with patience any one thought, but with a confusion of dislike^ stood gazing on
him, who talked on, and regarded, or not, said Verses, spoke Prose, and rhyme
again, no more heeding answers (so he heard himself) then i^ he had rau'd or
talked in his sleep: Yet at last there was no r^medie but she must hear some
lines the Knight lately made in commendations of his Mistresses eyes, and
blaming her being sleepy in the morning, when she should have been up to
entertain him; the Verses we^e these.

Rise, rise from sluggishnes, ^ly fast my Dear,
The early Lark preuents the rising lights:
The Sun is risen, and shines in the rights
Of his bright glory, till your eyes appear.
Arise, and make your two Suns so clear show,
As he for shame his beams call back again,
And drown them in the Sea for sorrows pain,
That you, Commandresse of the light may know,
The duty Sun, and all must yield to you
Where richness of desert does lie imbracd,
Night by your brightness wholly now defaced,
And Day alone left to you as lights due.
Yet be as weighty still in love to me,
Press me with love, rather then lightly fly
My passions like to women, made to tie
Of purpose to unloose, and often be free.
Thus may your lightness showing ruin me,
I cannot live if your affections dye,
Or leave off living in my constancy
Be light and heavy too, so we agree.
These I protest before God (said he) I made at the instant, when I saw she
was not up, nor reddy, and many more I made to her, and others, on the sudden.
I seldom think of them, but naturally they come unto me; many of my Ancestors
has been Poets, and so I succeed in that quality, and I like it well, it
passes away the time well, and some of my songs I have set, and song them. But
when he talked of singing, the Florentine was then ready to die, for half dead
he was with the noise of speakiug, singing added to it would utterly have
ruined him, so as he was forced to say, My Lord, we came hither to visit this
excellent Lady, and short time I have to enjoy the happiness of her sight; let
us therefore I beseech you, gain so much favor, and honor from her, as to
hear her say some thing of her self. It is well said, cried he, and since the
Prince desires to hear your story, I pray let him have it. I have not
(answered she) ready, or perfect delivery of speech so well as you; therefore
if it please you, especially of the Prince, I desire to be excused, since I can
only when I have said all, but conclude, I am as you see me, the most
unhappy, unfortunate, miserable, lost woman, that can be found breathing. Then
did the tears again fall from her eyes, but so lovely she appeared in sorrow,
as it was almost equal in sweetness, and winning, to joy, and as powerful in
command, for it fully conquered the Florantine, never after being cured but by
death, living many years, and loving constantly to his death, a rare, and
seldom known thing among men, of his rank especially.

Night now grew on, so as they took their leaves; feign the Prince would have
staid, but she never, or wo^drous seldom invited any, though if they ca^e and
staid, she did welcome brave, or needing men; two tortures were he now ^allen
into, parting from her, and going with him, whose noise would make him mad, his
heart being oppest with melancholy, and but justly was he punished for aspiring
ever till that time to love, and win this, he saw the Emperor loved; as if
being his servant, he were bound to like as he liked, and love as he loved,
which did not please his Master, nor got him much gain, if not where no gain
was by winning. Once more he must see her, and rather then miss his desire, he
persuaded his silent companion to accompany him, which he did, and taking
Hounds with them, as if both to visit, and show pleasure, they took their
journey. They came where she lay, and with much ado got her abroad, who rid
daintily, and which quality did more (if more could be) entice, and inflame
the brave Prince, who still attended her; she as little, as he infinitely
fond, still accompanied her, who finding it, meant to put him, beside his
ordinary Knightly pace, and if he would be with her, take pains like a good
honest Forrester; wearier he had been with this chase, which was of a Stagge,
then of three days travel, but she was there, as his heart told him, fainting
would never win such a spirit; so he spurred on, and she rid from him; at last
the Stagge fell, and so the hunting ceased with the death mote. Home they al
^eturnd, and with much glory and loss, glory for victory, loss of hearts:
back to the Knights house the Companions went, whence the next morning the
Prince of Florence was called by an Adventure of some joy, an Esquire came unto
him, who had been in many Countries to seek him, and by mere chance cast upon
this shore as they were, was informed that three brave Knights were there
lately arrived, being in the West part of the Country of Brittany, by their
description they seemed to be some of those he sought, and so finding him, was
much comforted with hope of the others. He was sent from the Duke of Burgundy,
whose good hap it was to go the right way, and find the Emperor after some
time, and much travel; this gave great content to the Prince, yet grieved he
was to part out of Brittany, but necessity did compel him, so as away he
went, taking his leave of the Knight, who was most kind, and freely noble,
leaving him in trust to do a friends part in remembering his service to the
Lady. With the Squire he posted with as much speed, as that Country would give
him leave, taking first to the place, where his two Companions parted from him.
There arrived (as he did) at that instant, but unarmed, and all in Willow
color; the Prince of Venice, who had fallen on this Adventure, riding down
the way allotted him, he came at the end of three days travel to the side of
a most delicate and sweet River, being indeed one of the best of Brittany; at
that place there was a passage to cross to the other side, he took boat
there, and landing, came into very rich grounds, but not much pleasant, that
soil being rather for profit then pleasure; but passing that, he found a most
delectable Country, being a Forest, and the daintiest of all those parts,
seeming rather an exact piece of curiosity, then an habitation for wild
Beasts, woods, plains, corn grounds, and delicate Springs, many brave
dwellings, and fair and fine houses in abundance, so as they seemd as the
Banquetting-houses to so many excellent Gardens: the Woods were not great, but
pleasant, every field as it were fringd, and laced about with trees.

The Prince rode on, much in admiration of this place, following a pretty
Brook, which with the sweet murmuring and pleasing passing invited him to
follow him, as if by loving whispers he had entreated him, he understood it
so, and so rid beholding him with as much kindness, till at last he brought him
into a fair Meddow, there he grew as if angry, he had not said some thing in
his commendations, to swell and grow high with spite, but calm still, and
fair, and well might he be so, for close by on the bank lay such a
Shepherdess as Urania was, and that is sufficient expression for her
perfections, her Hook and Scrip lay by her, her bright and delicate hair
looked like straw in the Sun, when his glistering beams shine on it, and
that receives, and pays equal lusture: yet she to grace the straw more (or
fearing her parcialitie should be by the Sun corrected for wearing other
beams then his, or else punished for being near equal) had to defend his
blows a Hat of that matter, on her more radient rays, shunning the Suns hot
kisses, or envious touches. She was tying flowers together, the rest lying in
her Lap, and she picking out those she best liked, cas^ing some others into the
River, which smild in thanks to her for those favors. As she thus played, so
did her Sheep and Lambs by her: as free in joy, as she was from love, or any
such vexation: full were her eyes, and full of commanding power, her forehead
was most covered with her Hat, as in pity for fear of murdring with the
clearenesse, and azure veined pureness, yet her smoth cheeks, plumpe soft
lips, and delicate fine chin, showed a field of conquest, where still they
held the victory, her hands bare (making up her Nosegay) said by their
unmatched whiteness, that they were to be adored, not put to use, unless to
cherish hearts, their softness knowing no hard work, could no^ be cruel, but
gentle to wounds, by themselves especially given. Were not here allurements
sufficient to draw the Venecians heart to servitude? certainly far less
would have had power to melt the most iron breast of any Italian, whose hearts
are all apt enough to love, but here his admiration staid his love to wonder,
yet wonder brought at last resolution to love, and go unto her, had not he a
little been interrupted by the coming of a Lady toward the Shepherdess.

This Lady came, as it seemd, from an house on the top of a Hill, which well
might thither, and many miles further he discride, a Grome some half a mile
below it on the descent of the Hill, out of which she did seem immediately to
come. She came alone accompanied only with a Book to the Rivers side, but on
the contrary side of them, and chearefully (affection gloriously shining in her
eyes) saluted the Shepherdess, who instantly arose, and with as kind and
loving looks answered her salutations. The Lady said, that the water was now
proved to be as dull an Element, as the earth which joined with her here in
heavy thwartnesse to hold them asunder, ignorant of such spirit, as love had in
their hearts in desire of meeting. Here is a Bridge (said the Shepherdess) if
you will venture. I am ill at such a business, said the Lady, and you little
better, we may both fall in.

With that the Prince drew near, and offered his service to them: they accepted
it, and he pulling off his Gauntlet, took the Lady by the hand, and safely led
her over; then did the two (louer-like) women kiss, and embrace each other:
when their own passions were a little satisfied, then they both thanked the
Knight, desiring to know what accident brought him thither, especially armed,
where little Arms was required, or used; blessed Peace, the comfort of souls,
having only government in that place. He said, he was a stranger, and but
lately arrived in those parts, being the Prince of Venice, by chance cast on the
Brittan shore, whence he came, he had bin much out of fashion if he had not
been in Arms, and being so, you are as much out here, said they, and therein
is our happiness. Have you no Knights Adventurers in this Country, said he?
Knights we have (said the Lady) good store, and adventures; but they seldom
are put together, our Knights leaving the aduenturing part, unless out of
necessity, none loving a happy, and worthy peace better, and none abler, or
brauer in war, when occasion calls on them: but if you will try
adventures, here are many in this place, several Enchantments, and diverse hard
ways to attempt them; Charms are here in abundance also. So it appears,
says he, for you do carry charms enough about you to overthrow Armies of
hearts, then making so many yield, how can you be but in peace, when none dare
war against such powers. We are armed with strong resolutions, said the
Shepherdess, and defended by our own virtue, so as we fear no enemy, if
not lurking in our own breasts, which yet have not appeared, I am certain
have not had the boldness to adventure in my sight. How free you are (said the
Lady) while I that live in the same State, am yet environed with enemies: I had
the same subiect-like freedom which you had, yet I have yielded to another
Prince, and in that am a Traitor; for alas I have another Monarchy ruling in
me, then the true one of this Country. This is a strange confession, said the
Shepherdess: but for Loves sake, how long has it governed, and what is it?
The same Lord, in whose name you conjure me. How, cried the Shepherdess? why
dearest Lady, can your incomparable wit, matchless spirit, unparalleled
judgment, unspeakable discretion, unusual knowledge, pearelesse learning, and
most admirable virtue yield to the poor, mean, wayward, foolish and weakest
passion; you that have conquered hearts, and millions of them, while you have
gloried in your own strength and power, rightly to be made an example to all
your sex for constant worth and worthy confidence, will you fall lower then my
companions, poor and weak Shepheardesses, let your spirit awake, and open your
eyes to virtue, it is she calls upon you. It is she shall rule me, said the
Lady; for none but a virtuous love will I take, or yield unto, and in such is
virtue requisite to be called to counsel. You will all flatter your selves said
the Shepherdess, and Love that blind Devil which deludes you, bringing you
on, as men do children by Plums, to have them do as they desire; so this
false God will abuse you with his crafty delusions, he will make all faults
show as fair, and rich as Diamonds; but the richest of them taken inwardly,
are poison; he will paint over his worst cousenages with virtue to entice you;
but won, he will appear in other colors: he will guild his bitterest pills
with golden promises, rich hopes, and all falsehoods, and when; You have said
your worst, replied the Lady, and we considered all, I must love, and so I
hope shall you dear friend, if but for loves honors sake, since an enemies
gaining is more honor, then the conquest of hundreds of us that are professed
his enemies. A goodly profession certainly (said she), and a great purchase
you have yet to enrich your self withal, who had lately the richest stock,
and treasure of true, noble, and virtuous freedom. The Lady took her in her
arms, and smiling kissed her, Chide me not dearest Celina, I cannot help nor
alter my fortunes, run not on the error that I can withstand the power,
commands from Kings to your companions; for who are (unless your self) free;
what man ever lived, that loved not, or woman breathed, who had not some
affection; not your self but love, if but this life; I love where I may gain
happiness, and the truest end for which we are, and to which I hope you will
come: then Oh do not you afflict me with blaming me, my love to you shall be
no less, but rather more, since the better I know how to love, the better, I
shall love you. A fine and rare conclusion truly, said Celina, and just
louer-like to deceive your self; in troth Love has played her part well in so
short a time to instruct you thus perfectly: but if you pardon your loving, I
can scarce do so for your cursing me, since wishing me to be a lover is a flat
curse; pardon me thus you may (said ^ossilea), since I wish you as my self.
With that the Prince, who was taken with the Shepheardesses love, came in to
part the loving, yet for love disputing friends, little needed any peacemaker
between them, whose affections to each other were so twined in union, as could
not be vnwouen by any workman but death, yet he loving and pleading for love,
they all sat down jointly lovers, he loving her, the Lady her Servant, the
Shepherdess her liberty. The Prince then looking on her, who so much scorned
lone: and speaking to the other subject of affection, entreated he might be so
bold, as to beseech the favor of her, to know who she was, and the manner of
her love, she answered, she would not deny that request, but tell her story
with so much truth and passion, as she could, hoping by it to win the
Shepherdess to be her fellow in service, as her chosen friend in love. You
must use strange eloquence (said she) to persuade me to such a servitude; but
if ever I fall into it, it will be to keep you company, yet dearly should I
buy such a friendship.

As they were thus going about to relate their stories, the Shepherdess
started up, saying, she saw her sheep disturbed, and frighted at something by
the bank, as they were going to drink; she ran thither, and looking to see
what it was, found a man drowned, as she thought; she with that cried out, and
the other two came hastily to her, and altogether helping her, lifted him up,
no sooner had she (fair and loving Lady) seen his face, but she forgot the
delicateness of her green Velvet Gown, the richness of her fair carnation,
imbrodred peticote, her white shoes, and rich laced shooties, all was cast
aside, and he being laid on the bank, she laid her self in the wet, and on
the ground by him, rubd his pale face, wept, cried for help, did all that a
friend, a servant, but most a lover could do for his recovering.

Elina saw the care her friend had of him, and with what affection she sought
his saving, she thought it charytie, she liked the vert^e, she seemed to lament
with her as her friend, she counte^feited not, but in truth sorry, yet at first
she immitated Rossalea, first knew not alas how to greiue, but so she played
till it was so perfectly counterfeited, as she acted beyond that part, and in
earnest greiued; palenes here won more then beauty, that to her was the
greatest beauty, wannes and dead looks, more then cheerful color, cold lips
more then warm living ones, heat yet in them to burn her: she who could not
like a living Prince, or any man, falls in love with a dead man; can such fire
rise out of ashes if not kindlied by love the truest fire; she who hated love,
loves in the most miserable sort, she who contemned affection, affects an image
of a man; nay, she who chid her friend for this fault, as she calls it, falls
into a greater, and more to be disliked, for she does not only love, but loves
hopelesly, not only a man, but a stranger, and not but which was above all a
man fittest to be for his worth beloved, but her friends chosen loue^ here is
love just in power and punishment: Now may Rossalea not only blame her friend
but her self, for had she not instructed her, and wished her captivity she had
never thought of it, had she not commended love she had still continued an
enemy unto it, but had she not so passionatly loved, and showed the way by her
affectionate and dear expression, she had not known how to entertain those
flames, or practice the use of them.

Now Rossalea sigh's, rubs his temples, lays her lips to his as if to feel if
he breathed. C^lina does so also, but when she touches his lips she finds a
new pain, and yet she stays on them, and thinks, nay swears, Love was a
fine power, and that she infinitely offended while she did not love, and then
vows if life come again to him she will love him, and needs must I said she,
for if in death he be thus lovely and winning, how rare will he be in life?
then she considers he may be the man, her friend loves, seeing her unusual
grief for him, and care of him; friendship then comes in, but love preuailes,
and to give her due punishment deluds her as she before told, and described the
truth of loves falsehood, and in the same kind she had told Rossalea he used
her, thus she falls into the snare she persuaded her to avoid, being fed
with hope by this blinding spirit, that this might be the much admired brother
of that Lady, but hope had not here so settled a ground, but that some other of
loves followers came in also; jealousy appears in yellow mantles dressed
against Rossaleas kissing him: why, said she^, if he be her brother does she
so af^ectionatly kiss and embrace him, with such deerenes as I do who love
him; and if her love, why should she do this before me who so much affect
him? Or why should she be so unkind to her friend, to manifest her passions
before my face to vex me; at last so full of raging love she was, as she
would scarce let the Lady touch him, who poor woman could hardly do it,
grief so abounding in her, and what ease she had was only that she saw she
should want nothing, Celina her friend being so careful of him, this care she
imputed to love, love indeed it was, but not as she took it to her only, but
merely to him, here did that little, though great conqueror play a master
prize; the poor Venetian strove as much by way of helping as either, and at
last searching about him, found a wound in his left side, whereout issued into
his clothes much blood, the wound he stopped and bound neatly up, then with
the continual rubbing him, and throwing water in his face, he came a little
again to himself, breathed, and in a small space looked up, and seeing his
life in his Mistress before him, strove to express his joys, what could she
do, weep and wash his face with her tears, holding each other in their arms
twined like bows we call twins; one dying, the other but a little
flourishing, he weak, and his arms though shaking, yet withal her
affections power held her, she loving as much as he, with her arms incircled
him, and withal tenderness and love closed him in her breast; Celina embraced
both, loving both as their kinds were; in excess on the other side the
Venetian held all three, so as the four made in their cross embracements a
true lovers knot, and so it was on some parts; poor Celina, I pity thee, but
what help can be found for thee? alas none, insolent thou were to love;
scornfully, peeuishly reviling him, and now but deservedly thou art p^ined, and
he justly revenged: this is scarce the entrance, what will be the success?
pain, torment, loss, affliction, mourning, lamenting, pining, nay, dying, and
this will be the conclusion; woeful profits, but such as reuengefull love
allotteth thee; let never woman (especially hereafter) be so bold to contest,
nay contemn so powref^ll a godhead; when this small remainder of life had a
little stayed, and gained some other poor addition to it, the Lady with all
love and care entreated Elina to call some boy of hers (as some she had to
look to her flocks) and send him to her house for her Coach to carry him
thither, she called a lad but loath she was to go on the message, both for
going from him, and by that means to have him carried from her; but the
Venetian took his horse, and being directed by them to the safest foord, rode
to the house and speedily with the Coach returned, bringing a bed in it the
easelier to carry him without shaking, or opening his wounds, the fair
sheepheardesse mourned much at this parting; but one must suffer, and now it is
her part and time; being come to the house, Chirurgions are presently sent for,
and soon brought, for a great City was not far off; life was then assured
him, but a long time they thought it would be before he recovered, so much
blood he had lost, and the long lying in the water had hurt the wound and would
hold it something longer from healing, mother never was so tender of a child,
as Rossalea of her love; the Venetian as ready as a friend to express care, yet
was he amorous, and in the morning after he had seen the Gentleman had taken
rest, he walked forth to find his heart houering about the body of the
Sheepherdesse, passing down the walk which went to the Grove, he heard not
far from him, two discoursing earnestly, the one as repenting, the other
threat^ing; he ha^kened, though scorning that trick if upon any occasion but
profit to his friend, wherein he was most just and obseruant, this besides
leading him by their own inducing speeches on, saying did I consent to so
detestable a fact led by thy wickedness. Oh Framin^us, that not only thy self
may curse, but I already find the hellish tortures for it, my soul boyles and
burns in the flames of my offense, yet thou wickedly say thou have but
revenged thy self, and done but right in that, my breast swells with sorrow,
and I pine in despair of pardon, a religious poor thing said he thou art,
and as re^igion ties me I must not suffer thee too long to languish; then did
he with a Dagger in many places stabb him, the youth (for so the Prince after
saw him to be) patiently, yet sadly taking his end, committing himself to
God and admonishing the other to think, to whom he had committed himself,
and his last hopes. With that the Venetian called Leurenius, step in, and not
after the ordinary way taking the hurt body, but the hurter he caught, and
using these words held him. Villain, said he, thus to murder one, whose all
and least drop of blood being staind by thee should so have been cheerish'd:
What can thou then say in thy defense, or on thy part, to excuse this
cruelty? this youth is not only sl^ine by thee but tied to suffer the
slaughter having no defense for himself, not only so but as your speeches argue
made ill and guilty of blood, this but annimated and imboldned him having no
more order or bounds then the Sea has in a storm on rotten and yielding
ground: wicked soul what can thou say to answer thy wickedness? better then
you replied he, this bold and saucy inquisition; who authorized you in this
examination? who made you inquisitor or judge? truth and pity said Leurenius:
neither ever ruled or had power in me said Vicianus; I am Lord of my self,
and much good lands hereabout, I owe now nothing to any, I did, and was
indebted to the great keeper of the Forest, whose command greater then mine I
c^uld not suffer, but after many contentions and controversies between us, he
not the man that would submit or yield, I laid a plot for revenge, that being
my refuge, and yesterday finding my advantage took it, and now am satisfied,
for his life I have, and now am free, this creature being my only Counselor,
who hurt dangero^sly by him, who intruth was valiant and had many good parts,
yet drowned them all in the brook of dislike to my orders which were not to be
corrected by him, I so ordered him as we two I say had his life, and least
that should come out, I have now made away with him, so will I do with you
(for in such bussinesses I love no Counsell-keepers, with that he let fly at
him with a weighty club of Iron, but Leureneus was nimble, and well used to
escape such perrils, so as slipping aside he avoided it, but withal stepped in
like a younger brother to possession, and closing with him threw him down;
then possessed he himself with his arms, and forced him to tell him he had done
this ill, he confessed it was done by treasons compact, more he would not say,
but by chance watching opportunity, catched the Princes dagger and would have
stabbed him, but he quickly prevented it, and made the actor better act his
part, shunning the blow, and catching him unprovided, for resistance armed only
with mischeife got the dagger from him, and throwing him down on his knees,
made him acknowledge his fault, and make his confession; the chief Forrester
is a great Lord and infinitely powerful in love of friends and people, but
most inricht with the affection of the Lady of the Forest whom I affected, and
who had by the Lords appointment, that honor done to her, that title being
given her, which madded me as much as her refusing me, which proudly she had
done, yet sought I not so much revenge of her, as of her servant, and our
Forest Lord, her affection I hoped to win by love or force, he gone whom she
affected, and to be rid of him I resolved, and yesterday I dispatched it. This
youth, my then in show cherisht-Lad, slew him with an arrow as he alone rid to
see his walk, and to be suer of him when wounded, I threw him into the
Brook, where if any seek they may find him; his wound is on the left side,
the instrume^^ a Bow, the weapon abroad arrow, so as now if I dye I have this
satisfaction, he goes, and is gone before me. You are said the Prince, much
deceived in this, for though hurt, he lives, and to recover we make no
question, but to assure you of it, you shall go with me, and from him, and his
dearest only beloved receive your punishment. Back he led him by force, and
delivered him unto them, he was by the Officers of that part the Lord being a
party having no power to punish him) sent unto the City into a sharp prison,
whence he was conducted to such punishment as the Judges, and Officers
appointed for him. Leurenius again going down toward the Meddowes to find
his heart which in Celinus breast he saw craving love, or pity, she lying on
the ground, careless of order, or modesty, almost distracted, and lying in
the most disordered Posture that could be, for so discreet and curious a woman,
tumbling on the ground, clapping her breast, sobbing, weeping, crying, all
passionate joined to her masterie: one while she tore her hair, and thrust her
face, as it were, into the ground, another time she rated her passions by
sufferance, and so challenged reward: then she confe^t the reasons, and so
recald her claim; then she blamd her folly, but quickly commended her love:
thus by contrarieties she gained respit, but not ease from her pains, flying
like down in the air; miserable bondage, and most so, because to a late free
heart. O servitude insufferable, and slavery not to be endured. Wretched
Celina, cried she, that have these unmeasured thoughts, and want of power to
express them but in patience, some lines she put together, but so few, as
could make no kind of verse, not having proportion, or number: these indeed,
said she, are fit for my making, unmeasurable thoughts leave me, as hope and
help abandons me. Then she again vexed to the soul rold on the grass, and
with her tears to the earth, and on it, Receive me dear Mother, said she,
into thee, and let me be as I am, once again with thee. The Prince was grieved
to see his soul, which in her was thus perplexed, he cried against his ill,
lamented as for her, and in as much distress as any that ever loved, he
governed under the weight of his affliction; he heard her complain of
unfortunate love, he said he might as justly do so to: she said it was
strangly fatal to love so violently at first sight: He shrug'd, and said it
was his fate; no complaints she would make that he had not the same cause to
dislike, for no pain was in her that he was not a patient of, yet strong it
was, the pains one, the accident one, and cause one, they were by two equal
sufferings made diverse, and several. She complayn'd she could not measure her
passions. He, that he could not please her by putting them in measured feet,
yet to pass the time, having a fine voice, and skill fit for a Prince, he sung
this Song.

1
Have I lost my liberty,
And my self, and all, for thee
O Love?
Yet will thou no favor give
In my loss thy blame will live;
Alas remove.
2
Pity claims a just reward,
But proud thoughts are thy best guard
Once smile:
Glory it is to save a life
When deceivers are in strife
Which to beguile.
3
Your gai^e has my pain begot,
But neglect does prove my lot,
O turn,
Say it was some other harm,
And not your still sought for Charm
Did make me burn.
4
Thus may you all blame recall,
Saving me from ruins thrall
Then love
Pity me, I Will no more say
You to cruelty did sway,
But loyal prove.
5
Else be sure your tricks I Will blaze,
And your triumph Castle raze
Take heed,
Conquerours cannot remain
Longer then men's hearts they gain,
Worse will you speed.
6
You a King set up by love,
Traitors soon may you remove
From by,
Take this counsel serve loves will
And seek not a heart to kill,
Least both do cry.
She heard him, and liked neither, his tune nor words, her heart another was
flying, or staying but to fly further, as taking breath for a longer journey.
He looked toward her, she from him, he went as to her, she rose and walked
toward the Grove; he followed and sighed, she went on, and was deaf to his
sorrow; he cried to her, she was silent, and answered not, as not taking his
words to her. He ouertooke her, and with tears told her his pain; she was
sorry for him, and could be so, her own being so great. He said her sight had
killed him: she answered, he lived yet (and she hoped should) to be cured of
that wound.

He said, none but she could cure him. She replide, she was an ill Surgeon,
else she would not be uncured. Alas, said he, pity me. O pity, said she, have
compassion on me. It is you dear Shepherdess (sigh he) can and must pity
me. Pity, said she, has so little acquaintance with me, as I cannot inuit
her to me, how then shall I spare so much to you? Your first sight (said he)
murdered me. Alas that first sight, said she, should hurt us both; it is my
case, and certainly this is but a charitable pains you take, to help me to
discover my pain, which is so intolerable, and past remedy, as both with our
best (and I think addition of) wits cannot relate or discover.

I but saw you, and my heart was made subject to you. I but saw him, and I was
his slave, cried she. Would I were that He, said he. So would not I, said she,
for then I should not have this pleasure in grieuing nor tormenting you. Why,
hate you me because I love you? No, answered she, but because I am rejected; I
love to see others tortured I will suffer all tortures, crid he, so you will at
last commiserate my woe. I shall in a general kind, said she; for I shall
lament, mourn, and feel my torment, such as I shall pity all that smart, and
so may pity you, but with no more favor, then a private man may take a Kings
thanks, when thousands cry, God save him. Will you permit me to live, and
serve you here, said he. I need no defendants, said she, and for servants I
have those sitter for my command then you can be: but Sir let not falsehood, or
beguiling hopes abuse you, this is no life for you, this no place for your
abiding, be your self, and fruitlesly follow not what you shall never gain,
proceed in your profession, and as armed against enemies, arm your self
against this fond affection, I wish you well, but am unable to aid you, my
heart is disposed of, you a brave Knight may better fit your self with a
deserving, and gallant Lady; I wish you all good fortune, but that now you
seek, and as a friend advise you to leave this suit endless, and gainelesse.

With that she came to a Gate which opened into a fine Grove, she had the key,
and opening it, went in; yet at the entering turned, and with a sigh, a
scornful look to him, and a slight courtesy bad him farre-well, shutting the
door after her. He (as in that Country they have a Phrase) returned with a
cold fire to warm himself, if not with his own flames; yet straight he went
not thence, but a while looked after her, when he perceived her cast her self
on the ground at the root of a Hauthorne, speaking to her self, but the words
he directly heard not, at last she sang with a sad voice, a song the delicate
Rossalea had once made, she being perfect in Poetry, it was but finished, when
an other Shepherdess came to her, as sad, and grieved as she was, no
difference, but that the former had the greater, and curster spirit; this as
much, but milder, and softer; she wept, and had done so long, this distressed
Maid did so too, at last they came nearer to speak, and thus they discoursed.

What accident, said Celina, has brought you hither? Sadness and mischance
said the other. What procured them, said the first? Love, cried the second, the
Lord of hearts, and of yours too I hope, and so should seem by your looks.
Mine eyes and looks are but true to my heart, said Celina. If they tell you
so, they are but the glasses which I see my self in, said the other drawn to
misery. We are all picturd in that piece, said she, a large cloth, and full of
much work. While they were in this discourse, a third came singing a song
merrily, and carelessly of either being heard, or the power of love, it was
this, Love grown proud with victory,
Seeks by sleights to conquer me,
Painted shows he thinks can bind
His commands in women's mind.
Love but glories in fond loving,
I most joy in not removing.
Love a word, a look, a smile,
In these shapes can some beguile,
But he some new way must prove
To make me a vassell love.
Love but etc.
Love must all his shadows leave
Or himself he will deceive,
Who loves not the perfect sky,
More then clouds that wanton ^lie.
Love but etc.
Love, yet thus thou may me win,
If thy staidness would begin
Then like friends w'would kindly meet
When thou proou'st as true as sweet
Love then glory in thy loving
And I Will joy in my removing.


Finely sung (said Celina), but it is an idle subject you sang of, because it is
love (said she), because it is not loving, said the other. Loving (cried the
new come Less) then I would swear 'twere idle indeed: why sweet Celina (said
she) I hope you are none of those poor Vassels, his baby Kingdom consists
of; I am one, if you call his royal government such, and I think one of his
truest servants. Now in troth I lament your mischance (said she) it is a
fortune I would not wish mine enemy: yet your friend, said Celina, is fallen
into it: then pity her, and pray for her I think, I were best (said she) for
sure all his subjects are in miserable case. I am in it above help, or hope of
returning; then, said she, both we see nothing is impossible. I rejoice in your
company smilingly, said the first come Less, and I lament for you both cried
the last: And I thank you both, said Celina, and for you I hope ere long by
such an occasion, or some worse, you may fall into my fortune.

The Prince seeing all the three thus free in discourse, entreated, that he
might be admitted, Celina was persuaded by them, and so they called him in: then
began they again to talk, at last they went to pretty plays, as choosing of
Kings and Queens; the lot fell on Celina, who commanded the Venetian to stay
no longer in those parts, but to go unto his friends, and in witness of his
captivity, to travel unarmed, till he met them, or was forced by injury to
put them on. This was more then sport, yet he obayed, and having liberty to
take his leave of the Lady, he kissed her hand, and departed. The last
Shepherdess that so reviled love, being called Lemnia sighed at this parting,
loving good company, or him who had gaind f^o^ her a more kind conceit, then
she had had formerly of mankind, as if the spring to the summer of her love,
which increased by a strange heat, growing in absence to the height of flaming,
as if the fire of love were so universal, as the warmth like that of the Sun,
would heat worlds at a time: so his force served in absence to scorch, nay
burn her heart. She looked after him as long as she could see him, and
marking his loving looks back cast, and sad on Celina, she liked, pitied and
loved his manner, so him, and at last stole in to be a lover before she was
aware; a crafty Ladd this Cupid is, poor creatures how you are beguiled by
him. Celina, and Derina had enough now to please themselves, and vex her
withal, yet sometimes, and often the latter part fell to them, while she
pleased her self with her passions; these three now soundly captive might
dance the tricks of Love to the tune of Sorrow. Celina loves one whose heart
and soul was her friends. Lemnia a Prince stranger, and loving Celina. Derina
a brave youth, but married to the Forest Lo^ds Sister, poor souls, and the
poorest, loving thus hopelessely; All they could do in their best humors, was
to lament absence, in the curstest, and worst to rail at Love, and their
misfortune, curse sight, hearing, believing, and all that were assistants,
instruments, or sufferers to these passions; but the Venetian having (as the
rest had at first done) sworn to obey what ever he was commanded, went with
sad steps up the Hill, his heart falling faster into despair, then his feet
ascended.

When he came into the Garden he met the Lady, who told him some were with her
Lord about business, therefore entreated him to stay, he obeyed her, and
being loath to have his ill known, which might be imputed to folly in him, to
avoid her question, entreated to hear her story, which thus she related.

My name (said she) is Belizia, daughter to the Earl Marshall of this
Country, near allied I am to the greatest of this Land, but only tied to
this Forest Lord, for whose sake, I have forsaken all, and live here a lonely
life with him; much my friends, and Kindred were displeased withal, his means
being small, t^ough his honor and worth great, which I looked on, and loved
and so to them gave my heart, and had not this misfortue happened, the
celebration of my gift had been performed to our only joys this next week,
but now must be deferrd, though I trust to be one day happy for all this
misery; never man has been so loving, nor so constant; nor if I may speak
for my self, never any woman has been so firm and passionate, none yet so
secret; for many years I loved before I acknowledged it, nay, before any
thought I could think on such a flame, yet when discovered, some remembered I
had been a good friend to his pretty godhead, never suffering him to be abused
when my power could help his honors defense.

One of his Sist^rs was the first mistrusted me, and telling me of it, I denied
it, but so blushingly, and faintly, as that was a perfect confession. She loved
me so well, as she was glad of it, being sure to have a perpetual tie on me by
this means, which though she might have assured her self of before, yet
Lovers love strictest ties to bind their loved to them; so much indeed we
loved, as but the fair Celina I affected her only, and best of woman kind.

The ill man you took yesterday, my friends had rather have bestowed me on,
but he was contrary to my heart to like, would so I had been to his, then had
not my dear been wounded, nor he come to so untimely an end, for this last
night (before his time for execution, by the Law appointed) he strangled
himself in the Prison, having nothing but his garters to execute his wicked
enterprise: withal when this Story was thus telling, one came unto the Lady,
to let her know, that many Ladies were come to visit her, she then, though
unwillingly, took leave of the Venetian, whose good, and fair behavior gave
content where ever he did come, but he said, he was compelled by necessity, so
he took his way, first taking leave of the Lord, his Squire carrying his
Arms, he not being to wear any, while he was in Brittany, by his cruel
Loves command.

He traveled till he came to London, admiring the bravery, and sumptuousness
of the City, but most of the Court, arriving just against a mighty triumph was
to be made in honor of the King, and some strange Princes who came of purpose
to honor themselves, with kissing his hands. Nobly, and courteously was he
received at the Court, much was he pe^plexed with passion, much pitied by
all, and as much he was troubled, that he was barred from exercising himself
in those sports, which by reason of his promise to Celina he could not do,
not being able to wear arms while he was in Brittany, if not for defense, yet
at the Ring he ran, and did it so finely, as the King and all admired him;
here he stayed the conclusion of the tryumphs, then remembering his friends,
and oath, he took his leave, taking toward that place where he arrived, just
as the Florentine did, but when he saw Leurenius in a Court Suit of Willow
color Satin embrodered with Gold, his Armor trust up, and carried on a Horse
after him, What Metamorphosis is here, cried he? Is this Leurenius the brave
Venetian Prince, and my friend? While I was worthy, I was so, but now am
nothing, replied he, but sorrow and despair. What is the cause said he, and
what makes you travel contrary to our vow, vnarm'd^? Overcome (cried he) by
the power not equallable of a Shepherdess, and by her command to leave this
Country, and to travel unarmed till I met with you, having heard my story,
and my former ill fortune, she added this to me the worst of ills.

Brittany, said the Duke of Florence, has been counted the most pleasant,
delightful, and happiest Country in the world, being for all bounty of
contents a world it self, nothing missing or wanting to the full plenty of
happiness. Yes said Leurenius, pity wants in the heart of Celina, and in a
Lady whom I met, sighed the Florentine, and who has tied me as fast as you are
in the bonds of Love, but not of slavery, for you are a little to far gone, but
Leurenius here is good news, the Emperor is found, and we must straight
repair unto him, Celina to be thus causlesly cruel alas, but is the Emperor
found? and you utterly lost, cried his friend I fear: fear not dear friend,
(said he) she will not yield, her heart made of these Rocks cannot be pierced,
her soul has no compassion, nor will hear more to pity, then fire will by
s^pplication when it is ruining the rarest buildings, then fear not I shall
go with you; but said the Florentine you are much altered in your speech, your
discourse differs, nor is so certain. All is in me uncertain, but my love,
that is fixed cried he, I am Love, I love, and will love. His friend b^held him
with infinite grief, cursing the accident that parted them, on the ground he
cast himself, a bank by chance being there green, and clean, rouled on it,
wept, and groueling on the ground, wiped his face again with it, thus, thus,
cried he, would I have done at Court, cursing the order that held me from it;
my heart swelled with bearing my pains, and all the honors done me were but
corsiues to my soul, she, she Celina having banished me. Leave these vain
passions said his friend. I must leave my self first cried he. I love dear
friend, and if you could love so, you would not wonder at me but envy my
happiness in being such an one. Such an one, cried he, God forbid, I love,
and this Country I may thank for it also: this charming Country; for no
better, she is filled with inchaunting beauties framed to tie, and ruin men:
revile not this blessed Realm, the flower of peace, beauty, honor, virtue,
happiness, and most of Shepheardesses. I love this Country, and I love, did
not the valiant Hercules love? Yes, said the other, and spin almost as wise a
web as you go about to do, certainly (dear friend) I shall in my extremity
gain help by seeing your affliction; but man what think you of the Emperor?
God bless him, said Leurenius, and make Celina knde, else I dye. His companion
was discreet and loving, so he urged him no further, but made the Squire tell
the story of the Emperor, as his Master the Duke of Burgundy had related it to
him, and commanded him to deliver it to the Princes, and as he found any of
them to send them still home. When that unfortunate hunting was past, wherein
Amphilanthus was lost, the Queen distressed, and all the Princes scattered, the
Emperor having got his arms, followed in search of Pamphilia, who was (as he
by a villain was informed) stolen away by Thieves, in the wood, hotly
pursuing the quest, rage and revenge boiling in his breast, he happened on a
strange place for thickness and obscurenesse; yet the undaunted and loving
Prince proceeded till he found a Crown of stones, of infinite and huge
bigness; weary with travel, he allighted, and thinking to rest, tide his
horse to one of those stones, no sooner was it done, but a terrible, fierce and
mighty boar, issued out of the wood, running mainly at Amphilanthus, but he
thinking to shun the encounter, and take advantage of the Beast, in his
passing, the Horse unruly at the sight of him, did his best likewise, striking
at him, but missing him, the Boar with his tuske struck the Horse into the
body, so he died. The Emperor troubled as well for the love he bore the
horse, as for his want and danger he remained in with this cruel beast,
watched opportuni^y, with vow of revenge, and so as the Boar ran at him, he
stepped aside, and nimbly skipping in again, thrust him to the heart before he
could turn. This was no sooner done, but many men armed set upon him, he
valiantly, like himself, defended his honor and life, one young man unarmed,
but above all most harming him, and pressing more then the rest upon him, he
slew, the rest all at the instant vanished, and with a blow given that was on
the head, which cut him to the eyes, a voice cried, Farewell Amphilanthus; the
voice he knew, and presently in stead of that young man, he saw to his
thinking Pamphilia slain, and by his hand; he threw himself on the ground,
striving to help her, but she was carried into a stone which lay in the
midst of the Crown, by whom he could not see: but how did he labor to hold
her back or keep her with him, who living never sought, but to be with him,
nor now left him, deceit only abusing him by this inchauntment; entreat,
pull, all would not serve, stronger powers had her, as he believed, and made
her inocently offend, and part from him she entirely and loyally lou^d, and
from whom she never slid: into the stone she was carried, up he then rose,
with his sword striking at the stone, as to hew it asunder, and take her out,
but his sword stuck therein: will thou leave me too said he? then his armor
he pulled off which with the blows those enchanted men struck was much hacked,
and blood thrown of purpose, as if shed by him upon it (when he was unarmed he
laid the pieces on the stone, vowing that should be his monument, being the
richest, her heart enclosing him, and there would he dye, a Ring of iron he
then saw, which pulling hard, opened the stone; there did he perceive
perfectly within it Pamphilia dead, lying within an arch, her breast open and
in it his name made, in little flames burning like pretty lamps which made the
letters, as if set round with diamonds, and so clear it was, as he distinctly
saw the letters engraven at the bottom in Characters of blood; he ran to take
her up, and try how to vncharme her, but he was instantly thrown out of the
Cave in a trance, and being come again to himself, resolving to dye, or to
release her since he found her loyalty, he saw these words only written in
place of the entrance.

This no wonder's of much weight,
It Is the hell of deep deceit.
Admiring it and the words he was called to for help by Musalina, her he saw,
she must be followed, Pamphilia is forgotten, and now may lie and burn in the
Cave, Lucenia must be rescued also, her he saw madly carried by a savage man,
he ran toward the place he saw them go into, as he thought, then were they
there rudely handled, and they carried several ways, all that night in the
wood he lay, three passions distract him, tired with running, and laded with
grief, in sleep Lucenia wan him, all passions now but how to recover her
having abandoned him; three days he did wander thus, till at the end of them
toward night he came unto the Sea, there he saw a savage man take her up in
his arms and throw her into a Boat, leaping himself after, and when she
would have thrown her self into the Sea, crying still to Amphilanthus to
succor and have compassion of her, the rude wretch tied her by the hair, to
his leg, and so road away with her. Musalina from the wood again claiming aid,
with her hair rudely cast about her, and lowdest cries; the divine powers held
him for all this witchcraft, from hurting himself, else certainly he had
been much in danger, what passions he suffered then cannot be told, a furnace
of fiery torments blazing and burni^g in him, then came on other boats, as
standing doubtfully whether to return to Pamphilia, or follow Lucenia, but
force of charms prevail, so he called to that and those in it, offered
money, prayed, besought, used all means to gain passage, at last the bark
put in, and took him aboard, a storm then rose, or as by charms he believed
not, yet being free from those devilish witchcrafts, till he arrived at
Tenedos, on the shore he saw Musalina and Lucenia walking, and safe; Musalina
having by devilish Art been the cause of all this. Now had he almost forgot
all had past by the enchantment, that being almost finished, but all things
before happening were fresh in his memory, his sword, armor and horse he had
he thought use of, and now blames himself for going so madly and foolishly
unarmed, but they saluted him, welcomd him, cherished him, he told his
fortune, how pleasant and dear was this to them, and now, said he, I am
disinchanted, and to us most affectionatly welcome said they; no more shall
charms now trouble you, from them, and through them said he, I have broken,
and am come to you, and there is he still living in much pleasure, the Duke my
Master, by his traveling that way, after adventures many and dangerous,
landing in Tenedos, where he happily (because the search ended) found the
Emperor, but seeing his resolution took hi^ leave of him, and the Princes of
Denmark and Swethland, whom he met and rescued in a cruel fight at Sea
against Pirates, with noble victory, are all retu^ned and gone into their
several Countries, sending me hither to seek you, being advertised by the
ships that brought you hither, asking of all ships and men still for you, that
you were by her landed here, am I faulty said Leurenius to be charmed by love?
since the earths glory, and such a Ruler as Amphilanthus can be charmed, Love
said the Florantine has in this greatest triumph; the Duke of Sauoy the next
day arrived, who told his story thus: after they had to him related the
Emperors fortunes, his discourse being of the rescuing of a distressed Lady
set on by thieves, who finding advantage by her staying a little behind her
company, had ceazed on her, robbed her of her Jewels, and would have shipped
her, she lamentably complained, he coming by heard her, so he relieved her,
and her servants wanting her also, came in to her succor, many thanks he had
for his noble favors, and most when she knew that he was a great Prince, and a
stranger, and would be so free and courteous to a strange Lady: after that
adventure being a brave one, saving the modest honor of a Lady, he returned
with little more knowledge of Brittany, the time short of stay, the places
desert and wanting of adventures, Knights none to encounter, peace having with
true honor and conquest, taken away those rude troubles, and travels, all these
met, they resolved, to go to their own homes, and thence send to know what
the Emperor would do, and so resolved, home they went: The Florentine being
so free as to leave his heart with the sad loving Lady, the Venetian so mad to
give his unrewarded to Celina, but the Sauoyan, grauer and more stayed, as his
years were some more then theirs, carried his home to bestow it in his own
air.

Amphilanthus having stayed in Tenedos, sometime walking abroad alone, many
several thoughts possessing him, he saw a Nymph sitting by a Brook side,
being in the evening, besides a private and unfrequented place, each Angle and
wanton winding embanked with trees, and flowers, reeds, rushes, all other water
commodyties richly abounding there, for the service and pleasure of such like
her self, she stood still behind a large willow tree, while she undressed her,
and pulled off her fine aparell, as her upper garments and ruff, her neck
then remaining bare, so as more fine and delicate she seemd, and merrily did
she this, singing a dainty song concerning chastity; so pure and mild is the
stream near her thoughts, and actions such as made the Emperor jealous if he
could be so, being royally free from such folly, yet tender he was least the
Brook with his cold (and her unused to cold) arms might make her start and so
molest her with such unpleasing imbracements, therefore to preserve her from
such hazard, and her honor from the danger, her naked simplicity might bring
her to, in any hands but his, he spoke to her, now was she amazed, bashfulnes,
modesty, fear, trembling and all possessing her, yet so prettily in such
danger she looked, and such commanding in petitioning looks she cast, as
humility and submission directly governed, but he who was by them, only put in
mind of such as once pleased him, he in place of taking, or thinking, of taking
these, asking favor, or using power, told her she need not fear him, who
only sought to gain quiet rest to his thoughts which were wandering to his
heart, distant thence by much; then with tears in his eyes, casting them up as
unwilling to let such passions govern in him, or seem to do so in his
brauest parts, though he must thus be subject to passion, he walked away toward
the house again, more perplexed then ever; sigh she did, and so, as made every
good heart groan to hear them, strangly alterd he grew, the cause none knew,
many, most, nay a ^ that saw him, admired, after supper some two days being
past, the Duke of Saxsony, arriving there, having heard of his being in that
Island, he told the Ladies that the Squire had bin long without him, and that
he must confess himself extreme negligent, and unworthy of that dignity no
more prizing the care of it, wherefore he resolved with the Duke of Saxony the
next morning to take his way toward Germany, and because the ways were
tedious, long, and besides filled with such noble friends of his, as would make
him stay longer then he was willing, he would go by Sea. Musalina and Lucenia
were much grieved at this, but reason, and there ancient knowledge of his
resolutions if once resolutly taken, not to be removed, were forced to give
consent; Lucenia came with him to the waters side, so to pass over into
Romania to the Queen again to serve her, Musalina so far brought him and
her, there they took their leaves. The Emperor and his friendly servant,
sailing along the Archipelago, Amphilanthus willed him to tell him his
adventure, which he did, having all happened in Pamphilia, lead therein by
marvelous, rare, and unheard passages, then he told him as occasion brought
in, his being at the Nimphs house, where the Queen had lain, her recovering
her first love by their means and discourse, with the Queens passion and
g^iefe for him, and his loss, and all the sorrow which after these Adventures
were finished he found, and left Pamphilia in, directly assuring him, that in
such miserable grief she remained, as long she could not sustain. Lastly, how
Polarchos kept the crowned Stones, none at his departure being assured of the
Emperors life, or being, but within the Stone.

These things wrought in him, like drops falling on soft stones, they wear in
to them at last, though in the beginning touch and slide off; more and more
this pierced, and so much strengthened with his own affection, as he resolves
to see her; so he commanded the Mariners to land him on the Pamphilian shore,
which they did, he enioyning them to sail on for Germany, giving the Duke of
Saxony letters to Ollorandus, and the rest of the Counsel, with all
instructions fit for such employment, promising to be there in short time
after, nothing (this visitation made) should hinder him; the Duke humbly
kissing his hands, overwhelmed with joy for this good news, and assured hope
of the having it performed, went for Germany, safely arriving there, the King
Ollorandus more ioyed with this blessed intelligence, then with all the
happinesses he ever enjoyed, Bonfires and all expressions of joy made, in
testimony of this happy tidings, and all the Princes sent unto, to come and
assemble themselves against his return, which with glad souls they did, for
as their souls they loved him; grief now abiding no where but in the Ladies
breasts, who hardly brooked absence; but variety of content made that passion
and want sufferable.

Pamphilia still continued her devour vow, and heart tormenting sorrow, was yet
by her servants and Nobles persuaded to ride abroad; she was wonderful
unwilling, knowing it would but trouble her the more, for what pleased others
tormented her; what others delighted in vexed her to see? what others gloryed
and pleasured in, tortured her; when others commended the sweet Air, pleasant
Feilds, Brooks, Meddowes, Springs, Flowers, all these said she, show
severally to me my only loss, and serve but as if I wanted remembrance of
him, which I should hate my soul for, if she had not true, and multiplicity
of worthy matters to glory in the memory of him, and sorrow for his loss; that
word loss, made her as if loose her self in passion, yet never lost she the
use and plenty of her tears, being as if silent, and retired to spare her
breath to spend it in sighs for him, and her thoughts to be expressed in tears;
yet abroad she went to satisfy their desires, and as it happened to content
her self, although had any that morning but spoken that word, as if she should
be content, it had bin as ill to her, as meriting her disfavor; but coming
into a wood, sweet and delicately pleasing to all but her self, to whom
nothing could be in that nature, she walked alone having lighted from her
horse, commanding them to attend her return in that place, they obeyed, and
she wandered a good space, her thoughts yet making farther iourneyes, yet so
far she went till she came to a dainty Spring, issuing out of a stony bank
upon pibbles, and making on them a murmuring, sweetly doleful tune, clear
the water was running on gravel; and such as was fit for her clear eyes to
look upon, weep she did, tears falling into the stream, not much
increasing the brightness of it, though abundantly they fell, but certainly
enriching it with rare sweetness, and dropping into it such virtue as appeared
after in some that drank of it, for at that very instant there arrived a
Knight armed on horseback, the Queen heard his horse, and looking up contrary
to her accustomed fashion, had no sudden wit to leave the place, but sat still
or lay still as she did, he saw her not, but seeing the dainty stream
alighted to drink of it, and not knowing a readier way, pulled first his
gauntlet off, then his helm to take up some of the water; the Queen lying
among the flowers, and some bushes between, so as she could better see him,
then he discern her, especially not thinking of any there perceived; O what?
nay what? her soul without her self, because in an other body returned, she
quickly rose up, and as she parted so hoped to meet him, kind to her, she
ran unto him, forgiving, nay forgeting all injuries, he seeing her threw
down his helm, with open arms received her, and withal unfeigned affection
embraced her, and well might he joyfully do it, love thus expressed, besides a
labor saved of asking pardon, but here such Ceremonies needed not, those are
by these lovers thought fit for either false Lovers, that must make up their
contents with words, or new or unexperienced Lovers, who talk half their time
away, but they knew each other, loved, ouely happy in each other, and admired
each others loves; never was such affection expressed, never so truly felt, to
the company, they together returned, he leading her, or rather embracing her
with his co^quering arms, and protesting the water he drank being mixed with
her tears, had so infused constancy and perfect truth of love in it, as in him
it had wrought the like effect, then were they the best bestowed tears that
ever my eyes shed, though till now hardly have they bin dry said she; speak
not said he of so sad a business, we are now again together, and never, so
again, I hope, to part, to her train thus they arrived, but when known by
them, they never staid to be called to kiss his hands, but ran all at once,
every one striving to be first, and all casting themselves at his feet, he
took them up, and with much noble kindness received them; then they returned to
the City, and the next day to the wood again to see the hell of deceit, but
now no more to be abused, thence they brought with them the most loyal
servant, and the brauest f^iend that ever man had, the noble Polarchos;
Amphilanthus now recovered his Sword, and brought home his Armor, resolving
nothing should remain as witnesses of his former ficklenes, or the property of
that place, destroying the monument, the Charms having conclusion with his
recovering; but none but himself could have gained the Sword, because
belonging to him, millions had tried in the mean space, and all lamentably
perplexed; now all is finished, Pamphilia blessed as her thoughts, heart, and
soul wished: Amphilanthus expreslesly contented, Polarchos truly happy, and
joyful again; this still continuing all living in pleasure, speech is of the
Germans journey, Amphilanthus must go, but intreates Pamphilia to go as far
as Italy with him, to visit the matchles Queen his mother, she consents, for
what can she deny him? all things are prepared for the journey, all now merry,
contented, nothing amiss; grief forsaken, sadness cast off, Pamphilia is the
Queen of all content; Amphilanthus ioying worthily in her; And

PAMPHILIA, TO AMPHILANTHVS.
1
WHen night's black Mantle could most darkness prove,
And sleep (deaths Image) did my senses hyre,
From Knowledge of my self, then thoughts did move
Swifter then those, most sweetness need require^
In sleep, a Chariot drawn by winged Desire,
I saw; where sat bright Venus Queen of Love,
And at her feet her Son, still adding Fire
To burning hearts, which she did hold above,
But one heart flaming more then all the rest,
The Goddess held, and put it to my breast,
Dear Son now shut, said she, thus must we win;
He her obeyed, and martyred my poor heart.
I waking hoped as dreams it would depart,
Yet since, O me, a Lover I have been.
2
Dear eyes how well indeed, you do adorn
That blessed Sphere, which gazing souls hold dear?
The loved place of sought for triumphs, near
The Court of Glory, where Loves force was borne.
How may they term you Aprills sweetest morn?
When pleasing looks, from those bright lights appear
A Sunshine day, from clouds, and mists still clear:
Kind nursing fires for wishes yet unborn.
Two Stars of Heaven sent down to grace the Earth,
Placed in that Throne which gives all joys their birth,
Shining, and burning; pleasing yet their Charms:
Which wounding even in hurts are deemed delights;
So pleasant is their force, so great their mights,
As happy they can triumph in their harms.
3
YEt is there hope, then Love but play thy part,
Remember well thy self, and think on me;
Shine in those eyes which conquered have my heart,
And see if mine, be slack to answer thee.
Lodge in that breast, and pity moving see,
For flames which in mine burn in truest smart,
Exciling thoughts, that touch Inconstancy,
Or those which waste not in the constant Art.
Watch but my sleep, if I take any rest,
For thought of you, my spirit so distressed,
As pale and famished, I for mercy cry.
Will you your servant leave? think but on this,
Who wears Love's Crown, must not do so amiss
But seek their good, who on thy force do lie.
4
Forbear dark night, my joys now budd again,
Lately grown dead, while cold aspects, did chill
The root at heart, and my chief hope quite kill,
And thunders struck me in my pleasures waine.
Then I alas with bitter sobs, and pain,
Privately groaned, my Fortunes present ill;
All light of comfort dimb'd, woes in prides fill,
With strange increase of grief, I grieved in vain.
And most, when as a memory to good
Molested me, which still as witness stood,
Of thos^ best days, in former time I knew:
Late gone as wonders past, like the great Sow,
Melted and wasted, with what, change must know:
Now back the life comes where as once it grew.
5
CAn pleasing sight misfortune ever bring?
Can firm desire a painful torment try?
Can winning eyes prove to the heart a sting?
Or can sweet lips in Treason hidden lie?
The Sun most pleasing, blindes the strongest eye,
If two much looked on, breaking the sights string;
Desires still crossed must unto mischief hie,
And as Despair, a lucklesse chance may fling.
Eyes having none, rejecting proves a sting,
Killing the budd before the tree does spring;
Sweet lips, not loving, do as poison prove:
Desire, sight, eyes, lips; seek, see, prove, and find,
You love may winn, but curses, if unkind,
Then show you harms dislike, and joy in love.
6
O Strive not still to heap disdain on me,
Nor pleasure take, your cruelty to show
On hapless me, on whom all sorrows flow,
And byding make, as given, and lost by thee.
Alas, even grief is grown to pity me,
Scorn cries out against it self such ill to show,
And would give place for joys delights to flow;
Yet wretched I, all torture bear from thee.
Long have I suffered, and esteemed it dear,
Since such thy will, yet grew my pain more near:
Wish you may end, say so, you shall it have;
For all the deapth of my heart-held despair,
Is that for you, I feel not Death for care,
But now I Will seek it, since you will not save.
Song. I.
THe Spring now come at last
To Trees, Fields, to Flowers,
And Meadows makes to taste
His pride, while sad showers
Which from mine eyes do flow
Makes known with cruel pains,
Cold Winter yet remains,
No sign of Spring we know.
The Sun which to the Earth
Gives heat, light, and pleasure,
Joys in Spring hates Dearth,
Plenty makes his Treasure.
His heat to me is cold,
His light all darkness is,
Since I am barr^d of bliss,
I heat, nor light behold
A Shepherdess thus said,
Who was with grief oppressed,
For truest Love betrayed,
Barrd her from quiet rest:
And weeping thus, said she,
My e^d approaches near,
Now Willow must I weare^
My Fortune so will be.
With Branches of this tree
I Will dress my hapless^ head,
Which shall my witness be,
M^ hopes in Love are dead:
My clothes imbroder'd all,
Shall be with Garlands round,
Some scattered, others bound;
Some tide, some like to fall.
The Bark my Book shall be,
Where daily I will write,
This tale of haples me,
True slave to Fortunes spite.
The root shall be my bed,
Where nightly I will lie
Wailing in constancy,
Since all true love is dead.
And these Lines I will leave,
If some such Lover come,
Who may them right conceive,
and place them on my Tomb:
She who^ still constant loved
Now dead with cruel care,
Killed with unkind Despair,
And change, her end here proved.
7
Love leave to urge, thou know thou have the hand
It Is Cowardice to strive where none resist,
Pray thee leave off, I yield unto thy band,
Do not thus still in thine own power pe^sist.
Behold, I yield; let forces be dismissed,
I am thy Subject conquered bound to stand
Never thy foe, but did thy claim assist,
Seeking thy due of those who did withstand.
But now it seems thou would I should thee love,
I do confess, 'twas thy will made me choose,
And thy fair shows made me a Lover prove,
When I my freedom did for pain refuse.
Yet this, Sir god, your Boy-ship I despise,
Your charms I obey, but love not want of eyes.
8.
LEdd by the power of grief to wailings brought,
By false conceit of change fallen on my part;
I seek for some small ease by lines which bought,
Increas^ the pain; grief is not cured by Art.
Ah! how unkindness moves within the heart,
Which still is true and free from changing thought:
What unknown woe it breeds, what endless smart,
With ceaseless tears which causelessly are wrought.
It makes me now to shun all shining light,
And seek for blackest clouds me light to give:
Which to all others only darkness drive;
They on me shine, for Sun disdaines my sight.
Yet though I dark do live, I triumph may,
Unkindness, nor this wrong shall love allay.
9.
Be you all pleased, your pleasures grieve nor me;
Do you delight? I envy not your joy:
Have you content? contentment with you be;
Hope you for bliss? hope still, and still enjoy.
Let sad misfortune, hapless me destroy,
Leave crosses to rule me, and still rule free:
While all delights their contraries employ,
To keep good back, and I but torments see.
Joys are ber^au'd me, harms do only tarry,
Despair takes place, disdain has got the hand:
Yet firm love holds my senses in such band,
As (since despised) I with sorrow marry.
Then if with grief I now must coupled be,
Sorrow I Will wed; Despair thus gouernes me.
10.
THe weary Traveler, who tired, sought
In places distant far, yet found no end
Of pain or labor, nor his state to mend:
At last with joy is to his home back brought.
Finds not more ease though he with joy be fraught,
When past his fear content like souls ascend:
Then I, on whom new pleasures do descend,
Which now as high as firstborn bliss is wrought.
He tired with his pains, I with my mind;
He all content receives by ease of lymbs:
I, greatest happiness that I do find,
Belief for faith, while hope in pleasure swimmes.
Truth says 'twas wrong conceit bred my despite,
Which once acknowledged, brings my hearts delight.
11.
YOu endless torments that my rest oppress,
How long will you delight in my sad pain?
Will never Love your favor more express?
Shall I still live, and ever feel disdain?
Alas now stay, and let my grief optaine
Some end; feed not my heart with sharp distress:
Let me once see my cruel fortunes gain,
At least release, and long-felt woes redress.
Let not the blame of cruelty disgrace
The honored title of your godhead Love;
Give not just cause for me so say, a place
Is found for rage alone on me to move.
O quickly end, and do not long debate
My needful aid, lest help do come too late.
12.
Cloyed with the torments of a tedious night,
I wish for day; which come, I hope for joy:
When cross I find, new tortures to destroy,
My woe-kild heart, first hurt by mischiefs might.
Then cry for night, and once more day takes flight.
And brightness gone, what rest should here enjoy
Usurped is: Hate will her force employ;
Night cannot Grief intombe though black as spite.
My thoughts are sad, her face as sad does seem;
My pains are long, her hours tedious are;
My grief is great, and endless is my care;
Her face, her force, and all of woes esteem.
Then welcome Night, and farewell flattering day,
Which all hopes breed, and yet our joys delay.
Song. 2.
ALl Night I weep, all Day I cry, Ay me,
I still do wish, though yet deny, ay me:
I sigh, I mourn, I say that still,
I only am the store for ill, ay me.
In coldest hopes I freez^, yet burn, ay me,
From flames I strive to fly, yet turn, ay me:
From grief I have, but sorrows hye,
And on my heart all woes do lie, ay me.
From contraries I seek to run, ay me,
But contraries I cannot shun, ay me:
For they delight their force to try,
And to Despair my thoughts do tie, ay me.
Whither alas then shall I go, ay me,
When as Despair all hopes outgoe, ay me:
If to the Forest Cupid hies,
And my poor soul to his law ties, ay me.
To the Court: O no, he cries fie, ay me,
There no true love you shall espy, ay me:
Leave that place to falsest Lovers,
Your true love all truth discouers, ay me,
Then quiet rest, and no more prove, ay me,
All places are alike to Love, ay me:
And constant be in this begun,
Yet say, till Life with Love be done, Ay me.
13.
Dear famish nor what you your self gave food,
Destroy not what your glory is to save:
Kill not that soul to which you spirit gave,
In pity, not disdain, your triumph stood.
An easy thing it is to shed the blood
Of one who at your will yields to the grave:
But more you may true worth by mercy crave,
When you preserve, not spoil, but nourish good.
Your sight is all the food I do desire,
Then sacrifice me not in hidden fire,
Or stop the breath which did your praises move.
Think but how easy it is a sight to give,
Nay, even desert, since by it I do live,
I but Camelion-like, would live, and love.
14.
Am I thus conquered? have I lost the powers,
That to withstand which joys to ruin me?
Must I be still, while it my strength deuoures,
And captive leads me prisoner bound, vnfree?
Love first shall lean men's fant'sies to them free,
Desire shall quench loves flames, Spring, hate sweet showers;
Love shall loose all his Darts, have sight, and see
His shame and wishings, hinder happy hours.
Why should we not Loves purblinde charms resist?
Must we be servile, doing what he list?
No, seek some host to harbor thee: I fly
Thy Babish tricks, and freedom do profess;
But O, my hurt makes my lost heart confess:
I love, and must; so farewell liberty.
15.
Truly (poor night) thou welcome art to me,
I love thee better in this sad attire
Then that which rayseth some men's fant'sies higher,
Like painted outsides, which foul inward be.
I love thy grave and saddest looks to see,
Which seems my soul and dying heart entire,
Like to the ashes of some happy fire,
That flamed in joy, but quenched in misery.
I love thy countenance, and thy sober pace,
Which euenly goes, and as of loving grace
To us, and me, among the rest oppressed,
Gives quiet peace to my poor self alone,
And freely grants day leave; when thou art gone,
To give clear light, to see all ill redrest.
16.
Sleep fie possess me not, nor do not fright
me with thy heavy, and thy deathlike might:
For counterfetting's vilder then death's sight;
And such deluding more my thoughts do spite.
Thou suffer'st falsest shapes my soul t'affright,
Sometimes in likeness of of a hopeful spright;
And often times like my Love, as in despite;
Ioying, thou can with malice kill delight.
When I (a poor fool made by thee) think joy
Does flow, when thy fond shadows do destroy
My that while senseless self, left free to thee.
But now do well, let me for ever sleep,
And so for ever that dear Image keep
Or still wake that my senses may be free.
17.
SWeet shades, why do you seek to give delight
To me, who deem delight in this vilde place:
But torment, sorrow, and mine own disgrace,
To taste of joy, or your vain pleasing sight?
Show them your pleasures who saw never night
Of grief, where ioyings fawning smiling face
Appears as day, where grief found never space:
Yet for a sigh, a groan, or enuies spite.
But O: on me a world of woes do lie,
Or else on me all harms strive to rely,
And to attend like servants bound to me.
Heat in desire, while frosts of care I prove,
Wanting my love, yet surfeit do with love,
Burn and yet freeze, better in Hell to be.
18.
WHich should I better like of, day or night?
Since all the day, I live in bitter woe:
Inioying light more clear my wrongs to know,
and yet most sad, feeling in it all spite.
In night when darkness does forbid all light;
Yet see I grief apparent to the show,
Followed by jealousy, whose fond tricks flow,
And on unconstant waves of doubt alight.
I can behold rage cowardly to feed
Upon foul error, which these humors breed,
Shame doubt and fear, yet boldly will think ill.
All those in both I feel, then which is best
Dark to joy by day, light in night oppressed?
Leave both and end, these but each other spill.
Song. 3.
STay my thoughts do not aspire,
To vain hopes of high desire;
See you not all means bereft,
To enjoy no joy is left,
Yet still me thinks my thoughts do say,
Some hopes do live amid dismay.
Hope then once more, Hope for joy,
Bury fear which joys destroy,
Thought has yet some comfort given,
Which despair has from us driven:
Therefore dearly my thoughts cherish,
Never let such thinking perish.
It Is an idle thing to plain,
Odder far to dye for pain;
Think and see how thoughts do rise,
Winning where there no hope lies;
Which alone is lovers treasure,
For by thoughts we love do measure.
Then kind thought my fant'sie guide,
Let me never hapless slide;
Still maintain thy force in me,
Let me thinking still be free;
Nor leave thy might until my death,
But let me thinking yield up breath.
19.
COme darkest Night, becoming sorrow best,
Light leave thy light, fit for a lightsome soul:
Darkness does truly suit with me oppressed,
Whom absence power does from mirth control.
The very trees with hanging heads condole
Sweet Summers parting, and of leaves distressed,
In dying colors make a grief-full role;
So much (alas) to sorrow are they pressed.
Thus of dead leaves, her farewell carpets made,
Their fall, their branches, all their mournings prove,
With leauelesse naked bodies, whose hues vade
From hopeful green to wither in their love.
If trees, and leaves for absence mourners be,
No marvel that I grieve, who like want see.
20.
THe Sun which glads the earth at his bright sight,
When in the morn he shows his golden face,
And takes the place from tedious drowsy Night.
Making the world still happy in his grace.
Shows happiness remains not in one place,
Nor may the Heavens alone to us give light,
But hide that cheerful face, though no long space,
Yet long enough for trial of their might.
But never Sunset could be so obscure,
No Desert ever had a shade so sad:
Nor could black darkness ever prove so bad,
As pains which absence makes me now endure.
The missing of the Sun a while makes Night,
But absence of my joy sees never light.
21.
WHen last I saw thee, I did not thee see,
It was thine Image which in my thoughts lay
So lively figured, as no times delay
Could suffer me in heart to parted be.
And sleep so favorable is to me,
As not to let thy loved remembrance stray:
Lest that I waking might have cause to say,
There was one mnute found to forget thee.
Then, since my faith is such, so kind my sleep,
That gladly thee presents into my thought,
And still true Louer-like thy face does keep,
So as some pleasure shadow-like is wrought.
Pity my loving, nay of conscience give
Reward to me in whom thy self does live.
22.
LIke to the Indians scorched with the Sun,
The Sun which they do as their God adore:
So am I used by Love, for evermore
I worship him, less favors have I won.
Better are they who thus to blackness run,
And so can only whiteness want deplore:
Theu I who pale and white am with griefs store,
Nor can have hope, but to see hopes undone.
Besides their sacrifice received in sight,
Of their chose Saint, mine hid as worthless rite,
Grant me to see where I my offerings give.
Then let me wear the mark of Cupids might,
In heart, as they in skin of Phoebus light,
Not ceasing offerings to Love while I live.
23.
WHen every one to pleasing pastime hies,
Some hunt, foam hawk, some play while some delight
In sweet discourse, and music shows joys might:
Yet I my thoughts do far above these prize.
The joy which I take is, that free from eyes
I sit and wonder at this day-like night,
So to dispose themselves as void of right,
And leave true pleasure for poor vanities.
When others hunt, my thoughts I have in chase;
If hawk, my mind at wished end does fly:
Discourse, I with my spirit talk and cry;
While others music choose as greatest grace.
O God say I, can these fond pleasures move,
Or music be but in sweet thoughts of Love?
24.
ONce did I hear an aged father say
Unto his son, who with attention hears
What Age and wise experience ever cleares
From doubts of fear, or reason to betray.
My son (said he) behold thy father gray,
I once had as thou have, fresh tender years,
And like thee sported destitute of fears;
But my young faults made me too soon decay.
Love once I did, and like thee, feared my Love,
Led by the hateful thread of Jealousy,
Striving to keep, I lost my liberty,
And gained my grief, which still my sorrows move.
In time shun this, to love is no offense,
But doubt in Youth, in Age, breeds penitence.
Song. 4.
SWeetest Love return again,
Make not too long stay;
Killing mirth and forcing pain;
Sorrow leading way:
Let us not thus parted be,
Love, and absence nere agree.
But since you must needs depart,
And me hapless leave;
In your journey take my heart,
Which will not deceive:
Yours it is, to you it flies,
Ioying in those loved eyes.
So in part we shall not part,
Though we absent be,
Time, nor place, nor greatest smart,
Shall my bands make free:
Tied I am, yet think it gain,
In such knots I feel no pain.
But can I live, having lost
Chiefest part of me?
Heart is fled, and sight is crossed,
These my fortunes be:
Yet dear heart go, soon return,
As good there as here to burn.
25.
Poor eyes be blind, the light behold no more,
Since that is gone which is your dear delight:
Ravished from you by greater power and might,
Making your loss a gain to others store.
Oreflow and drown, till sight to you restore
That blessed Star, and as in hateful spite,
Send forth your tears in floods to kill all sight,
And looks, that lost wherein you joyed before.
Bury th^se beams which in some kindled fires,
And conquered have their loue-burnt hearts desires,
Losing, and yet no gain by you esteemed;
Till that bright Star do once again appear,
Brighter then Mars when he does shine most clear;
See not then by his might be you redeemed.
26.
Dear cherish this, and with it my souls will,
Nor for it ran away do it abuse:
Alas it left (poor me) your breast to choose,
As the best shrine, where it would harbor still.
Then favor show, and not unkindly kill
The heart which fled to you, but do excuse
That which for better did the worse refuse;
And pleased I Will be, though heartlesse my life spill.
But if you will be kind and just indeed,
Send me your heart, which in mine is place shall feed
On faithful love to your devotion bound,
There shall it see the sacrifices made
Of pure and spotless Love, which shall not vade,
While soul and body are together found.
27.
FIe tedious Hope, why do you still rebel?
Is it not yet enough you flattered me,
But cunningly you seek to use a Spell
How to betray; must these your Trophies be?
I looked from you far sweeter fruit to see,
But blasted were your blossoms when they fell:
And those delights expected from han^s free,
Withered and dead, and what seemd bliss proves hell.
No Town was won by a more plotted slight,
Then I by you, who may my fortune write,
In embers of that fire which ruined me:
Thus Hope your falsehood calls you to be tryde,
You Are loath, I see, the trial to abide;
Prove true at last, and gain your liberty.
28.
Grief, killing grief, have not my torments been
Already great and strong enough? but still
Thou do increase, nay glory in mine il,
And woes new past, a fresh new woes begin?
Am I the only purchase thou can win?
Was I ordained to give despair her fill,
Or fittest I should mount misfortunes hill,
Who in the plain of joy cannot live in?
If it be so, Grief come as welcome guest,
Since I must suffer for another rest;
Yet this (good Grief) let me entreat of thee,
Use still thy force, but not from those I love
Let me all pains and lasting torments prove;
So I miss these, lay all thy waights on me.
29.
Fly hence, O Joy, no longer here abide,
Too great thy pleasures are for my despair
To look on, losses now must prove my fare;
Who not long since on better food relide.
But fool, how often had I Heavens changing spi'de
Before of mine own fate I could have care:
Yet now past time I can too late beware,
When nothings left but sorrows faster ty'de.
While I enjoyed that Sun, whose sight did lend
Me joy, I thought that day could have no end:
But soon a night came clothed in absence dark;
Absence more sad, more bitter then is gall,
Or death, when on true Lovers it does fall;
Whose fires of love, disdain reasts poorer spark.
30.
YOu blessed shades, which give me silent rest,
Witness but this when death has closed mine eyes,
And separated me from earthly ties;
Being from hence to higher place adrest.
How often in you I have lain here oppressed?
And have my miseries in woeful cries
Delivered forth, mounting up to the Skies?
Yet helpless, back returned to wound my breast.
Which wounds did but strive how to breed more harm
To me, who can be cured by no one charm
But that of Love, which yet may me relieve;
If not, let Death my former pains redeem,
My trusty friends, my faith untouched, esteem,
And witnes^e I could love, who so could grieve.
Song. 5.
TIme only cause of my unrest,
By whom I hoped once to be blessed,
How cruel art thou turned?
That first ga^'st life unto my love,
And still a pleasure not to move,
Or change, though ever burned.
Have I thee slack'd, or left undone
One loving rite, and so have won,
Thy rage, or bitter changing?
That now no minutes I shall see,
Wherein I may least happy be,
Thy favors so estranging.
Blame thy self and not my folly,
Time gave time but to be holy,
True Love such ends best loves:
Unworthy Love does seek for ends,
A worthy Love, but worth pretends;
Nor other thoughts it proves.
Then stay thy swiftnes cruel Time,
And let me once more blessed clime
to joy, that I may praise thee:
Let me pleasure sweetly tasting,
Joy in Love, and faith not wasting,
and on Fames wings I Will raise thee.
Never shall thy glory dying,
Be until thine own v^tying,
that Time no longer lives,
It Is a gain such time to lend,
Since so thy fame shall never end,
But joy for what she gives.
31.
AFter long trouble in a tedious way,
Of Loves unrest, laid down to ease my pain,
Hoping for rest, new torments I did gain
Possessing me, as if I ought to obey.
When Fortune came, though blinded, yet did stay,
And in her blessed arms did me inchaine:
I, cold with grief, thought no warmth to obtain,
Or to dissolve that ice of joys decay.
Till rise (said she) Reward to thee does send
By me the servant of true Lovers joy:
Bannish all clouds of doubt, all fears destroy;
And now on Fortune, and on Love depend.
I her obeyed, and rising felt that Love
Indeed was best, when I did least it move.
32.
HOw fast thou fliest, O Time, on Loves swift wings,
To hopes of joy, that flatters our desire:
Which to a Lover still contentment brings;
Yet when we should enjoy, thou do retire.
Thou stay'st thy pace (false Time) from our desire
When to our ill thou hast'st with Eagles wings:
Slow only to make us see thy retire
Was for Despair, and harm, which sorrow brings.
O slake thy pace, and milder pass to Love,
Be like the Be, whose wings she does but use
To bring home profit; masters good to prove,
Laden, and weary, yet again pursues.
So lade thy self with honey of sweet joy,
And do not me (the Hiue of Love) destroy.
33.
HOw many eyes (poor Love) have thou to guard
Thee from thy most desired wish, and end?
Is it because some say thou art blind, that barred
From sight, thou should no happines^e attend?
Who blame thee so, small Justice can pretend,
Since 'twixt thee and the Sun no question hard
Can be; his sight but outward, thou can bend
The heart, and guide it freely thus vnbar'd.
Art thou, while we both blind and bold, often dare
Accuse thee of the harms our selu^s should find:
Who led with folly, and by rashness blind
Thy sacred power do with a child's compare.
Yet Love, this boldness pardon; for admire
Thee sure we must, or be borne without fire.
34.
TAke heed mine eyes, how you your looks do cast,
Lest they betray my hearts most secret thought:
Be true unto your selves; for nothing's bought
More dear then Doubt, which brings a Lovers fast.
Catch you alwatching eyes ere they be past,
Or take yours fixed, where your best Love has sought
The pride of your desires; let them be taught
Their faults for shame they could no truer last.
Then look, and look with joy, for conquest won,
Of those that searched your hurt in double kind:
So you kept safe, let them themselves look blind,
Watch, gaze, and mark till they to madness run.
While you mine eyes enjoy full sight of Love,
Contented that such happinesses move.
35.
FAlse Hope which feeds but to destroy and spill
What it first breeds, unnatural to the blrth
Of thine own womb, conceiving but to kill
And plenty gives to make the greater dearth.
So Tyrants do, who falsely ruling Earth,
Outwardly grace them, and with profits fill,
Advance those who appointed are to death;
To make their greater fall to please their will.
Thus shadow they their wicked vile intent,
Coloring evil with a show of good:
While in fair shows their malice so is spent;
Hope kill's the heart, and Tyrants shed the blood.
For Hode deluding brings us to the pride
Of our desires the farther down to slide.
36.
HOw well (poor heart) thou witness can, I love,
How often my grief has made thee shed forth tears,
Drops of thy dearest blood; and how often fears
Borne testimony of the pains I prove?
What torments have thou suffered, while above
Joy thou tort^r'd were with racks, which longing bears:
Pinched with desires, which yet but wishing reares
Firm in my faith, in constancy, to move.
Yet is it said, that sure love cannot be,
Where so small show of passion is descri'd^
When thy chief pain is, that I must it hide
From all, save one^y one, who should it see.
For know, more passion in my heart does move,
Then in a million that make show of love.
Song. 6.
YOu happy blessed eyes,
Which in that ruling place,
Have force both to delight, and to disgrace;
Whose light allures and ties
All hearts to your command:
O look on me who do at mercy stand.
It Is you that rule my life,
It Is you my comforts give,
Then let not scorn to me my ending drive:
Nor let the frowns of strife
Have might to hurt those lights;
Which while they shine they are true loves delights.
See but when Night appears
And Sun has lost his force,
How his loss does all joy from us divorce:
And when he shines, and cleares
The Heavens from clouds of Night,
How happy then is made our gazing sight?
But more then Sun's fair light
Your beams do seem to me,
Whose sweetest looks do tie, and yet make free:
Why should you then so spite
Poor me? as to destroy
The only pleasure that I taste of joy.
Shine then, O dearest lights
With favor and with love
And let no cause, your cause of frownings move:
But as the souls delights,
So bless my then blessed eyes,
Which unto you their true affection ties.
Then shall the Sun give place,
As to your greater might,
Yielding that you do show more perfect light.
^^en but grant this grace,
Unto your Loue-tide slave,
To shine on me, who to you all faith gave.
And when you please to frown,
Use your most killing eyes
On them, who in untruth and falsehood lies,
But (Dear) on me cast down
Sweet looks, for true desire;
That banish do all thoughts of feigned fire.
37.
NIght, welcome art thou to my mind distressed,
Dark, heavy, sad, yet not more sad then I:
Never could thou find fitter company
For thine own humor, then I thus oppressed.
If thou be dark, my wrongs still vnredrest
Saw never light, nor smallest bliss can spy:
If heavy joy from me to fast does hie,
And care out-goes my hope of quiet rest.
Then now in friendship join with hapless me,
Who am as sad and dark as thou can be,
Hating all pleasure or delight of life,
Silence and grief, with thee I best do love.
And from you three I know I cannot move,
Then let us live companions without strife.
38.
WHat pleasure can a banished creature have
In all the pastimes that invented are
By wit or learning? Absence making war
Against all peace that may a biding crave.
Can we delight but in a welcome grave,
Where we may bury pains? and so be far
From loathed company, who always jar
Upon the string of mirth that pastime gave.
The knowing part of joy is deemed the heart,
If that be gone what joy can joy impart
When senseless is the feeler of our mirth?
No, I am banished and no good shall find,
But all my fortunes must with mischief bind;
Who but for misery did gain a birth.
39.
IF I were given to mirth,,twould be more cross,
Thus to be robbed of my chiefest joy:
But silently I bear my greatest loss;
Who Is used to sorrow, grief will not destroy.
Nor can I as those pleasant wits enjoy
My own ^ram'd words which I account the dross
Of purer thoughts, or reckon them as moss;
While they (wit-sick) themselves to breath employ.
Alas, think I, your plenty shows your want;
For where most feeling is words are more scant;
Yet pardon me, live and your pleasure take.
Grudge not if I (neglected) envy show,
It Is not to you that I dislike do owe;
But (crossed my self) wish some like me to make.
40.
IT is not Love which you poor fools do deem,
That does appear by fond and outward shows
Of kissing, toying, or by swearings gloze:
O no, these are far off from loves esteem.
Alas, they are not such that can redeem
Love lost, or winning keep those chosen blows:
Though often with face and looks love overthrows;
Yet so slight conquest does not him beseem.
It Is not a show of sighs or tears can prove
Who loves indeed, which blasts of feigned love,
Increase or dye, as favors from them slide.
But in the soul true love in safety lies
Guarded by faith, which to desert still hies:
And yet kind looks do many blessings hide.
41.
YOu blessed Stars, which do Heauen's glory show,
And at your brightness make our eyes admire:
Yet envy not, though I on earth below,
Enjoy a sight which moves in me more fire.
I do confess such beauty breeds desire
You shine, and clearest light on us bestow:
Yet does a sight on Earth more warmth inspire
Into my loving soul his grace to know.
Clear, bright, and shining, as you are, is this
Light of my joy: fixed steadfast, nor will move
His light from me, nor I change from his love;
But still increase as the earth of all my bliss.
His sight give life unto my loue-rould eye,
My love content, because in his love lies.
42.
IF ever love had force in humane breast,
If ever he could move in pensive heart:
Or if that he such power could but impart
To breed those flames, whose heat brings joys unrest.
Then look on me; I am to these adrest,
I am the soul that feels the greatest smart:
I am that heartlesse Trunck of hearts depart;
And I that One, by love, and grief oppressed.
None ever felt the truth of loves great miss
Of eyes till I deprived was of bliss;
For had he seen, he must have pity showed.
I should not have been made this Stage of woe,
Where sad Disasters have their open show:
O no, more pity he had sure bestowed.
Song. 7.
SOrrow, I yield, and grieve that I did miss;
Will not thy rage be satisfied with this?
As sad a Devil as thee,
Made me unhappy be:
Will thou not yet consent to leave, but still
Strive how to show thy cursed devilish skill?
I mourn, and dying am, what would you more?
My soul attends, to leave this cursed shore
Where harms do only flow,
Which teach me but to know
The saddest hours of my life's unrest,
And tired minutes with griefs hand oppressed.
Yet all this will not pacify thy spite,
No, nothing can bring ease but my last night,
Then quickly let it be,
While I unhappy see
That time so sparing, to grant Lovers bliss,
Will see for time lost, there shall no grief miss.
Nor let me ever cease from lasting grief,
But endless let it be without relief;
To winn again of Love,
The savor I did proone,
And with my end please him, since dying, I
Have him offended, yet unwillingly.
43.
O Dearest eyes, the lights, and guides of Love,
The joys of Cupid, who himself borne blind,
To your bright shining, does his tryumphs bind;
For, in your seeing does his glory move.
How happy are those places where you prove
Your heavenly beams, which makes the Sun to find
Envy and grudging, he so long has shined
For your clear lights, to match his beams above.
But now alas, your sight is here forbid,
And darkness must these poor lost roo^es possess,
So be all blessed lights from hen^^^orth hid,
That this black deed of darkness have excess.
For why should Heaven afford least light to those,
Who for my misery such darkness chose.
44.
HOw fast thou have st O Spring with sweetest speed)
To catch thy water which before are run,
And of the greater Rivers welcome woone,
Ere these thy newborn streams these places feed.
Yet you do well, lest staying here might breed
Dangerous floods, your sweetest banks t'orerun^,
And yet much better my distress to shunn,
Which maks my tears your swiftest course succeed.
But best you do when with so hasty flight
You fly my ills, which now my self outgoe,
Whose broken heart can testify such woe,
That so orecharg'd, my life-bloud, wastes quite.
Sweet Spring then keep your way be never spent,
And my ill days, or griefs, assunder rent.
45.
GOod now be still, and do not me torment,
With multitude of questions, be at rest,
And only let me quarrel with my breast,
Which still lets in new storms my soul to rent.
Fie, will you still my mischiefs more augment?
You say, I answer cross, I that confessed
Long since, yet must I ever be oppressed,
With your tongue torture which will never be spent?
Well then I see no way but this will fright,
That Devil speech; alas, I am poss^st,
And madd folks senseles are of wisdoms right,
The hellish spirit, Absence, does arrest.
All my poor senses to his cruel might,
Spare me then till I am my self, and blessed
46.
Love thou have all, for now thou have me made
So thine, as if for thee I were ordained,
Then take thy conquest, nor let me be pained
More in thy Sun, when I do seek thy shade.
No place for help have I left to invade,
That showed a face where least ease might be gained;
Yet found I pain increase, and but obtained,
That this no way was to have love allayed
When hott, and thirsty, to a Well I came,
Trusting by that to quench part of my pain,
But there I was by Love afresh embraced
Drink I could not, but in it I did see
My self a living glass as well as she;
For love to see himself in, truly placed.
47.
O Stay mine eyes, shed not these fruitless tears,
Since hope is past to win you back again,
That treasure which being lost breeds all your pain;
Cease from this poor betraying of your fears.
Think this too childish is, for where grief reares
So high a power for such a wretched gain:
Sighs nor laments should thus be spent in vain;
True sorrow never outward wailing bears.
Be ruled by me, keep all the rest in store,
Till no room is that may contain one more;
Then in that Sea of tears drown hapless me,
And I Will provide such store of sighs, as part
Shall be enough to break the strongest heart:
This done, we shall from torments freed be.
48.
HOw like a fire does Love increase in me?
The longer that it lasts the stronger still;
The greater, purer, brighter; and does fill
No eye with wonder more then hopes still be.
Bred in my breast, when fires of Love are free
To use that part to their best pleasing will,
And now impossible it is to kill
The heat so great where Love his strength does see.
Mine eyes can scarce sustain the flames, my heart
Does trust in them my passions to impart,
And languishingly strive to show my love.
My breath not able is to breath least part
Of that increasing fuel of my smart;
Yet love I will, till I but ashes prove.
Sonnet.
LEt grief as far be from your dearest breast
As I do wish, or in my hands to ease;
Then should it banished be, and sweetest rest
Be placed to give content by Love to please.
Let those disdaines which on your heart do ceaze,
Doubly return to bring her souls unrest:
Since true love will not that beloved displease;
Or let least smart to their minds be addressed.
But oftentimes mistakings be in love.
Be they as far from false accusing right,
And still truth govern with a constant might
So shall you only wished pleasures prove.
And as for me, she that shows you least scorn,
With all despite and hate, be her heart torn.
Song.
O Me, the time is come to part,
And with it my life-killing smart:
Fond Hope leave me, my dear must go,
To meet more joy, and I more woe.
Where still of mirth enjoy thy fill,
One is enough to suffer ill:
My heart so well to sorrow used,
can better be by new griefs bruised.
Thou whom the Heavens themselves like made,
should never sit in mourning shade:
No, I alone must mourn and end,
Who have a life in grief to spend.
My swiftest pace to wailings bent,
Shows joy had but a short time lent,
To bide in me where woes must dwell,
And charm me with their cruel spell.
And yet when they their witchcrafts try,
They only make me wish to dye:
But ere my faith in love they change,
In horrid darkness will I range.
Song.
SAy Venus how long have I loved, and served you here?
Yet all my passions scorned or doubted, although clear;
Alas think love deserves love, and you have loved,
Look on my pains and see if you the like have proved:
Remember then you are the Goddess of Desire,
and that your sacred power has touched and felt this fire.
Persuade these flames in me to cease, or them redress
in me (poor me) who storms of love have in excess,
My restless nights may show for me, how much I love,
My sighs vnfaignd, can witness what my heart does prove:
My saddest looks do show the grief my soul indures,
Yet all these torments from your hands no help procures.
Command that wayward Child your Son to grant your right,
and that his Bow and shafts he ^eeld to your fair sight,
To you who have the eyes of joy, the heart of love,
And then new hopes may spring, that I may pity move:
Let him not triumph that he can both hurt and save,
And more, brag that to your self a wound he gave.
Rule him, or what shall I expect of good to see?
Since he that hurt you, he (alas) may murder me.
Song.
I That am of all most crossed,
Having, and that had have lost,
May with reason thus complain,
Since love breeds love, and Loves pain.
That which I did most desire,
To allay my loving fire,
I may have, yet now must miss,
Since another Ruler is.
Would that I no Ruler had,
Or the service not so bad,
Then might I with bliss enjoy
That which now my hopes destroy.
And that wicked pleasure got,
Brings with it the sweetest lot:
I that must not taste the best,
Fed, must starve, and restless rest.
Song.
Love as well can make abiding
In a faithful Shepherds breast
As in Princes: whose thoughts sliding
Like swift Rivers never rest.
Change to their minds is best feeding,
To a Shepherd all his care,
Who when his Love is exceeding,
Thinks his faith his richest fare.
Beauty but a slight inuiting,
Cannot stir his heart to change;
Constancye his chief delighting,
Strives to flee from fant'sies strange,
Fairness to him is no pleasure,
If in other then his love;
Nor can es^eeme that a treasure,
Which in her smiles does not move.
This a Shepherd once confessed,
Who loved well, but was not loved:
Though with scorn and grief oppressed
could not yet to change be moved.
But himself he thus contented,
While in love he was accur^t:
This hard hap he not repented,
Since best Lovers speed the worst.
Song.
DEarest if I by my deserving,
May maintain in your thoughts my love,
Let me it still enjoy;
Nor faith destroy:
But pity Love where it does move.
Let no other new Love inuit you,
To leave me who so long have serud:
Nor let your power decline
But purely shine
On me, who have all truth preserved.
Or had you once found my heart straying,
Then would not I accuse your change,
But being constant still
It needs must kill
One, whose soul knows not how to range.
Yet may you Loves sweet smiles recover,
Since all love is not yet quite lost,
But tempt not Love too long
Lest so great wrong
Make him think he is too much crossed.
Song.
FAirest and still truest eyes,
Can you the lights be, and the spies
Of my desires?
Can you shine clear for Loves delight,
And yet the breeders be of spite,
And Jealous fires?
Mark what looks do you behold,
Such as by Iealonsie are told
They want your Love.
See how they sparckle in distrust,
Which by a heat of thoughts unjust
In them do move.
Learn to guide your course by Art,
Change your eyes into your heart,
And patient be:
Till fruitless Jealousy give leave,
By safest absence to receive
What you would see.
Then let Love his triumph have,
And Suspicion such a grave,
As not to move.
While wished freedom brings that bliss
That you enjoy what all joy is
Happy to Love.
Sonnet. I.
IN night yet may we see some kind of light,
When as the Moon does please to show her face,
And in the Sunns room yields her light, and grace,
Which otherwise must suffer dullest night:
So are my fortunes barr^d from true delight,
Cold, and uncertain, like to this strange place,
Decreasing, changing in an instant space,
And even at full of joy turned to despite.
Justly on Fortune was bestowd the Wheel,
Whose favors fickle, and unconstant reele,
Drunk with delight of change and sudden pain;
Where pleasure has no settled place of stay,
But turning still, for our best hopes decay,
And this (alas) we lovers often gain.
2.
Love like a Iugler comes to play his prize,
And all minds draw his wonders to admire,
To see how cunningly he (wanting eyes)
Can yet deceive the best sight of desire.
The wanton Child, how he can feign his fire
So prettily, as none sees his disguise,
How finely do his tricks; while we fools hire
The badge, and office of his tyrannies.
For in the end such Iugling he does make,
As he our hearts instead of eyes does take;
For men can only by their slights abuse^
The sight with nimble, and delightful skill,
But if he play, his gain is our lost will,
Yet Child-like we cannot his sports refuse.
3.
MOst blessed night, the happy time for Love,
The shade for Lovers, and their Loves delight,
The reign of Love for servants free from spite,
The hopeful seasons for joys sports to move.
Now have thou made thy glory higher prove,
Then did the God, whose pleasant Reed did smite
All Argus eyes into a death-like night,
Till they were safe, that none could Love reprove.
Now thou have cloasd those eyes from prying sight
That nourish Jealousy, more then ioye^ right,
While vain Suspicion fosters their mistrust,
Making sweet sleep to master all suspect,
Which else their private fears would not neglect,
But would embrace both blinded, and unjust.
4.
Cruel Suspicion, O! be now at rest,
Let daily torments bring to thee some stay,
Alas, make not my ill thy ease-full pray,
Nor give loose raines to Rage, when Love's oppressed.
I am by care sufficiently distressed,
No Rack can stretch my heart more, nor a way
Can I find out, for least content to lay
One happy foot of joy, one step that is blessed.
But to my end thou fly'st with greedy eye,
Seeking to bring grief by base Jealousy;
O, in how strange a Cage am I kept in?
No little sign of favor can I prove,
But must be way'd, and turned to wronging love,
And with each humor must my state begin.
5.
HOw many nights have I with pain endurd?
Which as so many Ages I esteemed,
Since my m^sfortune, yet no whit redeemed
But rather faster ty'de, to grief assured.
How many hours have my sad thoughts endured
Of killing pains? yet is it not esteemed
By cruel Love, who might have these redeemd,
And all these years of hours to joy assured.
But fond Child, had he had a care to save,
As first to conquer, this my pleasures grave,
Had not been now to testify my woe.
I might have been an Image of delight,
As now a Tomb for sad misfortunes spite,
Which Love unkindly, for reward does show.
6.
MY pain still smothered in my grieved breast,
Seeks for some ease, yet cannot passage find,
To be dischargd of this unwelcome guest,
When most I strive, more fast his burdens bind.
Like to a Ship on Goodwins cast by wind,
The more she strive, more deep in Sand is pressed,
Till she be lost: so am I in this kind
Sunck, and devoured, and swallowed by unrest.
Lost, shipwrackt, spoyld, debarred of smallest hope,
Nothing of pleasure left, save thoughts have scope^
Which wander may; go then my thoughts and cry:
Hope's perished, Love tempest-beaten, Joy lost,
Killing Despair has all these blessings crossed;
Yet Faith still cries, Love will not falsify.
7.
AN end fond Jealousy, alas I know
Thy hiddenest, and thy most secret Art,
Thou can no new invention frame but part,
I have already seen, and felt with woe.
All thy dissemblings, which by feigned show,
Won my belief, while truth did rule my heart,
I with glad mind embraced, and deemd my smart
The spring of joy, whose streams with bliss should slow.
I thought excuses had been reasons true,
And that no falsehood could of thee ensue,
So soon belief in honest minds is wrought;
But now I find thy flattery, and skill,
Which idely made me to observe thy will,
Thus is my learning by my bondage bought.
8.
Poor Love in chains, and fetters like a thief
I met ledd forth, as chaste Diana's gain
Vowing the untaught Lad should no relief
From her receive, who gloried in fond pain.
She called him thief, with vows he did mainetaine
He never stole, but some sadd slight of grief
Had given to those who did his power disdain,
In which revenge his honor was the chief.
She said he murdered and therefore must dye,
He that he caused but Love, did harms deny,
But while she thus discoursing with him stood;
The Nymphs vnti'de him and his chains took off,
Thinking him safe; but he (loose) made a scoff,
Smiling and scorning them, slew to the wood.
9.
PRay do not use these words, I must be gone;
Alas^e do not foretell mine ills to come:
Let not my care be to my joys a Tomb;
But rather find my loss with loss alone.
Cause me not thus a more distressed one,
Not feeling bliss, because of this sad doom
Of present cross; for thinking will overcome
And loose all pleasure, since grief breeds none.
Let the misfortune come at once to me,
Nor suffer me with grief to punished be;
Let me be ignorant of mine own ill^
Then now with the foreknowledge quite to lose
That which with so much care and pains Love chose
For his reward, but joy now, then mirth kill.
10.
FOlly would needs make me a Lover be,
When I did little think of loving thought;
Or ever to be tide, while she told me
That none can live, but to these bands are brought.
I (ignorant) did grant, and so was bought,
And sold again to Lovers slavery:
The duty to that vanity once taught,
Such band is, as we will not seek to free.
Yet when I well did understand his might,
How he inflamed and forc^d one to affect:
I loud and smarted, counting it delight
So still to waste, which Reason did ^eiect.
When Love came blindfold, and did challenge me.
Indeed I loved, but wanton Boy not he,
Song.
THe Spring time of my first loving,
Finds yet no winter of removing;
Nor frosts to make my hopes decrease:
But with the Summer still increase.
The trees may teach us Love's remaining,
Who suffer change with little paining:
Though Winter make their leaves decrease,
Yet with the Summer they increase.
As birds by silence show their mourning
in cold, yet sing at Springs returning:
So may Love nipt a while decrease,
but as the Summer soon increase.
Those that do love but for a season,
Do falsify both Love and Reason:
For Reason wills, if Love decrease,
It like the Summer should increase.
Though Love sometimes may be mistaken,
the truth yet ought not to be shaken:
Or though the heat a while decrease,
It with the Summer may increase.
And since the Spring time of my loving
Found never Winter of removing:
Nor frosts to make my hopes decrease,
Shall as the Summer still increase.
Song.
Love a child is ever crying,
Please him, and he strait is flying;
Give him, he the more is craving,
Never satisfied with having.
His desires have no measure,
Endless folly is his treasure:
What he promises, he breaks,
Trust not one word that he speaks.
He vows nothing but false matter,
And to cosen you he will flatter:
Let him gain the hand, he will leave you,
And still glory to deceive you.
He will triumph in your wailing,
And yet cause be of your failing:
These his virtues are, and slighter
Are his gifts; his favors lighter.
Fathers are as firm in staying,
Wolves no fiercer in their praying.
As a child then leave him crying,
Nor seek him so given to flying.
BEing past the pains of Love,
Freedom gladly seeks to move:
Says that Loves delights were pretty;
But to dwell in them twere pity.
And yet truly says, that Love
Must of force in all hearts move:
But though his delights are pretty,
To dwell on them were a pity.
Let Love slightly pass like Love,
Never let it too deep move:
For though Loves delights are pretty,
To dwell in them were great pity.
Love no pity has of Love,
Rather griefs then pleasures move:
So though his delights are pretty,
To dwell in them would be pity.
Those that like the smart of Love,
In them let it freely move:
Else though his delights are pretty,
Do not dwell in them for pity.
O Pardon Cupid, I confess my fault,
Then mercy grant me in so just a kind:
For treason never lodged in my mind
Against thy might, so much as in a thought.
And now my folly ^ have dearly bought,
Nor could my soul least rest of quiet find;
Since Rashness did my thoughts to Error bind,
Which now thy fury, and my harm has wrought.
I curse that thought and hand which that first framed,
For which by thee I am most justly blamed:
But now that hand shall guided be aright,
And give a Crown unto thy^endlesse praise,
Which shall thy glory and thy greatness raise,
More then these poor things could thy honor spite.
A Crown of Sonnets dedicated to LOVE.
IN this strange Labyrinth how shall I turn,
Ways are on all sides, while the way I miss:
If to the right hand, there in love I burn,
Let me go forward, therein danger is.
If to the left, suspicion hinders bliss;
Let me turn back, shame cries I ought return:
Nor faint, though crosses which my fortunes kiss,
Stand still is harder, although sure to mourn.
Thus let me take the right, or left hand way,
Go forward, or stand still, or back retire:
I must these doubts endure without allay
Or help, but travel find for my best hire.
Yet that which most my troubled sense does move,
Is to leave all and take the thread of Love.
2.
IS to leave all and take the thread of Love,
Which line straight leads unto the souls content,
Where choice delights with pleasures wings do move,
And idle fant'sie never room had lent.
When chaste thoughts guide us, then our minds are bent
To take that good which ills from us remove:
Light of true love brings fruit which none repent;
But constant Lovers seek and wish to prove.
Love is the shining Star of blessings light,
The fervent fire of zeal, the root of peace,
The lasting Lamp, fed with the oil of right,
Image of Faith, and womb for joys increase.
Love is true Virtue, and his ends delight,
His flames are joys, his bands true Lovers might.
3.
HIs flames are joys, his bands true Lovers might,
No stain is there, but pure, as purest white,
Where no cloud can appear to dim his light,
Nor spot defile, but shame will soon requite.
Here are affections tryde by Loves just might
As Gold by fire, and black discerned by white;
Error by truth, and darkness known by light,
Where Faith is vallu'd, for Love to requite.
Please him, and serve him, glory in his might
And firm he will be, as Innocence white,
Clear as the air, warm as Sun's beams, as day light
Just as Truth, constant as Fate, ioyd to requite.
Then Love obey, strive to observe his might
And be in his brave Court a glorious light.
4.
ANd be in his brave Court a glorious light
Shine in the eyes of Faith, and Constancy
Maintain the fires of Love, still burning bright,
Not slightly sparkling, but light flaming be.
Never to slake till earth no Stars can see,
Till Sun, and Moon^ do leave to us dark night,
And second Chaos once again do free
Us, and the World from all divisions spite.
Till then affections which his followers are,
Govern our hearts, and prove his powers gain,
To taste this pleasing sting, seek with all care
For happy smarting is it with small pain.
Such as although it pierce your tender heart,
And burn, yet burning you will love the smart.
5.
ANd burn, yet burning you will love the smart,
When you shall feel the weight of true desire,
So pleasing, as you would not wish your part
Of burden should be missing from that fire.
But faithful and unfeigned heat aspire
Which sin abollisheth, and does impart
Salues to all fear, with virtues which inspire
Souls with divine love; which shows his chaste Art.
And guide he is to ioyings, open eyes
He has to happiness, and best can learn
Us, means how to deserve this he descries,
Who blind, yet does our hidn'st thoughts diserne.
Thus we may gain since living in blessed Love,
He may our Prophet, and our Tutor prove.
6.
HE may our Prophet, and our Tutor prove,
In whom alone we do this power find,
To join two hearts as in one frame to move
Two bodies, but one soul to rule the mind
Eyes which must care to one dear Object bind,
Ears to each others speech as if above
All else, they sweet, and learned were; this kind
Content of Lovers witnesses true love.
It does enrich the wits, and make you see
That in your self which you knew not before,
Forcesing you to admire such gifts should be
Hid from your knowledge, yet in you the store.
Millions of these adorn the throane of Love,
How blessed are they then, who his favors prove?
7.
HOw blessed be they then, who his favors prove,
A life whereof the birth is just desire?
Breeding sweet flame, which hearts inuit to move,
In these loved eyes, which kindle Cupids fire,
And nurse his longings with his thoughts entire,
Fixed on the heat of wishes formed by Love,
Yet whereas fire destroys, this does aspire,
Increase, and foster all delights above.
Love will a Painter make you, such, as you
Shall able be to draw, your only dear,
More lively, perfect, lasting, and more true
Then rarest Workman, and to you more near.
These be the least, then all must needs confess,
He that shuns Love, does love himself the less.
8.
HE that shuns Love, does love himself the less,
And cursed he whose spirit, not admires
The worth of Love, where endless blessedness
Reigns, and commands, maintained by heavenly fires.
Made of Virtue, joined by Truth, blown by Desires,
Strengthened by Worth, renewed by carfulness,
Flaming in neuer-changing thoughts: briars
Of Jealousy shall here miss welcomeness.
Nor coldly pass in the pursutes of Love
Like one long frozen in a Sea of ice:
And yet but chastely let your passions moon,
No thought from virtuous Love your minds entice.
Never to other ends your Phant'sies place,
But where they may return with honor's grace.
9.
But where they may return with Honor's grace,
Where Venus follies can no harbo^r win,
But chased are, as worthless of the face,
Or style of Love, who has lascivious been.
Our hearts are subject to her Son, where sin
Never did dwell, or rest one minutes space;
What faults he has in her did still begin,
And from her breast he sucked his fleeting pace.
If Lust be counted Love, it is falsely named,
By wickedness, a fairer gloss to set
Upon that Vice, which else makes men ashamed,
In the own Phrase to warrant, but beget
This Child for Love, who ought like Monster borne,
Be from the Court of Love, and Reason torn.
10.
Be from the Court of Love, and reason torn,
For Love in Reason now does put his trust,
Desert and liking are together borne
Children of Love, and Reason, Parents just.
Reason aduiser is, Love ruler must
Be of the State, which Crown he long has worn;
Yet so, as neither will in least mistrust
The government where no fear is of scorn.
The reverence both their mights thus made of one,
But wantonness, and all those errors shun,
Which wrongers be, Impostures, and alone
Maintainers of all follies ill begun.
Fruit of a sower, and unwholesome grownd
Unprofitably pleasing, and unsound.
11.
Unprofitably pleasing, and unsound.
When Heaven gave liberty to frail dull earth,
To bring forth plenty that in ills abound,
Which ripest, yet do bring a certain dearth.
A timelesse, and unseasonable birth,
Planted in ill, in worse time springing found,
Which Hemlocke like might feed a si^k^-wits mirth
Where vnrul'd vapors sw^mme in endless round.
Then joy we not in what we ought to shun,
Where shady pleasures show, but true borne fires
Are quite quenched out, or by poor ashes won,
Awhile to keep those cool, and wann desires.
O no, let Love his glory have, and might
Be given to him, who triumphs in his right.
12.
BE given to him, who triumphs in his right;
Nor fading be, but like those blossoms fair,
Which fall for good, and lose their colors bright,
Yet dye not, but with fruit their loss repair:
So may Love make you pale with loving care,
When sweet enjoying shall restore that light,
More clear in beauty, then we can compare,
If not to Venus in her chosen might.
And who so give themselves in this dear kind,
These happinesses shall attend them still,
To be supplide with joys enriched in mind,
With treasures of content, and pleasures fill.
Thus love to be divine, does here appear,
Free from all foggs, but shining fair and clear.
13.
FRee from all foggs, but shining fair, and clear,
Wise in all good, and innocent in ill,
Where holy friendship is esteemed dear,
With Truth in love, and Justice in our Will.
In Love these titles only have their fill
Of happy life-maintainer, and the mere
Defense of right, the punisher of skill,
And fraud, from whence directions does appear.
To thee then, Lord commander of all hearts,
Ruler of our affections, kind, and just,
Great King of Love, my soul from feigned smarts,
Or thought of change, I offer to your trust,
This Crown, my self, and all that I have more,
Except my heart, which you bestowed before.
14.
EXcept my heart, which you bestowd before,
And for a sign of Conquest gave away
As worthless to be kept in your choice store;
Yet one more spotless with you does not stay.
The tribute which my heart does truly pay,
Is faith untouched, pure thoughts discharge the score
Of debts for me, where Constancy bears sway,
And rules as Lord, vnharmd by Enuies sore.
Yet other mischeifes fail not to attend,
As enemies to you, my foes must be,
Cursed Jealousy does all her forces bend
To my undoing, thus my harms I see.
So though in Love I fervently do burn,
In this strange Labyrinth how shall I turn?
Song. I.
SWeet, let me enjoy thy sight
More clear, more bright then morning Sun,
Which in Springtime gives delight
And by which Summers pride is wun.
Present sight does pleasures move
Which in sad absence we must miss:
But when met again in love,
Then twice redoubled is our bliss.
Yet this comfort absence gives,
And only faithful loving tries,
That though parted, Loves force lives
As just in heart, as in our eyes:
But such comfort banish quite,
Far sweeter is it, still to find
Favor in thy loved sight,
Which present smiles with joys combind.
Eyes of gladness, lips of Love,
And hearts from passion not to turn,
But in sweet affections move,
In flames of Faith to live, and burn.
Deare^t then, this kindness give,
And grant me life, which is your sight,
Wherein I more blessed live,
Then graced with the Suns fair light.
2.
SWeet Siluia in a shady wood,
With her fair Nimphs laid down,
Saw not far off where Cupid stood,
The Monarch of Loves Crown,
All naked, playing with his wings,
Within a Myrtle Tree,
Which sight a sudden laughter brings,
His Godhead so to see.
An fondly they began to jest,
With scoffing, and delight,
Not knowing he did breed unrest,
And that his will's his right:
When he perceiving of their scorn,
Grew in such desperate rage,
Who but for honor first was borne,
Could not his rage assuage.
Till shooting of his murdering dart,
Which not long lighting was,
Knowing the next way to the heart,
Did through a poor Nymph pass:
This shot the others made to bow,
Besides all those to blame,
Who scorners be, or not allow
Of powerful Cupids name.
Take heed then nor do idly smile,
Nor Loves commands despise,
For soon wi^^ he your strength beguile,
Although he want his eyes.
3
COme merry Spring delight us,
For Winter long did spite us,
In pleasure still persevere,
Thy beauties ending never:
Spring, and grow
Lasting so,
With joys increasing ever.
Let cold from hence be banished,
Till hopes from me be vauish'd,
But bless thy daynties growing
In fullness freely flowing:
Sweet Birds sing
For the Spring,
All mirth is now bestowing.
Philomel in this Arbor
Makes now her loving Harbor,
Yet of her state complaining,
Her Notes in mildness strayning,
Which though sweet,
Yet do meet.
Her former luckelesse paining.
4.
Lovers learn to speak but truth,
Swear not, and your oaths forgo,
Give your age a constant youth,
Vow no more then what you will do.
Think it sacrilege to break
What you promise, shall in love
And in tears what you do speak
Forget not, when the ends you prove.
Do not think it glory is
To entice, and then deceive,
Your chief honors lie in this,
By worth what won is, not to leave.
It Is not for your fame to try,
What we weak, not often refuse,
In our bounty our faults lie,
When you to do a fault will choose.
Fie leave this, a greater gain,
it is to keep when you have won,
Then what purchased is with pain,
Soon after in all scorn to shun.
For if worthless to be prized,
Why at first will you it move?
And if worthy, why dispis'd?
You cannot swear, and lie, and love.
Love alas you cannot like,
It Is but for a fashion moved,
None can chase, and then dislike,
Unless it be by fash^^d proved.
But your choice is, and your love.
How most number to deceive,
As if honors claim did move
Like Popish Law, none safe to leave.
Fly this folly, and return
Unto truth in Love, and try,
None but Martir's happy burn,
More shameful ends they have that lie.
1.
MY heart is lost, what can I now expect,
An evening fair after a drowsy day?
Alas, fond Phant'sie, this is not the way,
To cure a mourning heart, or salve neglect^
They who should help, do me, and help reject,
Embracing loose desires, and wanton play,
While wanton base delights, do bear the sway,
And impudency reigns without respect.
O Cupid let they Mother know her shame,
It Is time for her to leave this youthful flame,
Which does dishonor her, is ages blame,
And takes away the greatness of thy name.
Thou God of Love, she only Queen of lust,
Yet strives by weakening thee, to be unjust.
2.
LAte in the Forest I did Cupid see
Cold, wett, and crying, he had lost his way,
And being blind was farther like to stray;
Which sight, a kind compassion bred in me.
I kindly took, and dried him, while that he,
(Poor Child) complained, he sterued was with stay
And pined for want of his accustomed prey,
For none in that wild place his Host would be.
I glad was of his finding, thinking sure,
This service should my freedom still procure,
And in my arms I took him then vnharm'd,
Carrying him safe unto a Myrtle bower,
But in the way he made me, feel his power,
Burning my heart, who had him kindly warmed.
3.
IVno still jealous of her husband Jove,
Descended from above, on earth to try,
Whether she there could find his chosen Love,
Which made him from the Heavens so often fly.
Close by the place where I for shade did lie,
She chafing came, but when she saw me move,
Have you not seen this way (said she) to hye
One, in whom virtue never grownde did prove?
He, in whom Love does breed, to stir more hate,
Courting a wanton Nymph for his delight;
His name is Jupiter, my Lord, by Fate,
Who for her, leaves Me, Heaven, his Throne, and light.
I saw him not (said I) although here are
Many, in whose hearts, Love has made like war,
4.
WHen I beheld the Image of my dear,
With greedy looks mine eyes would that way bend,
Fear, and Desire, did inwardly contend;
Fear to be marked, Desire to draw still near.
And in my soul a Spirit would appear,
Which boldness warranted, and did pretend
To be my Genius; yet I durst not lend,
My eyes in trust, where others seemed so clear.
Then did I search, from whence this danger rose,
If such unworthiness in me did rest,
As my starved eyes must not with sight be blessed,
When Jealousy her poison did disclose.
Yet in my heart unseen of Jealous eye,
The truer Image shall in triumph lie.
5.
LIke to huge Clouds of smoke which well may hide
The face of fairest day, though for a while:
So wrong may shadow me, till truth do smile,
And Justice Sunne-like has those vapors tide.
O doting Time, can thou for shame let slid,
So many minutes, while ills do beguile
Thy age, and worth, and falsehoods thus defile
Thy ancient good, where now but crosses bide?
Look but once up, and leave thy toyling pace
And on my miseries thy dim eye place,
Go not so fast, but give my care some end,
Turn not thy glass (alas) unto my ill
Since thou with sand it can not so far fill,
But to each one my sorrows will extend.
6.
O That no day would ever more appear,
But clowdy night to govern this sad place,
Nor light from Heaven these haples rooms to grace
Since that light's shadowed which my Love holds dear.
Let thickest mists in envy master here,
And Sunne-borne day for malice show no face,
Disdaining light, where Cupid, and the race
Of Loue^s are despisd, and shame shines clear.
Let me be dark, since barred of my chief light,
And wounding Jealousy commands by might,
But Stage-play-like disguised pleasures give:
To me it seems, as ancient fictions make
The Stars, all fashious^ and all shapes partake,
While in my thoughts true form of Love shall live.
7.
NO time, no room, no thought, or writing can
Give rest, or quiet to my loving heart,
Or can my m^mory, or Phant'sie scan,
The measure of my still renewing smart.
Yet whould I not (dear Love) thou should depart,
But let my passions as they first began,
Rule, wound, and please, it is thy choysest Art,
To give disquiet, which seems ease to man.
When all alone, I think upon thy pain,
How thou do travel our best selves to gain,
Then houerly thy lessons I do learn;
Think on thy glory, which shall still ascend,
Until the world come to a final end,
And then shall we thy lasting power dicerne.
8.
HOw Glowworme-like the Sun does ^ow appear,
Cold beams do from his gloriou^ face descend
Which shows his days, and force duw to an end,
Or that to leave taking, his time grow^s near.
The day his face did seem but pale, t^ough clear,
The reason is, he to the North must end
His light, and warmth must to that Climat bend,
Whose frozen parts could not loves ^eat hold dear
Alas, if thou bright Sun to part from hence
Grieve so, what must I hapless w^ from thence,
Where thou do go my blessing sall attend;
Thou shall ^nioy that sight for which I dye,
And in my heart thy fortuues do nuy,
Yet grieve, I Will love thee, for thistate may 'mend.
9.
MY Muse now happy lay thy s^fe to rest,
Sleep in the quiet of a faitfull love,
Write you no more, but let the^ Phant'sies move
Some other hearts, wake not to ew unrest.
But if you Study be those thoughts adrest
To truth, which shall eternal goodness prove;
Enjoying of true joy the most, and best
The endless gain which never will remove.
Leave the discourse of Venus, and her son
To young beginners, and their brains inspire
With stories of great Love, and from that fire,
Get heat to write the fortunes they have won.
And thus leave off; what is past shows you can love,
Now let your Constancy your Honor prove.
FINIS.

