OF THE Conscience.

A DISCOVRSE wherein is plainly declared, the unspeakable joy, and comfort
of a good Conscience, and the intolerable grief and discomfort of an evil
Conscience.

MADE BY JOHN Woolton, Minister of the Gospel.

ANNO. 1576.

Imprinted by H. Iackson, for Humfery Toye.

TO THE RIGHT worshipful, Sir John Jylbert, knight, John Woolton wishes
prosperous success in all worldly affairs: and in the life to come, immortal
felicity.
AMONG MAny worthy and divine lessons, which Seneca gave unto Lucilius,
touching the leadyng of an honest and godly life: he borrows one of the
Epicure, in mine opinion not to be accounted the meanest, which he would have
his friend to imprint diligently and deeply in the bottom of his breast. Let
us Senecca lib. 10. epist. 11.
so live (says he) as if the eyes of all men were bent toward us: let us so
study and devise with our selves when we are alone, as if strangers did view
our secret cogitations. Cur actions and deeds always vic^^^d.
Many faults and mischiefs shall thou avoid: if thou imagine that thou have
a witness of thy doings always at thy elbowe. Which lesson every christian ought
to learn, not imagining (as Seneca would have us) that Cato Lelius, or some
such grave man; dy^ always with open eyes look upon us: but persuading our
solues as the truth is in deed, that we have with us always present, waking
and watching us, a sage and grave Censor of life and manners (our conscience The
Conscience in steed of a thousand witnesses.
I say) which according to the como^^ proue^ be is in steed of a thousand
witnesses, This conscience so wonderfully frami^ and fashioned in man by
ahnighty God, to be a witness and an informer of mankind ^^lans conscience is
a scoolemester vuto him.
and of the law of Nature, which comman death things that be honest, and
forbids th^^ contrary. Sommone^^^ us as it were before the tribunal feate
of God, sometime accusing, sometime excusing, now punishing and now absoluing
us; for God did of his good will and upright justice ordeyne this watchman in
our Nature, that joy should follow lawdable and honest actions: and
contrariwise Sorrow, abominable and desperate deeds: that anguishe and dolor
might be a continual torme^^ter of ungodliness, and a destroyer of rebellious
natures. There can nothing happen The ve^ntion to a corrupt Consc^ence.
to a mortail man more grievous, heaup, or miserable the^ a guilty Conscience,
which all those yt are delighted with the filthiness of sin, are compelled to
carry about with the^, as a book of notes wherein they write all Chrisost in
psalm. 50.
their offenses. Whereof Bernhard speaks after this manner. An evil
Conscience is a witness of our debtes, a Judge, a tormenter, Bernhardus.
she accuses us, she judges us, she punishes us, and she condemns us,
which if it lie hid for a time yet it breaks out at the last, especially at
the hour of death, and gives The desperate end of (...) wilfully against
their Conscience.
a thousand evidences against men* Whereof Julian the Apostata, Henry king
of France, James Latomus of Louayne, and diverse others, are evident and known
examples, who felt these fearful anguishes Pantalion chron. rerum
memorabilium. Iho. Foxius et alii.
of the Conscience, and the sense of Gods wrath for their wilful obstinacy,
and cruel tirrany against Christ and his church, and at their departure out of
this world; with doleful voices, and fearful ex^clamacions uttered in their
grief, to such as had access unto them.

The good conscience on the other side as it were a brazen wall, against untrue
reports, Herat. lib. 1. epist.
peril and dangers, and makes the gool^, when they are persecuted, beaten
and tied in iron chains, void of dolor and pain: and when they come before
the mighty men of this world, they shrink not, they faynte not, they wax
not pale, neither change their countenance. Paul being a prisoner and brought
before Felix: was not abashed himself, but with his aunsweres, which were full
of divine power and might, he made the governor to tremble and quake: which
cannot be ascribed to any thing, but to ye sincere good conscience of his
whereof himself speaks thus. Act. 24.
Herein I endeavored my self to have always a clear Conscience toward God, and
toward men. Let us then beware that we wound not our Conscience, and whether
we be alone at home, or in company abroad, let us accoumpt that the principal
witness. For as S. Ambrose says: Every man has of Ambrosius in epist ad
Constant.
his own mind and Conscience a severe judge, either punishing the guilty, or
acquiting the guiltles and innocent: And Sencca writes to Lucillius divinely
after this manner. To what end do we hide our selves, and decline the eyes,
and ears of me^: A good conscience calls the company unto him, but an euel
conscience Seneca epist. 96.
is in doubt and fear, even, when we are alone. If those things that we do
be honest, what need we to care if the whole world look upon us: but if they
be unhonest, we must needs know them our selves, O miserable men that we
are, if we contemn this witness. Seeing then that so great joy and comfort
issues out of a good conscience, and so great heuines and discomfort comes
from an evil Conscience, I have thought good to write somewhat briefly and
shortly, as well of the one as of ye other. Neither was it my purpose to
prosecute all things, that belong unto this matter (which to do would require
more leisure the^ I yet have, and a longer worck then this treatise) and who so
list to read more hereof, I refer him to Saint Bernhard, Melancthon,
Hemingius, and especially to Ioh. Riuius, who will plentifully satisfy the
greedy Reader, desirous to understand more of this matter: but I have collected
out of all these, so much as seemed unto me most convenient and necessary for
the Christian reader in this behalf. Which if I have not accomplished so
pithely and eloquently as perhaps some of our English ^^hilosophers or
Retoricians would have done, I will not contend in rendering a reason of my
doings: but do give them leave to amend that which is amiss, for as Cinicall
taracion is detestable, so is charitable animaduersion in my judgment
cc^mendable, not misdoubting but that the godly reader will rather accept
hereof with like affection as it is delivered: then dis^ain my want of ability
to offer it so per^^tc in all points, either as the matter deserves, or I my
self desired.

These my Labors (such as they be) I offer unto your worship, as a taken of
any good will, and obseruancy toward the same, for your great love and entire
affection toward me: which you have diverse and sunday ways, in benefits
be^^owed upon (...) and mine, effectually declared. And because I certainly
know that in your life and daily actions, you do not any ^^ing willingly
against the testiniony of a good Conscience, which you only ground upon Gods
word, the surest foundation in all your building, and clearest light and
lantern to direct your paths to everlasting life. This treaty of the same
matter cannot be unmeet to be presented unto you: which your whorship
according to your good nature, will I trust accept in good part: the living God
blesseand preserve you, and that verteous Land your wife, long in all
prosperity. From Exceter the 20. of Mirche.

Your Worships humbly to com^^und. John Woolton.

OF THE CONSCIENCE, a Treatise collected by John Woolten.
THERE ARE TWO principal parts of man's After what forte there are two parts
of manners Souls.
Soul (as I have plainly declared in my Treatise of of the immortality
thereof) which of necessity must con^^^^ in all exerutions and actions of
virtue. For although the naturs of the Soul be simple and without composition
and division, yet they use to attribute unto him certain parts: to wit
according to his sundry and diverse operations. As for example take, we
acknowledge in the fire two powers or qualities: the one ^^^ming or heating,
the other showing or discovering from darkness all thi^^: even so when men
speak of the parts of the Soul, they ^^urpe that name for the functions and
effects of the same. These (...) parts are called Reason^and Wyll^ whereof the
(...) shows what is seemly and Reason. Will.
conue^^ent to be (...), or to be lest undone: and the second either coueteth
and pursuith as good, that which was proposed by reason, either else declineth
and auoydeth the same as evil. Hereof came that apt and fine sentence. All
mortal actions, are as ^^ were engendered and conceive by Reason, but are
brought forth, and (...) by Will.

Now as brute beasts have no spark of reason, (whereby man both diffe^th most
far from them, and resembles very near an express Image of the divine
nature) so have they no Will but Sense and Appetite, and with the one, they are
le^de to their Brute be^s have ^^yth^^ Reason ner Will but sense and Appetite.
natural food, with the other they di^cerne things wholesome, from hurtful.
Some there are, that term this Appetite in beute beasts Will without Reason;
for that domine creatures bo^d of mind, and vidnerstanding, are led toward
things with a certain secret motion, and in stinct of nature, rather shen
with any free will, choice, or understanding. For they in she ^e of Reason,
have given unto them by Gods a certain natural ^kill, to defend and to serve
them selves. This Will or Appetite which perseweth things, conceived by Sense,
is common to man with beasts: even as the Senses, as well external as
internal, (from whence this Appetite ysseweth) is unparted equally to man and
beast saving to the sense of all bruise beasts commonly is more quick and
persite, then that which is in man, and in beasts this fence is the supreme
and most excellent faculty. In man it is but a servant, or handmayde to
Intelligence, or understanding.

And Reason was given unto man, not The effect of Reason.
only to fearche after virtue, that the Will should embrace the same, but to
^^oderate carnal motions, and to bridle their rage, and furnes, Albeit Reason
very often, as it were shadowed and ouerralle with darcknesse, judges
peruersly and corruptly: and not that alone, but also is so infirm and weak,
that it cannot restrain evil determined any thing, Will is either so ouerth
The off^^^.
wa^^, or else so weak, that she does not excute the same. Whereof may rise
no small question, seeing that the very object of will is virtue her self,
showed and opened unto her by Reason, how it comes to pa^^e that we are
^^^^ed headlong, as it were violently to mischief, so that pernicious and
deuilishe affections, do ouerrule that excelent faculty guien by God to covet
that which is good and honest, whereof the Apostle himself complayneth. That
good thing which I would do, that I do not: and that evil which I would
not, that I do.

And Medea burning in mad love with Jason: having wrastled with her self much
and long, yet could she not overcome that furor with Reason, for thus she
talks with her self.

Video meliora proboque, deteriora sequor.

But the scripture resolves this doubt, and tells us that through the fall
of our why will is ^ysobydi^t ^o Reason
first parents, and by original sin descending into all mankind from that
route: these diseases of the mind, these swarms of perturbations, and these
continual conflictes between reason and lust do budde out and spring.
Therefore great need have we to crave Gods aid and help: by whose grace we
may vanquishe and overcome that rebellion of desires and affections: for
without that neither Reason nor. Will is of power either to do good, or else
to resist the crooked and froward mocions of man.

In the chief and principal part of the The Consience in respect of
Indgement is placed i^^ the mind but in respect of affections and motions it
is in the heart.
Soul which we call Reason, they commonly place the Conscience, that
wonderful workmanship of God, being according to the proverb in steed of a
thousand witnesses, not only commanding things honest and diswading the
contrary, but more over asciting us as it were before the Tribunal seat of
the divine Majesty, sometime accusing and someting excusing. In The opetation
of the Conscience
this matter punishing and another acquyting. Whereof as I mind to write
somewhat at this time: so will I not follow the subtyle and thornye manner of
the Schoolmen, who with great curiosity of definitions and deuisions, have
altogether darkened rather then lightened this matter: but so far forth as my
abiliti^ will extend, do purpose with brevity and perspicute, to prosecute
this matter. Whereunto if I cannot reach, according to my earnest desire, yet I
trust at the least hereby to move some happy wit to polish this enterprise,
for it were great pity that comfortable Conscience should be any longer mute
and domme as a stranger: but that she might franckly and freely speak unto
our conntry men in our English tongue.

And that I may keep some certain The ^^e^^odot this ^^^ca and ^^^ deu^^^
^^ruf.
niethode in the translation hereof, which they call Analysis seems most
concienient for me to follow. First I will put down the definition,
comprehending and enfolding as it were in one bundell, the whole matter
generally. Then I will open and resolve into parts, every porciorr of the
same. In the which Analysis, besides fundry and diverse things, a man may easily
see the principles and grounds of the Conscience, how she is placed in the
mind: her force and power in examining all moral actions. This done I will
speak of the difference between a sound, and a corrupt Conscience, and of the
effects of them both: to wit, of the solace and comfort of the one in
aducrsitie, and of the privy wounds of the other even in worldly felicity.
Lastly, I will discourse certain questions incicent to this matter: which
being finished, I trust that the knowledge of Conscience, which has been
secret and obscure, shall show her self somewhat plainly to the eyes, and
shall stir up in men a marvelous love and desire of a sineere conscience.

The Apostle in that golden and excellent Epistle to the Romans speaks of
the Gentiles in this wise. For when the a to scrip expressing Conscience
Gentiles which have no law, do by nature the things contained in the law,
they having not the law, are a law unto themselves. Romans 2.
Which show the effect of the law, written in their hearts, their conscience
also bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing one another or excusing. In
this sentence of saint Pause I observe four things, first he says that the
worck of the law is written in their hearts: this worck of the law, is the
discelning between things honest, and dishonest: Secondly he says ye they
show it. For in mainteyning of Religion, they acknowledge that there is a God
to be worshipped: and in that they punish crimes and heinous offenses, they
profess themselves defendors of honesty, and Justice. Thirdly he makes metion
of the inward testimony of the conscience. Fourthly he ^howeth what manner of
Testes the Conscience is even by ^uident Arguments accusing or exeusing, out of
the which this definitio is deduced. The Conscience is a certain natural
intelligence of the law, ingrafted The ^efynition of the Conscience.
in the mind or power understanding, whereby we allow good actions and disalow
evil actions. Which judgment planted in the internal man by God, breeds in
the execution of virtue, a quietness and rest of mind, and in vice a
wonderful veration of the same, punishing and afflicting the Three thigs in ye
mind to be observed.
man guilty: but there are three, things in the mind, which are to be
observed for the better understanding of this matter.

The first is the understanding which Ondirsta^^ ding con^emplatyre.
they call contemplaty^e, busied always in the study and searching out of
things, and this is that better part of the mind which always (as the
Philosophers say) aspireth to the best. In this they place Syn^res^ which is
the keeper and conseruer of notices, Aristo. li. 1. ethick.
or understandings, which are bredde with us by nature, examining what is, and
what is not expedient. And therefore it is fayde that she ministers
propositions to reasons and arguments, which are called Sillogismes practical,
Such propisition are these that follow, honest things are to be done,
dishonest things are not to be done: Out of which two grounds or principles
infinite singular propositions are derived, serving in arguments, or as I
called them Sinterisis est habitus innatus co^ seruans principia moralia et
practica sicut Sinesis conseruat principia specu labilia.
Sillogismes practical. And it is so called for that it examineth and
inquireth a reason out of the law of nature, of the quality of all human
accions.

In the second place of the mind is Intelligence practical, which consists
in accion. And therein is the Conscience properly placed, for that of the
difference of Accions, she puts down and as it were delivers the less
proposition or assumtion in the Sillogisme or Argument in this wise, Sinterisis
or Understanding minisereth this proposition in Hector. Honest things are to
be done. Then Conscience apprehends this assumtion. To defend a man's country
and to die therefore is honest. Again Sinterisis or Understanding delivers
this proposition in Oedipus. Fil^hy and detostable deeds are to be eschewed.
Then the Conscience assumeth. But Inceste with my mother and paricide, are
most detestable deeds. And so understanding and Conscience reasons in all
other accions.

Thirdly in the mind there is Judgment, Judgment or decerm^nation.
pronouncing of all accions, whether they be worthy of praise or disprayse. And
as she served in generality in the Mayor or first proposition, so as a witty
Judge, she descends unto the special case in the conclusion and gives
sentence. For examples sake, Intelligence contemplat^ue in Hector, delivers
this proposition. Honest deeds are praise worthy. The^ the Conscience
subsumeth: To defend my country and to dye in defense of it, is an honest
deed, lastly judgment gives sentence, Therefore to defend Examples plainly
expressing this matter.
my country, and to die in defense of it, is praise worthy. Again Intelligence
delivers this proposition to Oedipus. Most vile and filthy acts deserve
most greucuse punishments. Conscience adds: Inceste with my Mother and
paricide, are most vile and filthy acts. Finally Judgment gives sentence:
Therefore inceste with my Mother and paricide, deserve most grievous
punishments. The former argument bredde in Hectors breast unspeakable courage,
in so much that he utterly contemned death. For Polidamas, did advise him not
to go out among the Erecians that day: because the fliyng of Birds did
portend some heavy event. Hector answered stoutely, whether the birds fly on
the right hand toward the East, or on the left hand toward the Weste, I am
resolved to obey great Jupiter his counsel: meaning that valyant mocion of
his mind to be Jupiters counsel, whereby he was excyted to do uoble and
valyant deeds. Neither could supersticious obseruacion of times, withholde
him from doing his duty, especially in the common peril of his natural
country. Contrariwise the latter Sillogisme kyndled such tormenting and
burning fyres, that through impaciencie and inward grief for wickedness by
him committed, he rent out his own eyes. Oedipus verily was a Oedipus.
Noble fellow and king of the Thebanes, who albeit he contenmed Tiresias the
Prophet, casting in his teethe incestious marriage, yet in ye end he was so
converted with one testimony of his own conscience, that he confessed
himself guyltie and a cast away, not worthy to behold any longer the light
of Heaven, and even so Iocasta his mother with an halter strangled her self.

There are infinite such examples of Syllogismes, or arguments practical in
holy scripture. Ezechias knows that there is but one true God, who only is
to be called upon and worshipped, which thing Synteresis or Intelligence
tells him out of the first commandment: Then Conscience The ground of
Ezechias his consci^net.
aduoucheth the same: and last of all judgment concludes in this manner. The
true and living God, eue^ the God of Israel is only to be worshipped: But
Idolatry maintayneth many Gods, even in despite of the living God, therefore
Idolatry is to be abolished, Ezechias armed with this judgment of Conscience,
cutteth down the Groves, takes down the brazen Serpent, overthrows Idols,
and abolisheth Idolatry, and commits the event to God. And says: For these
are no Gods but wood and stone, even the work of men's hand. And in like
manner David stays his hand from David. 1. Sa. 24.
slaying of Saul, even offered unto him in the Cave, because he knows that
he is Gods anointed, and a magistrate by his ordinance, reasoning thus with
himself. No violence is to be used toward Gods magistrate: But Saul is Gods
magistrate, therefore I must do him no violence. Examples also are worthy
consideration, as Regulus led eue^ wtth civil honesty keeps promise made
unto his enemy, reasoning thus with himself: There is nothing more seemly for
a noble heart, then to consider the end of his accions, and his own honesty:
But to keep my oath made unto my ennemie is the end of my accions, and
apperteineth to my honesty, therefore I will keep my oath made unto my
ennemie, even in the perrill of my life. Such like examples are in
deliberations, counsayles and examples in all histories of the acts and deeds
of mortal men.

I am not ignorant that some handle this matter otherwise, dividing Reason
into Riuiu^. lib. 1. de conscientia: and hausit ex Augustino.
two parts. The Superior and the inferioure Reason. And that would have that
light of man's mind prescribing things divine and eternal, to be the higher
Reason: and that which is busied about temporal and profitable things to be
the inferior. Moreover some there be also that affirm that the Conscience,
puts down the Minor proposition, and conclusion. And touching the division
of Reason, they use Riuius lib. de consc. dissentit ab
such examples as follow. Imagine Caesar deliberating with himself, whether he
should take Armoure against his native country. Conscience answers that
he omnibus aijt enim conscientiam ponere complectione^ in Syllogismo practico.
ought not to do it. Reason Superior confirms it, because it is contrary to
Godliness, and to the law of nature, being in it self vile and dishonest:
Reason Inferioure, allows the same because it is in y^ world a thing
infantous and reprochful, and therwithall very perilous. Out of these
Sinterisis or Judgment infers: that it is abominable and by no means to
be attempted. In like manner miagine Popilius delyberating with himself whether
he might execute Antonies commau^ndement and murder Cicero. Conscience tells
that he ought not to murder Cicero by any means. Reason Superior says, that
he shall be noted of great ingratitude, if he murder that man who sometime
defended him in a matter of life and death, and procured his delyuerance.
Reason Inferior adds that he shall procure common hatred and malice of all
good men, if he murder a man that has most notably preserved the liberty of
his country, whereof Sinteresis or Judgment gathers, that Ingratitude as a
most odious and detestable thing is to be avoided. And thus you see all the
parts of a Sillogisme which they call practick: wherein reason probable examine
moral actions by the law of Nature and by principles deryued out of the same.
I call Principles those Notices or knowledge which are planted and graued in
our minds by good sentences common and known unto al men, whereunto we without
gainesaying. do wyllingly and naturally assent. Such are these. Thanks are to
be yielded to those which deserve them. Every man ought to have his own. We
ought to imitate no man. And these principles which apperteyne to our duty
and vocation in a cyuill life are named practicke, and their natural habit
Sinterisis. But those Theorick principles which properly belong to
contemplation and knowledge, they term the Intelligence of principles, as for
example. The whole is greater then a part. Of nothing can nothing be made, and
such like. I thought it requisite to interlace this short admonition of the
terms or words, which writers in these cases use: whereof many curious
questions are of many moved, which may be the better discerned, these things
known for my part, I think the first division to be most commodious and
plain for knowledge and understanding sake, otherwise most certain it is that
these things differ not in man's mind, if you respect their substance and
essence: being in deed mingled and confused one with another: only for
instruction sake, they are separate in thought and cogination. For the heavenly
Philosopher S. Paul names the whole Sillogisme, whereof I have spoken before,
man's conscience.

It is evidence by the premises that the Causes why diverse men be of d^uerse
Consciences.
quality of Conscience varieth, according to the condition of men's factes. For
in me^ that fear and love GOD, there is a good Conscience, which proceeds
of virtues and sincere deliberations, and deeds bringing unto man an
incredible joy and pleasure of things well done: And an evil Conscience, in
wicked and evil persons which by reason of vile and abhomiuable facts, of
shame and discredit received, does fret and know the mind with great
intolerable greefes and fraunces.

Wherein it is to be no^ed, that Conscience takes not these differences of ye
facultye Iudicatiue which is a natural gift, and therefore to be nombred
among good things and is sometime named the light of the mind, sometime the
natural (...) time the instruction of Reason: But the The things which
Conscience chife in respects.
Conscience takes such qualities of these three things: Of the fact paste,
of the present affection of the heart, and of the eue^r following. For if the
mind be thoroughly persuaded of his Innocence, it rejoices, and cherishes
good hope, and is called a good Conscience the difynition whereof is as
follows.

A good Conscience is a^ joyful remembrance Defynytyons of the good
Conscience.
of our former life, well paste and spente, having a sure hope and expectation
of some happy event: Or thus, a good Conscience is a gladsome motion of the
heart conjoined with a perfect knowledge of a fact well done, where it is
called not Science but Conscience. Which good Conscience is as well the cause of
cheerfulness in the face and countinaunce, being but an outward token of the
inward affection: as also the breder and conseruer of the solace and joy in
the mind conceived of good factes and happy events. For better declaration
hereof I will examine certain cases particulerly. And for examples sake let us
look upon these rich men of the world, having at their own will abundantly
things necessary to a sweet and pleasant life, and therefore are generally
almost reputed blessed and happy. If a man with more insight examine their
estate, he shall not find any men either more miserable, or more trembling and
fearing Gods wrath and vengeance, then they if at any time they happen to call
an account of them selves, by what means they have heaped these things
together. I do not now speak of such as have gotten riches and increased
their substance without any man's injury, if any such be (for in deed such
birds are rarely seen:) But I note those that without respect of right or
wrong, do only or chiefly seek for gain, neglecting in the mean season
those things which principally do adorn and bewtifie man. Whiles such men do
record their couen and frawde in gathering gain: what agonies and passions of
mind? what gna wings and wounds of Conscience do they abide? wherewith they
bring as it were scourged and whi^te, do sustain inwardly unspeakable misery
in their external show of felicity. On the other side they that with honest
and lawful mean grow to be ritche, and have used no cellusion nor hurtful
guile in their trade of life, must needs inwardly rejoice, and give endelesse
praise and thanks to the almighty for his goodness mercy toward them.
Moreover, those meli that excel in Of bewty and strength
beauty, strength, health, or other gifts of the body, must needs be said to
have rereceyued great benfites of God, but those that abuse their beauty to
unchaste love, their strength to hurt their neighbor, their health to filthy
and unlawful pleasures, what miseries and sorrows shall they afterward Of
Nobility
sustain. We may judge the fame of Nobility, of power, of glory, of honor
and such like. For if only vertuo be the true and perfect Nobility (as the
Poet says:) Then surely they may not rightly be called Noble, that only
descend of a famous house, and have gotten Arms and Nobility by their
renowned Ancestors, that is with other men's virtues: or else (as often it
happens) by our notorious Pyraries, robbres, or murders: but those only that
with their own worthy and excellent deeds have advanced themselves, or being
sprung of Noble parentage by imitation, do withal their endeavor, study to
resemble them from whence they came Such the as are Noble in deed, do
conceive of their excellent and worthy deeds toward their country an
unspeakable joy in their Conscience: whereas the Noble unnoble with his guyltie
conscience (howsoever men fawn upon him or flatter him) is inwardly vexed and
tormented.

And whereas that is a right power and The abuse of power and auttoryty.
good deminion, to have many whose wealth and prosperity a man may tender and
consider, whose liberties and laws a man may defend and conserve: they that
do otherwise, must needs have deep griefs, and perilous wounds in their
minds. The example of ancient Tyrauntes in all hystories verify the same: as
Dionisius, Phalaris, Nero, and many more innumerable. Whose great and manyfolde
miseries that I may omit, which have vered them day and night, by means of
their monstrous deeds, yet I note this one thing very worthy observation, that
such excellent and worthy wightes as have deserved the love of all men: these
Tyrauntes have not only always feared and hated: but also have vanished or
expelled out of their companyes, yea and sometime have put them to drath, and
the stowte and valyant men they hate, lest they should attempt with force to
bridle their cruelty: the wise men: least they should moderate their rashness
and impotencie: the tust men, lest the multitude should be led away through
admiration of their virtues. Well said Salust, Kings and Tyrants do always
more suspect good men then badde, and other men's virtues are terrible unto
them. Removing therefore from them such men, whose virtues their naughty minds
detest and abhor, they conioyne with Cutthrctes and Ruffynes, and commit
both themselves and their subjects to their Regimentes, And yet hereby can
they not exclude fear, for they always mistrust their guard and other keepers
of their body, and think that the edge of the sword is always even at their
necks. Dionisius doing is often mentioned, who hangyng a sharp poynted sword
by the heir of a horsetaile over his friends head: plainly paynteth out the
inward conscience and outward life of Tyrants.

The same Denis as Tully writes shonned the company and society of men: and
led his life with Fugitives, Ruffyans, and Barbarous people, and reputed al
such for his enemies, in whom there appeared any show of virtue and honesty.
But contrariwise those Princes that seek to maintain the wealth of their
subjects, that yield unto them lawful and needful liberties: that think
with themselves the proper duty and part of a Prince, not to consist in
precious garments, nor delicious banquets and vain pleasures, not in great
heaps of Gold and Silver: But in pietic, virtue, and prudencie: Such Princes I
say will not have neither of their counsel, neither of their Court, ryotous
Bankeruptes and Ruffyans, but will be assisted with such who bend all their
studies for the prosperity of their country: and will content himself only
with the friendshyp and familiarity of good men.

True glory is much accounted of, and True glory
not without cause. It is a Renowned fame for some notable and excellent deed
done: having annexed unto it the love and reverence of good men. But I pray
you what pleasure can those conceive hereof, who being altogether void of
virtue and honesty, have either by some mischicfe gotten them fame amongst the
multitude: either by Userie, Extorcion and oppression of the poor, are become
notable? assuredly such men do hear their own conscience tell them another
tale: and in continuance of time that vain persuasion like smoke vanishes
away. Contrariwise, these that by their own domerits are magnified and
advanced to true honor and glory by good men: must needs enjoy unspeakable
solaces and pleasures in their minds: and do account the same a sufficient
reward for all their trauayles and adventures.

So Pompeius Magnus, When the people did salute him, calling him the father of
their country, acknowledged that he had received that day a most ample and
worthy reward for all those labors which he had sustained for his country.
Therefore wealth, Riches, Power, Glory, Honor, strength, health, and such like,
when by the madd multitude measures man's felicity cannot bring unto man any
stable or firm comfort unless they have anexed unto them the testimony of a
sincere Conscience, for that pleasure is not durable, which arises of in
continency, of ambition, of avarice, of intemperancy, and of others of that
Rabble.

All these certeynlye are deceive able and spotted repastes. Most truly is it
said, The fear of the Lord delights the heart, and gives joy and
gladness continualy. But the ungodly have no joy at all. Thus they that lead
a godly and honest life, albeit they contemn or have not these se^suall
delectations, and do not follow Venus court neither haunt delicate fare, nor
esteem dancing, wanton playing, and other vanities, yet no doubt they live
in greater mirth, and joy then those carnal men: Who what with the furors of
their Conscience, the remembrance of Gods wrath and malediction hanging over
their head, and the continual fear of the great day of doom, do lead a
wretched and miserable life.

Adversity and misery so grievous to this our nature is it not mitigated and
made more easy by reason of a good Conscience: That saying is no more common
then true. It is the greatest solace to want Guylt. Again: It is no finale
thing to be innocent in adversity.

And even so it fares in matters of Regiment, wherein if happily at any time
there happen overthwart euentes to men's good consultations or when good actions
are sinisterly interpreted by ^^^ll men: what other consplation does so
effectuallye diminish griefs and sorrows of the mind, as an upright
Conscience. Which thing you may evidently see by reading the Romayne hystories
in Furnis Camillus, Scipio. A^^icanus and many others, who salued the deed
wounds of exyle and banishment, and the ingratitude of their Citizens, with
the certain knowledge and remembrance of their valiant acts in defense of
their Country! Socrates vmustlye condemned, spoke so deuinely (as Cicero
records) eue^ when he should suppe up the deadly poison: that he seemed not
to descend into hell, but to ascend into heaven. Aepamino^das stricken into the
breast with an arrowe fighting in defense of his country, and through
faintness enforced to lie down in his Panilion, would not suffer the arrowe
to be plucked out, before he might know the event of the battle: And at last
when tydinges was brought him of the flight and conquest over his enemies, he
then at the last wylled the arrowe to be drawn out: and pouring out his heart
blood, he dye^ myldely, gratulating so happy success un his country: The
holy scripture proposes unto us store of such examples: and specially Job
pressed with so great calamity; and almost swallowed up with miseries: when his
children were gone: his wife raging and railing, and his friends in steed of
honye, gave unto him talk as bitter as Gaull, what lenitiue had he but a good
conscience, borne up with a strong faith, whereby he cried saying. Though he
kill me, yet will I Job. 19.
trust in him still; and albeit his friends told him that he was forsaken of
God, yet he held fast by the Ancker of Gods prouydence.

I know (says he) that my redeemer lives, and that I shall rise again at the
last day, and shall be compassed again wish my skin, and shall see god in my
flesh. Joseph that Godly and chaste young man, being chayned in she stocks,
what solace had he in the deep dungeon, but his sincere mind and unspotted
Conscience: And even so it was with Eliazarus, with Paul, and with all the
Apostles in their distress, for Eliazarus says O lord I am piteously
tormented in my body, but I willingly suffer all these things for thy names
sake, Paul being certified by Agabus, of the afflictions which he should
suffer at Jerusalem. I (^^ he) am ready not only to be bound, but also to
suffer death for the name of the Lord Jesus. The Apostles likewise being
scorged for preaching the Gospel, Went away with Joy, that they were found
worthy to bear infamy for the name of the Lord Jesus.

The principal cause of these things was doubtless a good conscience, which
writes sorrow into joy, calamity to felicity, and to conclude, death into
life it self.

OF THE EVELL AND CORrupt Conscience.
AS THERE IS IN GOD that supreme and nigh may is of God, a wisdom
descerning between good and evil things: and also a will wishing goodness,
with a divine delectation and pleasure: and contrariwise nylling that which is
naught, and with great indignation and anger rejecting and punishing the same.
Even so has he created the life of man: that there should be certain laws
as it were notices or admonitions of the mind, commanding things honest, and
forbidding the contrary, besides these he has appointed magistrates that they
should defend the good, and punish the evil. And to this end were things
thus ordered and disposed in the creation: that men might learn that there is
both a God, being a wise and just Judge: and there withal that manne should
know and perceyde himself to be the image of God: whom he ought to imitate
and follow. For God is neither known of heaven nor of earth: of plants:
neither yet of beasts, although they obey him in their kind, but Aungelles
and men only has he so created, that he might he obeyed, known and
worshipped of them, and that they being fashioned like unto God: might not pyne
away and dye with impiety and vexation of mind: but having their hearts
agreeable to right reason and judgment, might rejoice in good actions as well
before as after the fact.

But in this corrupt and wounded nature, man's heart burns as it were with
flames, mere contrary to right judgment and at the first trembles not to
run into mischief. Now for that it concerns Gods justice to punish and
route out obstinate and rebellious natures: therefore has he conjoined the
dolor and anguishe of the Conscience, following wicked and mischeuous deeds,
that might (as it were an hangman) punish and execute offenders. And although
this sorrow he somewhat dull now and then in persons, yet at the last, God
does so kindle it in the wicked, that they tremble and quake, and are oppressed
(as it were) with the noise of the thunder as it is said in the Psalm. In thy
anger thou shall vex and trouble them. Whereof Plato writes excellently in
this Plato primo de repub.
wise. When an evil man draws toward his end, he is suddenly stricken with
a four and care of such things, as he once thought not of before: and those
talk of Devils of Hell and of pains which the wicked suffer there where of he
made a scoff and stale jest, do then miserablye encoumber his mind, whereby
he faleth into an examination of his former life. And recording his vile and
filthy acts: he is quiet neither waking not sleeping: and often times he
sturteth in his sleep, as it were a fearful child out of his dream, and so
living awhyle, he droupeth away, in evil hope.

Sophocles writes, that Oedipus being old and blind, was led to Athens by
Sophocles. Oedipus.
his daughter Antigona. Who dying there, was buried in the Temple of Erinnyus.
By the which fable he signifies the unquiet Conscience at the hour of death
of all such as have led an dishonest life. For Erinnius.
Erinnyus by interpretation are nothing else then contentious perturbations of
the mind, by reason of an evil Conscience, which always wait upon dishonest
acts and deeds. And they are said to be mindestill, for that condign
punishment, for sinful acts are never forgotten, which although they be for
a time prolonged, yet this is the very property and effect of Eriunius that
when mischief and pain is least looked for, then it falls most grievously.
Thus much I thought: good to note touching the occasions of doloures, and
grief in the evil conscience, now let us consider the difinition of the
same.

An evil Conscience is a heavy and vexing The difinion of an e^uel Conscience.
motion of the heart, conjoined with perfect knowledge of a detestable fact. For
assuredly furies do always pursue and chase the wicked, not with burning
torches and fire brandes, as inter Iudes and plays set out, but with
hor^^res of Conscience, and anguish of mind, waiting always upon mischievous
men, even as the shade we follows the body, not suffering them to beeath and
as it were to pause one ^^^iuente from trembling and fear. And for this cause
only Seneca commends that saying of the ^pienre: The gilty man may happily
hide himself sometime, but he has no assured confidence to escape. Which
things as they are true, so are they confirmed with Histories through^ute all
times and ages. Tacitus reports that Tiberius vex^d with such torment^a,
(...) unto the Senat^ in this wise: What should: I write unto you my Lords, or
how should I write, or rather what should. I not write, I at this instant All
the Gods of heaven at ons rather distroy the then to pine away daily thus as I
do. Such plagues and torments had Tiberi^s inwardly, by his monstrous ^dings;
Neither is that ^odn^ the purpose (...)
which a certain man vt^ered. If the wicket of Titaunts minds might be
unlocked ^^midsi should (...) see their mangled wound^, for as it fares with
the body by reason of ^ stripes, and blows, even so it the mind at ^oil
resite and torn with cruelty, filthy lust, f^^udo malice, Tiberius.
and such like. For (...) Tiberius had ^o want of any^ worldly things, ^^
that might serve to solace and comford (...) afflicted mind, yet was he hot
able by any of means to ease or cons^ate the torments ^^ and pains of his
Conscience. Suetonitis Caligula.
writes of Caligula, who seemed neither to care for God nor man, yet at ye
least roumbling and glauneing of thundering and lightning, he would wink and
cover his face: and when with greater terror heaven and earth seemed both to
shake, and to burn with f^^e, he would run into corners and hyde himself.
The same Author also notes home Nero, after he had murdered Nero.
his natural mother, was so greeuouslye ve^ed in conscience, that he could not
be comforted, neither with joyful show^es and acclamations of the people, nor
with the gratulacions of the Senate, but always confessing his crime: and
declaring how his mothers Ghoast appeared unto him, vnished his speedy
destruction. And moreover offering his heathenishe sacrifice by the han^^s of
his Southsayers, he wylled them to call up his mothers soul, and to make
atonement between her and him, that he might live in ^eace and rest, Richard
the third king of England of that name, who with great tyranny came to the
kingdom, murdering not only his enimyes, Richard the third.
but such as had been his faithful assistants: neither sparing his Nephews
king Edward sons nor his own wife, but imbruing himself in blood on every
side, that he might set him self sure in his Throne. When he came to a
vilage cales Bosworth not far from Leycester, where he meant to encounter his
enemies. The same went that the mghte before the field was sought, he had a
dreadful and terrible dreme. For it seemed to him being a sleep, that (...)
saw diverse Images like terrible deuilles, which pulled and haled him, not
sufferinge him to take any quiet or rest. The whithe strange vision not so
stroke his heart wish a suddayne fear, as it stuffed his head and troubled his
mind with many busy infaginations. For incontinent after, his heart being
almost damped, he pregnosticated before the doubtful chance of the battalle
to come, not using such cheerfulness and ^orage of mind and countenance as
he was accustomed to do before he came toward the battle. Whereunto
Polidore adds Polidorus virg. angli. hist. lib. 25.
this fit and excellent Sentence, I verily think this was no dreme, but a
punction and sting of of his sinful Conscience, which being so much more
wounded, as the offense is more heinous in degree, which surely if at any other
time, yet principally at the hour of death, it calls freshly to our
rememberaunce mischiefs con^icted and painted forth before our eyes,
punishementes imminent, so that in the momente of death we are pricked in
spirit for our evil life and even then we depart this world with
intolerable vexation and grief. Moses veraly does most lively express the
misery of a guity Conscience after this manner. And thy life shall hang before
thee, and thou shall fear both night and day, and shall have no asurance of
thy life. In the morning thou shall say, would God it were evening, and at the
Eueuing thou shall say would Got it were morninge, for the fear of thine heart
which thou shalt fear, Deuteronomy. 28. How breefely and plainly does Moses
paynte out the daily, and continual straites and agonies of a troubled
Conscience. Semblably speaks Salust of Cateline, For that impure mind of
his, detested of God and man, could not be quieted night nor day. Therefore his
couloure was pale and wanne, his eyes were foul and his pace sometime swift,
sometime slow, in his face and countenance there appeared Tyranny. To this
end serves y^ out of the book of the Origin of y^ world, where Adam and Eve.
Moses writes that our first parents after their transgression, did hide
them selves and shonne the sight of God, their fearful conscience without
all doubt condeinning them, thereunto accords that in the same book, of
Iosephes brethren fearing Ioseph^s brethren.
lest now their Father being dead, he would remember (...) ^ruell dealing
with him and reuehge the ^^ct ^^id even so was it with the traitor Judas who
weary of his life: by means of a wounded Conscience, Judas.
strangled himself. But I cease from gathering any more examples, for it is
most euidente that as the sincere Conscience among the greatest sorrows and
miseries of this world, ministers an incredible pleasure, and as it were taste
of the heavenly bliss, so the impure and corrupt Conscience; records his
guiltes and transgressions, tormenteth man in this world: and in some manner
represents unto him the furies sorrows and cruel torments of Hell. And as
we see it come to pass in those that have been incombred with a long
consumption, albeit they dye at their appointed time, yet living they seem to
dye leysurely, rather then to live, so it fares with the gaulled mind, and
scared conscience, albeit they shall perish everlastingly, unless they
repent, yet they cannot upon this earth go skotfree, but receive a taste of
their appointed fair in the world to come.

Now if a merry and contented mind (according to the wise man's saying)
procures Pro. 17. An unquiet Con^tience hasheneth old age, and sycknesse.
a flourishing age, and if a sorrowful spirit dries the bones, it cannot
otherwise be, but the inward agony of the mind, breaks out into the body, as
well impayring the health, as the strength thereof. The Philosophers and
Physicians, hold this opinion, that through auxitie and grief of mind man
pyneth away, waxes old quickly, and is taken away with untimely death. And
therefore they prescribe in their dyets and ordery vsuals, that all men desirous
of many years and long life, ought to avoid great pensiveness and grievous
cares as cause thereof. Whereby it may easily appear, how pestelent and
consuming a plague it is, which weakeneth and in the end utterly destroys
body and mind, whereof Fabius speaks excellently, if I can Judge any thing
in this wise. There is nothing so busied and variable, noching so rent and
torn with diverse affections, as is the evil and unclean mind. For when it
attempteth any thing, it is wonderfully distract with hope care and labor, and
atchiuing his desire, it is wrong and racked with carefulnes, fearefulnes, and
an expectation An evil Conscience ^^ayde of ^^ery bla^^^^ (...).
of al mischief. The same is confirmed by the holy Father S. Ambrose, The
corrupt Conscience, starteth at every crack, and the raw wounds cannot be
corrected, with any plaster, whatsoever it hears red or spoken, it
accounts as spoken against it self. If a man eat, if he study, if he
pray, his crime is straighte way before him, the Conscience witnesses
against him, pleads against him condemns him. Which thing considered by the
Prophet, caused him to speak in The horcor of an evil Conscience
this sort. The wicked are like the raging of the Sea that cannot rest, whose
waters cast up mire and dyrte, there is no peace says the Lord to the wicked.

The heathen writing of ^he manifold torments of Hell, spoke of the ravening
bird called a Gryffon, which should gnaw upon man's liver, by the which they
signi^^e nothing else but the gnawing of the conscience, mangling as it were
manne with dreadful remembrances of evil, committed in this life. Of a very
like opinion are some Deuynes, who think that men shall abide the grievous
torments of Hell, in their Conscience which our Savior calls the worm,
gnawing the conscience of the wicked, never dying.

But as that opinion of theirs is not true, that the pains of Hell are
tolerated in the All yartes shall be ^e^cd and tormented in Apell.
conscience only. For out of doubt, al parts of man, internal and external,
shall perticulerly abide intolerable pain: so I will not deny but that to
other torments, this of the conscience is added, as a principal weight or
heap: whereby with great bytternesse of mind the wicked recognize, and set as
it were present before their eics, their foul facts and detestable deeds done
in their life.

And to shut up this matter, whereas ^ayth is the vnely Instrument, whereby
An exhortationte beware of an evil Conscience
man obteyneth justification and immortality, which can not be lively in any
man, having a guplly conscience: hereby we may cafely gather, how detcstable
and horrible a mischief that is. Therefore whosoever seeks salvation by
faith: it stands them upon to bridle their affonions and concopiscences: and
to commyt nothing against the commandments of God. For he that transgresses
his conscience accusing him, how can he persuade himself, that God will be
merciful unto him. The faithful in deed now and then stumble and stagger,
it cannot be denied, but out of all doubt, a true and lively faith, has no
fellowship with the works of darkness. Moreover seeing that death in it self
of all terrible things is most terrible: it must needs be much more horrible
in those who through the accusation of their own conscience: look for a
speedy passage into hell torments. For nathelesse doath it self is not so
terrible as the ^ugsome opinion thereof: for even thereafter as the conscience
is good or badde, so does she wyllingly embrace or dreadfully eschew the
same. The godly receive death wyllingly and gladly, which they know to be sent
unto the^ from God as a delyuerance and passage, out of the miseries of this
troublesome world, into the port of eternal rest, but the wicked declyne the
same as the perilous rocks and sands, where they must needs make shypwracke
of eternal life. Therefore it was truly and comfortably uttered by a certain
writ. We have no cause to fear any thing in death, if our life have not
committed any thing procuring cause of fear. For it is not possible that he
should dye impenitently that has lived well.

That a pure Conscience is to be respected in all humane actions, wherewith a
man may content himself.
WHERE AS there are many things The So^ace and comfor^ of a good Conscience.
notably written by Cicero, which argue his great wisdom and knowledge, yet
amongst them all has he left no saying more excellent and divine then that in
his book entitled Of old age: to wit. That a conscience of a life well
spent, and a remembrance of many good deeds is a thing most comfortable. Which
worthy and memorable sentence, is not only agreeable with the secret
judgment of any good man: but is also consonant to the opinions of ancient
Sages and good Deuines, who with one mouth do which their voices confirm the
same. And it is worthy to be observed, that Tully makes not a common person to
utter that sente^cc, but Cato surnamed yt Sensor, a vcric grave Cato.
and wise father. Whose uprightness in cyuill Regimc^t, long experience in
worldly affairs, worthy virtues, and singular wisdom, all the Romayne
hystories doc at large proposse and express: Cato without al controucrsie
spoke so of his own experience, contenting himself with that inward
testimony, when he susteyncd the checkes of his superiors, the envy of his
equalles, and the obloque of his inferiors, an unthankful reward for that his
vigelant and fatherly care for the prosperous and happy estate of his Citizens
and country men. And it were to be wished that all men, whether they live
privately or publicly, would in all their doings set that pattern before
their eyes, wherein they beholding themselves daily, as it were in a clear
glass, might evidently see what ^eutefieth or blemisheth their vocation or
condition of life.

And that these things may be the better considered: it shall not be amiss
perticulerly to open and unfold the duetyes of some functions in the common
weal, whereby men may pass from the parts to the whole, and by a few to
understand what is convenient for all.

Thou art called to be a Judge, or chosen an Arbyter to composse controversies,
The part of a judge.
see that therein thou do nothing against law and conscience respecting any
person: Let neither threttes, neither flattery draw thee one hear breadth
from uprightness. Remember in that matter thou ought neither to have friend
nor enemy, Coosen nor stranger. For all these things ought to be set a side
in judgment. Yield nothing to favor nor consanguinitie: nothing to hatred or
displeasure, nothing to hope or fear, which things commonly stricke men stark
blind in judgment: and to be short, suffer not any affection to be of thy
counsel, but consider the law, and moderate the same, if it be extreme with
a good conscience. So did good Aristides, who appointed a days man between
two men, whereof the one to the end he might draw him into displeasure with
his adversary, produced many impertinent things: as that his adversary had
also much accused Aristides. Well says the Arbiter, omyt at this time these
matters, and allege only those things wherein he has abused thee. Cato also
as Valerius reports, sitting in judgment upon a wicked and infamous Senator,
receiving Pompeius Magnus his letters commendatorie in the behalf of the
malefactor: would not suffer the^ to be opened. The good Iusticer would rather
follow his own internal judgment, then obteyn thanks of that mighty man:
teaching by his example that a Judge ought not by any request, reward or
favor, to be led from the true execution of Justice.

Those that are called in any state to be The part of a Counselor and
Captain.
of the privy counsel, ought to direct all their consultations to the health
and wealth of their countriemen: And albeit he see before his eyes present
danger with floudes of envy and malice, together with false rumoures, and
unjust suspicions of his doings, yet let him not follow vain fame, which
neither profits the evil, neither hurts the good: but the judgment of
his conscience as it were a guide and Lodesman in all his actions. Neither
would I have any man to mistake me, as though I meant that we should altogether
neglect what the world thinks and speaks of us (which mind ought to be
far from a christian for we ought not only to avoyde evil, but to be far
from all suspicions of evil, but I say principally and chiefly our Conscience
is to be respectted. Yet we see the contrary in these days to usual, and that
saying every where verified, Multi famam pauci conscientia^ verent, verentur.
Many tender their own fame and credit but very few their Conscience. So
Callicratides, a Captain of the Lacedaemonians, having greater respect of his
private glory, then of his Conscience, in preserving of his Navy received a
great overthrow of the enemy. Cleombrotus also fearing envy only, encountered
rashly with Epaminondas and became almost an utter ruin to the Laredemonians.

Richard plantaginate duke of yorck because he would not seem to be enclosed
and kept in his Castle of Sandale by a woman, and resting only upon his credit
and fame, he having not above five thousand men, rashly joined battle with
the Queen, having xviij. M. good souldyers, contrary to counsel, wisdom
and al policy, and so rashly run into his destruction. Q. Fabius Maximus
after ward of his dooinges surnamed the Delair, more discretely handled the
matter who in that tottering time of his country, abstayned for a season from
fight with Hannibale, nothing accoumpting of the peoples obloquies, who called
him a timorous man and a toward, being in deed a right valiant man, and a
stout warrior, but contented himself with the ^mer consideration of his own
counsels, of whom Ennius writes thus.

Vnus homo nobis cunctando restituit rem Non ponebatenim rumores ante Salutem.
And assuredly if Fabius: had not so done, the state of Rome had then utterly
ben subverted. And therefore he rested upon his owu Conscience, and not upon
populare rumoures, and liked rather that men should speak evil of his wise
regimente, then with their favorable acclamations, to, cast away himself and
endanger his country.

The Sages of the Law being called togiue out their opinions and speeth,
nyther The office of good Lawyers.
touching the right judgment of cases, or of factes and deeds done, may not
seek to speak pleasantly but sincerely, they ought not to disprayse things
commendable, nor commend things blameable, no not if he be allured to the one
with hope of great favor and gain, or drawn from the other with great
terrors and dangers. Such Papinianus.
a Lawyer was Papinianus of the Emperor Antonius his counsel, who being
desired; and afterward with terrible threats commanded to defend the Emperors
tyranous fact, in murdering his young brother Geta even in his mothers lap,
was willing rather to abide death, the^ to speak things contrary to the law
of nature and of al nations, answering Antonius franckly. O Emperor it is
more easy to commit paricide then to defend it: Such another Sir James Hales.
Lawyer was sir James Hales knight one of the justices of the common place, who
being called by men of great power and might, to subscribe unto a device for yt
dissenheriting of the then Lady Mary, and Lady Elizabeth, would in no wise
neither by courteous nor severe speeches be brought unto it.

And afterward in the days of blood, when all his fellows changed their
coats he at a quarter sessions holden in Kente followed the law, and gave
charge upon the statutes of King Henry the eight and Edward the sixth, in
derogation of the primacy of the Church of Rome. For which cause his former
fidelity forgotten, he was committed to prison, and there so terrifyed by the
bloody Priests, that he also at the last would show himself a conformable
man, whereby he was brought into the Queens presence, and received words of
grace and comfort, but alack whiles he obtained this he loses gods grace and
his guiding spirit: and the Devil that capital and ancient enemy of man,
leads him unto a shallowe brook within half a mile of his own dwelling,
where he having no doubt a gauled Conscience, for the shipwreck of his faith
lay down groueling and with much labor drowned him self. His last fall and
punishment succeeding the same, does pythily enough persuade men to avoid
such declinations from Justice, and to contend with all their powers and might
to imitate the former notable and worthy deed of his in pronouncing what law
and equity required, even to those that then were mighty and malicious enemies
of the same.

Those that be in authority and use the same, to hale and pull from the
ministerye, Spotlers o^ the church.
lands and possessions given and left to the Church, by the liberality of our
forefathers cannot but have an unquiet Conscience, which albeit for a time it
seem to sleep, yet it will wake at the last, and to their great vexation
will set before their eyes their rapine and spoil, in degree nothing behind
detestable Sacrilege. Their Conscience will one day tell them that whereof now
they cannot be ignorant: that these things were given of old toward the
conseruing of religion, and to the needeful uses of the Church, to mainteyne
Pastors, Preachers, Doctors, and interpreters of Gods law, to breed and bring
up young Plants that may in time, become fruitful trees, in Gods orcharde, as
well in preching pure doctrine, as in confounding heresis.

And to convert such things to satisfy private avarice, rape, greedines,
and vanity, what other thing can it be then most horrible impiety and
wickedness. It avails them very little to say that those goods have been
abused, or that in the beginning they were dedicate to idolatrous uses, it is
an old and good saying, propter abusum, res non tollenda, that things
necessary and prof^table are not to be taken away for the abuse sake only. And
if we have thought it hereto fore unlawful and ungodly to abuse the goods of
the Church in pomp and pleasure (as in deed they have been, which all good
men lament) let us think it more intolerable and impius, to make those things
private which before were public: and to transfer them from divine, to
profane uses. Touching the exchange of the possessors, Luther that worthy man
was wont fynely to say, that these goods, were sometime given to Asses and
Swine, meaning rude monks and Godless Epicures, and now at the last they
return to like persons again, surely he spoke rightly: for except a few,
such goods have been a pray to hunters, foulers, and such like. But God (such is
his righteous and just dealings, although secret) suffers not these breakers
of dead men's wills and testamentes, to have theirs performed.

For commonly such fathers do deliver like children, who being Coggers,
foysters, and at the last banckeroute: enjoy not commonly in the third
dissente, goods so racked and drawn together. As for their dedication to
profane uses, it is no new objection. And the answer shapen of old may yet
serve to wit that idolatry ceassing those goods ought to be employed to the
use of Christ's church, even as Constantine the Emperor took the
ecclesiastical gooddes of the Donatistes and bestowed them upon the Catholic
church, whereof when the Donatistes complained as of great wrong and injury
offered by the catholics. S. August. afterward defended the fact, and
answered them. That those goods in deed, were the churches, and might well by
the superior maiestrate, be taken from those that were no members of the
same, and restored to the right owners, to wit the Church only.

These possessions and donacions then do In whom the property of church goods
does test.
appertain neither to the Prince, nor to the Priest, nor to the people
perticulerly, but to the whole church and their property cannot by any means
be changed. Joseph bought all the substance of the Egiptions to the house of
Pharao, but the lands and fields of the Priests he touched not. Genesis 47. The
reason is given in another place, That amongs other privileges of ye clergy
their goods should never be allienated from them, for that their grounds are a
perpetual possession. Number. 25. Therefore the blessed martyr Laurence led by y^
holy ghost, would not deliver Decius the Emperor Backbiters and sclaunderers
of the ministetye.
the treasure of the Church. These greedye worldlinges when the matter will not
support then, turn to the persons, and they say that ministers are idle and
live without labor, that they are covetous and ambicious: therefore the less
portions will serve them, and thereby their minds will not be so busied about
worldly affairs, and therewithal they ought to be content, for humility and
poverty say they, is the preachers profession and such does our savior
pronounce blessed and happy.

What idlencsse and want of labor honest ministers live in, God knows, but
it may truly be said of most of them that their study which Epicures call
idleness, consumes the strength of the body, and wears the very soul, as
all that put the same in ure can testify. And as for the Avarice and
couetousenesse of the Preachers let that fault touch some, but it cannot be
verifyed of the most part: For daily experience, in the country abroad,
lets them see ministers, widows, and orphaynes, to have scarce sufficient
to pay their creditors, and to hire them a cotage to hide them in, from storms
and tempests: be it that a few of the clergy in place of honor provide better.
But not only the poor country minister, but also the doctor in the Cathedral
Churches, have left those whom God willed them to care for, in no better
estate then I have said, power and hability not serving them any better. Is
this the^ that great greediness which so much greeueth these contemners of
Gods word and of his ministers?

Now in that they will have ministers, and preachers, to follow with Friars
wilful poverty: besides that they do violence to the holy scripture, which
speaking of a Christian and Godly life, generally these good men forsooth may
not abide that those precepts should be extended to their bellies but to the
pore ministers only, they also follow Julian the Apostate, who taking from pore
Christians their goods and liuinges, told them that it was their profession if
a man took their coats, to give him their cloakes also, with such pretty
conceits, do these Hypocrites sport them selves, and spoil the pore
ministry of their dew and lawful liuelehode.

But some forsooth can not abide such extremity, they will have the
te^poralities only as they call them, that is they will have the Royalty, and
the ministers shall have necessaries: And would god they would leave Christ's
church, but to serve even necessities, but according to the common proves.
They give a flee, and take a Cammell, they leave a louse and take an horse. It
were good for them to have in remembrance the old saying: It is a destruction
for a man to denour that which is sanctified, and after the vows to inquire.
Pro. 20. Of the which you may reed further in Moses and Mala. Leuit. 22.
Mala. 11.

Those that have the Tutell or wardship The office and duty
of young Gentlemen, ought to use their lands and liuinges, and chiefly their
Pupils of Patron^ toward their wards
in good education, as they may with a sincere Conscience, give a reckening
thereof another day, both before God and man. But now a days the number is
great of those that more respect their own gain, then the good guyding of
their pupilles, so that simple and weak infancy, wants not her underminers,
Demostenes complaneth much of his Tutors, that they suppressed his parents
goods guilefully, and respected nothing his good education. Such a Tutor was
Richard duke of Gloucester, of whose life and death I have spoken somewhat and
therefore will be the shorter in this matter.

It is much to be lamented, that wards in England are as commenly bought and
sold, as are brute beasts and Cattle, and ungodly marriages often times made,
between either infantes, or such as be of tender years, who before they come
to their Of the marriages of wards.
mature time of discertion, are led by other men's eyes and hearts, to that,
will they nill they, which likes not them but their Guerdons and Tutors.
Whereby it fauleth out most commonly, that those that are linked together in
such wise with formal matrimomes, and ceremoinall, rather then material, do
not love, but mortally hate, and detest each other, whom never liking love of
lawful matrimony, but greedy gain forcibly coupled and comoyned. Daily deuorces
and often murders iusuing such supposed marriages in this our country, shows
forthy incommodity of the same: but especially is most lamentable that our law
is nere repugnaunt to the dinne law, which in semblable cases permits to each
party free election, but there is good hope, that such as be in authority will
also reform this thing so far out of all good form.

Their diverse and sundry good provisions in all other matters, bids us look
for the li^e in this, which God grant.

To descend to less matters, let men in Of by^ts and scllers.
bying and selling, respect their Conscience, and not follow perverse custom,
let them thinck that there is no good gain, where plain dealing has no
place. And to omit those that sell not their wares, according to their valor,
but for as much as they can: do we thinck that those men respect their
Conscience, that mingle their wares and corrupt the same. For example y^ W^ther
selling wine with-water for pure wine and cousloring, else mingle his wines,
cannot have herein a good and honest meaning. Anacharsis said truly, the
Market to be a set place for Fraud and Rapine, meaning that men in buying and
selling had no respect of a good Conscience. It were needeful in contractes
for men, not only speak to nothing saving truth, but also that they co^ceile
not from the byer any faults, of such things as they sell.

We must no doubt decline from al things that agree not with the internal
judgment of the conscience, and therefore V^p^an in the Digestes writes
gravely. That even the law of nature commands us not to increase our
substance, with other men's losses.

But those men are much worse; who in Against rash and bayn swearing.
their oaths use against al right judgment, a kind of perverse subtilty, and
wiliness, not only abusing their Conscience, but scorming Gods holy name.
Such fraud was practiced by one of those ten captives, whom after the fiew
foughten at Canmas, Anniball sent to Rome for the exchange of Prisoners: taking
their oath only, for their return, who when they had taken their love of
Anniball and departed the Camp, one of The Godles sleights and ^iftes of many
to illude the it oaths.
them by and by retourneth back saying that he had forgotten something behind
him and supposing by that slight his oath to be satisfied, he speedeth him
self in his journey, and ouertaketh his fellows before night. Now when these
ten could not draw to any Conclusion in the Senate house, they al returned to
Anniball saving that one who thought that by such guilful means, he had
discharged himself.

Which thing when the Senate had knoledge of, they caused him to be apprchended
and sent unto Anniball. Cicero says that this was an illusion, and no good
interpretation of his oath, for fraud and Guile does bind and not disolue
penurye. It was then nothing else but a peevish wiliness peruersly imitating
Prudence and Wisdom.

Anniball himself at what time he had taken Anniball.
truce with the Romans, for forty days: in the night time he spoiled the
fields, and when the league was aleaged he answered that he had not broken
the same, which extended only to the day and not to the night. The like we may
read in Plutarch of Cleomenes, in Strabo of y^ Thracians. Cleomenes.
Such practices are red even of Popish Prelates, who with fraudulent
interpretations of their oaths have sucked the blood of those that reposed all
faith in their promises, and committed their lives unto their protection.

At what time Lewis king of France beseege^d Adelbartus an Exle in the Castle
of Bamberge, which by means of the commodius cituacion, and good furniture of
Artillery, could by no means be gotten: wh^ he saw the lions skin would not
avail, he put upon a Woulues skin, leaving manhood, and practicing
subtilty. The king then sent a Bishop unto the Earl, to move him to come to
some Parle with the King: giving him his faith that he would reduce A popish
Prelates feaude.
him safe and sound into his Castle again. The Earl was soon persuaded and
adventured to go with the bishop. And when they had not passed many paces out
of the Castle gate. Were it not good said the Prelate for us to eat a morsel
of meat before we go unto the king, with a good will quod the Earl, and so
returned unto ye Castle to duiner again, After meat they arose and came to
the King, who immediately (...)
caused the Earl to be apprehended and executed.

Now when ye Earl saw he must needs dye, he complained of breach of faith and
trothe: unto whom the Bishop made this answer. That he performed his promise
in that he brought him safe and sound into his Casile to eat meat, and for
that he renewed not his promise afterward, he could not he charged with
violating of his oath. Ottho Phringen sis.
The recorder of this matter puts down his own judgment of the deed, in
this wise. Let other men judge of this Prelate, what they list, as though it
were done for the peace, and quietness of the whole Land. But for my own part
I thus thinck, that no Christian ought once to conceive any such thought,
especially in so great a matter of life and death.

The end of this Prelate was fearful and strange afterward, when the
Elements most terribly seemed with fire to burn, and with noise to be
confounded together the mighty. God strack him with his Thunderbolt and so he
miserably dyed: who soever examineth his own Conscience and secret judgment,
shall soon see that such fleightes proceed of an dishonest and malicious
policy, mere contrary to nature, being most shameful and vile for any
liberal man but once to think upon, much less to put the same in any
execution. For Nature her self desires things that be right and just, and
despises the contrary: neither will she hermit commodity without honesty, to
have any place with her. So Joshua kept the league and truce taken with the
Sabonites, notwithstanding their fraud and circumuention, neither would he by
any means break his faith and troth given unto them.

Albeit there is some diversity of judgment Of the G^^ bouites.
among the learned, whether Joshua did well or not, in sparing those people both
whom God commannded him to destroy, and also of whom he was circumuented,
and deceived in making of the league. For he seemed not to he bound by any
Religion to keep that faith which he gave, deceived with their Guile, and that
unto Gods enemies. These things seem somedeale hard to be discussed. First of
all Joshua could not be ignorant, that all those people, that dwelled in the
Land of Promise ought by Gods commandment, utterly to be routed out. But that
the Gabaonites did inhabit any part of that land he wist not. Therefore albeit
in some respect for ignorance, Joshua might seem to pretend excuse: for that
the Gabaonites coming with their old shoes, and torn Garments, abused him,
feyning them selves to be people that came from far: yet he cannot avoid blame
both for his overmuch security and credulity, and also for his negligence, in
that according to the manner, he inquired not at Gods mouth what was convenient
for him to do.

There be some that go about to lose this knot after this manner. That Joshua
did both execute Gods commandment, and also that he well performed his
promise. For whiles he suffers them to live he offers the better, and in
that he makes them seruill Ambroci us in offi.
men, he executes the first, for Vlpian in the Digests compares perpetual
servitude with death. S. Ambrose says, Joshua asked not the Lords will, by
mean of to much credulty, which commonly al plain and good natures have in
them, and he adds this fine and golden sentence. So holy and reverend was
faith in those days, that collusion and fraud was rarely sound amongste men.

This is then the cause why Joshua took peace and truce with the Cabaonites.
Now that he killed them not deprehending their Euile, but brought them in
servitude: was because he would not break his word bound with an oath: less
in blaming other men's unfaithfulness, he should seem to incur the same
fault himself. He saved their lives therefore; but ^ee made them slaves: his
sentence contained mercy, but she long punishment had in it severity, and thus
far S. Ambrose.

Others write hereof in this wise. We gather that god accepted and ratified
Joshua, his oath given to the Gabaonites, not in y^ he liked fraud and Guile, but
that their study desire, and submission pleased him. For Lauaterus in Ios. 9.
P. Martyr in 2. Sam. 21.
first God promised Joshua to be with him in reskewing and defending of the
City Gabaon. Secondly, when Saul had caused certain of these Gabaonyttes to
be murdered, contrary to this promise of Joshua, made unto their ancestors,
God was angrle and sent a famine among the Israelites, which continued by the
space of three years, neither could his wrath be mitigated, until such time
as seven of Saules sons, or nearest kinsmen were hanged: It is credible that
Gods special pleasure was to have the Gabaonyttes preserved. And it is lykely
that Joshua being a Prophet, understood so much: Mine own judgment is this,
That whereas the chief cause why the Lord God would have the inhabitants of
that country destroyed was: lest they might afterward draw the Israelites from
the true worshipping of the living God, as Moses declares in Deutero. and Number.
22. These Gabaonyttes whom the second book of kings, accounts among the
Amdrits, were both humble and lowly, and also willing to embrace the Religion
of the Hebrews, moved there unto with the fame of Gods great miracles, and
wunders which he showed in defending and preserving the Israelites in Egypt, in
the wilderness and about Iordayn, for so them selves confessed, Joshua therefore
spared their lives, but took from them their liberty: whereby he supposed all
occasions of auerting the Israelites from the living God to be removed away:
and so he imbasing them and weakening them with servitude, kept him self pure
from the spot of infamous perjury, and wicked Atheism, wherewithal the
Godless people with open mouths would have most shamefully blotted him.

The fact of Joshua therefore is very commendable, and lets us see what
regard men ought to have of Leagues, and truces confirmed with oaths between
them and their enemies, contrary to the inconstant dealinges of the Romans
in times past, and the french Catholics, in this our time. For the Senate of
Rome did violate and break the League taken with the Samllites and confirmed
with solemn oaths of their Consulles. T. Veturius, Caluirius, and Sp.
Postumius Albinus. Supposing that their oath was discharged, when they had
delivered the said Consulles back into the Samnyttes hands, to be handled at
their pleasures: so that it is said of one no less finely then truly. If the
Romans had The perittry of the (...)
kept like faith with the Samnites, which they exacted of other: either they
had not remained at al, either else they had served the Samnyttes. And not much
unlike was their dealings, with the Numantynes. Whereby it is most evident that
the Romans did August dei viu ita te dei lib. cap. 22.
not always so precisely keep their faith holy and unbroken, as some would
seem to importe. Although I see what may be answered in their behalf: to wit,
that conclusions or articles taken between the cappitaines are so far forth to
be observed on both parts, as the superioure magistrate (which was the Senate
among the Romans) assenteth there unto. So say they the conclusion of peace
made by Mancinus the Consul, with the Numantines was of no moment, the whole
Senate mislyking the same. And so Camillus would not stand to Camillus.
the conditions of peace, which the Senate made with the french men, without
his consent being dictator or chief officer. Which aunsweres or rather
fryuolous excuses, I will not now examine: only I ^^ ke that saying of
Mithridates, worthy remembrance. Romulus and the Romayne stock have sucked
Iustinius. liber. 38.
with wolves milk, wolves conditions.

And touching the Tragical doings of the Catholics of late in the realm of
France, what tongue or pen can sufficiently The late tragical delinges in
^^aunce.
set forth the same. Surely all posterities will abhor and detest such
infidelity, joined with barbarouse cruelty, when they shall reed in histories
of Edicts, and decrees, made in Parlaments, of leagues and truces, taken and
confirmed between party and party, with solemn contestation of Gods most
reverend majesty: of most assured and inteere friendship, peace, amity, and
Concord, with an utter oblivion of all former quarrels, and displeasures. Where
upon insued Ambassages Gratulatory, from great and mighty Princes round about:
and marriages between great estates on either party, most strongly to unite and
knit this knot of friendship: and not withstanding all these in ye middle of
pastimes and triumphs to murder so many grave fathers and Matrons, such
seemly and comely gentlemen and gentlewomen in their beds; that had reposed
them selves in the faith and troth of their Prince, so many sucking babes in
their cradels, ye were not able to discern between the right and wrong, is
such an example as unto ye day has not ben heard of. Surely it is expressly
against that law of war, appointed by God. Deuteronomy. 20. Which is after this
manner. If thou shall come to besecge any city, thou shalt first offer them
peace, and if they accept it, and open their gates unto thee, then shalt
thou save all the people of that City, and they shall serve thee and pay thee
tribute.

But here the subjects yield their goods, their towns, yea their bodies into
the hand of their Lord: and yet we see what immanity was executed upon them.
Secondly al me^ ought to grant to forreyn ennemies, the The law them to
supplyantes and to such as yield them selves in war.
law of Suppliaunts, if they demand it, Deuteronomy. 20. and therewithal not to
touch the unarmed multitude, as infants, young folks ancient and aged
persons, Deuteronomy. 20. And so the Ethnucks did soundly keep the law of
Suppliantes, and thought Jupiter to be the Patron of them, and revenger of
their ennemies, as the moral of that fable of Aesope of the Eagle and
Scarabaes does declare: but in France we see no consideration of this law,
but a general hauock or bouchery to have been made of al ages, seres, and
degrees, without any difference at all.

Pausanias cyteth a worthy example of a plage that fell upon yt Acheans because
they Pausanias in Acha.
broke the law of Suppliants. When (says he) the Achayans drew the
suppliantes out of the Temple, Gods revenging wrath was not sloe nor prolonged
against the^, for there happened a vehement and suddayne earthquake, which
turned up not only the wales, but also the whole City, in such sort, that no
signs thereof appeared. And the Lacedaemonians are much spoken against in
histories, because they murdered the inhabitauntes, after they had yielded their
City, and great miseries and calamities came upon them for such unmerciful
dealinges.

Out of al doubt Conquestes and victories ought not to be insolente and
bloody, Conquestes ought to have modetation as a companion.
but modest and merciful, as well for the establishing of peace as for the
conservation of those which be vanquished and overcome, it is a good saying. He
that co^quereth Mimus.
himself in victory, is twice a Conqueror: Neither may the victor repute
himself out al peril. Agamemno^ is admonished in Seneca: that he should not use
victories crewelly, uses this arrogant speech: Where of should the conqueror
be afraid, Cassandra answers. Of that which he fears not. That is to say,
the victor ought to doubt many suddayne chaunses. And the same Author in
Troade. When Pirrhus said, No law commands to spare captives, Agamemnon
answers, That which law forbids not, shamefastness forbids, Pirrhus.
The victor may do what him lists: Agamemnon: That man ought to do lest,
that he may do most. Wherefore Ageselaus is much commended for his clemency,
Ageselaus
for that in his orations he accustomed to admonish his souldyers, that they
should not handle their captives cruelly, but always to remember them to be
men which were fallen into calamity: whereunto men as long as they live upon
earth are subject. God has purtured in the Lion a Picture The property of the
Lion.
of valiant warriers, for in the Lion there is not only a stout courage,
conjoined with the strength of body, but also an heroical clemency, toward such
as fall down before him, according to that vearse.

Percere prostratis seit nobilis ira Leonis.

A good warrior ought therefore to expres both their virtues, as Hirgil
writes most gravely.

Percere subiectis and debellare superbos.

When one of Sigismundes counsel, expostulated Sigismu^d.
with him, for that he did not only pardon his ennimies lives and goods, whom
he had taken, but received them among the number of friends, the Emperor
answered after this manner. Thou think it good to kill thy ennemy, because a
dead man cannot bite, according to the proverb: But I do kill mine enemy whilst
I spare him craving pardon: and do make him my friend, in that I advance him
to credit. A notable wise saying no doubt of an Emperor. Like examples are
found in the ancient hystories of the Romans, who for that they did
religiously keep the law of Suppliants: written amongst the alwes of Heralds:
they adiorned unto them many Princes and people in amity and friendship.

But peradventure some will answer that the french Catholics did not break
S. Augustine.
any law of arms in using policy against their enmmies, for saint Augustine
in his questions upon Joshua says. When war is just and lawful: he swerueth
not from justice that pursues his enemies, either by strength or policy. And
even so Antigonus, when one asked him how he should deal with Antigonus.
his enemies, answered: Either with fraud or dinte of sword: either openly or
secretly. And Virgil. Dolus an virtus quis in host requirat. Saint Hierome
alleges that Hier. in 17. Ezeh.
verse as seculer, but likes very well thereof: so far forth as no faith and
troth given be byolate. But I think the word Dolus in ye verse to be taken of
honest and lawful policies in war: And that all subtle cauilations, frauds
and periuries, are excepted. For the word no doubt signifies Prudens
Stratagema.

The king of Denmarck using fraud and The king of denmark his policy.
perjury against his subjects is much discommended, for that when he could
not bring in by maine might, certain pernicious outlawes and pirates, he
brought it to pass by policy: for he pretending open war against forreyn
enemies, sommoned his men os war to come and serve him, and among the rest sent
also unto those thieves both granting them pardon for all their offenses
committed against him, and also promised them for their service large and
liberal wages, And when they were commen, he straight way put them to death.
Such pollicyes having perjury anexed unto them ought to be detested of al good
men and chiefly of Princes, whom verity and constancy in words of promises,
have always singulerly commended.

The french Stratagemes are not much unlike the danish dealings, saving ye
their pertury was more heinous in France: for that the adverse part were
already come in and had laid down their arniour and weapon, and had on their
part given out infallible and evident signs, of their love and fidelity to
their Prince.

The cruel deed of Peter Arrogon is much detested, who slew eight thousand
Peter Arrogon.
french men in Cicil, for that they had surprised that I Will in his abscnce, and
yet he excercised his cruelty upon forreyners and strangers, but these upon
their own nation and nere kinsnien, They seemed to have set before their eyes
the dissimulation A. Commodus.
of Antonius Co^modus whose manners they have exactly expressed: For when he was
wearyed with filthy pleasures, where (...) he was exceedingly given, lest he
might seem^ to spend tune in doing nothing, he devised with him self how he
might murder the Nobles of his Empire: especially he caused one Iulianus to be
slain suddenly and horribly in his bed, and yet in the sight of men he would
kiss and embrace him, calling him his sweet heart, and well-beloved father. Or
hapely they looked nerer home, and bchelde the policies of some of Carolus
septimus Gal rex.
their Ancestors. We read of Charles the vy. king of France, that after long
and grievous troubles in that country, he entered into league and affinity with
the duke of Burgondy: and promised most constantly to bury all ancient
quarrels and grudges: and there upon they both received at the priests hands
the host consecrated, as the manner was in those days, in confyrmation of
their oaths and promyses, yet notwithstanding, when as the said king had
invited the duke to come to Montrell, pretending to entertayne him most
frendely, and to exhibit unto him spectacles and triumphs, he suffered the
duke to be murdered upon the bridge there, as they werein communication
together.

Some may answer that how these Nothing is protitable rule vnlest it be
honest.
men kept their faith they will not examine, but by these doings there followed
tranquillity and quietness unto those Regions, and country: I answer let it be
so accounted for y^ present time, but if we consider, the consequence of such
truce breakings, and immayne cruelties, we shall find in the end utter
subversion to have ensewed great houses, and families therefore. Surely all
good men embrace that saying, There is nothing Aristidea.
profitable unless it be also honest. And therefore Aristides did openly in
the Themistocles.
audience of the people reiecte the polliticke counsel of Themistocles
concerning the burning of the Lacedaemonians Navy: because being profitable it
was not thought honest, Furius Camillus received not the F. Camillus.
children of the Lords of Phalice, betrayed to him by their Schoolmaster, but
stripped him naked and delivered him to be whipped home with rods by the same
Children.

Kingly virtues in times past have been ^^r^otes virtues.
reported to be these, Justice, gentleness, and clemency: but cruelty, and
outrage have been misliked. Scipio has in all ages been praised, who was wont
to say, that he had rather save one citezen, then sley a thousand enemies,
which sentence the Emperor Antonius surnamed Pius did often repeat.
Contrariwise it was a shameful byworde used against young Tiberius, to be
called Clay tempered with blood. It is no sufficient allegation to say, that
kings have absolute power of life and death over their subjects. There cannot
be alleged any greater authority, then that the Dictators had at Rome, in
whom was the sovereign power of peace and war, and of life and death, and
that without appeal. Yet might they not execute a Citisen, his cause unheard,
and without condemnation by order of law. Only murderers and thieves do take
away men's lives, without order of law, without hearing the party plead his
cause, and to speak for himself, but what need many words. It is cleerer
The proper and especial notes and signs of Papists.
then the noone day, that cruelty, perjury, and filthy adultery, are the
very proper noates and badges of Papists in these our days.

It is much to be lamented that the noble and famous Nation of France, should
learn of Pope and Turck, unto whom they linck themselves in legue to care for
no promise, faith, or oath: and I pray God in the end they be not scourged by
Antichrist, whom they trust, and distrust God, with whom whiles they seek to
concerue peace, and concord, they cannot choose but be at discord and open
war with God. The old Poets do feine that the proud Giauntes waged battle
against heaven, whereby they meant undoubtedly, those that despise laws and
break their oaths, most blasphemously abusing Gods name. And those that easily
commit such offenses, the Deuel does wholly possess their hearts by little and
little, and breeds in the^ a deadly hatred against God, whereby they run into
foul and heinous facts, and so at the last fall into tragical pains, both
in this world and in the world to come. Which the Poets meant also to express
in Jupiter his conquests, over the said Giauntes called Philegians, who were
carried quick to Hell, with a flood sent out by Neptune, of whom Uirgil writes
thus.

Phlegiasque miserrimus omnes, Admonet et magna testater voce per vmbras,
Discite insticia^ moniti et no^ temnere diuos.

How grievously and odiously men do profane Gods name by perjury, it will
Perjury a^ deyu^us of^^^uce.
plainly appear by the difinition of the same.

An oath is an asueration, of a thing possible and lawful, made with the
invocation of The definion of an oath
Gods name, wherein we pray God to cast down upon us his malidiction and
vengeance, if in swearing we say untruth, or wittingly and willingly break our
oath, In bare and naked promises; wherein we promise to do truly, it is said:
Let your communication be yea, yea, and nay, nay, but of oaths there are
severe precepts, Thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform thine
oath to God: Whereunto he aodeth a fearful Communication, For the lord will
not hold him guiltles that takes his name in vain: There is no doubt but Gods
majesty and name, is wonderfully abused, when men run into wilful perjury.
For in that we call upon him to be our witness and Judge. Our wilful perjury
denies him to be a true witness, argues him of falsehode, procures his
plagues, and binds us by our own mouths to abide the same. There can then
no greater contumely be done against God, nor no more grievous crime committed
by man then wilfully: to make a mock and by word of Gods name: where unto if
men add wilful murder, and shedding of innocent blood: they must needs fill
up even to the brimme, the measure of iniquity.

Such men are vngraciouslye led and Of sinners iudutate and past grace.
drawn to punishment and vengeance: so that among such transgressors, you
shall skarce find one that has in this world escape the revenging hand of
almighty God: as we may plainly see by Caine, Saul, Richard king of
England; the third of that name, and infinite other examples. Hereof the
Poets have written thus. (...) Ah miser and si quis primum periuria celat, Sera
tamen tacitas pena venit pedibus.

The former examples are special, but Examples of Princes and people punished
for their perjury.
when we behold things more public, and general, we see a more sorrowful
Tragedy. For we may read of them est noble and floorishing Famelies of
Princes, to have beue utterly rooted up, for wicked murders and perjury. And
so God does show himself to be a defender and conseruer of justice and pull
it ike order: and that his pleasure is, that the inteynall mocions of man's
mind, should conform themselves to the working of Gods spirit, and also that
the external members should be kept within the compass of good laws and
regiment. Which whosoever have broken, they have always been accounted
factious, seditious, perjured, and men noted otherwise, with vile reproaches and
infames. Such men were the Carthaginenses Carthage.
reputed, who unconstant and slypping in in all their words and promises,
sought still by guylefull and crafty interpretations to illude their oaths,
who at the last being utterly subdued, and their city stick and stone
consumed, even to the ground with fire: do bid us behold the end of
leuitie and perjury. Philyp of Macedonia Philip.
was wont to play with his faith, as children do with sticks: which was the
cause as the wise Ethnickes thought of the suddayne and strange ruin of all
his posterity: for within twelve years after his son Alexander in the flower
of his time, died either with poyso^ or with immoderate drink whose mother,
wife, and two sons, were murdered of his Nobles, neither was there found any
Patrons of so royal a famely. And in our fathers days Lewis, king of Engenius
Pope of Rome and Lewis king of Hungaria.
Hungaria, induced by Eugenius bishop of Rome, brake the league which he had
made with Amaruthes the great Turcke: and drew that Tirant to bend all his
power against Christendom, being at that time otherwise busied in the east, in
which war, Lewis the king with the greater part of his army, miserably
perished, the smart whereof not only Hungaria feeteth, but all Christendom
lame^teth at this day. And to omit those things that histories record, many
examples as well private as public, daily experience in man's life, do verify
the same: whereof it came to pass that the old writers, appointed certain
Gods, to be reuengers of perjury, and Homecide: For they beholding such daily
examples, not without great admiration, judged that those things came not to
pass by chance, and at adventure, but that some divine power was especially
appointed to be the punisher of Perjury and wilful murder.

And hitherto, I thought in some private callings and conditions of man's life,
to point out as it were with the finger, the joy and solace of a pure and
sinerre Conscience, and the endless vexation and sorrow of the contrary: now I
will descend to certain questions, which men commonly move, about man's
Conscience.

It is demanded commonly, whether an Whether is be enough for men to rest
upon their Conscience.
erring Conscience deeth condemn man: That is to say, whether man's will
sweruing and discenting from reason dceriued, condemns a man: we must observe
that it is the part of Reason, to give light unto Will wandering in darrknesse,
and gross ignorannce: and therefore Will discenting from Reason disceiued, must
needs offend and do wickedly. He does evil I say, not in his own nature,
but because the Conscience so judges of it self, albeit it be perfect and good.

And therefore the divines plainly affirm, that Will discenting from Conscience
and Reason, whether she be sincere or corrupt, in what kind of action soever
she be busied, whether they be good, evil, or indifferent, she offends and
commits sin.

And from hence is derided the solucion of that question: Whether the
Conscience erring excuses: That is, whether the Will consenting with Reason,
swaruing from truth offends: for if Will discenting from Reason deceived
transgress, surely it must needs follow, that the same consenting with Reason
does not offend: For of things contrary, there follow contrary sequelles, as
not only Cicero but the Logitians generally, and experience proves. We must
herein observe that as a seemly and comely body is so called, when there is
right shape and composition of all the rest of the members of man's body: and
it is the named evil favored if in any one hmme or joint, there be nay thing
uncomely, crooked, or law: even so that is only accounted good, which is
absolute and consumate in all parts, and so it is named evil when any little
thing wants, to the perferfection thereof, or to speak plainly and briefly:
Evil proceeds of special vices and defects, but goodness of that which is
on every side without fault or blemishe. So y^ in this matter it is enough if
either ye Will be corrupted, or Reason which is the guide and ruler of Will.

But this thing will be plain by the apposityon of an example. Those that did
both curse the Apostles of Christ, and committed the^ to pryso^, minding to
execute them, with most paynfull deaths, thought that they offered a most
acceptable sacrifice to God, even as Christ himself bears witness. The time
shall come says he, that whosoever kills you, shall thinck he does GOD good
service.

These men's reasons and understanding was merueylously shadowed with darcknes
and error, and yet their will and intelligence did concur together. And Paul
himself when he persecuted the Church of Christ, and cast his servant into
bonds: had a Will obedient to Reason, wandering in great darcknes. And yet that
Apostle afterward confesses, that albeit, he did that ignorauntly through
unbelief: yet that he grievously offended God, albeit through repentance, he
afterward obtained Gods mercy. For God does easily and soon forgive simply
ignorance repenting the fault, and where malice and wilful will wants, the
fault is reputed less in Gods sight.

I will not have any man mistake, me as though I thought that any kind of
ignorance should either excuse a man, or be accounted tolerable in Gods
sight. For without doubt all kinds of ignorance are blame worthy, Else the law
in Moses should seem to be in vain, appoynting a sacrifice to be offered
unto God for ignorance. Nu. 15. but my meaning is, that ignorantia facti, as
they term it wanting negligence and security, may seem to have some probable
excuse.

And touching Paul's error, it had a show of probability and likelihoode. It
was written by Moses that if any Prophet did arise teaching things contrary
to the law, he should out of hand be stoned to death: that Jesus was such a
one, Paul herd by the reports almost of all men, and that he was for that
cause, by the Priests, Scribes Pharisees, Seniours, and by consent of all the
people apprehended, accused, found gylty, condemned and finally crucified: for
he never herd nor saw personally Christ, neither any of his Apostles, teaching
or worcking of miracles. Paul's error therefore did arise as well in respect of
the matter, as of the person: Wherein his mind and Reason drowned in
ignorance, hadd^ an agreeable will, whereby as he offended, yet that came not
to pass by wilful ignorance, but by a zealous study of the law, covered with
simplicity, as him self to Timothy witnesses.

The scolasticall divines do also move another The true ground and foundation
of a good Conscience.
question, whether the Conscience binds: That is whether a man ought to do
al things that his Conscience moves him unto: Moreover if it happen
Conscience, and the superior maiestrate to prescribe things mere contrary,
they ask which of them a man ought to obey and follow. Wherein this is
commonly their judgment, that the Conscience is always to be moderated and
directed by Gods word: whereunto if it be agreeable and consouant, yet it
binds a man no more then it was before bound by the eternal word of God. And
therefore such Conscience is always to be followed and obeyed. But if it do
prescribe any thing, mere contrary unto the same word, then it is to be
corrected and amended. For if the least Scruple remain in the mind, whether a
man do according to the mocion of his Conscience, or against it, be sins
grievously: For in doing the one, a man sins against Gods law, and in
doing the othe^r, thou also offendest. For although the deed in it self be
good in Gods sight, yet man does it Doubtfulnes of the conscience ^angerous.
doubtingly, whether it be good or no: which doubt and staggaring of the mind
is offensive and condemns a man, Hereof the Apostle pronounces him blessed
that does not co^demn himself in that he aloweth. To. 14. In which sentence he
tells us y^ s^ee may not dee any thing, which leaves behind it a doubt or
remorse of Conscience, for he that doubts, and yet goes through with the
matter, do most plainly centrinne God.

And moreover, whiles that he does a good thing, doubting with in him self
whether it be so or nay: he gives just occasion for all men to judge that he
would also not stick to do mischief if eccasion serur. So it comes to pass
that the thing which is not evil in it self, is yet by doubting euel to him
shat does it, and his own Conscience accusing him, will pronounce sentence
against him. For this cause it is rightly said, that if Reason erring and
deceived, does prescribe and appoint any thing as Gods hestes, and yet not so
in deed: that then if the Will do neglectt Reasons commandment, it is as
great an offense as if a man should withstand the commandment of God.

And touching that other question which encombreth many men, whether we ought
to follow our Conscience, or the magistrate commanding things contrary: in
which question if master For had at large put down that which he briefly and
finely touched and shadowed (as it were) in his preface, before his titles of
common places: or if master Mullins would vouchsafe to commit that to writing
which he discoursed herein profoundly and learnedly at Paul's Cross: then I
should not want any thing that might serve to the full dissolucion of this
question, my opinion is this. If the Prince or magistrate, do command any
thing repuguaunt to Gods Law, our Consciences, witnessing the same: then let
us remember that the Apostles and other the faithful servants of Christ, in
the primative church would rather abide painful imprisonment and sustain most
sorrowful death, then in any one iotte obey their wicked ordinances. The
blessed martyr and Bishop. Policarpus answered the Romayne Proconsull: We are
taught to obey princes and Potentates, in those things Policarpus.
that be not contrary to sincere Religion. And Chrysostom said divinely to
Gaynas: It is not lawful for the Emperor being the defendour Chrisost.
of true Godliness, to attempt any thing against the same. The Prince or other
supreme Magistrate, is appointed the keeper of both the tables: but he may not
preceede to decree any thing without the compass of the Scripture. For Will
worshippinges are not acceptable to God, because they are not agreeable to his
eternal will, neither can they assure men's Conscience, that they are accepted
of God. Wherefore such authority was not given to Moses himself, that he
might of himself devise and orde^^ Religion, but God did expressly and
perticulerly by name appoint these things which he would have proposed to his
people to be kept of them. Neither did be instrua Moses in a moment, but
taking God in^^^^^ted (...) by degrees.
him up into the mountain unto him, by the space of forty days: gave him
instructions, and afterward lest any simple or doubt should remain: he
solemnly authorized his ministry by miracles and wonders in the eyes of all
the Israelites. Neither had the Apostles power at their pleasure, to fashion
and form what Religion they would, but Christ first taught them by mouth,
and afterward added sacraments of true Religion, and confirmed the same with
signs and wonders: and finally gave them commission to teach, and preach those
things which they had heard, seen, and received of him.

And so both the Testaments have been given, not by human, but by divine
tradition and power, confirmed moreover with many nighty signs and wonders:
For it is the pleasure of almighty God, that his ministers shall certeynly
know his will, which cannot be, if men might in any resped invent new
religions. Which the Numa Pompilius.
Ethnicks in elder time knew right well, for Numa Pompilius setting by a
religion, persuaded the people of Rome, that in the night season, Aegeria
appeared unto him and revealed such things as he instituted. He knew right
well that all opinions of religion are of no valor without the fear of God:
and therefore his meaning was that the people should receive those things as
delivered not by man, but by instinction of the powers above. And therefore men
should exceedingly swerve, if for the title of the office of a Magistrate, they
accept al decrees and edicts of Religion: which in deed were nothing else then
of a ecclesiastical, to make a seculer Pope. Whiles then we touch that the
care of religion apperteineth to Magistrates, we mean not that they may at
their pleasures daily Coin new articles of the faith: but that they should
follow the examples of Godly Princes, who always in the reformation of
Religion, had an especial eye to the word of god, the lantern and light unto
our paths, and steps.

Now as concerning the princes temporal laws. If they be made to the end to
lay upon men opinion of religion, as though the observation of them were
necessary: then the conscience is burdened and snared contrary to godliness.
For in matters of conscience we have to do only with God, and not with man. In
some places the scripture seems to extend the same to men, as when Paul
says, he walked before God and man with a pure conscience, but that is because
the fruits of a good conscience does issue and flow amongst good men: but
properly as I said it appertains to God only, neither does that place of
saint Paul to the Romans prove, that contrary where a distinction ought to
be observed. For although every particular law reach not to the conscience,
by the general precept, yet obedience to the magistrate is commended, because
they be of God: but the cyuill laws of princes, either touching common
profit, pleasure, uniformity, and comeliness, being either profitable or
pleasant are to observed and kept. For although in their properties they be
indifferent: yet by means of authority they are almost equyualent with Gods
laws: and are not by any means to be violated and broken, unless extreme
necessity urge and as it were infer violently to y^ same. Necessity in
deed is pardoned, if wilful arrogancy and malicious contempt of our
superiors be absent. For in such cases, God respects the mind and not the
fact: and where no wilfulness is, there is his mercy most ready. And for as
much as the law of God sometime gives place to necessity: as when David
against the law did eat of the Shewbread, whom Christ defends: why should
not man's ordynannces a great deal more do the same, so that Malapartenesse
and contumacy of our superioures, and the offense of our brethren be far from
us.

It now rests only, that neither those Two (...) tyons the first against bayn
confidence in one own righteousness.
that have good Conscience do trust in their own merits, neither yet having
an euel Conscience for his fylthy and abominable life, should fall inio
despair: and so finally run into desperation. That of saint Augustine is
diuiuely spoken. Conscience and Fame are two things, Conscience is needeful to
thy self, and Fame for thy neighbor: But if thou respect thy good name to the
uttermost, and yet it nothing avails thee, be thou quiet in thy self,
because of a good Conscience in the sight of God.

And yet no man ought arroga^tly to have affiaunce in his good worckes, and
Pharisaically to please himself, and to contemn others: For the modesty of
sinners displeasing them selves for their offenses, is much acceptable in Gods
sight, then the worckes and merits of those who in their own conceit accoumpt
themselves just. Which thing is clearly seen in the parable of the Pharisie
and Publican, whereof the one pust up with the opinion of his own good worcks
(which affection encombreth even good men often, unless they dilligently take
heed) displeases God, pleasing himself over much: not only a flatterer of
himself, but contumelious to his neighbor. The other male content with
himself, for his guilts and offenses, and beating his breast with most humble
voice, craved gods mercy: and so the more he was displeased with himself, the
more he pleased God, according to that of Saint August. The justice as it were
of God, looked down from heaven saying: let us spare this man, because he
spared not himself, let us forgive him, because he forgave not himself, he
converted himself to punish his sin, let us convert to deliver him. August.
psa. 48.

This self love and good opinion of our selves ought to be eschewed, and it
is best for us to thinck simply of our selves, and to say with Danyell. We
have offended, we have committed iniquity, we have declined and gone astray
from the commandments. To thee O Lord belongs glory, and Justice, but to us
shame and confusion. For he glorifieth God that accounts him self a sinner,
and repenting, puts his whole trust and confydence in Gods mercy: whereas
proud Pharisees judge eternal life to be the reward of their virtues, and good
worcks.

And what is sinful man able to do of himself: or if he be hable to do any
thing is not that to be attributed to Gods grace, by whose gift we are that we
are: so that in all things, unless we will be over impudent, we must needs
grant our exceeding great imbecility, and Gods infinite mercy. That trust
therefore in our own merits, and vain opinion of our righteousenesse, which
will not suffer a man to be humble and lowly: but stirs him to pride and
arrogance, is by all means as a pestelence to be eschewed.

For God highly displeased there with, takes from man the right hand of his
protection and suffers us to have the raynes at our will and pleasure:
wherewith we run into ruin and destruction. And that I may leave external
accions, when we hapely may be blamles in the eyes of man; who dare once open
his mouth to say my heart is clean, seeing that Job in admiration cries
saying, Can that be clean which is borne of a woman, not one, albeit he live
but a day upon the face of the earth? And S. John, if we say we have no sin
we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. But if we confess our
sins, he is saythful and just to forgive us the same, and the blood of Jesus
Christ does purge us clean from al iniquity. This sentence of that excelent
Apostle and so well-beloved of God, takes from Hipocrits al vain trust and
confidence in their merits: and ministers great consolation and unspeakable
comfort, to afflicted consciences, and such as be unquieted for their crimes,
and offenses, wherewithal they have estraunged the countenance of their loving
father from them.

S. Paul says, This is our boasting even the testimony of our conscience. But
he says again: He that reioceth let him rejoice in the lord, every man may
rejoice then in his good deeds, but not without the Lord. And therefore we
must always remember these three Cawtelles, first that we acknowledge all our
goodness to come from God. Secondly, that we put our trust and confidc^ce in
God alone: Thirdly, that we rest and repose our selves wholly in God the
fountain and author of all goodness. These foundations being laid: then I say
it is not only good but also needeful, that we rejoice in our good deeds, not
with vau^ting Thraso, or the glorious hipocrite, but in the approbation and
comfort of our good Conscience.

Neither may the wounded Conscience, Against sorrow and despair of an aff^eted
Conscience
(which is as it were a taste of eternal death) despair of salvation, because
of their heinous sins and offenses: for they have the merits and death of
christ for their refuge and sanctuary. For our heavenly father most tenderly
and dearly loving us, has given his only son to the death of the Cross
for us, to obtein salvation, he has given him unto us by whom he is pleased
and reconciled to man, the remembrance of our sins stricken out, so that we
certainly persuade our self thereof, and having this faith do wholly yield our
selves unto him. Hereof speaks y^ Apostle, if any man sin, we have an
adudcase with ye father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiatio^
of our sins, not for our sins only, but for the sins of the whole world, and
that saying is very comfortable: What time soever a sinner does repent him of
his sin, I will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance. And again. As
truly as I live says the lord, I would not the death of a sinner, but that he
should convert and live. These and such like sentences do comfort us against
desperation, into the which Caine, Saul and Judas, by diffidence fell, and with
an oath God does assure us of his love and mercy, which whosoever dispaireth of,
he accuses god of perjury, being most heinous impiety, and donieth Christ's
sacrifyce to be available to put away our sins. For our loving God does
principally request this at our hands, that we distrusting our selves, should
trust and commit our selves only to him, whose love and charity toward us, has
appeared abundantly, that he has given his only son for wicked and sinful
men for his enemies, whereby he might receive us again, into his love and
gracious sauoure, with this faith and confidence a sinful man may stay himself,
and assure unto him most firm consolations and defense, when (...) wrastleth
with the pau^rs and agonyes of sin, death, and desperation: where unto often
times a man is drawn, and tormented as it were of an hangman, by his own
unquiet Conscience, or by the malicious and guileful temptations, of his mortal
and capital enemy the Devil.

And these things I thought good to commit to writing, touching the good and
evil The coucinsion.
Conscience, wherein we see that as there is nothing more horrible and
peruicidus then the euel Conscience, doubting, mistrusting and despairing in
all things: so there is nothing better, nor more comfortable then a good
Conscience, which makes a man live even a blessed life upon earth, and
procures unto him sincere and perfect pleasure. Seeing then the commodity of a
good Conscic^ce is so great, and that no man can have it, unless he live in
his vocation, and do his duty uprightly. It stands every man upon to
endeavor and bend all his power and strength even unto the uttermost, to
satistie and answer the same, which that I may speak breefely, is to abandon
vice and embrace virtue, so shall we be partakers of such an inestimable joy and
treasure. So shall no good man devise or practice any fraud or guyle: he shall
not offer any injury to his neighbor, and so to conclude shall vice be
banished, and virtues, as Religion, piety, Justice, peace, concord, and such
other like, shall spring and flourish again. God the author and giver of all
good gifts grant us all this excellent treasure, that in all our actions we
may weigh and consider our Conscience, being a daily and ^omestical Judge,
whereby we shall be stayed from committing those things which offend his high
majesty: that so living holyly and sincerely in this world, we may in the
other world, come to perfect bliss and immortality.

FINIS.

